A 12-year-old Iranian boy was referred to the Pedodontics Department of Shaheed Beheshti University Medical Sciences, Dental School due to excessive painful swelling of his mandibular left cheek region. Clinical examination showed that the following teeth were present in his mouth:
7654321 12 C4567
7654321 12 C4567
The crowns of his teeth had normal morphologic characteristics, but the color of his teeth was slightly more yellow than expected for a patient of his age . Oral hygiene was poor and there were plaque deposits present in all quadrants. The patient's medical history revealed no evidence of disturbance in general health. Caries were present in most of the teeth. The maxillary and mandibular central and lateral incisors were mobile, and there was a painful expansion on the buccal region of the mandibular left first molar. Information supplied by his mother indicated that the child's gingiva had become markedly swollen in both upper and lower jaws on various occasions and that this condition had been treated by antibiotic therapy. Radiographic examination revealed pulpless teeth with no root formation in most teeth and roots of only a few millimeters in some teeth. There was a well-defined round unilocular radiolucency in association with the apex of the left first permanent molar. The left maxillary and mandibular canine teeth were impacted and located horizontally in panoramic view .
On the basis of the clinical and radiographic appearance, a diagnosis of DD type I, subtype 1a, was suspected. Clinical and radiographical examination of the patient's parents and siblings revealed no cases of DD type I, and there were no previous cases of this disturbance in the familial history. The following treatment plan was formulated: dietary and oral hygiene instructions, fluoride supplements, surgical enucleating of the cystic lesion at the left first permanent molar region, restoration of the carious teeth, and extraction of the left primary canine and primary first molar, which were carious and mobile.
The cystic lesion was enucleated and sent for histopathological examination. Based on the pedodontist's and surgeon's view, it was decided to extract the remaining root of the lower left first permanent molar during surgery because of extensive caries. The histopathological features were consistent with the clinical diagnosis of a radicular cyst. The cystic cavity was lined with a variable thickness of non keratinized stratified squamous epithelium with arch-shaped appearance and exocytosis in the underlying connective tissue was severely infiltrated by chronic inflammatory cells. Extravasated red blood cells and hemosiderin pigments were also seen . The extracted primary teeth were sent for histological examination. The ground section was examined with a stereomicroscope: the superficial dentin of the crown appeared normal, but the pulp chamber was obliterated by an unusual type of calcified material consisting of dentin, and deeper layers of dentin had an atypical tubular pattern . These features are consistent with those of DD type I, confirming the diagnosis based on the clinical and radiographic features. It is anticipated that more permanent teeth may be lost due to severe mobility and may undergo spontaneous pulpal necrosis. The possibility of endosseous implants is being explored for when the patient reaches his late teens and growth is complete.