A 57-year-old Caucasian man diagnosed with HF due to hypertensive dilated cardiomyopathy associated with permanent AF was referred to an exercise training program. He had non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and LVEF was 35%. The functional class was III [(New York Heart Association (NYHA)] and drug therapy was according to the III Brazilian Guideline on Heart Failure and II Brazilian Guideline on Atrial Fibrillation: Losartan 100 mg, Furosemide 40 mg, Carvedilol 150 mg, Warfarin 5 mg, Simvastatin 20 mg, Metformin 1700 mg, and Omeprazole 20 mg. Because of a long history of AF, rate control strategy was implemented. The patient did not have a history of neuromuscular or pulmonary disease. He never smoke and did not drink alcohol. According to his level of physical activity, he led a sedentary life, defined as self-reported less than 1 day/week of planned, structured, and repetitive exercise. His body mass index was 36.8 kg/m2 and resting blood pressure was 115/80 mmHg. Resting electrocardiogram showed AF with an average heart rate of 75 b.p.m.
The supervised exercise training program was carried out three times a week, for a period of 12 weeks in a closed environment, with a controlled temperature between 21°C and 24°C in the afternoon (3:30 pm to 4:30 pm). The exercise training protocol consisted of 5 min of warm-up exercises, 30 min of aerobic training performed on a cycle ergometer at 60 rpm, 20 min of resistance exercises with lower and upper limbs and 5 min of relaxation exercises. The workload was adjusted during the stimulus phase of the aerobic training to keep the perceived effort intensity between 11 (relatively easy) and 13 (slightly tiring) of the Borg Scale. Resistance training was performed in a weight training station and consisted of 2 sets of 10 repetitions, and the following sequence of exercises: leg extension, leg curl, lat pull-down, peck deck, and press chest. The initial workload was set at 60% of 1 repetition maximum. He was encouraged to complete the sets of 10 prescribed repetitions, performing the appropriate movement and avoiding Valsalva manoeuvre. He was instructed to rest for 30–60 s between sets. The intensity of the exercise was increased from 5% to 10% whenever the patient adapted to the exercise workload thorough the 12 weeks of training.
After 12 weeks of supervised sessions, the patient became asymptomatic (NYHA I) and was instructed to continue exercising at home.
displays the results of the cardiopulmonary exercise test before and after 12 weeks of exercise training, performed on a cycle ergometer, using the modified Balke protocol (25 w/min). Comparing the exercise test before and after 12 weeks, we observed that the rest HR reduced and the peak HR increased, and that systolic blood pressure increased, and diastolic blood pressure decreased at the peak of exercise. Peak oxygen consumption (VO2peak) increased and VE/VCO2 slope decreased after training. shows data on muscle sympathetic nerve activity (NMSA) before and after the intervention, obtained by a microelectrode implanted in the fibular nerve and recorded by the shots per minute and every 100 b.p.m. We observed that the shots decreased in both registers, indicating a reduction in NMSA. The muscle blood flow (MBF), obtained by plethysmography venous occlusion, increased after exercise intervention as shown in .