A 37-year-old man was referred by his gastroenterologist to the endocrinology clinic regarding insufficiency fractures and chronic hypophosphatemia, on a background of ileocolonic Crohn’s disease. He reported difficulty walking for 2 years due to weakness and bilateral foot pain. He was mobilizing in a wheelchair. He had lost 6 cm in height and had known fractures of L1 and L2 sustained during a fall 1 year prior. Recent investigations for foot pain included an MRI demonstrating a calcaneal fracture. Hypophosphatemia was present intermittently for 4 years and persisted despite oral phosphate supplementation (elemental phosphorous 1,000 mg daily) for the past 4 months.
He had three bowel resections for Crohn’s disease over a 20-year course, further complicated by enterocutaneous fistula. Initial treatment was with azathioprine monotherapy, though adherence had been variable. He had participated in a 2-year etrolizumab (anti-integrin α4β7 and αEβ7) trial but withdrew just prior to presentation due to persistent disease, with a plan to transition to infliximab. His cumulative corticosteroid exposure was minimal. Other history included vitamin D deficiency, iron deficiency anemia, and gastric ulcers. He was a non-smoker.
Current daily medications were azathioprine 100 mg, cholecalciferol 4,000 IU, calcium carbonate 600 mg, elemental phosphorous 1,000 mg, naproxen 500 mg, pantoprazole 40 mg, multivitamin and paracetamol/codeine 1,000/30 mg. Over 2 years, four intravenous iron infusions had been administered (shown in ). He had adverse drug reactions to intravenous iron polymaltose and FCM, which caused tachycardia and dizziness.
He presented in a wheelchair. His weight was 105 kg and height 191.6 cm, with body mass index 28.5 kg/cm2. There was lower limb proximal weakness and diffuse tenderness over the feet bilaterally.
Biochemistry at initial endocrinology assessment demonstrated a low plasma phosphate of 0.52 mmol/L (reference range 0.75–1.10). The nadir phosphate level of 0.31 mmol/L, shown in , had occurred prior to receiving any iron infusions. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was persistently raised in the absence of other liver function abnormalities. CRP was 20 mg/L (<5).
Fasting urine phosphate was 50.1 mmol/L with urine creatinine 25.9 mmol/L. The calculated tubular reabsorption of phosphate (TmP/GFR) was low at 0.42 mmol/L (1–1.30), indicating inappropriate renal wasting of phosphate. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) was normal. There had been a recent normalization of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D level with cholecalciferol replacement. However, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D was low at 30 nmol/L (48–190) and plasma FGF23 level was inappropriately elevated at 101 ng/L (23–95).
Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry showed low bone mass, with Z score −3.3 at the lumbar spine and −3.8 at the left femoral neck. Bone scintigraphy, shown in a, was consistent with osteomalacia. MRI foot demonstrated a left calcaneal fracture traversing 50% of the depth of the calcaneal tuberosity and a suspected fracture of the medial cuneiform. Taken together, his biochemistry and imaging were consistent with osteomalacia due to FGF23-mediated hypophosphatemia.
A search for the source of FGF23 ensued. DOTATATE PET scan, shown in b, identified an avid 10 × 15 mm soft tissue nodule posterior to the right knee. The patient proceeded to an uncomplicated excision of the lesion.
Histopathology shown in demonstrated a highly vascular lesion with spindle cells in short fascicles (a), positive for FGF23 on immunohistochemistry (b). The final histopathological diagnosis was PMT.
Following surgery, FGF23 levels dramatically decreased and plasma phosphate levels completely normalized . The bone pain improved over the ensuing months and the patient was able to walk with no aid within 4 months of tumor removal. Two years post-surgery, there was significant improvement in the bone scan appearances, with now largely physiologic activity (c).