A 19-year-old Italian male student came to the Emergency Department of the "Policlinico Paolo Giaccone" University Hospital in Palermo, Italy, with fever, headache and altered consciousness. The fever started one week before presentation; he had experienced pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy and asthenia. He had no other history of disease and was immunocompetent. An initial cranial CT scan was normal.
On admission, he had a Glasgow score of 12 and a temperature of 38.6°C; he had visual disorders including blurred vision, impaired accommodation and diplopia.
He presented with cervical lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly.
Laboratory tests revealed that he had a white blood cell count of 15400 cell mm-3, with 20% neutrophils, 36,2% lymphocytes, 33,1% monocytes and hypertransaminasemia (aspartate aminotransferase level of 78 IU l-1 and an alanine aminotransferase level of 271 IU l-1).
Lumbar puncture revealed 81 cells/μL with 27% mononuclear cells and a protein content of 102 mg dl-1.
Real Time quantitative PCR of Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) was positive for EBV (2.200 copies/mL). We used the BAMHI-W fragment region of the EBV genome as the target of our PCR screening .
PCR of the CSF sample was negative for Herpes Virus 1 And 2, Varicella Zoster Virus, Cytomegalovirus and Enterovirus. Bacterial cultures were negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other pathogens which are epidemiologically relevant in our geographic area (e.i. Rickettsia conorii, Brucella spp).
On admission, serological tests for HIV, VDRL, CMV, HSV, hepatitis A, hepatitis C, b Borrelia and Brucella were all negative. Serological tests for EBV confirmed primary infection: VCA IgM positive, EA IgG positive, VCA IgG positive, and EBNA IgG negative.
An MRI scan of the brain using gadolinium contrast enhancement was performed 18 hours after the patient was admitted to hospital. Images were taken of the axial, coronal and sagittal sections.
MRI was initially performed with a 1.5-T unit (General Electric, United State) with a single channel receiver coil and body coil for excitation. The examination protocol included FRFSE T2W, FLAIR T2W, DWI and FSE T1W before and after intravenous administration of Gadobutrol. A power injector was used to administer 0,1 mL of Gadovist® (Gadobutrol, 1 M, Bayer Schering Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany) per kg of body weight (equivalent to 0,1 mmol/kg body weight) followed by 20 ml of saline. Injection rate was 2 mL/s. Sequence parameters are reported in Table .
The DWI sequence did not show any signal abnormalities whereas the T2 Fast relaxation fast spin echo sequence detected demyelinating alteration of the sub- and supra-tentorial white matter, and internal and external capsule and periventricular white matter and semioval center involvement, with scattered, partly confluent white matter changes Fourth ventricle size was reduced, which is consistent with cerebral edema, and we also observed hyperintensity in the ponto-mesencephalic region (cortico spinal tract), on the T2 FLAIR sequence. .
Contrast agent enhancement pattern suggested an inflammatory response restricted to the brain microcirculation .
The patient was treated with intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 h) combined with methylprednisolone (500 mg intravenous bolus for 3 days then 1 mg/kg daily for 21 days).
Neurological improvement was noted at day 10 (Glasgow score of 14) but his diplopia symptoms persisted. PCR on CSF performed three weeks after admission was negative for EBV.
An MRI scan of the brain after three weeks showed markedly decreased hyperintensity on T2W and contrast enhancement had disappeared on post-gadolinium T1-W .
Scanner and sequence parameters were identical to those used previously .
Six months later, the patient had residual diplopia but was otherwise normal.