Following an open gastrectomy for early-stage gastric cancer and a subsequent internal hernia in Petersen’s space, reduction of this internal hernia, and incident bilateral leg edema, a 75-year-old man presented at the emergency room of our medical center with a recurrence of post-surgical bilateral leg edema.
A 75-year-old man with a history of diabetes and hypertension had undergone an open gastrectomy for early-stage gastric cancer 1 year and 5 mo before the occurrence of an internal hernia in Petersen’s space. Following the initial surgery, he was treated conservatively on an outpatient basis without receiving chemotherapy and showed no recurrence or metastasis. At this point (1 year and 5 mo after the gastric cancer surgery), he presented at the emergency room of our medical center with complaints of mild, occasional abdominal distention and pain after meals that had mainly resolved naturally and a worrisome continued loss of appetite over approximately the past two weeks. Following imaging examinations described below, an internal hernia in Petersen's space was suspected, and laparoscopy was immediately performed. The operation revealed small intestine intrusion in Petersen's space, which was challenging to reduce laparoscopically. The patient underwent laparotomy, and the incarcerated small intestine was restored successfully, and the Petersen's defect was sutured using a non-absorbable thread. There was no necrosis of the intestine, and bowel resection was not performed. After surgery, the patient was managed with analgesia (mainly epidural anesthesia). He was administered non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as flurbiprofen axetil (twice on the day of surgery and the next day) during his hospitalization and later follow-up. Excluding a mild surgical site infection, the patient had a good postoperative course and was discharged on the fifteenth day after surgery.
Approximately 3 mo after his surgery for Petersen’s hernia, the patient developed bilateral leg edema, with laboratory findings and diagnostic imaging scans described in detail below. Briefly, as a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed no thrombus in the SMV but a slight thrombus in the lower limb, the patient was started on oral edoxaban. Although the etiology of this complication was not discerned, prompt recovery of his leg edema after administration of albumin solutions and diuretics resulted in early discharge. However, the leg edema resurfaced three weeks after discharge, and the patient was re-admitted for examination.
The patient had a history of Type II diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Apart from this, his medical history was uncomplicated before early-stage gastric cancer, with no chronic or acute major illnesses, infections, or injuries.
The patient’s height was 157 cm, and his weight was 51 kg. He was retired and did not have any family history of cancer or allergies to food and drugs. His medical history included Type II diabetes mellitus and hypertension, both of which were well controlled without oral treatment and insulin injection or any diet at the time of presentation. He had been taking magnesium oxide (330 mg × 6 tablets), mosapride citrate (5 mg × 3 tablets), Pancrelipase (150 mg × 6 capsules), and Kampo Daikenchuto (2.5 g × 6 packages) after surgery for gastric cancer, and he also took edoxaban for lower limb thrombosis and furosemide (20 mg × 2 tablets) and spironolactone (25 mg × 2 tablets) for the bilateral leg edema.
Blood test results, including those for renal and hepatic function, at the time of admission were as follows: Total protein, 4.2 g/dL; albumin, 1.9 g/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 33.1 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.83 mg/dL; Na, 136 mEq/L; K, 4.4 mEq/L; Cl, 100 mEq/L; Ca, 7.1 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 45 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 33 U/L; total bilirubin, 0.6 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 0.2 mg/dL; lactate dehydrogenase, 336 U/L; creatine phosphokinase, 116 U/L; amylase, 51 U/L; cholinesterase, 70 U/L; total cholesterol, 131 mg/dL; high density lipoprotein cholesterol, 51 mg/dL; low density lipoprotein cholesterol, 63 mg/dL; and triglyceride, 88 mg/dL.
He followed an ordinary diet before admission and switched to a low-fat, high-protein, elemental diet in the hospital.
During the patient’s second incidence of bilateral leg edema, we performed technetium diethyl-enetriamine-pentaacetic acid human serum albumin lymphoscintigraphy, which showed accumulation in the ascending and transverse colon. However, no abnormalities were found on colonoscopy. Capsule endoscopy was performed to examine the small intestine, revealing an extensive jejunal ulcer with stenosis. The capsule was stalled by this stenosis. Oral DBE was performed to retrieve the capsule and closely examine the lesions in the jejunum, revealing continuous jejunal ulceration with circumferential stenosis and erosion extending approximately 8 cm. Tissue biopsy was performed to differentiate lymphoma and small intestine cancer, and India ink injection was used to mark the lesion via DBE. Transanal DBE could not reach the jejunal ulcer and stenosis. No other lesions were found in the intestine.
As previously described, approximately 3 mo following this patient’s surgery for Petersen’s hernia, he developed bilateral leg edema. Four months after the surgery, his serum albumin had dropped to 1.9 g/dL, and his total serum protein levels had dropped to 4.2 g/dL, resulting in admission to the hospital for additional examination. At the first incidence of leg edema, blood tests showed no liver dysfunction, and urine tests for protein were negative. In addition, no signs of lymphoma or small intestine cancer were detected by histopathology during diagnostic tests performed following the second incidence of leg edema.
Upon the patient’s presentation with Petersen’s hernia, a contrast-enhanced CT scan showed an SMV twisted around the superior mesenteric artery in a spiral-like pattern, as well as venous congestion in the small intestine mesentery . On presentation for bilateral leg edema following his surgery for Petersen’s hernia, a contrast-enhanced CT scan showed no thrombus in the SMV but a slight thrombus in the lower limb. At his presentation for the second occurrence of bilateral leg edema, amidotrizoic acid radiography revealed lesion stenosis and poor dilation over a segment approximately 6 cm in length .