The proband, a 45-year-old man, was referred to the endocrine unit of a tertiary hospital in Pretoria, South Africa, in July 2015 due to poor glycaemic control (glycated haemoglobin [HbA1c] = 13%; abnormal > 6.5%). Glycated haemoglobin was assessed using the National Glycohaemoglobin Standardization Program-certified high performance liquid chromatography (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, United States) method. He was diagnosed with diabetes (presumed type 2), at age 37 years, and hearing impairment was noted a year later. He had a previous admission for congestive cardiac failure and an echocardiogram revealed an ejection fraction of 13% – 15%. At age 42 years, he developed proximal myopathy, leading to reliance on a wheelchair for mobility. He was grossly underweight, with a body mass index of 14.48 kg/m2. The patient had established renal impairment (urea = 18.8 mmol/L, reference interval = 2.1–7.1; creatinine = 139 µmol/L, reference interval = 64–104), and an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 47 mL/min per 1.73 m2 (chronic kidney disease, stage 3) with frank proteinuria. Urea was analysed using the urease enzyme assay, creatinine the alkaline picrate while urine protein was tested with the turbidimetric method that utilises benzethonium chloride (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, Illinois, United States) . Type 1 diabetes mellitus was excluded (anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase and islets tyrosine phosphatase 2 antibodies were negative), and C-peptide levels were normal (2.6 µg/L; reference interval = 0.9–7.1), suggesting residual insulin secretion. As C-peptide levels may be decreased in patients with kidney failure, looking for features of monogenic diabetes can assist to reduce misclassification. He had not experienced any episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis. His clinical and biochemical features were in keeping with MIDD.
Genetic investigations were pursued for some of his maternal relatives. Genetic investigation of the proband was not done as the patient demised prior to testing. Only one of his siblings and two of their children were available for testing. The presence of the m.3243A>G variant was investigated using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by the restriction fragment length polymorphism method with ApaI (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) in DNA extracted from urine samples. Generated fragments were compared against a GeneRuler DNA Ladder Mix (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) .
The family pedigree and characteristics indicated variable presentations across three generations. The proband’s mother had hearing difficulties and died from a suspected cardiovascular cause at age 43 years. Among his three sisters, two were diagnosed with diabetes and deafness, and died prematurely, one at age 46 (II 5) due to congestive cardiac failure, and the other at 54 years (II 6) due to acute myocardial infarction. A son of one of these sisters (III 7) was diagnosed with diabetes (HbA1c = 7.7%), hearing loss and had the m.3243A>G variant. The third sister (II 4) also tested positive for the m.3243A>G variant; however, apart from a recent decline in hearing, she had no features of target organ damage. In contrast, her daughter (III 3) developed end-stage kidney failure requiring transplant in her 20s. Her other child, a son (III 4), tested negative for the m.3243A>G variant and has remained free of any related symptoms. Heteroplasmy levels were not determined for any of these cases.