A 60-year-old Indian man presented to our institution with complaints of generalized epigastric abdominal pain of moderate intensity for the previous 10 days, with associated nausea, vomiting and diarrhea of recent onset. His past medical history was significant for anemia that required blood transfusions on two separate occasions, but it was otherwise unremarkable. He had arrived in our area from India two weeks prior to presentation. A presumptive diagnosis of acute gastroenteritis was made, and the patient was started on intravenous fluids and admitted to the medical ward.
Ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging scans of the patient’s abdomen revealed thrombosis of the portal vein, splenic vein and superior mesenteric vein, along with a hypodense region in the liver suggestive of infarction and edematous bowel loops with fat-stranding indicative of mesenteric ischemia . A preliminary blood work-up revealed macrocytic anemia with 8.7g/dL hemoglobin and 137.1fL mean corpuscular volume. A peripheral blood smear showed numerous macrocytes, macro-ovalocytes and hypersegmented neutrophils indicative of megaloblastic anemia. His serum folate and red blood cell folate levels were normal, but his serum vitamin B12 levels were severely low at <44pmol/L. An additional work-up showed a positive 1:80 titer for anti–parietal cell antibody and a markedly positive anti–intrinsic factor antibody level of 131U, thus establishing the diagnosis of pernicious anemia. An extensive coagulation work-up showed a raised prothrombin time (13.3 seconds), an elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (43.4 seconds) and a high international normalized ratio (1.3). It also revealed a normal platelet count, normal protein C and protein S levels, and normal anti–thrombin III function, as well as a negative result for lupus anti-coagulant.
Genetic testing for factor V Leiden mutation and JAK2 gene mutation was negative. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgM assays for anti-cardiolipin and anti-β2-glycoprotein antibodies were below diagnostic values, as were anti-nuclear antibody tests. However, the patient’s serum homocysteine levels were markedly high at 70μmol/L (normal 4μmol/L to 12μmol/L). The results of a test for the methyltetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene was negative for any remarkable polymorphisms, including the C677T mutation. A genetic test result for factor II mutation was also negative.
The patient was admitted to the medical ward and started on anti-coagulation therapy with warfarin and low-molecular-weight heparin, as well as parenteral vitamin B12 therapy, after his vein thromboses were deemed surgically incorrigible. During his hospital stay, he developed progressive ascites that required periodic drainage. On day 20 of admission, the ascitic fluid drainage turned turbid and a CT scan showed mesenteric perforation . An emergent laparotomy revealed mesenteric gangrene with perforation, and a bowel resection with ileostomy and mucus fistula creation was performed. The patient’s recovery was complicated by Bacteroides ovatus bacteremia and Klebsiella pneumoniae sepsis, which resulted in septic shock and multi-organ dysfunction syndrome necessitating intensive care. He eventually developed progressively rising bilirubin and falling albumin levels as well as profound jaundice and encephalopathy, indicative of end-stage hepatic failure. Despite aggressive anti-coagulation therapy being administered continuously throughout the patient’s admission, and in spite of his vitamin B12 and homocysteine levels turning normal, his thromboses did not resolve. This resulted in splenic infarction as well as progressive liver failure with severe hepatic encephalopathy. The patient eventually died due to hepatic failure three months into his hospital stay.