A 25-year-old Asian man was referred to us for further investigation of the relationship between his disease and occupational exposure 5 months after receiving a diagnosis of polyneuropathy at another hospital. Information about his clinical course was mainly obtained from his self-report and medical records.
A 25-year-old Asian man presented with complaints of progressive weakness and numbness in his hands and feet for the past 10 months. He initially experienced numbness of his right hand. The numbness and weakness spread to all four limbs in 8 months. In the subsequent 2 months, he faced difficulties in using chopsticks, ascending stairs, jumping, and running because of weakness. He denied intake of alcohol or any prescription drugs. On examination, he was conscious and oriented to time, place, and person. He had sensory impairments in a stocking-and-glove distribution, impaired distal muscle power in all four limbs, and absent deep tendon reflex on biceps, ankles, and knees. His cranial nerves were intact. The results of all routine hematological (complete blood cell), serological (anti-nuclear antibody), and biochemical (blood urea nitrogen, creatine, sodium, potassium, glucose, glycated hemoglobin, vitamin B12, and folic acid) examinations were all within normal limits. Results of the tests determining lead, arsenic, and mercury levels in blood samples and cadmium level in urine sample were negative. Electromyography revealed a mildly positive sharp waves in the anterior tibialis and extensor digitorum brevis, and reduced recruitment with polyphasic potentials in the anterior tibialis, extensor digitorum brevis, rectus femoris, and first dorsal interosseous. Nerve conduction velocity studies indicated slowing of motor nerve conduction velocity, and prolongation of distal motor and sensory latencies. Brief data from the medical records at the other hospital are summarized in Tables and . Both auditory-evoked potential and visual-evoked potential studies remained normal.
Detailed history taking revealed that our patient was exposed to n-hexane in his workplace. Demyelination with axonal degeneration caused by occupational n-hexane exposure was strongly suspected. He was treated symptomatically with neurotropic vitamins. After removal from exposure for 4 months, his symptoms improved gradually, but he still faced some difficulty in running. Finally, he returned to the plant and shifted to another job without n-hexane exposure. The timeline of this case is depicted in Fig. .
Our patient was an operator in a Chinese medicine pharmaceutical plant for the manufacture of Chinese herbal pain relief patches. For the past 18 months, he had been working in the mixing room to prepare the herbal ointment of the patches. He used to work with bare hands for fear that the gloves might drop into the stirring barrel tank. Because the mixing room was extremely hot and stuffy, he seldom used the respiratory protective mask at work. His first task was to pour n-hexane-containing solvents into a barrel tank containing the Chinese herb extract and gel. n-Hexane is a solvent and an adhesive used for mixing herbal extract to form a gluey ointment. During the mixing process, n-hexane would vaporize and only the gluey ointment would remain (see Fig. ). His next task was to scoop out the mixture and to separate it into trays. The trays filled with the mixture were then subjected to the next process. Before the next cycle, he had to clean the mixer tank by using a rag dipped in a n-hexane-containing solvent. Furthermore, he used the same solvent, instead of water and soap, to clean his hands. The n-hexane-containing solvent was stored in buckets without any label or a lid. The daily consumption of the solvent was approximately 180 liters.
He worked in such conditions for at least 6 hours a day, had a 30-minute lunchbreak in between, and had only 4 days off per month. Among the 105 workers in this plant in total, three people, including this patient, were involved in the mixing process. The other operators had been working for 5 to 10 years, none of them exhibited symptoms of neuropathy; however, they had nonspecific complaints like headache, dizziness, and fatigue. Both of the senior workers claimed that they had worn masks and gloves while handling organic compounds all the time at work. The supervisors stated that they only knew that the chemicals used could be toxic. The workers were not allowed to eat or smoke in the workplace. The employer did not provide warning labels, display safety data sheets, ambient air sampling, biological monitoring, or provide the necessary safety and health education and training for workers regarding this toxic chemical. Moreover, no specific measures had been adopted to reduce the risk of solvent exposure.
The mixing room was reconstructed and fitted with an air conditioner and local exhaust ventilating system before our visit. The inlet of the exhaust pipe was near the stirring barrel tank, but there was no hood on it. We took both personal and workplace samples using SKC activated charcoal tubes (SKC catalog number 226-01, 6-mm outside diameter, 100/50-mg sections) under 27 °C and 756 mmHg for 1 hour at the flowrate of 200 mL/minute. The samples were desorbed with carbon disulfide and analyzed through gas chromatography (GC) and mass spectrometry (MS). The sampling sites and results are depicted in Fig. and Table .
The ambient hexane levels were as high as 1789 ppm and 456 ppm in the mixing room, and 120 ppm for personal concentration. Although the permissible exposure limit (PEL) of Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the recommended exposure level (REL) of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) for n-hexane are 500 ppm (1800 mg/m3) , these three samples considerably exceeded the permissible level in Taiwan, 50 ppm (180 mg/m3), which is the same level as the threshold limit value (TLV)-time-weighted average (TWA) of the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) . The European Commission recommends that the occupational exposure limit of n-hexane is 20 ppm (72 mg/m3) . Our findings suggested that workers might be overexposed to hexane even after reconstruction; however, the level of exposure was considerably higher before the reconstruction than after it. Further effective control measures needed to be implemented as soon as possible. The employer promised to make efforts to reduce workers’ exposure to hexane in the future.