We present a case of a 25-year-old male who presented with complaint of clawing of his left great toe. The patient had sustained a left-sided distal tibia fracture treated with open fixation of the tibia fracture 3 years ago. The implant was removed 18 months after the procedure due to the patient’s preference. After 6 months, the patient initially noticed clawing of his left great toe when he climbed stairs barefoot. He also complained that he had started to find it difficult to sit cross-legged, squat, as well as ride his bicycle due to the tightness he felt in his toes with certain ankle movements on examination, the patient walked with a normal bipedal unassisted gait. He had well-healed surgical scars and a plantigrade foot. Active dorsiflexion of the ankle joint produced an exaggerated flexion of the great toe. With the ankle held in dorsiflexion, it was not possible for the patient to actively or passively fully extend any of the toes . The diagnosis of checkrein deformity of the left great toe was made and attributed to the previous fracture of the distal tibia resulting in scarring or ischemic injury to the toe flexors. The possible patterns of injury could have been an isolated injury to FHL muscle or tendon causing fixed flexion of the great toe. The patient elected for surgical intervention and surgical exploration of FHL tendon at the level of the midfoot was planned. Exploration at the midfoot would give easier access to both tendons free from scar tissue making correction easier. The patient was suitably consented and the exploration was performed under spinal anesthetic with an inflated tourniquet at 250 mmHg. The tendon of FHL was identified . Subsequent z-plasty of FHL tendon gave a full correction of the great toe flexion contracture . The patient made an uncomplicated post-operative recovery and after final review, 3 months post-surgery had maintained the full range of movement in all toes . Weight-bearing photograph is also shown before surgery and after surgery .