In July 2011, a 63-year old male patient complained of an acute binocular diplopy with right trochlear nerve paralysis, and labial hypoesthesia.
Previous medical history included a high grade NMIBC, pT1b, treated in 2008 by TURBT and intravesical BCG therapeutic therapy. The patient presented no signs of local recurrence. He had ceased smoking after 60 Pack-Years.
Brain scan and MRI were performed finding a clivus infiltration and a pachymeningitis.
There were no infectious or autoimmune diseases, three spinal taps showed no bacteria, abnormal cells, or hyperproteinorachy, and the tumor markers (AFP, PSA, NSE, ACE, CA19.9, thyroglobulin, calcitonin) were negative.
The patient underwent a whole body CT-scan revealing blastic lesions mostly in the spinal and femoral regions. A PET-scan was then performed, showing a diffuse bone marrow hypermetabolism but no primary tumor site. Additional work-up included a cystoscopy, a prostate echography, a thyroid echography and a gastrointestinal endoscopy. All were negative.
Finally, a vertebral biopsy was performed finding an invasive carcinoma, CK7+/CK20+, TTF1-, PSA-, Thyroglobulin- and GATA3 + .
Based on the patient’s medical history and the immunohistochemical analogy we hypothesized that the metastatic event was in relation to the high grade NMIBC treated 3 years previously.
Palliative chemotherapy was then initiated with 6 planned cycles combining gemcitabine-cisplatine, with a mid-term assessment.
Chemotherapy was safely administered with with no side effects other than Grade 1 nausea and diarrhea for 4 days at each cycle. Due to the cumulative toxicity of the Gemcitabine, the last injection was not given because of a Grade 2 thrombocytopenia.
After 3 cycles, the binocular diplopy disappeared, the brain MRI found a decrease in the meningeal rising, and the PET-scan reported a decrease in bone metabolism but continued persistence of the heterogeneity of clivus and bones.
After 6 cycles and to date, 4 years after the last administration of chemotherapy, there is no further PET-FDG metabolism in brain or bones, but persistence of heterogeneity on MRI. The patient is therefore considered to be in complete response (CR).
Clinically, he has no other neurological symptom but a restricted labial hypoesthesia.
The interest of complementary cerebral radiotherapy was challenged in a multidisciplinary meeting. However, considering the complete response and the expected long term toxicity of a whole brain irradiation, the indication was not retained.
The patient still has his bladder. The last cystoscopy was performed in September 2015 and was normal.