A 56-year-old male presented with a left cervical mass that had been present for one month.
The patient's left cervical mass was incidentally discovered and no other clinical manifestations.
The patient was previously diagnosed with diabetes and took oral hypoglycemic drugs for control of blood glucose level.
The patient lived in Jining, China. He did not smoke and was not addicted to alcohol. No relevant family history was reported.
Physical examination revealed a solid small peanut-sized mass in the left supraclavicular region.
The laboratory assessment revealed that carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA199, and CA724 serum levels were moderately elevated.
Ultrasonography of the cervical mass showed that multiple hypoechoic masses were present in the left supraclavicular fossa, and the larger mass measuring 0.9 cm × 0.5 cm had a clear border and unclear internal structure. This mass was mildly enhanced on contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) . Positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) scan demonstrated that no significant fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake was observed in the left supraclavicular region . To determine the nature of the enlarged lymph nodes, lymph node biopsy was performed, and histopathological examination revealed metastatic adenocarcinoma . In the immunohistochemical analysis, the biopsied tissue was positive for SP-B, CK8/18, CK20, CDX-2 and P504S expression with a Ki-67 index of 80%; the tissue was negative for CK5/6, CgA, P40, P63, CK7, TTF-1, Napsin A, SPA and Syn expression. The laboratory assessment revealed that CEA, CA199, and CA724 serum levels were elevated. To further clarify the diagnosis, the patient underwent gastroenteroscopy, and the results revealed one pedunculated polyp with mucosal erosion in the sigmoid colon, measuring 2.0 cm in diameter . Histological examination with hematoxylin-eosin staining revealed adenocarcinoma was in the intramucosal tissue . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the polyp was positive for CDX-2 and CK20 expression, negative for CgA, Syn and CD56 expression, and the Ki-67 index was 70%. In addition, high-throughput gene sequencing showed wild type K-Ras.