The patient is a 15 years old boy born from non-consanguineous parents from the state of São Paulo, Brazil. He was sent to our evaluation at the age of 4 years due to a recalcitrant eczema at that time associated with a possible milk and egg allergy. In addition, the patient had rhinitis and asthma with a negative skin prick test for the most common inhalant allergens in Brazil including house dust, fungi, animal epithelium and cockroach. An oral food challenge with egg and milk came out negative and was done to better understand if any of these agents was a possible trigger of the eczema. The first skin biopsy found acanthosis, parakeratosis and agranulosis in the epidermis with micro abscess in the stratum corneum. In the papillary dermis was found vascular ectasia with a mix of inflammatory cells with neutrophilic predominance, both signs consistent of chronic eczema. Topical treatment with corticosteroids and tacrolimus was not effective in controlling the eczema. Due to the recalcitrant skin condition, the patient was medicated with oral cyclosporine (dose 2.5–4.2 mg/kg/day) for three years and discontinued after amelioration.
At the age of 7 years during routine laboratory work up a selective IgA deficiency (IgA levels of 0.4 mg/dL) was found. Also at seven, the patient started begun to present diffuse arthralgia with enlargement of knees and the diagnosis of Idiopathic Juvenile Arthritis was made. Another round of immunosuppression with Anti-TNF (Etanercept—dose 45 mg/2 weeks) and methotrexate (17.5 mg/week) achieved clinical control of articular conditions and no relapse of skin condition was observed for five years. At the age of 12 years, while still on MTX and anti-TNF therapy he had onset of new symptoms that included alopecia areata, vitiligo, and diarrhea without blood or mucus.. A colonoscopy was performed and lymphangiectasis and diffuse colitis was found which led to a presumed diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease. Anti-TNF and methotrexate were discontinued and oral mesalazine was initiated with partial resolution of the diarrhea and no worsening of the arthritis. Because of the initial suspicion of IPEX syndrome, the patient was screened for autoimmune diseases including endocrinopathy and anti-gad, ANA-antibodies and rheumatoid factor was negative. No growth alteration was observed over those years.
Because of the suspicion of IPEX, peripheral quantification of FOXP3 was performed at the age of 14, when the patient was under oral mesalazine and two years free of anti-TNF and methotrexate, which resulted normal. Nevertheless, with the high suspicion of IPEX a genetic sequencing was requested that came out positive to an already reported mutation in the FOXP3 gene. After genetic diagnosis, the patient was sent to bone marrow transplant. All relevant laboratory analysis, clinical and pathological results are shown in Figs. and .