On November 5, 2012, an 87-year-old Japanese woman with a history of hypertension was admitted to our hospital because of severe bradykinesia, muscle rigidity, gait disturbance and neck pain. She had noticed motor symptoms, such as slowness, stiffness and difficulty walking, for approximately 2 years, but had undergone no treatment. Her motor symptoms gradually deteriorated, and severe neck and back pain developed from around November 2, after which she became almost bedridden.
At admission, her body temperature was 36.9°C and her blood pressure was 124/70 mm Hg. Chest and abdominal examinations did not show any abnormal findings, but she complained of severe constipation. Upon neurological examination, a remarkable mask-like face and a low voice were shown. She presented marked cogwheel rigidity in both elbows, wrist and knee joints, and lead-pipe rigidity in her neck and trunk, with severe cervical and back pain. Additionally, she demonstrated remarkable bradykinesia, postural instability and severe gait disturbance (short-stepped gait), with freezing phenomenon and pulsion. The tremor at rest was unremarkable. She was oriented and her memory was preserved. There was neither agnosia nor apraxia. Initial routine laboratory examinations revealed marked elevation of white blood cells (10,100/µl) and C-reactive protein (CRP; 8.63 mg/dl). The level of serum uric acid (5.2 mg/dl) was not elevated. Blood examination results for connective tissue disease or vasculitis, such as rheumatoid factor, cytoplasmic (C-) antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), perinuclear (P-) ANCA, and antinuclear, anticardiolipin, anti-CL-β2GPI, anti-double-strand DNA and anticyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibodies, were all negative or unremarkable. A large number of white blood cells and bacilli were shown in the urine examination. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study demonstrated almost normal findings. The patient was primarily diagnosed with severe and untreated PD with pain and NMS as well as urinary tract infection. Her parkinsonism at the ‘off’ state corresponded to Hoehn and Yahr scale score IV and the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) revealed part I score 1, part II score 23 and part III score 62. The patient was treated with antiparkinsonism drugs (levodopa/benserazide at 100 mg/25 mg and droxidopa at 100 mg orally two times daily), antibiotic agents (ceftriaxone sodium hydrate at 2 g intravenously daily) and NSAID such as loxoprofen sodium hydrate and diclofenac sodium. The patient's parkinsonism, such as marked muscle rigidity of the limbs and trunk, bradykinesia and postural instability, was improved and she could walk with a walker. In particular, the UPDRS parts II and III, which reflect the motor symptoms in PD, markedly declined to scores of 10 and 22, respectively, at the ‘on’ state by dopaminergic therapy. In addition, dyskinesia and motor fluctuation such as ‘wearing off’ and ‘on-off’ phenomena were not recognized at all, so the UPDRS part IV, which reflects the motor complications in PD during dopaminergic therapy, revealed a score of only 1. However, her slight fever (37.7°C), neck rigidity with severe pain and elevation of the serum CRP level (10.47 mg/dl) continued. Blood culture, serum procalcitonin and routine cerebrospinal fluid studies all revealed negative results or were within the normal range; thus, meningitis was negative.
On November 10, a cervical plain CT scan detected remarkable crown-like calcification around the odontoid process . A three-dimensional reconstruction image confirmed more remarkable crown-like calcification on the posterior side of the dens . A cervical MRI study did not demonstrate any direct compression of the cervical cord (data not shown). Based on these cervical CT findings, the patient was diagnosed as having CDS with PD, and was immediately treated with corticosteroid (prednisolone at 30 mg orally daily, tapering off by 5 mg a week). The patient's slight fever, neck rigidity with severe pain and serum CRP level (0.83 mg/dl) were drastically improved within a week by the course of corticosteroid therapy. She was discharged home on December 11, 2012.