A 54-year-old woman was referred to our hospital due to cough and fever.
The patient developed cough and fever 20 d ago after catching a cold. The cough was paroxysmal with white sticky sputum. Her body temperature ranged from 38°C to 39°C.
She had a history of nephrotic syndrome for 7 mo and was given prednisone (60 mg/d) 6 mo previously. The hormone was then gradually reduced to the current dose of 25 mg/d. The patient was a farmer, but she did not work after she became sick. She had no special contact history, such as going into the greenhouse, dust exposure, or pet breeding.
The patient denied any family history.
On admission, her temperature was 38.3°C, respiratory rate was 23 breaths/min, heart rate was 114 bpm, and blood pressure was 90/69 mmHg. Breath sounds in both lungs were rough, and moist rales were heard.
Laboratory data revealed the following values: white blood cell count, 12.58 × 109/L; hemoglobin, 102 g/L; platelets, 118 × 109/L; C-reactive protein, 240 mg/L; and procalcitonin, 2.93 ng/mL.
Chest CT showed many nodular or hillock lesions in the right pleura, mediastinum, and interlobar fissure areas . Most of the lesions showed low density, and some showed soft-tissue density at the peripheral areas with low density in the center and had cavitary appearance. The edge of the lesion was clear, and the right lung was compressed with volume reduction and partial atelectasis. On the lower layer, one lesion infiltrated the chest wall, and the adjacent liver was compressed . Right pleural effusion and pericardial effusion were also observed.
She was treated with piperacillin sodium and sulbactam sodium, but her temperature still fluctuated. Her inflammatory markers were still elevated, and follow-up chest CT scan showed no improvement. In this regard, ultrasound-guided local infiltration anesthesia was further conducted for perihepatic hydrops drainage to improve diagnostic accuracy.
The puncture fluid was thick pus. Gram staining of the puncture fluid depicted Gram-positive bacteria with branching filaments , and the bacteria were positive for weak acid-fast staining . The tentative diagnosis of nocardiosis was made. Puncture fluid culture isolated Nocardia species, confirming the diagnosis of nocardiosis. Subtype Nocardia farcinica was identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry.