An 81-year-old female (height = 1.48 m, weight = 48 kg) was scheduled for laparoscopic and endoscopic cooperative surgery for a duodenal tumor under general anesthesia. She had no relevant medical history. Nasotracheal intubation was requested by the endoscopist to avoid accidental extubation during the endoscopic maneuver. General anesthesia was induced with propofol 30 mg, remifentanil 0.6 mg, and rocuronium 40 mg intravenously; anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane in oxygen and air. Before intubation, we cleaned the right nostril with cotton swabs soaked in 4% lidocaine and povidone-iodine. After applying a lubricating jelly to the right nasal passage, the lubricated Parker Flex-Tip nasal endotracheal tube (6.5 mm; Parker Medical, USA) was inserted blindly into the floor of the nose and then advanced by rotating clockwise. The depth of the tube was already 17 cm, so we tried to find the tube in the oropharynx by direct laryngoscopy. However, the tip of the tube could not be visualized; instead, the right submandibular subcutaneous tissue was observed to be bulging. We suspected a submucosal retropharyngeal dissection, and the tube was immediately removed. Brief mask ventilation was performed until conditions were suitable for intubation.
In a second attempt, a nasogastric tube (14 Fr, NIPRO, Japan) was inserted through the left nostril, and the tip of the tube in the oropharynx was confirmed by direct laryngoscopy. Then, the nasotracheal tube was put over it, and the tip of the endotracheal tube was also confirmed under direct laryngoscopy at the depth of 12 cm. After removing the nasogastric tube, nasotracheal intubation was performed successfully, and the tube was finally fixed at 29 cm on the nostril. Since there was no active bleeding in the pharynx or palpable cervical swelling, we decided to proceed with the surgery as planned. All vital signs were stable throughout the surgery. After the operation, we examined the pharynx again by direct laryngoscopy, and there were no remarkable findings. The nasotracheal tube was gently extubated in the operating room, and the patient was able to breathe normally. Considering the risk of airway obstruction caused by delayed retropharyngeal hematoma, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.
Chest X-ray imaging performed immediately after surgery revealed extensive subcutaneous emphysema on the right side of the neck . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) performed after extubation revealed that the retropharyngeal dissection extended to the right common carotid artery; however, contrast leakage was not observed in the region . Fiber-optic laryngoscopic examination of the nasal cavity and nasopharynx showed a fresh laceration of the posterior pharyngeal mucosa suggesting entry into the false passage by the nasotracheal intubation . Treatment was initiated with 1-g cefazolin administered intravenously every 8 h for 5 days, followed by 500 mg of levofloxacin administered orally every 24 h for 4 days. In addition, blowing the nose was prohibited to prevent further dissection.
The patient was transferred to the ward on postoperative day 1 and started oral intake on postoperative day 2. Follow-up fiber-optic examination performed on postoperative days 2, 3, and 10 indicated the laceration gradually reduced and disappeared. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 13 without any additional complications.