A 25-year-old man with history of a large RAT on transthoracic echocardiogram done for preoperative risk assessment presented for management of persistent RAT. He had completed a trial of systemic anticoagulation with twice daily apixaban 5 mg for 1 month without improvement. His past medical history included relapsed acute myeloid leukaemia treated with chemotherapy and bone marrow transplant in remission at the time of presentation. He had a history of chronic steroid use due to graft vs. host disease which was complicated by avascular necrosis of the left hip requiring surgical repair 2 months prior to presentation. His surgical history was notable for a right subclavian vein tunnelled catheter placed for administration of chemotherapy. The catheter was later replaced by a Port-a-cath (Smith Medical, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) which itself was replaced twice due to malfunction. The device was removed 2 years prior to presentation. The differential diagnosis of the right atrial mass included thrombus vs. tumour vs. vegetation. The patient’s physical exam was significant for jugular venous distention but was otherwise unremarkable. Vital signs were within normal limits on room air.
Transoesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated a persistent, hypermobile, massive RAT attached via a thin stalk to the lateral right atrial wall at the junction of the superior vena cava (SVC) and the right atrium with extension of the mass into the right ventricle during diastole (1.8 cm stalk, 3.0 cm × 1.3 cm mass) (, Video 1). No atrial septal defect or patent foramen ovale was noted. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, completed to characterize the right atrial mass in the setting of prior malignancy, demonstrated features consistent with thrombus and confirmed normal right ventricular function (Video 2). Computed tomography was completed to establish baseline absence of pulmonary embolus prior to any intervention. Of note, clinical suspicion for pulmonary embolism was low (Wells criteria score 1.5). Computed tomography also demonstrated extension of the RAT up into the SVC with partial thrombus in the right internal jugular vein. Ultrasound of the internal jugular veins and femoral veins did not show obstruction.
Given the precarious morphology of the RAT and failure of the mass to regress with systemic anticoagulation, the decision was made to mechanically remove the mass. Surgery was offered to the patient given young age and some uncertainty that the mass could be safely removed percutaneously; however, the patient declined due to an already arduous medical history up to this point. Given the location and size of thrombus, the Angiovac generation 3 (Angiodynamics, Inc., Latham, NY, USA) was deemed most appropriate for removal of the mass.
The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia in order to facilitate transoesophageal echocardiogram guidance. Access was gained via bilateral femoral veins. An 18-Fr Fem-Flex cannula (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted into the left femoral vein. A standard 0.035 J wire was advanced through the right femoral 6-Fr sheath into the right atrium. A diagnostic catheter was then advanced over the wire, then the J wire was exchanged for a stiff Lunderquist 0.035 cm wire (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA). The 6-Fr sheath was then removed in exchange for the 26-Fr Gore DrySeal (Gore Medical, Newark, DE, USA). The Angiovac catheter was advanced over the wire to the right atrium and wire removed. The patient was anticoagulated by bolus infusion of Heparin at a dose of 150 units per kg in order to achieve a target activated clotting time of 300 s. The Angiovac funnel with 180° bend was advanced and positioned over the mass using fluoroscopic and transoesophageal guidance (Video 3). The vacuum was then initiated at 500 rpm and slowly escalated to 3500 rpm (equivalent to about 4–5 L flow). Once the cannula was blocked with the RAT, inflow ceased until the mass moved into and through the cannula . A second pass was made to aspirate the partial remnant of the mass attached to the eustachian valve. A third run was made to aspirate remaining lateral right atrial wall mass however the mass was firmly adherent to the wall and repeated attempts at suction caused brief sinus pauses and bradycardia which resolved upon withdrawal of the suction cannula. The sheaths were removed and the percutaneous access sites closed with application of 2-0 silk purse-string suture and application of gentle pressure for 15 min bilaterally.
The patients post-procedure course was uneventful. There was no clinical evidence to suggest new pulmonary embolus. Transthoracic echocardiogram prior to discharge showed 1.4 cm immobile right atrial mass in proximity to the crista terminalis, normal right ventricular function and no pericardial effusion. Pathology of the extracted specimen demonstrated calcified organized thrombus . The patient was discharged on apixaban 5 mg twice daily to be discontinued only at the discretion of the patient’s oncologist. Transthoracic echocardiogram completed at 3 months from discharge showed stable appearance of the remnant right atrial mass.