A 29-year-old Caucasian primigravida presented at 29+0 weeks' gestation with abdominal pain and fever. A presumptive diagnosis of urinary tract infection was made with laboratory investigations demonstrating a raised C-reactive protein and peripheral leukocytosis, and treatment with intravenous cefuroxime was commenced. The expectant mother reported regular use of heroin, diazepam, 'street' methadone and cocaine. Heroin and cocaine were both smoked and injected intravenously. Frequency of use was difficult to clarify.
Abdominal pain continued intermittently and antenatal betamethasone was administered. A cardiotocograph (CTG) trace was non-reassuring and necessitated an emergency Caesarean section approximately five hours after the initial dose of betamethasone. A female was delivered alive and in good condition, weighing 1530 g (75th centile). Apgar scores were 71 and 85. There were no external dysmorphic features, organomegaly, rash or bleeding. An initial cranial ultrasound scan was normal with no evidence of haemorrhage. Mean blood pressure (BP) was normal. Laboratory investigations demonstrated marked coagulopathy and abnormal liver function tests . Aspartate transaminase (AST) was disproportionately elevated in comparison with other liver enzymes, a pattern suggesting extensive tissue injury due to the non-specificity of AST.
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and cryoprecipitate were administered without improvement in the coagulopathy. Urine was noted to be pink in colour, but microscopy did not demonstrate red cells. At 16 hours of age, there was generalised seizure activity confirmed on amplitude-integrated EEG (Cerebral Function Monitoring - 'CFM'). The infant was loaded with phenobarbitone and received a half correction of sodium bicarbonate for a progressive metabolic acidosis. Morphine was infused at 10 micrograms/kg/hour.
Urine output was <0.5 ml/kg/day by 24 hours of age and she was passing extremely liquid stools. Coagulopathy persisted and liver function deteriorated further on sequential monitoring . Repeat ultrasound at 36 hours of age showed bilateral intraventricular blood with evidence of marked midline shift. It was decided that continuing care aimed at the baby's survival was inappropriate and care was re-orientated following discussion with the baby's mother. The infant was extubated one hour following baptism, and died shortly afterwards.
A postmortem examination was performed and it demonstrated intraventricular haemorrhage (IVH) expanding all four ventricles and extending around the brain stem and cerebellum (grade 3). Histology showed recent subarachnoid haemorrhage and cortical vascular congestion consistent with multiple small focal interstitial haemorrhages distinct from the IVH. There was hepatic necrosis and evidence of colonic mucosal ischaemic injury with multiple punctate erythematous areas. The kidneys showed zonal interstitial haemorrhage involving the medullary pyramids. The bladder also contained an area of large submucosal haemorrhage. These urogenital changes probably explain the pink-coloured urine. The absence of red cells was possibly attributable to haemolysis within the urinary tract. In addition, there was ischaemia and necrosis of the islets of Langerhans with sparing of the exocrine pancreas. Thymus, heart and adrenals appeared normal. Examination of the placenta showed acute decidual haemorrhage and chronic intervillitis. Microbiological and metabolic investigations did not demonstrate any further cause for deterioration or death.