A 48-year-old woman found a mass in her right breast during a routine breast ultrasound (US) 4 d prior.
The patient felt a lump in the right breast during a routine breast US examination 4 d prior, but the patient did not feel any discomfort. She had no nipple retraction, itching, pain, discharge, bleeding or ulcers. For further investigation, she came to our hospital.
The patient had no history of hypertension, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, alcohol consumption or smoking. She also had no history of surgery.
The patient denied having any relevant family history.
On examination, no palpable mass was discovered. We found no nipple discharge or palpable ipsilateral axillary or supraclavicular lymph nodes.
The results of blood biochemistry and coagulation tests were normal. Hepatitis B surface antigen was positive, and anti-human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis and anti-hepatitis C virus tests were all negative.
An US scan showed an 11 mm × 7 mm hypoechoic mass in the upper inner quadrant of the right breast, 30 mm away from the nipple, regular in shape, with a distinct margin. Color Doppler imaging showed hypervascularity . The mammogram showed a high-density mass in the upper inner quadrant of the right breast measuring 13 mm × 8 mm with indistinct margins. The subcutaneous tissue structure was clear, with no obvious calcification or thickening of the skin and no enlarged lymph nodes in the axilla . This case is classified as Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) 4A according to the BI-RADS category.
She underwent a right breast mass excision. During the surgery, a 10 mm × 10 mm solid diseased mass was detected at the upper inner side of the right breast with an intact capsule. It had a smooth surface and intermediate texture. Intraoperative frozen pathology indicated a neuroendocrine tumor, and the final diagnosis needed immunohistochemical examination. The postoperative pathological examination confirmed that the tumor revealed abundant acinar-like structures formed by tumor cells with prominent eosinophilic granules in the cytoplasm, consistent with acinar cell carcinoma . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were positive for Ki67 (1% positive) and CerbB-2 but negative for ER, PR, HER-2, CK5/6, CgA, Syn, P63 and calponin .