A 35-year-old man was admitted to our emergency department with unexplained acute mental change, shortness of breath, and progressive disturbance of consciousness for 20 h. It is worth noting that he has prolonged exposure to alcohol and acetone for working as a firework maker for 8 years. His vital signs were stable and normal at first. Then he was admitted to the neurologic intensive care unit due to his rapidly worsening mental status to sopor (Glasgow Coma Scale E3V2M4 = 9). Physical examination revealed slurred speech, enlargement of both pupils (6 mm) with poor pupillary reflex responses, and more marked on the left side. Initial blood gas measurements revealed metabolic acidosis: pH 7.20 (normal range, 7.35 to 7.45), PCO2 of 10 mmHg (normal range, 35 to 45 mmHg), bicarbonate level of 3.8 mmol/L (normal range, 21 to 25 mmol/L), anion gap of 33.4 mmol/L (normal range, 8 to 18 mmol/L), and lactic acid level of 3.16 mmol/L (normal range, 0.60 to 2.20 mmol/L). CT scan showed low signal intensities in bilateral basal ganglia and pulmonary infection. Due to these findings, methanol poisoning was considered, and blood and urine samples were promptly collected for toxin analysis. Then the patient received treatment with sodium bicarbonate infusion, hemodialysis, folate, and high-dose vitamin B. In addition, he had a blood ammonia level of 98.3 umol/L (normal range, 16 to 60 umol/L) and an β-hydroxybutyric acid level of 1.31 mmol/L (normal range, 0.03 to 0.3 mmol/l). He had a total leukocyte count of 26.92 × 109 cells/L (normal range, 3.5 × 109 to 9.5 × 109 cells/L), blood interleukin 6 level of 296 pg/ml (normal range, 0–7 pg/ml), blood procalcitonin (PCT) level of 6.44 ng/ml (normal range, 0–0.05 ng/ml), which indicated infection. Thus, antibiotics were initiated.
After 8 h of hemodialysis, the patient's consciousness recovered, and blood gas measurements were normal. Bicarbonate infusion and hemodialysis were ceased. However, his vision examination showed no light perception bilaterally. The serum and urine toxicology from initial samples confirmed methanol poisoning (details in ). Due to the leukocytosis and high PCT indicating infection, we performed the para-eyeball corticosteroid injection instead of high dose steroids intravenous. Furthermore, we took a detailed history from the patient. He had long-term exposure to alcohol and acetone because of his job in a fireworks manufacturing factory without an organic-vapor cartridge or other air-purifying respirators, but nothing went wrong previously. He did not wear a mask or gloves as usual, and he took a hot bath right after work. A few hours later, he felt moody and uncomfortable with shortness of breath and unable to retrieve memories. Therefore, we conclude that the patient was occupationally exposed to a mixture of methanol absorbed by inhalation and transdermal route. Brain magnetic resonance images (MRIs) demonstrated abnormal signal intensity in the bilateral symmetric putamen . A Series of examinations related to eyes were conducted. Optic nerve MRIs illustrated optic neuropathy . Pupillary light reflex showed that both were insensitive to light . Visual evoked potentials revealed visual pathway impairment, and optic nerve demyelination with axonal deterioration, which was more severe on the left side . Fundus examination revealed features of toxic neuropathy with bilateral optic disc hyperemia and swelling , and fundus fluorescein angiography showed no fluorescein leakage . We performed the intermittent hemodialysis once more to remove residual methanol and its metabolites based on the toxicology result. Meanwhile, intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg once a day for 5 days was commenced with oral folate 10 mg three times and thiamine 100 mg daily. On day 3, the patient seemed well, and his visibility improved to counting fingers at 20 cm in his right eye, but no light perception in the left eye. After 10 days on the ward during steroids tapering, the patient was discharged from the hospital and continued oral thiamine 100 mg and methylprednisolone 60 mg daily—the latter for 2 weeks. During the subsequent visit of 6 months, his eyesight ceased to improve.