A 56-year-old female attended the ENT outpatient clinic at DR Sardjito Public Hospital with progressive throat discomfort and dysphagia for over five years with a previous history of severe dyspnoea due to upper airway obstruction. An emergency tracheostomy was done in the regional hospital. The patient was then referred to our hospital for further management. Upon initial assessment, the patient could not swallow adequately; therefore, we inserted a nasogastric tube to fulfil the nutritional intake. Laryngeal endoscopy revealed a smooth-surfaced, well-defined mass obstructing the laryngeal inlet and oesophageal introitus. Computed tomography (CT) imaging with contrast showed a well-circumscribed 4.8x3.4x2.1 cm cystic mass at the hypopharyngeal region at the level of the second and fourth cervical vertebrae that completely obstruct the upper airway passage .
An endoscopic tumour excision via transoral direct laryngoscopy was settled to determine the base of the mass and for diagnostic histopathology. The procedure was done under general anaesthesia via a tracheostomy tube. Intraoperatively, the base of the mass was attached to the right arytenoid mucosa. However, we ensured that the other part of the mass surface was not attached to the following posterior and lateral laryngeal walls, epiglottis, or oesophageal introitus. It is challenging to remove the whole integrated mass. Therefore, we performed initial debulking followed by excision of the remaining tumour mass using an ultrasonic harmonic scalpel .
No complications were found, and the patient was sent home three days following the procedure. Histopathologic investigation of the tumour showed the features of non-malignant atypical neurofibroma; the result was later confirmed using S100 immunohistochemistry staining that confirmed the diagnosis of laryngeal schwannoma .
Laryngeal endoscopic evaluation was done periodically at 1st, 2nd, 4th, 8th, and 12th week after surgery. Voice and swallowing therapy was given as early as possible, starting two weeks after surgery. The patient underwent decannulation and nasogastric tube removal in the fourth week after surgery with good swallowing function, no dyspnoea, no abnormalities in vocal cord motions, and no vocal ability after the 12th-week post-surgery . The patient was subsequently examined for two years without any relapse.