A 42-year-old man presented to the emergency department of our hospital with complaints of burning chest pain radiating to the jaw. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed elevated ST segments inferior and lateral. Invasive coronary angiography showed severe stenosis and thrombotic occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD). He underwent primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with the placement of one drug-eluting stent (DES).
Twenty-two years earlier, our patient was diagnosed with Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) stage IIA, localized in the mediastinal and right supraclavicular areas, followed by a recurrence of HL stage IIIB in the left axillary region, in the para-aortic and iliac lymph nodes, and spleen one year later. He was treated with chemotherapy (EBVP, DHAP, BEAM, and ifosfamide/etoposide), radiotherapy (involved field and mantle field), and autologous stem cell transplantation. Involved field radiation doses were given in fractions of 1.8 Gy and 2.0 Gy, with maximum doses of 30.6 Gy and 40 Gy, respectively. During mantle field therapy, our patient was exposed to a maximum radiation dose of 14 Gy. Unfortunately, information about the cumulative heart dose was not available. The chronological summary of visits is shown in the timeline in .
Twenty years after cancer treatment, our patient visits the outpatient cardiology clinic with complaints of dyspnea. In the absence of any cardiovascular risk factors, transthoracic echocardiography in 2020 showed severe mitral valve insufficiency based on Carpentier type IIIb. He was diagnosed with heart failure (HF) with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 43% on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which improved to 53% in 2021 after the initiation of HF medication (bumetanide, losartan, spironolactone, bisoprolol, and ivabradine). Blood pressure and cholesterol levels were well regulated (total cholesterol 3.38 mmol/L) and our patient had no significant history of smoking (0.75 pack years). Their family history was negative for CAD. A CAC scan was performed, and the calculated Agatston score was zero. In the spring of 2022, our patient presented at the outpatient cardiology clinic with complaints of progressive dyspnea at exertion. Transesophageal and transthoracic echocardiography showed good left and right ventricular function and moderate mitral insufficiency. Invasive coronary angiography showed wall irregularities without any significant obstructions , and statins were not prescribed. Except for known para mediastinal bronchopathy, the chest X-ray did not show any abnormalities. Possible differential diagnoses included interstitial lung disease and deconditioning. Due to persistent complaints, he was referred to the outpatient cardio-oncology clinic of our center. According to the New York Heart Association Functional Classification, based on patient symptoms, our patient was graded as Class III. Physical examination showed no signs of congestion, and during exercise stress testing, a moderate functional capacity of 160 watts (79%), a maximum oxygen uptake of 17.70 mL/kg (71%), and a respiratory exchange ratio of 1.03 was observed. Transthoracic echocardiography showed grade II diastolic dysfunction, good right and left ventricular function (LVEF 55%), and mild mitral regurgitation.
Three months later, our patient presented in a hemodynamically stable condition at the emergency department with an ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) for which primary PCI with placement of one DES in the proximal LAD was performed ( and ). At the presentation, there was no evidence of heart failure (Kilip Class I). After the procedure, TIMI flow in the LAD was 2–3: the proximal and mid part of the LAD and the diagonal showed normal flow, in the distal/apical part of the LAD the flow was reduced. Our patient was treated with Aggrastat. Left ventricular function was not impaired. Clopidogrel was prescribed for one year, as the patient was a normal metabolizer of CYP2C19 which is routinely tested in our hospital, and there is a life-long indication for acetylsalicylic acid. He was referred to the vascular medicine department, where coagulation disorders as the underlying cause of STEMI were ruled out.