A 47-year-old male patient was admitted to the Emergency Department in our hospital due to paroxysmal abdominal pain and postprandial bloating for 3 days. The pain was centered in the position around the umbilicus. The flatus and defecation were normal. He showed no fever, hematemesis, hematochezia, diarrhea, melena, or weight loss upon admission. CT performed in a local hospital showed intussusception, intestinal effusion, and pneumatosis. There was no remission in the symptoms after conservative treatment. Besides, the abdominal symptoms showed gradual deterioration.
The findings for the laboratory examination were as follows: white cell count, 7.62 × 109/L, neutrophils, 73.1%; hemoglobin, 145.0 g/L; hematocrit, 46.80%; platelet, 356 × 109/L .
Abdominal CT scan revealed intussusception in the ascending colon . The electrocardiogram and chest X-ray findings were normal.
For the treatment, the patient received surgery, in which the skin, subcutaneous tissues, anterior and posterior rectus sheath, and peritoneum were cut in turn. There was no abdominal distension or liquid overflow. The small intestine was slightly swollen and jasmine-colored ascites (500 ml) was seen in the pelvic cavity. The distal ileum, appendix, cecum, and greater omentum were found to be intussuscepted into the ascending colon. The length of the intussuscepted ileum was about 15 cm. The root of appendix and cecal wall was hard, and there was purulent substance on the surface. The greater omentum showed adhesion to the cecal wall. There was slight enlargement in the lymph nodes of radix of mesentery. In addition, adhesion was seen in the lateral region of peritoneum.
For the histopathological characteristics, the intestinal wall of ileum, cecum, and ascending colon were thickened in a diffuse manner and the thickest part was about 0.8 cm. The texture was hard and tough, with the serosal surface in a grayish color. Dilated lumen and blood clots were seen in the incisal surface. The mucosal surface of the ileum was erosive, and the colonic was smooth in a grayish-red color. The appendix showed a length of about 5 cm and a diameter of 1.5 cm. The wall of the appendix was hard. Mucoid substance was observed in the appendix cavity near the root. Microscopically, there were blood-filled lumens or cavities in the ileum, cecum, colon submucosa and serosa, which were lined with a single layer of endothelial cells, and the cells were not heteromorphic . The interstitium was filled with loose fibrous connective tissue, and dilated vascular lumen was found in some muscular layers in smooth muscle bundles. There were proliferative capillaries and large thin-walled vascular lumen in ileum, cecum, mesentery of colon, and serous surface of appendix. Meanwhile, remarkable proliferation was noticed in the interstitial collagen fibers. No anastomosis was noticed in the interacted capillaries. The large vascular lumen was filled with red blood cells (RBCs), and the lumen was lined with monolayer endothelial cells of no atypia. The appendix cavity was completely filled in with mucus. In addition, the appendix lamina propria mucosa and muscularis mucosa were not available. Part of submucosa showed fibrosis. The wall of the appendix was lined with low-grade mucinous epithelium .
CT results indicated a high possibility of secondary intussusception. Histopathology confirmed mixed type of cavernous and capillary hemangioma, combined with LAMNs and intestinal obstruction. For the treatment, the patient underwent laparotomy and right hemicolectomy. The postoperative recovery was good without any complications. The patient was followed up for 4 months, and no discomforts were reported by the patient until now.