We present a 24-month-old male patient, second child of non-consanguineous parents. During pregnancy thyroid hormone levels of the mother showed low free T4 level (8.75 pmol/L; normal values 9.39 - 28.31) and normal TSH level (3.17 mUI/L, normal values 0.25 - 5.0). Delivery was uneventful. Gestational age was 38 weeks and the Apgar score in the first and fifth minutes was 9 and 10 respectively. His birth weight and length were normal and the head circumference (38 cm) was above 2SD. Neonatal period was normal.
The mother’s homozygote twin sister has a 6-year-old son with the diagnosis of cerebral palsy with no history of any risk factors (prenatal, gestational or postnatal). The father and paternal grandmother have a sensorineural hearing loss, which occurred at around the age of forty.
From the age of 3 months global hypotonia and poor head control became evident. A rehabilitation program was started without any satisfactory improvement. At the age of 12 months the severe hypotonia persisted, without any improvement in head control. The child was able to grasp objects and bring both hands to the midline, but with significant difficulty. No pyramidal tract involvement was described. At this age, the pediatrician described the child as active and reactive to stimuli, with good visual contact, normal social smile and appropriate interaction between the child and his parents. At that time, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and revealed an enlargement of the subarachnoid spaces, without any description of white matter disorder. Brainstem auditory evoked potential was normal. Assessment of visual evoked potentials showed evidence of a conduction delay in central optical pathways; fundoscopy was normal. No alterations were detected in the basic laboratory and metabolic investigations performed (serum electrolytes, renal and hepatic function, creatine kinase, biotinidasis, urate, lactate and pyruvate, ammonia, urinary organic acid, plasma and urinary ammino acid).
By the age of 21 months the patient was referred to our Neuromuscular Pediatric Unit due to severe motor and cognitive delay. At this first visit the patient showed global and severe hypotonia, being unable to hold the head upright and to sit without support . When supine, the patient demonstrated brief episodes of mild dystonic movements and hypertonic posturing of the limbs, triggered by stress conditions or sensitive stimulus. The myotatic reflex was slightly increased in triceps surae muscle and Babinski sign was observed. Deep tendon reflexes were absent at the Achilles tendon bilaterally. Eye contact and visual tracking of human face were poor. He was responsive to sounds but was unable to speak.
At the age of 23 months he developed myoclonic jerks characterized by flexion of the neck and upper limbs, lasting no longer than few seconds, ocurring up to twice or three times per day. Initially these epileptic seizures improved with the administration of sodium valproate; however they have reappeared, up to three to four times a day, in spite of the treatment with sodium valproate, levetiracetam and vigabatrin. The latest electroencephalograms revealed polyspike and wave discharges that are widely spread over both hemispheres of the brain with a slow background rhythm. Electromyography and neurography were normal. Electroretinogram was normal. Cerebral MRI was repeated at 24 months of age, which demonstrated a delay of myelination .
After repeating some laboratory tests, alterations on thyroid function revealed elevated free T3 level (4.84 nmol/L, normal values 0.63-3.90), low free T4 level (8.2 pmol/L, normal values 9.1 - 25.0) and normal TSH level (3.54 mUI/L, normal values 0.3 - 4.5). Given this hormonal pattern, the existence of a deficit in T3 carrier was considered as a potential diagnosis. To investigate this hypothesis direct sequencing of the SLC16A2 gene was performed, revealing 26 base duplication in exon 2. This gene mutation has not been described previously and causes a Val254Glu substitution followed by a frame shift and a premature stop codon 24 aminoacids later (Exon 2 c.735_760dup p.Val254Glufs*24). His mother was subsequently confirmed to be a carrier for this duplication .