A 4-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital with a history of postprandial vomiting for more than 6 mo without precipitating factors and abdominal pain, chill, fever, or anal cessation of exsufflation or defecation.
He had poor appetite but no weight loss during his illness.
The child was of full-term natural delivery with normal feeding and timely vaccination.
He had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
Physical examination showed abdominal bulge and intestinal type in the upper abdomen. The epigastrium showed a palpable mass with poor mobility; the lump was hard but was associated with no tenderness.
The laboratory examinations (including blood and urine routine tests, coagulation function tests, liver and kidney function tests, and tumor markers) were normal.
The pre-contrast computerized tomographic (CT) scan presented a retroperitoneal giant hypodense mass with a size of 10.7 cm × 17.3 cm × 15.5 cm and a CT value of 33.8 HU. Spotted calcification with irregular distribution was noted in the mass. The tumor showed inhomogeneous flocculent enhancement in the venous phase and further enhancement in the delayed phase after intravenous injection of contrast agent . We observed that the stomach had been pushed forward and displaced, which was also considered the main cause of postprandial vomiting for the patient. The tumor surrounded the celiac trunk, hepatic artery, splenic artery, superior mesenteric artery, bilateral renal artery, and portal vein. Nevertheless, the enclosed vascular lumen did not become narrowed or distorted . Of course, this created a difficult problem for the patient’s surgical treatment, such that the surgeon was only able to remove the relatively non-vascular part of the tumor.
Histopathology revealed the spindle cell tumor with nerve fibers and ganglion cells. Immunohistochemical investigation showed the tumor cells expressed NSE (diffuse +), Syn (+), S100 (diffuse +), and NF (diffuse +) and were negative for GFAP, CR, P53, and SMA. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 5%.