After sustaining a motorcycle accident in July 2016, a 41-year-old man was initially treated with open reduction and internal fixation with a locking plate and single compression screw (LCP plate®, DePuy Synthes GmbH, Zuchwil, Switzerland) together with a split-thickness skin graft in Bulgaria . The fracture pattern showed a proximal tibial fracture (AO/OTA type 41-A2, Anderson Gustilo IIIb, Tscherne/Oestern type III open fracture) and a proximal fibula fracture with consecutive sensomotoric lesion of the peroneal nerve [–]. After admission to our hospital in September 2016, initial diagnostics including plain radiographs and a pan CT/MRI scan revealed an onset of septic pseudarthrosis in the proximal tibia, intramedullary osteomyelitis, a large abscess zone with contrast agent capturing 30 cm in the dorsal compartment and necrotic avascular muscle areas, a loss of the anterior tibial artery as well as a large anterolateral soft tissue defect covered with necrotic split-thickness graft that was transplanted onto bone and osteosynthesis material at the primary hospital in Bulgaria . Mobilization was painful due to the clinically unstable osseous situation and reduced accordingly. Laboratory chemical infection parameters were slightly increased (CRP 2.7 mg/dl norm value < 0.5; leukocytes 6.9 G/l norm value 3.90–9.80). Local wound smears showed Acinetobacter baumannii (Carbapenem resistant) as well as Enterobacter cloacae complex (overexpression of AmpC-Betalactamase and fluoroquinolone resistant) in the large anterolateral defect zone and intramedullary in the proximal tibia to the distal third of the tibial shaft. For the complete clinical course, see the timeline .
Initial surgical management included removal of the osteosynthesis material and necrotic split-thickness graft together with aggressive extensive osseous debridement, resection of necrotic muscles of the anterior lower leg compartment and negative pressure wound therapy. Radical intramedullary debridement was performed using an intramedullary reaming device (SynReam/RIA® DePuy Synthes GmbH, Zuchwil, Switzerland). After two local debridements, Colistin hand-modelled chains and sticks [24 Mio. IE Colistin (Colistin methanesulphonate sodium), InfectoPharm, Heppenheim, Germany + 40 g Palacos R + G®, Heraeus Medical, Wehrheim, Germany] were topically inserted intramedullary as well as into the muscle compartments to establish a local high dose of antibiotics. The intramedullary sticks were formed using a thorax drain as a matrix (Argyle™ Trocar Catheter, 24 Ch, Covidien, Dublin, Ireland) and filled with antibiotic-impregnated cement with a cement applicator gun while the chains were made using hand-modelled pads onto an artificial tape (Mersilene tape, Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA) . After eight osseous and soft tissue debridements, revision and changing of the local antibiotic spacers and parenteral antibiotic therapy, the wound smears were negative for bacterial growth of Acinetobacter baumannii and Enterobacter cloacae complex. Two months after initial trauma, an external fixator (AO Fixateur, DePuy Synthes GmbH, Zuchwil, Switzerland) was mounted to protect the planned soft tissue coverage . The soft tissue defect zone was covered with a full-thickness ipsilateral latissimus dorsi muscle flap and split-thickness grafts by the department of plastic surgery . The axial anterior external fixator was replaced with a hexapod external fixator together with a foot plate (Taylor Spatial Frame®, Smith & Nephew GmbH, Hamburg, Germany) to sequentially address the malalignment of the proximal tibia as well as to perform a gradual correction of the fixed drop foot. No further surgical interventions such as dorsal release or arthrotomy of the ankle joint were performed to reduce the risk for dissemination of the infection. From November 2016 to January 2017, the hexapod fixator was adjusted by the patient with a defined scheme after computed planning for the sequential correction . Following the completion of treatment (12 months after trauma), the patient showed good functional recovery without neurological or vascular symptoms except the persisting sensomotoric peroneal lesion and is returning to his previous occupation and to low-risk sports activities. ROM was extension/flexion: 0°/0°/120°; VAS was 1 of 10. Plain radiographs showed complete osseous consolidation at final follow-up .
Initial local wound smears showed Acinetobacter baumannii (Carbapenem resistant) as well as Enterobacter cloacae complex. Enterobacter cloacae complex was resistant to Ampicillin, Amoxicillin, Piperacillin+/−Tazobactam, Tigecycline, Cefuroxime, Cefotaxime, Ceftriaxone, Gentamycin, Tobramycin, Ciprofloxacin and Moxifloxacin. Acinetobacter baumannii was resistant to Fosfomycin, Ampicillin, Amoxicillin, Amoxi-Clavulanate, Ampicillin/Sulbactam, Piperacillin+/−Tazobactam, Tigecycline, Cefuroxime, Cefotaxime, Ceftriaxone, Cefepime, Ceftazidime, Meropenem (MHK > 32), Gentamycin, Tobramycin, Amikacin, Co-trimoxazole, Ciprofloxacin and Moxifloxacin but sensitive to Colistin. Topical application of antibiotics was performed using Colistin cement (24 Mio. IE Colistin (Colistin methanesulphonate sodium, InfectoPharm, Heppenheim, Germany) + 40 g Palacos R + G®, Heraeus Medical, Wehrheim, Germany). Systemic parenteral antibiotic treatment was performed using Colistin (1.10.2016 to 30.11.2016; 9 Mio I.E. loading dose followed by 4,5 Mio IE i.v. two times a day), Sulbactam (15.10.2016 to 30.11.2016; 3 g i.v. four times a day) and Fosfomycin (7.10.2016 to 30.11.2016; 5 g i.v. three times a day). After the detection of Corynebacterium jeikeium but eradication of Acinetobacter baumannii and Enterobacter cloacae complex, Vancomycin was added to the systemic antibiotic therapy with a trough level set at 15 mg/l from 4.11.2016 to 30.11.2016. Systemic levels of Vancomycin reached therapeutic levels. The patient suffered no neuro-, oto- or nephrotoxic side effects in the whole follow-up period controlled by neurologic assessment and laboratory chemical kidney retention parameters. Plasma levels of Colistin were not measured.
The large defect located at the anterolateral portion of the left lower leg with a size of approximately 50 × 12 cm and exposed tibial fracture zone required a large microvascular free flap to cover the defect and to support the previously infected wound with a well-vascularized, immunocompetent tissue. Preoperative CT angiography excluded the anterior tibial artery as recipient vessel so that end-to-side anastomoses to the popliteal vessels were planned. Due to the defect size and required pedicle length, the ipsilateral latissimus dorsi muscle was chosen for defect coverage. Time point of surgery was when wound smears were negative and local macroscopic condition showed vital granulation. It was harvested as a musculocutaneous flap with a monitor skin island to allow easy postoperative monitoring of the flap’s perfusion. Intraoperatively, the lateral sural artery, the nutrifying vessel of the lateral gastrocnemius muscle, was found to have a small-enough calibre difference to the thoracodorsal vessels of the latissimus flap’s pedicle to allow end-to-end anastomoses. Anastomoses of the artery and accompanying vein were performed with 9-0 Ethilon single knot sutures with help of a microscope (OPMI Pentero 900®, Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany) under 10× magnification. Intravenous injection of indocyanine green (ICG) and fluorescence microscopy showed patency of anastomoses and assured perfusion of the flap. Size of the flap and pedicle length allowed sufficient coverage of the exposed tibia. The flap and the adjacent exposed muscles were covered with 0.3-mm-thick, 1:1.5 meshed split skin grafts harvested from the contralateral thigh. Neither intra- nor postoperative complications occurred. After 1 week, the monitor island was resected, replaced by a skin graft and the mobilization of the patient started.