A 64-year-old woman presented to our outpatient department with a 2-year history of otalgia and hearing loss in the left ear. She had a history of recurrent otitis media in childhood but had not experienced otorrhea in adulthood. The left tympanic membrane was thick and white on otomicroscopic examination, with no discharge from an obvious perforation of the left tympanic membrane . Audiologic testing revealed a left-sided mixed hearing loss of 56.8 dB pure tone average (PTA). Computed tomography (CT) showed a soft-tissue mass that had destroyed the bony plate of the posterior and middle cranial fossa . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the mass displayed signal hyperintensity on T1-weighted imaging and a high-intensity periphery surrounding a low-intensity central signal on T2-weighted imaging . The mass compressed the middle cranial fossa without invasion of the brain. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) revealed an isointense signal, rather than the high intensity that would typically be seen with cholesteatoma . Based on these findings, cholesterol granuloma was diagnosed.
The operation was performed using a retroauricular approach. The mastoid portion was found to be filled with a dark purple tumor that was thought to represent cholesterol granuloma. The cyst wall of the cholesterol granuloma was very thick. We removed the tumor by dissecting the temporal bone from the mastoid to the epitympanum. We removed the granulation tissue in the epitympanum. A sclerotic lesion was found around the ossicles, and the pathway from the epitympanum to the aditus was obstructed by thick bone
When we removed the cholesterol granuloma under the middle cranial fossa that had invaded into the cranium, pulsatile bleeding was seen. This was attributed to a blood vessel of the dura in the middle cranial fossa . The bleeding was stopped through the use of a coagulating device.
The solid component of the cholesterol granuloma was removed from the dura. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow was noted from a defect in the dura in the middle cranial fossa and was terminated by applying pressure gauze. We covered the defect of the dura in the middle cranial fossa using connective tissue. We did not use bone, because we expected that the scar tissue would expand and cover the defect in the dura. We performed canal wall down tympanoplasty type III (Wullstein classification). Histologically, the lesion was consistent with a typical cholesterol granuloma; the granulation tissue contained clefts of cholesterol crystals, giant cells, and infiltration with inflammatory cells .
The postoperative course was uneventful. Pulsation of the dura (due to CSF interaction with the defect of middle cranial fossa) resolved by 1 month after the operation. The defect of the middle cranial was closed by the epithelium at 2 months after the operation, and the pulsation of the dura had resolved by this time. Temporal bone computed tomography (CT) revealed no recurrence of the cholesterol granuloma at 4 years postoperatively . Audiography showed that the preoperative hearing level of 56.3 dB (PDH) had improved to 33.8 dB2 years after the operation.