A 52-year-old Caucasian man presented at an outside hospital with three days of fevers and a swollen, purpuric right foot. He had noted a necrotic-appearing ulcer on the plantar surface of his fifth digit one week previously. His past history was remarkable for diabetes mellitus type 2 (his last hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c] test was 7.0%), his right great toe had been amputated secondary to infection in 2001; and he had a previous cigarette use of 60 pack-years. He had worked for the United States Forest Service, doing physical labor, often working in wet boots and with close contact to the feces of several species of forest animals. He had suffered a tick bite 6 months previously.
On admission he was found to have a leukocytosis of 19,000 cells/mm3 and mild normocytic anemia. The foot ulcer was superficially cultured and grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). While hospitalized, he experienced chills, night sweats, nausea and vomiting. He was discharged and given cefazolin and metronidazole for a planned six-week course following normalization of his leukocyte count and resolution of systemic symptoms.
One month after discharge, he was re-admitted for evaluation of recurrent sweats, chills and weakness. His peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) was removed, and the tip was cultured but yielded no growth. Surgical debridement of the fifth digit revealed no gross purulence, and broth from the deep tissue culture grew only Bacillus species. Vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam were substituted for the cefazolin and metronidazole regimen for a planned six weeks duration of therapy.
One week after admission, he had a new onset of lower back pain, prompting computed tomography (CT) and MRI scans of the spine which revealed diffuse bony lesions from T12 to L4. Microscopic analysis of a needle biopsy of the L4 lesion showed a mixed inflammatory infiltrate in a fibrotic background, interpreted as partially treated osteomyelitis . Core needle biopsy of a right inguinal node demonstrated a dense mixed inflammatory infiltrate with rare large degenerated cells of uncertain significance . Gram stain, acid-fast stain, and bacterial, mycobacterial and fungal cultures were negative from both biopsies. Antibiotics were discontinued and he was discharged.
He was re-admitted one week later with recurrent systemic symptoms and a total leukocyte count of 20,000 cells/mm3. Vancomycin and imipenem-cilastatin were started. Transesophageal echocardiogram revealed no valvular vegetations. A bone scan revealed multiple abnormal areas of uptake including the right foot, several ribs, scapula and both femurs. Blood cultures throughout these multiple hospitalizations did not recover any pathogenic organisms.
Upon transfer to our facility, he noted a 7 kg weight loss since the onset of symptoms, and he was fatigued but ambulatory. Examination was significant for a single <2 cm soft, mobile, tender lymph node in the left anterior cervical chain and symmetric mild lymphadenopathy in both axillae and the groin. His right foot ulcer was well healed, though mild purpura and swelling remained over the third through fifth digits. His spine was not tender to palpation. Laboratory testing revealed a leukocyte count of 18,400 cells/mm3 with 85% neutrophils and a platelet count of 404,000/mm3. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 83 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 106 mm/hour, and alkaline phosphatase 461 U/L. Laboratory evaluations for tick-borne and endemic fungal infections were all negative, as were an anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) test, a rapid plasma regain (RPR) test, and a human immunodeficiency virus enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (HIV ELISA). Intradermal purified protein derivative (PPD) did not elicit any induration. All antibiotics were discontinued, and the patient remained febrile at 38.3-39.3°C nightly with drenching sweats.
Ten sets of blood cultures were negative for bacteria, fungi and mycobacteria. CT scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed multiple small pulmonary nodules, bilateral small pleural effusions, a small pericardial effusion, two small calcified granulomas in the liver, and diffuse cervical, mediastinal, iliac and inguinal adenopathy (all ≤1.6 cm). A repeat MRI of the spine confirmed multiple areas of T1 hypointensity and T2 enhancement throughout the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine, sparing the intervertebral disks and the cord . Microscopic examination of a left cervical lymph node excisional biopsy and staging posterior iliac crest bone marrow biopsy revealed the presence of large atypical cells consistent with Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells and variants, and a diagnosis of Stage IV mixed-cellularity classical HL was made . Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT was performed, displaying innumerable lesions in the axial spine and fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid nodes throughout innumerable lymphatic chains. Increased uptake was especially noted in the right lateral nasopharynx, without other solid organ involvement. An escalated BE(A)COPP (bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone) regimen was initiated. Because of hematologic complications, our patient completed a course of modified Adriamycin [doxorubicin], bleomycin, vinblastine and dacarbazine (ABVD) chemotherapy and is in clinical and radiographic remission .