A 63-year-old woman was referred to Kochi University Hospital with a renal tumor discovered by medical examination, incidentally discovered on a computed tomography (CT) scan. There was no previous medical history and family history of kidney disease. Her vital signs were normal value. Blood electrolytes, proteinogram, renal function and hepatic enzymes showed all normal value. Soluble IL-2 receptor was slightly elevated (703 U/ml (normal, 145–519)). The other tumor markers were all within the normal range. Abdominal contrasted CT scan showed a 31 × 24 mm cystic tumor at the upper pole of the right kidney and multiple low-attenuation areas in the left kidney .
18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) scan showed moderate FDG accumulation of cystic tumor in marginal lesion . In addition, FDG-PET/CT scan also showed moderate FDG accumulation in the pancreatic body and small lung mass . Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance images (MRI) showed high intensity area and focal enlargement on pancreatic body. Furthermore, main pancreatic duct showed irregular narrowing on magnetic resonance cholangio pancreatography (MRCP) , indicating autoimmune pancreatitis.Multiple low-attenuation area in left kidney fitted the imaging findings of tubulointerstitial nephritis. However, right renal cystic tumor had diffuse wall thickening and weak enhancement of the cystic wall on CT scan and renal cell carcinoma with cystic change was suspected. In imaging test, it was very difficult to distinguish from tubulointerstitial nephritis and malignant renal cystic tumor. Ultimately, we made a preoperative diagnosis as suspicious of renal cell carcinoma with cystic change and then performed laparoscopic right nephrectomy. The macroscopic findings of cystic wall were gray white color and no hemorrhage was observed inside . Histological examination was revealed lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with storiform fibrosis in renal cortex (Azan staining positive) .Immunohistochemically, the IgG4 positive plasma cells infiltrated exceeding 10 cells per one high-power field . The ratio of IgG4-plasma cells to IgG-positive plasma cells was about 50%.Collecting duct was compressed longitudinally by severe inflammation and fibrosis in renal cortex around cyst . In contrast, collecting duct had a tendency to dilate in renal medulla adjacent to renal cortex and obstruct in renal medulla away from renal cortex . In additional immunohistochemical analysis of cyst wall showing collecting duct markers, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), the paired box (PAX) 2 and PAX8, were positive in the lining cell of the cyst wall . While proximal tubule markers, CD10 and renal cell carcinoma marker antigen (RCC-Ma), were negative . Also, cystic wall had no significant malignant components.Based on pathological results after surgery, then we analyzed stored preoperative serum retrospectively. As a result, the patients had hypocomplementemia and polyclonal gammopathy with elevated levels of serum IgG (1934 mg/dl) and IgE (1061 IU/ml). The serum level of IgG4 was also elevated (218 mg/dl). Finally, we diagnosed IgG4-related tubulointerstitial nephritis with renal cystic change according to a diagnostic algorithm of the Japan Society of Nephrology. After the operation, the patient receives steroidal therapy. Oral prednisolone at initial dose of 30 mg/day was administrated after surgery. Six month after therapy, serum level of IgG4 returns to normal level (28.1 mg/dl) and FDG-PET/CT scan showed disappearance of FDG accumulation in pancreatic body and lung mass .