A 33-year-old woman presented with a migrating painful swelling and erythema in the medial aspect of right thigh for 6 months, which had recently grown in size. She was referred to our hospital with suspected soft tissue tumor from the private clinic. She had previously noticed a small migrating mass in the right thigh area some 20 years previously, but she ignored as the condition was asymptomatic. The pain was intermittent and worsened after a long period of walking but improved with resting. She had no history of leg trauma and denied ingesting raw snake or frog. But she lived in China in childhood, and sometimes drank spring water from the mountain.
Physical examination revealed swelling, tendernes, and erythema, but local heatness was not found in the medial aspect of right thigh. Routine laboratory examination revealed no abnormal findings, and no leukocytosis and no eosinophilia was detected in the peripheral blood. Plain radiographs of the right femur showed multiple irregular radiopaque densities . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple elongated tubular tracts in subcutaneous tissue of thigh. Lesions showed low signal intensity on T1-weighted images, and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images .
Special laboratory investigations and ultrasonographic examination were not performed, because the patient decided to undergo surgery rapidly to clarify the etiology of the tumorous lesion and we did not suspect spargana infection. Under the clinical impression of soft tissue tumor, total surgical excision was performed. A long, wrinkled, whitish worm ~24 cm in length and 3 mm in width was removed . The parasite was histopathologically identified as Spirometra mansoni .
She was concerned about whether another worm was still living in her body after the surgery. Therefore, we measured the anti-sparganum IgG antibody using a microplate ELISA using the peripheral blood at 6 months after surgery without oral treatment for the parasite. The serum titer of the anti-sparganum IgG antibody revealed within normal range (0.18, reference range 0–0.99) and no recurrence was noticed in 12 months follow-up.