A 1-month-old boy was referred to our hospital for a perineal mass present at birth. Delivery occurred at 37 weeks and 2 days gestation, with a birth weight of 2962 g; a selective cesarean section was performed because of a previous cesarean section. Prenatal ultrasound revealed no abnormalities, and the birth was uneventful. The patient was otherwise asymptomatic, with normal growth, development, extremity movements, urination, and defecation. The dorsal area around the coccyx was normal, without a dimple. The mass was located posterior to the anus, at the 6 o’clock position. The mass had an unusual shape, comprising two masses connected by a narrow stalk; both masses were elastic and soft, and the proximal mass had normal skin, whereas the distal mass had scrotum-like skinfolds . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ruled out spina bifida and revealed that both masses were composed of adipose tissues; the stalk consisted of vessels and fibrous stroma. The MRI also showed no direct anatomical relationship between the lipoma and surrounding organs, including the anal sphincter. At 3 months of age, the patient underwent surgery, with the preoperative diagnosis of an accessory scrotum with lipoma. He was placed in the jackknife position. There was no continuity to deep tissue, and the mass was removed, preserving the anal sphincter . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 6.
The pathological features were as follows. Macroscopically, the mass showed a characteristic dumbbell-like shape, measuring 2.5 cm in length and comprising two masses, each approximately 1 cm in size, connected by a narrow stalk . Histologically, the distal mass displayed conspicuous epidermal irregularities resembling scrotal skinfolds. In the dermis, dense and intricately running bundles were observed and were positive for α-smooth muscle antigen (α-SMA), corresponding with the tunica dartos. However, elastic fibers were not confirmed . Thus, the distal mass revealed characteristic histological findings of a scrotum. The proximal mass was exclusively composed of lipoma, with normal skin . The stalk between the proximal and distal masses exhibited normal skin structures, with parallel and centrally running vessels and nerve bundles .