A 42-year-old Japanese man presented to our emergency department immediately after his motorcycle collision. The patient had a history of alcohol and tobacco use but otherwise no significant medical history. His left forearm was caught between the motor vehicle and the road, and became highly compressed and retracted. The patient was hemodynamically stable with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15/15, a blood pressure of 120/60 mmHg, pulse rate of 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, body temperature of 36.1 °C, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. Laboratory test results were as follows: hemoglobin 16.3 g/dL; hematocrit 46%; white blood cells 8100/mm3, with no left shift; platelets 195,000/mm3; urea 14.5 mg/dL; creatinine 0.8 mg/dL; total bilirubin 1.0 mg/dL; direct bilirubin 0.07 mg/dL. Major vascular and visceral injuries were not suspected. Physical examination and radiography showed an open radial shaft fracture with marked swelling of the left forearm . The patient was given 0.5 mL of tetanus toxoid vaccine intramuscularly and administered prophylactic antibiotic using intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g. Compartment pressure was measured in three different areas of the forearm, showing 40 mmHg in the volar component and 30 mmHg in the dorsal forearm compartment. Acute compartment syndrome was diagnosed on the basis of the clinical symptoms and compartment pressures of the forearm. Five hours after the injury, surgery was performed under general anesthesia. First, we made a curvilinear skin incision on the volar aspect of the forearm from the biceps tendon to the palm of the hand for carpal tunnel release . We performed a debridement of the involved muscles; however, we could not perform an internal fixation or immediate reconstruction owing to the risk of advancing the myonecrosis of the forearm muscles. After release of the superficial and deep flexor compartments, pressure in the dorsal compartment decreased. The wound was closed with vessel tape, utilizing the shoelace technique. After the release, the patient was not able to flex the interphalangeal joint of the thumb. At second-look operation (3 days after the initial release), swelling of the left forearm had reduced with no evidence of infection. Therefore, we performed open reduction and internal fixation for the left radius fracture and PL tendon transfer to the FPL tendon. Intraoperatively, the presence of the intact PL tendon was confirmed. The PL tendon was advanced to the FPL tendon, and an interlacing suture was performed thrice. The tendon was transferred with the wrist in 30° of dorsiflexion and the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of the thumb in 45° of flexion. The wrist and thumb were immobilized in a slightly flexed position using a splint for 3 weeks, following which active flexion and extension exercises of the thumb were started. The patient was discharged 32 days after hospital admission in a relatively good state of health. Six weeks after the reconstruction, passive extension exercises of the thumb were started. At 6-month follow-up, the patient had no complaints and had returned to his former job, despite slight residual muscle weakness of the FPL. The patient regained the full range of thumb interphalangeal joint flexion–extension. At 2-year follow-up, the patient had acquired 88% of pinch strength compared with the contralateral hand and scored 11.4 on QuickDASH score.