A 78-year-old Israeli man presented to our intensive care unit with fever, flaccid limb weakness, and dysarthria. On the morning of his admission he felt cold and weak. He awoke suddenly with vomiting, weakness of four limbs, and slurred speech. In the emergency room he had a fever of 39.2 °C, blood pressure of 166/118 mmHg, and heart rate of 91 beats per minute. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis, mild thrombocytopenia, mild eosinophilia (700 cells per microliter), hyponatremia, acute kidney injury, hyperbilirubinemia, elevated liver enzymes (both hepatocellular and cholestatic enzymes), elevated international normalized ratio (INR), metabolic acidosis, and hyperlactatemia. More laboratory results are shown in Table . Whole body computed tomography (CT) and CT angiography showed atherosclerosis of the carotid arteries and severe degenerative vertebral discopathy, with no signs of cerebral ischemia and no evidence of spinal epidural abscess. There were small bilateral pleural effusions, ascites, and anasarca. A quick review of his past laboratory results showed long-lasting chronic eosinophilia (reaching 3000 cells/microliter a month before admission) and immunoglobulin E (IgE) level of 1600 kU/L (normal < 214 kU/L) 6 years before admission.
He was a retired lifeguard, and his past medical history included biologic aortic valve replacement 3 years earlier because of aortic stenosis, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation treated with apixaban anticoagulant therapy, an episode of atrial flutter treated with ablation, status post cerebrovascular accident with mild right hemiparesis, coronary artery heart disease and bypass grafting, congestive heart failure, well-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus, peripheral vascular disease, arterial hypertension, bilateral knee replacement due to osteoarthrosis, spinal stenosis and chronic back and joint pain with recurrent corticosteroid local injections, benign prostatic hypertrophy, and asthma. A month earlier he underwent an inguinal hernia repair and 3 weeks prior to admission he received an inactivated influenza vaccine. He was born in Iraq and immigrated to Israel when he was 12-years old. He recalled only one international travel to Europe several years prior to admission.
Several possibilities were considered for this patient with fever and limb weakness. With regards to infectious diseases they included subacute prosthetic bacterial endocarditis with an embolic stroke, an infectious encephalitis (including herpes viruses, West Nile virus, sandfly encephalitis, Listeria monocytogenes rhombencephalitis), atypical bacterial infection (for example, Mycoplasma, Rickettsia), spinal epidural abscess, and non-infectious conditions such as post infectious/vaccine-related peripheral neuropathy, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), systemic vasculitis including eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg–Strauss syndrome), and an autoimmune state such as catastrophic anti-phospholipid syndrome. Blood cultures were taken and antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone, ampicillin, vancomycin, acyclovir, and doxycycline was commenced. Our patient was admitted to an internal medicine ward and on the following day the neurologic signs resolved. On examination he was coherent, without dysarthria and he had only mild limb weakness. He was dyspneic and complained of abdominal pain. Liver and kidney functions as well as lactate levels, worsened. Repeated CT angiography of his abdomen showed no signs of mesenteric ischemia. He was transferred to the intensive care unit. A lumbar puncture was postponed because of worsening coagulopathy. Blood cultures (two out of four) were positive for S. pyogenes. Antibiotic treatment was switched to penicillin G, clindamycin, and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) for presumed STSS. Repeated physical examinations failed to identify the source of the bacteremia. After 3 days his clinical state deteriorated. He complained of severe abdominal pain and profuse diarrhea, the confusion recurred, as well as dyspnea and restlessness. He had non-oliguric renal dysfunction. His Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score increased to 11 and he underwent mechanical ventilation. He received noradrenaline to maintain blood pressure (0.1 mcg/kg per minute). An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed triphasic waves compatible with encephalopathy. During the next few days the clinical and laboratory findings improved gradually, and he was extubated. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed no vegetations and antibiotic treatment was discontinued after 14 days. On day 12 of hospitalization the serology results from an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; Scimedx corporation, Denville, NJ, USA) for S. stercoralis that was sent on admission, came back positive from the Israeli reference laboratory. A microscopic stool examination showed numerous motile larvae; stool real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for S. stercoralis was positive. All other diagnostic tests were negative . Our patient was treated with ivermectin (200 mcg/kg). Urine was positive for larvae 8 days after treatment commencement. The treatment was continued for 2 weeks after repeated stool tests became negative; a total of 4 weeks of treatment. No side effects were noted and he was discharged for rehabilitation after 25 days of hospitalization. Repeated stool PCR for S. stercoralis after 10 weeks remained negative.