A 49-year-old white woman re-presented to hospital with a history suggestive of sepsis. She had a background medical history of primary APS on lifelong warfarin for over 20 years with good compliance, hypertension treated with ramipril, chronic kidney disease, and a bicuspid aortic valve causing moderate regurgitation. She exercised regularly, was a nonsmoker and drank alcohol rarely. She was on neither hormone replacement therapy nor oral contraceptives.
Ten days prior to this admission, she had been hospitalized following a 1-day history of high-grade fever, nausea, urinary frequency, back pain, and rigors that had commenced 2 days after returning from a vacation in Mexico. She was not exposed to freshwater or jungles. She was hemodynamically stable and alert. Her urine culture was positive for coliform species, and blood cultures revealed an Escherichia coli bacteremia. The result of an abdominal ultrasound was normal, and transthoracic echocardiography visualized no vegetations and normal left ventricular dimensions with preserved systolic function. She was commenced on intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam and fluids and improved promptly, enabling discharge 2 days later with a prescribed 5-day course of oral amoxicillin.
Ten days later she self-presented to hospital with ongoing fever, myalgia, and malaise. Her urinary frequency had stopped; however, she complained of intermittent abdominal pain and episodes of vomiting and diarrhea. A medical practitioner had reviewed her case a few days prior and had diagnosed gastroenteritis. On examination, she was hypotensive (105/52 mmHg) with a normal heart rate (85 beats per minute), her respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute, she had 98% oxyhemoglobin saturation on room air, and she was afebrile (37.3 °C). Her abdomen was soft and nontender without organomegaly. Intravenous fluids and antiemetics were instituted to good effect. No skin or buccal pigmentary changes or stigmata of infective endocarditis were noted. Investigations showed she had microcytic anemia, mild thrombocytopenia, hyponatremia, and acute-on-chronic kidney injury. The results of the patient’s blood tests done at admission are shown in Table , and her clinical course is shown in Fig. . Urinalysis showed 3+ blood, 2+ protein, and 2+ leukocytes, with no ketonuria or glycosuria by dipstick. The result of a pregnancy test was negative. Her electrocardiogram and chest x-ray were unremarkable.
The patient was admitted to the acute medical ward. Two blood cultures and one urine culture were negative. Test results for other infectious pathogens (malaria, rickettsia, dengue, West Nile virus, chikungunya, Eastern equine encephalitis virus, yellow fever) were negative. An abdominal ultrasound scan displayed an oval 20 × 40-mm echo poor area above the right kidney, with some debris within it. This had not been present on the previous ultrasound 2 weeks prior.
The patient was prescribed intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam for presumed urosepsis. However, on the second day of treatment, she developed chills, shivering, and tachypnea (respiratory rate 25 breaths per minute), yet maintained her blood pressure (160/80 mmHg). She was clammy, light-headed, drowsy (Glasgow Coma Scale score 14/15), and hypothermic (33.3 °C). Her capillary blood glucose level was 6.2 mmol/L. An urgent dose of intravenous gentamicin was given. An urgent computed tomographic scan of the patient’s abdomen and pelvis revealed bilateral adrenal enlargement with high density centrally consistent with hemorrhage . Blood test results confirmed primary hypoadrenalism with low early morning cortisol (33 nmol/L), high adrenocorticotropic hormone (943 ng/L; normal range 10–50 ng/L), and negative adrenal antibodies with normal thyroid function, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone levels. Her hemoglobin level was 100 g/L, her platelets were 218 × 109/L, her international normalized ratio was 4.0, and her fibrinogen level was 5.8 g/L (normal range 1.8–4.5 g/L).
The patient was treated with intravenous hydrocortisone 100 mg three times daily, followed by oral therapy. This resulted in prompt improvement of her symptoms. Warfarin was withheld, and 1 mg intravenous vitamin K reversal was given. Prophylactic low-molecular-weight heparin was later initiated, and follow-up in the thrombosis clinic included reloading on warfarin.
Three months later a repeat computed tomographic scan showed no further bleeding and some reduction in size of the adrenal glands. The acute-on-chronic deterioration in renal function gradually stabilized at a lower glomerular filtration rate. A renal biopsy showed some scanty mesangial deposits. No reversible cause of renal impairment and no evidence of underlying connective tissue disease or overt thrombosis were identified. Elevated transaminases progressed (alanine aminotransferase peaked at 846 U/L) and sequentially normalized without medical intervention. An acute liver screen including ultrasound of portal and hepatic veins was unremarkable. Six months later the patient was well and continued to have follow-up with the hematology, endocrinology, and renal physicians.