A 26 year-old man attended our ophthalmic ward in April 2017 with intermittent bleeding of the right eye, from which there was also strong odor. The patient was a heavy smoker but had no other underlying conditions. He had no history of drug-use. From his medical history it was noted that the patient had undergone a right ophthalmectomy 24 years previously due to retinoblastoma, and implantation of an artificial right eyeball in 2014 (timeline shown in Additional file ).
On admission, his pulse rate was between 80 and 100 beats/min. His body temperature and respiratory rate were both normal. Physical examination showed narrow conjunctival sac in right eye and the exposure of ocular prosthesis, which was discharging a yellow-green secretion along with a strong odor. The visual acuity of left eye was 0.3, and the intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg. All other characteristics of the left eye were normal. A auscultation did not show any abnormality in the lungs, and no signs of carotid murmur were found. Interestingly, laboratory investigations did not reveal abnormal inflammatory markers such as leukocytosis or any increase in neutrophils or C-reaction protein. According to clinical and laboratory investigations, infectious endocarditis was not suspected. The patient had no history of other immunosuppressive conditions, except smoking and a retinoblastoma 24 years previously. The patient did not report any direct contact with animals; however, he did work in a clothing factory so would have been contact with wool and cowhide for one month of the year. Three months had elapsed between the patient last coming into contact with wool and cowhide and the appearance of clinical symptoms. Considering the results of these investigations, partial artificial eye infection, especially anaerobic organism infection, was suspected.
Imaging workups were completed, which included chest x-ray, transthoracic echocardiography and eye magnetic resonance imaging. As shown in Fig. , eye magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the tissue surrounding the right eye prosthesis as well as the soft tissue of the lacrimal gland area were swollen, whereas the left eye appeared normal. Inflammatory disease in the right eye was therefore suspected. According to chest x-ray and transthoracic echocardiography, no obvious abnormalities in the lungs or heart were observed.
Before surgery, a few specimens of the right eye secretions were collected to be cultured, but no bacteria were isolated, possibly because most of the secretions had been absorbed by the artifical eye making it yellow-green in appearance. After removal of the right artificial eye with debridement (5 days after admission), both the artificial eye and specimens of the eye secretions were sent for bacterial culture under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. No bacterial growth was detected from the ophthalmic secretions, but cultures were obtained from the artificial eye. Sparse growth of β-hemolytic cocci and heavy growth of small, non-hemolytic, translucent colonies were observed on Columbia agar plates supplemented with 5% sheep blood (BioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) under aerobic conditions after 48 h. And the latter colonies only grow close to the hemolysis zone of the former one. Under anaerobic conditions, only the small, translucent colonies were detected from the artificial eye (as shown in Fig. ). Of the two colony types, the β-hemolytic cocci were confirmed as Staphylococcus aureus, whereas the small, translucent colonies stained positive in a Gram stain and occurred singly, in pairs, or in short chains . Catalase and oxidase reactions of the unknown colonies were negative and phenotypic characterization using the Vitek2 GP system (BioMérieux) was inconclusive. However, Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry revealed a match with Helcococcus ovis DSM 21504 T DSM (log score: 1.637) according to the Brucker Maldi-Biotyper database. Identification of this organism was confirmed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. BLAST analysis of the partial 16S rRNA gene sequence derived from our isolate (1492 nucleotides, deposited in the GeneBank database under accession number MG188744) showed 98.9% identity (15 nucleotide differences) with the 16S rRNA gene sequence of H. ovis s840–96-2 deposited in the GenBank database under accession number NR027228 by Collins and coworkers in 1999 when this species was first described.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) of both strains was performed. The disk diffusion method was carried out and with the exception of penicillin, erythromycin and clindamycin, S. aureus isolated from this case was susceptible to all other drugs including cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones. AST for Helcococcus was performed using the CLSI broth microdilution method on Mueller-Hinton II broth (BD Diagnostics, Heidelberg, Germany) supplemented with 3% (vol/vol) lysed horse blood (Oxoid, Wesel, Germany) and 0.001% (wt/vol) pyridoxal HCl (Sigma–Aldrich, Munich, Germany) incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO2 for 24 h [, ]. Streptococcus pneumoniae ATCC 49619 served as a quality control. Then, we changed the method and performed an E-test on blood agar, with S. aureus ATCC 29213 as the quality control (for reference only). The MICs (μg/L) of the drugs for this strain are reported in Table . Since no antimicrobial testing guidelines are currently available from the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) for Helcococcus, the MICs were determined in reference to the CLSI guidelines for S. aureus . According to the CLSI [, ], this strain was susceptible to penicillin, ampicillin, teicoplanin, ceftriaxone, vancomycin, and linezolid.
After admission, the patient received levofloxacin eye drops 4 times per day until being discharged from hospital. After surgery, the patient was initially treated with intra-venous cefotaxime (2.25 g/250 ml NaCl, 1/day) and ornidazole (500 mg/day) for 1 week. Two weeks after admission, the patient recovered and was discharged from hospital. Six months later, the patient returned to the hospital to finish implantation of the artificial right eyeball and no signs of infection were detected. With the patient’s consent, we collected samples from the skin around both eyes for aerobic and anaerobic culture, but only normal skin flora were detected, such as coagulase-negative Staphylococcus. After surgery, the patient was in good health and was discharged from the hospital.