A 72-year-old Japanese man had been treated by a nearby doctor for hypertension, but subsequently developed lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS; lower abdominal discomfort and difficulty urinating) and was prescribed an α1 blocker for 1 year. However, the patient was subsequently referred to our department because his symptoms did not improve. His medical history included sinusitis and laparoscopic cholecystectomy. At the first visit, the patient’s height and weight were 162 cm and 66 kg, respectively. HIs blood pressure was 132/74 mmHg, pulse was regular at 63 beats/minute, and body temperature was 36.4 °C. The patient had no history of smoking or drinking. No specific abnormalities or neurological findings were noted at the initial physical examination. However, a digital rectal examination revealed a walnut-sized prostate without tenderness, with a palpable nodule on the right lobe.
Blood biochemistry and urinalysis revealed no abnormal findings, and the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was 1.258 ng/ml.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a prostate mass of 36 cc. The International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) was 20 points, IPSS-Quality of Life was 4 points, and uroflowmetry revealed a urine volume of 211 ml, maximum urine flow rate of 10.7 ml/s, and residual urine volume of 10 ml.
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a high-intensity area in the right lobe on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) , and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) in that area revealed a low signal . No other abnormalities were detected in the search range. The radiologist’s interpretation result was according to Prostate Imaging and Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS) category 3.
Digital rectal examination and MRI findings suggested cT2a prostate cancer; therefore, a transrectal ultrasound-guided systematic biopsy (12 cores) was performed.
A pathological examination revealed no malignancy and poor glandular formation, while only a dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltration but no obliterative phlebitis or storiform fibrosis was observed . The pathologist’s diagnosis was suspected IgG4-RD. Thus, we performed IgG and IgG4 immunostaining with suspicion of IgG4-RD. IgG4-positive (IgG4+) plasma cells were observed in a wide range, IgG4+ cells were noted at > 10 per high-power field, and the IgG4+/IgG-positive (IgG+) cell ratio was > 40% .
Serum IgG4 measurements and lung and abdominal computed tomography (CT) were performed for a definitive diagnosis of IgG4-RD. Serum IgG4 levels were high at 1600 mg/dl (reference range: 11–121–mg/dl). Pulmonary CT indicated no abnormal findings, and enhanced abdominal CT revealed a soft tissue mass around the bilateral common iliac arteries from the abdominal aorta, suggesting periaortitis . Additionally, multiple lymphadenopathies were observed around the abdominal aorta , and malignant lymphoma was suspected. Therefore, the soluble interleukin 2 receptor was measured and was within the normal range of 392 U/ml (reference range: 121–613 U/ml).
Based on the above findings, we diagnosed the patient with IgG4-RD definite, diagnosis group (definite).
Regarding treatment strategy, we decided that no invasive treatment was needed as no symptoms were associated with the periaortic lesions. We proposed steroid treatment for LUTS; however, the patient refused treatment because of concerns regarding the side effects associated with steroid treatment. An α1 blocker that had no effect on the patient was also discontinued, and a CT scan 6 months after diagnosis revealed no changes in the soft tissue lesions around the aorta. Follow-up CT examinations will be performed every 6 months.