A 55-year-old male with a past medical history of anemia and long-standing alcohol abuse with recent diagnosis of cirrhosis (Child’s Pugh Score B, MELD-Na 22) decompensated by portal hypertension in form of abdominal ascites, and medium-size esophageal varices, presented with 2 weeks of worsening epigastric abdominal pain and distention. The patient drinks six cans of beer daily for 10 years. Denies smoking or eliciting recreational drugs. No prior surgical intervention. On physical examination, the patient looks cachectic. He has minimal scleral icterus and trace lower extremities edema. Abdominal examination notable for a mild epigastric tenderness and abdominal distention with shifting dullness. His laboratory data demonstrates complete blood count (CBC) with WBC 8. 7 K/MCL, hemoglobin (Hb) 9.1 gm/dl, Hct 26.8%, and platelets 46 k/MCL. The coagulation panel demonstrates an INR of 2.0. Abnormal liver chemistry, alanine transaminase (ALT) of 44 IU/ml, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 67 IU/ml, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 253 mg/dl, and a total bilirubin 5.2 mg/dl (direct bilirubin 3.8). The work-ups for abnormal liver chemistry were unremarkable including viral hepatitis A, B and C. Abdominal triple-phase CT was noteworthy for cirrhosis, mild to moderate ascites, and multiple new hypodense lesions throughout the liver, the largest being a 6 cm in diameter in the right lobe. The lesions were classified as an intermediate probability for HCC based on the LI-RADS classification system (LI RADS 3) . The tumor marker for AFP was normal. Three months before admission the patient had an unremarkable upper endoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy for an indication of iron deficiency anemia (IDA) which demonstrates no obvious luminal lesion. The hospital course was complicated by upper gastrointestinal bleeding with hematemesis required blood transfusion. Diagnostic EGD showed large non-bleeding esophageal varices, severe portal hypertensive gastropathy (PHG), and multiple new umbilicated, ulcerated, firm, submucosal nodules throughout the gastric body . Targeted liver biopsy performed given the suspicious radiological liver features for HCC in the background of cirrhosis Biopsy of the submucosal gastric nodules revealed high-grade B-cell lymphoma involving the lamina propria, without evidence of Helicobacter Pylori. Neoplastic cells were positive for CD20, Pax-5, BCL-6, CD10, BCL-2, and negative for CD3. Ki67 index was 95% positive for lymphoma cells . Further, tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 which were normal. The cell morphology and immunostaining profile of the liver biopsy was identical to the gastric submucosal nodules, thus confirming the diagnosis of primary gastric DLBCL with metastasis to the liver . The patient received one session of chemotherapy with low-dose Rituximab-Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin, Vincristine, and Prednisone (R-CHOP) knowing that lymphoma is chemosenstive tumor and patient continues to have stable bilirubin since hospital admission (MELD-Na 21). Unfortunately, his bilirubin levels started to rise up to 25 mg/dl over 3 weeks period. His hospital course was complicated with septic shock secondary to SBP and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) resulting in his death.