A 29-year-old white male was transported to the emergency department by ambulance after experiencing a seizure in the early morning hours in September 2018. He had experienced mild pain in his left leg 1 day earlier, but did not experience any shortness of breath or chest pain at this time. Past medical history included minor mitral valve prolapse diagnosed in adolescence and at age 18 years a left tibial tubercle fracture. The patient was a commercial airline pilot and reported an average of 18 days or 90 hour per month spent piloting. He was living in a high-altitude city at the time of symptom presentation. Family history included a cousin with epilepsy and was otherwise non-contributory. The patient was discharged after an unremarkable head computed tomography (CT) scan and was referred to neurology. Neurology ruled out epilepsy as the cause of his seizures. Additional work-up, including electroencephalogram (EEG), was within normal limits.
One week after his first seizure and subsequent neurology consult, the patient presented at urgent care with left leg pain and exertional shortness of breath. No imaging or bloodwork was ordered at this time. He was discharged with an erroneous diagnosis of allergies. Later in the same month, he experienced his second seizure, again in the early morning hours, but did not seek emergent medical care. Upon a second evaluation by the neurologist, he was prescribed levetiracetam.
In November 2018, the patient presented to the emergency department with 3-day history of shortness of breath, hemoptysis, left calf pain radiating to the popliteal area, and intermittent left midsternal chest pain. The patient underwent an extended period of automobile travel of approximately 20 hour duration 2 weeks prior. The patient’s vitals were BP 145/88, MAP 107 mmHg, temperature 97.8 °F, HR 93, RR 16, and SaO2 of 95% on RA. Upon physical examination, lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally with no diminished breath sounds. Cardiac auscultation revealed no gallops or murmurs. Radial and femoral pulses were normal bilaterally. No edema was found in the extremities. The neurological examination was within normal limits.
Blood work and imaging were subsequently ordered. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm and a rate of 98 bpm. D-dimer was elevated, which prompted further testing. Chest CT chest with intravenous (IV) contrast showed extensive bilateral pulmonary embolism . Clot burden was identified in left and right interlobar arteries extending into the segmental and subsegmental branches without infarction or effusion. IV tPA was administered. A 4-mm lingular nodule was found on CT, and oncological work-up was recommended.
At this time, the differential diagnosis was still broad. Trousseau’s syndrome was on the differential but was ruled out. Oncologic work-up was negative for malignancy. Laboratory values were within normal limits. The patient had not experienced another seizure. Work-up included full-body CT scan, which revealed MTS . Hematological profile was also within normal limits, and MTS was postulated to be the cause of the patient’s clotting and was added to the differential for the underlying cause of his symptom profile. Treatment options for MTS were discussed including long-term anticoagulation therapy as a minimally invasive option and venoplasty as an invasive option. The patient wished to proceed with the more definitive option and elected to undergo endovascular venoplasty with stent placement. In March 2019, Interventional Radiology placed bilateral common iliac and right external iliac venous stents to attempt definitive treatment. Stents were placed bilaterally after Doppler flow analysis showed diminished blood flow in both left and right internal iliac veins. Post-catheterization CT with three-dimensional (3D) rendering showed placement position of and patent luminary blood flow through the stents .
Postoperatively, the patient was referred to hematology for follow-up care. It was deemed safe to discontinue heparin and switch to daily aspirin 4 weeks after venoplasty. Six days after discontinuation of heparin, the patient experienced another thrombotic event presenting with left leg pain and shortness of breath. Diagnostic workup, including CT, was significant for PE, and the patient was taken to the interventional radiology suite.
The right popliteal vein was accessed in an integrated fashion using a six French vascular sheath. A venogram was performed. A guidewire and catheter were advanced into the common femoral veins bilaterally, and simultaneous iliac venograms were performed. Catheters were then advanced bilaterally into the common iliac stents, and IV contrast was injected. Significant thrombus was demonstrated within the right proximal external iliac vein and bilateral stented common iliac veins. The thrombus also extended proximally into the inferior vena cava (IVC) immediately above the stents as well as distally into the left femoral and popliteal veins . Pharmacomechanical thrombectomy was then performed through each access site, from the left popliteal vein through the left iliac veins and into the IVC, and also from the right external iliac vein into the IVC.
Following thrombectomy, 20 cm infusion length catheters were deployed bilaterally. tPA infusion was initiated through each infusion catheter. In addition, to treat the nonocclusive thrombus within the distal left femoral and popliteal veins, tPA was also infused through the access sheath at that site. All sheaths and catheters were secured to the skin, and weight-based heparin was continued. Twenty-four hours later, the patient underwent fluoroscopy which confirmed patency of the treated segments . The patient remained inpatient for monitoring for the next 24 h and was discharged home on apixaban for chemoprophylaxis. The patient tolerated the procedure without complication.
The patient has since reported no additional seizures, clotting events, or emergency department visits. No other significant disorders have been found, including testing for Factor V Leiden, cancer, thyroid disorders, and patent foramen ovale. Despite the negative hematological testing, the patient remains on lifelong Coumadin in the event of an undiscovered hypercoagulopathy. The care team theorizes that the seizures resulted from hypoxia due to MTS-induced hemostasis and associated thrombotic events, the high-altitude location of his residence at the time he experienced the seizures, and shallow breathing during sleep.