A 16-month-old Saudi Arabian boy presented to the emergency department due to shortness of breath. The patient experienced fever, poor oral intake, vomiting 1–2 times per day, and dry cough for 2 days. The patient had a large mid-muscular ventricular septal defect (VSD), with a previous history of percutaneous closure of VSD 3 months before the current presentation. The child had been in contact with his mother who tested positive for COVID-19. The mother’s manifestations started 8 days before the child developed symptoms. Upon presentation, the patient’s oxygen saturation was 70%. Hence, he required oxygen supplementation. COVID-19 test, other blood examinations, and chest radiography were performed. In the emergency room (ER), the condition of the child deteriorated. Therefore, he required mechanical ventilation for rapidly progressing respiratory failure. Premedication for endotracheal intubation was administered including atropine 0.02 mg/kg, ketamine 1 mg/kg, and rocuronium 1 mg/kg. During intubation, he developed bradycardia and asystole that required cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for 6 min and two doses of epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg/dose). Then, a successful return of spontaneous circulation was achieved, and the patient was transferred to the paediatric intensive care unit (PICU).
The following examination results were obtained. Assessment in the ER: weight, 7.1 kg; height, 71.5 cm (both below the 3rd percentile); temperature, 38.3°C; heart rate, 180 beats/min; respiratory rate, 70 cycles/min; blood pressure, 73/43 mmHg; and capillary refill time, >3 s. Chest examination: severe subcostal and intercostal recessions and bilateral fine crackles. Cardiac examination: grade I–II soft systolic murmur at the lower left sternal border. Abdominal examination: enlarged liver located 4 cm below the costal margin. Examination of the other systems: unremarkable results.
The patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 based on reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Initial laboratory testing revealed anaemia (haemoglobin 7.6 g/dL, normal range 9.6–15.6 g/dL), elevated D-dimer levels (40.56 mg/L, normal <0.5 mg/L), prolonged prothrombin time (23 sec, normal <12.5 s), increased aspartate transaminase enzyme levels (79 U/L, normal <37 U/L), lactic acidosis (7.7 mmol/L, normal <2 mmol/L), and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels (1284 U/L, normal <240 U/L) and high cardiac enzyme levels (troponin-I 2.07 µg/L, normal <0.04 µg/L). While in the PICU, the patient had thrombocytopenia (72–92 K/µL, normal >150 K/µL), lymphopenia (1.27–3.62 K/µL, normal range 4–10.5 K/µL), increased C-reactive protein (CRP) level (19 mg/L, normal <3 mg/L), and impaired liver and kidney functions (alanine transaminase 110–146 U/L, normal <78 U/L; urea 11.3–19.5 mmol/L, normal <6.4 mmol/L) . The bacterial culture and respiratory and blood examination results were negative. Chest radiography revealed bilateral ground-glass opacities and cardiomegaly . Electrocardiogram upon admission showed sinus rhythm with trifascicular block and precordial T-wave inversion .
Echocardiography was performed after PICU admission. Results showed that the VSD device was in place, with a small residual leak across the device, mild tricuspid valve regurgitation, with an estimated systolic pulmonary pressure of 60 mmHg, moderate biventricular systolic dysfunction with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% (Video1), normal coronary arteries (Video2), and no pericardial effusion or vegetations. Two days after PICU admission, a follow-up echocardiography demonstrated unchanged ventricular systolic dysfunction and pulmonary hypertension (PH) .
After a successful CPR, the patient was conscious with bilateral equal and reactive pupils. Fentanyl, epinephrine, and milrinone infusions were initiated in PICU. Then, norepinephrine infusion for vasodilatory shock was initiated. Six hours after PICU admission, oxygenation and ventilation were not maintained even with conventional mechanical ventilation. Thus, the patient was connected to high-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV). Based on our protocol, he received the following medical therapy: hydroxychloroquine 6.5 mg/kg twice daily for Day 1; followed by 3.25 mg/kg twice daily for 5 days, azithromycin 10 mg/kg on Day 1; followed by 5 mg/kg once daily on Days 2–5, and tocilizumab 12 mg/kg repeated within 12 h. Intravenous immunoglobulin (total dose of 2 g/kg) was administered for suspected myocarditis.
Despite the provision of aggressive supportive care, the patient developed multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS). HFOV and vasopressors were continuously administered for 5 days. Ultimately, he presented with worsening shock, refractory hypoxaemia, and cardiac arrest. The patient died on Day 6 of hospitalization.
At the age of 2 weeks, he developed shortness of breath and was diagnosed with a large mid-muscular VSD. He was referred for cardiac surgery but was never followed-up due to family living in a remote area. He returned to our institution at the age of 13 months. He was malnourished because of poor oral intake. Echocardiography was performed and revealed a large mid-muscular VSD (16 mm) with severe PH (70 mmHg).
Cardiac catheterization showed a baseline indexed pulmonary vascular resistance (PVRI) of 5.8 Wood units (WU)⋅m2, but it dropped to 2.6 WU⋅m2 on 100% oxygen. The baseline systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 71 mmHg; systemic blood pressure was 76/40 mmHg; QP/QS was 2.5 and the pulmonary vascular resistance/systemic vascular resistance (SVR) was 0.26. After a multidisciplinary consensus meeting and discussion with the family, percutaneous VSD closure was performed successfully without complications using a 19 mm Amplatzer septal occluder (St. Jude Medical, Plymouth, MN, USA).
One month before the current presentation, he had bronchiolitis that required hospitalization for 5 days. Echocardiography was repeated and revealed haemodynamically insignificant small residual VSD, PH (60 mmHg), and normal ventricular function (Video3). He was scheduled for a re-evaluation of PH after 6 weeks to allow complete lung recovery, but he presented earlier with COVID-19.