A 28-year-old gravida 0 para 0 (G0P0) woman, non-smoker, presented to our institution for chronic constipation. She had a long-standing history of constipation and tenesmus for more than 3 years. She had used multiple laxatives and linaclotide without much benefit. The patient is a physician assistant and mentioned that she eats healthy and drinks plenty of water. She noticed rectal prolapse on a regular basis when she strains, and occasionally, she had to manually evacuate herself for complete defecation. She had no other reported symptoms. Her symptoms got worse a few months prior to her presentation. She denied any family history of colon cancer or inflammatory bowel disease, but her father has irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). The patient has a surgical history of ovarian cyst removal .
Vital signs were normal, and routine laboratory tests were within the normal reference range. On physical examination, the abdomen was soft, non-distended, and non-tender. Bowel sounds were normal. Yet, obvious rectal prolapse and anterior rectocele were noted. The patient’s BMI was 23.3 kg/m2. The patient recently had a colonoscopy at another institution, and results demonstrated an entirely examined colon that appeared to be normal on direct and retroflection views. A year prior, a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a sigmoid colon which appeared prominently stool-filled and an area suggestive of rectal intussusception without wall thickening or peri-colonic inflammatory changes and likely representing the cause of severe constipation and fecal impaction. At that time, she also had a defecography that showed a 3.5 cm anterior rectocele.
At our institution, an X-ray gastrografin enema was performed, showing ahaustral mucosal appearance of the sigmoid and descending colon . MRI defecography was also done with findings suggestive of tricompartmental pelvic floor prolapse, moderate size anterior rectocele, and grade 2 sigmoidocele .
Those findings can be seen with chronic inflammatory conditions or chronic laxative use. The differential diagnosis included IBS, giant colonic pseudo-diverticulum, mesenteric cyst, colonic neoplasia, or colonic duplication. However, IBS was unlikely since the patient’s symptoms were refractory to medical therapy. Due to the severity of her symptoms and failure of conservative management, the patient agreed to undergo a laparoscopic sigmoidectomy with rectopexy for treatment of her rectal prolapse.
Diagnostic laparoscopic exploration was performed, revealing a broad-based diverticulum in the sigmoid colon, likely presenting a tubular duplicated colon that shares a common opening with the sigmoid colon .
A 17 cm segment of the colon was resected, and a side-to-side functional end-to-end anastomosis was performed. The rectum was straightened and secured to the posterior pelvic wall in order to fix the rectal prolapse. On gross pathologic examination, there was an intestinal outpouching located 4.3 cm from one end of the segment of the resected colon, making a 30 degrees angle with the colon. The intestinal outpouching was 7.3 cm in length and 2.6 cm in average circumference; it had a blind end and appeared grossly unremarkable. On microscopic examination, the intestinal wall of the duplication contained all three layers (true diverticulum) with mucosal lymphoid aggregates that extended to the submucosa . The differential diagnosis included giant colonic false diverticulum; however, the smooth muscle layer in that entity is typically not well-formed; hence, gross examination, as well as histopathological features of the resected colon segment, excluded that diagnosis. At 1-month follow-up, the patient was doing well without constipation or rectal prolapse.