We report a case report of a 29-year-old female who came to the dermatology department with black-colored lesions on the lower leg for the past 7 years which progressively increased in size over the years. There was no history of trauma and her family history was negative. No associated disease including epidermolysis bullosa was seen in our case. There was no itching over the lesions. On examination, blackish to brownish indurated plaque was present over left lower leg of size 0.5–1 cm. In fact, it is a commonly underdiagnosed variant of dermatofibroma. Histopathologically, this disorder presents as a decrease in at least 50% of the thickness of the dermis relative to the adjacent dermis. There was no discharge or bleeding on touching the lesion. Dimple sign was elicited and was positive . Dermoscopy of the lesions showed white scar-like patches along with peripheral pigmented network . A differential diagnosis of Bowen’s disease and lichen sclerosus atrophicus, melanocytic tumor, and dermatofibroma was made. A biopsy was done and histopathological examination revealed a non-encapsulated dermal tumor involving upper to deep reticular dermis and extending to superficial subcutis. There was epidermal hyperplasia and at the center of the lesion a slight epidermal atrophy was present. The tumor was composed of intertwined and interwoven spindle cells in a collageneous stroma with collagen trapping of collagen bundles along the edges . The cells had bland fusiform nuclei without cytological atypia or significant mitosis. Uninvolved papillary dermis containing mild perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate with few melanophages separated the tumor from epidermis showing irregular psoriasiform hyperplasia with elongated rete ridges with overlying mildly hyperkeratotic stratum corneum. Von Gieson’s stain was used for staining elastic fibers. Immunohistochemistry was positive for Factor XIIIa and negative for CD34. After the biopsy report was obtained, complete surgical excision of the lesion was done. Hence, we report a typical case of atrophic dermatofibroma, an uncommon and probably underdiagnosed variant of a frequent lesion.