A 22-year-old female patient was referred to the Department of Cardiology with exertional shortness of breath and a history of congenital heart disease with mitral stenosis (MS), VSD and pulmonary hypertension as an outpatient. Five days previously, her condition had deteriorated rapidly, the patient became progressively dyspnoeic and developed orthopnoea, and she was unable to perform daily activities due to severe shortness of breath associated with exertional atypical chest pain. An electrocardiogram showed an ectopic rhythm (78 b.p.m./m), rapid atrial arrhythmias, and a left QRS axis. Upon physical examination, her blood pressure was found to be normal (100/60 mmHg) and the cardiac auscultation showed a 3/6 systolic murmur along the left sternal border. On auscultation of the chest, there were normal vesicular breath sounds. Scoliosis was observed in chest findings. There were no peripheral oedema and jugular venous distention. Blood and biochemical laboratory tests revealed leucocytosis, white blood cell count 10.18 × 109 cells/L (normal value: 3.5–9.5 × 109 cells/L), elevated C-reactive protein levels 25.36 mg/L (normal value: 1–10 mg/L) and NT-proBNP 628 ng/L (normal value: 133–450 ng/L). Chest radiography showed a cardiothoracic ratio of 60%, pulmonary congestion, bilateral pleural thickening and scoliosis.
Next, we performed a transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) that revealed an abnormal membranous structure (1.3 cm × 1.2 cm) attached to the ventricular side of anterior mitral valve (MV) leaflet, with a subaortic chordal attachment. The abnormal tissue was similar to a MV leaflet. The parasternal short-axis view showed the relationship between the normal MV and the accessory valve . Therefore, we diagnosed it as AMVT. The peak blood flow velocity across LVOT had accelerated to 5.0 m/s . The MV had a parachute-like appearance. There were two normally positioned papillary muscles in the left ventricle, but they did not have chordae tendineae inserted into it. The chordae tendineae were located in the left ventricular wall between the two papillary muscles . Therefore, we described it as a parachute-like MV. Doppler assessment yielded a peak MV gradient of 27 mmHg and a mean MV gradient of 16 mmHg. Pressure half-time method yielded a valve area of 0.8 cm2. There was also a mild degree of mitral regurgitation. In addition, echocardiography revealed a peri-membranous VSD ( and ) and BAV. The diameter of the VSD was 1.0 cm, and the shunt flow through VSD was left-to-right with a peak velocity of 4.5 m/s. From these findings, we hypothesized that LVOT obstruction was due to the accessory MV, MS was due to PMV and the left-to-right shunt was due to VSD. The pulmonary and tricuspid valves were normal. The pulmonary artery systolic pressure was slightly high (44 mmHg). There was also a mild dilatation of the left atrium (4.2 cm) and left ventricle (left ventricle end-diastolic diameter = 5.2 cm). Systolic function of the left ventricle was estimated to be within normal limits (ejection fraction = 60%). right ventricle function as well as the dimensions and morphology of the aortic arch and the ascending and descending aorta were normal.
In addition, we performed transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) that confirmed the TTE findings, showing a fixed, membrane-like structure arising from the anterior mitral leaflet causing the LVOT obstruction . This also confirmed the presence of PMV and VSD ( and ). Transoesophageal echocardiography showed a BAV with only two sinuses: left coronary and right coronary. The right coronary sinus appeared aneurysmal, but not ruptured . The valve area of BAV was 2.5 cm2 by planimetry, BAV was functioning normally with no aortic valve stenosis or regurgitation.
After a comprehensive clinical evaluation, elective surgical treatment was performed because of the presence of VSD, severity of the MV stenosis and LVOT obstruction. The BAV was functioning normally and was not replaced. The operative findings correlated with the imaging diagnosis. During the operation, excision of the AMV and MV replacement were performed. In addition, the peri-membranous VSD and aneurysm of the aortic sinus were repaired. Grossly, the membranous structure specimens confirmed that it was AMVT . Histological examination showed valvular tissue associated with mucous degeneration and inflammatory cell infiltration.
A post-operative echocardiography showed complete resection of AMV, no residual shunt, no left ventricular outflow gradient or mitral regurgitation. The mosaic flow signals in the left ventricular outflow were diminished using colour Doppler, and the peak blood flow velocity decreased to 1.4 m/s. The peak pressure of rapid filling phase and atrial systolic phase across the prosthetic MV were 16 mmHg and 4 mmHg, respectively. The post-operative course was uneventful, and the patient was most recently reviewed 1 week, 1 month, 3 months after the surgical procedure by ultrasound, electrocardiogram, and chest radiography. The function of BAV was evaluated by ultrasound regularly. In the most recent follow-up, the patient’s shortness of breath disappeared, with no further episodes of chest pain.
In this study, we report an extremely rare case of AMVT causing LVOT obstruction associated with PMV, VSD, BAV, and an unruptured aneurysm of the aortic sinus. This combination of symptoms has not been previously reported in literature.