A 64-year-old man presented to his local doctor with vomiting and abdominal distention. He had a medical history of depression and Parkinson's disease. His arterial blood gas analysis results on room air showed severe hypoxemia and acidemia (pH 6.96, PaO2 60 mmHg, PaCO2 63 mmHg, HCO3− 14 mmol/L, base excess −18 mmol/L), and abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed gastric wall pneumatosis and portal emphysema. He was intubated and transferred to the Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Kansai Medical University (Hirakata, Japan).
On physical examination, he had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 5 (E1VTM4). His blood pressure was 80/59 mmHg, and his heart rate was 133 b.p.m. under administration of 0.2 μg/kg/min norepinephrine. He had abdominal distention, and 3000 mL of reddish-brown gastric juice was aspirated through his nasogastric (NG) tube. Blood biochemistry tests showed decreased levels of white blood cells (2100/μL) and elevated levels of C-reactive protein (15.8 mg/dL) and procalcitonin (6.6 ng/mL).
An abdominal CT revealed a dilated stomach and proximal duodenum, with extensive gastric wall pneumatosis and portal emphysema. This was unlikely to be bowel necrosis because the gastric wall was highlighted . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed acute gastric mucosal lesions (AGMLs) over a wide range of focus on the gastric fornix . Although the culture of gastric acid and gastric mucosa, and blood culture were negative, levels of C-reactive protein and procalcitonin were high. Our provisional diagnosis at that time was gastric wall pneumatosis, portal emphysema, and septic shock derived from emphysematous gastritis.
We treated him conservatively by giving antibiotics and antacids, and undertaking gastric drainage with a NG tube. His respiratory and circulatory conditions improved, and he was taken off of the pressor agent on hospital day 3. On hospital day 4, the abdominal CT showed a decrease in the gastric wall pneumatosis and portal emphysema. In addition, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed improvement of AGMLs, and we could culture no organisms from his gastric juice or gastric mucosa. We thus started him on NG tube feeding. Shortly thereafter, however, he went into shock and showed impaired consciousness. An abdominal CT and gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed exacerbation of the gastric wall pneumatosis, portal emphysema, and AGMLs. Therefore, we started gastric drainage and feeding by way of the jejunum through a double elementary diet (W-ED) tube. On hospital day 13, feeding was changed back to an NG tube because there was no appearance of digestive symptoms and improvement of AGMLs. But, again, shortly thereafter, the same findings and septic shock recurred. Because of the repeat of his symptoms following NG tube feeding, we re-examined his medical history and CT findings.
Due to the patient's lack of appetite, his body weight had decreased by 30 kg over 2 years and his body mass index on admission was 17 kg/m2. An abdominal CT showed an SMA of 7.7 mm in diameter arising from the aorta at a narrow aortomesenteric angle (AMA) of 9.8°, and constriction of the third portion of the duodenum . We thus diagnosed him as having SMAS and obstructive gastric emphysema and started gastric drainage and feeding by way of the jejunum through a W-ED tube. He began to gain weight and a CT showed an increase in the AMA. On hospital day 49, we changed from the W-ED tube to an NG tube, and the patient's general condition improved further. He was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital on hospital day 60.