We report a 53-year-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese male from Kandy presented to Teaching Hospital, Peradeniya with a history of fever for 4 days. He was previously apparently well and a nonsmoker and a nonethanol consumer. He presented on the fourth day of an acute febrile illness with arthralgia, myalgia, retro-orbital pain and headache. On admission he was having postural dizziness, nausea, vomiting and right upper abdominal pain with severe anorexia. On examination he was oriented in time, place and person, but confused. He was not pale, but a mild tinge of icterus was noted in the sclera. The patient was dehydrated, but the capillary refilling time was less than 2 seconds with warm peripheries. His pulse rate was 96 beats/minute with a supine blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg. Standing blood pressure was 110/90 mmHg with narrowing of pulse pressure. The rest of the cardiovascular system was normal. Reduced breath sounds were noted in the right lung base but the rest of the lung fields were normal. He had marked tenderness over the right hypochondrium with a hepatomegaly of 4 cm below the costal margin. He did not have clinically detectable free fluid in the abdomen.
On admission to the medical unit the patient’s complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 12.6 g/dl, white cell count of 1.85 × 106 cells/μl and platelet count of 36 × 103 cells/μl. His transaminase levels were elevated: aspartate transaminase (AST) was 27,220 U/L and alanine transaminase (ALT) was 11,100 U/L. Serum bilirubin was 50 mg/dl with a direct fraction of 45%. The prothrombin time (PT) was 17.1 seconds (control 12 seconds) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 142.7 seconds (control 29 seconds). Serum albumin was 30 g/dl and the corrected calcium value was 1.7 mmol/L (normal range 2.15–2.57 mmol/L). Venous blood gas showed a compensated metabolic acidosis with bicarbonate of 15 mmol/L and partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 20 mmHg. The venous lactate level was 5.8 mmol/L. Renal functions were within the normal range. Serum amylase was 145 U/L (normal range 1–137 U/L) and serum lipase levels were not available. Urine analysis showed trace protein, and three or four white cells with few granular casts. Bedside ultrasound scan revealed free fluid in perihepatic, subhepatic and pericholycystic spaces with marked gall bladder wall edema and a small right-sided pleural effusion. A diagnosis of DHF complicated with liver involvement was made.
The patient was moved to the high dependency unit and was catheterized. Fluid resuscitation was done initially using crystalloids. He was given a normal saline bolus of 7 ml/kg due to narrow pulse pressure and fluids were titrated according to blood pressure, urine output and packed cell volume (PCV). The patient was started on a third-generation cephalosporin and an intravenous proton pump inhibitor. He showed mild confusion and altered sleep cycle. In view of deranged liver functions, evidence of coagulopathy and altered sensorium, a possibility of acute liver failure with early encephalopathy was considered. Serum ammonia level measurement was not available at the hospital. The patient was started on oral metronidazole and lactulose. Intravenous vitamin K 5 mg was given. Blood sugar was checked every 4 hours and corrected. Serum calcium levels were monitored and corrected with intravenous calcium gluconate.
Dengue fever was confirmed by positive nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) antigen and the serotype was identified as DEN 2. Both dengue immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) were positive, suggesting a secondary infection with DENV. Because of severe liver involvement, alternative causes were sought. Tests for viral serologies including hepatitis A IgM, hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C IgM were negative. Leptospira and rickettsial serology was negative and blood cultures were sterile. The patient denied taking a supra-therapeutic dose of paracetamol or any other hepatotoxic drugs. He had not taken any ayurvedic or herbal preparations prior to admission as an ailment for fever. Serology for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) was not available in the hospital.
The patient’s PCV was maintained around 40% and he maintained more than 0.5 ml/kg urine output. Within the next 12 hours, further increase of transaminases was noted (AST 47,220 U/L, ALT 27,688 U/L) and the venous lactate level was raised to 7.8 mmol/L. The patient was started on an intravenous infusion of N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) at a rate of 100 mg/hour. The authors decided to transfuse packed cells to increase the PCV in order to improve the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood to relieve possible tissue-level hypoxia and to improve oxygenation at tissue level. The patient was given packed cells at a rate of 100 ml/minute to reach and maintain a PCV of 45% for 8 hours. Dramatic reduction of the venous lactate level was observed following packed cell transfusion. The patient’s postulated time window for plasma leakage (36–48 hours) was over by the following day. Gradual reduction in AST and ALT was noted. The PT and APPT were normalized. On day 5 of admission AST and ALT were less than 200 U/L, and NAC infusion was terminated and the patient discharged. He was in good health with normal liver enzymes, clotting profile and albumin at follow-up visits on day 7 and 2 weeks later.
Table presents the trend of hematological, biochemical, clotting and blood gas parameters during the hospital stay and at follow-up visits.