A 22-year-old male presented with a 1-week history of mild-grade fever, abdominal pain, and loose, watery stools. On examination, vital signs were within normal limits, and there were no abnormal findings on physical examination. Laboratory investigations revealed a low platelet count of 55 000 cells/μl, a total leukocyte count of 1900 cells/μl (neutrophils 24% and lymphocytes 80%), and a hemoglobin of 9.6 g/dl. Serum iron profile, reticulocyte count, and vitamin B12 levels were within normal range. On further investigation, a peripheral blood smear showed 8% atypical blast cells with normocytic normochromic anemia with leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. The occult blood test came out to be positive with subsequent normal ultrasonography findings. No active interventions were done during this time, and the patient was admitted for further workup. Thereafter, bone marrow aspiration and biopsy were performed, which revealed hypocellular marrow less than 10% for his age, with adipocytes replacing most of the marrow spaces. Parvovirus immunoglobulin M (IgM) positivity was highly consistent with recent infection. During his hospital stay, the patient complained of abdominal pain, reddish black stool, abdominal distention, and low-grade fever of 100°F, which was relieved by antipyretics. On abdominal examination, guarding and tenderness were present in the right iliac fossa, along with rigidity. Numerous petechiae were present on both upper and lower limbs. Initially, vital signs were normal; however, in a few days, there was a fall in the patient’s blood pressure to 80/60 mmHg. A fluid resuscitation was done along with noradrenaline infusion, which increased the blood pressure to 110/80 mmHg. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast was done, which showed diffuse bowel wall thickening suggestive of inflammatory changes in the terminal ileum, cecum, and ascending colon. A diagnosis of neutropenic enterocolitis was established based on clinical evidence and CT scan findings. After his diagnosis, the patient was put on a bowel rest. A nasogastric tube was placed as well, which relieved his abdominal distention. His lowest reported total whole blood count (WBC) was 600 cells/μl, in which neutrophils were 4 cells/μl during the hospital stay. Also, his platelets dropped up to 10 000 cells/μl of blood and hemoglobin 6.5 g/dl. Regular blood product transfusion was done to increase his blood counts during his hospital stay. Total parenteral nutrition was also initiated to maintain his daily caloric requirement. Following a blood culture and sensitivity report, the patient was started on broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy with piperacillin–tazobactam, cefepime, and metronidazole for 14 days. Despite the start of antibiotics, the patient still had recurrent episodes of fever, so Voriconazole, Bactrim, and Acyclovir therapy were started with a good response. Additional therapy with eltrombopag, filgrastim, and cyclosporine was also initiated. The symptoms subsequently reduced as the neutrophil count increased. The patient was thereafter transferred to a hematology isolation unit before being referred to a specialized institution for bone marrow transplantation. At the time of the follow-up, the patient had received bone marrow transplantation and was clinically better. He was discharged with regular follow-up appointments at the higher center.