An 83-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital because of a third recurrence of HCC. He had nonalcoholic steatohepatitis-related cirrhosis, and underwent radiofrequency ablation for a partial HCC of S4/S8 in his liver 3 years ago. Because abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple HCC of S4/S8 and S2 in his liver 1 year ago, he underwent TACE therapy with an emulsified mixture of Lipiodol (ethiodized oil) and Farmorubicin (epirubicin) together with gelatin sponge particles for multiple tumors. After the second TACE, abdominal CT revealed sufficient Lipiodol (ethiodized oil) retention and the inefficacy of this treatment. However, follow-up CT showed a HCC recurrence in the left lobe 2 months ago. His medical history included reflux esophagitis, hypertension, and pancreatic carcinoma and he underwent pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy approximately 5 years ago. His medications included amlodipine 5 mg, candesartan 4 mg, and esomeprazole 20 mg, all once daily. He was nondiabetic, did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol, and had no history of any drug or food allergies. His family and social history were unremarkable. He appeared well on presentation. His body mass index was 26.2 kg/m2, with no noticeable body weight changes. He had an axillary temperature of 36.0 °C, a heart rate of 70 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 118/52 mmHg, with an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air at admission. No conjunctival pallor, icterus, cyanosis, or spider nevi were detectable on physical examination. Cardiovascular and respiratory examinations indicated normal jugular venous pressure and heart sounds, with no detectable murmurs, and normal breath sounds, with no crackle or wheeze. There were no particular abnormal physical findings. Laboratory studies indicated elevated creatinine and α-fetoprotein levels . Abdominal ultrasonography showed several hypoechoic masses in his liver; an abdominal plane CT showed multiple lesions with the greatest extent more than 40 mm in the left lobe of his liver .
Owing to our patient’s high risk of liver abscess after TACE because of his medical history of pancreaticoduodenectomy, the treatment course was carefully decided after consultation with our patient and his family. He underwent TACE with a hepatic arterial infusion of 20 mg epirubicin, followed by 4 mL Lipiodol (ethiodized oil) . A few days after undergoing the procedure, he was generally well except for mild symptoms attributed to postembolization syndrome. Despite antibiotic therapy (cefmetazole 3 grams daily) to prevent infection, he complained of fever, nausea, and hematuria on the sixth day after the procedure. He appeared unwell, severely jaundiced, and extremely restless. When his condition deteriorated, he had an axillary temperature of 39.0 °C, a heart rate of 110 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 90/40 mmHg. He presented with deterioration in hemoglobin levels and renal function, anemia, and a coagulation dysfunction. Furthermore, total bilirubin and direct bilirubin levels increased. Because elevated bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase due to destruction of red blood cells showed hemolytic anemia, we performed a Coombs test for autoimmune hemolytic anemia to detect the presence of antibodies against red blood cells. However, the results for both the direct and indirect Coombs tests were negative. Based on our patient’s severe clinical course and laboratory data suggestive of hemolysis, intravascular hemolysis secondary to C. perfringens sepsis was suspected.
Because the embolic and necrotic lesion after TACE was suspected to be the focus of infection, we initiated antibiotic therapy (piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 grams and clindamycin 600 mg) combined with surgical debridement. However, he died within 6 hours following unsuccessful cardiopulmonary resuscitation. An autopsy showed a 4-cm local, necrotic, hepatic tumor. The cut surface revealed a tumor with an internal spongiform appearance, which was a pseudocystic and partially necrotic lesion . In addition, a diffuse spread of Gram-positive rods in multiple organs including the heart was histologically confirmed . The culture obtained by fluid aspiration from the hepatic abscess revealed C. perfringens.