A 72-year-old man was referred to our hospital after an abnormal shadow was observed in chest radiographic findings. He had been smoking 1.5 packs per day for 35 years, had been treated for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and had recently undergone a surgery for duodenal carcinoma, pT3N0M0 Stage IIA 3 months prior. Computed tomography (CT) findings revealed a 2.9 × 2.0-cm solid nodule with a cavity on the right upper lung . Positron emission tomography (PET)–CT scan revealed marked fluorine-18 deoxyglucose (18F-FDG) accumulation with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 7.94. Levels of all tumor markers related to the lung carcinoma were within the normal range. This nodule was diagnosed as a primary adenocarcinoma via transbronchial biopsy. Another 2.2 × 1.7-cm thin-walled cystic lesion was also observed in the right lower lung , with weak 18F-FDG accumulation with an SUVmax of 1.68. The thickness of the lesion’s wall was approximately 1 mm, but it was partially thickened to 2 mm. Furthermore, an ill-defined ground glass area was defined around the thickened part. Thus, we presumed that the cystic lesion was secondary lung carcinoma, and resected the lesion during the right upper lobectomy. We performed a wedge resection to preserve lung function and prevent postoperative complication, and the surgical margin was sufficient with a length of at least 10 mm.
Following histopathological examination, the right upper lung nodule was diagnosed as an adenocarcinoma with solid, papillary, and lepidic subtypes . It was classified as a pT3N1M0 Stage IIIA tumor due to the intrapulmonary and lymph node metastasis detected in the right upper lobe. Furthermore, the AIS proliferated on the part of the right-lower cavitary lesion . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with multiple synchronous lung adenocarcinomas. Detailed analysis of the imaging and histopathological findings of the thin-walled cavitary lesion revealed that the AIS surrounded the bronchi flowing into the lesion , which was consistent with the thickness detected on the CT scan . These findings suggested that the mechanism of cavity formation might have been a check-valve system secondary to the AIS obstructing the bronchus.