The patient was a 72-year-old woman who experienced sudden spontaneous small bowel bulging into the vagina during defecation at home and was transferred to our hospital 10 h after onset for treatment.
The patient suffered from excruciating abdominal pain and had assumed and maintained a hunched posture for over 10 h.
The patient was pregnant three times, gave birth two times, and miscarried once. Her height, weight and body mass index were 158 cm, 56 kg and 22.4 kg/m2, respectively. The patient had no history of chronic disease. She underwent radical cystectomy, uterine and double adnexectomy and bilateral ureterolithotomy due to bladder malignancy two months prior. Postoperative pathology confirmed high-grade invasive urothelial carcinoma invading the deep muscularis without involvement of urethral resection margins and bilateral ureteral stumps.
The personal and family history of the patient was unremarkable.
The patient’s temperature was 37.6°C, heart rate was 98 bpm, respiratory rate was 19 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 170/85 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 99%. Physical examination after admission revealed that the small intestine had prolapsed approximately 20 cm, and its color was dark red . The initial diagnosis was vaginal enterocele (Aa6, Ba7, C9, AP-4, BP6 stage IV prolapse) according to the POP-Q system[,].
Blood analysis revealed mild leukocytosis of 11.5 × 109/L, with predominant neutrophils (85%) and a normal hematocrit and platelet count. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, and the d-dimer value was 0.71 μg/mL. Serum C-reactive protein was normal, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 32 mm/h. The blood biochemistry and urine analyses were normal. The electrocardiogram, chest X-ray and arterial blood gas results were also normal.
In the initial imaging evaluation with a pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan, the patient’s uterus and bladder were not visualized. A partial small bowel herniation from the pelvic region was discovered , and the abdominal CT showed no other abnormalities.