The proband was a 5-year-old girl who was referred to Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center (KHGRC) . The affected proband had an affected sister and they were born to second cousin parents. This research has been performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki; Informed consent was obtained from all family members and the study was approved by the ethical committee of the Pasteur Institute of Iran (No: 91/0201/10425). The proband was incidentally diagnosed with raised CK (5175 U/L) prior to muscle biopsy at the age of 5 but she was symptom free. Calf hypertrophy was also observed in the proband but she was ambulant at the age of 5 without positive Gowers sign. She showed high levels of CK up to 5175 U/L (normal < 145), LDH to 843 U/L and also increased level of ALT (105 U/L) and AST (71 U/L). She also had poor weight gain. Heart echocardiography showed a mild right side enlargement and mild pericardial infusion. EMG/NCV (electromyography and nerve condition velocity) study revealed short duration MUAPs in two upper and lower extremities tested muscles which was in favor of myopathic changes. The proband was followed up and examined at the age of 10 and she showed some extrapyramidal signs. The proband’s sister was 2 years old who was normal in her physical examination but showed elevated levels of CK (3442 U/L), AST (136 U/L), ALT (73 U/L), and LDH (799 U/L). Her EMG/NCV result was also normal. Both of them, the proband and her sister, had speech delay.
According to their clinical examination and family history, the affected siblings were suspected to have LGMD. Therefore, they were candidate of performing muscle biopsy studies.
Muscle biopsy was performed on the proband at the age of 5. Fresh muscle specimen was taken from left deltoid of proband and quickly frozen in isopentane cooled by liquid nitrogen. Standard panel of special histochemical stains was used for sample analyzing . Immunohistochemical staining was done using monoclonal antibodies against dystrophin (1, 2, 3), sarcoglycans (α, γ), dysferlin and merosin (Newcastle, UK). Beta-spectrin was also applied as a positive control. All antibodies were purchased from Novocastra Laboratories (Newcastle, UK). Microscopic study of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains of tissue sections revealed slight variation in fiber size and dispersed, round and angular atrophic fibers with some small groups of necrotic or degenerative/regenerative fibers with rare myophagocytosis. Muscle fibers showed internalized nuclei but not prominently increased and hypercontracted myofibers were also seen . NADH-TR reaction revealed good differentiation of muscle fibers. Overall intermyofibrillar network seems regular . SDH reaction showed no prominent abnormal mitochondrial proliferation. Gomori-trichrome stains revealed no ragged-red-fiber. No red or rimmed vacuole have been observed. . ATPase histochemical reactions (at a PH of 9.4, 4.63, and 4.35) revealed type 1 fibers predominance. Most atrophic angular fibers were type 2, and no fiber type grouping was observed . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of sarcolemmal proteins with monoclonal antibodies against DYS (dystrophin) 1, 2, and 3, sarcoglycans (α and γ), dysferlin, merosin and beta spectrin showed that almost all fibers were labeled which is suggestive of mild myopathic atrophy with few dispersed or small groups of degenerative/regenerative fibers but no endomysial fibrosis, no adipose tissue replacement, and no inflammation .
Ruling out the most common forms of LGMD, haplotype analysis has been done. Salting out procedure was used to extract genomic DNA from the peripheral blood samples of all the family members . Haplotype analysis was performed using four STR markers linked to six genes of naming CAPN3, DYSF, SGCA, SGCB, SGCG, and SGCD in two multiplex PCR sets for all family members but no linkage was observed. Mutations in the mentioned genes are responsible for the most prevalent form of limb-girdle muscular dystrophies. DNA sequencing, interpretation and fragment analysis were done using methods described previously .
The blood sample of the proband was sent to Centogene (Rostock, Germany) for whole exome sequencing (WES) analysis. Enrichment was carried out using Nextera Rapid Capture Exome kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (Nextera Rapid Capture Exome, Illumina) and WES was performed by the Illumina HiSeq 2500 system sequencing platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) for DNA sequencing of the generated enriched library to an average coverage depth 70-100X. NGS results showed a novel homozygous deletion c.1295delA in exon 13 of the MICU1 gene (NM_006077.3) . This variation leads to a frameshift and cause premature stop codon in 8 following amino acids. In order to interpret pathogenicity of variants and predicting their effect on the protein structure, different software were used such as CADD (Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion) and Mutation Taster . According to the mutation taster, it is a disease causing mutation and its CADD score is 35.
Confirming the results of the WES, the Sanger sequencing was done in the proband and all her family members. As it was expected, the variation was in homozygous in two affected individuals and parents were carrier for this variation . These results indicated the co-segregation of the MICU1 gene variant with the disease phenotype in this family. The timeline for diagnosis of the proband in revealed in Table .