A 58-year-old man was referred to our hospital with abnormal findings from a chest X-ray. He had a history of smoking for 35 years and was medicated for chronic gastritis and hypertension. CT revealed a left renal tumor with bilateral multiple lung metastases . First, left laparoscopic nephrectomy was performed, and the tumor was pathologically diagnosed as a clear cell subtype of RCC with Fuhrman grade 4. With good performance status and normal laboratory data, he was considered an intermediate risk in the criteria of International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium. Then the combination therapy with four courses of ipilimumab (1 mg/kg) and nivolumab (240 mg) of every 3 weeks followed by nivolumab (240 mg) of every 2 weeks was started. After two courses of Ip-Nv, skin lesions like lichen striatus appeared on the face and neck. He did not accept biopsies. We considered the skin lesions as an irAE and treated them with corticosteroid ointment. The lesions were remitted in a month with residue of skin scleroses and were followed by additive medication of tranilast. On the CT after three courses of Ip-Nv, lung metastases were markedly regressed, whereas bilateral hilar/mediastinal lymphadenopathies, pleural nodules, and pulmonary interstitial micronodular lesions mimicking lymphangitic carcinomatosis were appeared without respiratory symptoms . Increased levels of ACE (25.1 U/L) and sIL2R (1337 U/mL), and accumulation at bilateral pulmonary hilar regions in Gallium scintigraphy suggested the possibility of sarcoidosis. We comprehensively diagnosed the new lesions as SLRs due to ICIs, although the histological diagnosis was not acquired. As there was no finding of other organ involvement, we continued the ICI treatment without definite medications for the SLR. After four courses of Ip-Nv and four courses of nivolumab, increased aminotransferases of grade 4 in Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v5.0 appeared. The ICI treatment was discontinued while maintaining stable disease of the SLR and complete remission of the metastases. The liver dysfunction was stable but persisted for a week. Then liver biopsy revealed acute hepatocellular and biliary damage and various cell infiltration not dominated by plasma cells without definite interface hepatitis or granuloma, which were not typical findings for autoimmune hepatitis or sarcoidosis but were compatible with DILI. Antinuclear antibodies were not detected and viral hepatitis was denied. Considering the clinical course together, we diagnosed him with DILI due to tranilast, which was stopped thereafter, and the liver function normalized in weeks. After the withdrawal of ICIs, the SLR regressed gradually and remitted in 6 months without cancer relapse .