A 55-year-old man reported persistent abdominal distension of one week duration, with no obvious underlying cause; the distension was accompanied by diarrhea, shortness of breath, and occasional fever.
The patient showed no symptoms of illness other than the one-week duration of persistent abdominal distension with diarrhea, shortness of breath, and occasional fever.
Medical records indicated a two-year history of abnormal liver function without treatment.
The patient had a history of smoking and alcohol abuse. There was no family history of other diseases.
Physical examination of the skin showed the evidence of spider nevi, jaundice of skin or sclera, and facial features associated with liver disease, but no evidence of palmar erythema. Auscultation revealed abnormal breath sounds over both lungs and a decreased breath sounds over the right lower lung. Examination of the abdomen showed abdominal distension but no tenderness or rebound pain, splenomegaly, or percussion pain in the liver area. There were also no signs of asterixis.
Laboratory analysis of blood samples indicated abnormal liver function: total bilirubin, 221.52 μmol/L; direct bilirubin, 138.76 μmol/L; indirect bilirubin, 82.8 μmol/L; total protein, 48.9 g/L; albumin, 21.6 g/L; alanine aminotransferase, 57 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 73 U/L; C-reactive protein, 34 mg/L; serum amyloid A, 92 mg/L; procalcitonin, 1.820 ng/mL; total lymphocyte count, 220/μL; HBsAg, 0.00 IU/mL; HBsAb, 29.19 mIU/mL, HBeAg, 0.38 S/CO; HBeAb, 1.30 S/CO; HBcAg, 8.88 S/CO; hepatitis A antibodies immunoglobulin (Ig) M, negative; hepatitis C virus antibody, negative; hepatitis D antigen, negative; hepatitis D antibody, negative; hepatitis E antibody IgM, negative; hepatitis E antibody IgG, weakly positive; cytomegalovirus antibody IgG, positive; cytomegalovirus antibody IgM, negative; coxsackie virus antibody IgG, positive; coxsackie virus antibody IgM, negative; antinuclear antibody, negative; antimitochondrial antibody, negative; anti-Ro-52 antibody, negative; anti-mitochondrial antibody type 2, negative; anti-SSA antibody, negative; anti-SSB antibody, negative; anti-CENP-B antibody, negative; antihistone antibodies, negative; anti-Jo-1 antibody, negative; anti-Sm antibody, negative; anti-Scl-70 antibody, negative; anti-soluble liver antigen/pancreas antigen antibody, negative; anti-smooth muscle antibody, negative; anti-liver and kidney microsome antibodies, negative; anti-PM-Scl antibody, negative; anti-PCNA antibody, negative.
Examination of ascites fluid showed a positive Rivalta test; ascites cell counts showed 1.6 × 109/L nucleated cells, 76% of which were neutrophils, 10% mononuclear macrophages, 12% lymphocytes, and 2% mesothelial cells. Conventional cultures of the patient’s blood and ascitic fluid were negative for bacterial growth; sputum culture did not show any pathogenic bacteria. However, screening for microbial pathogens in blood samples with next generation sequencing demonstrated the presence of M. tuberculosis infection in this patient . The presence of acid-fast bacilli in these samples was confirmed by blood smears and by fluorescence microscopy of blood cultured in conventional BacT/ALERT FA blood culture bottles. Blood cultured on Lowenstein-Jenden medium yielded white colonies, which were identified as M. tuberculosis by MALDI-TOF MS (France, Bio-Mérieux) .
Computed tomography (CT) scans showed abdominal and pelvic effusion and bilateral pleural effusion, with greater effusion in the right pleura. Multiple patchy high-density shadows were seen in both lungs, with blurred borders. Although there were no obvious signs of swollen lymph node shadows in the mediastinum, there were multiple areas of inflammation in both lungs . CT scans indicated liver cirrhosis and multiple cystic foci in the liver.