A 34-years-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese man was admitted in August 2014, with pain and numbness of both lower limbs for 3 days, followed by weakness of both lower limbs with numbness and pain of upper limbs for 1 day. On admission he was not able to walk as usual and had no difficulty in breathing or coughing. He could pass urine without any difficulty and did not have constipation. Ten days ago, he had been admitted to the same hospital with high grade continued fever of 3 days duration with generalized body ache, headache, nausea and retro-orbital pain. Then he had leucopenia, thrombocytopenia and positive dengue NS1 antigen in the blood. He had uneventful dengue fever without haemoconcentration and was discharged after 3 days in the hospital.
On examination, he was conscious, well oriented and had normal vital parameters. Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal system examinations were normal. The limb examination revealed hypotonia with reduced power in all four limbs, the lower limbs being most affected. The tendon reflexes were absent even with reinforcement. Sensory modalities were intact. His neck muscle power was normal and cranial nerves were normal. Provisionally, the diagnosis of ascending progressive polyneuropathy suggestive of GBS was made.
He had normal full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, serum electrolytes, renal function tests, liver function tests and chest X-ray. Serology for Hepatitis B, HIV were negative. Dengue IgM was positive. However an electrophysiological study revealed severe demyelinating polyneuropathy in the lower and upper limbs. Cerebro spinal fluid study showed albuminocytological dissociation [CSF appearance was clear, red blood cell: nil, 2 lymphocytes, protein 235 mg/dl, glucose 4.3 mmol/l (random blood sugar was 6.4 mmol/l).]. Gram stain CSF showed no bacteria. Finally a diagnosis of GBS associated with dengue fever was confirmed.
Therapeutically, plasmapheresis was carried out according to the protocol of the North American trial in which a total of 200–250 ml/kg is exchanged over 7–10 days. Meanwhile, on the second day, the limbs weakness increased and he developed left side lower motor type seventh cranial nerve palsy with positive Bell’s sign . But other cranial nerves, neck muscle power and respiration were normal. After two cycles of plasmapheresis on fourth day of hospital stay, he developed right side lower motor seventh cranial palsy with positive Bell’s sign . After four cycles of plasmapheresis, there was little improvement of upper limbs weakness. After fifth cycle of plasmapheresis, his upper limbs improved further and right sided facial nerve weakness showed some improvement. After seventh cycle of plasmapheresis, his right facial nerve palsy completely improved and upper limbs and lower limbs showed significant improvement. Left side seventh nerve palsy showed significant improvement and other cranial nerves were normal. He developed neither urinary nor bowel incontinence. He did not develop autonomic symptoms such as resting tachycardia, gustatory sweating. With continued supportive measures, the patient made a significant recovery after 20 days of hospital stay and was referred to a rehabilitation hospital for further care. One month later we reviewed patient and by then he could walk alone. His facial nerves weakness also showed significant improvement .