On 16th August 2020, a 62-year-old male presented to the Dentistry Teaching Clinic of Kabul University of Medical Sciences, due to a painful erosive ulcer on the dorsal surface of the tongue for one week. The patient reported that two weeks prior he had developed fever, cough, taste alterations, olfactory dysfunction, and chest tightness. He was referred to the local COVID-19 Hospital (Afghan-Japan Hospital) for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2. His rRT-PCR test was positive. He was treated with azithromycin 500 mg daily for one week and ceftriaxone 1 g twice a day for 3 days. After 2 weeks, a repeat COVID-19 test returned negative. When he came to the dentistry clinic, all of his symptoms had resolved except fora painful erosive lesion on the dorsal surface of his tongue. The patient had a history of controlled diabetes mellitus-type-2 and moderate hypertension. He did not have a history of any oral diseases such as candidiasis, lichen planus, or HSV.
Physical examination revealed normal temperature (37C); blood pressure 135/88 mmHg, heart rate 80; respiratory rate 19, and oxygen saturation 98%. We observed a white geographic ulcer with irregular borders on the dorsum of the tongue.
Laboratory examinations showed normal differential leukocyte count (DLC) and total leukocyte count (TLC), C-reactive protein 22.4/L, and glucose 120 mg/L. Computed tomography of lungs showed mild glass ground opacification bilaterally. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of a pharyngeal sample detected HSV-1 and he was treated with intravenous Acyclovir 5 mg/kg three times a day for 7 days with no effect on the oral lesions during the treatment.
For pain control of the ulcer, our dentist administered photobiomodulation therapy (PBMT) for 10 days. After 2 days of PBMT, the patient reported relief of symptoms and on the 11th day after PBMT treatment, the lesion partially resolved . Besides the mentioned therapy, we recommended antibiotics (Azithromycin 500 mg for 1 week), antiseptic agents (Chlorhexidine 0.12%, alcohol-free mouth rinses, and H2O2 1%), and antifungal agents (fluconazole 200 mg tablets for 1 week) for the prevention of secondary infections. The patient was advised to avoid hot and spicy foods, but to drink plenty of fluids and eat a bland diet. We also advised the patient to practice good oral hygiene.
On August 30, 2020, he returned for a follow-up. During the examination, the patient had fewer clinical symptoms, and the size and mass of the lesion were changed to moderate compare to the severe form on the first examination. .