A 22-year-old Tamang man, from Terai region of Nepal, presented to the medical out-patient department (OPD) of KIST Medical College Teaching Hospital, Lalitpur, on 8 February 2017 with complaints of fever, malaise, and arthralgia for the past 2 weeks and dry cough for the past 5 days. The fever was associated with chills but no rigor, the maximum temperature was not recorded, and a non-itchy erythematous skin lesion on his left foot was seen 2 days prior to OPD visit. His past medical history was uneventful. He did not give any significant family history. There was no history of contact with patients with tuberculosis. There was no history of loss of appetite or weight loss; he was not on any medication. There was no history of the use of long-term medications.
On examination, he was febrile with a temperature of 37.8 °C (100 °F). A general physical examination revealed bilateral cervical, axillary, and inguinal lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Other systemic examination was unremarkable. No skin lesion was visible at the time of examination. Routine investigations, which included complete blood count (CBC) with erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), liver function test, CRP, and antinuclear antibody (ANA) tests, were performed. He had leukocytosis (21,700/mm3) with neutrophilia (19,300/mm3) and raised ESR of 90 mm/hour. Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) was elevated at 154 (normal, 12–78 IU/L) and serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) was elevated at 210 (normal, 46–116 IU/L). Total bilirubin and total protein were within normal limits. CRP was positive whereas the results of ANA and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) factor tests were negative. Other tests done were urine routine examination; the result of which was unremarkable. Urine culture, blood culture, and sputum culture were negative for pathogenic microorganisms. Since brucellosis and scrub typhus are endemic, serological tests were performed for Brucella antigen and scrub typhus along with hepatitis B virus and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). All serological tests performed in our patient were negative. A serum adenosine deaminase (ADA) test was also performed to rule out tuberculosis and was within normal limits. A chest X-ray and computed tomography scan of his chest and abdomen were done and were unremarkable. During the first week of his hospital stay, he was treated with acetaminophen for fever. Since the fever did not subside and a definite diagnosis was not formulated with the above-mentioned tests, further investigations were ordered with a provisional diagnosis of pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO). Bone marrow aspiration and a biopsy were performed which showed myeloid hyperplasia suggesting inflammatory pathology. He was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics and corticosteroids.
During his hospital stay, he developed skin rash at extensor surface of his foot. An incisional biopsy of the skin was performed and sent to histopathology. The skin biopsy was superficial and was not adequate for reporting. Hence, a repeat biopsy was recommended. However, our patient did not give permission to perform a re-biopsy. The timeline of our patient from the initial presentation is shown in Table . With present findings, that is, persistent fever, malaise, arthralgia, generalized lymphadenopathy, persistent leukocytosis with neutrophilia, elevated SGOT and SGPT, positive CRP, and negative ANA and RA factor, Still’s disease was suspected as it met almost all the criteria .
Our patient was prescribed 40 mg of orally administered prednisolone. With the administration of steroids, his fever subsided and his enlarged lymph node started to shrink. Because of a satisfactory response to a high dose of steroids, he was discharged. After 2 weeks of 40 mg of prednisolone, a tapering dose was initiated. Once he reached 20 mg dose of prednisolone, his fever and lymphadenopathy recurred. He revisited our OPD and with the possibility of collagen vascular disease was referred to a hematologist in another hospital.
The hematologist recommended performing a lymph node biopsy. His inguinal lymph node was excised and sent to histopathology. On microscopic examination, the lymph node had an intact capsule with partial effacement of the nodal architecture. Occasional histiocytic granulomas were seen in the lymph nodes. Caseous necrosis or Langhans type of multinucleated giant cells was not seen. Other areas showed lymphoid follicles with prominent germinal center. With the presence of granulomas and tuberculosis being quite common, the possibility of tuberculosis was considered and on that basis anti-tuberculosis treatment category I was initiated. The anti-tubercular treatment category I include 2 months of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, followed by 4 months of isoniazid and ethambutol.
During that period, our patient developed nodular rash at the shoulder, back, and face. A skin biopsy was performed on 10 April 2017, which showed superficial as well as deeper dermis with patchy infiltration by epithelioid cells and lymphoid populations, along with foam cells and neutrophils. The infiltration was mainly limited to perineural and around the sweat glands and arrector pili muscles. Subcutaneous tissue also showed infiltration by similar population of cells . Wade-Fite stain in the tissue section showed several acid-fast bacilli . He was diagnosed as having ENL. Anti-tubercular treatment was stopped and he was referred to Anandaban Leprosy Hospital, Lalitpur, Nepal.
In Anandaban Leprosy Hospital, a detailed history was taken retrospectively. There was no contact history and previous history of treatment for leprosy. He gave a history of transposition of ulnar nerve when he was 12 years of age, although he did not know the cause and no medical file was available. On examination, many erythematous lesions along with ENL nodules were present all over his body. There was a loss of eyebrows. Both left ulnar and left tibial nerve thickening was observed. There was mild clawing of his left little finger. A slit-skin smear showed a bacillary index of 4+. He was diagnosed as having lepromatous leprosy (LL) with ENL. He was admitted in the leprosy hospital and prescribed multibacillary multidrug therapy which constitutes standard regimen of rifampicin 600 mg once a month, dapsone 100 mg daily, and clofazimine 300 mg once a month and 50 mg daily. All these drugs are prescribed for 12 months. He is tolerating the prescribed medicine well and is showing improvement.