A 69-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our department in August 2015, complaining of swelling in the right preauricular region. She had shown a mass lesion of the right lung on a chest x-ray and was referred to the university hospital. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) examination showed accumulation indicative of a pulmonary lesion and a temporomandibular joint lesion. The temporomandibular joint lesion had been enlarging but was otherwise asymptomatic. Her medical history included treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis at the age of 13 and surgery to remove breast cancer at the age of 53.
On examination, a tender mass in the right preauricular region was palpable. The chin of the mandible was deviated to the right side during mouth opening (mandibular maximum mouth opening, 41 mm). Facial nerve function and mandibular nerve were intact. There was no indication of cervical lymphadenopathy.
A panoramic radiographic examination showed resorption of the right mandibular condyle to the ramus . Computed tomography (CT) showed destruction of the right mandibular condyle and a large mass lesion with enhanced margin in the masticator space; a cystic lesion was present inside the tumor mass. Three-dimensional CT was useful to understand the bone resorption findings of the mandibular condyle. There was no finding of metastatic cervical lymph node . T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed an enhanced mass lesion in the right masticator space. Because some portions of the mass lesion showed high intensity in T2-weighted images, cystic lesions were suspected to exhibit changes of blood flow or retention of high-protein liquid. Tumor development was not observed in the articular disk of the temporomandibular joint . FDG-PET revealed abnormal FDG uptake in the right submandibular condyle and masticator space.
A malignant tumor was suspected after analysis by various modalities. Therefore, we performed an incisional biopsy via preauricular incision. Histopathologically, the tumor was largely composed of proliferative, atypical, spindle-shaped cells. Some tumor cells showed increasing mitotic change and extreme atypia . The histopathological findings of biopsy suggested spindle-cell sarcoma. Tumor resection was performed with the patient under general anesthesia via a combined preauricular and transmandibular approach to the masticator space and infratemporal fossa.
After preauricular temporomandibular incision, the superficial temporal fascia and temporal fascia were elevated. The facial nerve (temporal and zygomatic branches) was protected by the fascia .
The facial nerve trunk was identified, and its branch was traced according to the conventional method.
A midline lip-splitting incision was connected to the submandibular incision and accessed the anterior mandibular ramus. The lip-split incision traversed to the periosteum of the mandible; the periosteum dissector was used to elevate the soft tissues of the mandible, and the lateral mandible was exposed. The branch of the facial nerve was traced continuously with the skin flap, and the masseter muscle and deep parotid gland were dissected on the tumor side . The mandible was resected to within ≥ 20 mm from the primary tumor on the anterior of the mandibular ramus. The masseter muscle was divided at the lower edge of the zygomatic arch; further, the temporal muscle was divided horizontally at the height of the zygomatic arch to reach the side of the temporal bone. Excision was performed on the temporal bone to the base of the pterygoid process, and an osteotomy was performed continuously from the maxilla to the pterygoid process. Osteotomy was performed via ultrasonic scalpel. Then, deep excision was performed on the skull base until the foramen ovale was reached. The mandibular branch (VIII) of the trigeminal nerve was resected at the foramen ovale, and bone wax was used to fill the foramen ovale when hemostasis was achieved. The tumor was excised in bulk with the surrounding tissue . Especially, the glenoid fossa was close to the primary tumor site; however, it was excised including the joint disc, and the glenoid and infratemporal fossa were excised, including the periosteum of the skull base. For that reason, the margin was considered complete, and we did not perform the histopathological evaluation intraoperatively.
The surgical defect was reconstructed with a free vascularized fibula with skin paddle . The occlusion was performed with intermaxillary wire fixation for 1 week postoperatively. There were no abnormal findings during the postoperative course with complete healing. Right-sided facial nerve dysfunction appeared immediately after surgery.
The resected specimen exhibited nearly identical histological findings as observed in the biopsy. Because it involved a periosteal reaction corresponding partially to Codman’s triangle, the tumor was thought to have derived from bone . Immunohistochemical analysis showed positive staining for vimentin, MIB-1 index (40–80%), desmin, α-smooth muscle actin, Bcl-2, neuron-specific enolase, and S-100; it showed negative staining for AE1/AE3, caldesmon, and CD34. Thus, the final diagnosis was osteosarcoma (fibroblastic). The resection margin was negative for tumor. After excision of the mandibular tumor, excision of lung cancer was performed under thoracoscopy by a respiratory surgeon in our hospital. Although we recommended adjuvant treatment after surgery, the patient refused this treatment.
There has been no evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis through 30 months of follow-up. The chin of the mandible deviates to the right side during opening (maximum mouth opening, 40 mm). Centric occlusion has not changed. Facial nerve dysfunction gradually improved and became mild according to House-Brackmann Scale evaluation .