A 60-year-old cachectic male was admitted to our hospital with complaints of dyspnea and cough. The patient had previously been diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis and bullous emphysema, approximately 10 years earlier in another hospital. On that occasion, he had been treated with long-acting beta agonist, long-acting muscarinic antagonist and inhaler corticosteroid. He had a 20 pack-year smoking history and, for years, he had had recurrent admissions with pulmonary tract infections. Physical examination revealed decreased breathing sounds, across both sides of the lungs. Inspiratory coarse crackles were observed with finger-clubbing changes.
A chest X-ray showed right paratracheal lucency, ill-defined opaque areas, reticular dense areas and cystic lesions predominantly in the right middle and lower zones . Pulmonary function testing revealed a mainly restrictive but also obstructive pattern with forced expiratory volume in one sec (FEV1) of 2.01 liters (53%), forced vital capacity (FVC) of 2.49 liters (59%) and FEV1/FVC of 88%. Arterial blood gases showed hypoxemia and hypercapnia with respiratory acidosis (pH 7.30; PaO2 50 mmHg; PaCO2 69 mmHg; HCO3 28.3 mmol/l; and SaO2 82%).
Administration of nasal oxygen at 2 liters/min and NIMV were started. The inspiratory and expiratory pressures were started as 15/5 mmHg and then were titrated to 20/5 mmHg. ST (spontaneous/timed) mode was selected because of the patient’s insufficiency of inspiratory effort. Over the next few days, oxygenation improved and this revealed compensated respiratory acidosis with NIMV (pH 7.38; PaO2 61 mmHg; PaCO2 55 mmHg; HCO3 27.5 mmol/l; and SaO2 92%), which probably reflected improvements in tidal volume and reduction in airway expiratory collapse. Diverticulum orifices on the lateral tracheal wall and tracheal/main stem bronchial enlargement were noted, with expiratory collapse of the airways, seen using flexible bronchoscopy. Bronchial brushing was performed on the right upper lobe posterior segment and right lower lobe apical segment. After specimen collection, bronchial lavage was performed on both sides using n-acetyl cysteine solution to facilitate expectoration, also known as bronchial toilet. The cytological examination of these materials was negative for malignancy and/or acid-fast bacilli (AFB) staining. Common bacterial and AFB cultures were also negative.
Chest computed tomography was also performed. This demonstrated abnormally dilated trachea, with bilateral main stem bronchi and two diverticula arising from the intrathoracic trachea. Bilateral cystic bronchiectasis was present predominantly in the right middle and lower lobe and mosaic attenuation was observed in lung fields bilaterally ( and ).
Mucolytic treatment and physical rehabilitation therapy including postural drainage were arranged. Long-term oxygen and NIMV treatment were planned for home management. Pneumococcal and influenza vaccination were also suggested, to avoid recurrent infections. Regular follow-up visits were planned. The patient was discharged and has been doing well, with oxygen saturation increased to 89%. Furthermore, the patient has not had any serious complaints again, at follow-up visits.