A 75-year-old Caucasian man presented to our department with recurrent left lower quadrant abdominal pain, weight loss and progressive asthenia. The stools were occasional diarrheic, with no visible blood. The symptoms started a few months earlier and they gradually increased. He had no significant medical history.
The clinical examination showed a pale patient, with left lower abdominal quadrant pain, no palpable masses, no ascites and no peripheral edema. The blood tests were within normal limits except mild iron deficiency anemia (hemoglobin 10.2 g/dl, serum iron 33 μg/dl) and an inflammatory syndrome (positive C—reactive protein, high erythrocyte sedimentation rate 42 mm/h).
The patient had been admitted in a different department in the previous month, where an upper endoscopy that found no lesions and two colonoscopies attempts which failed to pass the sigmoid colon were performed. He underwent a barium enema and he was diagnosed with diverticulosis. His symptoms were interpreted as a diverticulitis attack. He received anti-diarrheics, spasmolytics, and a fluoroquinolone with partial and temporary symptom alleviation.
He was referred to our unit for a second opinion. Since he had two failures of colonoscopy and since we had an ongoing study using the Pillcam Colon2 videocapsule for the patients unable or unwilling to undergo colonoscopy, we decided to use the Pillcam Colon2 videocapsule from Given Imaging for the colonic exploration. The use of colon capsule endoscopy was not standard care at our institute at that time, but we considered it was the best alternative for our patient. Lately, according to the current European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy capsule endoscopy guidelines, CCE is feasible and safe for visualization of colonic mucosa in patients with incomplete colonoscopy and without stenosis. .
After review of his barium irigography, no colonic stenosis was suspected. A complete colonic examination was obtained by capsule and showed multiple diverticula with no signs of inflammation of the surrounding mucosa. However, we noticed a submucosal mass approximately 3 cm in diameter located in the sigmoid colon Fig. .
A CT scan of the abdomen and the pelvis showed multiple colonic diverticula and a soft tissue mass of 5 cm diameter with a necrotic centre, with increased thickness of the sigmoid wall. No clear demarcation between the mass and the urinary bladder was visible and important densification of the perisigmoidian fat was also noticed. Although a peridiverticular abscess was possible, viewing the CT aspect corroborated with the capsule images, the diagnosis of a tumor with necrotizing center, probably a GIST it was more likely, as this kind of necrosis is quite specific and previously described in GIST’s . The patient underwent surgery with complete tumor resection. The lymph nodes examined during surgery were not involved.
The histopathological examination report revealed a sigmoid GIST with a tumor size more than 5 cm, with spindle cells, CD117 positive and a mitotic rate more than 5/50 HPF and since the patient had no significant comorbidities we considered him for the adjuvant therapy. The patient started treatment with imatinib mesylate, with good evolution at 6 months.