An eleven-month-old, 3.0 kg, male unsprayed German Spitz dog was presented for emergency care presenting acute vomiting and seizures 3 hours after suspected accidental ingestion of commercial molluscicide containing 3% metaldehyde (Lesmax®). Minutes after the alleged intoxication, the tutors administrated approximately 4 g of activated charcoal and a commercial “antitoxic” containing acetyl methionine, choline hydrochloride, cyanocobalamin, arginine hydrochloride, inositol, riboflavin, thiamine hydrochloride, pyroxene hydrochloride and nicotinamide.
The patient presented tachypnea, tachycardia (195 bpm), normal mucosae, hemoglobin saturation of 75% and rectal temperature of 40.5 °C. Nervous system alterations were observed: lateral recumbency with stuporous mentation, salivation, tonic-clonic status epilepticus, systemic tremors, bilateral miosis, oculovestibular and gag reflexes, severely depressed spinal reflexes.
Diazepam was administrated initially (1 mg/kg) intra rectal, followed by intravenous injection of 0.5 mg/kg with ringer lactate solution at 5 ml/kg/h rate. However, epileptic seizures continued and phenobarbitone was administrated (5 mg/kg). At the same time, oxygen was provided via intranasal catheter. Intravenous fluid therapy was maintained, followed by metamizole (25 mg/kg) and metroprolol (0.1 mg/kg) injections. Seizures were controlled, although tremors and miosis were still noticeable. Venous blood samples were collected for glycemia, hemogram and hemogasometry. Leucogram showed moderated leukopenia due to neutropenia and monocytopenia, and reactive lymphocytes, whilst other parameters remained normal. Hemogasometry showed a compensated metabolic acidosis, with bicarbonate reduction (6.8 mmol/L), base excess (− 15.5 mmol/L) associated with respiratory alkalosis, with carbon dioxide pressure at − 12.7 mmHg and discrete hyperkalemia (5.22mmmol/L). Glycemic levels were low and glucose was administrated at 0,5 g/kg.
During the epileptic seizures, the dog defecated and feces containing great amounts of blue grains compatible with metaldehyde were visualized. The patient progressed to comatose mentation and died approximately 4 hours after hospital admission.
Necropsy examination revealed moderate pale mucous, extensive organ congestion and tissue damage. Kidneys were diffusely brown red; liver had multifocal white-yellowish areas and moderate multifocal petechiae. The spleen was increased in size and the heart had multifocal pale areas on the myocardial tissue. Central nervous system was diffusely red while stomach examination revealed content of feed, activated charcoal and blue-green granules, compatible to the presented commercial formula of metaldehyde . The remaining organs did not reveal macroscopic alterations.
Histology examination revealed extensive hemorrhage and severe centrolobular necrosis of the liver, tumefaction of Kupfer cells with multiple intracytoplasmic blue granules . Brain samples showed multifocal discrete hemorrhage and hyperemia. Heart showed discrete hyperemia and extensive dilation of lymphatic vessels. Kidney samples showed multifocal epithelial cells degeneration, micro and macrovacuolization of tubular cells, necrosis and desquamation, intratubular eosinophilic material and severe diffuse hyperemia. Spleen analysis showed multifocal central white pulp necrosis and extensive hemorrhage and hyperemia. Stomach showed moderate and diffuse submucosa hyperemia, while pancreas revealed liquefactive multifocal necrosis and discrete necrosis of Langerhans cells with diffuse hyperemia.
At the necropsy, samples were collected from stomach, intestine, feces, spleen, kidneys, heart, liver and brain for toxicological analysis. The extraction process consisted in adding dichloromethane to each biological sample followed by vortex agitation for 1 min and ultrasound bath for 10 min. Supernatant was collected and prepared with nylon filters (0.22 μm) attached to syringes. Gas chromatography analysis were conducted using equipment Shimadzu GC-2010 Plus, column Restek Rtx-1 30 × 0.25 m (0.25 μm). The parameters used were: column equilibrium time 3 min, injection volume of 1 μL, detector temperature of 240 °C, sampler temperature of 100 °C, slit 1:50, gas from the mobile phase was helium, with 100 KPa of pressure, 15 min of total analysis and 5.2 min of retention time.
For the calibration curve, commercial metaldehyde 3% (Lesmax, Insetimax®) was used with the same conditions as described above. Concentrations between 5 and 85 ppm were used to build the curve followed by the evaluation of the retention time and area under the curve. GC results confirmed the presence of metaldehyde in all samples: kidney, stomach content, feces, heart, spleen, liver, intestines, stomach and brain .