A 33-year-old man presented to our hospital with weakness of left lower limb and aberrant sensation (tightness and numbness) of his left lower trunk and limb (from T9 level to toes) for 2 days. He was transferred to a local hospital on the day of onset. Cervical and thoracic spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (1.5T) scanned in the local hospital showed no remarkable change in the spine. Ten days before admission he received a second dose of inactivated COVID-19 vaccine CoronaVac.
Initial physical examination revealed unilateral reduced superficial sensation below the T8 level. Slightly spastic monoplegia (grade 4 of muscle strength) and positive Babinski’s sign on the affected limb were objectified. Cranial nerves and cognition were normal. A brain and thoracic spine MRI (3.0T) was performed on the 5th day after onset. We found remarkable aberrant high signal in T-2 weighted imaging (T2WI) by axial scan at T7 spinal cord indicating an acute demyelinating lesion . Moreover, vertebral bodies of T3-T7 also presented high signal in T2WI accompanied by multiple sites of flowing void effect. No inflammatory change were found in cranial MRI scan. Conventional laboratory tests including blood cell counts, coagulation, liver function, kidney function, electrolytes, plasma glucose, lipids, C-reaction protein and procalcitonin were normal. No remarkable change was identified in routine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) except for a slightly elevated glucose level (5.42 nmol/L). Serum demyelination-related autoimmune antibodies including anti-AQP4, anti-MOG, and anti-MBP were all negative. CSF immunoglobulin classification test showed a slightly elevated IgA level (5.11 mg/L). Oligoclonal band (OCB) was positive in CSF while it was negative in sera.
A large dose of intravenous methylprednisolone (1g/d) was administrated for 5 days and subsequent dose-tapering prednisone. In addition, he received movement rehabilitation, acupuncture and Vitamin B1/B12 administration during hospitalization. His symptoms started to improve after 3 days of treatment. On the day discharging, the strength of his left lower limb turned normal and he was able to walk unaided. The aberrant sensation below T8 level was also “obviously relieved.” He discontinued oral steroids on the 30th day after discharge and reported “slight numbness and nearly normal strength of left leg” at telephone follow-up. He had a MRI recheck on the 45th day after discharge. The lesions in spinal cord and vertebral bodies all remarkably improved .