A 12-year-old girl with KTS (height, 124 cm; weight, 20 kg) was referred to our hospital for recurrent left lower limb lymphangioma since the age of eight years.
She presented with clitoral hypertrophy, hemihypertrophy in the left lower limb along with varicose veins and multiple lipomas, and gastrointestinal bleeding. She was admitted for excision of verrucous hyperkeratosis on the left foot and posterior aspect of the left leg and thigh and excision of a cutaneous hemangioma on the right buttock.
Before induction, the patient was irritably crying in her father's arms at the time. The patient’s vital signs were as follows: Heart rate, 111 beats/min; blood pressure, 127/75 mmHg; saturation, 100%; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min; and body temperature, 36.2°C. After preoxygenation, lidocaine (20 mg), propofol (50 mg), and cisatracurium (4 mg) were administered, and a 5.5 mm cuffed endotracheal tube was inserted. Monitoring was established using standard monitors and an intra-arterial line. Anesthesia was maintained with 45% oxygen and 2% sevoflurane.
After induction, the vital signs were as follows: Saturation, 100%; blood pressure, 97/61 mmHg; heart rate, 113 beats/min; respiratory rate, 17 breaths/min; tidal volume, 200 mL (controlled by ventilator); and body temperature, 36.2°C. Ten minutes after induction, her baseline blood gas test showed pCO2, 26 mmHg; pO2, 216.2 mmHg; HCO3-, 19.0 mmol/L; and Hb, 8.4. Sixty minutes after induction, the surgeon elevated the patient’s leg for sterilization. Her end-tidal CO2 dropped from 35 to 7 mmHg within a few minutes. She had hypotension and bradycardia; therefore, atropine and epinephrine were sequentially administered intravenously. The ABG analysis was repeated, and testing revealed acidosis (pH, 7.263; pCO2, 42.4 mmHg; pO2, 69.4 mmHg; HCO3-, 19.4 mmol/L; lactate, 1.2 mmol/L; and Ca2+, 1.04 mmol/L). Sixty-three minutes after induction, the patient have a cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR) was started. Seventy-eight minutes after induction, a return of spontaneous circulation occurred, and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed. TEE revealed severe right ventricular distension and little blood flow to the right and left pulmonary arteries. Eighty-six minutes after induction, the patient had a second cardiac arrest and CPCR was started again. Ninety minutes after induction, a right femoral 5 French-size two-way central line was placed at 13 cm. A cardiac surgeon was consulted who conducted ECMO 106 min after induction. Thirty minutes after ECMO, a normal sinus rhythm returned. CPCR was performed for approximately 70 min. The cardiac surgeon started target temperature management (TTM) of 32°C to protect the patient’s brain. Due to the incident of severe PE, the surgery was abandoned. Before getting transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), her vital signs were as follows: Heart rate, 112 beats/min; blood pressure, 119/100 mmHg; saturation, 100%; respiratory rate, 17 breaths/min; and body temperature, 31.2°C .
Initially, in the PICU, her bilateral pupil was dilated approximately 9 mm with no light reflex. She was under sedation with a midazolam pump, as well as a dopamine (10 mcg/kg/min) and heparin pump. Computed tomography (CT) performed three hours after the surgery revealed PEs in the left truncus anterior, right interlobar, bilateral lower lobar, and segmental pulmonary arteries . Laboratory data showed elevated D-dimer (7939.76 ng/mL) and decreased fibrinogen (203.3 mg/dL) levels. Six hours later, her body temperature had risen from 31.2°C to 35°C, and her bilateral pupil size was 5 mm with a light reflex. A cardiologist was consulted for thrombolysis six hours after the surgery. Ultrasound-facilitated catheter thrombolysis with the Ekosonic Endovascular System (EKOS) was performed via the right femoral vein to the right upper pulmonary arteryand left lower pulmonary artery for 48 h from the morning of the first post-incident day . On the third post-incident day, a post-procedure CT showed complete resolution of the PEs. The patient was weaned from ECMO on the fifth postoperative day, extubated on the eighth post-incident day, and prophylaxis treatment with enoxaparin was provided. Two months later, the patient was discharged without any neurologic complications . The patient had received the surgery 3 months later after the episode
Four years ago, she had undergone extensive resection of the vascular malformations in the left lower limb, including amputation of the lateral fourth toe on her left foot . There was no record of difficulty in intubation.
There was no specific personal or family history.
Physical examination presented with clitoral hypertrophy, hemihypertrophy in the left lower limb.
Preoperative laboratory data showed anemia (hemoglobulin: 9.2 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume: 66.9 fL) no thrombocytopenia or coagulopathy (platelet count, 379000/μL; prothrombin time, 11.1 s; international normalized ratio, 1.07; and partial thromboplastin time, 27.9 s), liver and renal function were within normal limit, C-reactive protein: 7.43 mg/L.
The preoperative CT revealed angiomatosis extending from the left pelvis to the left foot, pelvic hemangiomas involving the rectum, a splenic lymphangioma, and engorged epidural vessels on the left side of the sacral canal. There is no obvious deep vein thrombosis (DVT) on the preoperative CT.