A 33-year-old Chinese man presented with continuous fever for one month from July 15th, 2019, followed by 20 days of abdominal pain. The initial highest temperature was 38.9 °C, accompanied by night sweats, anorexia, fatigue, weight loss and diarrhea (watery stool, 4–5 times per day). On July 25th, 2019, the patient presented with intolerable abdominal pain and body temperature had increased to 40 °C. HIV infection was confirmed and the patient’s CD4+ T-cell count was 7cells/μL. The patient was born in Shenyang, located in the north of China. However, since July 2018, he had worked and travelled a lot in Guangdong province, located in the south of China. The patient had eaten roasted bamboo rat in December 2018.
The patient experienced abdominal tenderness and rebound pain. Brain contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and chest computed tomography (CT) scans were relatively normal. Abdominal CT scans showed severe fatty liver, thickened and swollen small intestinal wall, pelvic cavity effusion, and thickened mesentery accompanied by multiple enlarged intra-abdominal lymph nodes . The patient had normal leucocyte and platelet counts and mild anemia. The patient displayed elevated C-reactive protein (135.30 mg/L) and galactomannan levels (4.39 μg/L). Serum ferritin was above 2000.00 μg/L. Serum cryptococcal antigen was negative. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Toxoplasma gondii IgM and IgG antibodies were negative. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG antibody and herpes simplex virus IgG antibody were positive, while IgM antibodies were negative. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) IgM antibody was negative while viral capsid antigen IgG and nuclear antigen IgG antibodies were positive. Serum CMV-DNA was undetectable. Whole blood EBV-DNA was undetectable. The HIV RNA load was 5.1 × 105 copies/mL. Blood bacteria and fungi cultures were repeated three times and all tests were negative. Fecal bacteria and fungi cultures were repeated three times and all tests were negative. We did not observe parasite eggs in the stool specimens. Giemsa stain of bone marrow aspirate did not find any pathogens. A bone marrow sample culture was not carried out due to insufficient bone marrow samples obtained.
For this kind of patient with obvious peritonitis despite a negative T-SPOT result, empirical anti-tuberculosis treatment with a regimen of isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide was prescribed at the day 4 of admission. A week later, fever and abdominal pain had worsened. The patient complained of diffuse abdominal pain and sustained fever. The patient displayed abdominal rigidity. At the day 12 of admission, fungal infection was suspected and omentum majus biopsy was performed. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining showed granuloma with central necrosis and a large number of foamy macrophages, lymphocytes, and neutrophil infiltration. Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) and Gomori’s methenamine silver nitrate (GMS) staining showed clustered yeast in macrophages . Acid-fast bacilli staining (using Ziehl Neelsen), CMV-antigen, TB-DNA, and EBV-DNA in paraffin-embedded tissue sections were all negative. The patient began antifungal treatment with amphotericin B. In order to identify the specific fungal species, particularly to differentiate between Talaromyces marneffei, histoplasma, and other deep fungal infections, FFPE samples were sent to BGI PathoGenesis Pharmaceutical Technology (BGI-Shenzhen) for metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS), which indicated Talaromyces marneffei infection 3 days later . In brief, the experimental procedure was performed as follows: DNA from the patient’s FFPE samples was extracted using the MagPure FFPE DNA LQ Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. The DNA library was constructed and sequenced, human sequences were excluded, and low-complexity reads were removed, the remaining data were classified by simultaneously aligning to four microbial genome databases, consisting of 4061 whole genome sequences of viral taxa, 2473 bacterial genomes or scaffolds, 199 fungi connected to human infection, and 135 parasites associated with human diseases .
Fever and abdominal pain rapidly resolved after the initial days of starting amphotericin B treatment, while gastrointestinal bleeding occurred with a total bloody stool volume of 1000 mL. Gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed multiple small shallow ulcers scattered in the cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, and descending colon, partly accompanied by white exudates and active bleeding . After endoscopic hemostasis therapy with 1:1 epinephrine solution injected around the lesion, the bleeding temporarily stopped. Amphotericin B treatment was continued followed by oral itraconazole. Intestinal bleeding had another two relapses and achieved spontaneous remission. The patient’s serum creatinine increased to 120 μmol/L during amphotericin B treatment, but tenofovir alafenamide fumarate was not available in China at that time, therefore, we suggested to use abacavir, and spent weeks to detect HLA-B5701 and applied for abacavir. After eight weeks of anti-fungal treatment, ART was initiated with a regimen of lamivudine, abacavir, and dolutegravir. After 12 weeks of anti-fungal treatment, abdominal CT indicated that the thickened mesentery and small intestine had recovered, the retroperitoneal lymph node had shrunk, and colonoscopy showed that the colon lesions had recovered. A 12-month follow-up revealed that the patient’s CD4+ T-cell count had increased to 85cells/μL and HIV RNA was undetectable. The patient continues to take 200 mg itraconazole per day as secondary prevention until CD4 + T cells count reach 100 cells/μL for at least 6 months.