A 52 year-old female with hyperlipidemia history was admitted to our hospital with 10 years history of typical palpitations and chest tightness. Formerly, she was diagnosed with coronary artery disease (CAD) and received its therapeutic regimen. But her symptoms did not relieve, so the patient was transferred to our hospital for the diagnosis confirmation as well as to provide effective treatment. Moreover, the physical examination showed no abnormal findings, and the cardiac auscultation revealed normal first and second heart sounds, with murmurs not noted. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed nonspecific ST-T wave flattening and the chest x-ray showed the absence of heart dilation with normal pulmonary vascularity. The transthoracic echocardiogram indicated that the cardiac structure and function were normal without abnormal shunt. Although the exercise testing result was negative, the subject asserted on the performance of a selective coronary angiography. The selective coronary arteriography presented a right dominant coronary circulation without significant stenosis; however, with anomalous vessels originating from the proximal right and left anterior descending coronary arteries, draining into the pulmonary artery through a plexus of small vessels. Similarly, the selective coronary arteriography showed the proximal part of the left anterior descending coronary expansion, and the dysplasia of the distal left anterior descending coronary artery . The pulmonary-systemic flow ratio (Qp/Qs) was 1.36 by right heart catheterization (RHC). The FFR in the distal left anterior descending (LAD) was 0.73 under maximal hyperemia, increasing to 0.92 while under temporary experimental occlusion of the fistula using a 3.0/15 mm standard balloon catheter . However, the FFR in the right coronary artery (RCA) manifested no significant change. Subsequently, we told the patient that a coil embolization of the fistula in the LAD should be performed. To our surprise, the subject insisted on closing both the CPFs. After familial discussion and receiving the patient’s informed consent, the coil embolization of the fistula was performed in the procedure, using the 2 Fibered Platinum Coil™ embolization coils (Boston Scientific, USA) 4 mm–15 cm in the fistula of the right coronary artery to the pulmonary artery and the 3 Fibered Platinum Coil™ embolization coils (Boston Scientific, USA) 2 mm × 5 mm × 5.8 mm in the fistula of the left anterior descending coronary artery to the pulmonary artery . After the procedure, the patient felt that her symptoms were relieved and reported absence of any discomforts during the 1-year follow-up period.