A 67-year-old man visited the orthopaedic unit of our institution for worsening lumbago due to lumbar spinal canal stenosis, which was diagnosed 10 years ago. He could not walk well without support. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed stenosis of the lumbar spinal canal and compression of the spinal cord . Surgical intervention was decided for his treatment.
He was diagnosed with hypertension and dyslipidaemia at the age of 50 years, and diabetes mellitus at the age of 65 years; these conditions were controlled with medications (candesartan 8 mg and teneligliptin 20 mg). He experienced right rotator cuff tears at the age of 63 years and bilateral CTS at the age of 66 years and underwent surgery for both conditions. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm, biatrial load, prolonged PQ interval (211 ms), and ST-segment depression in leads II, III, aVF, and V5–6 . X-ray showed enlargement of the cardiac silhouette; therefore, he was referred to the cardiologist.
His heart rate was 80 b.p.m., and blood pressure was 114/75 mmHg. Auscultation detected no cardiac murmur and there was no oedema of the lower legs. He had no family history of amyloidosis and reported no exertional dyspnoea in daily life, but his activity was limited due to severe lumbago. There was a high concentration of B-type natriuretic peptide [358.5 pg/mL (normal range: <18.4 pg/mL)] and high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level [0.0890 ng/mL (normal range: <0.014 ng/mL)]. Transthoracic echocardiogram examination revealed left ventricular hypertrophy (interventricular septum: 13.7 mm) and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (38%) ( and Videos 1-2). Apical sparing of left ventricular longitudinal strain was observed on speckle-tracking analysis , and the global longitudinal strain was reduced (−6.8%). From the above medical history, echocardiographic findings, and hypertroponinaemia, we suspected cardiac amyloidosis. Contrast-enhanced cardiac MRI revealed diffuse transmural late gadolinium enhancement and a dark blood pool with marked increased in native T1 value (1440 ms, reference value in our institute is 1225 ± 35 ms), extracellular volume (63%) and mild increase of native T2 value (47 ms, reference value in our institute is 40–43 ms) . 99mTc-labelled pyrophosphate scintigraphy demonstrated higher uptake of the tracer compared to that in the bone (Perugini grade 3) and increased heart to contralateral ratio (2.98) . There was no evidence of the presence of monoclonal protein evaluated by free light chain and urine immunofixation assays. Coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis. Endomyocardial biopsy revealed amyloid deposition in the myocardium . Immunohistochemical staining revealed the amyloid precursor protein was TTR and no TTR mutation was found on genetic testing. The patient was eventually diagnosed as ATTRwt-CM complicated with lumbar spinal canal stenosis. Furosemide 20 mg and tafamidis 80 mg were added to treat his heart failure and ATTRwt-CM, respectively.
Since he had compensated heart failure, orthopaedic surgery for lumbar spinal canal stenosis was performed without any complications. The yellow ligamentum excised during surgery was sent for pathological evaluation. TTR amyloid deposition was found in the resected specimens .
Six months after the diagnosis of ATTRwt-CM, he underwent catheter ablation for atrial tachycardia. Currently, 1 year has passed since the diagnosis of ATTRwt-CM. His heart failure symptoms were well controlled and unrestricted in daily life. In echocardiography, left ventricular hypertrophy was slightly advanced (interventricular septum: 15.8 mm); however, left ventricular ejection fraction (38%) and cardiac biomarkers did not change (B-type natriuretic peptide: 246.4 pg/mL, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T: 0.0759 ng/mL).