A 74 year old male patient was admitted to our hospital because of subjective sensation of weight in right abdominal lower quadrant lasting 20 days. The patient also complained of a two-year history of skin eruptions.
A physical examination revealed an abdominal mass in right iliac fossa. It wasn't floating and sore and it had a roundish form. The patient presented anular, erythematous, itchy skin lesions with irregular borders and shaded margins over the trunk and lower limbs. Each lesion was from 1 cm to 5 cm in diameter . No specific abnormal findings were evident on examining his chest and heart. Laboratory findings are detailed in table . The white blood cell count was 4600/mm3. Hemoglobin was 12,5 g/dl and the platelet count was 123.000/mm3. Hematocrit was 35.5%. Serum concentrations of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 19-9 and CA 72-4 were within normal limits.
Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrated the presence of solid, expansive and roundish mass localized in right iliac fossa with seven centimeters in diameter and a probable origin from cecum. A complete colonoscopy did not reveal endoluminal lesions or compressive signs in any part of large intestine.
The total body computed tomography showed a solid and extraperitoneal pelvic mass of seven centimeters in diameter with a heterogeneous surface, necrotic and calcific areas and contrast enhancement. It displaced cecum forward and to the left side. It was also revealed a lower and adjacent mass of 2.5 centimeter in diameter with the same characteristics .
Histological examination of a biopsy specimen of a left thigh skin lesion showed hyperkeratosis, orthokeratosis, focal lymphocytic exocytosis and dermic perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltration.
Surgical resection of retroperitoneal mass was performed. The second tumor highlighted by CT scan was infact a budding of the larger one, but connected to it. The neoplasm didn't involve iliac vessels, right ureter, psoas or cecum and it showed an own capsule. It was not connected with surrounding organs making quite easy the dissection. Grossly, it appeared as a withish roundish mass of 11.5 centimeters in diameter . The section highlighted brownish-yellowish areas and calcific zones .
Definitive histological diagnosis was consistent with undifferentiated liposarcoma. It was composed predominantly of fusiform cell proliferation with oval-shaped nucleus, finely distributed chromatin and vacuolated cytoplasm. Cell proliferation occasionally showed giant multinucleate elements, an irregular vascular weave and areas of bony metaplasia.
After surgery, skin eruptions disappeared completely in seven days, so a diagnosis of paraneoplastic syndrome was done. Therefore the patient has been subjected to radiation therapy and he is still now undergoing treatment. He doesn't show signs of relapse four months after surgery.