The patient is a 40-year-old female diagnosed with breast cancer in 2019. She underwent modified radical mastectomy in July 2019 and was on trastuzumab chemotherapy. She was referred to the neurosurgical service for a right parietal tumor on metastatic workup and was scheduled for craniotomy for tumor resection. Before surgery, she underwent two COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests in accordance with our preoperative protocol, and both were negative. During surgery, gross total tumor resection was achieved and the dura was closed in a watertight fashion using absorbable 4–0 sutures. The bone flap was anchored using silk 2–0 sutures. The postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged home on the 3rd postoperative day. Histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic breast cancer.
One week after discharge, the patient experienced severe and persistent cough that kept her awake at night. She self-medicated with antitussives with minimal relief. Three days later, she noted a gradually bulging fluid-filled mass at her postoperative site, as well as the sensation that there was something moving underneath the fluid collection. After a 2 more days, fluid leaked from the surgical incision, prompting the patient to consult at the emergency department.
On examination, the patient was awake, oriented, and able to follow commands. She did not have fever or nuchal rigidity. She had a pseudomeningocele over the postoperative site, with dehiscence of a portion of the inferior limb of the surgical incision and watery fluid draining from it. On palpation, the bone flap was found to be mobile and displaced inferiorly. As part of the hospital protocol for admission, the patient underwent a COVID-19 PCR test, which was positive. She was thus transferred to the COVID-19 isolation unit.
A contrast cranial computed tomography (CT) scan showed postoperative changes at the right parietal area and no evidence of enhancing tumor. There was also no evidence of hydrocephalus, subdural empyema, or brain abscess. The bone flap was displaced inferiorly , and there was a fluid-filled collection at the right parietal area, consistent with a pseudomeningocele. Microbiological studies of the lumbar CSF and subgaleal fluid showed that there was no infection.
She was started on acetazolamide and mannitol to decrease CSF production and ICP. The leak site was sutured, and a lumbar drain was inserted to divert CSF and keep the postoperative site dry. The opening pressure at the time of lumbar drain insertion was normal at 7 cm H2O, likely due to the administration of mannitol, the CSF leak at the postoperative site, and the pseudomeningocele formation. Antibiotics were also given. The patient was quarantined in the COVID unit for 2 weeks and was only transferred to the regular ward after a negative COVID-19 PCR test.
The pseudomeningocele recurred after the lumbar drain was clamped, indicating failure of treatment. Thus, she underwent debridement, craniectomy, and duraplasty using fascia lata graft. Intraoperatively, the bone flap was found to be unsecured and displaced inferiorly, and the sutures securing the bone flap had become unraveled. A 3 cm × 4 cm dural defect was found along the margins of the previous dural repair, and a fascia lata graft was used to repair this. The bone flap was not reimplanted since the brain was swollen and herniating slightly past the craniectomy defect, likely due to cerebral edema from the infection as a consequence of the CSF leak. A new lumbar drain was inserted, then removed after a week. The patient’s postoperative site remained dry and flat, and she was discharged home.
On follow-up after 1 month, the patient was well, with no recurrence of the pseudomeningocele or CSF leak. She had no neurologic deficits and her cough had resolved completely.