A 78-year-old Japanese man was referred for sudden, asymptomatic gross hematuria with pyuria and clot retention that had occurred six days prior to his visit. Upon presentation at our hospital, he was afebrile and denied chills, pain, or weight change. Physical examination revealed no palpable mass or enlarged lymph nodes. The patient had undergone transurethral resection of the prostate for benign prostatic hyperplasia and transurethral lithotripsy for bladder calculi 11 years previously. He had also been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer (non-functional malignant endocrine tumor, pT2N3M1) seven years previously. Following resection of the pancreatic tumor, he had received chemotherapy for liver and lymph node metastases. Five cycles of gemcitabine therapy proved ineffective; however, stable disease was achieved by second-line chemotherapy (administered until 17 months prior to his being seen for urinary symptoms) using tegafur, gimeracil, oteracil potassium and octreotide. Because of severe adverse events (nausea, appetite loss), monotherapy using octreotide and best supportive care had been provided.
Cystoscopy revealed a solitary non-papillary, pedunculated mass measuring approximately 1.2 cm located lateral to the left ureteral orifice . The surface of the mass appeared reddish and highly vascular. Distended vessels were observed at the base of the mass originating from the surrounding mucosa, indicating that they were feeding vessels . Transurethral resection of the mass was performed and the tissue was submitted for histopathological examination. Magnetic resonance imaging and cystoscopy four months after surgery did not reveal any residual tumor. The pedunculated lesion had an eroded surface and was composed of a lobular proliferation of capillary-sized vessels with large dilated vessels, possibly feeding vessels, at the base of the lesion . Variable anastomosing small blood vessels admixed with dilated and sinusoidal vessels were lined with plump endothelial cells . The endothelial cells were positive for CD31, CD34, and factor VIII-related antigen, but negative for podoplanin (antibody D2-40) (data not shown). While mitoses were occasionally observed, the endothelial cells were without atypia . Edematous and/or fibromyxoid changes were observed in the stroma. Mild lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with intermingled neutrophils was seen. Therefore, the histopathologic findings were consistent with a capillary hemangioma with eroded surface. Because of the acute symptoms together with the cystoscopic and histologic findings, we believe that the lesion should be considered a pyogenic granuloma of the bladder.