A 31-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to hospital with obvious chest pain and dyspnoea. She had developed oedema of the lower limbs 1 year before admission. She had no history of hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension, coronary heart disease, alcohol consumption, or drug abuse, and her family history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed skin hyperpigmentation and minimal oedema of the lower extremity. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia, ventricular premature beat, and left deviation of the electrocardiogram axis . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a moderate amount of pericardial effusion, enlarged left atria, pulmonary hypertension (systolic pulmonary artery pressure of ∼46 mmHg), thickness of the left ventricle of 1.3 cm, hypokinesis of the left ventricular posterior wall, decreased left ventricular diastolic function (Videos 1–3), and global longitudinal strain of 12.3% . The patient received intravenous diuretics and underwent pericardial effusion drainage. Coronary computed tomographic angiography excluded coronary artery disease. Computed tomography of the chest and abdomen revealed bilateral pleural effusion accompanied by bilateral inferior pulmonary atelectasis, pericardial effusion, bilateral axillary, and slightly enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes , hepatosplenomegaly, ascites, and spinal segmental degeneration . Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed increased left ventricular radioactivity uptake (SUVmax: 20.8), increased right ventricular radioactivity uptake (SUVmax: 7.45), increased glucose metabolism in enlarged axillary lymph nodes (SUVmax: 1.32), splenomegaly with increased glucose metabolism (SUVmax: 1.52), pericardial effusion, ascites, and pleural effusion . The patient had no neurological symptoms, although electromyography suggested polyneuropathy.
Laboratory tests revealed that N-terminal-pro B-type natriuretic peptide concentrations were markedly elevated to 9841 pg/mL (normally <300 pg/mL). Serum cardiac troponin T levels were within normal limits. Infection, tuberculosis, and malignancy were excluded by biochemical and cytological analysis of pericardial effusion. Blood coagulation tests showed increased plasma D-dimer level and increased activated partial thromboplastin time. A routine urine exam showed a urine protein level of 2+. Furthermore, 24-h urinary protein quantitation result was 0.25 g (normally <0.15 g/24 h). The patient also had renal dysfunction. Serum immunofixation electrophoresis revealed increased production of M-protein. The increased production of M-protein may be related to immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis (AL) or POEMS syndrome. Further evaluation was performed to determine the aetiology of increased M-protein production. Serum and urinary light chain levels were increased, while serum autoimmune antibodies were negative. Endocrine tests confirmed hypothyroidism and increased prolactin value. Serum VEGF level was significantly increased (800 pg/mL, normal range: 0–142 pg/mL). Bone marrow and periumbilical adipose tissue biopsy results showed that bone marrow nucleated cell proliferation was active, with proliferation of collagen fibres in the dermis. The remainder of observations were unremarkable and crystal violet and Congo red staining results were negative. The final diagnosis of POEMS syndrome was made based on the combination of the following findings: polyneuropathy, plasmaproliferative disorder, elevated VEGF level, organomegaly, oedema, endocrinopathy, and skin changes. Pulmonary hypertension was thought to be secondary to POEMS syndrome. Upon obtaining written informed consent under the approval of the institutional review board, the patient was treated with bortezomib and dexamethasone.
Thirty days after the treatment, her cardiac function had markedly improved, her body weight had decreased by 10 kg, and oedema was obviously decreased. After 3 months, echocardiography showed no pericardial effusion. The thickness of the left ventricle was within normal limits and left ventricular systolic and diastolic function was significantly improved . Global longitudinal strain of 19.1% was significantly higher than before . Serum VEGF was significantly decreased, accompanied by the marked recovery of impaired nerve conduction. Serum and urinary light chain and M-protein levels became negative.