A 52-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital, suffering from chronic lumbar pain for ten years and aggravating after physical labour. 4 months ago, she experienced violent low back pain and numbness of left leg, radiating from left hip to the low extremity with no obvious predisposing cause. Physical examination showed tenderness of interspinal areas in the low lumbar and hypesthesia to pinprick in the L5 and S1 dermatomal distribution, as well as positive straight leg raising sign. Routine spinal X-rays showed L4 spondylolisthesis and spondylolysis in both sides. CT scan reconfirmed L4 spondylolisthesis and spondylolysis in both sides and showed evidence of disc protrusion and lumbar stenosis at L4/5 and L5/S1, compressing left L5 and S1 root .
The patient subsequently took a posterior lumbar decompression surgery at L4-S1, internal fixation and intervertebral fusion at L4/5 and L5/S1. Satisfied outcome was achieved and the patient got out of our hospital at the 6th day. Routine X-ray test was taken before her discharge and showed internal fixations were in good places, but with a black shadow at the surgical place. 10 days later, the patient had an uncontrolled lumbar sprain and began to have dysfunction of excretion. She was readmitted to our hospital. CT and MRI were taken and gas pseudocyst was detected, which compressed the dura sac . Laboratory studies before the revision surgery were taken to rule out the possibility of infection. Debridement surgery was taken. During the surgical procedure, a sound of rushing air was heard when the deep fascia and muscle were opened through the previous route. A thin, blister-like membranous structure surrounded with little clot organization were seen in the surgical field, significant compressing the dural sac with no sign of infection. The membranous structure and clot organization were removed until dura sac were decompressed and returned to throb. Isotonic saline and diluted iodophor solution were used to irrigate surgical field and intradiscal space at the last stage of the operation to prevent persistence of air and infection in spinal canal. Her symptoms disappeared soon after the surgery. Routine X-rays were repeated 2 weeks after debridement, and gas gap disappeared with no signs of infection .