A previously healthy 42-year-old man presented with cough and fever for three weeks. Chest radiograph on admission revealed bilateral consolidations with predominant upper zone involvement . Blood tests showed normal total white cell count (5.99×109/l), but marked lymphopenia (0.20×109/l). Ziehl-Neelsen-stained smear of the sputum revealed >1 acid-fast bacillus (AFB) per oil-immersion field, suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis (TB). The patient was started on oral isoniazid 300 mg daily, rifampicin 450 mg daily, ethambutol 700 mg daily, pyrazinamide 1250 mg daily, and pyridoxine 10 mg daily. His condition improved with good drug compliance under directly observed treatment in an outpatient setting. Sputum cultures on Lowenstein-Jensen and Stonebrink media were positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The patient was readmitted after four weeks of treatment with generalized weakness. Physical examination showed weakness of MRC grade two over all four limbs. He was hyporeflexic and plantar responses were equivocal. He had a palpable bladder and lax anal tone. Cranial nerve examination was unremarkable. Blood tests showed leukocytosis with neutrophilia and lymphopenia (total white cell, 13.11×109/l; neutrophils, 11.17×109/l; lymphocytes, 0.49×109/l). Chest radiograph showed worsened bilateral apical lung infiltrates. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the spine was performed urgently and revealed diffuse intramedullary T2-weighted hyperintensity of the spine from C1 to T4 levels and from T4 to the conus terminalis, suggestive of longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) . Diffuse consolidation of bilateral lung apices and a cavitating lesion with air-fluid level at the left lung apex were noted. Ziehl-Neelsen-stained smear of the endotracheal aspirate showed >1 AFB/oil immersion field, confirming treatment failure despite four weeks of first-line anti-tuberculous treatment.
The patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly with high fever, hypotension, and coma. He was intubated and vasopressor support was commenced. A plain computed tomography scan of the brain was unremarkable. Lumbar puncture showed clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with an elevated opening pressure of 20 cmH2O. Total cell count of the CSF was elevated to 62×106/l with neutrophil predominance. CSF and peripheral blood glucose levels were 1.1 mmol/l and 4.9 mmol/l respectively, and CSF protein was elevated to >6 mmol/l. Gram-stained and Ziehl-Neelsen-stained smears of the CSF showed no organism. Culture of the CSF yielded no bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal growth. Molecular tests including TB-PCR, HSV-PCR, and enterovirus RT-PCR were negative.
A diagnosis of disseminated TB with central nervous system involvement was made. As the patient’s condition had deteriorated despite four weeks of first line anti-tuberculous drugs, multidrug-resistant TB was suspected. The drug regimen was changed to intravenous rifampicin 450 mg q24 h, ethambutol 1200 mg q24 h, levofloxacin 500 mg q24 h, linezolid 600 mg q24 h, and amikacin 750 mg q24 h. The patient was also given a combination of intravenous meropenem 1000 mg q8 h and intravenous amoxicillin-clavulanate 1200 mg q12 h for broad-spectrum antibacterial and anti-tuberculous coverage [, ]. Intravenous dexamethasone was also started at 4 mg q8 h . Genotypic testing for drug resistance using a line probe assay (GenoType MTBDRplus, Hain Lifescience) on the M. tuberculosis isolate from the patient’s first admission was negative for the common isoniazid and rifampicin resistance mutations (katG, inhA and rpoB respectively). An underlying immunological defect was considered in view of the clinical deterioration despite in-vitro drug susceptibility. The combined HIV-antigen/antibody test and anti-interferon-gamma autoantibody were negative [, ].
Due to the radiological finding of LETM, the neuromyelitis optica (NMO) spectrum disorders were a diagnostic consideration. Serum anti-aquaporin-4 (anti-Aqp-4) antibodies were positive by an immunofluorescence assay (Euroimmun). The patient was diagnosed with NMO spectrum disorder complicating active pulmonary TB without evidence of mycobacterial central nervous system infection. Despite treatment with corticosteroid, the patient’s condition further deteriorated with severe hyperthermia, high ventilatory requirement, loss of brainstem reflexes, and labile hemodynamic status. He died after thirteen days of admission.