A 37-year-old male presented to our Accident and Emergency department complaining of a swollen, painful foot. There was no history of previous foot problems, injury or animal contact. He had no respiratory symptoms. He had a past medical history of a head injury resulting in subsequent seizures. The patient was not diabetic or debilitated, and there was no other significant past medical or drug history. He left prior to completion of assessment, but re-attended 2 weeks later with increased pain, swelling and rubor of his foot, and had been vomiting for the previous 48 h. There were signs of significant systemic upset with pyrexia (temperature 38oC) and tachycardia (pulse 144 beats min–1), with a blood pressure of 119/83 mmHg. His white cell count was 13.6×109 l–1 (reference range 4×109–11.6×109 l–1), predominantly neutrophils (11.1×109 l–1), and his C- reactive protein was 267 mg l–1 (reference range <10 mg l–1). A clinical diagnosis of osteomyelitis was made, and this was confirmed radiologically by MRI scan . T2-weighted images showed widespread osteomyelitis of the first to fourth metatarsals with extensive soft tissue oedema and oedema in the talus, calcaneum and distal tibia. Blood cultures collected at re-presentation showed Gram-variable bacilli after 48 h incubation, which grew on blood agar (Oxoid) as oxidase-positive, non-haemolytic, large greyish-white colonies after overnight incubation. The organism was identified by the local laboratory using API 20NE (bioMérieux), following the laboratory standard operating procedure at the time, as a Pasteurella pneumotropica (API 20NE profile 1220004). However, the colonial morphology and absence of a history of animal contact resulted in the organism being sent for further testing and confirmation to the UK National Reference Laboratory (Colindale, London). Gas chromatography identified the organism as a Pasteurella sp. However, further testing using 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis confirmed the identification as A. hominis. The patient repeatedly refused admission and was given an 8-week course of oral ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin, appropriate to the organism sensitivities. Within 48 h, the patient’s symptoms had settled. A follow-up MRI scan after 6 weeks of antibiotics demonstrated a marked improvement , which correlated with clinical improvement in his symptoms and serial improvements in CRP. CRP at 10 weeks was 2 mg l–1 and his white cell count had returned to normal at 4.9×109 l–1. He was discharged from further orthopaedic follow-up after his 6-month clinical review, as there were no clinical signs of infection. An X-ray of his foot taken 1 year after initial presentation, which followed an unrelated injury to his foot, showed no radiological evidence of infection. Therefore, the patient had clinical, serological and radiological evidence of successful treatment.