A 52-year-old man presented with a complaint of frequency and difficulty in urination since February 2016. The patient visited a urologic clinic and received antibiotics and an α1-blocking agent. However, the perineal pain and difficulty in urination worsened. The patient was referred to our hospital in May 2016. Rectal examination revealed a significant enlargement of the prostate with unclear margins. The prostate specific antigen level was 0.8 ng/mL. MRI (T2 weighted image) showed a heterogeneous, large, prostate tumor (10.6 × 9.3 cm) with invasion into the urinary bladder and bilateral seminal vesicles without invasion of the rectal wall or internal obturator muscle, as shown in Figure . CT demonstrated right hydronephrosis due to tumor compression but no metastasis to lymph nodes or visceral organs. A transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy was performed and the results are shown in Figure . H&E-stained sections revealed diffuse proliferation of pleomorphic atypical cells with chromatin-rich small nuclei. Leiomyosarcoma of the prostate was confirmed via immunohistochemical staining; tumor cells were positive for α-SMA, desmin, and vimentin and negative for androgen receptor, NKK3.1.
After consulting the oncologist at our hospital, we decided to apply preoperative chemotherapy with MAID regime. The patient underwent three cycles of MAID regime comprising mesna 6000 mg/m2, doxorubicin 60 mg/m2, ifosfamide 7500 mg/m2, and dacarbazine 900 mg/m2, every 4 weeks from June 2016. Grade 3 febrile neutropenia was observed after every cycle, despite subcutaneous pegfilgrastim injections. CT after three cycles of chemotherapy showed 28% tumor shrinkage and obvious necrotic changes in the tumor, as shown in Figure . Finally, total pelvic exenteration was performed, wherein the prostate, bladder, rectum, and anus were en bloc resected and replaced with an ileal conduit and sigmoid colostomy in September 2016. The surgical pathology is shown in Figure . The H&E-stained sections revealed that nearly all of the tumor cells were necrotic and only those invading the muscle layer of the urinary bladder were viable. The surgical margins were microscopically negative. The patient received no adjuvant chemotherapy and is alive with no disease at 5 years postoperatively.