An 11-year-old child, Asian male, brought to the ETU of our institution when he suddenly collapsed at home. At the time of presentation, he was in asystolic cardiac arrest. Following a prolonged uninterrupted resuscitation, signs of cardiocerebral revascularization were evident with spontaneous breathing and sinus rhythm in ECG. The patient was intubated and transferred to the ICU for post-resuscitation care. Corroborative history taken from the grandmother later revealed a similar past incidence of short-lived syncopal attack with spontaneous recovery about a year ago which was not investigated. She denied any recent history of trauma to head, past events of persistent headaches, seizures, visual symptoms, or behavioral changes. Except for the presumed syncopal event, neither the medical history nor the family history was significant.
On D1 of ICU care NCCT brain revealed diffuse, superficial subarachnoid hemorrhage (modified Fisher scale Grade 3) with evidence of cerebral edema, persistently low GCS (4/15) and WFNS grading of 5 (GCS <7 with deficits). According to the neurosurgical opinion, the patient was not amenable for any neurosurgical intervention at that time hence opted for conservative management with neuroprotective measures. ECG showed bradycardia with prolonged QT (QTc = 0.53 s). Correctable causes of prolong QT interval were excluded, and it was later attributed to subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Elevated intracerebral pressure (ICP) was confirmed by increased optic nerve sheath diameter in ultrasonography since the fundoscopy was normal. (ICP manometry was not available at our institution).
Electroencephalogram performed on D3 suggested severely reduced cerebral activity. Neuroprotective management was continued with neuroprotective ventilation, maintaining a normocapnia (PaCO2 30–35 mmHg) and normoxia. All the metabolic parameters including serum glucose, electrolytes, lactate, and liver and renal function tests were stable at that moment.
On D7 patient was found to have deteriorating lung functions, setting hypoxia, tachycardia, and elevated temperature with lung signs. Presumptive diagnosis of sepsis with ventilator associated pneumonia was made and after taking appropriate cultures, intravenous antibiotics were escalated. Cerebral diabetes insipidus was diagnosed based on elevated serum Na+ (158–162 mmol/l), polyuria, and suggestive urinary and serum osmolalities (260 mOsmol/kg and 320 mOsmol/kg, respectively).
Despite every effort, the patient gradually deteriorated with acute renal failure with metabolic acidosis, persistent hypotension which warranted the use of multiple inotropes, deranged clotting profile with liver failure, and ultimately multiorgan dysfunction. A cluster type respiratory pattern was noticed on capnography . On day 10 of ICU stay, brain stem reflexes were absent on two different occasions, bilateral pupils were found to be round, dilated, and nonreactive to light. Apneic test was negative. Ultimately, the patient succumbed to death by cardiac arrest while on ventilator on day 12.
Pathological postmortem revealed extensive SAH with diffused multiple tufts of irregular, dilated vessels in the occipital region of the basilar and interpeduncular cistern area of the cerebrum. Adjacent to the blood clots evidence of pressure effect causing sulci and gyri obliteration with extensive cerebral edema was found . Liquefaction of brain parenchyma was noted in several foci . Histopathological specimens revealed closely packed large cavernous vascular spaces, marginated by thin fibrous tissue with the absence of intervening glial tissue which is compatible with a CCM [ and ].