A 51-year-old man, who had a treatment history for thyroid tumor elsewhere, was referred to our institution in June 2006 due to a painful chest wall tumor. He had undergone right hemi-thyroidectomy as a 42-year-old but the detailed information was not available at presentation in our institution. On physical examination, the patient presented with a 15 × 10 cm bony swelling on the left chest wall. The thyroid tumor was not palpable in the residual left lobe of the thyroid gland. Ultrasound (US) examination subsequently revealed no thyroid tumor and no regional lymphadenopathy. Laboratory data showed an extremely elevated level of serum thyroglobulin (Tg) (12,000 ng/mL) with normal thyroid function. Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 14 × 8 cm tumor in the left 3rd to 6th ribs and multiple small lung nodules . Core-needle biopsy was performed on the left chest wall tumor. Hematoxylin-eosin staining revealed follicular growth in the tumor specimen obtained and immunohistochemical staining was positive for Tg and thyroid transcription factor-1 . Thus, we diagnosed that the previously resected thyroid tumor was FTC and his painful chest wall tumor and multiple lung nodules were metachronous distant metastases from the previously resected FTC.
Complete total thyroidectomy and chest wall resection and reconstruction using titanium micromesh covered with Marlex mesh were performed in August 2006. First, complete total thyroidectomy of the residual left thyroid gland was performed in the supine position before chest wall resection. There was no thyroid tumor in the resected lobe, as diagnosed pre-operatively. Then, the patient position was changed to the right lateral position. First, we observed the chest wall tumor from inside the thoracic cavity with a thoracoscope, endoscope technique, to determine the marginal line for resection. Next, a post-lateral incision was made. The anterior serratus muscles, 3rd to 6th ribs, and those intercostal muscles with 2 cm margins on both sides were resected . The thoracodorsal muscles were not resected because there was no invasion. After the resection, the defect was approximately 20 × 15 cm in size. Finally, we reconstructed the chest wall defect using titanium micromesh covered with Marlex mesh, with a sandwich method. Pieces of Marlex mesh and titanium micromesh were appropriately cut to be larger than the skeletal defect and the titanium micromesh was sandwiched between two Marlex meshes . Then, we sutured the mesh to the 2nd and 8th ribs and the dorsal edges of the 3rd to 6th ribs with titanium wires to provide rigidity . Two drainage tubes were inserted into the left thoracic cavity and the chest wall was suitably closed. The whole surgical procedure including total thyroidectomy and resection and reconstruction of the chest wall was accomplished in 10.7 hours of operation time and 1050 mL of blood loss was recorded during the operation The patient did not receive a blood transfusion.
There were no critical complications associated with the surgical treatments. Components of flail chest, dyspnea, and surgical site infection were not observed. Tumor pain disappeared during the postoperative period. Chest X-ray and CT scan showed that the left lung had completely expanded and reconstruction of the thoracic defect was successfully achieved . Respiratory function was approximately equivalent before and after surgery. Histopathological examination revealed that the resected specimens were metastatic lesions of poorly differentiated FTC. The patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day. The level of serum Tg decreased to 2800 ng/mL 2 months after the resection. He received RI ablation (50 mCi) and uptake was observed in the thyroid bed in November 2006, 3 months after surgery. Unfortunately, in December 2006, he developed spinal bone metastases and this caused spinal compression and paralysis at the level of the 7th thoracic vertebrae. Orthopedic surgery was immediately performed to fix the spinal aliments with rod instruments and paralysis was dramatically improved. Then, he received a therapeutic dose of RI (100 mCi) in May 2007, 9 months after our surgery. Uptake of RI was well observed in bilateral lung fields. Although the RI treatment was considered effective for lung metastases, spinal bone metastasis gradually progressed. Paraplegia and bladder bowel disturbance were present in August 2007, 12 months after our surgery, and his general condition deteriorated day by day. Eventually, he died of disease in March 2008 19 months after our surgery due to his reduced general condition. This patient never suffered painful chest wall tumor after the resection and lung metastasis was clinically controlled during the follow-up period.