A 4-year-old girl with autism spectrum disorder was hospitalized for close examination and treatment following the development of a fever and gradual poor oral intake. The patient’s height was 91.5 cm, and her weight was 14.5 kg. When spoken to, she did not make eye contact or respond. Her right eyeball was cloudy because of a corneal ulceration.
She was a fussy eater, eating only French fries from a particular fast-food company. The patient defecated in a diaper. At 4 years of age, 3 months before the current admission, she was diagnosed with a right corneal ulcer, left upper eyelid chalazion, and night blindness due to vitamin A deficiency, for which antimicrobial (cephem type 3) and hyaluronic acid eye drops were administered.
The patient’s body temperature at the time of transfer was 38.7 °C, blood pressure was 100/77 mmHg, heart rate was 100 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 98% (room air). Upon admission, blood test results revealed a leukocyte count of 21,600 cells/µL, hemoglobin concentration of 10.1 g/dL, C-reactive protein concentration of 6.57 mg/dL, and elevated inflammatory reactions, whereas urinalysis revealed cloudy urine and the presence of bacteria. Owing to the patient’s history of refractory cystitis, she was prescribed 700 mg piperacillin (50 mg/kg) for a suspected urinary tract infection.
On day 9 of admission, the patient exhibited bilateral swelling of the labia majora, predominantly on the left side . Ultrasonography revealed a subcutaneous abscess, superficial echocardiography revealed fluid retention in the left labia majora over the inguinal area, and contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed fluid accumulation with a contrast effect in the labia majora. Therefore, a diagnosis of bilateral Bartholin’s gland abscesses was made , and the patient was referred to the pediatric surgery and obstetrics department for incision and drainage. Following maximum drainage of the abscess in the left labia majora, which was punctured with an 18-G needle, the contents were submitted for culture examination.
The blood test results were as follows: leukocytes, 36,300 cells/µL; hemoglobin, 8.9 g/dL; C-reactive protein, 2.57 mg/dL; total protein, 6.4 g/dL; serum albumin, 3.1 g/dL; ferritin, 112.2 (reference range, 3.6–114) ng/mL; iron, 13 (40–188) µg/dL; zinc, 40 (80–130) µg/dL; vitamin A, 6 (97–316) IU/dL; vitamin C, 2.9 (5.5–16.8) µg/ mL; and selenium, < 2.0 (107–171) µg/L.
The patient had an excessive inflammatory response, vitamin A and C deficiencies, and a trace element deficiency due to an unbalanced diet. Bacterial culturing of the abscess yielded anaerobic gram-positive cocci (streptococci), and intravenous treatment with 1,574 mg piperacillin/tazobactam (100 mg/kg) was initiated. Subsequently, Streptococcus constellatus and Prevotella bivia were detected in the abscess culture.
The swelling did not decrease after the abscess was punctured; thus, 1 week after the antimicrobials were administered, incisional draining of the abscesses was performed under general anesthesia, and the wounds were sutured completely to avoid dead space. The patient was intravenously treated with 4,350 mg sulbactam/ampicillin (300 mg/kg) until postoperative day 5 and discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 8. As she recovered without any complications, no further postoperative blood tests were performed.
An outpatient examination 1 week after discharge from the hospital revealed healing of the wound. Three months after the patient’s surgery, no recurrence of abscesses was noted. Although the patient’s picky eating seemed to have lessened after discharge from the hospital, she had already returned to eating only French fries 3 months after surgery and continued to receive treatment with nutritional supplements.
Initially, her parents demonstrated efforts to address her selective eating habits. However, over time, she exclusively consumed a specific brand of French fries, insisting on a particular location and plate for her meals. The child’s behavior had to be addressed before she succumbed to further malnutrition-related ailments and to provide support to families facing similar challenges within society. Hospitalization facilitated the parents’ comprehension of their child’s health impact and allowed for the monitoring of her nutritional status through the administration of supplements and the assessment of trace elements and vitamins as required.