A 66-year-old man (height 172 cm, weight 92 kg) presented with diabetic nephropathy for planned living donor kidney transplantation. He suffered from CAD, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, insulin dependent diabetes mellitus II and a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He had undergone coronary artery bypass surgery in a different hospital 7 months before (left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to left anterior descending (LAD) and saphenous vein graft to the ramus diagonalis). The ramus circumflexus (RCX) was not accessible to revascularization during bypass operation according to the documents of the different hospital. The LAD was supplied with a drug-eluting stent three years before. The RCX was supplied with a bare-metal stent one year before and, because of an in-stent restenosis, 5 month before with a Genous stent in a different hospital. Additionally another Genous stent was placed distally to the previous stent area.
The patients’ wife was intended to serve as the organ donor. She had a history of severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with intercurrent infectious exacerbation, why the transplantation had been called off twice, yet. Prior to the planned date of transplantation she was in good condition.On account of the medical history of the recipient and according to the pre-transplantation guidelines of our institution with regard to high-risk patients a cardiac catheterization was carried out 5 days before transplantation. Here an in-stent restenosis of the proximal ramus circumflexus, which had already been supplied with drug-eluting and bare metal stents two times before, was observed (see Figure ). After intensive discussion between the cardiologist, the surgeon and the anaesthesiologist the following therapeutic plan was made: the stenosis was dilated with a 3.0/15 mm drug-eluting balloon (Inc. Braun, Germany) followed by anticoagulation with tirofiban and aspirin until surgery. The post-interventional angiography showed a very good result after PTCA (see Figure ). Definitive stenting was planned after full recovery from the kidney transplantation.
Five days later the planned kidney transplantation was carried out. Medication including aspirin and tirofiban was continued up to the day of operation. In the operating room (OR) induction with sufentanil 0.33 μg kg-1, propofol 1.6 mg kg-1 and rocuronium 0.33 mg kg-1 was performed. Anaesthesia was maintained with sevofluoran 1.6 Vol%. During whole operation mean arterial pressure was above 70 mmHg with a heart rate between 50 and 60 bpm. The patient received norepinephrine with a maximum dose of 0.11 μg kg-1 min. Intraoperative blood loss was 800 ml, and the lowest level of haemoglobin was 12.2 g/l. The patient received 2500 ml of crystalloid solution. After successful kidney transplantation he was extubated in the OR and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).One hour after admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) the patient developed pectanginous symptoms. The ECG at 10 minutes after clinical presentation of angina revealed no significant abnormalities. The cardiac troponin I was initial negative and 13.9 pg/ml after 4 hours with a peak level of >50.0 pg/ml 7 hours after admission. Cardiac catheterization, carried out 20 minutes after the first complaint of angina by the patient presented a sub-acute in-stent thrombosis of the RCX stent which had been dilated preoperatively with a drug-eluting balloon (see Figure ). After PTCA with a 2.0 mm balloon the implantation of a 3.0/24 mm drug-eluting stent (Medtronic Endeavor Resolute, Medtronic, Germany) followed. The angiography again showed a good result (see Figure ). Postinterventionally, after consultation of the surgeons, anticoagulation with tirofiban over 3 days was started followed by prasugrel for 12 months and aspirin. During anticoagulation only minor skin bleeding appeared. 12 days after kidney transplantation the patient could be dismissed home in a good state and is still well after three years.