A 49-year-old woman presented to the outpatient service with a 1-year history of menstrual disorder. Laboratory studies showed a luteinizing hormone level of 27.69 international units per liter, a follicle stimulating hormone level of 81.29 international units per liter and a estradiol level of 123.91 pico mole per liter. The determinations of serum sex hormone indicated that the patient was perimenopausal. Transvaginal B-mode ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging both showed a huge mixed-sign mass in the uterine cavity . All imaging findings were similar to those of uterine leiomyoma. Due to the huge size of the tumor, laparoscopic hysterectomy was planned to be performed. Diagnostic curettage was performed firstly. The frozen pathological examination found only a small amount of smooth muscle tissue and stratified squamous epithelium. A small piece of myometrial tissue, fish-liking, was taken out though vagina and also sent to frozen pathological examination. It suggested that epithelioid-cell tumor with rich cells and malignant possibility. Considering uterine abnormalities, atrophic ovaries, perimenopausal hormone level, the experience of the chief surgeon and the will of family members, total hysterectomy, bilateral adnexal excision and laparoscopic pelvic lymph node biopsy were performed. In order to avoid the risks linked to morcellation, the big uterus was planned to be removed through the vagina. Oval forceps was used to separate part of uterine contents and take out from vagina. The uterus volume was reduced and could be removed with complete serosa . During this process, part of the uterine content was sent for frozen pathological examination twice. The third examination suggested that spindle cell tumors with rich cells and the forth showed uterine myoma with infarct. Nevertheless, postoperative pathological and immunohistochemical analyses of the surgical specimen revealed uterine leiomyosarcoma. Nucleus mitosis and coagulative necrosis were found under magnification 400× and one pelvic lymph node had metastasized .