A 70-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital because of 2 weeks of persisting epigastric discomfort. She had medical history of untreated choledocolithiasis for 4 years. Physical examination was only remarkable for tenderness in the right upper quadrant area. The patient’s white blood cell count was 5500/μl, hemoglobin was 12.4 g/dl, and platelet count was 190,000/μl. Any disorders for liver function tests were not detected. Serum bilirubin level was also within normal range. Serum tumor marker values such as CEA and CA 19-9 were not elevated. However, CRP was elevated to 4.8 mg/dl. CT scan revealed dilatation of intra and extra hepatic bile ducts, gallbladder stones and gallbladder wall thickness. No mass lesions in the head of the pancreas or in the biliary tract were detected except for enlarged swollen intra abdominal and para-aortic lymph nodes . Given these findings, she was initially diagnosed with acute cholecystitis. Although percutaneous transhepatic gallbladder drainage (PTGBD) was safely performed, common bile duct was not radiographically visualized. Magnetic response cholangiopancreatograpy (MRCP) showed severe stenosis in the middle extrahepatic bile duct with dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts . Histological diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the middle extrahepatic bile duct was made by endoscopic transpapillary bile duct biopsy . A covered self-expandable metallic stent (ZENOSTENT covered 10 mm × 80 mm; Zeon Medical Inc., Tokyo, Japan) was placed endoscopically. Based on these findings, she was diagnosed with BTC with para-aortic lymphnodes metastasis and treated with a combined chemotherapy regimen of GEM and S-1. 1000 mg/m2 of GEM was intravenously administered at day 1 and 8, and 80 mg/day of S-1 was orally given for 14 days followed by 7 days of rest, repeated every 3 weeks. After the six courses, enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes began to shrink. Adverse effects included grade 2 suppression of bone marrow function, hair loss, and GI symptoms such as diarrhea, and vomiting that were tolerable and managed by reducing administration dose to 80% of the initial dosage without discontinuation of the chemotherapy.
Finally after 32 courses of the combined chemotherapy, many enlarged lymph nodes were reduced by more than 50% in diameter . The patient agreed to undergo curative intent surgery 2 months after the final dose administration. Peritoneal lavage cytology did not detect any adenocarcinoma cells. Intra operative frozen section analysis of para-aortic lymph node station 16b1 did not detect any tumor cells, either. Therefore, pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy was safely performed. Hepatic duct was transected at the level of 1.0 cm below the union of left hepatic duct and right hepatic duct. Twenty-seven lymph nodes including stations 6, 8a, 12a, 12p, 13a, 13b, 16inter, 16b1, and17a were harvested. Pathological examination of the resected specimen showed no residual neoplastic cells in bile duct, cystic duct, and gallbladder. Fibrosis in the bile duct with the presence of plasma cells and macrophages was observed . Para-aortic lymph node specimens also showed replacement fibrosis and aggregates of macrophages, but did not show any residual tumor cells. . Postoperative complications included grade B pancreatic fistula that was treated conservatively. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 45. The patient did not agree to receive adjuvant chemotherapy. 48 months after the surgery, the patient is in a good condition, and no suspicious recurrent lesions have been detected.