A 52-year-old Syrian male patient presented to the hospital with a 3-month history of progressive exertional dyspnea, accompanied by a dry cough, lethargy, and unintentional weight loss. No additional abnormal symptoms or medical history, such as hemoptysis, chest pain, or a history of infection, were noted. On physical examination, it was noticed that the upper lobe of the right lung had diminished breath sounds and was dull to percussion. Laboratory investigations such as cbc, crp, LFTs, spirometry, arterial blood gases and saturation tests were within normal range. Upon examination, a chest X-ray revealed the presence of a density occupying the right lung, suggestive of a possible mass . However, a contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated the existence of a significant mass with heterogeneous density that was located in the posterior mediastinum and extended to the hilum and upper lobe of the right lung . The utilization of PET scans, EBUS, and MRI angiography was precluded in this case due to the substantial financial burden they imposed on the patient, exceeding their limited financial means. Furthermore, the restricted availability of these sophisticated diagnostic modalities further contributed to their omission. As an alternative, the patient underwent assessment utilizing a CT scan, which served as a substitute method for evaluation and diagnosis. This lesion was found to be the cause of extrinsic compression on the right lung. In addition, it was observed that the heart and great vessels, such as the aorta and superior vena cava, were subjected to compression displaying indistinct vascular borders, while the esophagus was anteriorly displaced. Bronchoscopy revealed severe extrinsic compression effects on the right main bronchus. The specimen comprises a mass measuring 25 × 10×8cm, displaying a lobulated and yellowish-white appearance similar to adipose tissue in texture. Microscopic examination revealed a well-differentiated liposarcoma with a low-grade malignant nature. The tumor exhibited localized areas of chondroid metaplasia and limited ossification. Abnormal cells were observed, featuring hyperchromatic nuclei, occasional prominent nucleoli, and increased mitotic activity. Focal regions demonstrated chondroid metaplasia and minimal ossification. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated positive expression of MDM2 and CDK4 in the tumor cells, while other markers, including S100 and desmin, were negative. The final pathological diagnosis is a well-differentiated, low-grade liposarcoma. In terms of TNM staging, the tumor was categorized as T2N0M0, indicating the absence of regional lymph node involvement (N0) and distant metastasis (M0). However, fibroadipose soft tissue with focal fibrosis were seen after a CT-guided biopsy, which is most consistent with well-differentiated liposarcoma. Consequently, surgical intervention was recommended. Under general anesthesia, the patient had a right thoracotomy with a fifth intercostal incision for the radical resection of the mediastinal lesion . The trachea and esophagus were examined and preserved during surgery, while the bulging azygos vein was ligated and removed. The lobular mass was resected, and it was composed of multiple nodules measuring up to 25 × 10x8cm, weighing 2250 g . The final pathologic diagnosis confirmed well-differentiated low-grade liposarcoma. Patient’s postoperative recovery was rapid, and the procedure was well-tolerated. The chest tube was removed on the fourth day post-operation, with an output of 150 ml/24 h. After surgery, a chest X-ray revealed a clear lungs and a central mediastinum of normal size . The patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day and subsequently followed up 3 months later, exhibiting an excellent postoperative status.