The patient was a Malagasy 21-year-old male, a street vendor. He consulted his treating physician for a flu-like syndrome for one month. Despite the treatments he received, he developed an exertional dyspnea evolving in the context of asthenia and emaciation. Hence his reference to the pulmonology department of Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Fenoarivo, Antananarivo. He had no specific medical history until 4 months before hospitalization. Indeed, he had a history of anal condyloma 4 months prior to hospitalization, which was operated on a doctor’s office 2 months later, without exploration. In his sexual history, we noted that he was homosexual.
On admission, the pulse oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 85% on room air but his hemodynamic status was stable. His body mass index was 15.6 kg/m2. Respiratory examination showed signs of moderate respiratory distress and audible crepitations upon basal pulmonary auscultation. Heart sounds were normal. The abdomen was soft but tender on palpation of the right hypochondrium. Examination of the anal sphincter revealed perianal sores. Examination of the external genitalia found the loss of scrotal rugae, which was not painful to palpation.
The blood tests showed a biological inflammatory syndrome. Table summarizes the results of the initial biological tests performed.
Chest X-ray showed reticular-micronodular opacities in the hilar and basal lung regions, bilaterally . Chest CT scan and bronchial fibroscopy were not available.
In view of the oxygen desaturation and the unexplained interstitial syndrome during the COVID-19 wave, he was treated as a case of severe COVID-19 by azithromycin 500 mg on day 1 and 250 mg/day for the next 4 days. Ceftriaxone 2 g/day, dexamethasone 8 mg/day, and enoxaparine 0.4 mg/day for 14 days.
After 3 days of treatment, the evolution seemed favorable with a SpO2 of 91% on 1 l/min oxygen. However, by day 5 he had become dyspnoeic again, requiring an increase in oxygen therapy from 2 to 4 l/min for 10 days to reach a SpO2 of 95%. No workup could be done because of the lack of financial means from the patient. The evolution was stationary until the 15th day when the patient became agitated, tachypneic, and complained of unspecified chest pain, and intense abdominal-anal and scrotal pain. SpO2 was 91% on 8 l/min oxygen. The vital parameters were normal with a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, heart rate of 80 beats per minute, and temperature of 36.8 °C. The clinical probability score for pulmonary embolism was low. The second-line biological tests revealed an HIV infection . The CD4 count and viral load were being measured. The HBs antigen test was negative. Testicular ultrasound showed a large inflammatory infiltration of the intrascrotal fat bilaterally, associated with an intravaginal effusion slide, without evidence of torsion or testicular nodule. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a multinodular hepatomegaly of 178 mm, the largest of which measured 6 mm in diameter, associated with latero-aortic lymphadenopathy. Thus, testicular cancer with interstitial lung, liver, and lymph node metastasis was suspected. However, tumor marker assays could not be performed. The patient's condition did not allow for immediate diagnostic and therapeutic testicular surgery.
In view of the febrile dyspnea in an immunocompromised patient, antibiotic therapy for Pneumocystis jirovecii was started, with the only medicine that exists in the country, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim 800/160 mg, 2 tablets 3 times a day.
After a few hours of hospitalization in the intensive care unit, the patient died of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy.