A 13-year-old Pakistani boy presented to our clinic with cyanosis, an intermittent cough, decreased exercise tolerance and episodes of bluish discoloration of his hands and feet that had been ongoing for one year. A clinical examination revealed clubbing and cyanosis with room air oxygen saturation of 88% in the supine position and 87% while sitting. There was no history of jaundice, cholangitis, hematemesis, melena or rashes. The chest was clear and there was no heart murmur. An abdominal examination revealed no abnormalities. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. Skin examination showed no stigmata of chronic liver disease. The patient had an increased alveolar-arterial gradient (A-a PO2 gradient) of 26mmHg and was started on two liters of oxygen that improved his oxygen saturation to 97%. His chest X-ray and echocardiogram were normal. Spirometry revealed normal percentages of predicted FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in one second) 90%, FVC (forced vital capacity) 86%, and FEV1/FVC 89%. Cardiac catheterization showed normal pulmonary pressure. His chest computed tomography (CT) scan was normal. An incidental finding of a prominent liver surface and collateral vessels connecting a dilated portal to the dilated terminal inferior vena cava (IVC) and mild splenomegaly was noted. Sonography of his abdomen along with the portal venous Doppler study showed a dilated portal vein. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of his abdomen showed attenuated hepatic veins and normal intrahepatic portal vein branches with a maintained texture pattern. The main portal vein was replaced by multiple prominent collaterals transforming to a portal cavernoma (Figure ).
His liver function tests, coagulation profiles, serum ceruloplasmin, alpha-1 antitrypsin, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were all normal. Endoscopy of his upper gastrointestinal tract showed no esophageal varices. An ultrasound-guided liver biopsy showed hepatocytes in lobules without significant inflammation or necrosis, surrounding portal fibrosis and bile duct proliferation in the fibrosis areas with bile stasis and little inflammation, all suggestive of congenital hepatic fibrosis (Figure A, B).
Contrast-enhanced echocardiography with agitated saline (CEE) and a 99m Technetium-macroaggregated albumin perfusion lung scan (99mTc-MAA) were compatible with an intrapulmonary right-to-left shunt. CEE is considered diagnostic if the bubbles are in the left heart cavities at least three beats after their visualization in the right cavities, as was found in our patient
. 99mTc-MAA is an injectable radiopharmaceutical used in nuclear medicine. It consists of a sterile aqueous suspension of Technetium-99m (99mTc) labeled to human albumin aggregate particles in the pH range of 3.8 to 8.0. 99mTc-MAA perfusion scanning is a more sensitive procedure as it allows quantification of the degree of intrapulmonary shunting. 99mTc-MAA particles >20mm in diameter are entrapped in pulmonary vasculature and undergo decay
. In patients with a right-to-left shunt, the 99mTc-MAA enters the systemic circulation and distributes to systemic organs, as was found in our patient.
The patient underwent a successful living-related liver transplantation with no serious complications. Histopathology of his liver resection confirmed congenital hepatic fibrosis. The patient required oxygen in the initial postoperative three months until his PO2 improved to 90mm Hg in room air and he did not require further oxygen therapy.