A 60-year-old man visited our hospital with bloody vomiting. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a circumferential ulcerative lesion measuring 40 mm at the pre-pyloric area, which caused tumor bleeding and pyloric stenosis . Biopsy revealed well-differentiated to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (tub1/por), which was later confirmed to be the HER2-positive type. A blood examination showed severe anemia (hemoglobin level: 5.5 g/dL) and an unfavorable nutritional status (total protein: 4.5 g/dL, albumin level: 2.5 g/dL, pre-albumin: 16.7 mg/dL). Regarding tumor markers, his AFP level was slightly elevated (53.6 ng/mL), while CEA and CA19-9 levels were within normal ranges . Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed thickening of the gastric wall at the pre-pyloric area (primary lesion) and two swollen regional lymph nodes (station No. 6) . MRI was performed, and a high-intensity lesion measuring 10 mm in diameter was identified in the liver (S7) on a T1-weighted image, suggesting solitary liver metastasis from GC . As pretreatment staging, he was diagnosed with advanced GC located at the lower third of the stomach that was 40 mm in size and macroscopically type 2, tub1/por, cT4a(SE)N1M1(HEP) cStage IV according to the third English edition of the Japanese classification of gastric carcinoma .
The present case was diagnosed with advanced GC with potentially/technically resectable liver metastasis and a nutritional disorder due to pyloric stenosis. We considered two therapeutic options: (i) surgery (standard primary tumor resection with lymphadenectomy and liver metastasectomy) with/without adjuvant chemotherapy, and (ii) systemic chemotherapy (as a neo-adjuvant setting) followed by surgical resection. After sufficient discussions and the provision of informed consent from the patient and his family, we selected the latter therapeutic strategy. Before the introduction of systemic chemotherapy, we performed gastro-jejunal bypass (Roux-en-Y gastric bypass) with the laparoscopic approach to overcome the food obstruction issue. Since modified Devine exclusion was added to bypass surgery [, ], the greater curvature side of the gastric body was transected using a linear cutting stapler to partition the stomach wall . During laparoscopic surgery, we confirmed no findings of peritoneal metastasis.
As a systemic chemotherapy, capecitabine and cisplatin in combination with intravenous trastuzumab (the XP plus T-mab regimen) were selected. The postoperative course after gastro-jejunal bypass was uneventful, and the patient received initial administration on the 9th day after surgery. The XP regimen comprised 1000 mg/m2 capecitabine (Xeloda®) orally twice a day on days 1–14 and 80 mg/m2 cisplatin intravenously on day 1, which was repeated every 3 weeks. An intravenous injection of 8 mg/kg trastuzumab was administered on day 1 of the first cycle and then at 6 mg/kg on day 1 of subsequent cycles. Although grade 3 neutropenia according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI-CTCAE) was observed before the induction of the second cycle, his overall therapeutic course was uneventful. After three courses of the XP plus T-mab regimen, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, CT, and MRI were performed and showed shrinkage of the primary tumor and regional lymph nodes as well as the disappearance of liver metastasis . Additionally, no newly detected metastatic lesion was found in the liver or other organs. The clinical stage following chemotherapy was ycT3(SS)N0M0, ycStage IIB.
Laboratory data after chemotherapy are summarized in Table (right side), and showed improved nutritional data (total protein: 4.5–6.7 g/dL, albumin: 2.5–4.0 g/dL, pre-albumin: 16.7–33.8 mg/dL), and a decreased AFP level (53.6 to 13.7 ng/mL). Along with this improvement in the nutritional status, the prognostic nutritional index (PNI) for postoperative complication risk factors was also elevated (31.6 to 49.9) .
We considered surgical curability and safety to be achievable at this point. The patient underwent macroscopic complete resection (R0 resection) by distal gastrectomy, D2 lymphadenectomy, and partial hepatectomy of S7. The previous transection line of modified Devine exclusion procedure was extended to the lesser curvature side in the second surgery . The hepatic lesion, which was recognized as a scarring lesion on the surface of the liver (S7), was resected with a sufficient safety margin .
Pathologically, the primary lesion was moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (tub2) and invaded the subserosal layers (T3(SS)). Viable tumor cells were observed in less than one-third of the lesion and more than two-thirds were replaced with scar tissue , indicating a grade 2 tumor response by preoperative chemotherapy . An immunohistochemistry of the resected primary lesion revealed focally positive for AFP . One lymphatic metastasis was observed in the subpyloric area (station No. 6) (N1). In the resected liver specimen, only scar tissue without viable cancer cells was observed . Collectively, these results indicated that the pathological staging was ypT3(SS)N1(1/30)M0, ypStage IIB.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from hospital on postoperative day 10. We proposed adjuvant chemotherapy; however, the patient and his family did not hope it. After enough consultation, we finally decided not to administer postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. He was followed up every 3 months and has remained free from recurrence 30 months after surgical resection. The outline of the clinical course is summarized in Fig. .