A 17-year-old female patient came to the oral and maxillofacial surgery clinic of Sardjito Hospital with inability to open her mouth and difficulty to eat. The patient had a history of left TMJ ankylosis due to facial trauma which treated with interpositional arthroplasty using a gold foil 5 years ago (A). After surgery, the patient was able to open her mouth to 20 mm wide. Five years after surgery, the patient found symptoms of narrow mouth opening and inability to open her mouth.
The objective examination found the general condition within normal limits. Extraoral showed a light asymmetrical face. In a resting position left TMJ was palpable protrusion with a hard consistency and painless. Palpation of the TMJ in the mouth opening position found no movement nor pain. Mouth opening ability and mandibular movement towards the anterior and lateral were both 0 mm. Intraoral examination was not possible, leaving only buccal and labial side could be examined, and showed normal occlusion and good oral hygiene.
Panoramic radiograph exhibited internal fixation and metal sheet appearance on the left mandibular ramus . Computed tomogram (CT) and 3-dimensional (3D) CT demonstrated narrowing of the joint space leading to a picture of left TMJ reankylosis .
Based on the subjective, objective and supporting examinations, the patient was diagnosed with left TMJ reankylosis type IV (extensed ankylotic bone mass to the mandibular incisura) along with hyperplasia of the left coronoid process.
The second surgery was performed with interpositional arthroplasty using temporalis fascia and RCU reconstruction with a costochondral graft followed by unilateral coronoidectomy.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia involving an orthopedic surgeon to obtain costochondral graft. Intubation was performed consciously assisted with a fiberoptic endoscope as the patient failed to open her mouth.
Incision was done along the first surgical incision site and blunt dissection performed to avoid injury of facial nerve and temporalis artery. Upon reaching the bone, the ankylotic bone mass in the ramus region was seen extending to the mandibular incisura and glenoidal fossa. The gold foil was found fixed with two screws which is partially covered by the bone mass. No gap was found between the glenoid fossa and the gold foil (B).
Removal of fixation screws and gold foil continued with resection of the ankylosis mass used a bur, 20 mm-wide gap is created (A). The first attempt to open the mouth reached 15 mm only. A submandibular incision was performed as an access for the hyperplasized coronoid process excision and costochondral graft placement. Following the gap making and coronoidectomy, the patient could open her mouth up to 20 mm.
The costochondral graft from the 6th costa with 5 cm–long graft (4 cm costa and 1 cm chondral) was taken by the orthopedic surgeon. The chondral part of the graft was reshaped to form a convex surface resembling the mandibular condyle. The costochondral graft was then fixed to the ramus (C) using two 6 mm-long screws where the chondral side faced cranially.
The temporalis fascia flap was then made with the size of 2 cm wide and 5 cm long, then the flap was rotated and inserted into the gap around the glenoidal fossa or above the chondral surface of the costochondral graft. The edge of the flap was then sutured to the soft tissue around the fixed costochondral graft (D). A vacuum drain was placed around the costochondral graft.
Seven days postoperatively extraoral edema was still visible, sutures were intact and there was no bleeding nor signs of facial nerve injury. Patient complaint of pain during mouth opening. Individual normal occlusion and no open bite on the contralateral side were found. The patient was instructed to use more ice cream sticks gradually while practicing to maximize mouth opening (A). 3D CT evaluation on the costochondral graft was well fixed to the mandibular ramus.
One month postoperatively showed that extraoral condition found no edema in the surgical area nor complaints of pain, and the surgical wound was healing well. No signs of injury were found in the facial nerve. Individual normal occlusion and no open bite on the contralateral side were found. Mouth opening widen up to 22 mm and no pain. The patient was instructed to keep practicing mouth opening using ice cream sticks.
Three months postoperatively mouth opening widen up to 24 mm and no pain. The patient was instructed to continue practicing mouth opening using ice cream sticks. 3D CT evaluation showed that the costochondral graft was well fixed on the mandibular ramus .
Eight months postoperatively no increase in mouth opening. Individual normal occlusion and no open bite on the contralateral side were found. The patient was instructed to keep practicing mouth opening using ice cream sticks.
Evaluation on 13 months postoperatively found that extraoral condition was within normal limits and there was scarring in the incision marks. Mouth opening widen up to 26 mm and no pain (B). Individual normal occlusion and no open bite were found on the contralateral side. The work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .