We describe the case of an 11-year-old right-hand-dominant White Portuguese girl who presented with pain in her right elbow following a fall onto the outstretched hand that occurred while she was riding a bicycle. She was unable to move her elbow actively due to pain. A physical examination revealed mild swelling and tenderness over the lateral aspect of the distal part of her humerus. The child had a restricted range of motion of her elbow, especially with flexion. Joint stability was considered normal and no neurovascular signs were observed. The diagnosis was made on a lateral and an oblique radiograph , which revealed a displaced fracture of the capitellum of her right elbow, a typical Hahn-Steinthal or Type I fracture. An anteroposterior radiograph of the distal part of her right humerus did not reveal a definite fracture. No other injuries were detected.
Our patient was treated by open reduction and internal fixation. Under general anesthesia, an attempt was made at closed reduction but complete reduction could not be achieved that way. With a pneumatic tourniquet in place, a posterolateral incision was made . Further manipulation of the fragment allowed reduction that was held in the correct position with two temporary Kirschner wires. The final fixation was performed with two 3.0 mm cannulated screws. The screws were inserted in a posteroanterior direction through the posterior surface of the lateral condyle. An intraoperative dynamic examination showed satisfactory stability of the osteosynthesis and anatomic articular congruity. A protrusion of the tip of the screw on the articular surface was carefully avoided . Postoperatively, her elbow was immobilized in a long arm cast at a right angle, with the forearm in a neutral position for three weeks. The postoperative outcome was uneventful, allowing our patient to leave the hospital 48 hours after surgery.
The follow-up period was of one year with regular clinical examination and roentgenographic control. Our patient was asked about pain and daily activities. Her elbow flexion-extension and pronation-supination were evaluated and compared with the contralateral side.
Our patient was able to perform normal elbow movements and normal daily activities without pain, but she mentioned having limited mobility after removal of the plaster cast. This initial period was followed by four months of a progressive mobilization program that was guided by a physiotherapist. On the basis of the radiographic appearance, the fracture presented convincing signs of consolidation after five weeks. At the fourth month of follow-up, the fracture was considered completely healed and our patient had a good range of motion with full flexion, pronation and supination, but lacked 15° of extension in comparison with her contralateral side . There was no varus or valgus angulation. At one year of follow-up, our patient had no pain and her elbow had a restored full range of motion. Furthermore, a radiographic examination revealed no signs of avascular necrosis, physeal arrest or angular deformity .