A 78-year-old man diagnosed with sick sinus syndrome received a permanent pacemaker (DDDR-MRI Medtronic [ventricular lead (MEDTRONIC cistofix 5076–58 cm); atrial lead (MEDTRONIC cistofix 5076–52 cm)]). The procedure itself and the post-procedure screening were both uneventful. The wound was clean, and there was no evidence of pneumothorax or hemothorax on the chest X radiography (CXR). The patient was discharged on the second day after the procedure.
However, the patient complained of a productive cough during a routine outpatient clinic follow-up visit conducted a week after the procedure. Laboratory findings showed a decrease in hemoglobin level from 10.9 to 8.9 mg/dL. A CXR revealed newly developed borderline cardiomegaly and bilateral blunting of the diaphragmatic angle. Pacemaker interrogation results showed normal threshold and impedance of both leads. An evaluation performed at fourteen days after the procedure showed evidence of orthopnea, dyspnea upon exertion, and a minor fever (38 °C). Physical examination showed engorgement of the jugular vein, basal crackles over the bilateral lower lung fields, and pitting edema in both legs. Laboratory data revealed worsening anemia (decrease in hemoglobin level from 8.9 to 7.7 mg/dL), high NT-proBNP (1610 pg/ml), and hyponatremia (Na: 115 meq/L, Osmo: 267), but no leukocytosis or worsening of renal function. An echocardiography revealed moderate pericardial effusion (maximal thickness 1.5 cm) without dynamic diastolic collapse of the right ventricle (RV).
The patient was treated for congestion, and administered a nitrate infusion. The patient also received empirical treatment with antibiotics since the low-grade fever was suggestive of an infection. The workup for pleural effusion showed evidence of transudate, and culture results for microorganisms tested were negative, including common aerobic and anaerobic bacterium as well as mycobacterium tuberculosis. Based on concerns about lead migration or protrusion-induced hemopericardium, the patient was subjected to chest computed tomography (CT), and no protrusion was detected . Additionally, the density of pericardial effusion was 20 Hounsfield unit (HU), which also did not support the possibility of hemopericardium. There was a limited improvement in the patient’s condition following several days of treatment, and echocardiography showed no worsening of pericardial effusion (thickness around 1.1 cm). Based on a suspicion of PCIS, the patient was prescribed prednisolone (30 mg/day initially), after which there was a dramatic improvement of his condition. The dosage of prednisolone was gradually tapered off to 20 mg/day after a week, 20 mg to 10 mg/day after two weeks, and the patient was maintained on 10 mg/day for 8 weeks. Although the CXR returned to baseline after completion of the steroid treatment , there was a recurrence of pleural effusion, leading to the resumption of low dose prednisolone treatment in addition to colchicine treatment. The patient recovered well after this treatment.
An 82-year-old male with a history of chronic atrial fibrillation (CHADS2: 3) was treated with rivaroxaban. The patient presented at the cardiology clinic with crescendo angina, and was reviewed with a coronary angiography examination, which showed significant focal stenosis at the orifice of the right coronary artery (RCA) . The patient was subjected to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), where a Xience Xpedition stent (3.5/15 mm) was deployed at the orifice. The procedure was uneventful, and the final angiogram showed good RCA flow, and no evidence of perforation, dissection, or extravasations .
However, two hours after the procedure, the patient developed cold sweats, tightness in the chest, and hemodynamic compromise along with bradycardia (50 bpm) and hypotension (systolic blood pressure: 70–80 mm Hg). Although a complete electrocardiography (ECG) showed no abnormalities, echocardiography showed new pericardial effusion (thickness 1.1–1.5 cm) with RV early diastolic collapse. This was immediately followed by a repeat coronary angiography, which showed good RCA flow without any extravasation, perforation or thrombosis. A chest CT scan with contrast showed no aortic dissection, and the density of pericardial effusion suggested hemopericardium (HU: 40) . In addition to vasopressors which were administered to stabilize the hemodynamics, the patient was also prescribed a 50 mg dose of hydrocortisone for PCIS. There was an improvement in the patient’s condition on the second day and all vasopressors was discontinued in 18 h. The patient was discharged to the outpatient department with a prescription for 20 mg prednisolone, and remained stable at his follow-up visits. However, 9 months later, after we tapered off prednisolone, the patient had increased discomfort of dyspnea on exertion and the echocardiography showed pericardial effusion recurred. We prescribed colchicine and low dose prednisolone for its control and patient’s discomfort improved.