An otherwise healthy 33-year-old woman in her eighteenth week of pregnancy presented with a five-day history of high spiking fever, generalized body aches with myalgia, and frontal headache. She had noticed a generalized maculopapular rash on the third day of the illness. On the fifth day, she noticed that her hearing got progressively impaired, worst towards the end of the day. She had no seizures, alteration of consciousness, or behavioral changes. On admission to us, she was febrile and had a widespread erythematous maculopapular rash involving the palms and soles but sparing the face . She had no eschar. There were no signs of meningeal irritation. Except for the involvement of the eighth cranial nerve, there was no other cranial nerve involvement. Other focal signs were absent, and the optic fundus was normal. She had no lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly. She could not recall any history of tick bite. Her immunization was up-to-date, and she was immunized against measles, rubella, and chicken pox in the past.
Her total white cell count was 3490/μL with 80% neutrophils and 15% lymphocytes. She had a mild thrombocytopenia of 128,000/μL. Her inflammatory markers were elevated including CRP of 120 U/L and ESR of 85 in the 1st hour. Except for a mild transaminitis (AST 58 U/L and ALT 60 U/L), rest of the liver functions were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis performed on the 6th day of the illness was normal. The audiometry studies confirmed bilateral sensorineural deafness . Neuroimaging was not performed since the patient was reluctant to undergo computerized tomography or magnetic resonance imaging due to the pregnancy. The virology screens (HIV, HSV, CMV, mumps, measles, and rubella) and serology for syphilis were negative. The Weil–Felix test was positive with a high reactivity of OX19 and OX2 antigens. She received oral azithromycin for a total of 10 days with a presumed diagnosis of rickettsial spotted fever. With this treatment, her fever settled, and her general condition dramatically improved with the maculopapular rash gradually disappearing. The inflammatory markers came down with a CRP of <5 U/L and ESR of 35 mm in the 1st hour at the end of ten days of treatment. Hearing impairment persisted and showed mild gradual improvement after one month . Her diagnosis of spotted fever was serologically confirmed with very high titers of Rickettsia conorii IgG (>1/450) after two weeks of the illness. After about five to six months, hearing was restored back to her normal, and by this time, she had an uncomplicated delivery. The baby did not have any physical abnormalities.