A 27-year-old Hispanic female with chronic hirsutism and oligomenorrhea presented to an outside hospital in June 2019 with worsening chronic cough for 1 year. Per family, patient was in good health excepted for rash on her chest and knuckles that responded to topical hydrocortisone. There was no evaluation done in the outpatient setting for her chronic cough. She had presented to an urgent care where she was prescribed azithromycin 2 days prior to hospitalization.
On presentation to the outside hospital, she was febrile, tachycardic, tachypneic, with an oxygen saturation of 85% on nasal cannula at 15 L/min. Respiratory exam was significant for rhonchi bilaterally. Initial labs showed normal white blood cell count, normal creatine, and slightly elevated globulin with normal liver function tests. Her streptococcus pneumonia urinary antigen was positive. She was treated with a course of antibiotics. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed no pulmonary embolus and demonstrated bilateral diffuse ground glass patchy opacities throughout the lungs .
She was initially admitted to the medical intensive care unit and intubated for hypoxemic respiratory failure due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Broad spectrum antibiotic therapy was started with intravenous piperacillin /tazobactam and levofloxacin. She was on maximal ventilatory support at the outside hospital and continued to remain hypoxemic with elevated peak and plateau pressures. Neuromuscular blockade was initiated, with only minimal improvement in oxygenation. Prone positioning was not attempted at the outside hospital. She was transferred to our hospital on day 7 of her course for evaluation of veno-venous extra corporeal membrane oxygenation (VV-ECMO).
On arrival to our hospital, her PaO2/FiO2 ratio was 40 despite maximal ventilator support and neuromuscular blockade. Given she had failed conventional ARDS treatments, VV ECMO was initiated. Bronchoscopy was performed and revealed no signs of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH), and infectious workup from bronchial lavage was negative.
Further workup at our center revealed mildly elevated aldolase, low-normal creatine kinase, and elevated transaminases. Autoimmune labs revealed positive antinuclear antibody (ANA), positive SS-A antibodies, elevated rheumatoid factor, elevated anti-PL-7 and anti MDA5 antibody levels detected by commercial immunoblot assay kit (Myositis Specific 11 Antibodies Panel, Quest Diagnostic, USA), and which was confirmed with repeated testing .
Physical examination revealed diffuse facial hair and hyperpigmented patches at the dorsum of bilateral third metacarpophalangeal joints . These skin features, along with the lack of muscle weakness and unremarkable muscle enzymes, CT chest findings of bilateral ground glass opacities, double positive MSAs (anti-PL-7 and MDA5), and negative infectious work up, all led to a diagnosis of acute hypoxemic respiratory failure secondary to rapidly progressive interstitial lung disease (RPILD) due to CADM.
Patient remained on maximal support from the ECMO circuit and the ventilator. Pulse doses of methylprednisolone 1 g daily was initiated on day 10, intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) was given on day 17, and rituximab was given on day 19. She was then transitioned to methylprednisolone 60 mg daily on day 20. Repeat CT chest on day 21 showed worsening of consolidation and persistent patchy GGO bilaterally.
She was eventually transferred to a lung transplant center on day 24 given no significant improvement despite on VV-ECMO and maximal ventilator support for 17 days. After a detailed evaluation by multi-disciplinary team at the lung transplant center, she was deemed not to be a lung transplant candidate. Her family had decided to transition to comfort care on day 33 and patient expired.