The patient was a 72-year-old male who was referred to the Department of Urology in our hospital due to a high level of prostate-specific antigen. Blood examination showed RBC 508 * 104/µl, Plt 35.6 * 104/µl, WBC 5700/µl, AST 20 U/L, ALT 16 U/L, LDH 217 U/L, Alp 310 U/L, γ-GTP 24 U/L, Amy 90 U/L, CRP 0.35 mg/dl, CA19-9 6.2 U/ml, CEA 4.1 ng/ml, and PSA 5.025 ng/ml. Enhanced computed tomography showed a sporadic small lung nodule lesion and a renal tumor 10 cm in diameter, which showed enhancement in the arterial phase and even greater enhancement in the venous phase but less than that in the normal right kidney. The renal tumor was diagnosed as an RCC with necrotic components, and the lung lesion was diagnosed as lung metastasis from the RCC. A 1 cm pancreatic head tumor was well enhanced in both the arterial and venous phases. The tumor was diagnosed as metastasis from the RCC or the primary PNET . Gadolinium-diethylene triamine pentaacetate-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging showed that the pancreatic head tumor presented with homogenous hypointensity on T1-weighted imaging and T2-weighted imaging. Mild hyperintensity was shown on diffusion-weighted imaging, but the hypointensity was unclear on apparent diffusion coefficient mapping. The pancreatic head tumor intensity on T2-weighted imaging was different from that of the neuroendocrine tumor, and the dynamic enhancement findings were consistent with those of the RCC. Therefore, the pancreatic tumor was suspected to be a pancreatic metastasis from the RCC rather than the asymptomatic and nonfunctional PNET .
The pancreatic tumor was indicated for operation with either diagnosis, and left nephrectomy and subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy were performed. Although a grade B pancreatic fistula occurred, it was conservatively improved and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 26. Three years after surgery, the unresected lung metastasis is stable without recurrent disease under nivolumab administration.
Resected left kidney included a 12 × 10 × 10 cm-sized yellow nodular tumor. Histologically large-sized tumor cells with atypical small nucleus and clear cytoplasm made trabecular nests with intervening thin-walled vascular network. Venous invasion and invasion to perirenal adipose tissue were observed. In immunostaining this tumor was negative for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, CD56, and positive for CD10 . This kidney tumor was diagnosed for clear cell RCC, Grade 3 (Fuhrman classification), pT3aNX. Resected pancreas tissue included a 1.2 × 1.1 cm-sized well-demarcated nodular tumor. Histologically, the nodule was composed of two different components. In the central area, large-sized tumor cells with atypical small nucleus and clear cytoplasm made trabecular nests with intervening thin-walled vascular network. In immunostaining this tumor was negative for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, CD56, and positive for CD10. These were exactly the same findings to clear cell RCC of the left kidney. In the peripheral area of the nodule, medium-sized tumor cells with fine granular cytoplasm and round nucleus made ribbon-like regular cord structures. Few mitotic figures were identified. In immunostaining, the tumor was positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and negative for CD10 and CD56 . This peripheral tumor was considered as neuroendocrine tumor G1 originated in pancreas. These findings in this patient were considered that clear cell RCC of the left kidney metastasized into the nodule of the PNET (tumor-to-tumor metastasis).