A 44-year-old male patient was admitted to our institution with a past medical history remarkable for CKD as a result of congenital left renal hypoplasia and adaptive focal segmental glomerulosclerosis due to long-term obesity. The patient started peritoneal dialysis at the age of 26. After 3 years, he underwent a cadaveric kidney transplant. During the postoperatory period, slow graft function was seen, which recovered satisfactorily over time. Immunosuppressive therapy was initiated with cyclosporine, mycophenolate mophetil and prednisolone. Nevertheless, multiple celular rejection episodes lead to chronic graft glomerulopathy and hemodialysis requirement after 8 years. At the time, the patient’s BMI was 30 kg/m2. Progressively, weight gain increased BMI to 42 kg/m2 with difficult-to-control hypertension and severe sleep apnea. At that point, the patient’s waist circumference was 120 cm and fasting glucose was 100 mg/dL. As for the lipid panel, total cholesterol was 145.8 mg/dL, high-density cholesterol was 33 mg/dL and triglycerides were 117.1 mg/dL. Uric acid was 7.9 mg/dL and albumin was 3.9 g/L. Regarding dialysis adequacy parameters: single-pool Kt/V was 1.47, body fat measured through bioelectrical impedance (BIA) was 45%, phosphorus was difficult to control, and oscillated between 5 and 8 mg/dL.
Behavioral, nutritional and pharmacologic measures were not sufficient for an adequate weight control, thus in order to allow access to a second kidney transplant, the patient’s case was brought to consideration by a multidisciplinary board where a surgical approach was decided. A gastric sleeve was performed. There were no early or late post-operatory complications after a 12-month follow-up period.
On the initial dialysis sessions after surgery, due to rapid weight loss, the patient displayed cramps, dehydration and hypotension, which required several adjustments of dry weight (DW) by BIA, almost daily at first and weekly thereafter in order to better define the optimal ultrafiltration rate and symptom resolution.
The patient achieved a BMI of 28.6 kg/m2, adequate blood pressure control and reduced severity of sleep apnea. He then met all required criteria, and was registered in the kidney transplant waitlist.