30-year old, nulliparous virgin Turkish Muslim woman admitted to Ankara University Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology outpatient-clinic in May 2012 with complaint of irregular menstrual bleeding ongoing for 3 months. Other symptoms included pelvic pain and yellow-pinkish vaginal discharge. Her medical history was uneventful and the patient denied any sexual intercourse.
On gynecologic examination, vulvar and vaginal inspection was uneventful with annular intact hymen. Abdominal examination was unremarkable, however rectal examination revealed significant vaginal fullness. Her laboratory tests, including tumor markers of CA-125, carsinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA-19-9 and alpha- fetoprotein (AFP) were in normal ranges despite severe anemia as her hemoglobin was 7.1 g/dl. Pelvic ultrasound revealed a 5×6 cm solid mass in the cervico-vaginal location which filled the vaginal margins. Mass was not belonging through endometrial cavity. Uterus and adnexa were considered normal.
Surgical removal of the myoma via vaginal approach was offered to patient as a first line surgical option. Patient was informed about written medical report that the integrity of hymen can be lost during medical intervention and hymenal repair can performed during the procedure. Because of very strict and standpatter nature of patient and her family, she was denied to have vaginal approach. Due to patient’s consistent desire for preserving hymenal integrity, written consent was obtained from the patient for abdominal approach and mini-laparotomy was performed.
During inspection; uterus, adnexa and pelvic surfaces were considered normal. Bulky appearance that located under the anterior wall of the vagina was observed and palpated. The bladder was then liberated and a small incision was performed on the anterior vaginal wall. A firm regular pedunculated mass was identified and delivered with rotational movements.
After clamping the peduncle, 5×6 cm mass was removed. Vaginal defect was repaired with absorbable 2/0 polyglactin 910. Histopathologic evaluation confirmed leiomyoma with degeneration and inflammation . The postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged without any complication on the second postoperative day. Postoperative ultrasonographic examination revealed a normal pelvic texture.