An 87-year-old Chinese male presented with right upper quadrant pain and obstructive jaundice for one day. He had no fever, nausea, or vomiting. He had no history of alcohol use. His medical history was significant for hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, recurrent gallstone cholangitis, and a previous cholecystectomy 20 years ago. Of note, he had presented with gallstone cholangitis 4 months prior, during which an ERCP had been performed with successful balloon trawling of a 14 mm gallstone from the distal common bile duct. Physical examination revealed scleral icterus and mild right hypochondrial tenderness. His laboratory workup was notable for raised total bilirubin of 81 μmol/L, a low serum albumin of 33 g/L, thrombocytopenia, and an elevated serum alphafetoprotein level of 611μg/L. He had no leukocytosis, and his INR was normal.
A computed tomography multiphasic scan of his abdomen showed a dilated intra- and extra-hepatic biliary tree with thickening and enhancement of the ductal wall as well as hyperdensities within the proximal left hepatic duct and common hepatic duct suggestive of choledocholithiasis. It also showed a 3 cm segment 3 lesion with faint arterial enhancement and subsequent washout on the delayed phase suggestive of HCC . Given his history of recurrent gallstone cholangitis, the initial impression was that of gallstone cholangitis and a possible newly diagnosed HCC. However, the biochemical profile and radiological appearance of his liver were not in keeping with cirrhosis. He was a non-drinker and his hepatitis B and C serology were negative. This patient was obese with metabolic risk factors such as diabetes and hypertension, suggesting that non-alcoholic steatohepatitis was the likely aetiology for his HCC.
An ERCP was performed which demonstrated a dilated left intrahepatic duct with amorphous filling defects obstructing its distal end . Balloon trawling during the ERCP managed to extract the obstructing intraductal lesions, which appeared to be necrotic tumour-like tissue . These lesions were later retrieved with a Roth Net. No prophylactic stent was placed as the obstruction had resolved. Histology showed necrotic tumour tissue, with the residual partially viable tumour cells showing morphology (trabecular architecture and hyaline globules) as well as immunoreactivity (diffusely positive staining with HepPar, Arginase, and CAM5.2) that was compatible with HCC .
After discussion at a multidisciplinary tumour board meeting, the options of surgical resection and systemic therapy were both offered to the patient. However, the patient opted for systemic therapy in view of his age and personal preferences, understanding that this was a palliative option. The extraction of the intra-biliary portion of HCC resulted in complete resolution of his jaundice, allowing initiation of systemic therapy. Nivolumab was eventually started after discussion with the patient and his family. A repeat computed tomography scan after completing six cycles of nivolumab showed partial response, and the patient remains well and free of jaundice.