A 5-year-old Iranian boy was diagnosed with a right inguinal hernia. Previously, at the age of 1 year, he underwent right inguinal herniorrhaphy. The child’s parents mention that, after the surgery at the age of 1 year, swelling occasionally occurs in the right inguinal region. As part of the examination, both testicles were palpated in the right scrotum. Throughout the examination, all other aspects were normal. All laboratory test results were normal, and the child’s parents do not mention a history of TTE in the family.
Ultrasound showed that two testicles are located in the right scrotum and the hernia sac is located in the right inguinal area, with an internal ring diameter of 9 cm. Two spermatic cords were also observed on the right inguinal canal.
The patient was recommended to undergo surgical reconstruction. We chose the type 1 technique (transseptal orchiopexy) for surgery. A right inguinal incision was made at the site of the previous scar. It was evident that the previous surgery had caused adhesions. The layers were opened according to anatomic construction. The hernia sac was opened from the scar site of the previous operation, and the spermatic cords were completely separated from it. During the release of the spermatic cords, care was taken to prevent damage to the cords. The testicles were delivered and dissected . Because two testicles were located in the right scrotum, it was necessary to make a mid-raphe incision. Through a hole in the middle of the raphe, one of the testicles was transferred to the left hemiscrotum, and fixed with Prolene suture. Also, the right hemiscrotum was fixed with the right testicle. We fixed a Penrose drain for removing blood and other fluids out of the surgical area, to prevent infection. For the closure of the fascia, subcutaneous tissue, and skin, a sterile bandage was applied . As soon as the drain was removed, the patient was discharged. One week later, the patient’s testicles were in their proper hemiscrotums, and no complications were observed . Follow-up with the patient occurs at 1 year intervals to check for possible complications. The case is briefly described in Table .