A 57-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital due to abdominal distension and pain for 1 year, which had been aggravated with nausea and vomiting for 1 mo.
The patient experienced abdominal distension and pain accompanied by the absence of exhaust defecation without obvious inducement 1 year prior. She was evaluated in a local hospital before admission to our hospital. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) (July 14, 2019) showed edema and thickening of the duodenal wall, with mild dilation of some parts of the small intestine with effusion. Transoral enteroscopy showed chronic erosive gastritis protuberans, duodenitis, and jejunitis. She was treated by fasting, gastrointestinal decompression, antibiotics, a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), and fluid supplementation, and then she was discharged after relief of abdominal distension and pain and restoration of anal gas evacuation. The patient had cracked fingernails, accompanied by hair loss, weakened sense of taste, and repeated abdominal distension and abdominal pain starting 10 mo prior. One month prior, the patient had nausea and vomiting with aggravated abdominal distension, and diarrhea consisting of yellow-green loose stools. She experienced anorexia and fatigue. In the previous month, her weight loss was approximately 5-6 kg.
The patient was healthy overall except for a 5-year history of hypertension. She had brown pigmentation on the anterior tibia skin of her lower limbs for more than 10 years, and the pigmentation size varied from a coin-sized area when the condition was relieved to an area extending from above the ankle to below the knee when the condition was more severe. The lesion produced itching and discomfort but did not exhibit redness, swelling, or ulceration. The patient had sparse body hair since childhood and had no history of oral steroids or long-term medication use.
She had no infectious disease, drug or food allergy, surgery, or blood transfusion. She also had no family history of gastrointestinal polyposis or other genetic diseases.
Height: 157 cm; weight: 36 kg; body mass index: 14.6 kg/m2; ear temperature: 36.2 °C; breaths: 18/min; pulse: 118 beats/min; blood pressure: 110/78 mmHg. The patient was conscious and alert but less vigorous than usual. Her conjunctivas appeared pale. Brown pigments were visible, particularly on the skin of her hands and bilateral anterior tibia. She had sparse body hair. The nails of both hands were pale and lacked luster, and the fingernail of her ring finger was longitudinally cracked . Small nodules (the size of a red bean) in the right supraclavicular lymph node could be palpated, with clear borders and no adhesions. No edema was noted in either lower limb.
The blood test results were as follows: White blood cell count (11.63 × 109/L↑), neutrophil count (8.4 × 109/L↑), hemoglobin 119 g/L (115-150), and platelet count (545 × 109/L↑). The C-reactive protein level was 1.9 mg/L. The biochemical test results were: Albumin 23.2 g/L (40-55) and blood calcium 1.85 mmol/L (2.11-2.52). The tumor marker test results were as follows: CA19-9 41.1 U/mL (0-37), immunoglobulin E (IgE) 193/mL (0-87), and gastrin 129 ng/L (13-115). Serum Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) antibodies were positive. The occult blood test in stool was positive (++), and the fat globule test was positive.
No abnormalities were found in the following test results: Liver and kidney function, coagulation function, troponin level, thyroid function, routine urine, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, immunoglobulin (G, A, M) levels, immunoglobulin G (IgG) 4 level, complement levels, rheumatoid factor level, hepatitis (A, B, C, D, E) antibodies, TORCH (Toxoplasma gondii, Rubella virus, Cytomegalovirus, Herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2) antibodies, Epstein-Barr virus antibodies, anemia test (ferritin, folic acid, vitamin B12), Mycobacterium tuberculosis antibodies, tuberculosis infection T cells, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, and blood lead level.
During the entire treatment, we recommended that the patient undergo further genetic examination, but she refused because of the expense.
Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen suggested that the gastric wall and part of the small intestine and colon were thickened with multiple cauliflower-like and nodular protrusions and showed obvious heterogeneous enhancement. A diagnosis of multiple polyps (malignant changes were not ruled out) was considered .
Positron-emission tomography (PET)/CT showed multiple nodules with increased 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) intake in the gastric wall (SUVmax 3.4), descending duodenum and bulb, small intestine, and colon (SUVmax 7.3). Multiple areas of nodular thickening with increased FDG intake were noted in the proximal rectum. Based on her medical history, a diagnosis of multiple polyps throughout the gastrointestinal tract (the possibility of malignant changes in individual polyps could not be excluded) was considered .
Gastroscopy showed extensive diffuse polypoid lumps of 0.5-3.0 cm in the gastric body, gastric fundus and antrum .
Colonoscopy showed multiple polypoid mucosal bulges in the terminal ileum and multiple polyps (0.3-5 cm) throughout the colon. Some were villus-like changes. Severe hyperemia was found on the surface. Larger polyps appeared in the ascending colon and the hepatic flexure .
Gastroscopic pathology showed juvenile polyps in the gastric antrum (H. pylori+) . Colonoscopic pathology showed juvenile polyps in the ascending colon .