Our patient is a 12-year-old girl with ulcerative pancolitis, diagnosed at age 10 at an outside facility. On diagnosis, she presented with a one-month history of abdominal pain, hematochezia, and a twenty-pound weight loss with a pediatric ulcerative colitis activity index (PUCAI) score of 60. Colonoscopy at initial diagnosis reported pancolitis with pathology showing chronic active colitis and crypt architecture changes. At the time of presentation to our facility, she was in clinical remission on infliximab 10 mg/kg every 4 weeks which had recently been increased secondary to an undetectable drug level. She presented with fevers and insidious onset of bone pain at multiple sites. The pain initially began a few weeks prior in her lower back and migrated to her left clavicle and bilateral metatarsals. Vital signs on admission were significant for the following: blood pressure, 100/53 mmHg; pulse rate, 124 beats/min; and body temperature, 38.9 °C. On exam, her left shoulder was exquisitely tender to palpation with overlying erythema. Additionally, her bilateral feet were tender to touch with erythema and fluctuance around her bilateral great toes. Foot radiographs demonstrated mild soft tissue swelling and fat stranding . Laboratory findings included white blood cell count 9.6 × 10^3/uL with 74% PMN’s and 10% lymphocytes, hemoglobin 11.4 g/dL, platelet 413 × 10^3/uL, albumin 3.3 g/dL, INR 1.52, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 54 mm/hr., C-reactive protein (CRP) 185.9 mg/L. Blood cultures were obtained on admission. Nuclear infection imaging demonstrated focal uptake in the left acromion concerning for osteomyelitis . Single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) scan also demonstrated lytic changes at the left acromial apophysis . To better elucidate the anatomy of the joint, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left shoulder was performed which also supported the diagnosis of osteomyelitis . Despite this finding, antibiotics were not initiated, and patient was taken to the operating room for further exploration. Surgical incision and drainage of the left acromion and bilateral metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints revealed copious purulence concerning for multifocal infection and abscess. Bacterial cultures and PCR were performed on the fluid from the left acromion and bilateral metatarsophalangeal joints prior to the initiation of IV Vancomycin and Ceftriaxone. Despite these interventions, the patient continued to be febrile, tachycardic and intermittently hypotensive with suboptimal pain control. Inflammatory markers continued to remain elevated. IV antibiotics were thus discontinued after 3 days. Biopsy of the left acromion was performed which revealed acute and chronic osteomyelitis with areas of necrosis and granulomatous inflammation . Aerobic, anaerobic, fungal and acid-fast bacteria (AFB) cultures and pan-bacterial PCR were negative from the joint fluid prior to the start of antibiotics eluding to a non-infectious cause. Methylprednisolone 1000 mg IV daily was initiated inpatient for a three-day course per Rheumatology recommendations with marked improvement in fever, pain and inflammatory markers. Patient was discharged on Prednisone 30 mg twice daily and started on Methotrexate 20 mg SQ weekly to be further managed by Rheumatology. The patient was seen in Rheumatology clinic 2 weeks following discharge and continued to remain afebrile and asymptomatic. She was followed monthly in Rheumatology clinic and was tapered off of steroids 5 months following her initial presentation. She has remained on Methotrexate 20 mg SQ weekly. She continued to have complete resolution of joint symptoms off of steroids without any limitations in joint movements. Furthermore, patient has followed closely with Pediatric Gastroenterology where she continues to remain in clinical remission on infliximab 10 mg/kg every 4 weeks. A colonoscopy was repeated 8 months following discharge from the hospital which showed mild proctitis.
In this case, despite the negative tests for microorganisms, the possibility of an infection cannot completely be ruled out. However, when considering that the inflammation occurred in multiple bony sites without involvement of other organs, the negative response to broad-spectrum antibiotics along with negative blood and joint fluid cultures and PCR, these clinical findings and laboratory results indicate the likelihood that the inflammation was due to a non-infectious origin.