A 44-year-old Japanese female with a medical history of untreated hypertension presented to our emergency department with right-side paralysis and dysarthria and was admitted with a diagnosis of pontine haemorrhage. On the fifth day after admission, she developed a fever (37.5–38°C) that lasted for several days but was subsequently diagnosed with central hyperthermia. On the 15th day, ceftriaxone (2 g/day) was administrated for urinary tract infection; nevertheless, on the 25th day, she developed chest pain and dyspnoea. Physical examination revealed the following: blood pressure, 94/45 mmHg; pulse rate, 102 b.p.m. (regular); and oxygen saturation, 96% (O2 1 L/min). The jugular venous pressure was observed to be elevated; however, no cardiac murmur, abnormal lung sounds, or pericardial rub were detected. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm and ST-segment elevation (1 mm) in the inferior leads. Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion. The white blood cell count (WBC) was 10 000/mm (reference, 3300–8600/mm). Further biochemical analysis revealed the following: no evidence of elevated myocardial enzymes, C-reactive protein, 7.4 mg/dL (reference, 0–0.14 mg/dL); N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide, 8138 pg/mL (reference, ≤55 pg/mL); and creatinine, 3.38 mg/dL (reference, 0.65–1.07 mg/dL). Plain chest CT showed bilateral pleural effusions, large pericardial effusion, splenic infarction, and consolidation and cavity lesions in the upper left lung zones . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal biventricular function but a large circumferential pericardial effusion, inferior vena cava dilation, and right ventricular (RV) collapse. Pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiogram showed a 25% decrease in the E-wave velocity of the LV inflow during inspiration, while the E-wave velocity of the RV inflow increased by 76% during inspiration, which was determined to be the signs of cardiac tamponade . The patient was referred to our department, where an emergency pericardiocentesis was performed for suspected cardiac tamponade due to acute pericarditis. A pericardial drainage tube was placed, obtaining 750 mL of blood-stained fluid. Subsequent TTE showed mild residual pericardial fluid in the posterior LV wall; however, the drain was removed 24 h later due to haemodynamic improvement and minimal output. Pericardial fluid cytometry revealed an elevated count of inflammatory cells with no malignant cells. Blood and pericardial fluid cultures were positive for S. aureus, sensitive to ceftriaxone. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed no evidence of infective endocarditis and bidirectional shunt flow through patent foramen ovale . Considering these results, acute purulent pericarditis due to hospital-acquired pneumonia caused by S. aureus infection was diagnosed. The patient was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g/day); nonetheless, on the 49th day after admission, she became febrile again and had elevated inflammatory markers (WBC, 13 000/mm; C-reactive protein, 6.97 mg/dL). Computed tomography showed increased pericardial effusion . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed dyskinesis and a pseudoaneurysm on the inferior LV wall and a large pericardial effusion located behind the inferior LV wall (see , ), with blood flow from the pseudoaneurysm into the pericardial space (see , and ). Contrast-enhanced chest CT showed a large, moderately dense pericardial effusion and a pseudoaneurysm on the inferior LV wall . Emergency coronary angiography performed to identify ischaemic heart disease did not show stenosis or any evidence of myocardial infarction. Preoperative TEE also showed a pseudoaneurysm in the inferior LV wall, a large pericardial effusion behind the inferior LV wall, and blood flow from the pseudoaneurysm into the pericardial space (see , ). Cardiac rupture with ongoing purulent pericarditis was suspected, and urgent surgical intervention was conducted. Preoperative cerebral angiography revealed no abnormal findings. After consultation with the neurosurgeon, anticoagulation therapy was administered as usual during surgery. After sternotomy, the tense pericardium was incised, and bloody pericardial fluid was detected. A cardiopulmonary bypass was established, and the ascending aorta was clamped. A 2 cm-sized myocardial defect and myocardial thinning had developed at the posterior LV wall. The defect was closed using a 5 cm large glutaraldehyde-treated bovine pericardial patch . Ceftriaxone was continued for 3 weeks postoperatively. Diuretic therapy (torasemide, 2 mg/day) was required to manage right heart failure caused by moderate or more severe tricuspid regurgitation, and the patient’s condition was stable. She was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital after 108 days of hospitalization. Approximately 18 months post-surgery, subsequent clinical and echocardiographic examinations indicated a stable patient condition.