The proband (III:1, Fig. A) was a 32-year-old nulligravida woman who presented with recurrent and bilateral multiple FOLs in the mandible . She had undergone six surgeries, causing disfigurement of the facial features and teeth deformities. She had noticed a mass in the left mandible when she was 11 years old, and undergone a tumorectomy. Currently, at admission to our hospital, she also had a 2-year history of two cystic/solid tumors (4.1 × 5.2 cm and 4.9 × 4.6 cm on MRI scan) in the right kidney, which was classified as a Bosniak III or IV lesion, indicating a pre-operative clinical impression of cystic renal cancer . She accepted percutaneous renal puncture surgery. Additionally, she had suffered from life-long menorrhagia resulting in anemia. Ultrasonography of the urinary and genital system showed leiomyomas and endometrial hyperplasia (results of out-of-hospital are not shown). The proband did not present with polydipsia, polyuria, nocturia, constipation and hematuresis. Biochemical analysis results: normocalcemia (2.23 mmol/L, reference range: 2.11–2.52 mmol/L), normal levels of intact serum parathyroid hormone (25 pg/mL, reference range: 18.5–88 pg/mL), hypohemoglobinemia (70 g/L, reference range: 130–175 g/L). A technetium 99 m sestamibi parathyroid scan revealed no parathyroid tumor.
The patient’s father, II:2, also had undergone a tumorectomy when he was 11 years old on account of FOLs in the mandible. He had experienced total mandibulectomy at age 44 because of multiple-recurrent lesions in the mandible. Upon presentation to our hospital for evaluation at age 56, de novo FOLs were identified in the bilateral maxillae, especially in the right . He had not presented with HPT over the years. Blood routine examination and renal ultrasonography are normal.
All the jaw tumor samples of patients III:1 and II:2 were microscopically examined in our department, featured as varied amount of calcified substance lying in a variable density of fibrous stroma . Mineralization was not homogeneous, displaying in the form of immature woven bone or of cementum-like round structures. With a careful correlation of radiologic characteristics and microscopic features , we established the diagnosis of OF in both patients.
Morphologically, a core biopsy of the proband’s right kidney consisted of tubular epithelial components admixed with spindle cells with fascicles patterns. The most mesenchymal component resembled that of uterine smooth muscle . Fewer mesenchymal component which surrounded the epithelium consisted of cellular stroma with hyperchromatic nuclei and scant cytoplasm, resembling endometrial stromal cells . Tubular glands lined by columnar epithelium were similar to endometrioid-type glands. Immunohistochemically, the epithelial cells were positive for CK and PAX8; the stroma cells were positive for vimentin, ER, PR and SMA diffusely; and small focal endometrial stroma-like cells stained positively for CD10. Histologic classification of mixed epithelial and stromal tumor (MEST) were confirmed .
In consideration of hereditary jaw disorders, the DNA samples extracted from tumor tissue of jaw and peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) of the patient III:1 were screened for genetic variation by next generation sequencing (NGS) based on a pan-tumor 1021-gene panel, including somatic and germline mutations. A germline CDC73 heterozygous mutation (c.1A > G, p.Met1Val) was identified . This mutation is recorded in ClinVar Database , but not observed in Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) Database . At the same time, copy number loss at the CDC73 gene locus was identified in the jaw tumor DNA , indicating of a somatic second hit. Furthermore, the germline CDC73 mutation was verified by sanger DNA sequencing . In addition, the PBMC genomic DNA from family members of the proband were evaluated for this mutation. As was expected, the same germline CDC73 heterozygous mutation (c.1A > G) was observed in proband’s father, II:2 .