In January 2019, a 39-year-old right-handed woman from a European country presented to our department with a 1.5-year history of deteriorating right arm shaking and coordination. She reported limitations in almost all activities of daily living involving her right hand, which forced her to use her left hand mainly; she did not complain about walking difficulties or falls. She experienced learning difficulties and was later diagnosed with cataracts in the right eye and secondary amenorrhea. In addition, the patient’s sister reported hospitalization a few days after birth (without complications) because of diarrhea and vomiting, which responded well to the strict temporary consumption of lactose-free milk (without a formal diagnosis). She was otherwise healthy, did not follow a lactose/galactose-restricted diet in adulthood, and had no family history of neurological disease, although she reported that her parents were consanguine.
Neurological examination revealed a persisting, postural, and intentional tremor of the dominant upper extremity, hypermetria with overshooting upon release, hyperreflexia with bilateral positive Babinski’s sign, gait ataxia, slight dysarthria, square-wave jerks, but no other abnormal eye movements. Pouring water between cups was only possible by adduction of the right arm against the body and flection of the elbow to partly suppress tremor activity. Anyhow, it led to a massive spillage of water. Other relieving factors or triggers were neither noted nor reported. We did not notice rest tremor. Furthermore, the Montreal Cognitive Assessment test indicated mild deficits in visuospatial and executive function and recall memory (21/30 points).
Based on the patient’s history and physical findings, we postulated an adult-onset progressive cerebellar ataxia with pyramidal and cognitive dysfunction. We then performed a three-stage diagnostic evaluation (, partly performed by the referring neurologist), which yielded no clear explanation of the patient’s symptoms. The laboratory tests were performed according to the recommendations of the German Neurological Society for the workup and management of Ataxias . Our investigation revealed two key findings. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed mild frontal lobe cortical atrophy and diffuse hyperintense lesions in the centrum semiovale and the pons (a, b). Second, carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT) levels were more than three times the upper limit of normal (disialo-transferrin 5.68 [<1.7] %). However, the patient denied alcohol consumption.
Considering the patient’s medical history (neonatal diarrhea and vomiting, cataracts, amenorrhea, cognitive difficulties, motor coordination problems, and parental consanguinity) and the secondary CDT elevation in untreated carbohydrate metabolism disorders, we assumed galactosemia to be the most likely diagnosis. We then confirmed our hypothesis by detection of elevated erythrocyte Gal-1P concentration (3.47 [0.18–0.57] mg/dL) and reduced erythrocyte GALT enzyme activity (1.0 [21.3–38.4] μmol/h/g hemoglobin), whereas plasma galactose was 0.01 (<0.27) mmol/L. Liver function test results were normal [alanine transaminase, 14 (<35) IU/L; aspartate transaminase, 22 (<35) IU/L; and alkaline phosphatase 75 (35–104) IU/L]. Clinicians should confirm the diagnosis of classical galactosemia by measuring GALT enzyme activity in red blood cells (absent or significantly decreased) and/or GALT gene analysis, per the International Clinical Guideline for the Management of Classical Galactosemia . In this clear situation, we decided not to perform genetic testing.
The patient and her relatives were informed about the disease in detail. The patient’s condition remained stable with strict adherence to the recommended galactose-restricted and lactose-free diets, regular physiotherapy, and speech therapy. Attempts to control her debilitating tremor using propranolol, topiramate, and clonazepam were unsuccessful. Nevertheless, with dietary treatment, Gal-1P levels were reduced, but consistently over 1 mg/dL (1.92 and 2.85 [0.18–0.57] mg/dL, August 2022), whereas plasma galactose was <0.1 (<0.27) mmol/L, and CDT levels returned to normal. This constellation and the clinical course with primary ovarian insufficiency suggested classical galactosemia rather than clinical variant galactosemia.