The 5 year old female child enjoyed good health in the past until three days before the admission when she began to have high fever, vomiting and diarrhea. The child was treated by the mother with different formulation of acetaminophen as suppositories 250 mg and tablets 500 mg every 3 hours for three consecutive days. The used dose of acetaminophen was calculated by the physician at the admission time to Pediatric Intensive Care Unit of UHC, being approximately 90 mg/kg/24h for the last 72 hours. No other concomitant medication was administered.
At the admission the child presented with high fever, vomiting, confusion, drowsiness alternated with agitation especially to external stimuli. On examination, absent neck stiffness, Babinski response was negative, pupils were slightly midriatic, corneal reflex was present, sensible only to pain according to AVPU evaluation and was classified as grade II to III of encephalopathy, dehydrated and icteric. The arterial pressure was 90/50 mmHg, heart rate was 160/min, the respiratory rate was 45/min the temperature was 39°C, the pulsoximeter 97% saturation in room air. Abdominal palpation revealed liver enlargement 2-3 cm under the costal arch, and a soft palpable abdomen. The bedside blood sugar was 45 mg/dl, ALT 5794 UI/L, AST 6000 UI/L, Total Bilirubine 3.5 mg/dl, INR 3.86, blood urea 80 mg/dl, blood creatinine 1.3 mg/dl, 8GT 60 UI/l, Na+ 111 mmol/l, K+3.5 mmol/l. The blood albumin level 3 g/dl, Red blood cells 4.4*1012/L, Hemoglobine 12.3 g/dl, Platelets 332*109/L, White blood cell 25*109/L C reactive Protein 70 mg/dl. A careful disease history was taken and acetaminophen poisoning was strongly suspected. The blood acetaminophen obtained 10 hours after the last administered dose, was sent abroad having the positive result 32.9 mg/l. The viral serologic profile includes HIV, HEV, HAV, HCV, HBV, Coksaxie Virus, influenza A, B, Adeno Virus, was negative. The chest radiograph was normal. Blood culture failed to isolate any microorganism. NAC was immediately given by nasogastric tube as the only drug formulation the hospital could provide according to the standard oral guideline with 140 mg/kg loading dose followed by 70 mg/kg every 4 hours for a total of 18 doses over 72 hours. Oral feeding was stopped and the hydration was maintained by electrolytic solution.
After administration of 18 oral recommended NAC doses of hepatic failure treatment protocol, the renal indicators as blood creatinine, blood urea and the liver enzymes were improved but without INR. The coagulopathy aggravated with clinical manifestations of melena and hematemesis despite the therapy with fresh frozen plasma, Vitamin K, Human Albumin, Acid tranexamic, Lactulose. Abdomen became painful and the blood sugar 340 mg/dl, hypernatremia 160 meq/l, hypokalemia 2.7 meq/l. Acute pancreatitis was suspected and confirmed by hyperamylasaemia 255 UI/l, hyperlypasaemia 514 UI/l, and ultrasound examination which revealed a swollen pancreas and minimal peritoneal liquid at Douglas space. Accordingly the therapy was modified to parenteral hydration, fluid and electrolytes correction and reduces enteral stimulation. A further 24 hours of NCA treatment was added until the INR and pancreatic enzyme decline.
As the patient condition improved in terms of hepatic failure and clinical acute pancreatitis, the fever remained high with chills and high spikes. The patient developed left leg pain with thrombophlebitis and coccygofemoral arthritis.
The repeated blood culture finally isolated Klebsiella pneumoniae despite the extendum spectrum antibiotics (Cefuroxime 150 mg/kg/day and gentamicin 5 mg/kg/day) and the therapy was adopted according to antibiotic susceptibility (Piperacillin-Tazobactam and Amikacin) supported with Pentaglobine. This situation required also the use of anticoagulant (Fraxiparin 2850 UI s/c) and Ibuprofen. Despite the long progress of the disease the child recovered totally within 29 days with a complete resolution of all clinical and laboratory abnormalities. The liver function tests remained in normal range during the following up of 1st, 3rd, 6th and 12th month.