A 57-year-old male patient with overweight (weight 97 kg, height 186 cm, BMI 28 kg/m2) presented to the emergency department at University Hospital with a 24-h history of multiple episodes of light-headedness. His medical history included ischemic heart disease treated with stent placement in 2017 and long-term aspirin use without any previous abdominal surgery. The patient was haemodynamically stable, and physical examination showed no abdominal pain. Digital rectal examination unveiled melena. Blood analysis showed a haemoglobin level of 10.5 g/dL, leukocytes of 8.2 × 103/μL, and C-reactive protein of 13.92 mg/L; finally, arterial lactate levels were measured at 3.0 mmol/L. During his stay in the emergency unit, the patient passed two melanic stools, and his haemoglobin levels dropped to 8.6 g/dL. A first upper endoscopy showed no active bleeding and no lesion.
The patient was admitted to the middle care unit, where he experienced haemodynamic instability and a further drop in haemoglobin levels to 7.0 g/dL. Abdominal CT did not reveal any active bleeding or suspicious gastrointestinal neoplasm. A second diagnostic gastroscopy and a colonoscopy were also carried out but yielded no significant findings. On the fourth day, due to persistent melena and the transfusion of four units of blood since admission, an upper endoscopy was repeated. This endoscopy extended to the jejunum and revealed a submucosal lesion measuring 20 mm, located approximately 40 cm distally to the ligament of Treitz, and a fresh blood clot was observed . An MRI of the gastrointestinal lumen did not contribute to the diagnosis. Given the clinical findings, the decision was made to proceed with an exploratory laparoscopy. During the procedure, the segment of the jejunum containing the observed mass was resected, followed by a side-to-side peristaltic anastomosis. The patient was discharged on the sixth day postoperatively without any complications.
The gross analysis of the jejunectomy specimen showed a central stenosis. After opening the jejunal segment, a rounded purplish protuberance of the mucosa measuring 0.8 × 0.8 cm was found, centred by a millimetre-sized ulcer (A). On cross-section after formalin fixation, the tumour presented a cut surface made of a whitish capsule with bloody content, measuring 1 × 0.8 × 0.8 cm. The tumour was intramural, limited to the submucosa layer (B). No other macroscopic lesion was seen.
Histological analysis revealed a large vascular structure in the superficial submucosal layer, partially thrombosed and repermeabilised (C). An ulceration of the mucosa above the tumour was seen (D). Numerous papillary structures with cores of fibrin and lined by a single layer of plump endothelial cells were seen (E). There were no significant atypia, no mitotic figures, and no necrosis. A final diagnosis of completely resected submucosal papillary endothelial hyperplasia associated with a mucosal ulcer was retained. No additional treatment or follow-up was indicated for this benign tumour in a rare location.