A 62-year-old woman presented to our outpatient clinic with an 8-day history of painless gross hematuria. She had seen local general physician a few days before this presentation and was prescribed antibiotic for a presumed urinary tract infection, which helpless. She has no significant past medical history and physical examination was unremarkable. Ultrasonography revealed normal upper urinary tracts and a long strip, 4.2 cm × 1.2 cm sized, hypoechogenic mass floating in the bladder, with its pedicle located at the bladder base . Cystoscopic examination revealed blood clot and a pulsatile hemorrhage from the right bladder base . She went back to local hospital and transurethral electrocoagulation was performed as initial treatment. The hematuria resolved immediately. Therefore, the Foley catheter were removed and the patient was discharged at 2 days post the first operation. One day after discharge, the patient represented to our emergency department with severe hematuria. The patient appeared to be hemodynamically stable; however, the bloods tests revealed a life-threatening drop in her hemoglobin levels from 12.3 to 6.4 g/dL (normal range 11.3-15.1 g/dL). The blood fibrinogen level was grossly abnormal at 0.4 g/L (normal range 2.0-4.0 g/L). Supportive transfusion was provided. A pelvic CT scan was implemented as a further investigation, which surprisingly showed dilated pri-vesical artery on the right-side, a blood clot in the bladder; and the contrast blush suggestive of a pseudoaneurysm . Therefore, angiography with a retrograde catheterization from left common femoral artery was taken, which confirmed the right superior vesical arterial pseudoaneurysm as the source of bleeding . A successful endoluminal occlusion of the anterior trunk of the right internal iliac artery embolization with coils was performed . Urine gradually cleared during the next 2 days. Seven days later, she claimed only mild vesical pain which could be resolved by oral intake of solifenacin. Therefore, the Foley catheter was removed and the patient was discharged at 10 days after second operation.
During a follow up period of 4 months, CT angiography (CTA) revealed complete occlusion of superior vesical artery, and a duplex cystoscopy showed nomoral bladder . The patient is currently asymptomatic.