A 43-year-old man consulted his primary care doctor with a complaint of a headache. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed no abnormal findings. The patient became febrile on day 3 of illness and gradually became more disoriented. He was admitted to our hospital on day 10, as he appeared to be aggravated with abnormal speech and behavior. The patient had no relevant medical history or any contact with patients with tuberculosis. Although he worked for the Japan Self-defense Forces, he had no history of overseas missions.
He had clouding of consciousness and a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 10 (E4V1M5). The body temperature was 38.8°C, and chest sounds were clear. Laboratory findings revealed a mild inflammatory reaction indicated by a white blood cell count of 6,600 × 103/mL and C-reactive protein level of 1.42 mg/dL. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed a pressure of 30 cmH2O, cell count 139 × 103/mL (129 × 103/mL mononuclear cells), protein level 142 mg/dL, sugar level 20 mg/dL (117 mg/dL simultaneous blood glucose), and chlorine level 104 mEq/L. The acid-fast bacteria smear culture test of CSF and India ink staining were both negative. The total score of Thwaites’ criteria was 1. Chest X-ray and chest and abdominal CT showed no abnormal findings. Brain diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a high-intensity spotty lesion at the splenium of the corpus callosum .
The patient was diagnosed with meningitis and treatment was started with intravenous meropenem hydrate at 2 g every 8 h as well as aciclovir at 10 mg/kg every 8 h. On day 14, an emergency external ventricular drainage (EVD) system was inserted to treat acute hydrocephalus with a GCS score of 8 (E2V4M2) . The next day, tuberculous meningitis was suspected, and the patient was treated with the following four antitubercular drugs: 5 mg/kg/day isoniazid (INH), 600 mg/day rifampicin (RFP), 2 g/day pyrazinamide (PZA), and 1 g/day ethambutol (EB). In addition, the patient was treated with 13.2 mg/day dexamethasone sodium phosphate. On day 18 of illness, brain MRI revealed multiple high-intensity spotty lesions with diffusion-weighted imaging and abnormal gadolinium enhancement and thickening of the meninges with T1-weighted imaging. Brain magnetic resonance angiography showed multiple stenoses of the bilateral internal carotid arteries .
Following EVD, the patient’s consciousness improved to a GCS score of 11 (E3V3M5). The dose of dexamethasone sodium phosphate was gradually reduced and changed to 1 mg/kg/day prednisolone, which was also gradually reduced. Acyclovir was discontinued on day 28 as the CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was negative for herpes, and the EVD tube was removed the next day. However, on day 29, spinal drainage was carried out secondary to worsening consciousness due to the reaggravation of hydrocephalus.
On day 33, treatment with meropenem hydrate was discontinued because the CSF PCR test was positive for tuberculosis. Furthermore, the PCR test of the sputum was negative for tuberculosis. On day 40, CSF findings improved with a cell count of 11 × 103/mL (6 × 103/mL mononuclear cells), protein level 70 mg/dL, and sugar level 47 mg/dL. A VP shunt was surgically placed on day 48.
Eventually, on day 61, the patient was relocated to a rehabilitation hospital with a modified Rankin Scale score of 3 with attention and memory impairment . He returned to work with only mild weakness of the left lower limb (modified Rankin Scale score of 1) 10 months after illness.