Four years ago, an 85-year-old woman experienced abdominal pain and consulted another hospital. She was diagnosed with bowel obstruction and hospitalized; her symptoms were relieved by conservative treatment. When the patient again experienced fever and abdominal pain, she consulted other hospitals and was hospitalized for bowel obstruction. CT demonstrated small intestine incarceration to the right sciatic hernia, which was thought to be the cause of the intestinal obstruction. After her symptoms were alleviated through conservative treatment, she was referred to our hospital. Physical examination revealed the following: height, 142 cm; weight, 38.5 kg (body mass index: 19.1). CT revealed that the small intestine had herniated into the sciatic foramen and the oral side of the small intestine had dilated . Furthermore, a right dilated superior gluteal vein without findings indicative of small bowel obstruction was observed .
The patient was treated laparoscopically using three trocars and was positioned in a head-down position. The hernia was clearly evident in the suprapiriformis position of the greater sciatic foramen. Hernia orifice, 2.5 cm in diameter, was confirmed inside the right external iliac artery and outside the right ureter . The peritoneum was opened above the hernia orifice, and an extraperitoneal space was bluntly dissected. An ureterohypogastric nerve fascia (UNF) and a vesicohypogastric fascia (VF) were identified, and the fasciae were mobilized inside from the pelvic wall . This maneuver made it possible to separate the ureter and urinary bladder, which might have otherwise incarcerated in the hernia. As the tip of the hernia sac fell into the suprapiriform foramen, the hernia was diagnosed as a suprapiriform foramen hernia. The hernia defect was repaired with a Mesh Light Perfix Plug® (Bard Surgical, Cranston, RI). The plug was inserted into the hernia; an on-lay patch was placed over the plug . The overlying parietal peritoneum was closed with absorbable sutures. The patient had an uneventful recovery. One year postoperatively, hernia recurrence was not observed on CT.