The case was of a 95-year-old man with a history of hypertension and dyslipidemia who was on hydrochlorothiazide and simvastatin. He presented to our hospital with abdominal pain and frequent vomiting. The patient was suffering from longstanding constipation. He used to habitually insert a rubber hose into his anal canal and use a hydrostatic water tap to relieve his constipation. He gave a history of performing this habit 24 hours before his presentation.
The patient was distressed with a temperature of 36.5°C, a respiratory rate of 30 per minute, a heart rate of 130 per minute, and blood pressure of 130/65 mmHg on physical examinations. Abdominal examination revealed a tender, non-distended abdomen with guarding allover. A soft stool with an enlarged, firm prostate was revealed during a digital rectal examination.
Intravenous fluid, analgesia, and broad-spectrum antibiotics were used to rapidly resuscitate the patient. The patient could not tolerate standing for an upright chest X-ray, and a supine abdominal X-ray showed a suspicion of free air .
He was found to have a low white blood cell count of 1.5 × 103/μ L, a hemoglobin level of 10.2 g/L, a platelet count of 194 × 109/L, and an international normalized ratio of 1.4.
The diagnosis of bowel perforation with fecal peritonitis was made. Various causes were considered including stercoral perforation. However, based on the clinical context, self-induced hydrostatic colonic irrigation was the most likely cause of perforation.
The patient was stratified as an ASA IV and taken to the operating room at high risk of death and perioperative complications. An emergency midline laparotomy was performed, which revealed fecal matter all over the abdomen and a 2-cm free perforation of the sigmoid colon in addition to multiple diverticula in which some of them were included in the tear .
Abdominal washout and Hartmann’s procedure were carried out. He was shifted to the intensive care unit for critical continuous monitoring. Unfortunately, the patient died of multi-organ failure two days after surgery.
Pathological examination of the resected sigmoid colon confirmed the presence of sigmoid diverticula with a 2-cm tear.