The patient was a 75-year-old Japanese female who presented with chief complaints of fever and diarrhea. The past history, family history, and personal/occupational history were unremarkable. A diagnosis of small cell carcinoma of the thymus (cT4N2M1 stage IV) was made on January 19, 2010. Chemotherapy was started with carboplatin (CBDCA) + etoposide (VP-16) (Chemotherapy for small cell carcinoma of the thymus has not established. We performed the chemotherapy for small cell of the thymus using the regimen for small cell lung carcinoma as reference.) on the same day, and a total of four courses were administered. The tumor decreased in size following this treatment and the response was assessed as partial response (PR). Relapse of the tumor was detected in July, and chemotherapy with CBDCA + VP-16 was resumed due to sensitive relapse. Findings on chest-abdominal computed tomography (CT) performed for evaluation on October 12 after two courses of treatment suggested the possibility of peritoneal dissemination. However, the tumor response was assessed as stable disease (SD), and the treatment was continued. While receiving this treatment, the patient complained of constipation, which was dealt with symptomatically. On December 21 (the 7th day of the third course of chemotherapy), the patient developed chills, fever, and diarrhea, and was admitted on December 22 with a diagnosis of severe infection as an adverse event during chemotherapy. Vital signs were normal, except for a body temperature of 38.7°C. Chest auscultation revealed no abnormal findings. Examination of the abdomen also revealed no abnormalities, except for slight generalized tenderness. Laboratory examination revealed the following: hematology: pancytopenia (WBC 2,900/μL, RBC 335 × 104/μL, Hb 10.2 g/dL, Plt 10.1 × 104/μL); blood biochemistry: slight deterioration of liver function and electrolyte abnormalities (AST 37 U/L, ALT 30 U/L, LDH 250 U/L, ALP 454 U/L, γ-GTP 214 U/L, Na 132 mmol/L, Cl 95 mmol/L), and significant increase in serum CRP (CRP 32.76 mg/dL); blood coagulation profile: elevation of serum levels of FDP (FDP 22.5 μg/mL); serum tumor marker levels: within normal range. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed evidence of respiratory alkalosis (pH 7.532, pCO2 28.5 Torr, pO2 70.4 Torr, HCO3 23.8 mmol/L). Although Enterococcus faecalis was detected in the urine, urine microscopy revealed only 5-9 WBC/HPF, not suggestive of urinary tract infection . Influenza test was negative. A chest X-ray revealed no abnormal findings . Chest CT showed an increase in the size of the small cell carcinoma tumor arising from the thymus in the anterior mediastinum . Abdominal CT revealed mild ascites and prominent irregular granular shadows of the greater omentum and the mesentery , suggestive of peritoneal dissemination.
The focus of the infection was unclear, but since the patient was a compromised host, enteric bacterial infection was assumed and treatment was started empirically with cefepime (CFPM) 3 g/day. Samples were collected for two sets of blood culture at the time of admission. Because of a fall in blood pressure and neutropenia on December 25, the antimicrobial drug was switched to meropenem (MEPM) 1.5 g/day, and administration of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) was started. On December 26, L. monocytogenes was identified in both sets of blood culture bottle, in BacT/ALERT blood cultures by direct inoculation into the Vitek 2 system (This serotype is not known.). On December 28, with recovery of the neutrophil count, the antibiotic was again changed to ampicillin (ABPC) 4 g/day in consideration of the bacterial sensitivity. The patient then recovered gradually and was discharged on January 10, 2011.