A 23-year-old asymptomatic man with no past medical history, who had a family history of structural heart disease and arrhythmias in various members of his paternal family line , decided to consult the clinic. The patient presented with a genetic analysis revealing sequencing of the exon 1 of the LMNA 1 gene, describing a new genetic variant F113LfsX116 g551delT; a Frame Shift type heterozygous mutation done in infancy because of his extensive family history. After the death of the patient’s father, and considering the extensive family history in cardiac pathologies, the family physician recommended performing genetic analysis to evaluate for genetic cardiomyopathies. Because the results showed an unknown mutation, with uncertain clinical significance, the patient was counselled to have a cardiac evaluation when he was an adult.
The physical examination was uneventful. Complementary studies were normal, including electrocardiogram, NT-proB-type natriuretic peptide blood test, a 24 h electrocardiographic Holter, and a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE), with a normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and global longitudinal strain of −18.5% . A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no structural or functional alterations or abnormalities in late gadolinium enhancement.
Four months later, the patient remained asymptomatic, and the outpatient evaluation was carried out without pathological findings. Twelve months after the first visit, a nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT) and first-degree atrioventricular block were identified in a 24 h electrocardiographic Holter . The patient remained asymptomatic with a normal physical examination. The TTE revealed a normal LVEF and a global longitudinal strain of −19%.
The case was discussed with a multidisciplinary committee. We considered a male patient carrier of a frameshift type heterozygous mutation of the LMNA exon 1 gene (genetic variant F113LfsX116 g551delT). Because of the presence of NSVT and first-degree atrioventricular block (which are two high-risk features for sudden death), the final decision was to carry out an ICD. The clinical scenario and the recommended intervention were discussed with the patient, who agreed with the procedure, which later was performed without complications. A follow-up plan consisted of device analysis every 6 months, yearly echocardiograms, and MRI depending on the results. The patient is not interested in having children. A year after the procedure, there has not been any documented discharges from the device.