A 39-year-old man presented to our hospital with the complaints of double vision and memory impairment. He had suffered from anorexia and weight loss in the preceding 6 months, and diplopia and memory impairment in the preceding 3 months. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 22 mm large homogeneous contrast-enhanced lesion located mainly in the dorsal midbrain, including the bilateral superior colliculi. A 6 mm contrast-enhancing lesion was also identified in the right medial thalamus approximating the lesion. These lesions exhibited low signal intensity on diffusion-weighted images (DWI); fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images revealed extensive high signal intensity around the lesions, while the lesion itself was isointense. In the midbrain lesion, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) accumulation was also observed on 18F-FDG-positron emission tomography [-]. Cerebral angiography revealed no tumor staining, and chest and abdominal computed tomography revealed no neoplastic lesions. We suspected glioma or malignant lymphoma of the central nervous system as a preoperative differential diagnosis and performed an open biopsy using the right occipital transtentorial approach (OTA). We reached the quadrigeminal cistern and confirmed the location of the lesion through navigation. The superior colliculus was mildly enlarged, and the surface was discolored, appearing pale pink . A 4 mm specimen was resected from the right superior colliculus. The pineal gland was normal in size and appearance. Postoperatively, the patient recovered without neurological deterioration. As the rapid pathological diagnosis suggested lymphoproliferative disease, steroids were initiated 1 day postoperatively, and the lesion shrank transiently. Pathological examination revealed undifferentiated cells with a large round nucleus and prominent nucleoli associated with small lymphocytic infiltration, suggesting a germ cell tumor [ and ]. Immunohistochemically, the atypical cells were positive for C-kit and placental alkaline phosphatase [ and d]. Based on these results, germinoma was diagnosed. Blood tests performed after diagnosis revealed HCG-β ≤0.10 ng/mL and AFP 0.6 ng/mL, which were within normal limits.
The patient was treated with three courses of carboplatin 450 mg/m2 + etoposide 150 mg/m2, followed by whole-ventricle irradiation (WVI) at 24 Gy in 16 fractions .
Immediately after completing the entire course, MRI confirmed the disappearance of the contrast-enhancing lesions [ and c]. Outpatient follow-up was continued, and no recurrence or decline in performance status was observed until 5 years postoperatively. No late radiation morbidity such as leukoencephalopathy was observed .