A 15-year-old girl born prematurely with a low birth weight (696 g) developed meconium obstruction without mucoviscidosis when she was 5 days old. A 3-cm section of her small intestine, including a stenotic lesion 35 cm from the ligament of Treitz, was resected. An ileostomy was performed 65 cm from the ligament of Treitz. The ileostomy was reversed 6 months later, with no further complications.
A day prior to the current presentation, the patient experienced intermittent lower abdominal pain and was emergently transported to a local hospital with presyncope and convulsions, which both occurred at 07:00 on the day of the consultation. There were no abnormal findings on head computed tomography (CT) or abdominal ultrasonography. Her haemoglobin level was 11.8 g/dL (reference range: 11.6–14.8 g/dL). The patient was sent home. Massive melena occurred at approximately 14:00. Furthermore, she had difficulty maintaining an upright position and was therefore again urgently transported to the local hospital. Her haemoglobin level had decreased to 6.7 g/dL over the 7-h period since her morning visit to the hospital. Although blood transfusion was started, massive melena persisted, and she was transferred to our hospital at 23:00. The patient’s height and weight were 160 cm and 45 kg, respectively. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 14/15 (eye opening 3, best verbal response 5, best motor response 6), her blood pressure was 109/51 mmHg, and her pulse was 76 bpm in the Trendelenburg position. However, her blood pressure dropped to 73/36 mmHg, her consciousness further decreased, and she went into shock during the examination. Mild oppressive pain in the lower abdomen was noted. There was no increase in C-reactive protein, and the patient also tested negative for coronavirus, norovirus, adenovirus, and faecal bacteria. Contrast-enhanced abdominopelvic CT examination showed massive bleeding in the colon, but the source was not identifiable. The patient was subsequently diagnosed with haemorrhagic shock due to lower gastrointestinal bleeding. Thereafter, emergency endoscopy was performed under general anaesthesia. In the operating room, systolic blood pressure dropped into the 60s, necessitating an intraoperative transfusion of 1600 mL of blood. Although no abnormalities were detected in the upper gastrointestinal tract, lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed massive blood flow from the terminal ileum, and the patient was diagnosed with small bowel haemorrhage. The decision was made to perform open surgery. Intraoperative findings included irregular dilation in the ileum 40 cm from the ileocecal junction, and a scar presumed to be the anastomotic site was also noted . Dark red stagnant intestinal content was clearly observed on fluoroscopy. An incision made in the direction of the long axis revealed microulceration with exposed vessels on the mesentery and persistent bleeding . Since suturing alone was not sufficient to achieve haemostasis, a cuneiform incision was made at the same site, and haemostasis was achieved. Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen showed microulceration with a partial epithelial defect and inflammatory cell infiltration . No abnormalities were observed in the surrounding membranes. An ileal Dieulafoy lesion was diagnosed based on the appearance of slightly distended arteries and veins in the submucosa of the ulcerated site. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on day 11 of hospitalization. She recovered well enough to participate in her school’s athletic competition 2 months later.