A 17-year-old male was remitted to the allergist because he presented evanescent, erythematous lesions with any food consumption. He had been seen by other specialists because of this symptomatology and given the relation between the occurrence of symptoms and food ingestion there was the suspicion of food allergies. Along with these lesions he also presented conjunctival injection, warmth and diaphoresis after the lesions disappeared. He stated circumstances like standing for a long time, valsalva and strong emotions also triggered the symptoms. He denied abdominal pain, diarrhea, coughing or wheezing.
The initial physical exam was normal; no lesions were observed. While in consult we decided to trigger the symptoms. The patient was asked to eat; the first time he had coffee and a piece of chocolate cake. Nine minutes after the ingestion he presented an evanescent erythematous rash on the face, trunk and extremities , which lasted 12 min and resolved spontaneously. The lesions were flat, non-pruriginous, nor painful and didn’t leave any bruising after disappearing. Given the characteristics of the lesions, the diagnosis of urticaria was discarded. In order to dismiss the suspicion of a food allergy, we asked him to drink only water and once again the rash appeared. We consequently established there was no correlation with any specific food. Based on the characteristics of the rash, we determined it corresponded to a flushing, with an atypical presentation, as it was present in lower extremities and hands.
As the patient only presented flushing, we considered carcinoid syndrome an unlikely differential diagnosis, because it usually includes abdominal pain, diarrhea, wheezing or bronchoconstriction. Also, carcinoid syndrome is related to the release of serotonin in NETs, which is an improbable pathology in a teenager. Nonetheless, during his workup the 24-h urinary sample of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, a metabolite of serotonin, was 42.6 mg, reference value is less than 10 mg/24 h and serum chromogranin A was normal. It was unusually high taking into account the patient, as part of the preparation for this test, was avoiding drugs and foods with high serotonin levels such as avocado, walnuts, banana, pineapple, among others [, ]. Therefore, the flushing observed was somehow associated to endogenous serotonin hypersecretion. There was a high suspicion of a NET and thus we ordered a CT scan. The CT scan showed thickening of the distal ileum and multiple lesions on both hepatic lobules . To further evaluate these lesions, a colonoscopy was done which revealed a prominent ileocecal valve with a mammillated and eroded lesion. The hepatic and intestinal biopsies identified a well-differentiated grade 2 primary NET of the ileocecal valve with hepatic metastasis. Treatment was established; he was started on octreotide LAR 30 mg intramuscular monthly and underwent a wide hepatectomy and right hemicolectomy, with initial improvement of the symptoms.
Two years later the follow up visits showed evidence the patient had tumor progression in his liver. This suggests that the octreotide was not sufficient to block the effect of the neuroamines produced by the tumor. Everolimus 10 mg p.o. daily was started in combination with octreotide LAR in an attempt to control symptoms and tumor progression. Also, with the evident progression of hepatic lesions, the patient has so far been taken to four radiofrequency ablations in order to counteract its growth. The Endocrine Service continues to follow this patient and based on current disease evolution, more interventions will most likely be needed.