A 64-year-old pure Japanese male with end-stage idiopathic chronic kidney disease, scheduled to receive a living ABO-incompatible renal transplant from his wife, was referred to our renal transplant center in April 2012. His past medical history included angina pectoris and cholecystitis. Physical and laboratory findings were normal, except for the abnormal findings related to end-stage renal disease. The protocol for antibody removal before the transplant consisted of double-filtration plasmapheresis and rituximab. The induction immunosuppressive regimen included a combination of prolonged-release tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, methylprednisolone, and basiliximab. Renal transplantation was performed in December 2012. The postoperative clinical course was normal, and the patient was discharged 21 days after the renal transplantation, with a serum creatinine level of 0.78 mg/dl. Three months after the renal transplantation, the patient was admitted to our hospital with fever and general fatigue. Clinical examination, including chest and abdominal computed tomography, blood and urine culture, and cardiac ultrasound, revealed no abnormal findings, and the symptoms improved after antibiotic treatment. Three months later, the patient complained of fever and macroscopic hematuria. Cystoscopic examination revealed edema and bleeding in the left anterior region of the bladder . Because cold biopsy of the abnormal mucosa showed no malignant cells on hematoxylin–eosin staining , at that time, the bladder abnormality was suspected to be caused by viral hemorrhagic cystitis. The macroscopic hematuria stopped 3 days after dose reduction of the immunosuppressive drugs. Subsequently, the patient presented with intermittent fever, which resolved spontaneously within a few days. In May 2014, he presented with fever, general fatigue, and urinary retention and was re-admitted to our hospital. Ten days after admission, he required an artificial respirator and was transferred to an intensive care unit in circulatory shock. Because the precise cause for the aggravation of his general condition, frequent episodes of fever, and continuation of general fatigue was not clarified, his wife offered more details about the patient’s medical history. She stated that he had recurrent high fever since the age of 40 years and that his younger brother was suspected to have a familial autoinflammatory syndrome. After written informed consent, the patient’s serum sample was sent to the Department of Pediatrics at the Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine for screening mutations and polymorphisms associated with hereditary autoinflammatory diseases. The ethics committee of the Akita University School of Medicine approved the use of human samples in the present study. During waiting the results of the genetic test, the patient continued rehabilitation at a related hospital. However, 2 months after discharge from our hospital, he presented with fever and heart failure and was re-admitted. At that time, he was found to be homozygous for the Mediterranean fever (MEFV) mutation (M694V/M694V) . Based on the presence of the MEFV mutation and the patient’s history, he was diagnosed with FMF. Treatment with colchicine was planned, but the patient died from heart failure in October 2014. We re-evaluated the pathological findings of the various tissue biopsies obtained during his treatment after the renal transplantation because FMF is known to be associated with systemic amyloidosis. Immunohistochemistry revealed amyloid deposits in the abnormal bladder region , transplanted kidney, and myocardium, which was diagnosed as AA amyloidosis associated with FMF.