Two patients of Italian ethnicity, a 52-year-old man (Patient 1) and a 76-year-old man (Patient 2), with clinical signs of increased intracranial pressure were admitted to our institution. Pre-operative neuroradiological studies (computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)) were performed. The patients underwent surgical treatment and received radiotherapy at a 54.9 Gy dose and concomitant chemotherapy with temozolomide.
Fresh surgical specimens were frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after removal, and were treated immediately upon arrival at the laboratory. Isolation of DNA from these specimens was performed using the ChargeSwitch gDNA Micro Tissue Kit (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany). Isolation of total RNA from the surgical specimens was performed using the PureLink™ Micro-toMidi™ Total RNA Purification System following the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen).
TP53 exons 5-8 and all PTEN exons were analyzed by the sequencing of various tumor regions. Each exon was polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified. Sequence reactions were performed with a BigDye Terminator v3.1-kit (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) using both forward and reverse primers. Finally, the sequences were read by an automated sequence reader (ABI PRISM 3130, Applied Biosystems).
For CGH analysis, a custom 60-mer amino modified oligo-microarray was used, containing 6000 spots, specific to 287 chromosomal regions implicated in cancer. Labeling reactions were performed on purified restricted DNA using the BioPrime Array CGH Genomic Labeling System (Invitrogen). Experimental and reference targets were hybridized for 14 to 18 hours at 42°C. After washing, slides were scanned using an Affymetrix 428 array scanner (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
For LOH analysis, a custom 30-mer amino modified oligo-micro array was used. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were chosen to represent markers for 2q14.3, 2q22.1, 3q13, 7q22, 10q22-10q23, 12q14, 13q14, 16q22 17p.13.1, and 19q13.2. Two 30-mer oligonucleotides per locus were designed to represent the alternate alleles of each SNP. Each oligonucleotide consisted of a 12-nucleotide hairpin and an 18- to 21-nucleotide target sequence with the polymorphic base in the middle.
A custom 60-mer amino modified oligo-array was used, containing 800 probes specific for genes commonly altered in cancer. RNA was labelled using the SuperScript Indirect RNA Amplification System (Invitrogen). The resulting amplified amino-allyl aRNA was dyed using Cy3 for test samples and Cy5 for reference samples.
The microarray expression results were validated by quantitative real-time PCR, using an ABI 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to analyze statistical significance.
The DNA methylation patterns in the CpG island of the O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), p16, deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) and death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) genes were determined by sodium bisulfite treatment and subsequent methylation-specific PCR MS PCR. Primers for MS PCR were designed to encompass the CpG-rich area of the promoter region around the transcription initiation site.
The neuroradiological studies (CT scan and MRI) indicated gliomatosis cerebri Type II. Both patients underwent surgical removal of the focal mass and biopsies in the adjacent areas, and received temozolomide and radiation therapy postoperatively. At the 24-month follow-up, after chemo- and radiation therapy, Patient 1 was still alive with impaired neurological conditions, while Patient 2 had died.
The histological study on the removed masses revealed a diffuse proliferation of neoplastic spindle cells with rod-shaped nuclei infiltrating the brain parenchyma in both patients. Such cells appeared arranged in short chains parallel to nervous fibers, in the shape of a high-grade malignant neoplasm. These aspects were compatible with the pre-operative diagnosis of gliomatosis cerebri Type II. Paraffin-embedded sections were stained by the immunoperoxidase method which yielded the following results: positive staining reaction to glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and to S100 protein .
In Patient 1, bidirectional sequencing revealed a mutation in codon 248 of TP53, with arginine to tryptophan substitution . Patient 2 carried an intronic point mutation in the PTEN gene, which altered the splice donor site within intron 2 and therefore likely caused expression of an aberrantly spliced mRNA . These same mutations were observed in all of the tumor regions.
CGH analysis did not detect any CDKN2A (9p21) deletion (confirmed by LOH) and no CDK4 or MDM2 amplification in either patient. Patient 2 showed a gain in the EGFR gene copy number. These analyses revealed the deletion of the p27kip1 gene locus, no aberrations of CDKN1A (p21), and losses of 2q, 3p, 16q and 19q and gains of 7q in both patients (data not shown).
The results of cDNA gene expression profiling are reported in , while shows a scatterplot with a 2-fold threshold. Genes found to be overexpressed were:
- transcriptional regulators (including ZNF258, EYA2, EGR1, JUNB) and intracellular signal transduction genes (RGS7, EHD3, CS1, ITPK1, GRB2, STK2) in both tumors; - angiogenesis related genes (VCAM1, VEGF) and drug resistance genes (ABCC3, MTIL) in Patient 2.
Genes found to be down-regulated were:
- signal transduction genes (PSHL, P1M1, IQGAP, RDC1, RGS16) and cytoskeleton related genes (PFN1, MSN, PLEK, VIM, CAPG) in Patient 2; - apoptosis genes (CASP7, BCLW, DAP3 and DCC in line with methylation status) in both tumors.
Interestingly, p16 and pRb were expressed in Patient 1 and down-regulated in Patient 2, while EGFR was overexpressed only in Patient 2.
Statistically significant changes in gene expression at the P = 0.025 level were seen with all transcripts analyzed. The results of real-time analysis are reported in .
DCC was found methylated in both tumors, MGMT methylated only in Patient 1, in line with the chemotherapy response, and p16 methylated only in Patient 2 since this gene is under-expressed even if not mutated . Primer sequences used in methylation-specific PCR (MSP-PCR) are reported in .