A 90-year-old Turkish male patient (Diyarbakir, Turkey) presented to our emergency department in April 2011 with severe abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and inability to defecate or pass gas. According to the information obtained from patient relatives, the patient had been admitted to separate healthcare facilities for a couple of times with abdominal pain and constipation for five years, but no pathology had been found by a variety of tests and examinations. The patient also lost at least 5 - 6 kg within the last year. His medical history was unremarkable except for hypertension controlled by a salt-free diet. His general appearance was cachectic, his abdomen distended and mucosae dry. Vital signs were as follows: blood pressure as 90/50 mmHg, pulse rate of 95 bpm and body temperature of 37.9°C. On physical examination, there was marked rebound tenderness and guarding in all quadrants. His laboratory tests were as follows; WBC 8.890 (neutrophil: 86.1%), Hemoglobin 14 gr/dL, BUN 38 mg/dL and creatinine 0.8 mg/dL. There were diffuse air-fluid levels in the abdomen on upright plain abdominal X-Ray (, ).
The physical examination findings, patient's age and plain abdominal radiography were consistent with tumoral obstruction or viscus perforation; therefore, patient was urgently taken into operation. A laparotomy was performed via midline incision, followed by abdominal exploration that revealed encapsulation of all intestinal segments by a dense, plate-like fibrous membrane that encased whole small intestine and caused dense adhesions between intestinal loops . Taken into consideration our previous experiences, we regarded this appearance as abdominal cocoon syndrome. As the fibrocollagenous membrane was densely adhered to both intestinal surface and interloop distance, excision and adhesiolysis could only be applied to a limited region. Considering the overall medical condition of the patient, we did not perform membrane excision and adhesiolysis that would prolong the operation time. A loop ileostomy was established and the operation was terminated. The patient was admitted to intensive care unit owing to his poor general status. Despite aggressive fluid and electrolyte replacement attempts and administration of wide-spectrum antibiotics, the patient died as a consequence of septic shock and multiorgan failure (WBC 1880/µL, BUN 123 mg/dL creatinine 2.92 mg/dL and albumin 2.4 gr/dL) three days after the operation.