A 34-year-old Japanese woman displayed weakness, hypoesthesia, pain and edema (grade 1 according to National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0) in the lower limbs, decreased grip strength, night sweats (grade 2), amenorrhea, abdominal distention, fatigue (grade 2), and weight loss of 10% in 6 months. Computed tomography (CT) revealed systemic lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, ascites (grade 2), and multiple osteosclerosis , and she was referred to our department on suspicion of a hematological disease.
On admission, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was 2. Overall Neuropathy Limitations Scale (ONLS) score was 2 for the arm grade and 3 for the leg grade (total score, 5). She was unable to walk independently and had to take a leave of absence. Peripheral sensory neuropathy and peripheral motor neuropathy were classified as grade 3. Nerve conduction velocity testing showed demyelinating polyneuropathy with a lower-extremity predominance. Serum electrophoresis and immunofixation showed a level of 1.81 g/dL for immunoglobulin A λ-type monoclonal protein. Bone marrow examination showed 3% plasma cells, and flow cytometry showed a λ bias. Human herpesvirus-8 deoxyribonucleic acid quantification in plasma was negative, and cervical lymph node biopsy revealed multicentric mixed-type Castleman disease . Positron emission tomography–CT showed abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulations and a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 6.91, consistent with cervical, axillary, para-aortic, and pelvic lymphadenopathy and sclerotic lesions of the humerus, lumbar spine, ilium, and femur . The serum level of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was 5000 pg/mL. Endocrine examination revealed central amenorrhea and subclinical hypothyroidism. Hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, and glomerular hemangiomas were observed. Papilledema (grade 1) and thrombocytosis were also observed. Platelet count was 447,000/μL. Respiratory function testing showed a diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide of 53%.
The diagnosis of POEMS syndrome is confirmed when both of the mandatory major criteria, one of the other three major criteria, and one of the six minor criteria are met . Polyneuropathy (typically demyelinating) and monoclonal plasma cell-proliferative disorder (almost always λ) are mandatory major criteria. Castleman disease, sclerotic bone lesions, and VEGF elevation are other major criteria. Organomegaly (splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, or lymphadenopathy), extravascular volume overload (edema, pleural effusion, or ascites), endocrinopathy (adrenal, thyroid, pituitary, gonadal, parathyroid, pancreatic), skin changes (hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, glomeruloid hemangiomata, plethora, acrocyanosis, flushing, white nails), papilledema, and thrombocytosis/polycythemia are minor criteria. All mandatory major, other major, and minor criteria were present , so she was diagnosed with POEMS syndrome. After the patient provided written informed consent and approval was obtained from our institutional review board, 28-day cycles of DLd therapy (intravenous daratumumab at 16 mg/kg on days 1, 8, 15, and 22 during cycles 1 and 2, on days 1 and 15 during cycles 3 and 4; oral lenalidomide at 25 mg/day on days 1–21; and dexamethasone at 40 mg/day on days 1, 8, 15 and 22) were started. Symptoms began to improve during the first course and continued to improve over time. The only adverse events were diarrhea (grade 3) and a decrease in the white blood cell count (grade 1). Serum VEGF decreased to 1850 pg/mL and 826 pg/mL after one and four courses of DLd therapy, respectively. After four courses of DLd therapy, ONLS scores were 0 for the arm grade and 1 for the leg grade (total score, 1), allowing the patient to walk independently. All clinical symptoms and test results also improved . Peripheral sensory neuropathy (grade 2) and peripheral motor neuropathy (grade 2) remained in the lower limbs.
Hematopoietic stem cells were collected using plerixafor and filgrastim in combination (subcutaneous plerixafor at 0.24 mg/kg on days 3–4; subcutaneous filgrastim at 400 μg/m2 on days 1–5) at a dose of 3.7 × 106 cells/kg of CD34-positive cells. ASCT was performed with high-dose melphalan (intravenous melphalan at 100 mg/m2 on days −3 and −2). As soon as neutrophils engrafted on day 10, fever of 40 °C with no identifiable infectious etiology, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema requiring oxygen administration at 2 L/minute by nasal cannula, and weight gain more than 2.5% of baseline body weight were identified. Engraftment syndrome was diagnosed, and steroid (intravenous methylprednisolone at 125 mg/day on days 10–12) was administered. Engraftment syndrome was quickly relieved, and the patient was discharged home on day 25. At 3-month post-transplantation follow-up, serum VEGF had decreased to 212 pg/mL and total ONLS score was 0. All clinical symptoms except central amenorrhea had disappeared, and all test results were improved . The only residual neurological deficits were peripheral motor neuropathy (grade 1) and peripheral sensory neuropathy (grade 1) of the lower extremities. Peripheral neuropathies have continued to improve over time, and the patient is negotiating job conditions with her employer to return to work approximately 1 year after ASCT.