A 22-year old black African woman, single, primigravida at 14 weeks gestation, otherwise apparently well, presented with a 1-month history of unilateral left-sided throbbing headache, without facial radiation, which was not relieved by analgesics—including paracetamol 1 g q8h and ibuprofen 400 mg q8h per oral—and anti-migraine drugs-vasograin—ergotamine tartarate 1 mg, caffeine 300 mg, paracetamol 250 mg, prochlorperazine maleate 2.5 mg q6h per oral, at a primary care facility. On enquiry, the patient reported a history of nausea associated with early morning non-projectile vomiting. She later developed severe headache 2 weeks prior to admission and one-day history of serial seizures which were characterized by jerky movement of the right arm which progressed to generalized tonic–clonic seizures accompanied by eye rolling without loss of consciousness, each lasting 2 to 3 min, followed by confusion and persistent right arm weakness. These convulsions were not preceded by abnormal physical sensation or emotional disturbances. There was no history of urine or fecal incontinence.
She did not report any history of fever, head trauma, ear or nasal discharge, easy bruising and bone pains. Moreover, she did not report any visual or speech disturbances, hearing loss or dizziness. She had no family history of similar illness, epilepsy or seizure disorders. She admitted to have a regular consumption of pork at casual food vendor outlets. She denied any history of cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption. Her past medical history was unremarkable, without a history suggestive of syphilis infection and any perceived increased risk of HIV infection. She was a primigravida at 14 weeks of gestation, without any untoward pregnancy complications and she denied any history of abortions. The review of other systems was non-contributory. She was the third born in a family of four siblings, without any family history of any known genetic condition or allergies. She was working as a cashier at a small company after dropping out of the university due to lack of tuition fee. Intriguingly, during the follow up visit the patient reported to have two episodes of epistaxis. The ear, nose and throat (ENT) examination revealed actively bleeding small tuft of blood vessels in the right nasal mucosa.
The patient was evaluated, at the emergency department, and found to be at 14-week pregnancy. She was fully alert, with warm extremities, not dyspneic, not pale, not icteric, and afebrile, without superficial lymphadenopathy. She did not have skin rashes, freckles, or lower limb oedema. ENT examination was unremarkable on admission.
The patient had stable vitals, with a blood pressureof 110/60 mmHg, pulse rate of 101 beats per minute, temperature of 36.1°C and oxygen saturation of 99 percent on room air.
The CNS examination; She was fully alert, oriented to time, place and person, had intact short and long-term memory with normal speech and language. All cranial nerves were intact and the patient did not have anisocoria and had normal sized pupils with normal reaction to light. Examination of upper and lower limbs revealed normal muscle bulkiness and tone in all muscle groups except for reduced power of grade 3 out of 5 on the right upper limb. Both superficial and deep tendon reflexes were normal. The Babinski sign was negative and the clonus was not sustaining. The examination of all sensory modalities was intact in all dermatomes of the upper and lower limbs. The coordination, balance and gait were all normal. Examination of the spine was essentially normal. Other systemic examinations were unremarkable.
The index patient was evaluated in May, 2022 during her initial visit where she presented with a history of headache, convulsions and right upper limb weakness. She underwent brain MRA imaging and other evaluation which revealed ruptured bilateral parietal AVMs with intracerebral hemorrhage and associated peri-lesional oedema. At 4 weeks, she was re-evaluated and at 7 months, December. 2022, a repeat MRA was performed. The patient was managed conservatively with a good clinical and radiological response.
Brain MRA was performed which revealed a ruptured bilateral brain AMVs as depicted in Figs. A, A and A below. In brief, axial T2_ff2d_hemoFFE revealed multiple foci of low signal on the post central sulcus of both parietal lobes in keeping with AVMs. Associated hyper intense signal is also shown on axial sagittal and coronal T2WI. Axial T1WI shows intra-lesional foci of hyperintensity. The MRA/TOF images reveal connecting vessels particularly on the left side. These features are consistent with bilateral parietal lobe bleeding AVMs with associated brain oedema.
During follow up visits MRA imaging, revealed intra-axial sub-cortical small tuft of vessels shown as aggregated linear signal voids involving the bilateral high convexity parietal region. Central feeders and venous drainage couldn't be adequately identified. No hemorrhage could be detected. These features were consistent with bilateral high convexity parietal AVM with resolved intracerebral hemorrhage.
Images at initial presentation .
Follow up visit images at 7 months .
The patient was managed conservatively to control bleeding and seizures. She was managed conservatively with intravenous paracetamol 1 g q8h for three days, intramuscular injection trenaxamic acid 500 mg q8h per oral for three days, with repeat dose on the fourth week after presenting with epistaxis and anti-seizure drugs—lamotrigine 25 mg daily per oral for initial 2 weeks with dose escalation to the maintenance dose of 100 mg q12h daily per oral from the eighth week onwards and followed up with a repeat brain MRA on the seventh month. The pregnancy was allowed to continue to term under close obstetric and neurological monitoring.