A 54-year-old Iranian woman presented with excessive thirst, increasing polyuria, and polydipsia. About six weeks prior to the endocrinologist's consultation, she was diagnosed with COVID-19 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test on the nasopharyngeal swab specimen. She got cured of COVID-19 without pulmonary complications or being hospitalized. She had a history of hyperlipidemia but denied any history of psychological disorders. She had been taking Atorvastatin and Gemfibrozil for many years. During the SARS-CoV-2 infection, she had received Famotidine, Naproxen, and Vitamin D3 supplement. She did not report any similar condition in her family or a history of head trauma, brain surgery, underlying cancer, or radiotherapy. She had a family history of diabetes mellitus in her father. Physical examination was significant only for mild tachycardia (110 beats per minute).
To find the cause of polyuria, an initial laboratory test was performed. Hyperglycemia was ruled out. Renal ultrasonography was unremarkable and renal function test results were normal. Other laboratory test results are shown in Table . She was requested to collect the 24-h urine specimen. Over a 24-h cycle, the urinary volume reached 13,300 ml with a low urine specific gravity (1.005). Serum osmolarity was measured at 298 mOsm/L.
The water deprivation test was not performed due to non-compliance with the test and lack of consent. Intranasal desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) 10 mcg was administered. Subsequent urine output decreased to 2850 ml and urine specific gravity increased to 1.025 . Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) level was undetectable.
A pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to investigate any pathologic findings in the pituitary and hypothalamus glands. MRI showed the normal size of the pituitary gland with no evidence of mass, infarct, or hemorrhage. Bilateral chronic foci of small vessel infarction were detected in the periventricular region. In addition, the patient had serum cortisol, prolactin, and thyroid hormone levels within normal ranges. Due to the DDAVP test and undetectable antidiuretic hormone level, the patient was diagnosed with central diabetes insipidus. Laboratory tests, imaging findings, and history of the patient were not suggestive of known etiologies of diabetes insipidus. Considering an idiopathic etiology, diabetes insipidus was suspected as a late complication of coronavirus disease. The patient was treated with intranasal DDAVP 5mcg twice a day. She tolerated the treatment and her symptoms were relieved without any complications. She did not complain of any adverse side effects. Four months after treatment of diabetes insipidus, a follow-up test was performed to check out whether the disease was reversible, but she still needed the medicine to control her disease.