The patient was a 59-year-old female with 2 prior pregnancies and child births and no particular prior medical or family history. In January 2012, she noticed swelling in the genitals and sought the advice of a local obstetrician/gynecologist. A tumor measuring 2 cm was detected on the left side 1 cm from the vaginal opening. She was diagnosed with a tumor of the vaginal wall (spindle cell tumor) based on the results of biopsy and histopathology, and she was referred to our clinic. We confirmed the presence of a white, vaginal wall tumor 1.8 × 1.0 cm in size located on the left side, 1 cm from the vaginal opening by speculum examination. No abnormalities in the initial blood biochemistry or tumor marker values were detected. Laboratory values were as follows: WBC, 5200/μl; RBC, 437/μl; Hb, 13.6 g/dl; Plt, 20.4 × 104/μl; LDH, 195 μl; CRP, 0.0 mg/dl; CEA, 3.2 ng/ml; CA125, 14 U/ml; CA19-9, 21 U/ml; and SCC, 0.7 ng/ml.
Histological diagnosis: spindle cell tumor with suspicion of leiomyosarcoma .
No clear evidence of distant metastasis or vaginal wall tumors was obtained by CT examination or pelvic MRI.
Histopathological diagnosis performed using specimens from the previous doctor indicated spindle cell tumor suspicious of leiomyosarcoma, and a vaginal wall tumor resection was qa 1 cm surrounding margin. Histopathology of the resected sample indicated a malignant melanoma-positive surgical margin .
An FDG-PET-CT scan was performed after the first operation to rule out the presence of remaining lesions or distant metastasis. The results showed an area of high FDG accumulation on the left side of the vagina; however, tracer accumulation in the lymph nodes or evidence of distant metastasis was not found .
In preparation for additional surgery including sentinel lymph node biopsy, we injected m99Tc into the region of the vaginal wall tumor 1 day before surgery, and confirmed the accumulation of m99Tc 2 hours later in the left inguinal to retroperitoneal lymph node .
A second surgery was performed 35 days after the first operation. We found surgical scars from the previous operation 1 cm from the vaginal opening on the left side. Therefore, the tumor was resected with a 2 cm margin and resection of the vaginal wall was performed. A sentinel lymph node (left superficial inguinal lymph node) biopsy was performed using an isotope, which did not detect lymph node metastasis (0/3) in a rapid histopathological examination. Therefore, pelvic and inguinal lymph node metastasis was not performed.
Histopathological analysis of the resected samples revealed malignant melanoma, and a microscopic distance of 0.3 mm was observed between the resected margin of the vaginal wall and the tumor. This indicated that the resected region did not fall within the safety margin and an additional surgery was scheduled. A third surgery was performed 35 days after the second operation. To ensure adequate vaginal wall resection, we performed an abdominal modified radical hysterectomy followed by a left-side vaginectomy.
Surgical findings: We performed an abdominal modified radical hysterectomy. After processing the anterior layer of the vesico-uterine ligament bilaterally, we separated the bladder from the vaginal wall from the outside of the left abdominal cavity. We then processed the paravaginal tissue on the left side by accessing it from the abdominal side; vaginal wall resection was performed by approaching it from the external genitalia. Finally, we penetrated the abdominal cavity and the left side of the vagina, and removed the left side of the vagina and the uterus together.
A modified radical hysterectomy was selected instead of a simple total hysterectomy to ensure adequate excision of the vaginal wall by separating it from the ureter. Moreover, we excised the vesical branches of the pelvic splanchnic nerve on the left side to ensure adequate separation of the bladder from the vaginal wall on the left side. We did not opt for total resection of the vaginal wall, as a similar approach from the right would have ensured post-operative dysuria. Instead, we limited the operation to the left side. The total time required for the procedure was 8 hours 30 minutes with a blood loss of 1440 ml. As shown in the analysis of the extracted sample , we found no evidence of remaining malignant tissue.
The final diagnosis was primary malignant melanoma of the vagina T4bN0M0 Stage IIc (UICC 2009), based on the tumor size of 2 cm, over 4 mm of interstitial invasion, the lack of evidence of metastasis to the inguinal lymph nodes extracted as sentinel lymph nodes, and the lack of evidence of distant metastasis.
A 6-course postoperative adjuvant therapy with DAV-Feron was planned . Four courses of DAV-Feron treatment were administered between June and November 2012. Although a fifth course of therapy was planned, the patient developed grade 4 thrombocytopenia and the treatment was changed to 2 courses of locally injected Feron-only therapy. At 5 months after terminating the adjuvant therapy (18 months after the initial treatment), a 2 cm single lung metastasis was detected in the lower-left lung field. It was diagnosed as recurrence of the malignant melanoma of the vaginal wall metastasized to the lungs, and we performed a laparoscopic lower left lobectomy. Analysis of the resected sample revealed relapsed malignant melanoma with a negative surgical margin. Additional chemotherapy is currently being planned.