A 63-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our hospital with a 3-month history of dyspnoea, hacking cough, and distended jugular veins.
Seven years before, a complete blood cell count had revealed polyglobulia. The subsequent bone marrow biopsy showed a cellularity of 70%, with trilinear expansion; the myelo-erythroid ratio was 5:1, with preserved maturation. The proliferative megakaryocytic series were slightly polymorphic, with little tendency to cluster aggregation. The histology was highly suspicious for an initial phase of polycythemia vera (Vasquez disease). After diagnosis, our patient was placed on oral administration of 1,4-bis (3-bromopropionyl) piperazine 25 mg and hydroxyurea 500 mg. Three years later, JAK2 V617F mutation was found. Our patient did not refer for any further relevant medical issue.
On physical examination, our patient showed facial rash, periorbital and facial edema, distension of the jugular veins, bilateral disappearance of his supraclavicular fossae, mild ptosis especially on the right side, and a chest wall formation, just upon the projection of the sixth right rib, of hard consistency . A neurological examination was negative. Our patient showed signs neither of laryngeal and phrenic nerve involvement (dysphonia, hiccough) nor of abnormal sympathetic response (Bernard-Horner syndrome).
Blood test results showed relative (17.5%) and absolute (1.57*103/μL) lymphocytosis; his lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 423 U/L; C-reactive protein (CRP) 1.8 mg/dL; fibrinogen 414 mg/dl; immunoglobulin A (IgA) 549 mg/dL; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 27 mm; β2-microglobulin was 2.6 mg/dL. Our patient was negative for hepatitis C (HCV), HHV8 and HIV, but positive for hepatitis B (HBV) (HBc IgG: 627 mIU/mL) and EBV.
A chest X-ray detected a bilateral flaring, especially in the upper right side; the trachea was deviated on the right . A total body computed tomography (CT) scan, performed a few days after admission, showed a polylobed solid heteroplasia to the anterior-superior mediastinum, iso-hypodense after contrast, of 9.7 cm in its transverse diameter, 8 cm in its cranio-caudal diameter and 5.7 cm in its antero-posterior diameter. The heteroplasia compressed the right jugular vein and the superior vena cava. The visible chest wall formation showed the same radiological characteristics as the mediastinal one . No lesion was found in our patient’s abdomen or skull.
One month after a total body CT scan, another chest CT scan was performed: in this case, the mass showed increased dimensions, being 12 cm in transverse diameter, 14 cm in cranio-caudal diameter and 7.5 cm in antero-posterior diameter .
One month later, a neck ultrasound (US) scan showed a thrombosis of the right internal jugular vein with signs of recanalization, despite previous anticoagulation therapy. The left internal jugular vein was patent .
A diagnostic mediastinal ultrasound (US)-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was performed with local anesthesia, using a low-frequency probe (3.5 MHz), . The mediastinal mass was showed as a hypo-/anechoic formation at the depth of 35 mm, with a 46.7 mm antero-posterior diameter and 82.1 mm transverse diameter . Contemporaneously, the chest wall neoformation was resected, always under local anesthesia with lidocaine 20% and naropine 1%. No complication occurred during and after surgery. Both samples were sent to pathologists.
Histological examination of the mediastinal FNAB and the chest wall biopsy gave the same results: resected tissue widely occupied by a monomorphic lymphoid proliferation composed of large-size cells with evident nucleoli, typical of a high-grade non-Hodgkin’s B cell lymphoma [, ]. Morphological and immunophenotypic findings (PanCK, CK20, chromogranin, NSE were also negative) were compatible with the diagnosis of PBL.
Our patient was pharmacologically treated with EPOCH, a combined therapy of intravenous etoposide (50 mg/m2/day), vincristine (0.4 mg/m2/day), and doxorubicin (10 mg/m2/day) for 96 hours with bolus doses of cyclophosphamide (750 mg/m2/day) and oral prednisone (60 mg/m2/bid) . Treatment response was good, with a prompt regression of symptoms after the first cycle. Our patient received five cycles of combination chemotherapy with good response. After 10 years, our patient is still alive and healthy with no clinical or radiological evidence of recurrent or residual disease.