The patient was a 5-year-old Caucasian boy (weight at birth 2900 g, height at birth 50 cm) born to non-consanguineous parents with no previous medical history of NP-C in Krasnodar, Russia. Jaundice was observed at the age of 3 days and was considered physiological. The child was therefore discharged. However, he was later hospitalized at a child care facility due to continued jaundice and mild hepatosplenomegaly (liver 2.5 cm and spleen 1 cm), at which point raised total and conjugated bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, cholesterol, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) were observed.
The results of his hematology and urine analysis tests were normal, but heightened nervous reflex irritability was observed. Blood polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), toxoplasmosis, and chlamydia infection were negative. However, a blood galactose of 12 ng/ml (upper limit of normal, 7.1 ng/ml) was observed, which increased to 20 ng/ml at repeat examination. On this basis, galactosemia was suspected and a galactose-free and lactose-free diet was prescribed. By the age of 2 months the patient’s blood galactose level was normalized, but cholestasis and hepatosplenomegaly persisted. He was therefore referred to the Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology at the Federal State Budget Institution in Moscow, Russia for further work up.
We observed hypotrophy and continued jaundice at our initial examination: body weight 4100 g (percentile 5 to 10); height 57 cm (percentile 25). Ongoing hepatosplenomegaly, cholestasis, and cytolysis were also confirmed, but synthetic liver function tests and standard metabolic parameters were all normal . There were no signs of portal hypertension in spite of the enlarged spleen (+6.5 cm under the costal rib). His plasma chitotriosidase was slightly increased (251.5 nmol/mg/hour, normal range 4.5 to 198 nmol/mg/hour). Galactosemia was eventually ruled out based on normal galactose-1-phosphate-uridyl transferase enzyme levels and genetic testing. Differential diagnoses for an extensive group of other metabolic and non-metabolic diseases were eliminated: biliary atresia, Gaucher disease type 1 (GD1), α-1-antitrypsin deficiency, tyrosinemia, citrullinemia type 2, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3, mitochondrial disorders, Alagille syndrome, and others.
A liver biopsy revealed swollen Kupffer cells with foamy cytoplasm, which are considered typical histopathological hallmarks of NP-C . A preliminary diagnosis of NP-C was therefore concluded. No causal NPC2 gene mutations were detected; while parallel investigations for progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 (Byler syndrome) indicated a heterozygous genotype suggestive of this disease.
Typical symptoms of Byler syndrome include progressive cholestasis with low blood gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT) levels and severe pruritus. Liver transplantation is always indicated for Byler syndrome because of its association with biliary cirrhosis and poor quality of life. During the examination of our patient at the age of 2 to 3 months he had slightly increased (near-normal) GGT and he was too young for pruritus. Pruritus usually appears at the age of 4 to 5 months or later, which is why we could not exclude Byler syndrome. On the other hand we could not insist on the performance of genetic testing for NPC1 in this case because of the expense involved and the fact that his family was not ready.
The patient undertook a high medium-chain triglyceride diet with fat-soluble vitamins, and ursodeoxycholic acid therapy. Jaundice eventually disappeared by 5 months of age, and by the age of 2 years his hepatomegaly had resolved. His splenomegaly had also decreased (6 to 7 cm). Later on it became obvious that he did not have Byler syndrome as his cholestasis resolved, he did not have pruritus, and he had splenomegaly without portal hypertension. He was therefore not indicated for liver transplantation. On balance, we decided to suspend further genetic testing.
After a bout of acute otitis he stopped walking on his own aged 2 years and 10 months. He also stopped eating independently due to a pronounced tremor. Brain MRI findings were normal. These neurological symptoms prompted further diagnostic tests for possible NP-C, and complete NPC1 gene mutation analysis identified an as yet unreported combination of known mutations c.2777C>T (p.Ala926Val: CM077214) and c.2196_2197insT.
Retrospective analysis of his neurological status showed normal psychomotor development during his first year of life, but he did display minor deficits (for example, inward turning of his feet, awkward gait) that were probably the first neurological disease manifestations. An observable tremor first appeared when he was 2.5-years old.
At the time of reporting he is 5-years old and displays abnormal saccadic eye movements, trunk ataxia, hypotonia, subcortical cerebellar dysarthria and dysmetria, and intention tremor. He continues to walk with assistance but his gait is ataxic-polyneuropathic. He has also lost 2 kg in body weight since the initial onset of neurological manifestations, and displays signs of first-degree hypotrophy. His splenomegaly persists (spleen size, 7 cm).
Miglustat (Zavesca®; Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd) was initiated 2.5 years ago with appropriate dietary alterations. Positive changes have since been observed, including reduced tremor and decreased muscle hypotonia. The patient can sometimes walk without assistance and he exhibits a degree of improvement in his speech. He has also gained weight. His liver function test results remain normal, and splenomegaly has persisted without signs of portal hypertension.