A 64-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for the treatment of chest wall necrosis. She had undergone Halsted surgery and postoperative radiation therapy with cobalt-60 (30 Gray) and megavoltage X-rays (30 Gray) 25 years earlier. Following the treatment, her left upper limb became completely paralyzed.
Six years earlier, she had sustained a left clavicle fracture due to osteonecrosis, and she had subsequently developed a chronic cutaneous fistula measuring 1 cm in diameter. The fracture and cutaneous fistula failed to heal, and she experienced bleeding from the fistula since 1 year. Two months before visiting our hospital, she was hospitalized in the Department of Breast Surgery at another hospital for massive bleeding and local infection. She was treated with antibiotics and cleansing of the fistula and the infection subsided 2 months thereafter. She visited our hospital after discharge.
At initial examination, her height was 153 cm and weight was 34 kg. Necrosed clavicle was exposed through the 6-cm-wide skin defect in the left clavicular region, and air entered and exited the opening from deep within the chest while breathing . Computed tomography (CT) revealed the part of the first to third left ribs, part of the left clavicle, the subclavian artery, and the brachial plexus to be missing. Her upper left limb was nourished by retrograde blood flow from the thoracodorsal artery; however, blood flow was weak to the skin of the arm, the surface of which was cold, resulting in complete paralysis of the upper extremity. Several rounds of debridement eliminated the necrotic tissue, and the local infection was completely resolved. Debridement revealed a tissue defect measuring 4 cm × 8 cm and 4 cm deep at the base and approximately 10 bronchial stumps on the surface of the collapsed lung covered in granulation tissue, from which exhaled air and sputum were effusing . She presented with severe emaciation and malnutrition, but no other systemic anomalies were noted.
After treatment, she had almost no problem with daily life but frequently coughed while taking baths or when exposed to cold air. Therefore, she consented to undergo the surgical closure of the pulmonary fistula. A left latissimus myocutaneous flap could not be used as the reconstructive material due to the absence of vascular pedicle . A free rectus abdominis flap was considered, but an omental flap was ultimately selected for its perceived ability to create the best air seal. Owing to her severe emaciation, the volume of the omentum available for harvest was considered inadequate; therefore, she was administered a diet by a nutritionist for 9 months to improve her systemic nutritional state and thereby increase her resistance. Subsequently, her weight increased from 34 kg to 38 kg, and her serum albumin level improved from 3.0 g/dL to 3.7 g/dL. Reconstructive surgery was performed. Preoperative blood gas analysis revealed pH of 7.400, carbon dioxide partial pressure of 45.3 mmHg, and oxygen partial pressure of 84.3 mmHg. Lung function test performed while holding down the pulmonary fistula revealed forced vital capacity of 1.16 L and forced expiratory volume as 1% of 100%.
Surgery was performed under general anesthesia with selective one lung ventilation.
The damaged skin, clavicle, and ribs surrounding the defect were debrided. The base of the defect was covered with hemorrhagic granulation tissue and was only rubbed with gauze for debridement to avoid over expansion of the bronchial stumps. A free omental flap (approximately 155 cc) with the right gastroepiploic blood vessel as its pedicle was harvested under laparoscopy. The right transverse cervical artery and right anterior jugular vein were anastomosed with the right gastroepiploic blood vessel; the tissue defect was filled with the omentum. A 20/1000-in.-thick split-thickness skin graft was placed over the omentum, and the graft was immobilized with tie-over dressing .
The tie-over dressing was removed on the 5th postoperative day, and the engraftment of the omentum and skin graft was observed to ensure that there was no air leakage . However, a bulge that moved with breathing was noted on the skin graft over the omentum 2 weeks after surgery. CT confirmed this bulge to be the buildup of air between the transplanted omental tissues (omental emphysema). Pressure was applied to the bulge with scrunched up gauze and adhesive tape for 2 months; however, omental emphysema persisted even after 2 months; therefore, the dressing was removed, and she instructed to apply pressure with the hand when coughing. She is currently undergoing the follow-up and has not developed any subsequent emphysematous or respiratory infection (e.g., pneumonia). Omental emphysema persisted almost entirely without change for at least 2 years after surgery, but it spontaneously resolved by the 3rd postoperative year . Changes over time, as observed in CT, at 7 years after the surgery are presented in Fig. .