A 68-year-old Japanese woman presented with a 2-cm mass in her lower left lung. Sixty-six months previously, she had undergone a curative esophagectomy via a right thoracotomy with three-field lymph node dissection for advanced esophageal cancer. A gastric tube was created during an open laparotomy and used as an esophageal substitute through the postmediastinal route. Pathological examination of the all-segmented tumor specimens revealed the proliferation of large squamoid cells with enlarged nuclei forming nests with a central necrosis, infiltrating throughout the esophageal wall . Some of the tumor nests exhibited ambiguous nuclear palisading arrangement in the peripheral region, in which deposition of hyaline-like materials was occasionally identified. These histological features were diagnostic of moderately differentiated SCC with a focal basaloid component. In accordance with the Union for International Cancer Control TNM staging system (7th edition), the tumor was classified as pT3N0M0, pStage IIA. Immunohistochemical examinations showed that the tumor cells were positive for p63 and p40 and negative for SP-A, TTF-1, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, S-100, and calponin. However, lymphatic and venous invasions were detected. She then received adjuvant chemotherapies combined with docetaxel (DOC; 40 mg/body) plus nedaplatin (CDGP; 40 mg/body). Routine follow-up chest x-rays and computed tomography (CT) scans showed no masses in the lungs or other abnormalities for more than 5 years after adjuvant chemotherapies. She never complained of gastrointestinal or pulmonary symptoms. However, at 66 months after the surgery, a chest CT detected a solitary, oval-shaped, 20 × 11-mm lesion in the left lung . An 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET)-CT scan revealed abnormal FDG uptake in the left lung, with a standardized uptake value of 9.58 . Pathological findings from a CT-guided biopsy specimen indicated the presence of BSCC components. As systemic examinations revealed no other metastases, we decided to remove it surgically and performed a partial resection of the lower left lobe via thoracoscopy. No pleural dissemination was observed intraoperatively. The postoperative course was uneventful. Histological features of the metastatic tumor were similar to the basaloid component of the primary tumor in the esophagus . Nests of polygonal cells of various sizes in an alveolar configuration showed a massively expansive-infiltrative growth pattern in a sheet formation with comedo necrosis. The presence of scant cytoplasm, round to oval nuclei, a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, relativistic nuclear palisading arrangement in the marginal region of the tumor, and deposition of hyaline-like materials was compatible with BSCC of the esophagus. We also observed characteristic PAS-positive hyaline material in part of the alveolar interstitium. There was no existing bronchial/alveolar cavity in the metastatic cancer foci or alveolar replacement growth around the peripheral lung tumor. The immunohistochemical examination indicated that the tumor had metastasized from the primary esophageal SCC, because its cells were positive for p63 and p40 and negative for SP-A and TTF-1. Finally, we diagnosed the tumor as a metastasis from BSCC components of the esophagus. The patient was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 9 and then received two courses of adjuvant chemotherapy of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and CDGP plus DOC (5-FU 450 mg/m2: Days 1–5, CDGP 20 mg/body: Days 1–5, DOC 80 mg/body: Day 1). Although the patient did well initially without any recurrence after the pulmonary metastasectomy, multiple lung and brain metastases were diagnosed 2 years later on follow-up chest/brain CT examinations. The patient died for 10 years and 6 months after the initial esophagectomy.