A 26-year-old woman of Cypriot origin presented with an acute onset of palpitations and chest tightness. She reported several weeks’ history of similar palpitations, however, this was the first occasion that the sensation had not self-terminated within minutes and had been associated with discomfort.
There was no further medical history of note, no relevant family history, and no regular medications. Our patient admitted to a moderate alcohol intake although no recent intoxication and no recreational drug use.
On assessment in the Emergency Department, her electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated a narrow-complex tachycardia with a rate of 194 beats per minute (bpm) . Her heart rate varied between 180 and 210 bpm and her blood pressure was 187/101 mmHg on first recording. Suspecting SVT, the assessing emergency physicians proceeded with vagal maneuvers, to no clinical effect. Next, an intravenous bolus dose of 6 mg adenosine was administered. This was followed by immediate development of coarse VF and circulatory collapse. Rapid deterioration to a fine VF ensued. She was successfully defibrillated with a single 150 J direct current shock. There was immediate return of spontaneous circulation and hemodynamic stability. A 900-mg loading dose of intravenous amiodarone was commenced and our patient was admitted to the cardiac high dependency unit. No further arrhythmias were identified.
Investigations revealed normal serum electrolytes, negative serial troponin measurements, normal thyroid function, and negative blood ethanol level. A urine drug screen was negative. A chest radiograph demonstrated clear lung fields. The presenting ECG was reviewed, and was likely to be that of AF with a rapid ventricular response, but with no clear ventricular pre-excitation. Similarly, her ECG in sinus rhythm had no features of ventricular pre-excitation . The Q-Tc interval was within normal range and there were no features of Brugada syndrome. In view of the development of VF with adenosine, an electrophysiology study was performed. Following administration of adenosine, there was progressive PR lengthening and eventual atrioventricular (AV) block with non-conducted P waves, excluding a typical anterograde conducting accessory pathway . There was also a negative programmed ventricular stimulation up to three extrastimuli. On exercise stress testing, there was an appropriate heart rate and blood pressure response with no ST/T wave changes and no arrhythmias identified. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed normal biventricular volumes and systolic function, no myocardial edema, fibrosis or infarction, and normal origins of the right and left coronary arteries.
Our patient was discharged, without any prescribed medications, following a short inpatient stay during which no further episodes of arrhythmia were identified on continuous cardiac monitoring. At routine follow-up 3 months later, our patient remained well, with no further symptoms and no recurrence of palpitations. She was satisfied by the care she had received and was discharged from routine outpatient review.