A 27-year-old male farmworker was referred to our service with a 10-day history of progressive headache, gait disturbance, diplopia, right facial numbness and weakness of the left arm and leg. He had no fever and no evidence of systemic infections such as endocarditis, sinusitis or otitis. A neurological examination showed ataxic gait, right dysmetria, left hemiparesis, dysarthria, right abducens nerve palsy and right facial nerve palsy. His laboratory tests and serological tests were normal. A cerebrospinal fluid examination was unremarkable. All further investigations for other infection sites were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging showed low T1 signal with ring enhancement after gadolinium administration, located at the right dorsal tegmentum of the pons, thus suggesting the presence of an abscess or a focal glioma . Restricted diffusion, seen on diffusion-weighted imaging, favored the hypothesis of an abscess. Suboccipital craniotomy was performed, and the floor of fourth ventricle was exposed using a telovelar approach. There was gentle bulging of the entire rhomboid fossa, and no floating point could be detected. First, puncturing was performed, and 3 cm3 of purulent yellowish fluid was drained. Gentle opening of the drainage point (1 mm) enabled more copious and spontaneous drainage. No hard capsule was detected. When the output of pus ceased and the tension on the rhomboid floor decreased, the surgical procedure was terminated. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were immediately administered (oxacillin, ceftriaxone and metronidazole) and were maintained for three weeks. Culturing was negative.
The early progress after surgery was uneventful, without any additional deficits. At the six and ten-month follow-ups, the patient presented improvement of all previous symptoms but continued to have mild hemiparesis and facial palsy. Magnetic resonance imaging produced in the sixth postoperative month showed only a mild hypersignal within the pons, from fluid-attenuated inversion recovery acquisition .