A 78-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for treatment for her inability to eat. She had undergone neoadjuvant chemotherapy and video-assisted subtotal esophagectomy with retromediastinal gastric tube reconstruction 7 years earlier. She had also undergone partial resection of her left breast with axillary lymph node dissection for breast cancer, and radiation with adjuvant hormone therapy 3 years earlier. She complained of vomiting and a 6-kg loss in body weight over 1 year. On physical examination, there were no abnormal findings other than emaciation. On chest X-ray, there was a dilated gastric tube in the thoracic cavity . Decompression using a nasogastric tube was performed but was ineffective. On fluoroscopy after decompression, the contrast medium remained in the thoracic part of the gastric tube and barely passed through to the abdominal part . On upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, there was no severe stricture; however, deflection and torsion at the site of the thoracoabdominal transition was observed . For several years after the esophagectomy, computed tomography had revealed no abnormal findings. However, with the onset of the current complaint of inability to eat, CT revealed a severely dilated gastric tube in the thoracic cavity with a stricture immediately anterior to the spine , with no evidence of cancer recurrence or dissemination. The stricture was soft, and the endoscope could pass through easily. Bypass surgery was not feasible because the stricture was in the thoracic cavity. We performed stent placement using a covered through-the-scope esophageal stent with clipping, in accordance with previous reports [, ]. However, the stent migrated to the upper side of the stricture several days after the patient restarted oral intake . Next, we planned to perform stent fixation using laparoscopy. We performed endoscopic stent placement using a bare metal stent (pyloric duodenal D-type stent) with clipping 1 day before surgery, with laparoscopic stent fixation (LSF) the next day. Intraoperatively, we explored the abdominal cavity and found no evidence of dissemination or compression of the gastric tube. We fixed the stent to the full-thickness gastric wall with 3-0 Prolene (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA) on the oral side of the antrum and lower gastric body (uppermost part in the abdominal cavity) and confirmed needle placement using endoscopy . Jejunal tube insertion was added to address possible difficulty with the passage of gastrointestinal contents. Postoperatively, the stent was fully patent and did not migrate. Contrast medium passed freely through the stent , and there was no evidence of dilation of the gastric tube in the thoracic cavity on CT . The patient’s oral intake and body weight improved markedly after surgery. However, she was readmitted after recurrence of symptoms, namely vomiting and inability to eat, 2 years after the operation. X-ray , fluoroscopy , and endoscopy showed that the stent had collapsed, with recurrence of a stricture and gastric dilation in the thoracic cavity. Therefore, we performed endoscopic stent-in-stent placement using over-the-scope clip fixation to the previous stent. We chose a covered esophageal stent to achieve long-term patency. The stent-in-stent procedure was successful, and safe placement and patency were confirmed on X-ray . After this procedure, the patient’s oral intake and body weight improved again . Unfortunately, recurrent breast cancer (invasive lobular breast cancer) occurred 4 months after this procedure, and palliative care was initiated.