A 25-year-old woman presented with a 4-d history of abdominal pain, melena, and nausea that were aggravated 1 d prior to admission. She had diarrhea approximately four times a day.
The patient presented to a local Chinese Medicine Hospital and was diagnosed with hemorrhoids. Her condition did not improve after the medical treatment, so she presented to our hospital for further evaluation.
There was no obvious abnormality in the past illness.
She denied any family history of related diseases.
No obvious positive signs were found in the abdomen.
The laboratory findings revealed normal routine blood parameters, coagulation function, tumor markers, and biochemistry results. Blood pressure was 90/70 mmHg, heart rate was 90 beats/min, and the heart rhythm was normal. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were strongly positive for HMB45, CD34 (vascular+), CD117, CD163, CD68, and Melan-A and negative for CK, Vimentin, S100, CK7, CK20, CD10, Dog-1, Des, CgA, SYN, LCA, EMA, smooth muscle actin (SMA), and SOX-10. Mitotic figures were approximately ≥ 2/5 per high power field, Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 2%, and there was a partially invasive boundary. The initial diagnosis was a gastrointestinal tract malignancy with perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (PEComa). However, we excluded primary melanoma and primary clear-cell sarcoma of the gastrointestinal tract. The patient was advised to have a genetic test or pathological consultation. Pathological consultation and a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) test were subsequently performed at Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University; immunohisto-chemistry showed that the tumor cells expressed a melanin marker and TFE3, accompanied by TFE3 gene translocation . FISH for TFE3 rearrangement showed that the TFE3 gene was fractured . The tumor showed an abnormal signal pattern consistent with rearrangement of the TFE3 locus in 52% of the cells. Taking into account all these immunohistochemistry and FISH tests, the final diagnosis was a melanotic Xp11-associated tumor. There was no intraoperative evidence of metastasis or involvement of other abdominal organs. Moreover, subsequent staging studies showed no evidence of metastatic disease.
Colonoscopy revealed a large mucosal bulge in the sigmoid colon, approximately 32 cm inside the anus. The surface was rough with local erosion. The tumor was brittle on biopsy and bled easily. Computed tomography revealed thickening of the rectal wall with edema. Gastroenterography revealed a filling defect at the junction of the sigmoid and the descending colon. Sputum passed through, the local wall was stiff, and the mucosal destruction was interrupted. Barium sulfate passed through, the local wall was stiff, and the mucosal destruction was interrupted. A malignant tumor was suspected after we completed the relevant examinations. Laparoscopic-assisted resection of the large sigmoid colon mass (about 10 cm × 2.1 cm) was performed. Postoperative pathology indicated the likelihood of a PEComa.