An 82-year-old Caucasian woman presented at our emergency department because of progressive dyspnoea and concomitant weight gain over the last 10 days. Upon request, she denied any form of angina, a history of syncope or fever. At primary evaluation, peripheral oedema and painless bulging flanks were found. Further physical examination revealed a holosystolic murmur with its punctum maximum over Erb’s point (3rd intercostal space, leftsided, parasternal), while chest radiography confirmed cardiomegaly with pulmonary congestion without any signs of infection or pleural effusion. Known comorbidities were permanent atrial fibrillation, hypercholesterolaemia, arterial hypertension, and chronic kidney disease (CKD, Stage 4). Cardiovascular pharmacological therapy included oral anticoagulation, a beta-blocker, and diuretics, which were halted for intravenous (IV) treatment with furosemide upon admission. Furthermore, drainage of ascites was conducted to relieve symptoms of the patient. Echocardiography confirmed the suspected diagnosis of acute heart failure (HF) showing left atrial functional MR [effective regurgitation orifice area (EROA): 0.7 cm2 (cut-off for severe MR: ≥0.4 cm2); vena contracta (VC): 9 mm (severe MR: ≥7 mm); regurgitation volume: 90 mL (severe MR: ≥60 mL)] and a secundum type ASD with significant left-to-right shunt (15 × 10 mm; , ). Besides, both atria and the right ventricle were substantially dilated, whereas left ventricular end-diastolic diameter was in normal range. Right ventricular (RV) function [tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE): 15 mm (normal value: ≥17 mm)] was moderately impaired, on the contrary left ventricular function was still preserved (ejection fraction 67%). Furthermore, she was found to have massive secondary tricuspid regurgitation (TR) (VC: 16 mm). Right-heart catheterization revealed mainly post-capillary pulmonary hypertension [mean pulmonary artery pressure: 40 mmHg (normal value: <25 mmHg), wedge pressure: 25 mmHg (≤15 mmHg), 3.3 WU (<3.0 WU), Qp:Qs = 2.5]. Invasive coronary angiography was deferred due to the complete lack of anginal symptoms and the presence of severe CKD.
Potential treatment options were discussed in the interdisciplinary Heart Team meeting and due to the high-risk constellation of the patient, transcatheter MVR and ASD was recommended in a single session. Consequently, the patient was further stabilized by continuously administering IV diuretics and discharged on intensified oral diuretic therapy with an appointment made for the procedure. Unfortunately, she returned to our emergency department with similar symptoms requiring hospitalization approximately 2 weeks later. Again, drainage of ascites and IV diuretics were administered to improve symptoms. In respect of repetitive HF hospitalizations, the date of planned procedure was brought forward. Meanwhile, the patient was referred to a secondary hospital to prevent further deterioration by continuing IV diuretics.
One week later, the patient was retransferred in stable condition to our department. Procedure was conducted by using a right femoral vein access in general anaesthesia. Transseptal puncture was performed under transoesophageal echocardiography guidance posterior to the immanent ASD . Due to a relatively short posterior leaflet (7 mm), an NTR MitraClip device was selected and implanted in medio-central position. Although MR reduction was present, a significant jet lateral to the first clip remained. Further reduction of MR was accomplished by implantation of a second clip (, Video 1, ). After confirmation of MR reduction, echocardiographic re-evaluation of the ASD still demonstrated a significant left-to-right shunt . Preselected strategy of ASD closure was therefore maintained and stretched ASD diameter (17 mm) was elaborated via a 34 mm compliant sizing balloon. To ensure complete closure of both defects, the pre-existing and the iatrogenic ASD, with one device and avoid embolization in the context of a floppy primary septum, a 22 mm Amplatzer ASD occluder was implanted without any notable complications (, Videos 2 and 3, ). Post-procedural transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a mitral transvalvular mean gradient of 5 mmHg, pericardial effusion was excluded. At the first post-procedural day, the patient was transferred to the ward and discharged 6 days after the procedure.
Two weeks later, she returned for short-term ambulatory follow-up showing further amelioration of symptoms, no recurrence of ascites, and continuously regressing peripheral oedema. Furthermore, confirmation of trace MR with improvements in TAPSE (19 mm) and TR [EROA: 0.5 cm2 (cut-off for severe TR: ≥0.4 cm2); VC: 12 mm (severe TR: ≥7 mm); regurgitation volume: 43 mL (severe TR: ≥45 mL)] were observed in TTE.