A 63-year-old male patient with large anterior mediastinal mass was referred to our hospital for treatment. The patient was pathologically diagnosed as cervical schwannoma and underwent surgical resection twelve years ago. He had re-operation because of the recurrent neck tumor four years ago. No specific neural, cardiovascular and respiratory disfunction and neoplasms his history contained as well as his family history. The patient suffered from chest oppression and shortness of breath for four months, and these symptoms gradually became worse. The Preoperative CT confirmed that the patient was diagnosed as TM and large anterior mediastinal mass Due to occasion of severe airway overreaction during the process of his endoscopy, fiber bronchoscopy was not finished.
Consideration of potential risk from serious TM, the patient was intubated with guidance of fibreoptic bronchoscopy in the supine position, then underwent median sternotomy and tumor resection followed by tracheal suspension. The prime procedures of this surgery were briefly depicted by hand drawings and details of surgical procedure were as follows:
Step 1: Tumorectomy. After medisection of sternum followed by opening pretracheal fascia, upper principal bronchus and frontage of cervical schwannoma were revealed. Along the line between the tumor and its adjacent tissue,the tumor was underwent entire resected.
Step 2: Fabrication of scaffold. Partial autogenous rib cartilage was removed from 5th rib, and its top and bottom parts were penetrated with flexible steel needle to form two channels available for thread, which could manufactured a scaffold to anchor the extensive malacial tracheal rings and membrane .
Step 3: Tracheal suspension. Free rib cartilage graft, fixed with bilateral tracheal rings, were deposited in front of malacial trachea by silk thread across the channels to cover the collapsed tracheal wall, so the malactic tracheal rings and membrane were elevated and pulled for enlarging the diameter of cartilaginous ring .
After living a short period of mechanical ventilation with positive airway pressure, the patient was successfully extubated within 12 h after surgery. During his hospital stay, major postoperative complications didn’t occur, but mild pneumonia happened. The patient was discharged on the 16th day postoperatively. In the follow-up,the images showed that either cross section of intraluminal stenosis or collapsed segment of airway was remarkably relieved, and scaffold made by autogenous rib cartilage clinged to extratrachea stably. It was surprising that the graft finally integrated with tracheal wall .