In early May, 2023, a 31-year-old male was brought to our hospital by an ambulance due to chest tightness and difficulty breathing. The patient had undergone liver surgery one month ago. He was an HIV-infected patient who had been on long-term oral antiviral therapy. Besides, he enjoyed eating raw food regularly.
Upon admission, the patient presented with shortness of breath, low-grade fever, and decreased blood oxygen saturation. Additionally, physical examination revealed his emaciated appearance, absence of breath sounds in the right lung, and tenderness in the liver area. The routine laboratory tests indicated an elevation in white blood cell count, neutrophil percentage, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein. Additionally, the lymphocyte percentage and hemoglobin level were found to be low. The HIV-1 ribonucleic acid (RNA) quantity was less than 20 copies/mL, T and B lymphocyte subset analysis showed cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4) lymphocyte percentage of 18% [normal range, (27–510%)] and CD4/CD8 ratio of 0.42 [normal range, 0.63–3.49].
Additional examinations: Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a large amount of pleural effusion on the right side . Closed thoracic drainage was performed and dark red turbid fluid was extracted. The pleural fluid was sent for different examinations, including polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for mycobacterium tuberculosis deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS), but no valuable results were found. Abdominal ultrasound showed a cystic mass measuring 19.3×16.5cm in the right lobe of the liver. Percutaneous drainage was performed for the liver abscess and a jam-like turbid fluid was extracted . Bacterial and fungal cultures of the liver abscess fluid and pleural fluid were negative. We also performed bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, and no specific blood-related diseases were found.
In September, 2022, the patient was admitted to Beijing You An Hospital due to massive lower gastrointestinal bleeding. At that time, the patient experienced acute diarrhea, starting with blood in the stool and eventually progressing to direct rectal bleeding, leading to a sharp decrease in hemoglobin levels to 30g/L. However, no significant abnormalities were found during gastrointestinal endoscopy examination. The patient was separated from the critical condition after receiving symptomatic support treatment such as blood transfusion and rehydration, but then he was in an anemia state. In March, 2023, the patient was hospitalized in the same hospital in Beijing due to abdominal enlargement. A contrast-enhanced abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated solid cystic masses with tumor-like characteristics . The positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan indicated liver masses, possibly malignant. On March 28, 2023, a laparoscopic resection of the cystic mass in the left lobe of the liver was performed. However, the pathological examination did not reveal evidence of malignancy. Following discharge, the patient’s overall condition progressively deteriorated, progressing to a life-threatening state within a short span of one month.
Taking into account the patient’s medical history, we began to search for alternative explanations. Later, we sent the liver abscess fluid for mNGS detection. It reported sequence reads of amoeba trophozoites (specific sequence reads: 81). Simultaneously, we actively cooperated with Beijing You An Hospital where the patient had undergone liver cystic mass resection, recommending additional testing on the liver tissue. The final pathological feedback confirmed the presence of amoeba trophozoites in the tissue . As a result, the patient’s diagnosis was determined as amoebic liver abscess, amoebic pulmonary abscess, and concurrent HIV infection.
Due to the severity of the patient’s condition, although the diagnosis was not yet confirmed, we empirically administered intravenous infusion of metronidazole sodium chloride injection at a dose of 0.5g q8h, which was adjusted to 0.5g q6h two days later. Gradually, the drainage fluid from the chest and liver became clear and reduced . And chest CT showed that the amount of pleural effusion was significantly lower than before. After 32 days of hospitalization, the patient’s condition stabilized. He was discharged with instructions for regular outpatient follow-up visits and medication to consolidate the treatment.