An 87-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital because of loss of consciousness. He had hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and angina. His regular medications did not include hypoglycemic drugs. At 18 months before admission, he was admitted to a nursing home due to cognitive impairment and gradually progression to frailty. One week before admission, he suffered from urinary tract infection with fever, and took 300 mg of cefcapene pivoxil hydrochloride, one of PCC, three times a day for 7 days. The next morning after the last dose of cefcapene pivoxil hydrochloride, he was found to be unconsciousness, and was referred to the emergency department, and hospitalized.
On arrival, the Glasgow coma scale was 10, and his vital signs and oxygen saturation were normal. He was lean (body weight, height and body mass index, 45.2 kg, 159 cm and 17.9 kg/m2, respectively), and his limbs were emaciated (the mid-upper arm and the thigh circumferences [right/left], 22.0/21.1 cm and 32.8/32.8 cm). Rest of physical examination findings were unremarkable, including normal body hairs. Blood glucose was 31 mg/dL, and urine ketone was negative. Intravenous administration of glucose immediately relieved his symptoms. After admission, all medications were discontinued.
His laboratory data showed hypoalbuminemia, hypocholesterolemia, and anemia . Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 4.7%. Later, blood samples obtained at admission revealed hypocarnitinemia; free carnitine (FC):17.0 μmol/L, acylcarnitine (AC); 16.5 μmol/L, (normal reference ranges; FC; 36–74 μmol/L, and AC; 6.0–23.0 μmol/L, respectively). AC/FC ratio was 0.971. Hypocarnitinemia is diagnosed when FC level is < 20 μmol/L and AC/FC ratio of > 0.4 [, ]. Hypocarnitinemic hypoglycemia was diagnosed, and levocarnitine (2250 mg/day) was administered. However, low blood glucose levels (50–70 mg/dL) persisted without any symptoms. Plasma insulin level was undetectable, and C-peptide was low . He was transferred to our department on the 12th day of hospitalization.
The pituitary and adrenal hormones were evaluated . Basal levels of plasma cortisol and ACTH obtained at 8 am were within normal limits, and growth hormone (GH), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) values were low or undetectable. Plasma thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine were slightly lower than normal limits . In corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), and GH releasing-peptide-2 (GHRP-2) stimulation tests, peak plasma ACTH, TSH, LH, FSH, and GH responses except prolactin were low . Peak value of plasma cortisol to intravenous 250 μg ACTH was low . Head magnetic resonance imaging revealed an empty sella. Subclinical ACTH deficiency with hypopituitarism was diagnosed due to empty sella. After diagnosis, hydrocortisone 20 mg/day was started. Immediately, his food intake trended upward and his hypoglycemia resolved . The patient was discharged to a nursing home on day 44 of hospitalization.