A 78-year-old man presented to our breast center with a palpable mass on his left breast diagnosed as malignant by core needle biopsy.
This patient recognized a palpable mass on his left breast 10 d earlier when he visited the local clinic. He had no complaints other than the lump.
He previously had a robot-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer in May 2016. He received routine follow-up in the urology department. He had also been followed-up for coronary artery obstructive disease in the cardiology department. He was taking dual antiplatelet therapy.
The patient did not abuse alcohol and was a non-smoker. There was no specific family history of malignancy.
There was a fixed mass on his left breast, with no visible signs like redness, skin ulcer, or edema. There were no palpable masses in the axillary areas.
Carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 15-3, and prostate-specific antigen were checked according to his history and were within the normal range (3.9 ng/mL, 7.73 U/mL, and 0.01 ng/mL, respectively). Except for mild anemia, his blood test results were normal. Genetic testing for BRCAness or next generation sequencing was not performed.
Ultrasonography showed an ill-defined, lobulated, heterogeneous hypoechoic mass 2 cm in size on the left breast . Mammography identified a 3.2-cm sized oval, indistinct, hyperdense mass on his left mid inner breast . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), there was a 2.9 cm × 2.9 cm × 3 cm sized irregular, rim-enhancing mass with an adjacent satellite-enhancing focus on the left breast. The mass showed diffusion restriction. There were two round enhancing lymph nodes on level I, which were suspicious for metastasis. For the metastasis workup, a bone scan and Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were performed. There were no metastatic findings in the bones or abdomen. Examination of chest CT revealed a 5.1 cm × 3.0 cm sized lobulated lung mass in the posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe with multiple enlarged sub-centimeter-sized lymph nodes in the subaortic area .
We reviewed the breast biopsy specimen. A percutaneous needle biopsy was also performed on the lung mass to differentiate between metastasis and primary lung cancer. The percutaneous needle biopsy revealed poorly differentiated carcinoma with spindle cell differentiation, suggesting metastatic metaplastic carcinoma. GATA3, pancytokeratin, and p53 were positive. Alpha-Methylacyl-CoA Racemase (AMACR) and TTF-1 were negative. These findings helped us rule out primary lung cancer.