A 32 year-old African female patient, G4P3013 (four previous pregnancies, one abortion 3 years ago, and 3 term deliveries with the 3 live children from different men); presented with a 10 day history of severe RUQ pain which progressively increased in severity. The pain was aggravated by movement and valsalva maneuvers. Systemic review was remarkable for offensive yellowish, intermittent vaginal discharge for two weeks. There was no fever, dyspareunia nor changes in urine and stool colour. She had no known previous history of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). She did not practice any contraceptive method and currently had a single sex partner. She had a regular 28–30 day menstrual cycle, with a 5 day flow and no dysmenorrhea. She was a farmer and unmarried.
She had no known chronic disease or previous history of abdominal trauma or surgery. She had been previously treated with intravenous ceftriaxone, and oral metronidazole, omeprazole, and fluconazole at recommended doses for five days at a local health centre. The details of disease evolution, further management and treatment could not be obtained due to poor recording of the medical records at the previous health centre. Persistence of the RUQ pain despite treatment prompted consultation at our community clinic.
On physical examination, she was afebrile, haemodynamically stable with anicteric sclerae. Cardiorespiratory exam was normal. Abdominal exam was remarkable for severe tenderness at the RUQ on superficial palpation, worst on deep inspiration and mild bilateral iliac fossa tenderness on deep palpation. There was neither clinical hepatomegaly nor splenomegaly. Pelvic examination was remarkable for an offensive mucoid yellowish vaginal discharge, with positive cervical motion and mild adnexal tenderness. Blood tests showed, haemoglobin level: 11.8 g/dl, Total WBC (White blood cell count): 11,800 cells/mm3, neutrophils: 8700cells/µl, Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST) 15U/l, Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) 17U/l, C-reactive Protein (CRP): 7 mg/l. Urinalysis was normal . An abdominal ultrasound performed to rule out differentials showed a normal hepato-biliary architecture (with no signs of hepatic abscess, acute cholecystisis or dilation of the intra or extra-hepatic bile ducts). There was no sign of acute appendicitis. Gallstones were not observed in the lumen of the gallbladder . Gram stain and culture of endocervical swab was negative for gonococcus and ureaplasma. Serological tests: Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and Chlamydia trachomatis (Enzyme Immuno Assay) were positive. Treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay (TPHA) and a serological test for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) were negative .
A diagnosis of FHCS caused by Chlamydia trachomatis was made based on the persistent RUQ pain and vaginal discharge in a patient serologically positive for Chlamydia. The patient was placed on doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 7 days per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines for the management of PID. The fifth day of therapy was marked by decrease in RUQ pain. The patient completely recovered 3 days after complete therapy. She was educated on the methods and importance of preventing sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and advised to treat her sexual partner with prescribed doses of Doxycycline as above.