A 73-year-old woman with past medical history of diabetes mellitus, degenerative disc disease, and osteoarthritis presented to the emergency department due to progressively worsening back pain for 1 month. The patient described the pain as intermittent, yet progressive, becoming constant, worsening with movement and lifting, and radiating to bilateral thighs without associated numbness, weakness, morning stiffness, or constitutional symptoms. She endorsed a prior history of urinary incontinence, unchanged during the current presentation. Physical exam was significant for low grade fever at 38.1o C, L5-S1 spinal tenderness, and a positive bilateral straight leg raise. She had an unlimited active and passive range of motion of the bilateral lower extremities but was noted to have significant pain on knee extension and flexion, without joint swelling or erythema. Initial laboratory findings were significant for leukocytosis (20.6 k/uL), moderate microcytic hypochromic anemia, and mild transaminase elevation. Computed tomography (CT) of the lumbar spine revealed diffuse degenerative changes and spinal stenosis at L4-L5, without mass, fluid collection, fracture or dislocation . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical and lumbar spine was negative for cord compression or epidural abscess, however was worrisome for possible discitis/osteomyelitis at C6-C7 and L2-L5 levels . The patient was started on empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics and admitted to the medical floor.
Further workup revealed markedly elevated inflammatory markers, specifically a ferritin of 9617 ng/mL . The patient continued to spike quotidian fevers up to 39 °C despite broad-spectrum antibiotics, persistently negative blood cultures, and a negative tuberculosis T-spot. CT scans of chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed a moderate left-sided pleural effusion, multiple mediastinal lymph nodes with the largest measuring 1.8 × 1.0 cm, and mild ascites . CT-guided biopsy of the superior aspect of the L5 vertebrae revealed normal bone marrow and was negative for bacterial, fungal, and acid-fast bacillus organisms, ruling out infectious and non-infectious osteomyelitis. Additional diagnostic evaluation including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Syphilis, Brucella, Cryptococcus, Hepatitis C, and Histoplasma were all negative. Transesophageal echocardiogram to exclude culture-negative infective endocarditis was unremarkable. Bone marrow biopsy, flow cytometry, serum and urine electrophoresis were normal. Autoimmune work-up revealed a positive Anti-Nuclear Antibodies (1:160, Nucleolar staining pattern) with an elevated C4 complement, but was otherwise unremarkable . The patient subsequently developed worsening left knee pain and swelling with limited range of motion, prompting arthrocentesis. Synovial fluid analysis demonstrated calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD) and the patient was started on methylprednisolone 40 mg daily with resolution of quotidian fevers as well as improved leukocytosis. She remained afebrile on steroids and was eventually discharged to subacute rehabilitation with intravenous ceftriaxone for a planned 6–8 weeks course for possible spinal discitis/osteomyelitis (despite the noted negative culture and biopsy results) and prednisone taper for CPPD.
Five days after discharge, she developed spiking fevers associated with a diffuse pruritic rash involving the anterior chest and neck and was readmitted to our hospital. No significant changes were noted except for a rapid taper of Prednisone to 10 mg. Physical exam was significant for a fever of 40.3 °C and a macular, pink truncal rash. Repeat laboratory findings demonstrated persistent leukocytosis (15.6 k/uL) with neutrophilic predominance (92.4%) and persistently elevated inflammatory markers. Blood cultures were obtained and empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated. A single dose of methylprednisolone 40 mg IV was administered, leading to fever resolution and improvement of the pruritic rash. Repeat CT scan demonstrated persistent mildly enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes, resolution of the previously observed pleural effusion and ascites,, and no organomegaly. Her antibiotics were switched to meropenem due to concern for osteomyelitis and ultimately discontinued in light of persistently negative blood cultures. Twenty-four hours after discontinuing Meropenem, a time that coincided with tapering of prednisone to 10 mg, she developed fever and a severe, pruritic rash involving the entire trunk that disappeared with resolution of fever. Mediastinal lymph node biopsy was deferred due to the high risk of complications. She remained afebrile, and in discussion with Rheumatology, prednisone was tapered to 5 mg, leading to recurrence of fever and the previously noted pruritic rash. Additional diagnostic workup demonstrated negative double stranded DNA antibody, anti-Smith antibody, and normal serum angiotensin converting enzyme. Given the negative workup and fulfillment of Yamaguchi criteria , the patient was diagnosed with Adult Onset Still’s Disease. She was started on Ibuprofen 800 mg three times a day and prednisone tapered to 5 mg for 2 days and then discontinued. The patient remained asymptomatic, afebrile and demonstrated improvement in the rash. She was discharged home and instructed to follow-up as outpatient with rheumatology.
Three months later her quotidian fevers and arthralgia recurred and she was admitted to a neighboring medical center. She was evaluated by multiple sub-specialty services, but extensive infectious, autoimmune, and hematological work-up remained negative. She was empirically started on colchicine with some improvement but continued to spike quotidian fevers. Positron Emission Tomography scan showed hilar and supraclavicular lymphadenopathy. An ultrasound-guided biopsy of supraclavicular nodes showed reactive lymphoid tissue without granulomas. She was discharged without a definitive diagnosis and a month later underwent bilateral temporal artery biopsy that was negative for giant cell arteritis. Over the course of the next 2 months she suffered from relapsing symptoms of fever and arthralgia, prompting readmission to the neighboring hospital. Comprehensive evaluation was once again negative except for elevated inflammatory markers . Rheumatology re-evaluated the patient and diagnosed her with AOSD. The patient was started on Anakinra 100 mg daily and remained asymptomatic with normal inflammatory markers on outpatient follow-up .