A 50-year-old male patient with a history of congenital aortic stenosis surgically corrected previously and with chronic HF due to severe left ventricular dysfunction presented to our emergency department complaining of dyspnoea. Due to acute decompensated HF with beginning cardiogenic shock, he was admitted to our intensive cardiology unit. Physical examination revealed pulmonary congestion with slightly cold extremities. The blood examinations showed normal renal and liver function, normal total and free calcium, 9.4 mg/dL (NV 8.5–10.2 mg/dL) and 1.16 mmol/L (NV 1.1–1.3 mmol/L), respectively, and lactates were mildly increased. The chest X-ray confirmed pulmonary congestion. On echocardiography, we found severe biventricular dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction 20%, right ventricular fractional area change 25%), moderate mitral regurgitation, and severe pulmonary hypertension (estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 65 mmHg). Since the patient was unstable, adrenaline (0.05 µg/kg/min) and high-dose SNP (2.47 µg/kg/min) were started. Additionally, an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was placed. Right heart catheterization with a Swan-Ganz catheter revealed severe pulmonary hypertension reversible with SNP and, therefore, the patient was inserted into the heart transplant list.
Patient haemodynamic was persistently unstable and we were able to avoid endotracheal intubation, with its inherent high infective burden, through continuous infusion of inotropes, prolonged IABP, and high dose of SNP (2.47 µg/kg/min). One of the side effects of SNP is thiocyanate toxicity. Thiocyanate levels were monitored and increased up to 10 mg/100 mL (NV < 3). An attempt to reduce the dose of SNP to 1.1 µg/kg/min failed due to acute pulmonary oedema rapidly reversed after the restoration of a higher SNP dose. However, after 3 weeks, the free calcium ion progressively decreased up to 0.94 mmol/L, despite normal total calcium and calcium supplementation intravenously and orally. Since the arrhythmic burden, characterized by frequent premature ventricular beats and iterative non-sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia, markedly increased, we started lidocaine which was not effective. The patient was not taking any antibiotics, albumin, or other drug capable of bonding the calcium ion; total plasmatic proteins were normal.
Since we suspected a possible causative role of thiocyanate, which might bond the double positively charged free calcium ion with its two negatively charged sulfur atoms, explaining the normal total calcium level and the low calcium ion, we carefully reduced the SNP dose within several days. This allowed us to reduce thiocyanate to 6 mg/100 mL, without compromising patient haemodynamics. Concomitantly, the free calcium ion tended to normalize, reducing the arrhythmic burden .