A 61-year-old Caucasian woman was seen by her primary care physician for a palpable abdominal mass that had been present for 1½ years. She did not complain of systemic symptoms, general malaise, weight loss, flank pain or urinary symptoms, but described mild diarrhea and right periumbilical pain that radiated to the right lower quadrant. Her medical history included well-controlled hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Her previous colonoscopic and endoscopic evaluations were normal. During her physical examination, a nontender, immobile mass was palpable in the right lower quadrant without peripheral lymphadenopathy. Examination and laboratory studies were otherwise unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) with intravenous and oral contrast of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a heterogeneously enhancing, 10.2 × 6.9 × 6.3–cm solid mass in the right retroperitoneal space immediately lateral to and displacing the inferior vena cava and right iliac vasculature . Significant deformation of adjacent retroperitoneal structures was also observed. There was no evidence of abdominopelvic adenopathy or intraperitoneal disease. A biopsy was not performed.
An exploratory laparotomy revealed a large mass with remarkable tumor and perivascular inflammatory changes extending to the right iliac vessels and over the inferior vena cava. The mass was completely resected without the need for multiorgan resection. The blood loss during surgery was approximately 1 L. The patient underwent a complete curative resection. She recovered well following the operation and was discharged on the seventh postoperative day. The patient has remained without radiologic evidence of disease recurrence during 2 years of follow-up.
A soft encapsulated mass measuring 11.5 × 6.0 × 5.0 cm with tannish orange cut surfaces was identified in a surgical tissue specimen that had attached fatty and inflammatory soft tissue . All surgical margins were clear, with the closest approximately 2.0 cm from the lateral aspect of the inferior vena cava.
Under the microscope, we could see that the nodule consisted of lymphocytes with marked vascular proliferation and prominent hyalinization. Low- and high-power histopathology revealed regressively transformed germinal centers with normal B-cell distribution surrounded by hypervascular mantle zones composed predominantly of concentric rings (“onion-skinning”) of small cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4)-positive T lymphocytes and plasma cells . We frequently observed hyalinized blood vessels perforating the follicles from the mantle zone. Immunostaining for CD21 demonstrated the characteristic follicular dendritic network of residual germinal centers . CD10 was also weakly positive in some of the transformed germinal centers. PCR analysis of paraffin-embedded tissue targeting the T-cell receptor γ gene revealed no gene rearrangement. In situ hybridization for EBV and immunostaining for HHV-8 were both negative. These architectural features and immunochemical findings are consistent with HV-CD.