A 50-year-old male with a history of metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, who has received chemotherapy and radiation in the past and had a partially covered metallic stent placed in the biliary tree 1 year ago, presented to the oncology clinic with fatigue, abdominal pain, and hypotension. He was found to have elevated bilirubin of 9.7 mg/dL, and alkaline phosphatase was slightly elevated at 162 IU/L. AST and ALT were within normal limits. CBC showed WBC count of 14.8 × 103/mm3, segments were 93%. He underwent ERCP for possible cholangitis secondary to obstructed previously placed biliary stent.
However, the duodenoscope could not be advanced to the level of major papilla because of narrowed pylorus and severely strictured duodenal sweep and second part of the duodenum. Forward-view gastroscope was then passed with careful manipulation to the severely narrowed second part of the duodenum where the previously placed metallic stent was visualized. Attempts made to cannulate the common bile duct through the metallic stent using the forward-view gastroscope were eventually successful and the balloon sweeping through the stent was done with removal of sludge. Cholangiography after balloon sweep showed there was no contrast leakage through the common bile duct.
Patient did not have any abdominal pain but nausea after the procedure. He was afebrile and hemodynamically stable and on physical exam, the abdomen was soft with mild right hypochondrial tenderness, and the bowel sounds were audible. His WBC count was 10.8 × 103/mm3 and the bilirubin was 6.9 mg/dL the next day. He was kept NPO till the results of further workup.
Patient underwent CT scan of the abdomen after ERCP to look at the biliary channels and the progression of malignancy. CT scan of the abdomen beside demonstrating pancreatic tumor and diffuse hepatic metastasis showed pneumoperitoneum which was communicating with the pneumobilia through a loculated air collection in the right lobe of liver (necrotic hepatic metastasis) perforating Glisson's capsule . CT scan of the abdomen did not show pneumoretroperitoneum and subsequent upper gastrointestinal tract study with contrast did not show any duodenal perforation . The patient was managed conservatively via NG tube placement, i.v. fluids and i.v. antibiotics. Repeat CT scan in 1 week showed resolving pneumoperitoneum with conservative treatment only. The patient was discharged on day 10 of ERCP.