An 83-year-old Asian man with a left lung tumor was referred to our hospital for SBRT in 2008. He had no clinical symptoms. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a 3.5 cm-sized tumor located close to his left diaphragm. Magnetic resonance imaging of his head and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT showed no metastatic lesions. The maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of the tumor on FDG-PET/CT was 6.9. The serum cytokeratin-19 fragment (CYFRA 21-1) level was elevated to 8.7 ng/mL. A transbronchial lung biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma. The lung cancer was staged at T2N0M0 based on the sixth TNM classification of malignant tumors. He had undergone upper lobectomy for stage I squamous cell lung cancer in 1993, and his medical history also included hypertension, atrial fibrillation, renal sclerosis, and chronic bronchitis with low respiratory function. Radical left lower lobectomy was not applicable because of his advanced age, history of left upper lobectomy, and low respiratory function; therefore, he selected SBRT.
SBRT was performed with the self-breath-holding technique using a respiratory monitoring system. Image guidance was performed using a CT-on-rails system for all sessions. A total dose of 40 Gy in 4 fractions was delivered to 95% of the planning target volume. The details of irradiation are shown in Table . The maximum dose (Dmax) in the stomach volume was 45.8 Gy. The dose distribution and dose volume histogram of his stomach are shown in Figs. and , respectively.
Immediately after the completion of SBRT, he developed vomiting and upper abdominal pain, and he was consequently treated with a histamine H2-receptor antagonist. Two months after SBRT, CT revealed a partial response of the lung tumor, and the serum CYFRA 21-1 level had decreased to the normal range. However, approximately 3 months after SBRT, he developed hematemesis. Endoscopy showed a deep ulcer on the fornix of his stomach , and he was treated with a proton pump inhibitor. Eight months after SBRT, repeated endoscopy showed an intractable ulcer . Around the same time, local recurrence was diagnosed by tumor progression on CT images accompanying high uptake on FDG-PET/CT (SUVmax, 4.9) and elevation of the serum CYFRA 21-1 level. A 4.5 cm-sized recurrent tumor was observed, in contact with his left diaphragm, while metastatic disease was not noted. The recurrent tumor did not cause any symptoms. He did not accept the risk of salvage segmentectomy, and radiofrequency ablation was not applicable because of the large tumor size. Thus, he selected re-irradiation with SBRT after receiving information regarding the possibility of serious toxicity due to repeated SBRT and providing informed consent.
The second SBRT was performed 11 months after the first SBRT. A Sengstaken–Blakemore tube was inserted below his diaphragm by laparoscopic surgery before the second SBRT in order to keep his stomach away from the tumor. The balloon was expanded with 200 ml of normal saline. A total dose of 50 Gy in 4 fractions was delivered to the isocenter. The Dmax of the stomach was 48.0 Gy, but we considered that the high-dose region differed from the previous one treated with the first SBRT, based on the change of the stomach shape by the Sengstaken–Blakemore tube. The dose distribution and dose volume histogram of the stomach are shown in Figs. and , respectively. One of four sessions was performed during free-breathing because of his depressed level of consciousness. He was irradiated with verification of tumor reproducibility using a respiratory monitoring system.
One month after the second SBRT, he was hospitalized with melena and anemia. An endoscopy revealed a deep ulcer in the same region as after the first SBRT, and he was treated with a proton pump inhibitor . Subsequently, he developed left thoracic empyema, and a tube was inserted into his left thorax for drainage. Two months after the second SBRT, a gastric perforation and gastropleural fistula penetrating his diaphragm were suspected because of food debris being observed in his drainage tube. He was treated conservatively because of inoperability. Three months after the second SBRT, an endoscopy showed a large gastric perforation and gastropleural fistula , and he died of multiple organ failure with thoracic empyema.