We report a case of a young female patient (25 years old and 52 kg) who came to our department since she developed dyspnoea on mild effort during pregnancy. The patient did not show a significant medical history. A mesocardial continuous murmur was appreciated, with a high differential pressure (systemic arterial pressure: 120/50 mmHg). Echocardiography was performed immediately and showed severe left ventricle dilatation (end-diastolic diameter 69 mm) with mild reduction of systolic function (left ventricle ejection fraction 45%). At parasternal short-axis view, a distal aortopulmonary window with significant left-to-right continuous shunt was detected . Systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 40 mmHg. Anti-congestive medical therapy (diuretics and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors) improved clinical condition of the patient. The Heart Team discussed the case addressing the management to a surgical closure of aortopulmonary window. However, the patient refused the surgery, and so an interventional approach was proposed to close the defect, since the aortopulmonary window was far enough from the aortic and pulmonary valves. A detailed informed consent was obtained by the patient. After delivery, the cardiac catheterization was performed.
The aortography showed an aortopulmonary window with significant and early opacification of pulmonary artery. The large defect (basal measure 9 mm) was far away from the aortic and pulmonary valve allowing a percutaneous chance to close without interference with ventricular-arterial valves function. A normal pulmonary pressure (mean pulmonary arterial pressure 20 mmHg) and pulmonary vascular resistance (1.10 WU) were recorded. A haemodynamically significant left-to-right shunt (Qp:Qs 2.10) was detected with an indirect Fick method. From arterial side, the window was crossed with a hydrophilic Terumo wire, which was captured by an Amplatz Goose Neck snare (Microvena Corporation, White Bear Lake, MN, USA) and pulled up to the femoral vein (outside the venous sheath) creating an arterial-venous circuit. From femoral vein, a sizing balloon was carried until the defect and inflated; highlighting the presence of significant waist measured 12 mm. The stretching confirmed the low distension of window and the percutaneous closure feasibility. An Amplatzer Muscular Septal Occluder device 16 mm (Abbott) was chosen. The unpredictability of device deployment suggested to use two safety measures: the over-the-wire technique and the capturing of device distal-end with an Amplatz Goose Neck snare (Microvena Corporation), as previously described.,
These measures allowed a hooking of device even after the realizing so that it might be retired in case of embolization. The device was deployed, and stability was checked with push-and-pull manoeuvre and then the delivery cable was unscrewed. No changes of device placement were noted and so both the snare and the wire were removed. Both aortography as well as pulmonary arteriography confirmed a good position of the device without residual shunt or injuries on great vessels or coronary arteries .
The patient was extubated and discharged 1 day and 6 days later, respectively. No-inotropic support was required during hospitalization.
At last follow-up (1 year later), the patient was asymptomatic, and echocardiography confirmed the good deployment of device with the absence of peri-prosthesis shunt and normalization both of left ventricle diameter as well as of ejection fraction. Normal pulmonary pressures (systolic pulmonary arterial pressure 30 mmHg) were estimated through the tricuspid regurgitation.