The patient was a 28-year-old Iranian man with a history of BS, who presented with right shoulder pain and hoarseness 1 week prior to admission. Going through his medical records, we realized that he had undergone an open right subclavian artery bypass for acute right upper extremity ischemia caused by thrombosis in the aneurysmal right subclavian artery to the distal arterial branches around 1.5 years ago. However, follow-up imaging suggested occlusion in the bypass area. Given the history of recurrent oral aphthous lesions and extensive body folliculitis lesions, BS was suspected. The BS diagnosis was confirmed by a positive human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B*51 test, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 79, and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 5.2 (normal: 0.5), as well as pathological findings from the open right subclavian artery bypass surgery. Cyclophosphamide therapy was the treatment of choice for the patient, but due to infertility concerns, he refused. Therefore, he was treated with azathioprine 100 mg daily, prednisolone 30 mg daily, colchicine 1 mg daily, and rivaroxaban 20 mg daily postoperatively.
The patient’s compliance was good, and according to the latest rheumatological reports prior to his admission to our facility, his BS was under control and no hypercoagulable symptoms were observed.
After admitting the patient, with all his past history in mind, we requested a contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography angiography (CTA) with suspicion of a vascular pathology causing pressure effect on the recurrent laryngeal nerves. CTA revealed a 32 × 27 mm ruptured pseudoaneurysm originating from innominate artery bifurcation with a 90 × 61 × 65 mm hematoma extending to the right shoulder and forming an extrapleural hematoma at the apex of the right thoracic cavity . The trachea was deviated to the left side due to the mass effect of the pseudoaneurysm. Despite total occlusion of the right subclavian and axillary arteries by thrombosis, the patient had no complaint regarding his right upper extremity, which shows that there was probably sufficient collateral blood perfusion. Even though we retrospectively reexamined his previous CTA from the former admission, no anomaly was found in the innominate artery. We decided to repair the ruptured pseudoaneurysm by an endovascular approach. Preoperatively, the patient received methylprednisolone to decrease postoperative complications. In a hybrid operation room, we performed a digital subtraction angiography. Unfortunately, owing to the lack of proper landing zone, we could not perform an endovascular repair by stent graft. Inevitably, we approached the pseudoaneurysm by a median sternotomy with supraclavicular extension. After excising the ruptured pseudoaneurysm and evacuating the surrounding hematoma, we performed an innominate artery to the right common carotid artery bypass with a 6 mm expandable polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) graft, which passed right behind the innominate vein . The pressure effect of the pseudoaneurysm was removed from the right recurrent laryngeal, phrenic, and vagus nerves with no neural damage. We decided not to perform a right subclavian artery bypass since it was previously thrombosed, and the patient had no complaint concerning the right upper extremity. Postoperatively, the patient developed a deep vein thrombosis at the central venous catheter site in the left internal jugular vein. Later, the patient was transferred to the rheumatology ward. The hoarseness of the patient resolved through the hospital course. Monthly infusion of cyclophosphamide 750 mg was started, and the azathioprine was discontinued. Follow-up during the next year showed no sign of recurrence.