A 44-year-old woman with no history presented at a local hospital with persistent headache and flickering in her eyes. Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed a small amount of hemorrhage with strong perifocal edema in the left occipital lobe. She was eventually transferred to our hospital for further treatment. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed heterogeneous enhancement in the left occipital lobe . No primary tumor was found with enhanced CT of the body. Blood examination showed normal tumor markers, C-reactive protein, and white blood cells. Our preoperative diagnosis was glioblastoma. We administered 5-ALA (Nobelpharma, Tokyo, Japan) at 20 mg/kg prior to her procedure, and biopsied the internal lesion that appeared as red fluorescence under blue light (ZEISS OPMI PENTERO 900) . However, intraoperative frozen section revealed the presence of only inflammatory cells and the absence of malignant tumor cells. During resection, strong 5-ALA fluorescence was continuously observed on the surface of and inside the lesion.
We performed a lesionectomy with enhanced lesion to confirm the pathological diagnosis and reduce edema in the brain. We did not resect the peritumoral lesion despite the vague fluorescence. After the surgical resection, the patient exhibited only right upper quadrant hemianopia. Histopathological examination with hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining revealed signs of infection, inflammation characterized by the accumulation of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages positive for CD68 in immunohistochemistry (IHC) . Gram, PAS, Grocott, and Ziehl–Neelsen staining demonstrated absence of pathogens in the lesion. We determined that the cause of the intraoperative fluorescence was inflammatory change and ruled out GBM . The patient did not require additional treatment and was able to return to her normal activities. Follow-up MRI at 30 months showed no recurrence and an unchanged postoperative cavity . Because specific enzymes or transporters in the porphyrin-biosynthesis pathway are factors in 5-ALA-induced false-positive fluorescence, we performed an analysis with IHC and found high expression of peptide transporter 1 (PEPT1) and low expression of ATP-binding cassette transporter G2 (ABCG2) and ferrochelatase (FECH) .