A 39-year-old Japanese woman consulted a doctor because of back pain, and UPJO was detected after an examination. She was referred to our department and agreed to undergo laparoscopic surgery. A renogram showed that the function of her left hydronephrotic kidney was maintained to some extent, and surgery was thought to be effective. However, CT data revealed that the network of arteries and veins was very complicated. Therefore, we decided to use our simulator before surgery, and our patient agreed.
CT data were saved in the DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine) file format. CT was performed with slices of 1mm in thickness from the chest to the pelvis, and its DICOM file was reconstructed to obtain three-dimensional (3D) volume data. The reconstructed organs were shaped with 3D mesh by using computer graphic techniques. After 3D conversion, the data were transmitted to our simulator, and relations and locations of organs were set. Fibrotic tissue and fat were added appropriately around the organs, and reconstruction of the body was completed (Figure
).
During the simulation, we first placed the camera and trocars on the body surface and obtained a virtual view of the abdominal cavity. When we changed the position of the trocar, the virtual view of the abdominal cavity also changed. Thus, we could choose a better position of the trocar in this pre-operative simulation. There were four renal arteries, two renal veins, and one gonadal vein that bifurcated in the middle. The lumbar vein was not important during surgery and therefore was not depicted.
During surgery, we chose the right flank position and four trocars. The pneumoperitoneum pressure was 10mmHg. We approached the retroperitoneum from the lateral aspect of the descending colon. We found the gonadal vein and ureter and then reached the renal hilum. We found an anonymous vein that tightened the ureter. We removed the target vein and ureteral stenosis and performed a dismembered pyeloplasty after placing a ureteral stent. The pathological finding was fibromuscular tissue, which was thought to be the cause of the UPJO. Operative and pathological findings showed that ureteral stenosis occurred not only because of the crossing vein but also because of endogenous stenosis. Our patient was discharged from our department without complications. After surgery, there were still four renal arteries, two renal veins, and one gonadal vein; the status of the lumber vein remained unknown because the lesion was outside the target area. The locations of the arteries, veins, ureter, and UPJO were almost the same. However, the anonymous vein, which tightened the ureter and ran dorsal to it on the simulator, ran ventral to it during surgery (Table
).