Patient is an otherwise healthy 28-year-old male. He struggled with his weight since his teenage years and tried several weight loss strategies, including diet and exercise, without any long-term success. Therefore, he sought other therapies. After an initial evaluation with a multidisciplinary team that included nutritional and psychological counseling, he accepted treatment with an IGB (A spherical 13 cm silicone-made balloon with a volume of 500 ml was placed) as his body mass index (BMI) was 27 kg/m2 at that time.
Four months later, he had great success; he had lost almost 13 kg, reaching a BMI of 24 kg/m2. In addition, he changed his habits, exercised more, and adjusted his diet. Nonetheless, he had to endure a very stressful situation as he had to graduate from his university; at this time, he stopped taking omeprazole, started smoking, eating poorly, and started drinking alcohol almost daily to cope with this stress. Then, five months after the IGB, the patient consumed vast amounts of alcohol to the point of intoxication; during this episode, the patient experienced severe abdominal pain, nausea, and vomits. Suddenly the patient started vomiting blood to the point where he became unresponsive and was brought immediately by his family to the emergency room.
On clinical examination, a tachycardic (130 beats/min) and hypotensive patient (Mean arterial pressure: 55 mmHg) was encountered; he had an arterial blood Ph of 7.22 with a lactate of 5.5 mmol/L. Therefore, aggressive intravenous resuscitation was given until the patient's pressure was normal and he regained some consciousness. At this time, severe abdominal pain with tenderness in his upper abdomen was discovered, so complimentary exams were requested.
A complete blood count (CBC) reported leukocytosis over 12,500 mm3 with a neutrophilia of 85%; due to the abdominal pain, a computed tomography (CT) was requested, revealing free air in the abdomen with perihepatic liquid. In addition, the stomach wall was thickened, and the IGB was found on the inside . With these findings, surgical consultation was needed, and after obtaining consent, surgery was required. On laparoscopy, 300 mL of purulent fluid was found in the abdomen. After thorough revision, 5 cm away from the pylorus, a 1 × 0.7 cm perforated ulcer was discovered on the anterior wall of the stomach . With these findings, a 3 cm gastrostomy was done through the perforation. Afterward, the gastric balloon was visualized, deflated, and removed from the stomach. Then, after hemostasis at the ulcer site was achieved, two sutures were placed 2 cm away from the ulcer perforation for traction, and two mechanical staplers (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, New Jersey, USA) were used to remove the ulcer and close the gastrostomy. After this, a staple line reinforcement was done with a non-absorbable suture, the abdominal cavity was cleaned with over 6 L of saline, two drains were placed, and the gastric balloon and the partial gastrectomy were removed . Pathology confirmed a 1 × 1 cm transmural ulcer surrounded by necrotic tissue with abundant neutrophils and necrosis. The surgical edges are viable .
The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were administered for seven days, the drains were removed on the sixth postoperative day, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day eight without complications. In the follow-ups, the patient is doing very well; he is back to his usual diet and under close supervision from the nutritionist and psychologist.