A 69-year-old woman with repaired TOF suffering from recurrent haemoptysis was referred to our institution for further investigations. She underwent palliation in 1962 (age 12) with a classic right-sided BTT shunt and TOF repair in 1967 (age 17) with closure of the VSD, relief of the RV outflow tract obstruction, and closure of the BTT shunt. Over the course of the years, she developed atrial fibrillation for which she was started on oral anticoagulation. In 1993, she had a first episode of massive haemoptysis which was treated conservatively. In 2002, computed tomography (CT) indicated a stellate nodule in the right upper lung lobe. Over the next years the lesion remained stable on axial follow-up imaging. In 2019, after new episodes of haemoptysis, this time with progressively worsening dyspnoea, a positron emission tomography–CT was performed showing isotope accumulation in the lesion of the right upper lung lobe . She underwent a bronchoscopy that showed mucosal swelling in the right upper lobe. Cytology indicated acute inflammation without evidence of malignancy.
On physical examination, the right-sided radial pulse was absent and blood pressure (BP) not measurable. Blood pressure and heart rate taken on the left arm were 112/45 mmHg and 78 b.p.m., respectively. Respiratory rate was 22 per minute. The second heart sound was pronounced with a grade 3/6 systolic and 2/4 diastolic murmur at the second intercostal space on the left. C-reactive protein was normal (2.9 mg/L) and N-terminal B-type natriuretic peptide slightly elevated (733 ng/L). The electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with inferolateral ST depression and Q-waves in V1–V2–aVR . Transthoracic echocardiography indicated a moderately dilated RV with normal systolic function, a peak/mean gradient of 53/32 mmHg across the pulmonary valve with severe pulmonary valve regurgitation .
A diagnostic cardiac catheterization was performed but no arteriovenous connections were seen and the BTT shunt was not patent. Right atrial pressure was 14 mmHg, RV systolic pressure 56 mmHg, systolic pulmonary artery pressure 33 mmHg, and mean pulmonary artery pressure 21 mmHg. The RV was dilated with severe pulmonary valve regurgitation. A bronchoscopy with EndoBronchial UltraSound (EBUS) in order to perform EBUS guided biopsy was performed. A rope-like structure was seen through the bronchoscope, but we were unable to take a biopsy .
After multidisciplinary discussion, the findings appeared to be most consistent with chronic inflammation due to a foreign body with secondary chronic inflammation, rather than vasculitis or a granulomatous infection, and the patient underwent a thoracotomy with lobectomy of the superior lobe of the right lung. The foreign body was removed without any resistance nor bleeding. Pathology indicated diffuse necrotizing granulomatous inflammation around the rope-like structure ( and ) which appeared to be the old suture around the BTT shunt that had caused a chronic inflammatory reaction invading the right upper bronchus and causing haemoptysis. The patient remained stable after the procedure. She left the hospital after a couple of days. The postoperative course was uncomplicated. After 3 months, she underwent percutaneous pulmonary valve replacement. After the surgical intervention, given a CHA2DS2 VASc score of 6/9, a HAS-BLED score of 5 and the fact that the most likely source of haemoptysis was removed, she was started on edoxaban 60 mg once daily.