A 72-year-old man with chronic alcohol abuse and hypertension, and who had been a smoker, had had past surgical interventions for atherosclerotic vascular disease (bilateral iliofemoral bypass and abdominal aortic aneurysm repair). In April 2001, the patient presented with severe chest pain due to a descending thoracic aortic aneurysm. At that time, there was no lung abnormality revealed by a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest. A thoracotomy was performed and a Dacron prosthesis was inserted surgically into the wall of the aneurysm and he had an uncomplicated postoperative course.
Six months later, the patient was hospitalized because of weight loss, night sweats, a dry cough and progressive dyspnea for the past 4 weeks. Chest radiography and CT showed bilateral interstitial lung infiltrates with miliary appearance. No cavitation was documented. A diagnostic bronchoscopy was performed. A Ziehl-Neelsen examination of the lower respiratory tract samples was positive for acid-fast bacilli. PCR and culture of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid revealed the presence of M. tuberculosis. Hematogenous dissemination of M. tuberculosis was confirmed by a concomitant positive urine culture. Treatment with rifampicin and isoniazid for 6 months, plus pyrazinamide and ethambutol during the first 2 months was given as directly observed therapy, since the strain isolated in culture was susceptible to all major antimycobacterial drugs.
Three weeks later, the patient presented with massive hemoptysis and severe bronchoaspiration requiring intubation and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Repeated bronchoscopies documented persistent bleeding from the left lower lobe bronchus. Despite the possible occurrence of a fistula between the aorta and the bronchial tree, the treatment was medical since a chest CT scan did not confirm the presence of a fistula. As bleeding resolved spontaneously, hemoptysis was suspected to be only due to lung tuberculosis and not to aortic involvement. Consequently, the patient was not referred for angiography.
Two months later, the patient presented with a recurrence of hemoptysis of about 300 ml while coughing. Bronchoscopy showed blood clots at the orifice of the left lower lobe bronchus. A CT scan confirmed the hypothesis of an aorto-pulmonary fistula by the presence of a hematoma around the distal anastomosis of the aortic graft and contrast enhancement in the anterior wall of the thoracic descending aorta. Despite the absence of active bleeding at the aortography, an endoprosthesis (Talent type 10 cm) was inserted around the level of the distal anastomosis. Five days later, another bronchoscopy did not show any further bleeding. The bronchial tree appeared normal on endobronchial inspection, and no mycobacteria could be grown from the bronchoalveolar lavage. Consequently, the fistula was not attributed to an uncontrolled infection. Antimycobacterial treatment was continued for about 3 months after this second episode of hemoptysis. The patient was then lost to follow-up and the evolution of the periaortic hematoma could not be monitored.
The patient remained asymptomatic until October 2006, when he developed recurrent hemoptysis. CT scan showed air anterior to the vascular graft , strongly suggestive of an aorto-pulmonary fistula. Bronchoscopy again revealed bleeding originating from the left lower lobe bronchus. A prosthetic infection was suspected. The graft was surgically replaced in November 2006, using a rifampicin-soaked gelatin-sealed polyester graft, after a transaortic debridement of the inside of the aneurysm. At the time of the operation, culture of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was still negative for M. tuberculosis but turned positive 2 weeks later. On a fragment of the removed prosthesis , acid-fast bacilli were seen on microscopic examination. Real-time PCR specific for M. tuberculosis and culture of the endoprosthesis later returned positive for M. tuberculosis. On a scraping of the prosthesis, inflammatory cells were seen , and Ziehl-Neelsen staining was positive for acid-fast bacilli . This M. tuberculosis infection of the vascular graft, which was responsible for the fistula and secondary hemoptysis, was treated with rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol. Two months later, given the antibiotic susceptibility of the strain, only rifampicin and isoniazid were continued. The patient's clinical course remained favorable at the last follow-up 9 months after surgery.