A 93-year-old female patient (weight, 32 kg; height, 130 cm) was scheduled for general anesthesia for the reconstruction of a soft tissue defect on her left cheek. She had no remarkable medical history, except for well-controlled hypertension. Preoperative chest radiography was normal and pulmonary function tests revealed normal respiratory function.
Glycopyrrolate (0.2 mg) was administered intramuscularly for premedication 30 min preoperatively. In the OR a standard monitoring, including pulse oximetry, electrocardiography, and non-invasive blood pressure measurement, was applied. Baseline vital signs included a heart rate (HR) of 64 bpm; blood pressure (BP), 188/85 mmHg; and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2), 92% on room air. General anesthesia was induced intravenously, using 40 mg of propofol, followed by continuous administration of remifentanil (0.26 mcg/kg/min), and 30 mg of rocuronium. Oral endotracheal intubation was performed with a direct laryngoscope and a 6.0-mm reinforced ETT. An anesthesia machine supplied a gas mixture with a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 50% at a total flow rate of 2 L/min. Anesthesia was maintained using 5.0 vol% desflurane and 0.1 mcg/kg/min of remifentanil. The tidal volume and respiratory rate were set to 200 ml and 14 per min, respectively. After induction of anesthesia was completed, the patient’s posture and position of the anesthesia machine were adjusted. In facial surgery, we routinely place the anesthesia machine on the side of the patient’s right lower limb; therefore, the breathing circuit is naturally placed on the neck, chest, and abdomen.
Given that the scheduled operation time was 6 h, a BCW was applied routinely to prevent hypothermia during anesthesia. Once surgical site preparation was almost complete, the BCW was turned on. Immediately, there was a spark with a popping sound, and smoke and flames could be seen at the patient’s end of the breathing circuit . An anesthesiologist and an anesthesiology resident doctor were participating in induction of anesthesia. The anesthesiologist disconnected the ETT and the breathing circuit and turned off the anesthesia machine and gas supply, within 10 s of the fire starting. Anesthesiology resident doctor extinguished the flames on the patient’s clothing by pouring water. After the fire had been completely extinguished, ventilation was restarted with an Ambu bag with 100% oxygen. The vital signs at that moment were as follows: HR, 72 bpm; BP, 159/63 mmHg; body temperature, 36.5 °C; and SpO2, 100%. As there was a significant amount of soot inside the ETT , we observed the upper airway using fiber-optic bronchoscopy (FOB). Soot was observed in the trachea and carina. The ETT was replaced with a new same-sized reinforced ETT using a video laryngoscope. After the fire, general anesthesia was switched from inhalation to total intravenous anesthesia and the surgery was suspended. At that time, the results of her arterial blood gas analysis were as follows: PH 7.401; PCO2, 49.5 mmHg; PO2 202.9 mmHg; and SaO2, 99.7%. The patient was transferred to an intensive care unit (ICU) with stable vital signs.
Upon arrival in the ICU, the patient underwent bronchoscopy by a pulmonologist. On FOB, no airway mucosal swelling or narrowing was observed; however, much soot were found in the carina, right main bronchus, left main bronchus, and right upper lobal bronchus . During bronchoscopy, the pulmonologist tried using normal saline irrigation to remove the soot to no avail. Salbutamol, N-acetylcysteine nebulizer, budesonide nebulizer, and hydrocortisone 50 mg intravenously were administered twice daily to prevent airway complications . Prophylactic antibiotic treatment was initiated with piperacillin and tazobactam. The patient was positioned with head elevated during mechanical ventilation. There were no respiratory infection source in the culture tests performed during hospitalization. Medical treatments for inhalation burn was continued until day 26, at the time of complete weaning of mechanical ventilation.
On the third day after the inhalation burn event, mucosal erythematous edema was observed on FOB . Tracheostomy was necessary for the treatment of the patient, and plastic surgery could not be postponed any longer, so we decided to proceed the two surgeries together. On the fourth day, the patient underwent the originally planned plastic surgery and tracheostomy under general anesthesia without any complications. On the sixth day, the first ventilator-weaning trial failed and she was placed on a portable ventilator. Deep breathing and expectorant training were initiated at the bedside. Afterward, daytime ventilator weaning was gradually performed. On the fourteenth day, significant granulation tissue and secretion were observed in the distal trachea and carina . On the seventeenth day, the mucus was dried in the trachea, and granulation tissue was reduced compared to prior observations . By the twenty-first day, the upper respiratory tract epithelium and mucosa had normalized . The ventilator was completely weaned on the twenty-fourth day. On the twenty-sixth day, she was transferred to the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine for swallowing rehabilitation and rehabilitation for delirium that occurred during hospitalization. On the thirty-fourth day, granulation tissue was no longer observed, and upper respiratory tract epithelium and mucosa recovery were almost complete . On the thirty-eighth day, the patient underwent tracheostomy closure surgery under local anesthesia. She was discharged from the hospital 40 days after the burn event.