A 37-year-old male, worker in a production factory of billiard balls, presented a large dorsal-radial wound over the second MCPJ of the left hand. His skin was severely crushed, after a work-related trauma by a grindstone machine while the MCPJs were flexed. On admission, the X-ray showed bone loss at the dorsal part of P1 and the metacarpal head of the index finger . There were also important lesions of the second and third extensor digitorum tendons as well as the extensor indicis tendon. There was no soft-tissue loss, and the neurovascular bundles of the index finger were intact. The first stage of treatment consisted of wound debridement and saline irrigation, suture of the extensor tendons of the index and the middle finger, and stabilization by a temporary external fixator to preserve the length and alignment . Two weeks later, we performed a second look to clean the wound and verified the integrity of collateral ligaments of the MCPJ. The favorable evolution of the wound allowed us to remove the external fixator and the patient started an active rehabilitation protocol with a physiotherapist.
After the initial debridement and stabilization of this injury, we discussed the best therapeutic option for this patient. A decision was made to reconstruct the joint with a MCP prosthesis (TMPR™, MatOrtho Limited, Leatherhead, United Kingdom) using a dorsal approach . This operation was performed 38 days following the initial trauma (5 weeks).
The patient returned to his job within 6 months following the procedure with the same manual work on the same machine, suitable for his abilities. At this time of follow-up, he was experiencing little pain with a slight lack of grip. Despite loss of finger length, the extension was complete and the flexion of the MCPJ was 15°.
The last follow-up was at 3 years postoperatively and the patient described occasional pain rated 4/10 on the Visual Analog Scale (EVA), and 5/10 during heavy activities. The QuickDASH score was 29 (40.91%), and the Patient-Rated Wrist Evaluation Score was 56/150. He scored 90% on the SF-36 physical functioning. X-rays validate the satisfactory stability and position of the implant.