A 55-year-old woman with BMI 24.6 kg/m2 diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma of right breast (cT2N0M0) was suddenly fainted with profuse sweating and followed developing severe gastrointestinal discomfort when she got up to walk in ward 12 h after lumpectomy, but no progressive chest pain, cough or unconsciousness was observed. Subsequently, she felt mild shortness of breath and dull pain on the right flank as well as lower right abdomen, accompanying vomiting and diarrhea in the next 30 min. Under this emergency circumstance, she was performed with a series of physical and screening laboratory examinations. Electrocardiogram monitor detected a mild decrease of blood oxygen saturation which ranged from 82 to 89% with 4 L of 100% oxygen inhalation through nasal cannula, blood pressure dropping to 88/57 mmHg, respiratory rate of 24/min, heart rate of 92 beats/minute with normal sinus rhythm. Apparent abdominal tenderness, rebound tenderness or abnormal auscultation findings was not detected on physical examination. The level of blood glucose was measured of 9.4 mmol/L. Brain natriuretic peptide did not indicate heart failure. Meanwhile, the value of myocardium enzymes including CK, CK-MB and cTnI were normal. D-dimmer level was slightly increased to 1.2 μg/ml (normal, < 1.0 μg/ml). The arterial blood gas analysis indicated: pH, 7.39; PaCO2, 42.9 mmHg; and PaO2, 65 mmHg. Additionally, routine urinalysis showed occult blood positive (+++) and microscopic haematuria was 120RBC/ul. Under 1000 ml liquid transfusion, there was still no any amelioration in her blood pressure and hypoxemia. After exclusion of hypoglycemia and acute myocardial infarction, the diagnosis of PE was highly suspected. Thromboembolism was evidenced in the main bilateral branches of pulmonary trunk and right renal artery after urgent MDCT of chest and abdomen. The final diagnosis was paradoxical embolism presented with concomitant pulmonary embolism (PE) and renal artery embolism (RAE). She was subsequently transferred to ICU and administered with anticoagulant therapy by low molecular weight heparin (LMWH, 4200 IU bolus) intravenously, followed by subcutaneously injection of LMWH (6000 IU) every 12 h upon the advice of multi-disciplinary team. Meanwhile, further examinations to unveil the cause of disease excluded the potential of antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APAS), systemic vasculitis and other autoimmune diseases. Echocardiography showed no presence of PFO or intracardiac defect , and no deep venous thrombus (DVT) of bilateral lower extremities was identified by ultrasound either. After 7 days of treatment with LMWH, most previous invisible thrombus could not be detected any more in the repeated MDCT scan . Ultimately, she was discharged in good condition after 10 days therapy and advised to continuously take rivaroxaban for 3 months. During 3 months following up, she was doing well without any special complaint.