A 47-year-old female presented with a progressive locoregional recurrence at 10 years after the initial diagnosis of a luminal A BC. As to her clinical symptoms, she complained only of intermittent pain in the parasternal area on both sides.
The breast magnet resonance imaging (MRI) performed in May 2014 primarily showed suspicious sternal metastasis, but the sternum biopsy did not reveal any malignancy. The subsequent mammography of both breasts also excluded local recurrence. Over a year later, in July 2015, a computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a tumor mass in the right para- and presternal area (between the 2nd and 5th rib) with invasion of cartilage and ventral pleura, and extending to the subcutis and contralateral parasternal region. Moreover, several enlarged mediastinal LN were detected, along with a pleural lesion in the anterior segment of right upper lobe and bony metastasis in the sternum body. Biopsy of the CW recurrence confirmed a moderately differentiated invasive carcinoma with ER 8, PR 8 (according to Allred score), HER2 negativity, and Ki-67 10%.
After a laparoscopic ovarectomy (both sides) was performed, the patient chose to participate in the MONALEESA-3 study investigating efficacy of fulvestrant in combination with ribociclib (vs placebo). In addition, she commenced biphosphonate therapy with zoledronic acid. In February 2016, she dropped out of the study due to progressive disease with newly-occurring parasternal LN metastases and slowly growing pleural metastasis; her endocrine therapy was switched to letrozole. However, the parasternal CW recurrence on the right side continued to grow, reaching roughly 30 mm × 50 mm × 20 mm in size. The patient participated in consults for both cyber knife therapy in another clinic and PBT at the Rinecker Proton Therapy Center, and eventually decided to undergo the latter.
At the age of 37, the patient had been diagnosed with a multifocal invasive ductal carcinoma, presenting as four cancerous lesions measuring up to 1.6 cm, as well as an extended ductal carcinoma in situ of the right breast. She underwent, first, a segment resection with axillary LN dissection. In the second session, she underwent an ablation of the right breast. The postoperative tumor stage was pT1c(m) pTis(4cm) G2 pN1a(2/23) cM0 L0 V0 R0. The receptor status (according to Allred score) was ER 8, PR 8, HER2-negative.
After completing 6 cycles of postoperative chemotherapy with docetaxel, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide, the patient received adjuvant RT with photon beams to the right CW and supraclavicular, axillary and retrosternal lymphatic drainage pathways (at a total dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions). A sequential electron boost treatment (providing a further 10 Gy in 5 fractions) was given to the tumor bed in the lower and inner quadrants over the period of June to July 2006. Under endocrine therapy with zoladex (until June 2009) and tamoxifen (until July 2012), there was no sign of tumor recurrence in the follow-ups. Consequently, the patient underwent a breast reconstruction with deep inferior epigastric perforator flap in January 2011.
Beside lymphedema of her right arm, a tumor conglomerate was noted on the right parasternal CW; although, the skin surface was still intact and without ulceration. The common clinical examination of cardiopulmonary and neurological status did not reveal any pathological findings.
No special laboratory test was arranged.
Prior to the PBT, the patient underwent positron emission tomography with 2-deoxy-2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-D-glucose (18F-FDG) PET/CT at our center, displaying intensively increased uptake in the LN stations of the right armpit, upper mediastinum, aortic arch on the left, and retrosternal in front of the right heart ventricle, as well as in the corpus sterni and on the CW in the right parasternal area with invasion of right breast, subcutis and mediastinum . Over and above that, pleural metastases with aspect of lymphangiosis carcinomatosa were detected in the right upper lobe, with adhesion on the interlobe of the right lower lobe apex .