The chief complaint of the patient was 1 year of epigastric pain.
A 50-year-old middle-aged woman had a history of rheumatoid arthritis and had undergone cesarean sections in 1995 and 2002. She had no history of hypertension, diabetes, or other internal diseases, and she did not have a history of drug or food allergies. In January 2022, the patient developed epigastric pain for the first time without obvious cause. The symptoms of abdominal pain were aggravated after eating, and they were sometimes mild and sometimes severe. The patient went to the Department of Gastroenterology of local hospital A. At that time, the patient underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and was found to have a shallow ulcer in the duodenal bulb, which was in scar stage S2. In addition to duodenal ulcers, the patient also suffered from chronic superficial gastritis and erosion-like changes on the surface of the gastric antrum. At that time, the patient also had an abdominal ultrasound examination, and the report showed that there was a small amount of cholesterol crystals in the gallbladder wall. Doctors believed that chronic gastritis and duodenal ulcer were the main causes of abdominal pain. After taking proton pump inhibitors (PPI) for a period of time as directed by the doctor and improving her bad eating habits, the symptoms of epigastric pain improved slightly, but in the following months, the symptoms of epigastric pain repeatedly occurred. In June 2022, the patient’s upper abdominal pain worsened, and she went to a local hospital and received another upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. The gastroscopy reexamination indicated that the patient still had inflammation and erosion in the gastric antrum, but that the duodenal ulcer discovered 5 months prior had healed after PPI treatment. In addition, a new small polyp was found and removed by the endoscopist. The pathological report of the biopsy tissue taken from the gastric antrum erosion indicated mild chronic superficial gastritis, and the small polyp was benign hyperplasia [HP (−)]. In addition to an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, the patient underwent enhanced computed tomography (CT) examination of the whole abdomen in June 2022. Several enlarged lymph nodes were found in the hepatogastric space, and there was a local distinct lesion of the lesser curvature of the gastric body with a diameter of approximately 1 cm, which was not mentioned in the gastroscopy report. Compared to the report from January 2022, the abdominal ultrasonography in June 2022 showed that the lymph nodes between the left lobe of the liver and the stomach were enlarged, potentially excluding the possibility of bacterial infection, inflammation, and even malignant tumors.
The symptoms of epigastric discomfort worsened in early August 2022. For better diagnosis and treatment, the patient decided to go to hospital B, the largest hospital in the city she lived in. The patient underwent relevant auxiliary examinations at hospital B, and the abdominal enhancement CT report was similar to that reported in June 2022, suggesting that the local wall of the lesser curvature of the gastric body was thickened, with a diameter of approximately 1 cm, and surrounded by multiple enlarged lymph nodes. An abdominal B-ultrasound showed multiple lymph node enlargements in front of the cardia. On August 12, 2022, the patient underwent gastroscopy at hospital B, which identified a smooth protruding lesion with a diameter of approximately 1.0 cm in the posterior wall of the lesser curvature of the stomach. The lesion, which was slightly soft to the touch of the biopsy forceps, was considered a submucosal lesion, and the patient was advised to undergo further endoscopic ultrasonography.
On August 16, 2022, the patient came to our hospital for endoscopic treatment due to a submucosal mass. We performed an abdominal physical examination on the patient with the following assessment: flat abdomen; no gastrointestinal type or peristaltic wave was observed; no varicose veins were observed in the abdominal wall; soft abdomen; mild tenderness in the middle and upper abdomen; no rebound tenderness; Murphy sign and shifting dullness were negative; and bowel sounds occurred approximately 4 times/min. After excluding the relevant surgical contraindications, the patient underwent painless gastroscopy at our hospital on August 17, 2022. We also observed a lesion approximately 1.2 cm in diameter in the posterior wall of the upper part of the gastric body of the patient. Unexpectedly, this protuberant lesion was greatly changed from the shape reported by the gastroscope performed at hospital B 5 days prior , which indicated a smooth lesion with a clean surface, no fluid attachment, and no surrounding scar tissue. However, observations at our hospital 5 days later indicated that the protuberant lesion surface was not smooth and was red in color, and a small amount of white mucus was observed. When the lesion was touched with biopsy forceps, the texture was soft and immobile, and it was completely different from hard and movable submucosal protrusions, such as gastric stromal tumors. When the lesion was flushed with water, a small amount of white mucus was observed flowing out of it, prompting a preliminarily diagnosis of an abscess lesion. In addition, we also observed a longitudinal scar lesion adjacent to this distinct lesion. To determine the nature of the lesion, endoscopic ultrasonography was performed on the patient. In the endoscopic field of view, the echo of the distinct lesion was mixed, mainly hypoechoic, measuring approximately 1.45 × 0.75 cm with clear borders . Three biopsies of this lesion and 1 biopsy of the adjacent scar tissue were collected. Considering that multiple enlarged lymph nodes were previously reported on the patient’s abdominal CT and abdominal ultrasound, we began to suspect the possibility of gastric tuberculosis. Therefore, the patient was subjected to the tuberculin test and antituberculosis antibody tests. The results verified our conjecture that the tuberculin test was positive and tuberculosis antibody was negative, indicating that tuberculosis infection could not be ruled out. One week later, the pathological report of the lesion tissue indicated that the mucosa was chronic and moderately active with necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, a large number of multinucleated giant cells, and occasional eosinophilic bacilli . Combined with all the above results, we confirmed the diagnosis of gastric tuberculosis and recommended that the patient be admitted to the tuberculosis hospital for special treatment. Based on the patient’s follow-up, the patient is currently receiving quadruple antituberculosis treatment (rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide) in the infectious disease hospital for 1 year. After 2 months of antituberculosis treatment, the patient returned to local hospital B for gastroscopy, and the lesion in the stomach was significantly improved . We advised the patient to undergo upper gastrointestinal examination in 6 months to review the changes in the gastric lesion.
In March 2023, the patient’s gastroscopy showed complete healing of the lesion.
The patient had a history of rheumatoid arthritis and had undergone cesarean sections in 1995 and 2002. She had no history of hypertension, diabetes or other internal diseases, and the patient did not have a history of drug or food allergies.
The physical examination made the following assessments: flat abdomen; no gastrointestinal type or peristaltic wave was observed; no varicose veins were observed in the abdominal wall; soft abdomen; mild tenderness in the middle and upper abdomen; no rebound tenderness; Murphy sign and shifting dullness were negative; and bowel sounds occurred approximately 4 times/min.
The tuberculin test was positive, and the tuberculosis antibody was negative. The pathological reports showed that the mucosa was chronic and moderately active with necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, a large number of multinucleated giant cells, and occasional eosinophilic bacilli .
Abdominal CT and abdominal ultrasound revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes.