A 49-year-old, previously healthy, Caucasian man, a motorcyclist, was referred to our Emergency Department (ED) after a high velocity frontal collision with a car. He was married and worked as a car body repairer. He had no tobacco smoking or drinking history and was not taking any medication. A prehospital primary survey assessment according to ATLS protocols revealed a hemodynamically stable patient with blood pressure (BP) of 136/82 mmHg and heart rate (HR) of 65 beats per minute (bpm) without airway or breathing alterations. He was oriented and conscious and reported pain in the symphyseal region and left arm. Cervical spine immobilization and intravenous access were obtained and a pelvic binder was applied by paramedics (SAM® Pelvic Sling™ II, Fig. ).
At arrival in our ED, he was alert without any relevant cardiorespiratory dysfunction: body temperature 36.8 °C, HR 65 bpm, BP 132/80 mmHg, oxygen saturation 100%, and Glasgow Coma Scale of 15. A secondary survey revealed a deformation of his left wrist, and painful palpation of the pubic symphysis and sacral region. The pelvic binder was maintained and a total body CT scan with two-dimensional MPR and three-dimensional reconstruction was performed. Laboratory findings revealed mild normocytic anemia (133 g/l) and liver and renal functions were normal. The chronologic timeline of patient management and investigations is provided in the Additional file .
No relevant pelvic anomaly was detected including after three-dimensional reconstruction and the pelvic binder was removed.
Because of the high velocity of the crash and persisting symphyseal pain, plain anteroposterior pelvic radiography was ordered shortly after the CT. Pelvic radiography revealed a non-osseous pelvic disruption, with an opening of the pubic symphysis (more than 2.2 cm) and of the left sacroiliac joint (type 61-B2.3d according to the 2018 revision of the AO/OTA fracture and dislocation classification compendium; type APC-2 according to the Young and Burgess classification) [–] .
He was admitted to the operating room for surgical pelvic stabilization, and external fixation of his left wrist and was discharged on the tenth day after admission. Full recovery of the pelvic disruption was observed after 6 months and ablation of the left wrist osteosynthesis material was performed at 7 months because of residual pain.