A 38-year-old female, gravida 3 para 2 at 33 weeks of gestation, was hospitalized for preeclampsia with severe features. A viable neonate had been expeditiously delivered yet the patient’s post-partum blood pressures remained severely elevated ranging from 230/130 mmHg to 280/170 mmHg. She had no antenatal care but reported a history of uncomplicated hypertension during her prior pregnancies and tobacco abuse which was stopped 8 months prior. At the bedside, she complained of mild headaches but denied visual disturbances or upper abdominal pain. She was alert and well oriented with a pulse of 80 bpm. There was no hyperreflexia, clonus, papilledema, peripheral edema or signs of pulmonary edema. Her examination was otherwise unremarkable including the absence of renal bruits. Apart from an elevated random urine protein to creatinine ratio of 0.7, the laboratory investigations were within normal limits including serum creatinine, electrolytes, platelet count, liver function and coagulation studies. There were no laboratory features of hemolysis. She was treated with multiple anti-hypertensives over the next 72 h including oral nifedipine, labetalol and clonidine as well as intravenous infusions of labetalol, nicardipine, hydralazine. Magnesium was used for eclampsia prophylaxis. Of note, a single dose of intravenous enalapril was given with a subsequent 60% increase in serum creatinine that returned to baseline within 24 h of discontinuation. Renal artery dopplers were performed which revealed greater than 60% stenosis of the proximal left renal artery and at least 60% stenosis of the distal right renal artery. Computerized tomography angiography showed approximately 50% stenosis of the proximal left renal artery without stenosis of the right renal artery . At this juncture, in the setting of recalcitrant severe preeclampsia and the mortality risk of impending eclampsia, an invasive strategy for better evaluation and possible intervention was deemed net beneficial. Renal angiography showed 50% stenosis of the left proximal renal artery for which balloon angioplasty and stenting was performed . The right renal artery demonstrated less than 50% stenosis with an insignificant hemodynamic gradient, thus was not stented. Following revascularization, the patient’s blood pressure improved, ranging from 180/100 mmHg to 160/90 mmHg within 48 h, on dual oral antihypertensive therapy. She was ultimately discharged to titrate further anti-hypertensive therapy as an outpatient.