A 68-year-old male present to the emergency department with pain and weakness in his feet. Medical history is significant for non-small cell lung cancer treated with chemoradiotherapy (Taxol and carboplatin) and consolidation therapy with durvalumab for one year. Five days prior he was diagnosed with neuropathy by his oncologist for tingling and numbness in his feet. Three days prior he became progressively weaker to the point where he could not stand, and he lost bowel and bladder function. He described the pain as pins and tingling throughout his leg. Pain was worse with gentle touch. He had hesitancy and frequency of urination. He denies back pain, trauma, or fever. His last radiation treatment was 15 months prior. Radiation was delivered over the left lung and mediastinum. The patient received 2 Gy doses for 31 treatments over a 45-day period for a total dose of 62 Gy. His last durvalumab infusion was 3 months prior. Exam revealed a low-grade temp of 99.3 °F with other vitals stable. General medical exam was unremarkable. Neurological exam showed muscle contraction without joint movement throughout the lower extremities, bilateral diminished patellar and Achilles reflexes, and a non-tender back. He was admitted to the hospital for additional management.
Brain MRI displayed chronic small vessel disease. Spinal MRI showed abnormally increased spinal cord signal intensity without cord expansion on T2-weighted images from C4-T11 suggestive of longitudinal extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) . T1 post Gadolinium images showed enhancement at T5-T6 . CSF studies revealed 8 WBC with 63% lymphocyte predominance and a protein of 48. Oligoclonal bands were negative with 3 bands in the serum and 3 bands in the CSF. Angiotensin-converting enzyme was negative as well. Viral etiologies including cytomegalovirus, enterovirus, herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, varicella-zoster virus, and West Nile were all negative. Serum Neuromyelitis Optica antibody (AQP4-IgG) and Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody (MOG-IgG) were negative. An autoimmune panel including Sjogren, anti-Smith antibody, scleroderma, and double DNA antibodies were negative. He had a positive antinuclear antibody with titration of 1:1280. Mayo clinic’s paraneoplastic autoantibody panel also came back negative.
The etiology remained unknown. The differential diagnosis included seronegative neuromyelitis optica, paraneoplastic syndrome, or autoimmune reaction secondary to Durvalumab with radiation. The patient was placed on high-dose steroids and plasma exchange with mild improvement in symptoms. He was discharged on a steroid taper and planned for outpatient follow-up at a neurology clinic in 3 months.
He finished his steroid taper the day before his clinic visit. At the clinic, he reported worsening bilateral leg weakness over the last few weeks. No muscle contraction was observed in the left side, and motion on the right was limited by gravity. He had decreased vibration sensation in both legs and decreased temperature sensation in his right leg. He was placed on 40 mg of prednisone daily and a repeat MRI was scheduled for 1 week later.
One day before his MRI, he called the clinic due to new leg stiffness further limiting mobility and no clinical improvement from the prednisone. His prednisone was increased to 80 mg with plans to further evaluate after his MRI. MRI showed worsening T2 hyperintense signal, particularly over the thoracic region . The decision was made to start cyclophosphamide Euro-lupus protocol, a 500 mg dose of cyclophosphamide IV given every two weeks for a total of six doses , in addition to increasing his prednisone to 100 mg daily. He saw mild improvement in leg weakness after the initial infusion. Infusions were continued every two weeks for a total of 6 doses, and the steroid was slowly tapered. The patient had no new or worsening neurological conditions during this time. The patient was started on oral methotrexate 7.5 g weekly with daily folic acid after his fifth cyclophosphamide infusion. Repeat MRI showed near complete interval resolution of the significant intramedullary increased T2 signal in the cervical spinal cord from C4 to T4 and no enhancement, but there was residual atrophy of the spinal cord . Methotrexate was increased to 10 mg weekly. Shortly after, the patient was hospitalized with radiation pneumonitis. He transitioned to comfort care and expired within the month.