A 70-year-old woman presented with a month-long history of blurred vision and photopsia of her left eye. She had medical history of well-controlled systemic hypertension and hyperlipidemia and had no particular family history.
Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 1.0 OD and 0.3 OS with mild hyperopia. The right eye was normal except for incipient cataract. Slit-lamp examination revealed 1+ flare and 1+ cells in the anterior chamber together with the infiltration of anterior vitreous cells OS. Her left fundus was hazy due to 2+ diffuse vitreous opacity; and multiple subretinal white dots could thus be barely observed at the mid-periphery . Corresponding to the white dots, fluorescein angiography (FA) showed hyperfluorescence as well as at the peripapillary area in the late phase and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) revealed no abnormal findings in the initial phase but numerous hypofluorescent dots were visible not only at the white dots but also diffusely around the posterior pole including the optic disc vicinity in the late phase . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed diffuse loss of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) at the macula OS . Goldmann perimetry revealed a ring scotoma of 50 × 70 degrees OS. Single-flash electroretinography showed a reduced amplitude of the a-wave OS. Screening tests were negative for the detection of syphilis, tuberculosis, and sarcoidosis. The patient was followed up with only topical 0.1% betamethasone under a diagnosis of presumed MEWDS OS, although the presence of vitritis was atypical for MEWDS. Five days later, the number of the white dots, anterior chamber inflammation, and diffuse vitreous opacity were reduced. Seventeen days after the first visit, her BCVA improved to 1.0. Hyperfluorescence on FA and hypofluorescent dots on ICGA initially observed almost disappeared . Three weeks after the first visit, macular EZ loss improved , followed by the regression of diffuse vitreous opacity and subretinal white dots OS . Electroretinography and perimetry normalized after 3 months. Brain magnetic resonance imaging and systemic computed tomography revealed no abnormal findings. There were no recurrences of intraocular inflammation until 63 months after the initial visit. Her BCVA maintained at 1.0 OD and 0.9 OS.