A 47-year-old man with diabetes mellitus, decompensated liver cirrhosis due to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) underwent LDLT with splenectomy using a right hemiliver graft procured from his son. His pre-transplant model for end-stage liver disease score was 18 points, indicating that he was a suitable (not too severe) candidate for liver transplantation. Preoperative culture screening and β-d glucan were negative. The HCC lesion was 2 cm in diameter within the Milan criteria.
This was a case of ABO-incompatible LDLT from a type-B-positive donor to an O-positive recipient. The patient was administered intravenous rituximab at a dose of 375 mg/m2 3 weeks before the LDLT and oral mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 2 g/day starting 2 weeks prior to the LDLT for induction immunosuppression. Post-transplant immunosuppression comprised tacrolimus, MMF, and steroids. The patient received oral fluconazole (100 mg/day) for 10 days to prevent fungal infections before switching to micafungin. The trough level of tacrolimus was adjusted by daily measurement, targeting a concentration of 10 ng/mL . Post-transplant surveillance to detect fungal infection consisted of chest X-ray twice a day, culture screening of the sputum sample twice a week, and β-d glucan testing once a week.
The patient’s liver graft function gradually improved, and serum bilirubin levels decreased postoperatively . After the LDLT, the patient’s level of consciousness remained impaired, with a Glasgow Coma Scale of G3V1M5, and he required intubation for > 1 week without respiratory failure. His oxygen saturation was maintained > 98% at 30% fraction of inspired oxygen. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was unremarkable. We temporally switched his tacrolimus to cyclosporine due to suspected adverse effects. However, there was no improvement in his consciousness. He underwent tracheotomy on postoperative day (POD) 9.
Chest radiography showed a right mid-zone infiltrate . Serum β-d-glucan levels were within the normal range until POD 6, but started to increase on POD 12 . Bronchoalveolar lavage revealed microscopic filamentous fungus on POD 13. Micafungin was administered, followed by voriconazole (assuming aspergilloma); subsequent chest computed tomography (CT) showed right middle lung lobe infiltration. Surgery was planned since the lesion continued to grow .
Preoperative examination revealed decreased ejection fraction (40%) on echocardiography and ST elevation on electrocardiography. There was no dominant stenosis on cardiac arteriography on POD 19.
Right lung segmentectomy was performed on POD 20 . C. bertholletiae was identified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from operative specimens cultured using Sabouraud dextrose agar culture medium (BD, Fukushima, Japan) . β-d-glucan level elevated five times the upper limit of the normal range (60.93 pg/mL), and amphotericin B (AmB) was started at 5 mg/kg IV on POD 22 .
On POD 23, the patient’s circulatory dynamics collapsed, and he developed bigeminy and atrial-ventricular block, thus requiring a temporary pacemaker. Enhanced CT scans revealed multiple myocardial , cerebral , and renal infarctions on POD 27. Cardiac arteriography revealed multiple peripheral occlusions . The patient’s cardiac arterial occlusion did not resolve despite percutaneous coronary intervention. An intra-aortic balloon was inserted for circulatory support; however, the recipient died of cardiac failure on POD 28.
Hypothrombocytopenia was present since the pre-transplant period, which worsened after the LDLT. The patient’s bone marrow had reduced megakaryocytes and a pseudo-Pelger–Huët anomaly on POD 16. The recipient was diagnosed posthumously with myelodysplastic syndrome due to hereditary abnormalities.
Autopsy revealed multiple microscopic bleeding infarctions in the brain , thyroid , heart , lung , liver , gastrointestinal tract , and kidneys . The cardiac arteries were patent but filled with fungal thrombi on the peripheral side. A fibrin-containing fungal mass covered the endothelium in all chambers, suggesting fungal endocarditis . Other organs also had multiple bleeding infarctions due to arterial septic emboli caused by fungi.