A 70-year-old man with a history of hypertension and dyslipidemia visited our hospital for an ulcer lesion extending from the gastric angle to antrum on esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). Repeat EGD revealed the presence of a tumor with a central ulceration at the lesser curvature extending from the gastric angle to the antrum (a) diagnosed as a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma by biopsy at our hospital.
Blood examination data showed an elevated serum AFP level of 122.9 ng/mL (reference range: 0.89–8.78 ng/mL), while carbohydrate antigen 19–9 and carcinoembryonic antigen levels were within the reference levels. Computed tomography (CT) revealed wall thickening with contrast effect on the anterior wall of the gastric lesser curvature without invasion of other organs (b), with no distant metastases, and this was diagnosed as cT3N0M0 cStageIIB according to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) tumor node metastasis (TNM) classification 8th edition.
We performed laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction and D2 lymph node dissection instead of total gastrectomy, because the distance from the esophagogastric junction to the oral margin of the tumor was approximately 5 cm.
On H.E staining of the specimen obtained during gastrectomy showed polygonal tumor cells forming, clear and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, separated by sinusoidal capillaries and trabecular and intestinal-like structures (a). At the proximal margin of the resected stomach, an intravenous tumor thrombus was observed (b). Immunostaining revealed positivity for AFP (c), SALL4 (d), and glypican-3 (e). Based on these pathological findings, the tumor was diagnosed as HAS. Five lymph node (No.1, 3, 8a) metastases were also observed.
The patient was diagnosed with pathological stage IIIA (U,Less,TypeII,130 × 80 mm, hepatoid > pap, pT3, INFb, Ly1, V3, pPM1, pDM0[80 mm], pN2[5/42], CY0, P0) according to the UICC TNM classification 8th edition.
The patient was started on CapeOX as adjuvant chemotherapy. The CapeOX regimen consisted of oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 on day 1 and capecitabine 2000 mg/m2 on days 1–14 with a rest period on days 15–21. After three courses of CapeOX, oxaliplatin was terminated due to peripheral neuropathy (grade 3) graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events. Since there was a venous tumor thrombus with a high risk of liver metastasis recurrence, capecitabine was planned to be continued as long as possible considering its adverse effects. Capecitabine was terminated after 3 years, because the adverse effect of hand-foot syndrome, progressed and reached grade 2, interfering with the patient's daily life.
The patient was followed up on an outpatient basis with blood tests every 3 months, CT every 6 months, and EGD every year. Serum AFP was elevated preoperatively but fell to within the reference range and remained within the reference range thereafter. Serum CEA and CA19-9 remained within the reference range from the preoperative period. EGD showed no evidence of recurrence of HAS or development of new residual GC in the residual stomach and CT did not show any evidence of peritoneal dissemination, local recurrence, or distant metastasis for 6 years after surgery.