A 64-year-old man was diagnosed with pulmonary adenocarcinoma stage IIIB. The patient had a smoking history of 50 packs a year. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a PD-L1 tumor proportion score of > 50%. Concurrent CRT using weekly courses of carboplatin plus paclitaxel and 60.0 Gy irradiation over 6 weeks was performed and partial response was achieved. Consolidation immunotherapy was initiated 4 weeks after the CRT treatment concluded. Durvalumab (10 mg/kg), an ICI, was administered every 2 weeks. The patient complained of dyspnea on effort 4 months after the initiation of durvalumab therapy.
Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scans showed radiation pneumonitis in the irradiated area accompanied with mild bilateral pleural effusion . There were no signs of the progression of lung cancer or thromboembolism. Because pleural effusion was relatively small, the performance of pleurocentesis proved technically difficult. Spirometry revealed a volume capacity of 1.77 L, a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 1.01 L, %FEV1 of 39.2%, and FEV1/forced volume capacity of 61.0%, suggesting severe obstructive disease by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) combined with constrictive disease by radiation pneumonitis. Laboratory examination revealed eosinophilia (1165 /μL) and serum IgE level of 2000 IU/mL, suggesting an asthma and COPD overlap. The echocardiogram showed normal cardiac function and pulmonary artery pressure. The cause of the dyspnea was assumed to be exacerbation of asthma and COPD overlap.
The patient was treated with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist, a long-acting beta-agonist, a moderate dose of inhaled corticosteroid, a leukotriene receptor antagonist, and a diuretic. The patient was also administered systemic oral corticosteroid (prednisolone 20 mg/day) for five days and antibiotics (levofloxacin) for seven days 4 months after the initiation of durvalumab therapy. Despite these treatments, the dyspnea was progressive. The chest X-ray and CT scans showed increases in the amounts of bilateral pleural effusion . No progression of radiation pneumonitis or lung cancer was observed in either lung field. Durvalumab was withdrawn after 13 courses of administration over 7 months because there was a possibility that the pleural effusion was induced by durvalumab. The patient was admitted for the treatment of pleural effusion.
Physical examination did not show any findings suggesting the presence of collagen vascular diseases. The levels of C-reactive protein and angiotensin-converting enzyme were 0.13 mg/dL (normal range < 0.15 mg/dL) and 8.6 IU/mL (normal range 7.7–29.4 IU/mL), respectively. The T-SPOT test for TB, which measures the number of interferon-gamma-secreting spot-forming T cells obtained from a patient stimulated by Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific antigens, was negative. There was an increase in the level of serum immunoglobulin of 6.4 g/dL. The level of serum IgG was 4.329 g/dL (normal range 0.87–1.7 g/dL), and among the IgG subclass, IgG4 was 2.750 g/dL (normal range 0.0045–0.117 g/dL). Serologic studies indicated that an anti-nuclear antibody was positive. Serum myeloperoxidase- anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antigen was negative (< 1.0 U/mL). The levels of thyroid stimulating hormone, free triiodothyronine, and free thyroxine were 2.92 μIU/mL (normal range 0.54–4.26 μIU/mL), 2.12 pg/mL (normal range 2.39–4.06 pg/mL), 0.87 ng/dL (normal range 0.71–1.52 ng/dL), respectively.
Pleurocentesis was performed on each side separately and revealed unilateral exudative pleural effusion with a predominance of mononuclear cells with no malignant cells. Bacterial culture and polymerase chain reaction analysis of the pleural fluids for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, avium, or intacellulare DNA were all negative. Adenosine deaminase concentrations were 47.2 U/L and 49.3 U/L in the right- and left-sided pleural fluids, respectively. The levels of IgG and IgG4 of the pleural fluids were 4183 mg/dL and 2790 mg/dL on the right side, and 4366 mg/dl and 2890 mg/dL on the left side.
On the 12th day of hospitalization, a pleural biopsy was performed using video-associated thoracoscopy and the specimen was collected from the pleura on the right side. Microscopic examination revealed lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with storiform fibrosis . There was no evidence of granulomas, necrosis, or malignancy. Immunohistochemical examinations showed the presence of numerous IgG4-positive plasma cells. The number of IgG4-positive cells was > 20/high power field (× 400) and the percentage of IgG4-positive to IgG-positive plasma cells was > 50%. These findings indicated that IgG4-related disease contributed to the pathogenesis of pleural effusion.
Oral prednisolone at a dose of 30 mg/day was initiated and remarkable clinical improvements were achieved. After 4 months of prednisolone therapy, chest CT scans revealed the complete disappearance of bilateral pleural effusion , the level of serum IgG4 was decreased to 0.37 g/dL , and the dyspnea was resolved. Presently, the patient is under treatment with an oral corticosteroid and under careful observation for the recurrence of adenocarcinoma.