The patient is a 6-year-old male who was referred to a pediatric clinic for an incidentally found CM-I and cervicothoracic syrinx identified during a preoperative workup prior to the surgical management of a progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis . The child has been experiencing daily headaches, but denied dysphagia, neck pain, or numbness or weakness in the upper extremities. His family also noted difficulty with hand coordination and strength when compared to his peers. Born via caesarian section at 41 weeks with a birth weight of 8 pounds and 12 ounces, he was diagnosed with HS and underwent a bone marrow transplant at the age of 14 months.
On physical examination, the patient was noted to be alert and oriented with clear speech and normal cranial nerve function. Muscle strength was 5/5 in bilateral biceps, triceps, and deltoids, 4+/5 in hand grip and finger abduction. Deep tendon reflexes were grade 2/4 in the upper and lower extremities with a negative Hoffman's sign bilaterally, no ankle clonus, and a downgoing Babinski test bilaterally. The patient was unable to perform single-leg stance.
On August 4, 2015 the patient was taken to the operating room where he underwent a successful suboccipital craniectomy measuring 3 × 3 cm, C1 laminectomy, intradural exploration with coagulation of cerebellar tonsils, lysis of arachnoid adhesions, resection of thick posterior arachnoid membrane, and duraplasty measuring 3 × 3 cm utilizing Dura-Guard™ (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Mountain Home, Arizona) and DuraSeal™ (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota). Intraoperatively, he was noted to have numerous arachnoid adhesions, an arachnoid cyst, and cerebellar tonsillar herniation to the level of C1 was confirmed. Postoperative course was unremarkable, and he was ultimately discharged home on postoperative day 3.
At his first 2-week postoperative follow-up, his mother reported more stability with his gait and improved balance. The patient returned to school. The patient's physical examination was unchanged from his preoperative exam except that he was now able to perform a single-leg stance. At his 3-month follow-up visit, his parents reported that he continued to improve. His daily headaches had resolved, and the MRI of the cervicothoracic spine revealed improvement in the size of the syrinx measuring 3.5 mm at its widest point .
Six months after suboccipital craniectomy, the patient underwent an uncomplicated anterior release and posterior spinal fusion with correction of his thoracolumbar kyphosis. During the most recent 3-month follow-up visit, the patient was found to have complete resolution of his gibbus deformity and no changes with his neurologic exam. The MRI of the cervical and thoracic spine revealed a stable syrinx. This case report was approved by the University of Missouri Health Sciences Institutional Review Board, and an informed consent was obtained from the patient's parents.