A 68-year-old previously healthy male was hospitalized for progressive weakness and dysesthesia of the lower limbs associated with urinary dysfunction lasting over 1-month. He was alert and had no other complaints or signs of fever. A clinical examination showed mild weakness and hyporeflexia of the lower limbs, and the plantar reflexes were in extension, although there were no abnormalities in the upper extremities. The results of routine biochemical, immunological, and serological studies were unremarkable, and a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed an increased protein level (205 mg/dl), no oligoclonal bands, a glucose level of 51 mg/dl and a cell count of 41/mm3 (47 lymphocyte cells/mm3). A cytological examination for malignant cells was negative. In addition, the findings of cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and abdomen were unremarkable, whereas whole spine MRI revealed increased signal intensity, which was more pronounced in the gray matter, on a T2-weighted image obtained at the level of Th3 . A physical examination revealed that no skin lesions or lymphadenopathy, and no mass lesions were found on whole body CT or endoscopy of the gastrointestinal tract. Gallium scanning and spinal Gd-MRI did not disclose any enhanced abnormalities. Therefore, the clinical diagnosis was myelitis of unknown etiology. Immediately after the initiation of treatment with methylprednisolone intravenous (0.5 g/day over 5 days), the patient was able to walk alone and resumed his activities of daily living.
One-month later, however, he was readmitted because the paraparesis recurred and newly appearing symptoms, including bilateral hearing disturbances, severe vertigo, and disorientation, developed. Cranial diffusion-weighted MRI showed several nonenhancing hyperintense lesions in the subcortical white matter . MR angiography demonstrated no intracranial arterial stenosis or occlusion . At that time, the patient received antiplatelet therapy under a diagnosis of multiple cerebral infarcts. However, his condition continued to deteriorate and he became very drowsy and developed seizures. The bilateral leg weakness was also exacerbated, progressing to flaccid paraplegia and urinary retention. In addition, the patient developed dyspnea, and XP and CT of the chest showed patchy areas of ground-glass opacity in both lungs [Figure and ]. The constellation of these worsening clinical manifestations raised suspicion of IVL, as this condition often lacks lymphadenopathy and preferentially involves the spinal region. Repeated CSF examinations were negative for malignant cells. Ultimately, four random biopsies of healthy-appearing skin on the bilateral abdomen and thighs were performed. All skin biopsy specimens showed obliteration of the small vessels in subcutaneous fat tissue by lymphoma cells, allowing for a diagnosis of IVL . Chemotherapy with 375 mg/m2 of rituximab, 750 mg/m2 of cyclophosphamide, 50 mg/m2 of doxorubicin and 1.4 mg/m2 of vincristine on day 1 and 50 mg/m2 of prednisolone on days 1–5 was started. Although no improvements were noted in the paraplegia, the patient's consciousness level started to recover. A total of six courses were completed within 12 weeks. The patient continues to have complete paraplegia and is wheelchair-bound, although he is well oriented, 8 months after the initial admission.