The patient was a 9-month-old boy who was born at 36 weeks 5 days of gestation with low body weight (2170 g) due to intrauterine growth retardation. At 9 months after birth, the patient was admitted to the hospital because of partial seizures. Upon admission, the patient’s level of consciousness was clear, and he had no neurological deficits. Computed tomography (CT) scanning revealed a mass lesion (35 × 40 mm) with calcification in the left temporal lobe . Isointensity was noted on magnetic resonance (MR) T1-weighted images (WI), T2WI, and fluid attenuation inversion recovery images . The tumor was heterogeneously enhanced with gadolinium (Gd) . Cystic components were not observed. MR spectroscopy showed increased choline and lactate levels and decreased N-acetylaspartate levels in the region of interest. Positron emission tomography showed high methionine uptake in the tumor . These findings suggested that the tumor had high cellularity with malignant alterations. Hence, a primitive neuroectodermal tumor was diagnosed. The patient underwent left temporal craniotomy, wherein the tumor was dissected and resected via the superior temporal sulcus. The tumor was gray in color and elastic-hard in texture; a moderately clear boundary was noted between the tumor and the normal brain parenchyma. The left inferior horn was opened by resection of the subependymal invasive tumor, which was elastic and soft and bled easily. The tumor was gross-totally resected. The patient’s postoperative course was generally good, but the convulsions persisted; hence, anticonvulsant therapy was continued. Two years after the surgery, the tumor showed no recurrence and the patient has been experiencing partial seizures monthly.
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections were examined via hematoxylin-eosin staining and immunohistochemistry. The primary antibodies and dilutions in buffer were as follows: mouse monoclonal anti-synaptophysin (Syn) antibody (1:50; Millipore), monoclonal anti-neurofilament protein (NFP) antibody (1:150; Dako), monoclonal anti-neuronal nuclear antigen (NeuN) antibody (1:100; Millipore), mouse monoclonal anti-tubulin, βIII isoform (TuJ1) antibody (1:200; Millipore), mouse monoclonal anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) antibody (1:500; Dako), rabbit polyclonal anti-olig 2 antibody (1:100; IBL), mouse monoclonal anti-isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)1 R132H antibody (1:20; Dianova), and monoclonal anti-Ki-67/MIB-1 antibody (1:50; Dako). For all antibodies, antigen retrieval was performed by autoclaving (121°C, 15 min). An Envision kit (Dako) provided secondary antibodies conjugated to dextran polymer and hydrogen peroxidase, and 3,3-diaminobenzidine was used as the chromogen. Silver impregnation was performed according to a previously described method of silver staining .
The tumor mainly comprised a ganglioglioma-like portion and short spindle cells in different densities . The ganglioglioma-like cells had large oval nuclei . The ganglion-like cells were strongly immunohistochemically positive for Syn , NeuN , TuJ1 and NF . These large cells partly proliferated in clusters . Between these clusters of ganglion like cells, we found large numbers of spindle cells with moderately small nuclei, which were strongly positive for GFAP . The tumor also contained a small oligodendroglioma-like lesion with a honeycomb appearance . These lesions were positive for GFAP and olig 2 staining, but negative for IDH1 R132H. The MIB-1 labeling index was 5% in the area anchored by a large number of ganglioglioma-like cells; in contrast, the index was 2% in the area anchored by a large number of short spindle cells. Desmoplastic components were not observed by silver impregnation staining . The tumor included an area that mimicked a primitive polar spongioblastoma pattern , in which TuJ1 staining was strongly positive in a ladder-like fashion.
Electron microscopic (EM) analysis revealed 2 types of tumor cells, round or polygonal cells with round nuclei and moderately clear cytoplasm and spindle cells with irregular nuclei and dark cytoplasm . Abundant rough-surfaced endoplasmic reticulum and free ribosomes were observed as characteristic structures of the neuron . A lot of intermediate filaments were easily observed in the spindle cells . These findings suggested that the former type of tumor cells were neuron-like cells and the latter were astrocytic cells.
In summary, the tumor contained both neuronal and glial elements. The neuronal elements were the main constituents of this tumor and included several ganglion-like cells of different shapes. Because neuronal elements gradually transited to glial cells, a mixed neuronal-glial tumor was diagnosed.