A 35-year-old, previously healthy woman, presented with severe headache and was transferred to the hospital. At presentation, the patient was drowsy, but did not show any focal neurological deficits. Her ocular position was neutral on both sides, and she presented with isochoric pupils. Ptosis was not found. Cranial computed tomography (CT) revealed a diffuse subarachnoid hemorrhage with a subtle ventriculomegaly. No abnormal findings were observed in the midbrain . Three-dimensional CT angiography revealed a saccular aneurysm, 3 mm in diameter, at the branching site of the distal M1 segment of the left middle cerebral artery. The patient underwent open microsurgical clipping. During surgery, a ventricular catheter was placed in the left anterior horn, and the cerebrospinal fluid was intermittently drained to avoid excessive retraction to the left frontal lobe. After satisfactory clip application to the aneurysm neck, a commercially available silastic tube, 3.0 mm in an outer diameter, was placed in the basal cistern at the medial aspect of the clinoidal portion of the internal carotid artery and the anterior clinoid process . Hematolytic agents such as papaverine or urokinase were not infused through the drain. The patient was well-oriented immediately after surgery, but presented with the left oculomotor nerve palsy represented by ptosis, mydriasis with sluggish light reaction, and restriction of extraocular movements, in 2/5, in the upward, downward, and leftward gaze. Prompt CT revealed that the tip of the cisternal drain was displaced to the lateral aspect of the anterior clinoid process . No other significant CT findings associated with the patient’s symptoms were observed. Assuming mechanical injury to the left oculomotor nerve, the cisternal drain was immediately withdrawn, and steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone, 500 mg/ day) was administered for 2 days. The patient’s mydriasis and sluggish light reaction recovered 7 days after surgery; however, photophobia in the left eye persisted for 6 months. In contrast, recovery from restriction of extraocular movements was necessitated 50 days after surgery . The constructive interference steady-state (CISS) sequence performed on postoperative day 30 detected the cisternal portion of the left oculomotor nerve coursing adjacent to the lateral wall of the clinoidal portion of the internal carotid artery [ and ].