A 42-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency department after stabbed in the neck. After anteromedial injury of the sternocloid muscle, two lacerations with active bleeding from the same site (one of 5 cm in length and two on the paraspinal muscle of the left lumbar L2-4) were present. There were minimal contamination on the wound edges. The patient’s examination revealed stabbing in the neck and lumbar region. The scars on the lumbar region were related to the skin. However, neck injury was deeper. There was no other injury. On examination, the patient was unconscious (Glasgow coma score:8(E2 M4 V2)). Pulse rate was 65 per minute and blood pressure was 110/67 mmHg. Intravenous fluid and medical treatment were initiated. The lacerations in the emergency room were repaired under aseptic measures. Cranial, cervical, thoracic and lumbar non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scans were performed in the emergency department. Moderate pneumocephalus was seen in the subarachnoid spaces of the suprasellar cistern region in the anterior of the intracerebral bilateral frontal lobe. No cranial fracture was observed. The air levels were observed in the retrofaringeal region and in the neighborhood of the trachea until deep neck fascia in the cervical region. In addition, pneumorrachis was seen in cervical spinal canal C2-C7 levels. There was no evidence of fracture or subluxation in the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine (a,b). The patient was intubated. Intravenous analgesic and antibiotic treatment was started. In addition, 100% oxygen from the ventilator was given for 6 h for the treatment of pneumocephaly and pneumorrachis. Four limbs were moving. There was no neurological deficit. It was pentotalized for 24 h due to loss of consciousness. Pentothal was stopped at 48th hour. In the sixth hour of pentotal discontinuity, the patient’s neurological examination revealed gks: 11 (E4 M6 V1e). He’s conscious. He left the ventilator and was then extubated. The patient’s neurological examination was normal after extubation (GKS: 15 (E4 M6 V5). After 72 h, cranial, cervical, thoracic and lumbar CT were performed. Pneumorrachis and pneumocephalus were completely resolved (a, b). He was discharged 4 days after admission. There were no problems in the late period. He was completely asymptomatic at three months follow-up.