The mother was a 28-year-old, G6P5006 female who presented at 39 weeks for induction of labor due to active, asymptomatic bilateral pulmonary embolism with a history of recurrent pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis. She previously had two spontaneous vaginal deliveries, two Caesarean sections, and two successful vaginal births after Caesarean section. Vertex presentation was confirmed by ultrasound, and labor was induced. At 3–cm cervical dilation, external fetal monitoring was concerning. Therefore, oxytocin was stopped, and a single helix FSE (Covidien Kendall™; Dublin, Ireland) was placed for better continuous monitoring of the fetus. Review of the record did not comment on the verification of fetal position immediately prior to FSE placement. A baby boy (birth weight = 3.255 kg) was delivered vaginally in left occiput anterior position with Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively.
Upon delivery of the neonate, the FSE was noted to be embedded in the left upper eyelid. Ophthalmology was consulted. On external examination, bilateral upper eyelids demonstrated marked edema consistent with postnatal swelling but no ecchymosis. The FSE was embedded in the left upper eyelid near the lateral canthus with adjacent superficial laceration but without significant discharge or bleeding . Given the eyelid swelling and position of the FSE, bedside exam could not rule out ocular injury, so the neonate was urgently taken to the operating room.
In the operating room, gentle manipulation allowed for view of an intact ocular surface and no evidence of full-thickness penetrating injury by the FSE . A scleral shell was placed over the ocular surface, and the FSE was removed from the eyelid by unscrewing in a counter-clockwise fashion. The remaining examination was unremarkable. The laceration was repaired with 7-0 Vicryl and treated with ophthalmic erythromycin ointment; wound healing was uncomplicated at one-week follow-up.
Written, informed consent was obtained at the follow-up appointment for the publication of this case and accompanying images.