A 66-year-old Japanese non-cigarette smoking woman was given a diagnosis of CEP for 8 years after moving out of her home. She was treated with prednisone; however, recurrence often occurred when prednisone was tapered. In August 2010, she developed respiratory symptoms again with tapering of prednisone (10mg/day). She did not have a history of alcohol abuse, drug abuse, occupational exposure, or exposure to birds. She was afebrile with a respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute, and complained of non-productive cough and malaise. Auscultation of her chest revealed expiratory wheezes in both lungs, and she had a history of bronchial asthma for 1 year. Results of laboratory findings are as follows: an arterial blood gas analysis while breathing room air showed evidence of respiratory alkalosis (pH7.55; partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood, 87.7mmHg; partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood, 30.3mmHg; and bicarbonate, 30.3mEq/L). Her leukocyte count was 7200/uL; 4% were eosinophils. Results of routine serum chemical studies were almost normal except for serum C-reactive protein of 1.1mg/mL (normal, <0.3mg/mL). Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were absent. Her serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) level was 56.4IU/mL (normal, <173IU/mL). Specific IgE to house dust including Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus or Dermatophagoides farinae, house dust mites in Japan, and Aspergillus fumigatus were all negative (radioallergosorbent tests; class range 0). Her urine analysis was normal, with no active sediments. Stool examinations for ova or parasites were negative. A pulmonary function test demonstrated an obstructive pattern with reduced diffusing capacity of her lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) (forced vital capacity, 106%; forced expiratory volume1, 64%; DLCO, 66%). A chest radiograph revealed patchy shadows in her bilateral upper lung fields . A chest computed tomography showed bilateral patchy ground-glass opacities with subpleural predominance . Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid recovered 980,000 cells per mL with a differential 62% of eosinophils. Based on negative findings for other causes of eosinophilia, the diagnosis of the recurrence of CEP was established. She was treated with prednisone, 20mg/day, which demonstrated rapid improvement of her clinical picture and chest imaging .Around that same time, her tame cat of 10 years, developed oral breathing, tachypnea (40 breaths/minute) and peripheral eosinophilia (12%). Chest radiography of the tame cat revealed ground-glass opacity in its bilateral upper lung fields . The tame cat, which had lived in the same house as the patient for 8 years, was also diagnosed as having eosinophilic pneumonia and was treated with 3mg/day (1mg/kg) of prednisone for 3 days, resulting in a rapid improvement of the clinical picture. Since eosinophilic pneumonia was diagnosed simultaneously in the patient and the tame cat, it can be suggested that inhaled environmental antigens in the home caused the eosinophilic pneumonia. After moving out of her home, she had no recurrence of CEP with tapering of prednisone. The tame cat also had no recurrence of eosinophilic pneumonia without prednisone.