A 55-year-old man presented to the hepatology clinic of our hospital complaining of manifestations of anorexia and jaundice along with weakness.
The patient’s symptoms started 10 d previously with manifestations of anorexia, jaundice, and weakness, and had worsened over the last 2 d.
The patient had no past medical history.
The patient did not abuse alcohol or substances. There was no family history of liver disease.
The clinical examination revealed that the skin and sclera were jaundiced.
Blood samples revealed alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 893 U/L, serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 831 U/L, γ-glutamyl-transpeptidase (γ-GGT) 423 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 150 U/L, and total bilirubin 342 μmol/L. Thyroid-stimulating hormone, blood count, triiodothyronine, prothrombin time, and thyroxine were all normal. Serum anti-HAV IgM (1.93) was positive. Other viral serology viral tests were negative. Antibody screening found positive anti-mitochondria antibody (AMA) but negative anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA) and anti-liver kidney microsome type 1 (LKM 1). IgA, IgM and IgG levels were normal.
Abdominal ultrasound imaging was normal.
Based on the patient's medical history and evaluation, he was diagnosed with acute hepatitis A (Hep A); PBC could not be excluded. After symptomatic treatment, we discharged the patient on the 20th day of hospitalization with AST 36 U/L, γ-GGT 323 U/L, total bilirubin 62 μmol/L, ALT 50 U/L, and normal ALP and prothrombin time. The patient continued to take ursodeoxycholic acid after discharge.
Two months after discharge, his aminotransferase levels began to increase. In the subsequent months, repeated blood examinations revealed ALT 927 U/L, AST 864 U/L, γ-GGT 476 U/L, ALP 133 U/L, and total bilirubin 185 μmol/L. The patient’s serum anti-HAV IgM (3.09) remained positive. Antinuclear antibody (1:100) and AMA were positive while ASMA and anti-LKM were negative. Liver histology showed interface hepatitis accompanied by plasma cell infiltration. Moreover, we observed florid bile duct damage with lymphocytic cholecystitis as shown in Figure . Histologic lesions were graded G4S2-3 as per the modified Scheuer score. We also assayed HAV RNA, which was negative.