A 40-year-old female presented to the emergency department 5 h after ingesting ~15 ml of a pesticide compound with suicidal intent. The nature of the pesticide was unknown at the time of presentation. She developed abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. She admitted to consuming 500 ml of homemade alcohol 2 h prior to her suicide attempt.
On examination, the patient had a pulse of 120 beats per minute. She appeared confused and had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 13/15 with an eye subscore of four, a verbal subscore of four, and a motor subscore of five (E4V4M5). Other findings of the general and systemic examination were unremarkable.
Initially, decontamination was performed by changing the patient’s clothes and washing her body surface. Intravenous fluid resuscitation and continuous monitoring of vital signs were initiated. Given the lack of knowledge about the nature of the pesticide, an atropine challenge test was performed with 1.2 mg of intravenous atropine. The atropine challenge test was negative, as her heart rate increased from 120 to 156 beats per minute. Considering the failed atropine test and absence of cholinergic clinical features, conservative management was continued.
Her laboratory results showed an elevated aspartate transaminase at 120 IU/l (Reference range: <40 IU/l), alanine transaminase 91 IU/l (Reference range: <40 IU/l), and gamma glutamyl transferase 73 IU/l (Reference range: <45 IU/l). ECG showed sinus tachycardia . Chest radiograph is shown in Figure . The patient’s laboratory parameters are detailed in Table and arterial blood gas analysis results are presented in Table .
Four hours after presentation, the pesticide ingested by the patient was located and identified to be lambda-cyhalothrin 5% . Subsequently, the patient was admitted to the medical ward and was managed with intravenous fluids, multivitamin injections, tablet thiamine, tablet pantoprazole, continuous monitoring of vital signs, input/output charting, and a normal diet. The patient’s clinical condition improved, leading to her discharge after 2 days following psychiatric consultation and psychosocial counseling in view of attempted suicide.
A follow-up outpatient department visit occurred 14 days after discharge and a telephone interview with the patient was conducted 1 year after discharge. The patient did not report any medical complaints.