A 70-year-old white man with a history of coronary artery disease, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and sinus node dysfunction with prior permanent pacemaker implantation presented with symptoms of dyspnoea on exertion and decreased functional capacity.
The cardiovascular examination findings include a jugular venous pressure (JVP) that is elevated by 2 cm above the clavicle and the presence of a 3/6 systolic murmur on the left lower sternal border. The lungs were clear on auscultation. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a left ventricular EF of 52%, increased biventricular wall thickness, bi-atrial enlargement, thickened atrioventricular valve leaflets with moderate mitral and mild TR, and abnormal global longitudinal strain of −9% with apical sparing. Cardiac MRI demonstrated extensive subendocardial delayed gadolinium. Laboratory evaluation revealed normal renal function (creatinine, 1.2 mg/dL, normal: 0.7–1.3 mg/dL), high-sensitivity troponin 61 ng/mL (normal: <14 ng/mL), NT-proBNP 1965 µg/mL (normal: <125 µg/mL), total bilirubin 2.7 mg/dL (normal: <1 mg/dL), direct bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL (normal: 0–0.3 mg/dL), and a normal haematologic evaluation with normal free AL ratio and no monoclonal protein detected on serum or urine immunofixation. Nuclear scintigraphy utilizing technetium-labelled PYP (Tc-99m-PYP) was performed and negative for ATTR amyloidosis. Fat pad aspirate did reveal amyloid deposits by Congo Red staining, but there was insufficient number of amyloid-associated peptides to perform amyloid typing. Given high clinical suspicion of cardiac amyloidosis, EMB was recommended, and biopsy revealed amyloid deposits by Congo Red staining with LC–MS demonstrating AApoAI amyloidosis, and genetic testing confirmed the Leu99Pro mutation.
During the EMB, there was injury to the TV consisting of a flail septal leaflet with severe eccentric TR (see , and ). The patient was initially managed conservatively with diuretics. However, over 3 years, he developed worsening dyspnoea, decrease in functional capacity, autonomic dysfunction felt to be related to the AApoAI amyloidosis, and recurrent ascites requiring paracenteses, early satiety, and worsening symptoms of right heart failure with New York Heart Association (NYHA) IIIb symptoms. Although some of his symptoms were related to progression of his restrictive cardiomyopathy secondary to cardiac amyloidosis, his severe TR was felt to be contributing to the rapid progression of right heart failure symptoms. Repeat transthoracic echocardiography revealed moderate–severe right atrial enlargement, increased right ventricular wall thickness, right ventricular end-diastolic diameter at the base was 4.8 cm, TV annulus systolic excursion by M-Mode (TAPSE) 13 mm, and severe TV regurgitation with hepatic vein systolic flow reversals and a dilated and noncollapsible inferior vena cava. Given the presence of advanced cardiac amyloidosis, after multidisciplinary discussion with cardiovascular surgery, structural cardiology, and shared decision-making with the patient, the decision was made to proceed with TV TEER to alleviate some of his right-sided heart failure symptoms.
Patient successfully underwent TV TEER with off-label use of the MitraClip device (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The MitraClip device was chosen given lack of availability of the PASCAL and the TriClip. The MitraClip delivery system was inserted via a right femoral vein approach. Given suboptimal TEE images, 4D ICE catheter was introduced via a left femoral vein with catheter tip positioned in the right atrium. With ICE guidance, the MitraClip XTW clip was implanted with a successful grasp of the septal and anterior leaflets (see , and ). The degree of TR was reduced to mild with closure of the clip and remained stable after the release. The patient was administered post-procedural anticoagulation therapy in the form of apixaban. Post-procedural transthoracic echocardiogram 1 day post-procedure demonstrated mild TR with a TV diastolic mean Doppler gradient 2 mmHg (heart rate of 80 b.p.m.). Patient did require intravenous diuretics prior to hospital discharge but remains on a stable diuretic regimen in the outpatient setting with improved functional capacity, NYHA II. On the most recent follow-up visit, the patient reported an improvement in their symptoms, including increased stamina. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed EF of 65% and mild TR.