A 2-year-old white boy who had no medical history presented to University Hospital Emergency Department with respiratory distress and fever. He is the second child of a Turkish father and a 40-year-old Uzbek mother; his older sister has no health issues. He was born at term weighing 3350 g. Milestones were reached at the appropriate age.
On admission to the primary hospital, he had jaundice and confusion; his blood tests showed anemia, thrombocytopenia, and liver and kidney dysfunction. Suspecting malignancy, abdomen and thorax computed tomography (CT) and cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were obtained, which revealed bilateral pleural effusions with more severe parenchymal compression on his left lung. Periportal edema and hepatomegaly were detected in the abdominal CT. The cranial MRI was normal. On the day of admission, he was transferred to our pediatric intensive care unit (ICU).
At the time of admission, a physical examination revealed a confused boy (Glasgow Coma Scale was 13) with a length in 90th percentile and weight in 90th percentile. He had generalized edema and icterus. His pulse rate was 132 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate was 45 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 120/54 mmHg, and temperature was 35 °C. Respiratory sounds were attenuated in his left lung. His abdomen was distended; his liver was palpable 4 to 5 cm below ribs. His Pediatric Risk of Mortality and Pediatric Logistic Organ Dysfunction scores were 20 and 11, respectively. Our preliminary diagnosis was multiple organ dysfunction secondary to sepsis. Antibiotic treatments were started with vancomycin (60 mg/kg per day) and meropenem (120 mg/kg per day) after sampling of pleural effusion, which showed characteristics of empyema . The cultures (urine, blood, catheter, and pleural fluid) were sterile. Due to increasing respiratory distress, he was intubated and artificially ventilated. A norepinephrine infusion was started to maintain cardiac output and prevent hypotension. HLH was diagnosed since he had elevated levels of serum ferritin, bicytopenia, splenomegaly, fever (> 38.5 °C), and hemophagocytosis shown in bone marrow sample, fulfilling five out of eight diagnostic criteria for acquired HLH. He had no urinary output for the last 72 hours; his blood urea nitrogen, uric acid, and creatinine levels were increased. Initial laboratory results are shown in Table . Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) and intravenously administered high-dose corticosteroid for HLH and continuous renal replacement treatment (CRRT) for acute renal failure were initiated.
Following 5-day high-dose corticosteroid administration, TPE, and CRRT, his clinical status and kidney and liver functions improved, and his vasoactive requirement and ferritin levels decreased. The norepinephrine infusion was decreased gradually and stopped after 4 days. He was extubated on the seventh day. On the tenth day of hospitalization he had a seizure; electroencephalography, MRI, and lumbar puncture did not reveal pathological findings. Since we excluded other pathologies that may cause seizures, he was thought to have septic encephalopathy. Antiepileptic medication was started, and he did not have a seizure in the follow-up period. CRRT was continued intermittently, and completely stopped on the 14th day of hospitalization. The antibiotic treatments were stopped on the 14th day of treatment. His immune functions were also investigated; his lymphocyte subset panel and immunoglobulin levels were found to be normal . The result of serologic testing for human immunodeficiency virus was negative.
Although his medical condition improved continuously, he had left spontaneous pneumothorax on the 21st day of admission as a complication of necrotizing pneumonia. Necrotizing pneumonia was diagnosed by thorax CT findings . Since pneumothorax persisted, left upper lobectomy surgery was performed on the 30th day of hospitalization. In the pathological examination of the excised lung tissue, features of CMV infection were observed and ganciclovir (10 mg/kg per day) treatment was started 2 days after surgery. In order to confirm the presence of CMV infection, CMV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) polymerase chain reaction (PCR), CMV DNA IgG avidity index, and CMV IgG and IgM tests were utilized. CMV IgM was found to be negative; however, CMV IgG was positive with high CMV DNA IgG avidity index (0.88; Table ). These results indicated that he had CMV reactivation, rather than an acute primary CMV infection. We determined the duration of ganciclovir treatment according to the level of CMV DNA PCR (10300 copies/mL) in the blood. Antiviral treatment was stopped after 17 days, when CMV DNA PCR results became negative. He fully recovered and was discharged from our hospital on the 50th day of admission. He had no health problem after discharge at 6-month follow-up at an out-patient clinic.