A 10-year-old girl came to Xiangyang No. 1 hospital in June 2021 due to the painless masses in the bilateral neck, which slowly increased in size in 1 year. The patient had no relevant clinical history. The ultrasound showed an enlarged thyroid gland with multiple cystic nodules in both lobes, according to the Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System Grade 3. The largest one was about 1.9 × 1.5 cm2 on the left lobe, and another one was 1.6 × 1.5 cm2 on the right lobe. The thyroid function test indicated that serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free triiodothyronine (FT3), free thyroxine (FT4), and calcitonin levels were normal. But the thyroglobulin (TG) level raised to 441.4 ng/ml (normal range 0.2-70ng/ml). Ultrasonography-guided fine-needle aspiration(FNA) cytology of the thyroid gland was performed to confirm the diagnosis. The cytology results suggested nodular goiter. Radiofrequency ablation on the thyroid nodules was conducted for the main treatment. However, the routine preoperative enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scanning showed a total of 4 nodules in both lungs, varying in size from 3 to 11 mm, with marked enhancement in the arterial phase and regression in the delayed phase . The largest nodule was approximately 7.2 × 11 mm2 in size. The aforementioned imaging findings suggested metastatic carcinoma of both lungs. We performed a CT-guided lung biopsy of one nodule in each lung to define the nature of the metastases. The pathological examination showed lung tissue and well-differentiated thyroid follicular tissue, without cellular atypia. The immunohistochemistry staining showed thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) and paired box gene 8 (Pax-8) positivity, thyroglobulin (TG), Cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and Cytokeratin 19 (CK19) partial positivity, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), galectin 3, and Hector Battifora mesothelial-1 (HBME-1) negativity. Also, the Ki67 index suggested a low level of proliferation . The pathological results of lung biopsy confirmed that the diagnosis was ectopic intrapulmonary thyroid. Considering thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine ablation might be harmful to the growth and development of the young girl, and the patient’s parents refused surgical treatment, radiofrequency ablation on the thyroid nodules was selected for the treatment of the neck mass. In view of the multiple intrapulmonary thyroid nodules in both lungs and the patient being asymptomatic, we applied the “wait and watch” strategy. One month after radiofrequency ablation, the patient is euthyroid (FT3:5.39pmol/L, FT4 :14.55pmol/L, TSH:1.02mIU/L) and has no associated complications. After the follow-up of 8 months, the CT scan showed no change in the pulmonary nodules in the bilateral lungs. Meanwhile, the patient’s serum FT3, FT4 and TSH were still in normal range, and TG level (80.72ng/ml) was nearly within the normal range (normal range 0.2-70ng/ml). The detailed diagnosis and treatment procedures are summarized in Fig. .