A 50-year-old Vietnamese male visited our cardiac outpatient clinic (S.I.S General Hospital, Can Tho, Vietnam) because of exertional dyspnea and chest pain. His past medical history was significant for hypertension and smoking. His family history was unrevealing. On examination, his blood pressure was 150/70 mmHg, heart rate was regular (about 63 bpm), oxygen saturation was 96% on room air, and respiratory rate was 22 times/minute. Signs of congestive heart failure and abnormal murmur were not presented on chest auscultation. The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm without pathological Q waves, ST segment, or T wave changes. Cardiac biomarkers were negative for myocardial damage. Both his complete blood count and biochemical blood test were normal. The echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of 62%, a dilated right coronary artery (RCA; about 7.8 mm in diameter), a normal left coronary artery (3.4 mm in diameter), and an abnormal shunt into the left ventricle (LV) near the base of the mitral valve. CTA showed an ostial RCA diameter of 8 mm and a coronary fistula originating from the terminal RCA and draining into the LV chamber.
Diagnostic digital subtraction angiography was performed to determine the detailed angioarchitecture of the CAF, revealing a fistulous connection between the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the LV chamber through an aneurysm. In addition, the RCA measured 7 mm in diameter with a fistula (16 × 9 mm) draining into an aneurysm and then terminating into the LV chamber. We did not discover any atherosclerosis disease .
The patient had an RCA aneurysm with a fistula into the LV. It was treated successfully by closing the fistula with a vascular plug. Access to the fistula was complex and difficult because of complications due to the CAF. The diameter of the entire RCA was about 7 mm, and an aneurysm (16 × 9 mm) was present in the distal RCA . The RCA was also long and tortuous. Therefore, we created an arteriovenous (AV) wire loop to provide a stable and solid path during device delivery. The ASAHI Hyperion AL 0.75 7F catheter (Asahi Intecc) was inserted into the RCA. We chose the ASAHI CHIKAI 300 cm wire (Asahi Intecc) with the Merit Maestro Microcatheter (Merit Medical) to approach the distal RCA through the fistula into the LV and then the ascending aorta. Then, we inserted the Guide Wire M 150m and ASAHI Hyperion JR 4.0 6F catheter into the right femoral artery to the ascending aorta, using the snare to catch the wire and pull the artery out to the right femoral artery. The 5F SteerEase Introducer (LifeTech Scientific) was guided through the right femoral artery to the aneurysm in the distal RCA. We placed the Lifetech Konar-MF VSD Occluder 6/4 mm (LifeTech Scientific) at the narrowest point of the aneurysm in the distal RCA and before the point draining into the LV chamber. The angiogram recorded the Occluder in the correct position, and the flow through the RCA fistula was reduced. We finished the procedure .
After the procedure, the patient had no chest pain or shortness of breath and was discharged after three days. After six months, he was taking dual antiplatelet therapy and antihypertensive medications and felt better. We performed contrast computed tomography (CT) to examine the fistula after a year, which showed the successful closure of the fistula without any relevant alteration in the coronary artery.