The patient is a 58 year-old female with relapsing remitting MS treated with subcutaneous GA since 2006, and otherwise unremarkable medical history. She presented at our department with a painful livedoid and haemorrhagic skin lesion that developed on her left abdomen approximately 24 h after GA injection. She reported correct injection practice.
She had no fever. Blood cell count, C-reactive protein, renal function, creatine kinase (CK), IgE, autoimmune screening, lupus anticoagulants and cryoglobulins were unremarkable. Superficial ultrasonography at skin lesion showed diffuse oedema without fluid collections. The patient was dismissed with symptomatic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory treatment and GA was stopped.
After 2 days, a livedoid violaceous skin patch with dendritic extensions below the injection site became apparent . At surgical evaluation at the Emergency Department cellulitis was suspected and a surgical revision proposed to avoid potentially lethal complications (such as sepsis and renal failure following rhabdomyolysis). Considering the negative inflammatory parameters and normal renal and CK values, we referred her before surgery to the Dermatology department for further counselling. Here, a NS was suspected and confirmed by a skin biopsy showing coagulative necrosis of dermal collagen and local adipose tissue, as well as several hyaline thrombi inside small and medium-sized blood vessels , without skin infection (cellulitis). Bacteriological culture of lesion samples grew only resident flora. The livedoid figures around the central haemorrhagic skin lesions disappeared spontaneously after a week. The haemorrhagic patch of NS necrotized . The skin necrosis was limited at the dermis and was removed by a surgical debridement. It was treated with a continuing multifunctional dressing to cleanse, fill, absorb and moisten the wound. A healing by second intention was obtained in 2 months after first evaluation. GA was definitively suspended. At that time, the patient reported that in 2007 a similar lesion had occurred after GA injection in her right abdomen. She experienced immediate and unusual local pain with subsequent appearance of a dark red area around the injection site. A central dark lesion developed within 2 days leading her to the emergency department. The lesion was initially treated conservatively, however, a surgical excision was required after a few days. No histological examination was performed at that time. The lesion evolved into a slightly depressed white scar. A recurrent NS was therefore diagnosed.