A previously healthy 3-year-old boy was in his usual state of health until he developed lower limb pain. On examination, he had tender calf muscles. He was treated for mostly reactive myalgia with ibuprofen. The patient started to develop a recurrent fever for 3 weeks with 3–4 temperature spikes per day with a maximum temperature of 40°C. It was associated with bilateral knee joint pain that was entirely relieved by ibuprofen. No joint tenderness, effusion, or any other abnormal signs were noted on examination. Parents were second-degree relatives.
Blood tests revealed a haemoglobin count of 9.6 mg/l and a mean corpuscular volume of 64.9. The C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration was 65 mg/l, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 70 mm/h. Others, including white blood cells, platelets, serum electrolytes, liver enzymes, antistreptolysin antibodies, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, the brucella test, cytomegalovirus and Ebstein-Barr virus serology, C3 and C4, and creatinine kinase, were unremarkable. The main laboratory findings throughout his illness are shown in Table S1.
Abdominal ultrasound showed splenomegaly (11.5 cm) with a homogenous pattern and a liver span of 10.5 cm. The whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan showed splenomegaly (10 cm) with no other related findings. Echocardiography, hip ultrasound, and bone marrow biopsy were unremarkable. A genetic study of common variants of familial mediterranean fever showed the heterozygous M694V mutation.
In this context of knee joint pain with recurrent fever and splenomegaly, it was suggested that he had systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis. The ophthalmic examination didn’t show any abnormal findings. He was treated with steroids orally (13 mg daily) for 1 month, which didn’t resolve the high-grade fever, ESR, and CRP. So, he was started on tocilizumab injections (150 mg every week for 2 months, then 150 mg every 2 weeks).
While he was on tocilizumab, he developed a pruritic skin rash in the form of wheels with elevated ESR and CRP levels. He was given dexamethasone (4 mg IM) once, as well as prednisone and loratadine orally for 3 days. It was suggested that he had a relapse. So, he continued the treatment for another 8 months before it was stopped. He remained free of any complaints until July 2022.
The patient started suffering from multiple symptoms, beginning with periodic polyarthralgia and occasional abdominal pain. The labs showed high CRP and low haemoglobin levels. Two months later, because of a lack of improvement, he was started on a tocilizumab injection (162 mg every 2 weeks). After the second dose, the patient developed severe epigastric pain, which increased at night and was associated with headaches and livedo reticularis all over his extremities. It was suspected to be due to tocilizumab; therefore, it was discontinued.
Six weeks later, the patient presented to the emergency room due to a sudden, left-sided loss of vision with a severe headache. He developed right-sided convulsions and eye twitches that were aborted with intravenous diazepam (5 mg). He subsequently had one episode of fever at 38.5°C.
Ophthalmic examination revealed a cherry-red spot in the left eye , and a central retinal artery occlusion was diagnosed. Complete blood count showed a haemoglobin of 10.6 (MCV 66), a white blood cell count of 6100 cells/µl and a platelet count of 218 000/ µl. Lumbar puncture did not reveal any abnormalities in the cerebrospinal fluid.
Brain MRI showed on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) increased intensity in the left medial temporal lobe and caudate nucleus in the region of the hippocampal formation, suggestive of mild limbic encephalitis . Electroencephalogram, echocardiography, and carotid duplex were in the normal range and didn’t refer to any potential conditions. Magnetic resonance angiography and venography (MRA and MRV) did not show any pathology. Abdominal ultrasound revealed splenomegaly (a span of 13 cm) and mesenteric lymphadenitis.
He was treated with a five-day pulse of intravenous methylprednisolone (20 mg/kg/day) and intravenous immunoglobulins for 2 days (1 g/kg/day). Enoxaparin sodium (clexane) was administered subcutaneously (20 mg once daily), and he was also given aspirin tablets (80 mg daily). Neurologically, he improved without a motor or sensory deficit. While hospitalized, his blood pressure (BP) measurements were elevated (systolic BP range was 130–150 mmHg and diastolic range was 85–102 mmHg), so he was treated with IV hydralazine (4 mg every 4 h) and then switched to oral amlodipine (2.5 mg twice daily). Renal doppler ultrasound was normal.
Moreover, the results of a genetic study of genes associated with thrombophilia (e.g. Factor V leiden, B-fibrinogen, etc.) did not explain the patient’s symptoms. Prothrombin/activated partial thromboplastin time, serum lipids, rheumatoid factor, anticardiolipin, anti-glycoprotein 1 antibody, lupus anticoagulant, protein C, C3, C4, and serum homocysteine were found to be within normal limits. The ophthalmic exam revealed visual acuity in right eye 6/6, left eye 6/95 and the fundoscopic exam showed a left flat cherry-red spot.
We reassessed the diagnosis and performed whole-exome sequencing for suspected monogenic inherited autoinflammatory disorders. A homozygous A->G substitution at chr22:17687970 confirms the diagnosis of DADA2 (germline mutation of the ADA2/ CECR1 gene c.533T>C leading to p.Phe178Ser). Treatment with etanercept (18 mg weekly subcutaneous injections) was initiated.
Six months after diagnosis, the patient is stable on weekly etanercept injections. There was a partial improvement in his left eye’s visual acuity (6/38); a fundoscopic exam showed pale optic disc temporally with macular atrophy and he was advised to patch the right eye daily for 3–4 hours.