Mr. R. is a 64-year-old, married, unemployed man, without a family history of mental disorders. He lives with his wife and has no children. His relatives describe him as an introverted person, with emphatic and social difficulties, a rigid adherence to routine, restricted interests and behaviors, always struggling with anxiety and with fear of economic strain. After a high school diploma, he entered the Law school and despite being an excellent student he had to quit university due to financial reasons. He was then employed in the family firm where, in the context of an increase in personal and work responsibilities, his strong adherence to routine and tendency to social isolation progressively intensified. At the age of 36, when he was the managing director, the firm went bankrupt and Mr. R. began to suffer from sporadic panic attacks. From then on, despite obtaining a stable job as a bank clerk, he was deeply preoccupied with the fear of losing everything and undergoing financial strain. While never delusional, the rumination about economic stability was pervasive and associated with frequent mood swings in both polarities and somatic symptoms without organic cause (mainly epigastric pain and dysphonia). However, he always refused to seek for psychiatric help and showed progressive social withdrawal. Since COVID-19 began spreading through Italy, Mr. R has experienced severe isolation, struggling to work and spending most of the time at home alone and talking to himself. The enforced lock-down measures further discouraged Mr. R. and his wife to seek for help.
In March 2021, the clinical picture definitely deteriorated as Mr. R. developed a deep rumination focused on the fear of contracting the COVID-19 (in spite of repeated negative swab tests) progressively increasing to racing thoughts and delusional hypochondria, together with hyporexia and severely disrupted circadian rhythms. When convinced to see a psychiatrist, Mr. R. presented in a full-blown catatonic state, with stupor, posturing, negativism, waxy flexibility, mutacism, lack of facial expressiveness, fixed gaze, echolalia and occasional episodes of agitation, a clinical picture that meets the criteria for the diagnosis of catatonia according to DSM-5.
After inpatient admission, Mr. R. was treated with increasing doses of lorazepam (up to 10 mg/day). After a few of days with no improvement, biweekly electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) was initiated. Mr. R. showed improvement in motor signs and verbal activity since the first session, and fully recovered after completion of the eight-session ECT treatment. Upon discharge, after 4 weeks, Mr. R was prescribed olanzapine 20 mg/day, paroxetine 10 mg/day and lorazepam 2 mg/day as maintenance therapy and administered the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders (SCID-5), the Autism-Spectrum Quotient (AQ) and the Adult Autism Subthreshold Spectrum (AdAS Spectrum) . He reported a diagnosis of bipolar disorder with catatonic features, with comorbid panic disorder and a clinically significant level of autistic traits (see Table ). The patient also gave written informed consent to the processing of health data for research purposes.