On 6 November 2008, a 53-year-old man presented to a nearby hospital with the chief complaints of epigastric pain and black stool. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a large deep ulceration in the gastric antrum. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes. The other lymph nodes were not enlarged. Positron emission tomography/CT showed abnormal accumulations of fluorodeoxyglucose in the gastric angle, para-aortic lymph nodes, pelvic lymph nodes, and prostate. They suspected malignant lymphoma or prostate cancer. The prostate biopsy showed prostate cancer, and a definitive diagnosis of gastric malignant lymphoma could not be made despite gastric biopsies that were performed every 6 months. There were no abnormal findings in the bone marrow biopsy. Because of the high-serum level of prostate-specific antigen (833 ng/ml) and prostate capsular invasion on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), they made the diagnosis of metastasis of prostate cancer to the para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes (cT3aN1M1). Treatment was initiated for the prostate cancer rather than the gastric malignant lymphoma. They started medical therapy for prostate cancer (bicalutamide and leuprorelin acetate). After medical therapy, enhanced abdominal CT showed that the para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes had become progressively smaller and the level of prostate specific antigen had decreased. On the other hand, upper gastroscopy showed that the gastric tumor had enlarged gradually. Once control of prostate cancer was achieved, they had planned to start medical treatment for the gastric tumor. The presence of Helicobacter pylori infection was demonstrated by the positive results of histologic examination, rapid urease test, and serology. They performed H. pylori eradication therapy.
In November 2013, the patient visited the authors’ hospital with acute abdominal pain. He had severe epigastralgia that had started after breakfast. He was 58 years old, 166-cm tall and weighed 62 kg, with a body temperature of 35.9°C, a pulse rate of 81 beats/min, and a blood pressure of 127/82 mmHg. On physical examination, abdominal distension and severe tenderness were present. Blood tests showed normal results for the white blood cell count (4,900/μl), C-reactive protein (0.1 mg/dl), lactate dehydrogenase (200 IU/l), and interleukin-2 receptor (264 U/ml). Abdominal CT scan showed a large amount of intraperitoneal free gas and a fluid collection around the stomach, liver, and spleen. Also, the site of gastric perforation at the anterior wall of the body of the stomach was identified . A diagnosis of perforation of gastric ulcer and pan-peritonitis was made, but details of the gastric lymphoma were unknown because it was his first visit to the authors’ hospital. The results of imaging studies indicated a perforated gastric ulcer, and an emergency operation was performed. At first, a laparoscopic omental implantation repair was planned. On laparoscopic visualization of the abdominal cavity, purulent ascites and food residue were observed. There was a large perforation about 50 mm in diameter in the anterior wall of the middle part of the stomach body . Because a large amount of food residue had escaped through the large perforation, removal of the food residue around and within the stomach was attempted but it was unsuccessful. Therefore, an emergency laparotomy was performed. A distal subtotal gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y anastomosis and lymph node dissection was performed. Macroscopically, the gastric ulcer was 4.2 × 1.5 cm in size, and the perforation was 4.0 × 1.3 cm in size and located on the anterior wall of the gastric antrum . It was ulcerative and infiltrative and was the excavated type according to Sano’s classification . Microscopically, a population of large atypical lymphoid cells diffusely infiltrated the full thickness of the gastric wall. Tumor cells were mainly centroblasts. Tumor cells diffusely infiltrated the muscle and subserosal layers . Tumor cells and necrotic matter were detected around the perforation and ulcer floor. The lymphoid nature of these cells was confirmed by the strong positive immunohistochemical staining for CD20, CD38, and CD10; the slightly positive staining for Bcl-6; and partial positivity for MUM-1 . On the other hand, the results for CD3, CD5, Bcl-2, and EBER ISH were negative. The MIB-1 labeling index was about 80%. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of germinal center B-cell-like type of DLBCL. There was no evidence of a low-grade MALT lymphoma. The number of metastatic lymph nodes was 3/31. Based on the Lugano International Classification, the stage was II1E (perforation and pan-peritonitis) since lymph node metastasis was present around the left gastric artery and greater curvature of the stomach and distant metastasis was absent.
He recovered from the operation uneventfully and was discharged from hospital 16 days postoperatively. He was administered rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) therapy at the previous hospital.