Right low back pain, abdominal distension and repeated gross hematuria for 2 wk.
The patient was a 68-year-old man admitted to The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University on September 20, 2020 with a 2-wk history of right waist pain and abdominal distension with repeated gross haematuria. No special observation was noted during physical examination.
In August 2016, the patient was admitted to our hospital with repeated gross haematuria. Computed tomography (CT) showed thickening of the wall of the lower part of the right ureter suggestive of ureteral cancer, hydronephrosis of the right kidney and upper and middle ureteral segments, and right renal insufficiency. After consultation with the patient and his dependents, we decided to perform a ureteral tumour biopsy, and postoperative pathology exhibited a limited lower segment of the right ureter, suspected to be cancerous. Immunohistochemistry showed CD20 (+ mainly umbrella cells, focal whole layer +), Ki-67 (+ mainly basal cells), and p53 (-) . We recommended a radical ureterectomy for this cancer; however, the patient and his family refused, and he agreed to undergo ureteral bladder replantation to treat distal ureteral strictures (right) 1 wk after the biopsy (right). Intraoperative frozen pathology and postoperative pathology of the vesicoureteral junction revealed chronic mucositis and mild atypical hyperplasia of the local urothelium .
The patient’s postoperative recovery was good, but irregular gross haematuria was observed during the follow-up period. Re-examination with CT in our hospital in January 2017, March 2019, and September 2019 showed postoperative changes in the lower segment of the right ureter and slight hydronephrosis in the right kidney and upper ureteral segment. A ureteral biopsy was performed again in 2019 for gross haematuria, and the postoperative pathology findings were consistent with the morphological manifestation of a right ureteral polyp . Urine exfoliative cytology was performed in August 2016 and March 2019, but the results were negative. The remainder of this paper is nothing special.
The patient had no relevant medical history.
The patient had no relevant personal or family history.
The patient’s vital signs were normal. There is percussion pain in the right renal area, normal on the left side.
The patient’s creatinine level was 114.1 μmol/L and urea nitrogen level was 4.9 mmol/L. The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of the left kidney was 31.88 mL/min, while that of the right kidney was 14.38 mL/min. The remaining participants were not special.
B-mode ultrasound showed the following: (1) Hydronephrosis of the right kidney suggestive of possible middle and lower ureteral obstructions; and (2) Benign prostatic hyperplasia with calcification. CT showed the following: (1) A soft-tissue tumour of the right kidney and right upper ureter segment suggestive of transitional cell carcinoma in addition to multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the right renal hilum suggestive of metastasis; (2) Blood perfusion and excretion function of the right kidney were significantly decreased; (3) Postoperative changes in the right ureter. The wall of the lower part of the right ureter near the entrance of the bladder was slightly thickened and enhanced. Therefore, an endoscopic examination was recommended; and (4) The presence of multiple nodes in both lungs suggested the possibility of metastasis .