A 9-year-old boy was reported to the hospital with a chief complaint of missing upper front teeth. There was no relevant medical history.
Clinically, on intraoral examination upper maxillary primary teeth from lateral incisor to molars were present with only left maxillary central incisor (21) erupting . Any swelling and pain were absent in the maxillary region. There was a history of trauma in the upper front tooth region at the age of three resulting in the intrusion of the maxillary left primary lateral incisor. The presence of supernumerary teeth was accidentally noted on radiographic examination ( and ). Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) was advised and the following findings were noted:
CBCT findings revealed that there was a well-defined unilocular, circular radiolucency measuring 19.0 × 15.3 × 11.7 mm extending from mesial aspect of impacted tooth 11 to distal aspect of tooth 13.
Superiorly, it is causing thinning of the floor of nasal fossa and inferiorly it is involving the alveolar ridge in tooth 11 and 12 regions. Buccally it is causing thinning of the buccal cortical plate in tooth 11 region.
Along with this, CBCT findings showed the presence of palatally impacted 11 along with bilateral supernumerary teeth with large crowns and absence of root resembling palatodont which were in close proximity to the nasal floor .
With prior preanesthetic evaluation and with proper consent, the patient was operated under general anesthesia. Mucoperiosteal flap from maxillary left canine to right canine was raised. To get access to the impacted supernumerary teeth, palatal bone was drilled . Bilateral supernumerary teeth were removed along with intruded lateral incisor with complete enucleation of cyst .
The tissue sample on histopathological examination revealed cystic lumen composed of delicate collagen fiber bundles, fibroblasts, and numerous dilated and engorged blood vessels. The cystic lumen was lined by non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium of various thickness and supporting connecting tissue capsule. The cystic lumen contained extravasated RBCs .
Follow-up of patient after 9 months showed normal healing of the lesion with normal eruption of central incisor without any abnormal swelling or pain. Follow-up OPG shows the absence of any abnormality.
CBCT findings, surgical resection, and histopathological reports confirmed the diagnosis of a radicular cyst associated with intruded lateral incisor.