A 37-year-old Caucasian male with a known history of aplastic anemia (AA), presented to a rural hospital after a ground level fall. AA was diagnosed 10 months earlier after he was investigated for pancytopenia. A bone marrow biopsy showed cellularity of only 10% and the presence of a small paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria clone (less than 0.2%). He received standard combination treatment for AA with cyclosporine 225 mg orally twice daily, horse anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) 40 mg/kg daily for 4 consecutive days, and prednisone 1 mg/kg daily. His other medications included daily Pantoloc 40 mg orally, daily Valtrex 500 mg orally, and daily Dapsone 50 mg orally for Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis due to a reported allergy to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. He had recently quit smoking and denied alcohol use but actively used other recreational drugs, including marijuana, cocaine, and methamphetamine. He was unemployed. He had no known other medical co-morbidities and was taking no other medications prior to developing AA. The etiology of AA was felt to be idiopathic because he had no improvement after an initial trial of sobriety. AA improved following immunosuppressive therapy and, although human leukocyte antigen typing was performed, a subsequent bone marrow transplant was deferred not only because of the medical therapeutic response but also due to his ongoing recreational drug use. Although he was no longer transfusion dependent a month after starting immunosuppressive therapy, his treatment compliance waned overtime due to regular ongoing recreational drug use of cocaine and methamphetamines. He routinely used unsterilized tap water for illicit drug injections, but he denied other exposure to fresh or salt water sources at home or in the community.
On presentation to the emergency department he was not in distress, with a heart rate of 90 bpm and a blood pressure of 116/59. Severe pallor was noted upon examination, as well as a petechial rash and mild ecchymoses . The rest of his physical assessment was normal, including a neurological examination. Admission bloodwork revealed severe pancytopenia with hemoglobin of 22 g/L, a platelet count of 1 × 109/L, a white blood cell count of 3.7 × 109/L, and an absolute neutrophil count of 0.2 × 109/L (reticulocytes were not sent at admission, but 2 weeks into his hospitalization his absolute reticulocyte count was 12 × 109/L with a reticulocyte percentage of 0.5). All other admission blood work was normal, including liver function tests (total bilirubin 9 μmol/L (reference < 21 μmol/L), alanine aminotransferase 13 μmol/L (reference < 41 μmol/L), alkaline phosphatase 66 U/L (reference 30–130 U/L)) and renal function tests (creatinine 63 μmol/L (reference 59–104 μmol/L), glomerular filtration rate 120 mL/min (reference < 59 mL/min)). He was stabilized and transferred to a tertiary care center where he was restarted on treatment for relapsed AA with a regimen that included cyclosporine (5 mg/kg/day) and prednisone 30 mg daily in addition to five doses of ATG. He remained transfusion dependent throughout his hospitalization.
On day 10 after admission, he developed generalized, mild (3/10), colicky abdominal pain with an associated fever > 38.5 °C. He was started empirically on piperacillin-tazobactam (PTZ) 3.375 gm intravenously every 6 hours. Two sets of blood cultures, each consisting of an anaerobic and aerobic BacT/Alert bottle (bioMérieux, Laval, Quebec), were collected peripherally and from his central line. E. coli grew in each bottle set at 10 and 11 hours, respectively. He then developed watery, non-bloody bowel movements, 3–4 times a day, associated with rectal pain. Real-time PCR for Clostridium difficile A/B toxin on a stool sample was negative. Computerized tomography of the abdomen and pelvis was also unremarkable. Repeat blood cultures were negative at 24 and 48 hours after the initial positive set. He improved dramatically after 7 days of intravenous PTZ and was stepped down to oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally twice daily to complete a further 7 days of therapy.
On day 19 of admission he developed acute continuous severe (9/10), non-radiating dull rectal pain, associated with a high-grade fever (40.4 °C). Vancomycin 1.5 g intravenously every 12 hours and metronidazole 500 mg orally twice daily were empirically started and ciprofloxacin was continued in the same dosage. Blood cultures that were collected from peripheral venipuncture and a peripherally inserted central catheter line grew A. hydrophila at 11 hours. The peripherally inserted central catheter line was immediately removed the next day (day 20 after admission). The same day he also began to complain of vague, mild, bilateral leg pain. Delayed serum sickness due to recent ATG administration was considered a possible cause for his new symptoms because clinical examination did not show erythema, edema, or deformities on either of his legs. However, sustained bacteremia was diagnosed by recovery of A. hydrophila from repeat blood cultures (i.e., one anaerobic and aerobic bottle set from two peripheral venipunctures) positive after 11 and 16 hours of incubation. Bilateral leg pain steadily worsened in intensity (10/10) over the next 48 hours, and the area of distribution of pain extended to the lateral aspect of the right thigh although physical examination remained unremarkable. Creatinine kinase was increased at 470 U/L (normal range for males, 0–195 U/L). Ultrasound venous Doppler of both legs also showed no evidence of deep venous thrombosis. However, magnetic resonance images of both legs showed extensive bilateral patchy multi-compartment muscular and fascial inflammatory changes highly concerning for NF .
Urgent initial surgical debridement was performed that evening. An extensive four-compartment fasciotomy, debridement, and myomectomy were performed on both legs. Extensive ‘dishwater’ purulent material was found in multiple compartments of both legs, including (1) the superficial posterior compartment between the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles, and (2) the lateral deep compartment. There was also clinical evidence of severe muscle necrosis of the tibialis anterior muscles in the anterior compartment of both legs. He was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit post-operatively. After consultation with the Infectious Diseases service and review of the antibiotic susceptibility profile of the previously isolated A. hydrophila strain, antibiotics were changed to meropenem 1000 mg intravenously every 8 hours and clindamycin 600 mg intravenously every 8 hours. High dose intravenous immunoglobulin (2 g/kg) was also given. All prior antibiotics were discontinued.
Gram stain of tissue samples from the right tibialis anterior muscle showed no neutrophils but that gram-negative bacilli were present, and subsequently grew a heavy amount of A. hydrophila. Gram stain and anaerobic culture from the right vastis lateralis muscle also did not show the presence of neutrophils or organisms but grew scant amounts of A. hydrophila. A genus-level identification as Aeromonas was obtained for all isolates from blood and tissue samples by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry using a VITEK MS (bioMérieux, Laval, Quebec, Canada); since this technique has an accuracy of identification rate of 80–90% for species-level identification of Aeromonas , all isolates were also analyzed using in-house bi-directional 16S rRNA gene cycle sequencing of the V1-V3 (approximately first 500 bp), as previously described . Broth microdilution susceptibility panel testing was performed and interpreted using published guidelines . All isolates were multidrug resistant to ampicillin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole but susceptible to meropenem and tetracycline. The isolates were confirmed to produce an extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) using published guidelines and the Mast Disc Test (Mast Group Ltd., Merseyside, UK) . Production of an AmpC β-lactamase was shown by resistance to cefoxitin disk (30 μg) testing and the Mast Disc test (Mast Group Ltd.).
Two additional extensive surgical procedures for removal of necrotic tissue from both legs were undertaken in the next 24 hours. Bilateral above-knee amputations were performed during the last debridement as a life-saving measure because of extensive rapid progression of bilateral leg necrosis, and the patient’s rapid clinical deterioration with severe unremittent hemodynamic instability during the operation. Post-operatively, he required aggressive resuscitation for septic shock in the Intensive Care Unit with intractable hyperkalemia and severe acidosis, and anuric acute kidney failure (creatinine 210 μmol/L; normal range for males, 50–120 μmol/L). Despite all therapeutic interventions, the patient went into cardiac arrest and passed away within 2 hours after the final surgery.
Post-mortem examination at autopsy revealed findings related to the underlying AA, and evidence of septic shock secondary to extensive bilateral lower limb necrotizing myofasciitis. The bone marrow was markedly hypocellular and there was splenic enlargement at 331 g. The heart was enlarged (536 g). Cardiomegaly was likely a compensatory response to the AA due to the absence of atherosclerotic and hypertensive cardiovascular disease. In keeping with the patient’s severe septic shock, there was marked centrilobular necrosis of the liver, as well as petechial hemorrhages of the skin, heart, pleural surfaces, kidneys, and liver capsule. Histologic examination of skin and muscle from the left thigh showed necrosis of the muscle and deep subcutaneous adipose tissue, admixed with dense collections of gram-negative bacilli . However, in keeping with the AA, there was notably an absence of an acute inflammatory response.