A 44-year-old man sought medical care in 2001 for a 2-year history of hematochezia. Colonoscopy performed at an outside institution in September 2001 showed a lesion within the rectum. Biopsy performed at that time confirmed a poorly differentiated, grade 3 adenocarcinoma, which measured 2×1.3×1 cm, with invasion through the muscularis mucosa. He came to our institution in October 2001 for further evaluation.
The patient’s family history of cancer was primarily limited to a brother who received a diagnosis of chronic myelogenous leukemia at age 47 years. His father had colon polyps removed in his mid 50s, and a maternal aunt had colon polyps at age 35 years. Distant paternal relatives may have had CRC in old age.
The patient had been a smoker for the previous 16 years and had a history of gastroesophageal reflux disease. He had a history of sebaceous cysts on the left scapula and the back of the thighs and a lipoma on the inferior border of the right scapula. He did not have supernumerary teeth.
Evaluation of the patient included genetics counseling and testing because of his young age at diagnosis . Immunohistochemical testing (IHC) for MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6 showed intact MMR. The patient was not tested for the APC gene mutation because he was not suspected to have FAP . He was also not tested for MYH, which was not discovered until later.
Endorectal ultrasonography with guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of suspicious lymph nodes confirmed an ulcerated lesion extending from the anal verge to 3.5 cm proximally along the anterior wall of the rectum. Fine-needle aspirates from 2 enlarged perirectal lymph nodes were positive for adenocarcinoma. In the ascending colon, a 5-mm hyperplastic polyp was removed with cold snare.
Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography detected a 0.6-cm sclerotic lesion within the left iliac bone, which was considered benign after a bone scan demonstrated no bony metastases. Results of upper endoscopy were normal. On the basis of the clinical evaluations, the patient’s cancer was determined to be stage IIIA (T2N1M0) by the American Joint Committee on Cancer 6th edition criteria.
Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy was recommended on the basis of the tumor stage and the proximity of the tumor to the prostate. From November through December 2001, the patient was given a continuous infusion of radiosensitizing 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) (225 mg/m2). He was treated with 180 cGy in 28 fractions, for a total of 5040 cGy. He tolerated the therapy well, with some mild diarrhea, weight loss, decreased energy, and perianal irritation. The cancer in the rectum showed complete response to therapy.
In January 2002, the patient underwent surgery to have an abdominoperineal resection and permanent colostomy. He tolerated the procedure well, and no residual tumor was identified. Two of 31 regional lymph nodes were positive for grade 3 mucinous adenocarcinoma. In the following month, the patient had several perineal drain site infections and was treated for depression.
In April 2002 the patient began his first of 4 cycles of adjuvant 5-FU and leucovorin systemic chemotherapy. Prolonged neutropenia and gastrointestinal tract bleeding occurred in the middle of the first cycle of chemotherapy; therefore, the dosage of 5-FU (425 mg/m2) was decreased by 10% (to 380 mg/m2). He completed chemotherapy in August 2002.
Surveillance colonoscopies in the following years have been negative. The patient was last seen at our institution in January 2007. He has had no new gastrointestinal tract or genitourinary symptoms or problems. His appetite has returned to normal, and he feels strong. He has returned to work as a carpenter and is now being monitored with colonoscopy every 3 years.