A 52-year-old male with a past medical history of alcohol abuse, hypertension, and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) at age 34 due to previous myocardial infarction (MI) and status postnormal stress test from 2 years before presented to the ED with 1 day of chest pain that began while watching television. He described the pain as different from his previous MI, less intense, not crushing in nature, rated 6 out of 10, with radiation to the neck and down the left arm. Each episode lasted 3 to 5 min throughout the day. He also complained of diaphoresis, but denied shortness of breath, dizziness, palpitations, nausea or vomiting. He endorsed running the day before with no chest pain and an exercise tolerance of 8–9 blocks, which had been unchanged for the past year. In the ED, initial troponin measured was 5.04 ng/mL, with repeat troponin 12 h later found at 4.72 ng/mL. CK-MB and renal function were normal. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm (NSR) but no significant ST elevations or depressions with some T-wave changes .
Echocardiogram showed mild tricuspid regurgitation, with normal left ventricular contractility, global left ventricular ejection fraction of 65%, and trivial pericardial effusion. Given the troponin elevation and patient history, he underwent cardiac catheterization, which revealed mild diffuse disease with patent left internal mammary artery to left anterior descending artery (LAD). He was deemed to have non-obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD).
Five years later, he presented to the ED at another hospital with severe lower abdominal pain that began around 5 am, described as gas pain with shortness of breath. Motrin did not alleviate the pain, so he presented to the ED. On further questioning, he denied any chest pain, nausea, vomiting, palpitations, dizziness, fever, or diarrhea and reported unlimited exercise tolerance. Troponin was trended every 6 h and was as follows: 4.75 ng/mL, 4.29 ng/mL, 3.98 ng/mL, 4.43 ng/mL, and 4.59 ng/mL. Creatinine in this admission remained at baseline. ECG remained unchanged from 5 years before .
He was transferred to our hospital for catheterization capabilities, and his troponin continued to be trended. They remained elevated in the same range. Given stably elevated levels of troponin without any signs of downtrending, the thought was that the patient had falsely elevated troponin. Therefore, catheterization was deferred, and he was discharged with a cardiac computed tomography (CT) follow-up a few days later. Troponin was measured the day of his cardiac CT and was elevated to 5.72 ng/mL; he was asymptomatic. Cardiac CT revealed mild diffuse disease with patent grafts, similar to the catheterization 5 years before.
The concept of falsely elevated troponin was further investigated. The integrity of the assay is tested daily by the lab and was deemed to be correct. The patient's sample was first diluted 2:1 with repeat value of 6.13 ng/mL. The sample was centrifuged to remove any interfering substances, and the supernatant was measured; the value still remained elevated. The next theory was that there must be an antibody to the assay; therefore, the patient's blood sample was tested for rheumatoid factor and heterophile antibody, the two most common causes of false-positive immunoassay; both were found negative. The patient's blood sample was sent to a different hospital that utilizes a three-site immunoassay method for troponin and was returned negative. Therefore, the patient has an interfering substance to the immunoassay used at our facility.