A 68-year-old male of Malay ethnicity presented to the haematology unit of Tengku Ampuan Afzan Hospital, Malaysia with a one-month history of left sided body weakness associated with reduced sensation and unsteady gait. His left sided body weakness was progressive in the last one week which lead him to seek treatment. He also complained of retrograde amnesia. B symptoms were absent. He is known to be hypertensive in which he is on oral amlodipine 10 mg daily. He previously worked with the national army as a soldier and currently in the last 15 years, he lives on an army pension. He is a non-smoker and a teetotaller. On further history, he has never consumed any traditional or recreational drugs. He has no significant family history and denies any high-risk behaviour.
On clinical examination, he was alert and orientated. His blood pressure was 126/82 mmHg with a pulse rate of 80 beats per minute. Neurological examination revealed a power grade of 3/5 over his left upper and lower limbs with hypertonia and brisk reflexes of his left elbow, knee and ankle. Signs of upper motor neuron lesion were positive in the left foot (Babinski's sign) and the left facial nerve. He showed an ataxic gait with no other cranial nerve palsies or cerebellar signs elicited. The results of other systemic examinations were unremarkable.
His complete blood count showed a haemoglobin of 13.8 g/dL, total white cell count of 6.2 × 109/L and a platelet count of 220 × 109/L. He had an elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase of 550 U/L. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis parameters for protein and glucose were in the normal range. CSF cytomorphology and flowcytometry analysis did not reveal any cluster of abnormal cells.
The Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) examination of the brain showed a vividly enhancing right intra-axial mass measuring 3.5 × 2.6 × 4.0 cm occupying the head of the right caudate nucleus. Another mass measuring 6.3 × 1.7 × 1.8 cm was seen at the right side of the body of the corpus callosum. The two masses were associated with perilesional edema. No midline shift or hydrocephalus were seen.
His baseline whole body computed tomography (WBCT) staging did not depict any enlarged lymph nodes and the bone marrow trephine biopsy did not show any infiltration. His viral hepatitis screening and HIV testing using fourth generation antigen/antibody analysis were all non-reactive. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and serology were negative for the evidence of Epstein Barr Virus infection.
A stereotactic brain biopsy of the head of the right caudate and histomorphology examination demonstrated infiltration by medium to large atypical lymphoid cells arranged in a diffuse pattern. The neoplastic cells were round to ovoid, having vesicular nuclei with some exhibiting prominent nucleoli.
Immunohistochemistry (C–E) revealed tumour cells were positive for CD10, CD20, CD79a, BCL-2, BCL-6 and C-MYC. They were negative for Epstein Barr-virus encoded RNA 1 (EBER1). The proliferation index (F) was 90%.
He was diagnosed as primary central nervous system lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma non-germinal B-center subtype with an International Extranodal Lymphoma Study Group (IELSG) prognostic score of 4 (High Risk-age >60, ECOG: 2, LDH: elevated, CSF protein: not elevated, Deep structures involved: corpus callosum).
He was treated with a 19-week De Angelis chemoradiotherapy protocol which involved high dose Methotrexate 3g/m2-based polychemotherapy (vincristine/procarbazine/dexamethasone) induction and whole brain radiotherapy (WBRT) consolidation of 42 Gy (21 fractions) followed by high dose cytarabine.
Following chemoradiation therapy, motor power of his left upper and lower limbs returned to normal with no residual neurological deficit. Follow-up brain MRI examination revealed a complete remission over the past 14 months. He is now on regular follow up at the haematology clinic.