A 46-year-old female with medical history significant for class II obesity and left eye uveitis presented to the emergency department of a tertiary hospital in November 2021 complaining of non-resolving fever, chills, and malaise while undergoing treatment for a urinary tract infection. She also had an extensive ophthalmologic history; the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic multifocal choroiditis and uveitic glaucoma of the left eye in 2016. She underwent treatment for glaucoma with an implant and subsequently developed retinal scarring in the left eye. She was on adalimumab for two years until January 2020. When she presented to the emergency department, she had been taking prednisone 60 mg daily for the past two weeks due to acute exacerbation of uveitis. From January 2020 to acute exacerbation this time, her uveitis was in remission and she did not receive recurrent courses of corticosteroid treatment. At the time of presentation, she was not taking other medications or supplements except trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for a urinary tract infection, prednisone, and ibuprofen as needed.
Initial vital signs were blood pressure of 89 mmHg/74 mmHg, pulse rate of 117 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 26/minute, oral temperature of 39.7 ºC, and oxygen saturation of 96% on ambient air. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of abdomen and pelvis without intravenous (IV) contrast reported no acute findings identified in the abdomen or pelvis. Laboratory studies were significant for alanine transaminase (ALT) of 147 units/L and aspartate transaminase (AST) of 196 units/L. Urinalysis revealed trace ketones, 6–10 white blood cells/HPF, 6–10 red blood cells/HPF, and rare bacteria. Urine culture showed < 10,000 CFU/mL of multiple organisms. A set of blood cultures showed no growth.
The patient was empirically started on cefepime IV 1 g every 12 h. However, the patient had persistent fever along with worsening liver tests with hepatocellular pattern (ALT 608 units/L, AST 836 units/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 94 units/L, total bilirubin 0.5 mg/dL) . On hospital day 3, diagnostic tests for infectious etiology of acute hepatitis were ordered, including serology and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for HSV and cytomegalovirus (CMV), syphilis serology, and interferon gamma release assay for tuberculosis. During hospital day 3 to day 6, the patient had persistent fever and increasing liver enzymes while undergoing treatment with IV cefepime . On hospital day 6, serum HSV-1 PCR resulted positive with viral load of 1.50 × 107 copies/mL. IV acyclovir was started at the dose of 10 mg/kg every 8 h and IV cefepime was discontinued. Serum HSV-1 immunoglobulin M (IgM) titer was elevated to greater than 1:320 and HSV-1 IgG titer was lower than threshold of detection. Other work-up for infectious etiologies all resulted negative. Non-infectious etiologies for acute hepatitis were explored; plasma acetaminophen level, total immunoglobulin A (IgA), total immunoglobulin G (IgG), actin-smooth muscle antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) screening, soluble liver antigen autoantibody, tissue transglutaminase IgG, M2 mitochondrial antibody, liver/kidney microsomal antibody, ceruloplasmin were all unremarkable.
On hospital day 7, liver enzymes peaked at ALT of 5885 units/L and AST of 15,107 units/L. The patient’s mental status changed, with new-onset confusion and agitation. With acute deterioration in mental status along with worsening liver failure, patient required admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). The next day, the patient had a witnessed tonic-clonic seizure for 30 s and was emergently intubated for airway protection. CT of the brain was negative for an acute intracranial process. On hospital day 9, the patient became hypotensive requiring vasopressor support with norepinephrine infusion. Serum troponin I was elevated to 18.38 ng/mL. Transesophageal echocardiogram revealed severe left ventricular hypokinesia with an approximate ejection fraction of 10%. The patient also had episodes of paroxysmal non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. At this point, the patient was evaluated for liver transplantation, however, was deemed not a transplant candidate due to severe cardiomyopathy and down-trending liver transaminases after starting IV acyclovir treatment. On hospital day 18, the patient was successfully extubated, and subsequently noted to be encephalopathic with disorientation and hallucination. On hospital day 26, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed left ventricular ejection fraction recovered to 43%, along with myocardial scar and thinning involving mid-apical inferolateral segment of left ventricle, with corresponding hypokinesis involving mid-inferolateral, antero-lateral, and apico-lateral segments. On hospital day 30, transjugular liver biopsy was performed and pathology showed acute hepatitis with sub-massive necrosis, with negative HSV-1 and HSV-2 antigen immunostaining. On hospital day 31, lumbar puncture was performed, and cerebrospinal fluid showed white blood cell count, protein, and glucose, all within normal parameters, however a positive PCR for HSV-1. During hospital day 33 to 36, patient developed acute worsening of thrombocytopenia, as platelet count decreased from 107,000/µL to 2000/µL. On hospital day 36, acyclovir treatment was held for one day, with improvement of platelet count to 32,000/µL. On the same day, serum HSV-1 PCR showed viral load of 7700 copies/mL. The patient’s mental status, liver function tests and coagulation panel all continued to improve. Given the patient’s clinical progress, decreasing viral load, and improvement in thrombocytopenia with cessation of acyclovir treatment, the decision was made to complete acyclovir treatment at that point. On hospital day 43, HSV-1 serum viral load further decreased to 2488 copies/mL without acyclovir treatment. The patient was discharged to a rehabilitation facility on hospital day 47 in a stable condition. After a month of comprehensive rehabilitation the patient was successfully discharged home.