The patient was a 4 year and 10-month old boy presented to gastroenterology department of our hospital because of 4 days abdominal pain and vomiting, and 1 day eyelid edema. The boy was born at term with unremarkable family history. Two weeks before the onset of abdominal pain and vomiting, the boy was suffered a course of severe pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. A regimen of ceftriaxone, azithromycin, amoxicillin and potassium clavulanate were given to eradicate the Mycoplasma pneumonia infection in respiratory department of our hospital. On admission, physical examination revealed obvious bilateral periorbital edema, abdominal pain around umbilical cord, mild edema of both lower extremities. Laboratory tests showed low levels of total protein (32.99 g/L, reference range: 60-80 g/L), albumin (24.82 g/L, reference range: 38-54 g/L), and globulin (14 g/L, reference range: 22-34 g/L). Hemoglobin level was normal, reticulocyte was slightly up-regulated, and eosinophil percentage was increased (11%). Coagulation function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal, tumor markers (alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen) and autoantibodies were negative. Parasites antigens, CMV-DNA, and EBV-DNA were all negative. The 13C urea breath test was negative. Clostridium difficile (CD) toxin test and culture were positive. Serological tests revealed decreased levels of IgG (1.42 g/L, reference range: 3.82–14.04 g/L), complement component 1q (67.27 mg/L, reference range: 159-233 mg/L), C3 (0.43 g/L, reference range: 0.79–1.52 g/L), and C4 (0.08 g/L, reference range: 0.1–0.4 g/L). Abdominal ultrasonography suggested diffuse thickening of the gastric wall. CT showed giant cerebriform enlargement of rugal folds in the gastric fundus and body , and minimal effusion in the pelvic cavity. Gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed enlarged gastric folds, erythema, and hemorrhagic erosions covered with whitish mucus throughout the gastric body . Histological findings of the gastric mucosa showed foveolar hyperplasia with glandular atrophy, infiltration of eosinophils, plasmocytes and neutrophils in the lamina propria . HP was not detected in the gastric biopsies. Combined with the laboratory examination and gastrointestinal endoscopy findings, the patient was diagnosed as giant hypertrophic gastritis (MD), CD infection and hypoproteinemia. The patient was administered with intravenous albumin for six consecutive days (a total of 110 g). A 2-week regimen of oral vancomycin was given to eradicate CD infection. The patient was discharged at the 16th day of admission without notable symptoms, the albumin level was normal (43 g/L) and CD toxin and culture tests were negative. After 2 months of discharge, follow-up gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a mild superficial gastritis, no manifestation of gastric fold hypertrophy and no ulcer. The boy did not complain of any notable symptoms during 6-month of follow-up.