A 16-year-old Chinese Han female was admitted to our Department of Nephrology for abnormal renal function. About 10 days ago, she suffered from abdominal pain and was treated as gastritis at other hospital. Abnormal renal function was detected at that hospitalization. She had no personal history of severe infectious diseases such as hepatitis and tuberculosis or family history of kidney disease, and she also denies smoking or drinking.
She had anemic appearance without edema, while the heart rate and blood pressure were normal. No obvious abnormality including growth retardation was detected during the physical examination, and no specific symptoms of NPHP such as polyuria and polydipsia were recognized. Blood routine test showed decreased blood cells and haemoglobin . Serum chemistry showed elevated levels of serum creatinine, uric acid, cystatin-C and parathyroid hormone. The estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 25.32 ml/min/1.73m2 without proteinuria. In order to confirm previous diagnosis, abdominal ultrasound examination was performed. Both kidneys were of normal size, but had hyperechogenicity. Renal cysts were detected on the right side. No abnormality was detected in the liver, pancreas and spleen by ultrasound examination.
To further understand its renal pathology, histopathology study of renal biopsy was performed. Totally, 21 glomeruli were observed, with 8 glomeruli being ischemic sclerosis. Partial glomeruli were shrunk, with the matrix showing slight hyperplasia. Focal tubular atrophy was observed, while dilatation and hypertrophy of partial renal tubules were also detected . The immunological staining was totally negative. All these changes indicated renal dysplasia.
Considering the possibility of genetic factor involved, the twin sister of the proband was recommended for serum chemistry test. Unfortunately, the elevated levels of serum creatinine, uric acid, cystatin-C and parathyroid hormone were detected . Also, decreased blood cells and haemoglobin were detected by blood routine test. The results of other tests were similar to those of the proband.
As both twin had similar clinical presentations, genetic testing was the best way to find its molecular basis. Thus WES was performed and homozygous full gene deletion of the NPHP1 gene was found in both affected twins. By comparing the relative reads depth of sequencing, a deletion spanned chr2:110881367–110,962,545 (hg19) was found. This deletion contains exon 1 to 20 of NPHP1 gene, and is pathogenic. To further confirm the full gene deletion, realtime PCR was performed to detect the copy number of this region, normalized by that of albumin (ALB) gene in human genome. As shown in Fig., only one copy of NPHP1 gene was detected in the samples of their parents (Supplementary material).