A 62-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with fever, confusion, irritation and severe bitemporal headache with occipital radiation. The symptoms had exacerbated acutely 1.5 h prior to hospital arrival (estimated NPRS: 9/10) and awakened the patient from sleep. According to his relatives, the patient also had fever (up to 39.5 °C), headache (estimated NPRS: 3/10) and bouts of vomiting during the last 3 days before admission. From his past medical history, the patient had arterial hypertension treated with irbesartan and atenolol. His personal and family history was free of neurological diseases and severe infections.
Vital signs upon admission were as follows: blood pressure 125/80 mmHg, heart rate 76 bpm, body temperature 38.8 °C and oxygen saturation 94% on room air. The basic neurological examination revealed an alert (GCS: 14/15, E:4/4, V:5/5, M:5/6) but disoriented and confused patient with nuchal rigidity and opisthotonus. There were no focal neurological deficits from the cranial nerves. Upper and lower limb strength appeared normal. Examination of the sensory and cerebellar function as well as systemic examination were not possible due to limited cooperation.
A chest X-ray was normal and an ECG showed sinus rhythm. Computed tomography of the brain was negative for acute intracranial pathology. In specific, no mass, haemorrhage or hydrocephalus was identified. Basal ganglia and posterior fossa structures were normal. No established major vessel vascular territory infarct and no intra or extra axial collection were reported. The basal cisterns and foramen magnum were patent. The air cells of the petrous temporal bone were non-opacified and no fracture was demonstrated.
Initial laboratory workup demonstrated a white blood cell count of 16.3 × 103/uL (88% polymorphonuclear cells; normal ranges: 4.0–9.0 × 103/uL and 42–85%, respectively), hemoglobin 18.5 g/dL (normal range: 13.5–18.0 g/dL) and platelets 192 × 103/uL (normal range: 150–400 × 103/uL). Blood biochemistry and coagulation were within reference limits except for high glucose (202 mg/dL; normal range: 70–115 mg/dL), LDH (534 U/L; normal range: 170–480 U/L), γ-GT (84 U/L; normal range: 10–49 U/L) and C-reactive protein (8.9 mg/dL; normal range: < 0.5 mg/dL). Lumbar puncture was performed while the patient was in the emergency department. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) assessment revealed a turbid fluid containing 760 leukocytes/mm3 with polymorphonuclear predominance (85%), markedly elevated protein (302 mg/dL; age-adjusted normal range: 15–60 mg/dL) and low glucose (34 mg/dL; normal range: 40–70 mg/dL). A remarkably increased CSF/serum albumin index (50.49; age-adjusted normal range: < 8.13) indicated significant dysfunction of the blood-brain barrier, with no signs of local IgG production (CSF IgG index: 0.46; normal range: < 0.65).
Despite a negative Gram stain of the CSF, an initial impression of bacterial meningoencephalitis was rendered and the patient was put on empirical intravenous therapy with ceftriaxone (2 g bid), vancomycin (1 g bid), ampicillin (2 g every 4 h) and dexamethasone (8 mg every 6 h). Blood and CSF cultures were obtained before treatment initiation and screening for common viral and bacterial pathogens involved in human CNS infection was carried out in CSF using a multiplex PCR assay (MeningoFinder 2SMART, PathoFinder; Maastricht, The Netherlands). While waiting for culture results, a positive PCR reaction for Lm was obtained and dexamethasone was discontinued, as it is contraindicated in patients with neurolisteriosis . Of note, co-detection of herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 DNA by the PCR assay was not taken into further consideration (see in the following section).
By day 3, the patient was already showing signs of clinical improvement, i.e. he was apyretic, GCS: 15/15, fully oriented in place, time, self and event. There was no nuchal rigidity and headache attacks were milder and infrequent (NPRS: 4/10) and were relieved with intravenous paracetamol. Brain MRI showed no abnormal focal areas of altered signal intensity in the temporal lobes or the cerebral hemispheres, brainstem and cerebellum. Appearance and intensity of brain parenchyma was normal. The ventricular system and cisternal spaces appeared normal as well. There was no evidence of intracranial space occupying lesion or obvious vascular anomaly and no shift of the midline structures was observed. An EEG was also performed and showed no abnormalities. In specific, the background waking state activity consisted of well-regulated medium amplitude alpha activity at 11 Hz symmetrically in the posterior head regions and attenuated with eye opening. Hyperventilation did not reveal any abnormal phenomena.
The CSF culture on blood agar grew a Gram-positive and catalase-positive coccobacillus which appeared as rod following enrichment in thioglycolate broth. The culture isolate was identified as Lm by means of the MicroScan Gram-positive panel (Biotype 306,403; Beckman Coulter; Atlanta, Georgia, USA) as well as by reverse dot blot hybridization (Bacterial CNS Flow Chip, Master Diagnostica; Granada, Spain). In keeping with this identification, the patient recalled upon specific questioning a recent consumption of ready-to-eat dairy products. Serotyping by PCR according to Doumith et al. placed the Lm isolate into serovar group 1/2a, 3a. No Lm was recovered from blood cultures.
Antibiotic susceptibility test of the CSF isolate was performed according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute criteria via standard disk diffusion method on blood agar. The isolate was found susceptible to ampicillin, vancomycin, ciprofloxacin and aminoglycosides (amikacin, gentamicin, tobramycin) but resistant to cephalosporins (cefuroxime, ceftazidime, cefepime). Ceftriaxone was therefore discontinued, while vancomycin and ampicillin were continued for a total of 2 and 3 weeks, respectively.
A second lumbar puncture on day 10 showed a clear amelioration of CSF parameters paralleling clinical improvement: 59 leukocytes/mm3 with lymphocytic predominance (85%), slightly elevated protein (88 mg/dL) and normalized glucose (54 mg/dL). CSF culture and PCR were both negative. By day 14, the patient was afebrile, fully oriented and free of headache. He was discharged in good clinical condition upon completion of treatment with ampicillin.
In view of the high postprandial glucose levels upon admission, we first ruled out diabetes mellitus on the basis of normal HbA1c levels (5.2%; normal range: 4.0–6.0%). In an effort to investigate further the presence of immunosuppressive comorbidities, we screened for both humoral and cellular immune abnormalities. Routine serology revealed persistently low serum IgM levels as measured by nephelometry, both during hospitalization as well as at 3- and 12-month follow-ups (see Table ).
By contrast, serum levels of IgG and IgA were largely normal. IgG subclasses at 12-month follow-up were also found within reference limits and repeated immunoelectrophoreses showed no abnormality. In addition, the patient was HIV-seronegative, with normal levels of complement components C3 and C4 and negative antinuclear antibody titers (< 1:80).
Whole-blood immunophenotyping by flow cytometry (Navios EX, Beckman Coulter) took place on the last day of hospitalization (day 21 – i.e., 18 days after dexamethasone discontinuation) as well as at 12-month follow-up. Although absolute counts of CD19+ B cells were normal on both occasions, surface expression of IgM was virtually absent (0.16%) in month 1, while it substantially recovered (77.58%) on total B cells after 12 months. The majority of B cells expressing membrane-bound IgM at 12-month follow-up were CD27-IgD+ naïve B cells, notwithstanding the fact that this subset was IgM-negative at baseline (+ 66.86% recovery). Small recoveries of IgM expression (ca. + 5%) were nevertheless observed on both non-isotype-switched and isotype-switched CD27+ memory B cells as well (see Table ). Of note, we did not observe major abnormalities in other leukocyte subsets (granulocytes, monocytes, T cells and NK cells), while modest increases of the CD4+/CD8+ T cell ratio and γδ T cells were confined to the acute post-infection period.