A 33-year-old man with epigastric discomfort underwent abdominal ultrasonic examination, revealing a solid mass next to the right kidney. Abdominal radiography revealed striated calcification on the right side of the first and second lumbar vertebrates . Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a well-circumscribed, homogenous mass with central calcification in the right psoas muscle . Characteristically, the mass presented in a dumbbell-like shape, extending to the intervertebral foramen on contrast-enhanced CT . On the basis of the characteristic shape, a neurogenic tumor was suspected. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an isointense mass on the T1-weighted image (T1WI) and a hyperintense mass on the T2-weighted image (T2WI) with a central radial hypointense area . On the caudal and anterior side of the tumor, a lipomatous component was observed . Contrast-enhanced axial T1WI showed marked enhancement of the tumor . Both iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine and gallium-67 scintigraphies were negative in the mass, suggesting pheochromocytoma and lymphoma as less susceptive diagnoses . Thallium-201 mildly accumulated in the tumor, suggesting blood flow to the tumor . Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed accumulation of fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose in the tumor at a standard uptake value (SUV) of 4.7, whereas no other abnormal uptake suggestive of a metastatic lesion was demonstrated . On the basis of all imaging findings, preoperative differential diagnoses included schwannoma, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, and liposarcoma. Because significant blood flow to the tumor was suspected, angiography was performed on the day prior to surgery revealing abundant vascularity . Feeding vessels from the right lumbar arteries were embolized with porous gelatin particles (Gelpart, Nihon-Kayaku, Tokyo, Japan) in order to reduce intraoperative bleeding .
Surgical resection was performed with the retroperitoneal approach from the right side by resecting the 11th rib . The tumor existed in the swollen psoas muscle, accompanying multiple feeding vessels around the tumor . Before excision, a small piece of tumor tissue was submitted for intraoperative pathological examination by frozen section. The pathological examination was suggestive of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, and no evidence of malignancy was noted. We decided to perform marginal excision of the tumor. After ligation and transection of several feeding vessels, we carefully dissected the tumor that adhered tightly to surrounding muscle tissues. The total blood loss was 940 g and the patient recovered without any postsurgical complication. The tumor was an encapsulated, tan, elastic soft oval mass sized 11 × 8 × 8 cm . The cut surface was dark red with a central white zone of fibrosis and calcification .
Pathological examination demonstrated infiltration of lymphocytes forming lymphoid follicles accompanied with capillary proliferation . Capillaries were surrounded by hyaline sheaths . Immunostaining revealed that the proliferated lymphocytes were positive for the B-cell marker CD79a and negative for the T-cell marker CD3 . In general, abundant IgG4-positive plasma cells are observed in plasma cell type CD, whereas hyaline-vascular type CD is accompanied only by a few IgG4-positive plasma cells . IgG4-positive cells were very sparsely observed in the present case, ruling out plasma cell type CD. The diagnosis of hyaline-vascular type UCD (HV-UCD) was established.There was no sign of recurrence at 1 year after surgery.