A 24-year-old female patient presented with complaints of painful deformity of her right foot with marked restriction of activities. Over the past 2years, she received conservative management in the form of medications, physiotherapy, and orthotics without any relief. Clinical examination revealed a planovalgoid foot along with a tight gastrocnemius, with a preserved ankle range of movements . The subtalar and transverse tarsal joint movements were absent, along with tenderness over the subtalar, talonavicular, and calcaneocuboid joints. The diagnosis was confirmed with standing radiographs. Radiographs demonstrated the congenital fusion of subtalar, calcaneocuboid, and talonavicular joints with heel in valgus .
Given her disablement and failure of conservative modalities over the past 2years, a decision of surgical management was undertaken. Her pre-surgery American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score was 35. Correction of heel valgus with a sliding medial calcaneal osteotomy, release of Achilles tightness with gastrocnemius recession, and correction of a collapsed medial longitudinal arch with a corrective fusion of talonavicular joint was planned. In a floppy lateral position, a gastrocnemius recession was performed followed by a medial displacement calcaneal osteotomy. The osteotomy was fixed with two 6.5 mm cannulated cancellous screws, pushed through the subtalar joint up to the neck of the talus. Finally, to correct the sag at the talonavicular joint, a dorsal open wedge osteotomy was carried out at the level of the talonavicular joint, packed with iliac crest bone graft and fixed using a plate, and screws to restore the medial arch . Postoperatively, she was immobilized for 4 weeks. Progressive weight-bearing with ankle range of motion physiotherapy was advised at the end of 6 weeks. The patient went back to all activities of daily living by 4 months.Her post-surgery AOFAS score was calculated as 72. At present, at 18 months post-surgery, she is asymptomatic ( and ).