We describe a 73-year-old female Caucasian patient who presented to a tertiary cancer centre following an incidental finding of extensive bone metastasis on investigation for presumed renal colic. A further PET-CT scan confirmed skeletal metastasis involving both femora, the ribs and spinal column (shown in a), but with no other sites of metastasis or obvious primary malignancy.
Ten years prior to this presentation, the patient had been diagnosed with stage Tx N2b M0 recurrent eccrine carcinoma of the right scalp, for which she had undergone radical surgical resection and lymph node dissection, with involvement of 2 of 42 lymph nodes. This was followed by adjuvant radiotherapy: 64 Gy in 34# to the right neck. Her only other past medical history was of hypertension and uterine prolapse. Her regular medications were felodipine and bendroflumethiazide. She was a life-long non-drinker and non-smoker.
At the time of presentation, she had a performance status of one with good mobility. Her only reported symptoms were of pain in the lower sacrum and right hip, and weight loss, despite good appetite.
The patient underwent bone biopsy, which confirmed metastatic EPC. Immunohistochemistry showed expression of GATA-3, EMA, CK07, AR, ER, and PR positive status. There was no expression of CEAm, CK05/06, TTF-1, CD56, PAX8, p40, and p63. HER2 score was recorded as up to 1 and therefore regarded as negative.
In light of previous case reports suggesting activity with anti-oestrogen therapy in ER-positive rare cancers, we commenced the patient on daily letrozole (2.5 mg). She also received denosumab 4-weekly in view of bone metastases.
The patient reported her pain improved early on in treatment, requiring less paracetamol at 11 days, and discontinuing this at 28 days post-letrozole initiation, foregoing the need for palliative radiotherapy. Additionally, the patient reported weight stabilisation following letrozole treatment. Prior to diagnosis the patient’s weight was recorded at 49.5 kg, with substantial weight gain occurring 3 months following letrozole commencement; this continues to be stable, with a most recent weight measurement of 53.8 kg. There were no side effects to letrozole reported by the patient.
Serial imaging with PET-CT showed a significant reduction in FDG avidity in all sites of disease (shown in b). At the time of last review, over 20-months from letrozole commencement, she remains well with no signs of progression. Her most recent PET-CT scan reports no new sites of disease and stable appearances of widespread predominantly non-FDG avid sclerotic bone disease.
The CARE checklist has been completed for this case report by the authors and can be found in the attached supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).