A 48-year-old male presented to the emergency department at our hospital with malaise, fever, chills, and left flank pain with no reported drug or food-related allergies.
On examination, a large palpable mass was located in the left flank with tenderness in that region. The physical exam showed no other remarkable findings.
Seven years ago, the patient was diagnosed with a staghorn calculus in the left renal pelvis. Surgery was performed to remove the calculus. This was followed by several rounds of lithotripsy. Nevertheless, the patient neglected his condition and did not complete his treatment.
Laboratory findings showed an elevated white blood count (WBC) count (16 850/ml) with high neutrophils (82.2%) and a high C Reactive Protein (CRP) (197 mg/dl). Ultrasonography showed an enlarged left kidney (longitudinal diameter of 20 cm) with a thin renal cortex (2 mm) and severe chronic dilation of the collecting system and the renal pelvis. The upper ureter was dilated (18 mm) and it contained a calculus (18 mm) that was located 8 cm below the renal pelvis.
The preliminary diagnosis was pyelonephritis. The patient was admitted to the urology department for further investigation and was treated with antibiotics.
A dynamic scan of the kidneys using the radioactive tracer 99 mTc-MAG3 was done, and it showed asymmetrical flow to both kidneys; decreased on the left renal angiogram. The renogram of the left kidney demonstrated heterogeneous faint cortical uptake with a delay in radiotracer excretion. The left kidney showed faint radiotracer uptake by the end of the study and the left collecting system was not visualized. The renogram of the right kidney showed homogenous cortical uptake and normal corticomedullary transit. The right kidney was within normal range.
The split renal function was 92% for the right kidney and 8% for the left kidney.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis without contrast was performed and it showed an enlarged left kidney with cystic formation measuring 4×5 cm in maximum dimensions and dilation of the pelvicalyceal system with the presence of multiple variable-sized calculi. In addition, there was a large stone seen impacted at the proximal third of the ureter measuring 1.6 cm. The right kidney was normal in size and position.
24 hours later, after the antibiotic treatment, the decision was made for the patient to undergo an open radical left nephrectomy to remove the dysfunctioning left kidney and to drain the abscess.
The surgery was performed by a senior surgeon with a left subcostal incision, and the surgeon encountered dense adhesions due to the prior operation. The renal artery and accompanying vein were tied and the kidney was resected.
The surgical site was flushed with saline and a silicone drainage tube (18 Fr) was placed until postop day four. The patient felt well immediately after the operation and all the related symptoms subsided.
The patient had a postoperative wound infection with a raised WBC count 34 800/ml and a CRP 150 mg/dl. Due to that, the patient was put on broad-spectrum antibiotics (metronidazole, ceftriaxone, and levofloxacin) and monitored closely until WBC count and CRP went back to normal.
A macroscopic exam showed an enlarged left kidney measuring (17×11×8) cm with a thickened capsule and yellow nodules. The resected kidney was opened and it showed cystic formations; some of which contained necrotic debris and others contained thrombi, especially in the lower pole. Pathological examination of the cystic yellow areas on routine stain (H&E) showed sheets of large to medium-sized cells with clear cytoplasm and central nuclei with scattered inflammatory cell exudates. The differential diagnosis based on gross and microscopic impression was clear cell RCC.
To confirm the diagnosis; immune stains were recommended . The suggested panel includes (CK, CK7, and CK20) and the suspected ‘clear cells’ were negative for CK, CK7, and CK20, which ruled out the diagnosis of RCC. The ‘foam cells’ consistent with XGPN were first misinterpreted as malignant ‘clear cells’. The immunohistochemistry study was essential to rule out malignancy and confirmed the diagnosis of XGPN. CD68 was not available in our pathology lab.