A 29-year-old male presented with persistent right flank pain since the past 2 years. Intravenous pyelography , computed tomography, and retrograde pyelography revealed grade-1 right hydronephrosis and multiple strictures of the right-upper ureter. There was no history of systemic inflammatory disease or malignant tumor, and all blood tumor markers were negative. The patient’s serum tuberculosis antigen and quantiferon test were negative. Ureteroscopic biopsy revealed pathologically nonspecific chronic inflammation without any malignant findings. Accordingly, the patient underwent transurethral balloon dilation thrice, transurethral ureterotomy with holmium yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser thrice, and retroperitoneal laparoscopic ureterotomy once. However, the dilating effect of the ureter was not sustained. Finally, the patient was referred to our hospital. As shown in Figure , the ureteral stricture in this case was long (13 cm) and had multiple sites, from the upper to the middle part of the ureter. Therefore, we chose ileal ureteral replacement.
The patient was placed in a modified flank position under general anesthesia. A 4-cm flank incision was made using the Hasson open technique at the level of the right midclavicular line, and the AlexisⓇ wound retractor (Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA, USA) was placed. The wound retractor was then covered with a surgical glove for the surgical glove-port technique. A 12-mm Hasson trocar and a 5-mm trocar were inserted via the glove-port. Additionally, two 5-mm trocars were placed at the lateral border of the right rectus muscle and at the right anterior axillary line, respectively . The peritoneum was carefully incised along the white line of Toldt up to the hepatic flexure, and the ascending colon was rotated medially to expose the retroperitoneum, with difficulties for strong adhesions. As shown in Figure , the ureter at the level from the renal pelvis to the iliac blood vessels adhered tightly to the surrounding tissues, and the ureteral wall was fibrous and thickened. Therefore, this portion of the ureter was resected. In contrast, the ureter below the iliac blood vessel level looked normal and was preserved, which indicated that a natural anti-reflux system could be completely preserved. On stopping the laparoscopic procedure, the ileum was pulled out of the abdominal cavity through the wound retractor and a 15-cm ileal segment was harvested for subsequent ureteral reconstruction. After resuming the laparoscopic procedure, the distal ureter and the ileal segment were first anastomosed and then the proximal ureter (immediately below the renal pelvis) and the ileal segment were anastomosed in an end-to-end fashion with interrupted sutures using a 4-0 absorbable braided suture (Vicryl; Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). A 7-Fr double J stent was placed transurethrally during the proximal ureter-ileal anastomosis. Two drains were placed at each ileal-ureteral anastomosis sites. The pneumoperitoneum time totaled 437 min. Due to a urine leak from the distal anastomosis, repair was performed 1 day after the surgery. The ileal segment just above the distal ileal-ureteral anastomosis was dilated obviously, therefore the distal side of the ileal segment was tapered to fit precisely to the diameter of the ureter .
The postoperative course was good following this, and the double J stent was removed 22 days after the surgery. In the postoperative follow-up, urine passage at the anastomotic site was smooth as per magnetic resonance imaging performed 54 months after the surgery . The serum creatinine level at 5 years was 0.74 mg/dL, ultrasonography at 10 years revealed grade-1 hydronephrosis, and no febrile urinary tract infection was recorded throughout the entire follow-up duration.