A 57-year-old man experienced acute onset of transient monocular painless visual loss in his left eye that lasted for over ten minutes. After occluding alternatively only one eye it was established that it was a complete, left, unilateral amaurosis. The recovery was slow, the patient started to see from the bottom up, “as if a blind were rising front of the eye”. Afterwards he suffered diplopia and ipsilateral eyelid ptosis for several hours. The next morning he was already asymptomatic. Past medical history included smoking (20 packs cigarretes a year for 20 years) and a larynx epidermoid carcinoma that had been treated with surgery and radiotherapy ten years before. There was also past history of dyslipidemia and arterial hypertension treated with statins and a renin-angiotensin inhibitor. Neurologic examination (performed after amaurosis recovery and while diplopia) revealed on the left eye: eyelid ptosis and ofthalmoparesis of extrinsic muscles: inferior rectus, superior rectus and internal lateral rectus with intrinsic muscles respected. Pupils were equal in size with conserved direct photomotor reflex and a consensual response. General examination showed first-degree obesity and tracheotomy. Urine and blood analysis (including autoimmune analysis, and serology for neurotropic infectious agents -Treponema Pallidum, Brucella Spp, Borrelia Burgdorferi, Cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr, Herpex simplex, Varicella Zoster- and acute phase reactants) were normal with the exception of a tiny rise in High density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Findings on head computed tomography (CT) 3 h after the onset of symptoms were normal. A pattern compatible with a critical occlusion/obstruction of the left ICA was revealed on ultrasonographic study of the supra-aortic trunks: the peak systolic velocity was undetectable, the lumen of the artery was markedly narrowed at colour and power Doppler ultrasound. The atherosclerotic plaque was heterogeneous, hypoechoic, the surface was smooth.
Cranial magnetic resonance (MR) and MR angiography of the supra-aortic trunks showed an acute infarct on the left lentiform nucleus , as well as a 95% and 60% stenosis of the left and right ICA respectively. MR cuts including the midbrain and orbit are shown in Fig. . These carotid stenosis were confirmed on digital subtraction angiography (DSA), an occlusion was observed in the ICA from its origin. The circulation of the left internal carotid artery came from collateral flow through the anterior communicating artery. The left ophthalmic artery blood supply was obtained through the anterior communicating artery of the circle of Willis and flow reversal of the left anterior cerebral artery . The ophthalmic artery is a branch of the internal carotid artery. Carotid balloon angioplasty and the placement of an endoprosthesis with embolic protection system (The Carotid Wallstent Monorail Endoprosthesis with the Boston Scientific embolic protection system type FilterWire EZ™, and diameter guidewire of 0.014 in - 0.36 mm-) on the left ICA were performed without complications . During 8 weeks after the surgery the patient was under double antiplatelet regimen with clopidogrel 75 mg/day and acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg/ day. Thereafter he has been under single treatment with acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg/day. After a 3 year follow up, the patient has not suffered any new symptom. Control sonographic studies have confirmed the permeability of the operated artery.