A 47-year-old Caucasian woman of Greek national origin was referred to our department with a mammogram showing increased breast density with multiple dispersed nodular opacities, linear opacities, periareolar fibrosis, and microcalcifications in the lower outer quadrant of her right breast. Histology of an open biopsy specimen showed foci of severe epithelial hyperplasia, areas of calcification, and apocrine metaplasia. Scintimammography with 99mTc-(V)DMSA was performed 2 days before the scheduled biopsy and then 7 months later. Within 4 weeks before the follow-up study, our patient took oral ibuprofen (400 mg daily) for persistent musculoskeletal back pain.
After intravenous administration of 925MBq of the tracer, early and late planar (lateral prone and anterior supine) images were acquired at 10 minute and 60 minute after injection. Breast 99mTc-(V)DMSA uptake in the early and late images was evaluated visually. Quantitative comparisons between the 10 minute and 60 minute scans and between the baseline study before biopsy and after the course of ibuprofen were performed by drawing regions of interest (ROIs) over the breast sites of greatest tracer uptake and over the normal breast parenchyma. The lesion-to-background (L/B) ratios were then calculated and compared between the same corresponding breast areas in the two scintigraphic studies.
A pattern of diffuse widespread tracer uptake corresponding to pre-invasive breast pathology (epithelial hyperplasia and in situ carcinoma, according to our previous reports [,]), was also observed in this case . This diffuse 99mTc-(V)DMSA distribution almost entirely occupied our patient's right breast parenchyma and was evident in the images both before and after her ibuprofen treatment . There was a gradual increase in the relative uptake of the tracer on the delayed images, compared with the early ones. However, after her ibuprofen treatment, diffuse tracer uptake was clearly diminished in both the early and late images. The L/B ratios in the 10 minute and 60 minute images were 1.562 and 2.719 in the baseline study versus 1.229 and 1.993 at follow-up examination. Based on our recent study, women without epithelial hyperplasia or with usual ductal breast hyperplasia without increased cellular proliferation rate (Ki-67 ≤ 3%) show 99mTc-(V)DMSA L/B60 min ratios in the range of 1.07 to 1.31 (mean = 1.15) and 0.77 to 1.62 (mean = 1.2), respectively (5).