A 60-year-old man presented to his local hospital with new-onset weakness, ataxia and paresthesia in the left upper extremity and was found to have an acute ischemic stroke based on MRI imaging showing multiple areas of acute cerebral and cerebellar infarction. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed which showed a 4.3 × 2.0 cm mass in the left atrium , consistent with an atrial myxoma which was thought to be the cause of his acute stroke. He was subsequently transferred to a tertiary medical center for further work-up and evaluation for cardiothoracic surgery. Prior to surgery for surgical myxoma resection, inpatient cardiology was consulted for preoperative evaluation. Aside from mild residual weakness, ataxia and paresthesia in his left upper extremity, the patient was asymptomatic and had been physically active. On physical exam, he was noted to have mild weakness of his left upper extremity (4+/5 strength in shoulder abduction) and trace dysmetria of the left hand. His cardiac exam was notable for a low-pitched sound heard early in diastole with no associated murmurs. His physical exam was otherwise unremarkable.
The patient reported being diagnosed with hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus approximately 7 years prior to admission. He was currently taking amlodipine and losartan and reported his systolic blood pressure was typically less than 130 mmHg at all recent clinic visits. At the time of diabetes diagnosis, his hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 12.3 and he reported his diet contained high amounts of processed foods, saturated fat, and sugar-sweetened beverages. He was prescribed metformin and subsequently stopped drinking sugar-sweetened beverages, made other healthful changes to his diet and started exercising on a regular basis. He subsequently lost 20 pounds and his HbA1c after one year was markedly improved at 5.0. On admission his HbA1c was 6.2 with a body mass index of 27.9 Kg/m2. He was also noted to have hepatic steatosis on an outpatient liver ultrasound prior to admission. He denied ever using tobacco or drugs and rarely consumed alcohol.
On admission the patient's standard lipid panel showed a serum LDL-C of 32 mg/dl and a non-HDL-C of 46 mg/dl. The patient had never been on lipid-lowering therapy and reported being previously told he had naturally very low blood cholesterol levels, which was confirmed on outpatient labs over the prior 16 years . He recalled being told his mother and maternal grandmother had very low levels of LDL-C. He had no family history of premature ASCVD. Further testing during his hospitalization revealed an ApoB level of 35 mg/dl, directly measured LDL-C of 48 mg/dl, and lipoprotein(a) of 36 nmol/L.
As part of pre-operative planning for cardiac surgery, the patient underwent coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) which demonstrated an anomalous right coronary artery (RCA; ) at the origin of the left sinus with mild atherosclerotic plaques in the RCA. Mild atherosclerotic plaques were also noted in the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and left circumflex artery (LCx; ), with normal LAD and LCx origins. To assess for ischemia due to the anomalous RCA, pharmacologic myocardial perfusion imaging with positron emission tomography was performed which showed a small-sized, mild-intensity, reversible perfusion defect in the apical inferior wall which was thought to be clinically insignificant due to lack of any exertional symptoms.
The patient underwent successful robotic-assisted resection of the left atrial mass (confirmed to be a myxoma on pathology) with no intervention performed to the RCA. He was discharged on post-operative day 4 with rosuvastatin and metoprolol. He was also recommended for consideration of outpatient genetic screening for hypobetalipoproteinemia.