A.Z., a previously healthy 3-year-old male child was brought to the pediatric outpatient clinic with a 6-day history of nonproductive cough associated with fever and hypoactivity. One of his family members had a COVID-19 infection 1 week ago. The patient was tested for COVID-19 and was positive. The general medical condition of the child was significantly improved and the symptoms completely disappeared. Two months later, the patient came to the emergency department of the hospital with complaints of severe abdominal distention associated with occasional dyspnea. The patient had no fever, cough, abdominal pain, jaundice, or weight loss. He had no significant past medical, surgical, psychosocial, or drug history. No family history of genetic disorders. Upon admission, the physical assessment revealed a pale and critically ill child with multiple palpable submetacentric cervical lymph nodes. The heart sounds and jugular venous pressure were normal, but diminished breath sounds were noted at the level of the lung base on the right side. The abdomen was significantly distended with mild tenderness and a positive shifting dullness. The liver and spleen were not palpable. A purpuric rash was seen in the right lower quadrant region. Examination of lower limbs showed no pedal edema. Vital signs were normal except for a respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute. No other remarkable findings were noted on examination. Laboratory evaluation was normal except for pancytopenia . Imaging studies revealed the presence of massive ascites with mild liver enlargement and pleural effusion on the right side . No other prominent pathologic findings were seen. Analysis of pleural fluid demonstrated glucose of 90 mg/dl, protein of 3800 mg/dl, and lactate dehydrogenase of 235 IU/ml. In all, 1.5 l of the ascitic fluid were aspirated and subjected to biochemical and cytological assessment. This showed hemorrhagic content and prominent lymphocytic infiltrate with few atypical lymphocytes. Malignancy was suspected and bone marrow aspiration was performed. This, in turn, revealed more than 85% of bone marrow cells were lymphoblasts, and flow cytometry testing confirmed the diagnosis of CD10-positive pre-B-cell ALL. The patient was given intravenous fluid, fresh frozen plasma, platelets and started therapy according to the BFM-AIEOP (Berlin–Frankfurt–Munich – Associazione Italiana Ematologia Oncologia Pediatrica) 2009 protocol combined with methylprednisolone. The patient was also started on nystatin and trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole. At the 3-month period of follow-up, lymphadenopathy was subsidized, and ascites and pleural effusion were significantly improved without recurrence. The patient achieved complete remission with less than 5% blasts in the bone marrow, a normal peripheral blood count, and no other symptoms of the disease. He also had no immunophenotypic evidence of minimal residual disease. According to the patient’s parents, their child showed good adherence and tolerability to the provided therapy without any noticeable adverse events.