A 29 years-old man with a medical history of traumatic cervical spine fracture (C6) managed operatively with full recovery and otherwise healthy presented to the emergency department with a one day history of epigastric pain and vomiting following excessive use of alcohol during the past 6 months. Based on physical examination (epigastric tenderness and guarding) and elevated plasma amylase levels (6 times normal upper limit), a diagnosis of alcohol-induced acute pancreatitis was made, the ultrasound examination revealed no gallstones or bile duct dilatation, and there was marked edema around the tail of the pancreas. The initial C-reactive protein level on admission was normal, but increased on the subsequent days to 205 mg/l (Day 1), and 271 mg/l (Day 2), respectively. The diagnosis and severity of acute pancreatitis were verified with a CT scan . The initial treatment consisted of analgesics and intravenous crystalloid infusion and the patient was admitted to the emergency ward for observation.
The patient received 7000 ml of crystalloids during the first 12 hours and 7018 ml of crystalloids for the next 12 hours totaling more than 14 liters during the initial 24-hour period. The Ranson score was 4, and the APACHE II scores were 10 (admission day), 13 (Day 1) and 12 (Day 2), respectively. During the admission day, the blood pressure was 162–182/95–113, heart rate 122–130/min and the urine output dropped to 50 ml/hour. The pH was 7.31 and base excess (BE) -4.9. Because of increasing breathing difficulties requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation, anuria, need for norepinephrine (0.4 microgram/kg/min) and BE decreasing to -8, the patient was moved to a Surgical Intensive Care Unit (SICU) 16 hours post-admission.
IAP was measured via the urinary bladder initially 17 hours post-admission and was 27 mmHg. Subsequently, IAP was measured 8 times during the next 20 hours with values of 23–33 mmHg. The simultaneous mean arterial pressures (MAP) varied from 75 to 130 mmHg with calculated abdominal perfusion pressures (MAP-IAP) of 46–100 mmHg with a decreasing trend during the observation period.
Because of increasing severity of organ dysfunction in spite of maximal supportive care and elevated IAP, a diagnosis of ACS was made and a decompressive laparostomy was performed 38 hours post-admission. A bilateral, wide subcostal incision about 5 cm below the costal margins was made and the fascial and muscle layers extending to about 5–8 cm lateral to the rectus sheats were divided on both sides . Immediately before the incision, the IAP measured on the table was 23 mmHg dropping to 10 mmHg immediately after, before extensive drainage of ascites (about 2 liters). Simultaneously without changing the ventilator set up, the tidal volume increased from 400 to 500 ml, and the mean arterial pressure about 10 mmHg. The abdomen or peripancreatic area were not explored further and the viscera were covered with a negative pressure dressing. Back at the SICU a renal replacement therapy was started.
During the next 6 hours, the patient's condition improved markedly (norepinephrine down to 0.1 microgram/kg/min, BE -3, pulmonary function was improved and spontaneous diuresis started at 40–90 ml/hour). The abdominal dressing was changed 48 hours later and a tracheostomy was performed. Subsequent dressing changes were performed every 48–72 hours and every time about 3–5 cm of the fascia was closed from both edges with 1 polyglactin interrupted sutures. At the fourth dressing change, 10 days from decompression, the fascial and skin closures were complete without developing recurrent ACS, although the IAP rose from 15 to 24 mmHg, but causing no adverse effects requiring re-decompression. The patient was gradually getting better, was decannulated on day 16 post-admission and was transferred to a regular ward on day 20. The total length of SICU stay was 19 days. The patient made full recovery and was discharged 5 days later for a total hospital length of stay of 25 days. Seen at outpatient department 1 and 6 months later, the patient had made full recovery, there was no diabetes and the wound had healed without hernia or infection.