A 56-year-old male patient presented with hematemesis, melena, weight loss of 40 kg, steatorrhea, and new-onset DM. He had a history of left-sided abdominal pain for 10 years, which was managed conservatively. He had no other medical comorbidities; however, he had a family history of intra-abdominal malignancies of unknown primary origin in two first-degree relatives. His abdomen was tender in epigastrium and left upper quadrant with a palpable mass. There was no evidence of melena on digital rectal examination. His hemoglobin (Hb) was 100 g/L (Ref. 130–180) and his white cell count was elevated at 33.4 × 109/L (Ref. 4.0–11.0) but urea, kidney, and liver function tests were normal. The heart rate and blood pressure were 110 beats per min and 103/63 mmHg, respectively, which responded to intravenous fluids. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a 94 × 72 × 83 mm necrotic pancreatic body mass with direct invasion of the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and abutment of the portal vein (PV) by more than 180°. Gastric mural invasion at the lesser curvature and multiple liver metastases were also seen . Staging CT unveiled no distant metastases. However, gastroscopy revealed two large deep ulcerations at the posterior wall of the stomach, which were friable and had slow ooze but no active bleeding. Given the nature of ulcers, no hemostatic procedure was performed; instead, a biopsy was taken to confirm the diagnosis . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed a large hypoechoic paragastric lesion at the lesser curvature of the gastric body , and a fine-needle biopsy was performed. His Hb level steadily dropped to 84 g/L with ongoing small volume melena over the following week, requiring multiple transfusions with packed red blood cells.
Histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of poorly differentiated SCC of the pancreas with no adenocarcinoma components. The tumor cells were positive for p40 and CK 5/6 and negative for CK 20, CK 7, and CDX-2 .
The objective of administering palliative radiotherapy was to control bleeding from the tumor, and a dose of 20 Gy in five fractions was delivered. The treatment was effective, as the patient did not experience any more episodes of melena, and his hemoglobin level remained stable at 90–100 g/L post-treatment.
Dietitians recommended dietary modifications for pancreatic exocrine insufficiency on cancer diagnosis. He was referred to diabetes educators and required a switch from oral hypoglycemic agents to insulin therapy because of worsening DM. The patient was linked to hospital and community palliative care providers during his inpatient stay.
The patient was subsequently considered for palliative chemotherapy as per a multidisciplinary recommendation. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was zero. The treatment protocol was initiated with a combination of gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel every 4 weeks. Four days after the first cycle, he was admitted with non-neutropenic sepsis of unknown origin, with a fever of 41°, and hemodynamic instability requiring a brief period of vasopressor support. The Hb level was stable at 89 g/L, but WCC and neutrophil were elevated at 22.2 × 109/L and 21.8 × 109/L (Ref. 2.0–8.0), respectively. With no source of sepsis identified, he was discharged home on day four of hospital admission following supportive care. The patient’s second cycle of chemotherapy was cancelled after 4 weeks upon his request. Restaging CT showed disease progression. There was no evidence of pancreatic SCC regression, measuring 86 × 95 × 61 mm in size, but growth in numbers and sizes of liver metastases, measuring up to 68 mm and 58 mm in size, up from 17 and 12 mm, respectively. Four weeks later, the overdue chemotherapy was not administered as he presented with symptomatic anemia without evidence of melena. His ECOG performance status was four. Blood tests showed sepsis with an elevated WCC of 87 × 109/L. No tumor markers were repeated. He was considered for comfort care by the palliative care team due to the high tumor burden, and he declined further chemotherapy. The patient succumbed to cancer 14 week post-diagnosis with sepsis.