Our patient is a 60 year-old female with history of Rai stage II chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) which was diagnosed in January 2004. She did well without treatment till August 2006. In August 2007, she presented with sudden onset of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, transaminitis and jaundice of 2-month duration. She denied any prior history of jaundice or blood transfusions. There was no history of travel. She had received 5 cycles of chemotherapy (oral chlorambucil plus prednisone) through January 2007. Rituximab was added due to progression of disease and continued till August 2007. Physical examination revealed mild icterus, generalized lymphadenopathy, right upper quadrant tenderness and splenomegaly without stigmata of chronic liver disease.
Peripheral blood smear revealed marked increase of small lymphocytes; many smudge cells and normocytic normochromic RBCs with mild anisocytosis. Serum acetaminophen and alcohol levels were negative. Serologies for hepatitis A, B, C, paramyxovirus, herpes virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV) were negative. Hepatitis C PCR was checked for confirmation and was found to be negative. Autoimmune workup for anti-nuclear antibody, anti-mitochondrial antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-liver-kidney-microsomal antibody, and a coombs’ test was negative. Serum ferretin was 1196, iron 163 and percent saturation was 67.9. Serum copper was within normal limits. Computerized axial tomography scan of the abdomen revealed enlarged lymph nodes secondary to her known CLL but no biliary obstruction.
The patient’s alanine aminotransferase(ALT) peaked at 2776, aspartate aminotransferase(AST) peaked at 1471, alkaline phosphates at 419 within 9 days of presentation . INR peaked at 1.7. Liver biopsy was done which revealed syncytial giant cell hepatitis (GCH) with extensive periportal and subsinusoidal fibrosis along with infiltration by small lymphocytes .
The patient was treated with hydrocortisone 100 mg every eight hours for 9 days and intravenous immunoglobulin 1gm/kg body weight once every 4 weeks. She was discharged on oral prednisone 60 mg/day.
Post-discharge at day 36 after presentation her liver enzymes normalized . Patient’s CLL treatment was changed to a fludarabine (25 mg/m2 daily for 5 consecutive days), plus monthly rituximab (375 mg/m2 on day 1) and IVIG (1gm/kg BW) without signs of hepatitis. The patient developed warm antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) in April 2008 with positive coombs test. Due to AIHA, fludarabine was replaced by oral cyclophosphamide 100 mg daily and monthly rituximab was continued. Her CLL therapy was changed in May 2011 to Bendamustine (90 mg/m2/day for 2 days in a row) with rituximab (375 mg/m2 IV on day 1). The patient has received 2 cycles as of July 2011 and has shown significant reduction in her splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy and her lymphocytosis. As of the last follow up in July 2011 her liver enzymes have remained normal. Treatment is fairly well tolerated although the patient has required G-CSF support.