A 74-year-old female with a history of hypertension and mild to moderate valvular aortic stenosis (AS) (mean gradient 20 mmHg) suffered cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation (VF) at a restaurant. Bystander cardio pulmonary resuscitation was initiated immediately, and after two defibrillations she was cardioverted to atrial fibrillation. Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved after 10 min of CPR. The patient was intubated on site and transferred to the nearest primary coronary intervention centre. During transport she showed signs of awakening and was sedated with propofol. Adrenaline infusion was titrated to a mean arterial pressure (MAP) >70 mmHg.
The coronary angiogram showed severe proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery stenosis. Complete revascularization was achieved after implantation of a single drug-eluting stent in the LAD artery. Troponin T values were only mildly elevated (257 ng/L) and the electrocardiogram without ST-segment elevation. The bedside transthoracic echocardiogram showed a hyperdynamic and hypertrophic left ventricle with ejection fraction of 50–60%. There were signs of LVOTO, SAM, and moderate MR, but no aortic regurgitation (AR).
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for haemodynamic stabilization. Targeted temperature management was omitted due to haemodynamic instability and because the patient had been partly awake.
Within 6 h her haemodynamics deteriorated further with tachycardia 110–130 b.p.m., lactic acidosis (9.2 mmol/L), increasing demand for vasopressor therapy (norepinephrine: 0.7 μg/kg/min) to maintain MAP >60 mmHg and concurrent severe pulmonary oedema with a fall in peripheral oxygenation saturation to 60% despite 100% oxygenation supply and titration of positive end expiratory pressure settings of the mechanical ventilator. Efforts to increase pre- and afterload by volume and additional vasopressor therapy (vasopressin 1.0 U/kg/d) only worsened the degree of congestion.
Repeated transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiograms revealed progression of LVOTO and SAM resulting in severe MR and pulmonary oedema .
After a multidisciplinary team conference, it was decided to attempt to establish mechanical circulatory support with femoro-femoral veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) for oxygenation and restoration of tissue perfusion. Right femoral vein and artery was cannulated via Seldinger’s technique and VA-ECMO established using a Cardiohelp ECMO system. A 21 Fr venous catheter was placed in the right atrium guided by transoesophageal echocardiography for venous drainage. A 17 Fr arterial cannula was placed in the femoral artery and advanced for return of oxygenated blood. Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation blood flow was set at 4.0 L/min. This led to immediate improvement in haemodynamics and resolved SAM.
Lactate was normalized within 24 h and oxygenation improved. Demand for vasopressor therapy was minimized. On Day 4, haemodynamics had been restored. The echocardiogram revealed cessation of MR severity to mild and after VA-ECMO flow had been reduced to 1.5 L/min it was removed. After 5 days sedation weaning and extubation was achieved without complications despite intermittent use of low-dose norepinephrine to maintain MAP >70 mmHg.
A Day 13, the patient was discharged from the ICU to the coronary care unit. She was neurologically intact without echocardiographic signs of LVOTO or SAM. Overall, the patient was hospitalized for 16 days. She was discharged with beta-blocking agents after implantation of secondary prophylactic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) to ambulatory cardiac rehabilitation. At 6 months of follow-up, the patient was in high spirit and fully asymptomatic. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated normal ejection fraction, mild septal hypertrophy, and unchanged mild AS and discrete AR. No Doppler signs of MR.
Pressure gradient in LVOT at rest was not elevated. However during Valsalva manoeuvre the gradient in the LVOT increased to 42 mmHg, suggesting a latent LVOTO. The patient gave informed consent and all identifiable information has been removed.