We report a case of S-ICD implantation with right-parasternal electrode position in a 45-year-old male congenital heart disease (CHD) patient after atrial switch surgery, due to d-TGA, with a concomitant AAI pacemaker.
The patient had undergone atrial switch surgery at the age of one and an AAI pacemaker was implanted at age 14 years, following atrial asystole. An additional atrial lead was implanted at age 44 years, because of lead failure. The patient had no other pre-existing conditions beyond being overweight and was not taking any regular medication. He had suffered an out of hospital cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation on 8 March 2018 and was successfully resuscitated by emergency medical services. After spontaneous circulation was re-established by external defibrillation (360 J) of ventricular fibrillation, the patient regained consciousness. On the 12-lead ECG, the patient was in sinus rhythm and did not show signs of myocardial ischaemia. On physical examination at admission to our institution, the patient was alert and oriented without neurologic impairment. He complained of chest pain at inspiration, which could be reproduced by rib compression. Vital signs were SpO2 95% under 5 L/min O2, RR 120/70 mmHg, heart rate 70 b.p.m., and regular. Myocardial ischaemia was excluded by high-sensitive troponin T assay and pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection were excluded in a thoracic computed tomography (CT) angiography. Laboratory testing revealed no relevant electrolyte imbalances. Furthermore, coronary artery disease and coronary anomalies were excluded by coronary angiogram. As the patient did not show any neurological sequelae, secondary prevention ICD implantation was indicated. On CT coronary angiography, which was performed to better assess the complex anatomy prior to ICD implantation, access to the subpulmonary ventricle was revealed to be hindered by the two atrial leads and the narrow diameter of the venous baffle connecting the vena cava superior with the subpulmonary ventricle . Also, the projected shock path of a transvenous ICD would not have included the systemic ventricle, which was suspected to be the arrhythmogenic ventricle. Taking into consideration the young age of the patient, the anatomical challenges, the shock vector of a transvenous ICD implantation, and the potential future need for stent implantation within the narrow baffle, we decided to recommend implantation an S-ICD. The patient gave his consent after detailed consultation.
To include as much of the anatomical right ventricle as possible, a right parasternal electrode position was evaluated in the pre-operative screening. The primary and secondary vectors were sufficient in the supine and standing position. The S-ICD system (Boston Scientific Emblem S-ICD) was implanted and tested successfully under general anaesthesia on 27 March. Due to the right parasternal electrode location and patient’s build (1.81 m, 96 kg); the length of the electrode was the limiting factor in achieving an even more dorsal position of the S-ICD generator. Still, a sufficiently dorsal intermuscular position of the S-ICD between the M. latissimus dorsi and M. serratus anterior was achieved. Intraoperative automatic vector set-up of the S-ICD revealed no oversensing during bipolar and unipolar atrial pacing. After 50 Hz induction of ventricular fibrillation, a 65 J S-ICD shock terminated to stable sinus rhythm, with a shock impedance of 82 Ohm . In the post-operative interrogation, both bi- and unipolar atrial pacing did not lead to oversensing in any of the vectors in the supine and standing position. The pacemaker was programmed to bipolar pacing. A post-operative chest X-ray confirmed the dorsal position of the S-ICD . The patient was started on beta blockers and discharged on the first post-operative day. At the 3-month follow-up visit in June 2018, the patient was well and had not suffered from further ventricular arrhythmia or S-ICD shocks.