Here we report a case of a 50-year-old male diagnosed with S. suis spinal canal infection. The patient was a pig farm owner with a right-eye vision loss due to injury 30 years ago. He had a history of alcohol use but denied having any chronic disease. He did not have any wounds on his extremities. The patient presented to our department with a 4-day fever and headache, with a temperature of 38.6 °C accompanied with sore throat and dry cough. Apart from these, He did not have other symptoms.
Right after disease onset he sought for medical assistance in a local hospital where the diagnosis was assumed to be an upper respiratory tract infection. Then oseltamivir and doxycycline were prescribed. After taking these medicines, his symptoms did not improve significantly. To search for further treatment, he came to our hospital. On initial physical examination, in addition to a moderate elevated body temperature and faster heart rates, little moist crackles could also be heard in the left lower lung. The patient also had mild edema in both Lower limbs. Apart from these, other abnormal signs were not observed. Routine blood analysis revealed a thrombocytopenia. WBC count was within normal range. Procalcitonin and C-reactive protein concentrations were 3.08 ng/mL, 83.5 mg/L respectively. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 29 mm/H. Chest CT scan showed inflammation infiltrates on the lower left lung, consistent with what was observed on physical examination. The day after admission, the patient complained of Lower back pain, neck pain and a worsening headache. A Lumbar puncture was performed which showed clear CSF. The CSF pressure was 240(mmH2O). The WBC count was 40/μL. Biochemical analysis of the CSF revealed that the levels of glucose, chloride and protein were 2.98 mmol/L, 120.2 mmol/L, 1854 mg/L, respectively. Blood culture and CSF culture were both negative. At this time, the patient was treated with ceftriaxone, an empirical treatment for community-acquired bacterial meningitis. Six days after admission, the pathogen was identified through Meta-genomic next generation sequencing, indicating a S. suis infection. Then antibiotic was switched from Ceftriaxone to penicillin. After treatment switching, the patient’s symptoms were partly relieved but not completely. He still had a fever. And 5 days after penicillin treatment, the patient experienced a worsening lower back pain. MRI scan shows high density signal in spinal canal of L5-S1 level (as is shown in Fig. ). A repeated lumbar puncture after symptom worsening revealed lower CSF pressure relative to the previous value. But CSF WBC count rose to 80/μL. Biochemical studies demonstrated that the levels of glucose, chloride, and protein were 3.39 mmol/L, 122.8 mmol/L, and 1126 mg/L, respectively. Considering possible drug resistance to penicillin, the physician decided to switch the treatment to vancomycin according to antibiotic sensitivity data, after which the patient’s symptoms had a greater relief. But 2 days after vancomycin treatment, the patient present with excessive peeling of fingertips, which was probably attributed to vancomycin. Therefore, the antibiotic treatment was switched to Linezolid again. The patient’s symptoms were much more relieved after Linezolid treatment. Auxiliary examinations also indicated a recovery. The patient was discharged after 26 days’ hospitalization.
Two weeks after discharge, the patient returned to our hospital for follow up. He did not show any abnormal signs. Hearing loss was not observed either. Whole blood cell count revealed that platelet count had returned to normal. MRI scan after discharge showed improvement of spinal canal infection (as is seen in Fig. ).