A 4-year-old girl reported to the Department of Pediatric and Preventive Dentistry at Bharati Vidyapeeth Dental College and Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India with a chief complaint of pain in the lower left and right back tooth region of the jaw for 1 week. The pain was intermittent, aggravated during meals, and gave a positive history of nocturnal pain suggestive of irreversible pulpitis. Medical history was noncontributory.
The patient was uncooperative on the first visit and was rated definitely negative according to Frankl's behavior rating scale. The parent gave a history of past negative dental experiences 1 week back in relation to treatment for the same chief complaint.
Intraoral examination revealed a complete set of deciduous dentitions with no soft tissue abnormality and a flush terminal molar relation. Superficial carious lesions were observed with respect to 51 and 61 ; 73, 74, 75, 84, and 85 showed deep carious lesions (Fédération Dentaire Internationale system of teeth nomenclature) .
Intraoral periapical radiographs revealed caries involving the pulp in relation to 74, 75, 84, and 85 . Resorption was observed on the distal root of 84 . Interestingly, there were large pulp chambers and small roots in relation to 74, 75, 84, and 85, suggestive of taurodontism. Based on Shifman and Chanannel's classification of taurodontism, three variables are measured, variable 1 is the height of the pulp chamber, variable 2 is the distance between the roof of the pulp chamber and the root's apex and variable 3 is the distance between the cementoenamel junction to the floor of the pulp chamber. After obtaining the values of all the variables, the degree of taurodontism is calculated using the following formula:
T1 = Variable 1 × 100/Variable 2
Taurodontism is diagnosed when T1 is greater than 20 and variable 3 exceeds 2.5 mm. Based on the calculations according to Shifman and Chanannel, 74, 75, 84, and 85 were classified as hypertaurodontism. Extraoral and general examination did not reveal any significant findings that could point to any syndrome and was associated as an independent anomaly ( and ).
Based on the clinical and radiographic diagnosis a tentative treatment plan was made. Restoration of 51 and 61; pulp therapy with respect to 73, 74, 74, and 85; extraction with respect to 84 followed by space maintainer was decided, in accordance with parents and after obtaining consent.
On the second visit, behavior modification and restoration of 51 and 61 were carried out. Modeling and Tell, Show, and Do was used for behavior modification. Caries was excavated using small round bur BR-45 (Mani, Inc., Utsunomiya, Japan) and was restored using composite (3M ESPE Filtek™ Z350 XT, United States of America) using a standard protocol.
On the third visit, a pulpectomy with 75 was done. Rubber dam isolation could not be achieved since the patient was not cooperative. Local anesthesia [2% lignocaine hydrochloride with 1:2,00,000 adrenaline (Lignocad Adr Cadilla Pharmaceuticals Ltd., India)] was administered using the inferior alveolar nerve block technique. Access opening was done using a large round bur BR-31 (Mani, Inc., Utsunomiya, Japan), on gaining access to the pulp chamber, the hyperemic pulp was observed. Pulp tissue was extirpated using a barbed broach. The working length was determined using the radiographic method. Biomechanical preparation was done using 21 mm K-files (Mani, Inc., Utsunomiya, Japan) up to #30 K-file. H-files (Mani, Inc., Utsunomiya, Japan) were used for circumferential filing. Copious irrigation with normal saline was done. After drying the canals, canals were obturated using calcium hydroxide and iodoform (Metapex, Meta Biomed, Korea). Postobturation restoration was done using glass ionomer cement (3M Ketac™ Molar, India).
On the fourth visit, after administration of local anesthesia using the inferior alveolar nerve block technique, pulpectomy was done with 85 similar to 75. On the same day, extraction with 84 was performed. After the reflection of the flap, the tooth was luxated with the help of a straight elevator thus minimizing the use of forceps. After achieving sufficient mobility, forceps were introduced for completing the procedure.
On the next visit, the patient showed acceptance towards the operator and dental procedures. Rubber dam application was achieved and pulpectomy with 73 and 74 were performed under local anesthesia using the inferior alveolar nerve block technique. A temporary restoration was placed with respect to 73 until the cementation of a preformed stainless steel crown with 74.
Preformed stainless steel crown (3M ESPE™ Stainless Steel Primary Molar Crowns, United States of America) with 85 was cemented using type I glass ionomer cement (GC Gold label Type 1 Luting and Lining Cement, Japan). Tooth preparation for 74 and 75 was done simultaneously and preformed stainless steel crowns were cemented. Postobturation restoration with 73 was done after obtaining a distal contact with 74 using composite .
Space management was done using a band and loop space maintainer over a crown with 85. A band was adapted over the crown. A band and loop was fabricated and cemented over the crown ( and ).
Follow-up was done after 6 months. The patient was asymptomatic and was rated definitely positive according to Frankl's behavior rating scale. Clinically a pit and fissure caries were observed with 65 at follow-up. Caries was excavated and restored using glass ionomer cement. Intraoral periapical radiograph revealed resorption of Metapex with 74. No such resorption was seen with respect to 73, 75, and 85 .