A 66-year-old gentleman with no known comorbidities presented to us with a history of multiple melenic bowel movements. He has associated lethargy and easy fatiguability as well. Further history from the patient revealed that he had been treated for symptomatic anaemia for the past two years. On clinical examination, he was pale, tachycardic but normotensive. His abdominal examination was unremarkable and digital rectal examination revealed melena. Initial investigations revealed a drop of haemoglobin from 11 g/dl to 4 g/dl. He was promptly resuscitated with blood products, and an early upper endoscopy was performed.
The index oesophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGDS) showed a small Forrest 3 antral ulcer with multiple subcentimeter gastric polyps . The gastric polyps were biopsied, and the histopathology subsequently reveals it to be benign. A colonoscopy showed blood-stained colonic mucosa in its entirety. However, no bleeding source was identified. An urgent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the abdomen was performed which revealed no significant abnormality. There were no bowel related masses seen. After the acute gastrointestinal bleeding episode subsided, we proceeded to work him up with a presumptive diagnosis of possible small intestinal bleed.
Capsule endoscopy was performed which showed several small telangiectasias in the proximal part of the small bowel . There was no visible tumour, polyps or ulcers. A double-balloon enteroscopy was then performed. It showed abnormal vascularity with a central umbilication over the mucosa of the small bowel . The mucosal abnormality was located at 165 cm from the incisor. Preoperative assessment of the patient showed he has an ASA score of 1 and a Revised Cardiac Risk Index score of 1 . He subsequently underwent a laparoscopic examination in the theatre. Laparoscopic entry was performed with a closed technique (Veress needle) . Intraoperative findings revealed an exophytic lesion measuring 6 cm × 6 cm × 3 cm approximately 30 cm distal to the duodenojejunal flexure (, , ). Small bowel resection and primary side-to-side anastomosis were performed, without regional lymphadenectomy. He recovered uneventfully and was discharged after a short hospital stay.
The histopathological report confirmed the diagnosis of GIST arising from the jejunum, with a TNM staging of T3N0M0. The tumour measures 60 × 65 × 30 mm, with a mitosis of 1 per 50 high power field (HPF), with no evidence of tumour rupture. On immunohistochemistry staining, the tumour is positive for CD117 and DOG1. During his clinic follow up, he remains symptom-free with no evidence of recurrence or metastases at six months follow up.