A 93-year-old male presented to the emergency department aphasic to English but still fluent in French. Two hours prior, the Creole-born Louisiana native felt suddenly lightheaded without more definite subjective symptoms. The multilingual patient understood English, confirmed through a French translator; however, when asked to repeat English words like “house” his response was the correct French word “maison.” He had no motor deficits. Per the translator, he was neither dysarthric nor disarticulate in his speech but was speaking with an “English” accent, the colloquial term used by French Canadians for their English-speaking countrymen. Most noteworthy, the patient was not speaking his native Creole but rather true French, a learned language, but one in which he was fluent. His friend noted a similar episode had occurred several months before and lasted about an hour, but they had not sought treatment as it resolved.
With a National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) of zero, and his three-hour fibrinolytic window rapidly closing, the most pressing question was whether to administer fibrinolytic therapy for an isolated speech deficit. Vital signs were only notable for moderate hypertension, 158/72 millimeters of mercury; the remainder of his neurologic testing was normal with symmetric and appropriate reflexes, strength, sensation, and cerebellar testing. The patient underwent rapid computed tomography without any evidence of hemorrhage. His glucose and electrolytes were normal, and his electrocardiogram was unremarkable. He bore no evidence of acute trauma, and he had no identifiable infection. Over the hour of his workup, the patient’s expressive English began to return, providing a relative contraindication to fibrinolytic therapy, as his clinical course was more suggestive of a transient ischemic attack. He retained his memory of the entire event, unsure of why it had occurred. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging did not demonstrate an acute stroke, and the patient was discharged by the neurology service the following day on optimal medical therapy.