A 50 year old woman with a normal Pap smear history presented in 2012 with an abnormal Pap smear that showed atypical squamous cells, cannot exclude high grade lesion (ASC-H) and atypical glandular cells. Cervical biopsy and endocervical curettage (ECC) showed atypical glandular/endocervical epithelium. A loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) was performed, revealing well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the cervix with mucinous and intestinal features. The tumor measured 12 mm in horizontal spread and invaded 8 mm into the stroma. The deep stromal, endocervical, and ectocervical margins were positive. PET/CT was negative for metastatic disease. Given her apparent stage IB1 disease, the patient was dispositioned to radical hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection.
Macroscopically, the cervix revealed a red-tan granular lesion measuring 3.5 × 3.5 cm. The uterine cavity was lined with a red-tan, shaggy endometrium measuring up to 0.4 cm in thickness. The bilateral fallopian tubes and ovaries appeared grossly normal. Histologically, sections of the cervix revealed a well-differentiated, neoplastic proliferation of glands with focal mucinous and intestinal differentiation. The lesion invaded 7 mm where the wall measured 15 mm with surface extension to the upper genital tract. This included the endometrium and focal non-invasive involvement of the right fallopian tube . No lymphovascular space invasion was identified. The parametria, vaginal cuff margins, ovaries, and 26 regional lymph nodes were negative for malignancy. On immunostaining, the tumor cells from the cervix were diffusely positive for CK7 and p16, focally positive for mucicarmine, and negative for ER, CK20, vimentin, CDX2, and p53. An identical staining pattern was found in sections of the endometrium and fallopian tube , supporting extension of the cervical primary tumor. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues from the cervix and endometrium were genotyped using Roche Linear Array® . Both tissues harbored HPV18 DNA. The morphology and immunostaining pattern supported the diagnosis of invasive adenocarcinoma, endocervical type with focal mucinous and intestinal differentiation, with involvement of the superficial endometrium and right fallopian tube. Given the unknown significance of the tumor in the endometrium and fallopian tube in a patient with otherwise low-risk disease, no adjuvant therapy was recommended. She has remained without evidence of disease since that time (48 mos).