A 32-year-old dichorionic twin-pregnancy Chinese gravida 1 para 1 had NS with renal biopsy confirmed type V lupus nephritis for over five years. She was treated with prednisone 10 mg a day before pregnancy, and NS was well controlled. She became pregnant in consultation with her follow-up nephrologist and continued to take prednisone 10 mg per day. At 22 weeks gestation, she was referred to her nephrologist because of severe proteinuria (24 h urinary protein quantity 3.041–4.952 g), and her medication regimen was adjusted to prednisone 30 mg per day as well as cyclosporine 1 mg/kg (75 mg in total) twice a day and hydroxychloroquine sulfate 200 mg per day. Her cyclosporine dose was increased to 125 mg in the morning and 100 mg at night from 28 weeks gestation, and this regimen was then maintained. At 36 weeks gestation, she received a Cesarean section, and her twin infants were born, weighing 2.4 and 2.5 kg, respectively. Both infants were male with Apgar scores of 10 at 1, 5, and 10 min.
After parturition, the mother continued to take cyclosporine (3 mg/kg or 225 mg per day in two doses, 125 mg in the morning and 100 mg at night), hydroxychloroquine sulfate, and prednisone. Each medicine was to be taken at a specific time every day. Cyclosporine levels in maternal blood ranged from undetectable (< 30 mcg/L) to 43.1 mcg/L. The infants were initially given formula milk until the cyclosporine level of a milk sample two hours after a dose was gained 7 days after delivery (1.7 mcg/L). The milk cyclosporine level was initially undetectable (< 15.625 mcg/L). Thus, the laboratory method was optimized, which is described in an additional file [see Additional file 1], to achieve the exact concentration. The infants were then 70–80% breastfed since the 7th day after birth. In order to evaluate the safety of feeding on breast milk at different times of the day, hindmilk was collected every 2 to 4 h (except sleeping time) for consecutive 48 h starting from the 9th day after parturition. The mother was instructed to hand-express breast milk of the first five min each time to excrete foremilk and collect subsequent breast milk into a disposable bottle. A 2 mL breast milk sample was then extracted and stored in a sampling tube for later testing. Figure depicts cyclosporine levels in breast milk. Infant blood levels were not measured since infants’ intake was low throughout the day. The mother continued to breastfeed for several months after that, and she did not receive any additional medications. The mother`s NS symptoms were alleviated. At one month, the twin infants weighed 3.9 and 4.2 kg, respectively. No adverse effects were detected in the two infants for the first three months after birth. The research was approved by the Ethics Committee for Research in Human Beings of West China Second University Hospital of Sichuan University. The mother provided written informed consent for participation in the study and publication of her and her infants` case history.