A 24-year-old Caucasian female diagnosed with CF (DF508 and G551D) at the age of 3 years was admitted to a hospital in Arkansas in November 2010 with a 2-week history of fevers (up to 101.5°F), worsening cough, coughing up blood, severe right-sided chest pain, and a 10 pound weight loss. Past sputum cultures had grown methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and past acid-fast bacilli (AFB) cultures revealed no growth. Her forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume (FEV1) had dropped to 57 and 42% of predicted as compared to her baseline of 103 and 79%, respectively. On clinical examination, she was an ill-appearing thin female with increased work of breathing and bilateral coarse rhonchorous breath sounds. Vital signs revealed a temperature of 101°F, respiratory rate of 24, and pulse rate of 98. Laboratory parameters including complete blood count and basic metabolic panel were normal. Admission chest radiograph and computed tomography (CT) chest revealed the chronic collapse of the anterior subsegment of right upper lobe and multiple bilateral cavitary lesions that had worsened. She was started on broad spectrum antibiotics consisting of amikacin, levofloxacin, and vancomycin; without significant clinical improvement in her symptoms even after 4 weeks of treatment. Her initial AFB smears were negative, but subsequent cultures grew MTB after 4 weeks, which was sensitive to all first-line TB drugs. Due to the culture results, the patient was initiated on a four drug anti-tuberculous regimen of isoniazid (INH), rifampin (RIF), ethambutol (EMB), and pyrazinamide (PZA) that was continued for 2 months followed by 4 months of INH and RIF. The patient demonstrated clinical improvement with resolution of her submassive hemoptysis and febrile episodes along with an increase in her weight. Her subsequent AFB cultures after 2 and 6 months of treatment were negative for MTB and a radiograph of the chest 7 months after the initial diagnosis showed marked clearing of the multiple bilateral cavitary lesions. Her FVC and FEV1 had improved to 85 and 58% of predicted, respectively.
Arkansas is a participant in the United States TB genotyping program that was implemented in 2004. TB genotyping is a laboratory-based approach used to examine the genetic material of MTB. Specific sections of the genetic content help in distinguishing between the different strains of MTB based on the distinct genetic patterns formed by them. The isolate from our case was found to be in a genotype cluster with another case that was reported at the same time from an 87-year-old female in another county about 200 miles away. No epidemiologic links were found between the two and these were the only cases with the genotype G08667 in the national database. Laboratory cross-contamination was ruled out.