A nine-year-old south Indian girl was brought to the casualty at the Prathima Institute of Medical Sciences with complaints of vomiting and loose stools that had started three days earlier. The vomit did not have a foul smell and contained no blood or mucus, but it did contain undigested food particles. The patient described a history of recurrent abdominal pain. She was a non-vegetarian and said she had a history of eating fish. She had had a low-grade continuous fever for three days. Her loose stools were watery in consistency, were not foul smelling, and contained no blood or mucus, and the patient showed no signs of dehydration. She reported no history of similar complaints or any previous hospitalization. A general physical examination revealed the patient to be moderately built and dull looking, with a body temperature of 99°F, a pulse rate of 110 beats per minute, and a respiration rate of 22 breaths per minute. Her blood pressure recorded upon admittance to our hospital was 110/70 mmHg.
The hematological profile of the patient showed 9.3 g/dL hemoglobin, total red blood cell (RBC) count 3.82 RBC/mm3, a low hematocrit level of 27.6% (normal 37% to 47%), a below normal mean corpuscular volume of 72.3 μm3/RBC (normal 82 μm3/RBC to 92 μm3/RBC), a low mean corpuscular hemoglobin volume of 24.3 pg/cell (normal 27 pg/cell to 32 pg/cell), and a mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration 33.6% (normal 32% to 36%). No eosinophilia (3%) was observed, and her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was found to be 10 mm per hour.
Stool samples obtained for ova and cyst examination were sent to the microbiology laboratory. Simultaneously, blood was sent for culture. Macroscopy of her stool revealed undigested material that was semi-formed but without any foul smell. White to creamish specks were observed in her stool, indicating the probable presence of tapeworms. A wet mount showed the presence of operculated eggs measuring 75 μm×40 μm . Characteristic broader than long segments of tapeworm were observed. On repeated wet mounts, scolex of the tapeworm along with gravid proglottids and a group of eggs were observed . On the basis of the morphology of the eggs with operculum and the presence of broader than long segments, as well as the scolex, the parasite was identified as Diphyllobothrium spp. The patient's blood culture was negative.