A 57-year-old man transferred to the neurocognitive behavior center of Seoul National University Bundang Hospital in 2012, from other university hospital. He presented with a three-month history of rapidly progressive memory loss and behavioral changes. Although previously a healthy man, he was unable to recollect the place for the tools, and his processing speed had decreased substantially while working as a carpenter, due to which his boss suggested he should quit his job. He experienced tremors in the upper and lower extremities, especially when targeting objects such as tools or shoes; he sometimes also experienced jerky movement. Previously of a meek and mild disposition, he had recent episodes of short-temper with emotional incontinence.
Neurological examination showed increased deep tendon reflex (DTR) at biceps, knees and ankles, with Hoffmann sign and ankle clonus at the four extremities. Dysmetria at finger to nose and heel to shin test, dysdiadochokinesia at rapid alternating movement, and bilateral sway at tandem gait, were noticed. Postural tremor at the upper extremities, and myoclonic jerky movement at the right big toe were also observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electoroencephalography (EEG) were unremarkable . The Korean version of Mini Mental Status Examination score was 29/30 (normal), whereas the comprehensive neuropsychological test showed decreased memory at immediate, delayed recall as well as recognition, and scores on stroop test fell below normal limits . Before being transferred to our clinic, he underwent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tapping with mild pleocytosis (100 leukocyte/mm3, mainly lymphocyte) and hyperproteinorrachia (134 md/dL), as well as tested 14-3-3 positivity on Western blot. After confirmation of CSF study, he was transferred to our hospital as a suspected CJD, due to the subacute progressive cognitive impairment, tremor, myoclonus, increased DTR, pathologic reflex, cerebellar ataxia and 14-3-3 protein positivity in CSF.
Initial assessment included infectious disease, CJD, paraneoplastic syndrome and toxic-metabolic disease. Further laboratory studies were performed after transfer. Tumor markers, thyroid function test, vitamin B12, anti-nuclear antigen, and anti-HIV test were all negative, but serum RPR level was increased up to 33.2 (normal range as 0−1 RU). This was followed by venereal disease research laboratory positivity (1:64) and fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorption reactivity in CSF. Additional history was taken, and his wife revealed that the patient had an ulcerative lesion with discharge on his penis about 15 years ago, but he was reluctant to get regular treatment from a hospital. Thereafter, the diagnosis was changed to general paresis by neurosyphilis, and the patient was treated with aqueous Penicillin G 24 million units a day intravenously for 2 weeks. Two weeks after treatment, neurological examination revealed partial recovery of gait and limb ataxia, whereas cognitive dysfunction persisted in the memory domain, in addition to visuospatial and frontal executive domains, according to the follow-up study after 1 year .