The single eye of a 16-year-old boy with history of scleral buckling and buckle revision developed inferior redetachment approaching the fovea. Pars plana deep vitrectomy with injection of heavy silicone oil (Densiron 68, Fluoron GmbH, Neu-Ulm, Germany) was scheduled for this large, myopic eye which also had a mild posterior subcapsular cataract.
The procedure included pars plana lensectomy, deep vitrectomy, injection of perfluorocarbon liquid (DK Line; Bausch and Lomb Inc., Waterford, Ireland), endolaser photocoagulation, superior peripheral iridotomy, air-fluid exchange and injection of 10 milliliters of Densiron 68 into the air filled vitreous cavity; all of which were accomplished without complications.
The retina was reattached after surgery but the postoperative course was complicated by an intense inflammatory response, early emulsification of silicone oil in the first week, and formation of macular pucker. Repeat pars plana vitrectomy along with epiretinal membrane removal and silicone oil injection was performed 4 weeks after the initial vitrectomy. Despite attempting meticulous removal of heavy silicone oil droplets, many remained in the eye and were obviously heavier than water in the early postoperative period, but became lighter with time.
Two months after silicone oil removal, some droplets were visible in the mid-vitreous cavity, some adhered to the cornea in supine position while others still rested on the retinal surface. Along with these changes, the media became hazy and diffuse iris depigmentation developed together with pigment globules on the iris, and in the anterior chamber and vitreous cavity .
With time, increasing droplets were noted floating in the vitreous cavity, hindering fundus visibility and reducing corrected visual acuity from 20/100 to 20/200. Another washout surgery was performed 6 months later. , taken at the time of this operation, demonstrates the large, lighter-than-water silicone oil droplets behind the cornea.
This surgery was successful in partially clearing the media and returning 20/100 vision to the patient.