The first clinical description of the current patient, a nonconsanguineous KCNMA1 haploinsufficiency male (Caucasian), was when he was 6 years old . His clinical presentation was associated with autistic features and severe ID that consisted of impairments in reciprocal social interactions and communication skills, lack of spoken language, poor communicating gestures, and restricted, stereotyped behaviors. Results of the Psychoeducational Profile–Revised indicated a developmental score equivalent to an age of 23 months and confirmed the associated diagnosis of severe intellectual disability according to DSM–IV criteria. Moreover, a diagnosis of autistic disorder was confirmed by administration of the Autism Diagnostic Interview–Revised and the Childhood Autism Rating Scale. Physical examination revealed normal growth parameters, and there were no discernible dysmorphic features. Electroencephalogram and cranial magnetic resonance imaging findings were normal. The patient’s parents were nonconsanguineous, and family history lacked confounding medical or neuropsychiatric disorders.
Recently, at 25 years of age, the subject still presented the same clinical features but additionally exhibited perseverative ideas, soliloquy (playing several roles with voice modification), repetitive speech, hyperactivity and aggressiveness, and outbursts of anger. Evidence of sensory abnormalities were present, including atypical reactions to odors (e.g., hypersensitivity to food odor), tactile defensiveness, and persistent (daily) sensation-seeking, especially auditory self-stimulation. Caregivers specifically reported disturbances in ocular and visual systems, with the subject exhibiting pronounced sensitivity to light and evidence of photophobia (e.g., avoiding going out on sunny days, hiding his eyes with his hands, and closing the shutters all day long). There were no notable findings upon physical examination of the eyes, including absence of nystagmus and strabismus. His stature was within normal range for age, but with moderate obesity and body mass index of 32.7 kg/m2. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s caregiver.
In a previous investigation, karyotyping of the subject and his parents revealed a de novo balanced translocation (46, XY, t [9; 10] [q23;q22]) . In addition, although no gene was observed in 9q23 region, the 10q22 region breakpoint was localized in the KCNMA1 gene (NCBI NM_002227, MIM number [*600150]), encoding for the BKCa channel . More recently, transcriptomic analysis performed on lymphoblastoid cell line of the patient showed haploinsufficiency of the gene (KCNMA1+/–) characterized by 50% decreased KCNMA1 mRNA expression (data not shown), which is in accordance with the 50% decreased mRNA expression and BKCa activity measured using conventional patch-clamp electrophysiology originally reported by Laumonnier and collaborators . Sequencing confirmed the localization of the breakpoint in the first intron of the KCNMA1 gene, with a microdeletion of 14 pb . No other significant mutations were observed. CGG repeat detection was normal (32 ± 1 CGG), and no mutation was detected in the FMR1 gene (Xq27.3) by exome sequencing (data not shown), thus the subject did not express an FXS genotype. In addition, transcriptomic arrays on lymphoblastoid cells showed that KCNMA1 mRNA was decreased by 50%, as also demonstrated by Laumonnier et al. in 2006, and that FMR1 mRNA was expressed at wild-type level (data not shown).
Combined ERG and CS using methods found to be feasible and reliable in population presenting neurobehavioral phenotypes such as FXS was performed with this subject, as described previously . Electroretinograms (ERGs) were recorded by using a RETeval system (LKC Systems), a FDA 510(k) cleared, non-mydriatic full-field ERG device commonly used clinically in ophthalmic settings. ERGs were recorded in light-adapted (LA) conditions in accordance with standards established by the International Society of Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) . ERG could not be performed adequately in a dark-adapted environment due to the subject’s anxiety in the dark. CS was assessed using the LEA SYMBOLS® low-contrast test, as described previously .
Results from the RETeval device for this subject showed some ERG waveform measures to be out of the normal range compared with the RETeval normative database [, ] in both ISCEV standard LA single flash (3 cd s m−2, 2 Hz) and ISCEV standard LA flicker stimulation (3 cd s m−2, 28.3 Hz) stimulations. For both eyes, the LA single flash b-wave amplitude was below the 3% percentile of the reference distribution (3% and 2%, respectively), and the retinal response to the LA flicker stimulation was smaller than all references value at a 0% percentile of the reference distribution [, ] .
Similar differences in the subject’s ERG are evident when current results are compared with normative reference values of a separate age-similar cohort of healthy volunteers . Indeed, ISCEV standard LA single flash (3 cd s m−2, 2 Hz) analysis revealed that the mean b-wave amplitude of the KCNMA1 subject was significantly decreased (p = 0.0051) by 60.4% compared with healthy volunteers (control group, Fig. A, C, F), whereas no significant alterations of the a-wave were observed . ISCEV standard LA flicker stimulation (3 cd s m−2, 28.3 Hz) revealed a significant impairment as shown by a 63.6% decreased amplitude (p = 0.0026) in the KCNMA1 subject compared with a healthy volunteer (control group, Fig. E–G). No differences in implicit time were observed for single flash a- or b-waves, or in the flicker response .
In CS testing, statistical analysis of LEA SYMBOLS data from the KCNMA1 subject revealed significant decreases in total success scores (sum of success to discriminate the symbols at three distances) when compared with data from a published age-similar healthy volunteer cohort of similar age . Deficits in CS were specifically present at the 3 m (p < 0.0001) and 5 m (p < 0.0001) testing distances . Regarding nominal contrast, no difference was observed at the 1 m distance at any nominal contrast level between the KCNMA1 subject and the published healthy volunteer group . At the 3 m distance, the performance of the KCNMA1 subject was significantly (p < 0.0001) lower compared with the published healthy volunteer group, beginning at the 5% level of nominal contrast and increasingly worse for lower nominal contrasts (2.5% and 1.25%) . At the 5 m distance, the KCNMA1 subject failed to discriminate contrasts .