We present a 32-year-old male patient, a right-handed athlete, who presented with a bilateral (predominantly right upper limb) abduction paresis of 12 months duration, associated with progressive paresthesias and changes in the coloring of the upper limbs. As an important history before the consultation, he had been diagnosed with vascular Thoracic Outlet Syndrome in another institution for which he had undergone surgery. The right first rib had been resected in that procedure with an axillary approach on that side. After surgery, the patient developed persistence of previous vascular symptoms and loss of flexion strength in the right shoulder. On physical examination at our clinic, we observed a right-winged scapula together with an absence of commitment of the deltoid, triceps, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus muscles . Magnetic resonance imaging of the right scapular region ruled out structural joint lesions at the level of the rotator cuff and the remaining ligament and muscle structures. The suspected diagnosis was traumatic injury of the long thoracic nerve, which was confirmed by electromyographic studies. The patient underwent physical therapy for 6 months without improvement. We, therefore, decided to perform surgical treatment 8 months after the onset of symptoms by means of a nerve transfer from the thoracodorsal nerve to the right long thoracic nerve. The reason for this indication was the absence of improvement in the paralysis observed up to that moment. The patient was positioned in dorsal decubitus, with the right upper limb in 90° abduction. A 15 cm skin incision was made on the right mid-axillary line, following the free border of the latissimus dorsi muscle. Dissection of the subcutaneous cellular tissue and aponeurosis of the latissimus dorsi muscle was continued until the right thoracodorsal nerve was identified by dissection and neurostimulation. Subsequently, the aponeurosis of the serratus anterior muscle was opened, which allowed the identification of the right long thoracic nerve, which had not responded to intraoperative motor stimulation . A donor branch of the right thoracodorsal nerve of similar size to that of the recipient was repaired to perform a nerve transfer in which the former would function as the axon donor and the latter as the recipient . End-to-end neurorrhaphy was performed under microscopic magnification using a 9–0 nylon microsuture. Fibrin glue was used to coat the repair.
A bandage was applied to immobilize the patient’s shoulder in adduction and internal rotation for 2 weeks, after which physical therapy sessions were started with activation movements for the latissimus dorsi and pectoralis major muscles, 5 times a week for 90 min during the first 3 months, and then continued for the same duration, 3 times a week. During the sessions, the exercises described by Ray et al. were carried out, with evident and progressive results from the 4th month of physiotherapy.
The patient was monitored 6 months after surgery, with partial improvement of the winged scapula and good recovery of flexion and function of the right shoulder. At 12 months, there was complete resolution of the winged scapula, with full functional recovery and muscle strength of both the latissimus dorsi and pectoralis muscles. The patient reported that he was able to complete all his routine activities normally and also showed a decrease in preoperative pain with Visual Analog Scale, 5/10–2/10 .