A 60-year-old Kosovan woman was admitted at the Division of Cardiac Surgery of our hospital on an emergency basis with an acute onset of exertional dyspnea associated with chest pain. Her medical history was positive for hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. A month before, she had undergone a left-side total mastectomy for treatment of breast cancer. She presented with sinus rhythm, tachycardia, tachypnea, and pulse oximetry of 72% on room air. Her cardiac enzymes were normal. An urgent transthoracic echocardiography was performed, which demonstrated an embolus extending from the right atrium to the left atrium through the PFO . Severe right ventricular dysfunction was present, with a fractional area grade of almost 14%. Pulmonary hypertension of 75mmHg was measured, which was associated with poor right ventricular function. Immediately, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed, which revealed severe bilateral pulmonary artery emboli and a right atrial mass . Coronary angiography demonstrated a normal coronary tree.
The patient underwent an emergent on-pump beating-heart surgical pulmonary and bilateral pulmonary embolectomy. A bicaval and standard aortic cannulation was performed. An extra 6-French line was extended from the aortic line to the cardioplegic cannula. After cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated, the ascending aorta was clamped, and the line connected to the aortic line with a cardioplegic cannula was unclamped, making possible delivery of almost 800ml of blood per minute to the coronary arteries. The patient’s heart was maintained in sinus rhythm during the operation. The right atrium was opened, and the migrating thrombus across the PFO was pulled out. The interatrial septum was opened widely, and the left atrium was inspected carefully and then closed after de-airing. The right atrium was closed with a direct 4–0 continuous PROLENE™ polypropylene suture (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). Next, the main pulmonary artery was opened and extended toward the left pulmonary artery, and a 5-French Fogarty catheter was employed to remove the thrombus from the left pulmonary artery and its branches. The same procedure was attempted to the right pulmonary artery through the same incision, but it was unsuccessful. Next, the right pulmonary artery close to the superior vena cava was opened. The superior venous cannula was removed and repositioned on the superior caval vein, which was then detached from the right atrium. The incision on the right pulmonary artery was extended toward the right pulmonary hilus, which was opened completely, and the thrombus was removed. The embolectomy of the branches of the right pulmonary artery was performed using the same Fogarty catheter. Next, the hilus was reconstructed using an autologous pericardial patch, and the right pulmonary artery was closed. The superior vena cava was then anastomosed to its usual position at the right atrium. The air was removed carefully from the heart, and the aorta was declamped.
The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on the eighth post-operative day. Post-operatively, the patient received daily warfarin treatment for 1 year to maintain a 2.5 to 3.5 international normalized ratio. At 1 month after surgery, contrast-enhanced CT showed a normal pulmonary tree . At 1 month, the patient underwent inferior caval filter implantation at another institution in a European Community country. At 1 year after surgery, the patient was still alive and free of symptoms.