A 19-year-old Asian male patient presented to our clinic with complaints of irregular heartbeats and dyspnoea on exertion since 2 months. On 12-lead ECG, PVCs with an inferior axis, left bundle branch block morphology, and R/S transition in V4. A Holter ECG monitoring revealed a high burden of monomorphic PVCs (38.185/24 h). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed preserved systolic and diastolic left ventricular function (ejection fraction—59%, E/A—1, 2), no valvular or any other structural pathology, pulmonary pressure—19 mm Hg. General standard blood tests were unremarkable. There was no family history of any cardiac disease or sudden cardiac death. Subsequently, a treatment with ethacizine 150 mg/day over 2 months was attempted without success (PVC burden remained at 32.365/24 h) and the patient was referred for catheter ablation.
The patient's informed consent was acquired and an electrophysiology study was performed 5 days after discontinuation of ethacizine. The ablation catheter (irrigated EZ Steer™, Biosense Webster, CA, USA) was inserted through the femoral vein. The earliest activation time (dT = 52 ms) was located in the superior part of the tricuspid annulus . Pace mapping at this spot matched the PVC morphology by >98% . However, repeated applications of radiofrequency energy at the earliest activation site (RF with 45 W, flow of 17 mL/min, and temperature control mode at 40°C) resulted in dislocation within 5–10 s and could not eliminate the PVCs.
To improve stability, we replaced the multipurpose sheath with a guiding sheath with additional anterior curvature (Preface, Biosense Webster, CA, USA). This provided longer contact time with the ablation target, but did not prevent dislocation during ablation with the same parameters. Focal activity (short idioventricular rhythms) with the same PVC morphology was observed but PVC elimination could not be achieved.
To reduce the number of catheter bending points, we inserted the ablation catheter through the right internal jugular vein. We placed the tip of the catheter in the same location achieving tight contact with the underlying myocardium . The earliest activation time in this point was the same (dT = 52 ms) and pace mapping matched the clinical PVCs (>98%). Radiofrequency ablation at this site (40 W and flow of 17 mL/min) completely eliminated PVCs within 15 s. We continued application of radiofrequency energy for 60 s and after that no PVCs could be seen after a waiting time of 20 min. A Holter monitoring on the day after the procedure and at 3 months of follow-up revealed no PVCs.