A 71-year-old healthy and independent New Zealand European female presented to a peripheral hospital with new onset central chest pain. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm without ischemic changes, and her serial troponin blood tests were unremarkable. Given that her age was a risk factor for cardiac events, she was admitted to the general medicine ward for suspected unstable angina. She was commenced on subcutaneous therapeutic LMWH at a dose of 80 mg twice daily while awaiting transfer to a tertiary hospital for coronary angiography.
On day 3 of her admission, while still awaiting transfer, the patient noticed new cough, worsening lower abdominal pain, and an enlarging suprapubic mass. A bladder scan was performed showing a postvoid residual volume of 87 mL. The mass was thought to be a palpable bladder when assessed by a junior doctor, and an indwelling catheter (IDC) was inserted. All vital observations were within acceptable limits, including her blood pressure remaining stable at 148/91 mmHg. Her hemoglobin from earlier in the day was 131 g/L.
The next morning (day 4 of her admission), her pain had worsened, and her blood pressure fell acutely to 80/40 mmHg. The mass was still palpable despite her IDC remaining in situ. A total of 250 mL drained through her IDC overnight. Repeat physical examination showed a hard tender mass in the suprapubic area of approximately 15 cm diameter. Localized peritonism was present, with normal bowel sounds. An urgent repeat hemoglobin test was performed, which showed a drop to 84 g/L . An urgent contrast computed tomography (CT) scan was also performed, revealing a large RSH with an active jet of arterial bleeding from the right inferior epigastric artery (IEA) .
The patient underwent an emergency laparotomy to decompress the hematoma and achieve hemostasis. Intraoperatively, no active bleeding was seen from any major blood vessels. However, generalized venous ooze was present throughout the rectus abdominis muscle. At the end of the procedure, the right IEA was sutured and ligated.
Postoperatively, all anticoagulation therapy was withheld. A CT aortogram (study indication unrelated to her unstable angina presentation) from 2 months prior was reviewed by an inpatient cardiologist who felt that there was unlikely to be ischemia of her coronary vessels. She remained well on the ward and was discharged on day 12 of her admission. Ultimately, she did not require transfer to a tertiary hospital for coronary angiography, and her diagnosis was considered “noncardiac chest pain.”
For completeness, she was followed up in a cardiology outpatient clinic 3 months after discharge. She had remained symptom free with regard to chest and abdominal pain. Her troponin remained normal at follow-up. Outpatient echocardiogram and ECG tracings were all unremarkable. Subsequent full hemostasis screening, including platelet function and clotting factor assays, were all within normal limits, and the patient was discharged from cardiology care.