A 14-year old adolescent boy was referred to our otolaryngology clinic with a complaint of right-sided ear canal painless mass and hearing impairment. Based on the patient's statement, he experienced progressive hearing loss for one month to the extent that he had difficulty hearing. He also stated that the mass which was small at first grew fast and filled the ear canal. He denied any history of ear discharge, pain, tinnitus, and vertigo. According to the patient, the earlier attempts for mass excision were followed by the recurrence of the problem after a few weeks. He did not mention any other disease or drugs administration in his medical history. Moreover, no benign or malignant cysts or tumors were reported in his family members.
On otoendoscopic examination, a broad base mass was detected which arose from the posterosuperior wall of the external auditory canal under the skin and clogged the canal .
The mass was consistently soft, without any ulcer, discoloring, or bleeding on touching. The probing demonstrated no connection between mass and tympanic membrane; moreover, the eardrums were intact. The vascular appearance of the lesion was suggestive of the provisional diagnosis of granulation tissue and vascular tumor. Therefore, after examination, the radiological investigation was requested and Computed Tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a smooth mass outside the tympanic membrane (,).
No evidence of bony erosion was noted, the middle ear cavity and the ossicles looked normal, and no middle ear lesions were observed. The pre-operative audiogram illustrated unilateral moderate conductive hearing loss.The patient with an initial diagnosis of vascular tumor underwent general anesthesia and the transcanal surgical excision at the specialist discretion. The mass was dissected from the skin and sent to the pathologist, no bony erosion was noted intraoperatively, and the skin was returned back properly with no defect. The tympanic membrane was kept intact. According to the pathological investigation results, the mass was a capillary hemangioma in the external auditory canal.Finally, the patient was discharged in good general health after a successful recovery without any side effects. Postoperatively, the site of surgery healed well and the conductive hearing loss was disappeared. The postoperative audiogram recorded normal hearing ability one month after the surgery. Furthermore, no significant mass was observed on post-operative otoendoscopic examination. In addition, a one-year clinical follow-up demonstrated no recurrence of the lesion and symptoms.