A 65-year-old male patient without a history of diabetes or immunological diseases presented to the Emergency Unit of University Hospital S. Anna of Ferrara, Italy, with photophobia and ocular pain in the left eye. The patient had just returned from a long holiday in Cape Verde and he reported that the onset of symptoms had occurred about 20 days earlier with the sensation of a foreign body in the eye, without any previous ocular trauma. In a Medical Centre of Cape Verde Island, he was diagnosed with a keratitis in the left eye, initially treated with tobramycin 0.3% and dexamethasone 0.1% eye ointment for a week, then discontinued because of the worsening of his condition. Then oral amoxicillin 875 mg and clavulanic acid 125 mg tid and topical ofloxacin 0.3% eye drops qid were administered for the following 10 days. Since the symptoms were more severe and the visual acuity reduced, the patient decided to return to Italy.
On admission to our Hospital the best correct visual acuity was 20/200 at distance in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination of the left eye showed conjunctival congestion and hyperemia, a large inferior corneal ulceration with brown pigment, corneal edema, about 3 mm of hypopyon and irido-lenticular synechiae . The posterior segment was not visible, ultrasonography did not show any sign of intraocular infection. Corneal scrapings were obtained for microbiological analyses. Sample obtained by scraping was directly inoculated onto chocolate agar plate (Vacutest® KIMA) and sent to the Clinical Microbiology Laboratory of University Hospital of Ferrara and incubated at 37 °C with 5% of CO2 atmosphere.
Since the clinical picture was suggestive of a fungal keratitis, pending the outcome of microbiological tests, the patient immediately started treatment with fortified topical tobramycin 14 mg/ml qid, moxifloxacin 0.5% eye drops qid, cyclopentolate 1% tid and voriconazole 1% every 2 hours . In addition, oral voriconazole was administered at the loading dose of 400 mg bid on days 1 and 2 and subsequently at the dose of 200 mg bid from day 3. Blood cell count and liver and kidney function blood tests were monitored every 15 days.
Forty-eight hours after corneal scraping fungi colonies were observed without any bacterial growth. Microscopic examination evidenced hyaline filamentous forms with clear mycelium. Growth was shown at 30 °C and 37 °C after 1 week of incubation on Chocolate Agar plate (CHOC), BCG agar plate, and Sabouraud Dextrose Agar plate . Microscopic observation showed hyphae broad, septate, hyaline, turning dark brown with age. Conidiophores phialidic, terminal or intercalary, short, hyaline, obclavate or cylindrical. Conidia hyaline, unicellular, obovoidal or ellipsoidal .
Cultured samples on Sabouraud’s agar plates were sent to the Laboratory of Mycology at Policlinico “A. Gemelli” of the Catholic University of Rome for biomolecular analyses to identify the filamentous fungus obtained by cultures [, ].
Molecular methods allowed the identification of Subramaniula asteroides by fungal DNA extraction (using Plant extraction kit, Qiagen®), PCR amplification of β-tubulin gene (βtub) by specific primers and Sanger sequencing method of fungal gene [, , ]. PCR products were sequenced and compared in GenBank database . The βtub sequence shared 99% identity with the reference sequence (KP900696.1) for Subramaniula asteroides (Strain CBS 128679).
Antifungal susceptibility testing on the case strain was performed by broth micro-dilution according to CLSI methods for filamentous fungi (Sensititre™ YeastOne ITAMYUCC, Thermo Scientific) . This test showed a low minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of S. asteroides for isavuconazole and the other triazoles, echinocandins and amphotericin B .
Antifungal susceptibility testing on the case strain was performed in triplicate by broth microdilution according to CLSI methods for filamentous fungi (Sensititre™ YeastOne ITAMYUCC, a modified panel YO10 with isavuconazole instead of 5-fluorocytosine, Thermo Scientific). Sensititre YeastOne was tested for efficacy in Aspergillus spp. and non-Aspergillus molds MIC valuation as previously described [–]. MIC values of the triazoles for Candida krusei ATCC 6258, A. fumigatus ATCC MYA-3626, and A. flavus ATCC 204304, which were used as quality control isolates, were all within the expected ranges (data not shown). The MICs of the antifungal drugs amphotericin B, anidulafungin, caspofungin, micafungin, voriconazole, posaconazole, itraconazole, isavuconazole were 0.25, 0.125, 0.5, 0.125, 0.06, 0.06, 0.06, 0.06 μg/mL, respectively . Unfortunately, there are no clinical breakpoints available for Subramaniula asteroides. However, CLSI epidemiological cutoff values for antifungal susceptibility testing for Aspergillus spp. have recently been released . Regarding these molds, the document shows ECV (μg/mL) of amphotericin B, caspofungin, isavuconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, voriconazole.
Due to the scarce improvement of the keratitis and considering the inability to determine the ocular tissue concentration levels of the drugs in the patient, voriconazole was stopped and isavuconazole was started at the loading oral dose of 200 mg tid for the first 48 h, continuing with 200 mg per day. Ten days later, hypopyon had been reduced and symptoms were improved. Over the next 4 weeks the cornea had epithelized, and the inflammation was solved. Oral isavuconazole, topical antimicrobials and cyclopentolate were discontinued after 6 weeks.
The fungal corneal ulcer due to S. asteroides was successfully treated; the best correct visual acuity 2 months after treatment was 20/50 with a residual corneal scar . Periodic eye tests showed a progressive improvement.