A 30-year-old Chinese woman with a childhood history of acute lymphoblastic leukemia, currently in remission, presented to our Neurology clinic with a 3-week history of worsening headaches, giddiness and vomiting. The neurological examination revealed positive cerebellar signs in keeping with an infratentorial space-occupying lesion.
A computed tomography (CT) head scan revealed a large (4.0cm×4.1cm×4.8cm) posterior fossa cystic mass with an eccentrically located enhancing nodule measuring 1.5cm×1.9cm (Figure ). This tumor was compressing the midbrain and 4th ventricle causing dilatation of the 3rd and lateral ventricles. There was compression of the cerebellum posteriorly resulting in tonsillar herniation. The initial radiological differential diagnosis of hemangioblastoma or pilocytic astrocytoma was based on the tumor’s characteristic appearance and location.
Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the cystic mass in the posterior fossa with an eccentrically located nodule lying adjacent to the vein of Galen. This nodule was hyperintense on T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences, hypointense on T1 weighted and showed avid enhancement with gadolinium (Figure ). There was no evidence of a ‘dural tail’ enhancement. Findings of periventricular hyperdensities on T2 FLAIR in keeping with cerebrospinal fluid were indicative of acute hydrocephalus. A magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) of the enhancing nodule showed non-specific reversal of the choline-to-creatine ratio with slight reduction in the N-acetyl acetate peak. Diffusion-weighted imaging and apparent diffusion coefficient (Figure ) also showed restricted diffusion of the ‘mural nodule’. After reviewing the MRI findings, a radiological diagnosis of ‘hemangioblastoma’ was made. The patient was then scheduled for surgery.
The tumor was approached via the infratentorial supracerebellar corridor with the patient in a prone position. Frameless neuronavigation using a fine-cut (1.2mm) contrast-enhanced CT brain scan was utilized in planning the surgical access. Gross total excision of the tumor was achieved under microscope assistance. The cystic component of the lesion contained xanthochromic fluid. The well-circumscribed solid component was a greyish, soft vascular lesion attached to the undersurface of the tentorium cerebelli. The wall of the cyst was smooth with no nodular lesion, suggestive of a pilocytic astrocytoma. The wall was not excised. The deep venous complex was visualized and preserved. A blood transfusion was not needed. The symptomatology improved post-operatively. She was discharged on the 4th post-operative day.
A pathological examination revealed that the tumor tissue was composed of meningothelial cells in sheets and rudimentary whorls (Figures and
). The neoplastic cells exhibited round to oval nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, fine chromatin and indistinct cytoplasmic borders (Figure ). Mitoses were seen 1 per high-power field but no necrosis was noted. Cytological atypia was noted focally and hyalinized vessels were observed. There was no evidence of malignancy. The tumor cells showed positivity for ‘vimentin’ and ‘epithelial membrane antigen’ and staining for S100 was negative. The histopathological diagnosis was ‘meningioma, World Health Organization Grade 1’.