An eighteen years old male patient, from Bijapur, came with complaints of pain in right ankle, difficulty in walking since one year. Pain was insidious in onset, gradually progressing, intermittent, aggravates with walking and movements of ankle and foot, relieves with analgesic medication. Patient had history of twisting injury to the right ankle one year back. Patient had history of massage. It was interfering in his daily activities like walking, running. No history of swelling and no constitutional symptoms.
On examination, tenderness present over anterior aspect of talus. Terminal movements of subtalar and mid tarsal joints are restricted and painful. Laboratory tests were normal.
Radiology of ankle anteroposterior and lateral views showed an expanded lytic lesion around 2×3 cm in talar neck body junction, involving articular cartilage, with thin shell of periosteal bone, clear zone of transition and sclerotic rim . On the basis of clinical and x-ray features provisional diagnosis of osteoblastoma is done.
The patient was planned for wide excision biopsy, bone grafting from ipsilateral Ilium and talo-navicular fusion with cannulated cancellous screw fixation [, ]. Biopsy material sent for histopathology and report showed irregular spicules of mineralized bone and eosinophilic osteoid rimmed by osteoblasts. The vascular stroma is characterized by pleomorphic spindle cells. The tumor cells differentiate into osteoblasts which make varying amounts of osteoid and woven bone confirming osteoblastoma talus . Post operatively, below knee cast was applied with non-weight bear mobilisation for six weeks . Cast was removed at seventh post operative week. Gradual partial weight bear mobilisation carried out from seven to eighteen post operative weeks. Ankle, subtalar joint active and passive movements were also carried out [, , , ]. Patient attained full weight bear painless unaided mobilisation with satisfactory ankle and subtalar movements at the end of six months. No recurrences of disease with one year follow up. Hardware was planned to be removed at a laterdate.