A 49-year-old woman presented with 2 weeks of peripheral vision loss and intermittent, painless, ten-minute episodes of peripheral “prism-like” photopsias. Her vision loss progressed and became more persistent while intruding bitemporally towards central fixation. She denied other ocular or systemic symptoms. Her past medical history was notable for a 15-pack year smoking history. She had no personal or family history of ocular or autoimmune disease.
At her initial visit, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/30 in the right eye (OD) and 20/25 in the left eye (OS) with intraocular pressures (IOP) of 11 and 12 mmHg, respectively. Anterior segment and fundus exam, as well as laboratory evaluation and neuroimaging, were unremarkable. Lumbar puncture demonstrated elevated protein with negative oligoclonal bands and normal IgG index. Her presentation was concerning for bilateral optic neuropathy, and she was treated with IV Methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily for 5 days. She noted that steroid treatment arrested progression of her visual symptoms.
At the one-month follow-up, she reported stability of her visual symptoms. BCVA was 20/30 in both eyes (OU) with IOP of 16 and 17 mmHg OD and OS, respectively. Exam was notable for trace vitreous cell OU, retinal venous sheathing and retinal whitening OU. Widefield Optos color fundus photos and autofluorescence , exhibited peripheral regions of RPE hyperautofluorescence, demonstrating areas of photoreceptor and RPE degeneration. Fluorescein angiography (FA) demonstrated areas of perivascular hyperfluorescence that increased in intensity with time, consistent with leakage and retinal periphlebitis. Indocyanine green angiography (ICG) demonstrated choroidal hypercyanescence and dilated choroidal vasculature OU . Humphrey visual fields (HVF) demonstrated a temporal field deficit OD and peripheral constriction with a central island remaining OS , which corresponds to the retinal changes observed by fundus autofluorescence.
She was admitted and treated with high dose IV methylprednisolone. Repeat MRI of the brain noted increased FLAIR signal, T2 enhancement and restricted diffusion of the left optic nerve, concerning for optic neuritis . CT of the chest revealed mediastinal and left hilar adenopathy. Fine needle aspirate (FNA) biopsy revealed a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma.
She was diagnosed with limited stage SCLC, chorioretinitis and optic neuritis consistent with CAR. An autoantibody panel was positive for anti-recoverin and negative for other CAR-associated antibodies. Electroretinography (ERG) was scheduled but was not obtained due to progression of her malignancy and worsening clinical course. She underwent treatment with carboplatin, etoposide and radiotherapy, but she declined prophylactic brain radiotherapy. She was maintained on Prednisone 60 mg daily for 12 weeks before being tapered by 10 mg weekly to 10 mg daily.
At the six-month follow-up, her BCVA and HVF were stable . Fundus exam demonstrated persistently attenuated vasculature, retinal whitening and development of choroidal and outer retinal scarring. She achieved and sustained remission until brain metastasis was detected 10 months after the initial onset of visual symptoms.