A 33-year-old healthy woman (height, 159 cm; weight, 66 kg) underwent her second CS under spinal anesthesia. During the postoperative course, she experienced SM in the lower extremities. There were no preoperative neurological findings in her medical history, and preoperative laboratory examination results, including blood cell count, blood glucose level, and serum electrolyte concentrations, were within the normal range. Intrathecal administration of local anesthetic was performed at the L3/4 level using 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine (13 mg) without anesthetic premedication. Intermittent administration of ephedrine (at a total dose of 25 mg) was used to maintain the systolic blood pressure above 80 mmHg during the operation. Following the delivery of a healthy baby, droperidol (1.25 mg) was intravenously administered for nausea. Midazolam (2 mg) was also intravenously administered as a sedative at the patient’s request. Upon the completion of CS 67 min after induction of spinal anesthesia, the maximum level of sensory blockade was at the bilateral T2 level. Approximately 130 min after the intrathecal administration of local anesthetic, the patient complained of occasional myoclonic leg jerks in the maternity ward, which gradually increased in frequency and magnitude. The frequency and magnitude of the myoclonus were not constant, ranging from 2 to 30 times per minute. The patient’s pulse rate was 96 bpm, blood pressure was 120/78 mmHg, body temperature was 37.1 °C, and respiratory rate was 19 bpm, and her consciousness was clear. She presented severe postoperative lower abdominal pain associated with the myoclonic leg jerks; therefore, pentazocine (30 mg) and hydroxyzine (50 mg) were intravenously administered. No movement disorders were observed in the upper extremities. However, sensory perception in her lower extremities was not restored and she was unable to move her legs at will. The severity of the involuntary movements peaked at approximately 3 h after the induction of spinal anesthesia. The patient displayed bicycle-riding-like involuntary movements of the lower extremities; subsequently, these gradually decreased without treatments, and the sensation and voluntary movements in the lower extremities recovered. Approximately 5 h after the intrathecal administration of local anesthetic, the involuntary movements had almost disappeared. On postoperative day (POD) 1, neurological findings such as signs of meningitis, high fever, nuchal rigidity, impaired consciousness, or convulsions were absent. The patient was discharged on POD 8.
The patient underwent CS on three occasions. The first CS was at the age of 29 years and was performed under a combination of spinal and epidural anesthesia. Following placement of an epidural catheter at the T11/12 level, spinal anesthesia was performed at the L3/4 level using 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine (8.5 mg) and fentanyl (20 μg). Patient-controlled epidural analgesia was induced at a rate of 4 mL/h with 300 mL of 0.14% ropivacaine containing fentanyl (1.5 mg) and droperidol (7.5 mg). The third CS occurred at the age of 35 years and spinal anesthesia was performed at the L3/4 level using 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine (11.5 mg) and fentanyl (15 μg). Following delivery of a healthy baby, droperidol (1.25 mg) was intravenously administered for nausea. At the end of the CS, the maximum level of sensory blockade was at the bilateral T2 level. No postoperative neurological events occurred during the first or third CS.