Twenty-six years old Saudi male, a victim of a high-speed motorcycle accident, where he lost control and hit an iron roadblock. He sustained a direct, blunt injury to his abdomen. He was wearing personal protective equipment. The rider was brought to ED by the Red Crescent ambulance with severe eviscerated abdomen transversally and de-gloving of the chest wall .
He was immediately intubated in critical status and shifted to the operating room for exploration as a damage control surgery after the primary survey.
The patient underwent eight exploratory laparotomies for damage control open abdomen, packing, revision, repair, lavage, and definitive surgery.
First exploration; at presentation (damage control surgery by Trauma and vascular team); Hgb: 3.2 g/dL. Plt: 74 k/ul. Blood pressure was maintained by blood and components transfusion + inotropes.
Eviscerated abdomen transversally where muscles were avulsed from the ribcage to approximately mid-axillary line and exposed the ribs bilaterally.
Through a midline incision:Perforation of the stomach at the greater curvature about 2 cm managed by primary repair with a linear stapler. Multiple mesenteric vessels' tears ligated. Perforation of small bowel at about 100 cm from the ileocecal junction, resected by stapler without anastomosis. Large central expanding retroperitoneal hematoma (zone 1), exploration was carried out by Mattox then Cattel-Braasch maneuver with supra celiac aorta clamping and evacuation of the hematoma. Minor bleeding points controlled and packing done. Grade one liver injury identified in the right and left lobe. The abdomen was left open. Then the patient was shifted to the crash area where secondary survey and PAN CT done, then admitted to SICU. PAN CT report:Postsurgical changes noted in the form of intraperitoneal and extraperitoneal packing with multiple intra-and extraperitoneal hematomas. Free fluid and air pockets associated with surgical emphysema. Diffuse small-bowel loops mucosal hyperdensity could be a hematoma. Liver hypo-density in segment IV likely to be laceration associated with periportal edema. Peripancreatic free fluid is noted, which can be attributed as postsurgical change (, , ).
Second exploration; Day 2 post-admission (Trauma team); Hgb: 5.6 g/dL. Plt: 48 k/ul.Previously resected small bowel segment 100 cm from the ileocecal junction anastomosed side – side. Another area of small bowel 70 cm from duodenojejunal junction was found dusky, resected and anastomosed side – side. Multiple serosal tears at transverse colon and cecum, primarily repaired. Spillage of bile identified in the retroperitoneum. Partial transection of the neck of the pancreas (main duct intact). Kocherization of duodenum showed approximately 2 cm perforation in 3rd part of the duodenum, and A catheter was inserted for drainage as a controlled fistula. Changing of abdominal packing carried out and hemostatic agent applied to control oozing .
During both first and second exploration, the patient was kept with an open abdomen (No closure of skin and fascia). We used an Opsite sandwich technique to cover the abdominal cavity, which is made of two Opsite transparent waterproof sheets sandwiched together with large lap gauze in-between.
Third exploration; Day 5 post-admission (hepatobiliary team); Hgb: 8.1 g/dL. Plt: 92 k/ul.Exploration and removal of all abdominal packing with a meticulous examination of bowel from the stomach to the rectum. A narrowed segment of the transverse colon, which was repaired in the second exploration, was resected and anastomosed side-side with a linear stapler. The duodenal injury was repaired primarily in two-layers PDS 3–0 and prolene. Two tension sutures of prolene 2–0 applied to both corners of the pancreas. Hemostasis and irrigation were done, with four drains inserted. Closure of the incised fascia and abdominal skin.
Fourth exploration; Day 10 post-admission (hepatobiliary team), on the fifth day after the third exploration, general patient condition suddenly deteriorated, bowel contents were seen in the abdominal drains from the surgical wound, exploration showed devitalized duodenum in addition to the right-side colon to the mid-transverse colon. Therefore, the patient underwent a Whipple procedure and extended right hemicolectomy with ileostomy creation.
Fifth – eighth explorations were for abdominal lavage.
The patient was admitted to the SICU for a total of 45 days for close monitoring. Afterward, he was transferred to the ward for 11 days and continued to have an uneventful recovery until he was discharged in a satisfactory condition.
Eight months later, the patient was electively admitted to the hospital for ileostomy reversal, where he underwent uneventful exploratory laparotomy with Ilio-sigmoid anastomosis and skin graft of the abdominal wound.
Currently, the patient is on regular outpatient clinic follow up for the past one year in a satisfactory condition with complete resolution of his intra-abdominal injuries.