An otherwise healthy 67-year-old woman presented to a private clinic with common cold-like symptoms, and the clinician diagnosed her with upper bronchitis. She was prescribed garenoxacin mesylate hydrate, dimemorfan phosphate, and L-carbocysteine.
After 10 days from the appearance of the bronchitis symptoms, she was also presented to another hospital with severe fatigue, fever, and jaundice. Her initial findings were as follows: total bilirubin (T-Bil) 8.1 mg/dL, direct bilirubin (D-Bil) 5.8 mg/dL, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 222 U/L, asparate aminotransferase (AST) 115 U/L, prothrombin time (PT) 104%, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 29.2 s. Viral hepatitis was suspected due to hepatitis-like symptoms, including acute liver injury, fever, and jaundice; however, serological testing was negative for viral hepatitis, hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV). Although the patient was not a drug user or a commercial sex worker, she was tested for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), another virus that could cause liver damage, and the antibody test was found to be positive. Her HIV viral load was high (119,036 copies/mL), and required treatment. The patient was transferred to our hospital, and then antiretroviral therapy (ART) was initiated.
Initial laboratory values in our hospital and other liver biomarkers were as follows: T-Bil 10.2 mg/dL, ALT 166 U/L, AST 94 UL, INR 1.64, APTT 27.6 s. Since biliary enzymes were extremely high, we considered that biliary strictures should be differentiated. For diagnosis of biliary stricture, ultrasonography (US), computer tomography (CT), magnetic resonance image (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangio pancreatography (MRCP) were initially considered to be performed as non-invasive examination methods. However, no stenosis was observed in the US or MRCP of the patient. Abdominal US at our hospital revealed a blunted rim of the liver and no dilation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. The patient was diagnosed with acute hepatitis. T2-weighted (T2W) MRI of the abdomen showed a high-intensity region around the intrahepatic portal vein, indicating abnormal periportal intensity. No laboratory findings confirming bile duct structure that would identify sclerosing cholangitis were obtained. Bile duct stenosis, which could positively identify the sclerosing cholangitis could not be performed. To confirm bile duct stenosis and other histological abnormalities, liver biopsy was essential for accurate diagnosis; however, liver biopsy could not be performed because of hyperbilirubinemia.
While we considered the condition and timing of ART initiation, her liver condition worsened. We considered that the liver damage might have been induced by some drugs prescribed at the previous hospital; thus, we did not start ART. We tried to reduce cholestasis, using ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), but her jaundice worsened. Based on the MRI findings, considering the inflammatory changes in the portal region, prednisolone treatment was started; however, the patient did not respond to the treatment.
She showed a rapid progression to anemia and fever; a bone marrow puncture was performed, which indicated hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS). Serum laboratory data also indicated HPS. Each index of appearance of HPS was elevated, including ferritin 9,923 ng/mL, fibrinogen 429 mg/dL, and triglyceride 525 mg/dL. Based on the HIV viral load, we decided to start ART. We diagnosed the HPS as viral-associated HPS (VAHS) due to the exacerbation of viral infection. To avoid ART-related liver toxicity, we selected Emtricitabine/Tenofovir alafenamide fumarate (FTC/TAF) + Raltegravir (RAL) as the ART. Due to elevated hepatobiliary enzymes the ART regimen was changed to RAL+3TC. With this regimen, T-Bil gradually decreased to 9.0 mg/dL.
Her treatment was changed from RAL+ 3TC to TAF/FTC + RAL on the 104th day post hospitalization because of the improvement in hepatobiliary enzymes. The HIV viral load decreased, and the biliary enzymes were within normal limits. She was discharged on the 140th day post hospitalization.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this report.