The patient was a 63-year-old woman with a recurrent parafalcine meningioma. She had presented originally 6 years prior with focal right lower extremity motor seizures and was found to have an approximately 4 cm bilateral parafalcine meningioma at the paracentral lobule that was eccentric to the left. Her initial resection was aborted due to sustained ST elevations before dural opening. After cardiac catheterization, evaluation, and clearance, she underwent resection 1 month later through a bicoronal approach. The tumor was heavily calcified, invading, and densely adherent to the falx and sinus, and although sinus bleeding was encountered, a Simpson Grade III resection was achieved. The sinus was preserved. Pathology revealed the WHO Grade II atypical meningioma. Notably, she was later diagnosed with coronary artery disease.
She underwent adjuvant radiotherapy (54 Gy) and later twice underwent gamma knife radiosurgery for progressive disease at 4 years and 5 years postoperatively. Six years postoperatively, she experienced worsening seizures and imaging revealed meningioma recurrence. Preoperative vascular imaging showed SSS occlusion and repeat surgery was recommended.
Perioperatively, a central line was placed, and precordial Doppler was used due to concern for possible AE. We opened and extended her prior bicoronal incision. After significant dissection through scar tissue and extension of craniotomy, we began resection of the tumor. During tumor resection, the falx was being coagulated and the patient became profoundly bradycardic, then asystolic . Given that tumor invading the SSS was being resected, there was concern for AE and we copiously irrigated the field and placed the head in Trendelenburg position, followed by tamponade with wet sponges. She remained asystolic for approximately ten seconds and then became profoundly bradycardic for approximately 1 min. There was no evidence of AE on precordial Doppler or end-tidal CO2 monitoring, and the patient recovered spontaneously during medical interventions by the anesthesia team.
After discussion between the anesthesia and neurosurgery teams, AE and a cardiac etiology were ruled out and surgery resumed. By careful exploration of the tumor-falcine-sinus interface, we confirmed that the sinus was occluded by tumor and began to coagulate it again to sacrifice it to improve resection. Given the likely chronic nature of her sinus occlusion, we felt confident that this would not result in venous congestion. During repeat coagulation of the SSS and posterior falx, profound bradycardia occurred again and self-resolved upon cessation of coagulation. This was repeatedly reproducible. After sacrifice of the sinus and falx in the region of the tumor and careful dissection, we were able to achieve a Simpson Grade I resection. The remainder of the case was uncomplicated.