A 21-year-old male was admitted to our hospital because of frequent urination lasting 2 months. When the patient developed symptoms of frequent urination, he presented to another hospital first and underwent some routine tests at admission. Urinalysis revealed 81 white blood cells/ul, normal biochemical indicators of renal function. No sperm was seen on semen analysis; thus, a further testicular biopsy was performed. This revealed a few seminiferous tubules in the testicular tissue, and spermatogenic cells were seen in the lumen, but mature sperm cells were not visible. Because the patient’s urinalysis suggested the presence of a urinary tract infection, anti-inflammatory therapy was administered. When his symptoms subsequently resolved, he asked to be discharged from the hospital.
Nevertheless, frequent urination recurred, and for further diagnosis and treatment, the patient visited the outpatient department of our hospital on June 6, 2022. On physical examination, the patient was found to have an old surgical incision scar, approximately 12 cm in length, on the left side of the abdomen, with no abnormalities of the anus. Routine urinalysis of the patient: 8 white blood cells/ul. In addition, the patient’s mother reported that he had suffered from long-term constipation with abdominal distension before the age of 5 years. At the time, he was admitted to the local hospital and was diagnosed with congenital megacolon based on the relevant examinations. After communication between the attending doctor and the patient’s family, the patient was advised to undergo immediate surgical treatment. The patient underwent resection of the above malformation. The patient’s family members have no similar clinical manifestations and malformations. Given the long interval, we were unable to obtain relevant clinical evidence and specific treatment procedures used for the patient.
At our hospital, an ultrasound examination showed a hyperechoic strip within the dark area of the bladder, which was connected to the posterior wall, and two urethral lines could be seen in the prostate . Bladder separation or a double bladder was considered. Simultaneously, a plain computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a separation of about 7 mm in the bladder. A delayed enhancement scan displayed that two cavities were filled by the contrast agents in the pelvic cavity, the right half was slightly smaller and the left half was slightly larger . Maximum intensity projection (MIP) showed that the left and right bladders were connected to the two kidneys through a single ureter on each side . Volume rendering (VR) presented the entire collection system, showing a single ureter on each side connecting to the left and right bladder cavities, but the urethra was not shown . The patient also underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): the T1- and T2-weighted images showed a sagittal septum between the left bladder and right bladder, with a thickness and signal similar to those of a normal bladder wall . Magnetic resonance urography (MRU) revealed two bladders that were separately connected to two urethras .
Cystoscopy was performed to clarify the anatomical structure of the malformation . Two urethras were seen from the membrane part of the urethra. Each urethra entered the left and right incoherent bladders. The diagnosis of sagittal septum duplication of the bladder combined with a duplication of the posterior urethra was confirmed by cystoscopy. Cystoscopy also displayed that a verumontanum was present in the right urethra, but not in the left urethra. Based on combined cystoscopy, CT, and MRI examination, we speculated that the patient’s two bladders could normally discharge urine to the left and right urethras. Our cystoscopy results together with the previous testicular biopsy findings suggested that the patient may have azoospermia (verumontanum obstruction).
After the patient was diagnosed with duplication of bladder and urethra, the doctor recommended surgical treatment to the patient. However, he considered that he only had frequent urination symptoms, and chose conservative treatment rather than to undergo surgical treatment. Thus, the doctor prescribed anti-inflammatory treatment. Four months later, the patient reported that frequent urination symptoms persisted, and was also considering fertility-related problems. The outpatient follow-up will be continued.