A 13-year-old female patient was admitted to the Liver Transplant Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, to identify the nature of the space-occupying lesions in her liver in August 2022. She had developed full-abdominal distention twelve years earlier without obvious cause. However, she had no fever, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting, melena, or yellowing of the skin, and she was not treated. Eight years ago, her parents found that the child’s growth and development were significantly behind those of her peers, with normal intelligence, abdominal distension, skin ecchymosis and epistaxis occurring approximately once a week. She was admitted to a local hospital and diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis syndrome but was not treated. One year prior, the child experienced syncope after physical exercise, which lasted for 2 min, and she woke up without headache, disturbance of consciousness or other discomfort. The patient presented to our hospital 5 months prior, and she was found to have hepatomegaly and multiple space-occupying lesions in the liver by B-ultrasonography and blood biochemical abnormalities. The doctor provided symptomatic treatment and ordered regular review. At this visit, her parents wanted to clarify the pathology of her liver for better treatment.
Physical examination revealed that this 13-year-old girl was 112 cm in height and 20.5 kg in weight, which are below the average height and weight of her peers. Her secondary sex characteristics were undeveloped, and she had facial signs of chronic liver disease. Her liver was palpable 6 cm below the right rib and at the level of the anterior superior iliac spine, with rigidity and a blunt edge. Moreover, the patient was a junior high school student with no menarche.
Imaging studies showed evidence of multiple hepatic hyperplastic nodules with fatty liver changes. An upper abdominal enhancement CT scan showed that the liver volume was increased, the density of the liver parenchyma was decreased unevenly, there were multiple liver nodules and masses, the arterial phase was significantly enhanced, and the portal phase was mildly and continuously enhanced . B-ultrasonography revealed multiple solid nodules in the context of fatty liver. After contrast agent injection, the nodules showed high signal intensity in the arterial phase, a slightly greater signal intensity in the portal vein phase, and an enhanced parenchyma phase . Abdominal CT revealed a smooth surface of the ovary without abnormalities, but B-ultrasonography was not performed to further evaluate the development of the ovary.
Laboratory examinations revealed low glucose (1.83 mmol/L, reference range: 3.90–5.90 mmol/L), high lactic acid (11.71 mmol/L, reference range: < 2.10 mmol/L), high blood ammonia (48.4 μmol/L, reference range: 9.0–33.0 μmol/L), and high alanine transaminase (84 IU/L, reference range: < 40 IU/L) levels . The levels of endocrine hormones were not measured for this patient.
According to this evidence, she was suspected of suffering from glycogen storage disease (GSD). To confirm the suspicion of GSD, \ exome sequencing and liver biopsy were performed.
After informing the patient and family and obtaining signed informed consent, we collected the peripheral blood of the patient and her father and mother (her brother could not be collected for some of the reasons) and extracted DNA from white blood cells. We first sequenced the entire exome of the patient to identify the mutant gene and then used first-generation sequencing to verify the mutation in the patient and her family. Exome sequencing was performed via Illumina HiSeq using an Agilent Surelect Kit, and the platform for Sanger sequencing was an Applied Biosystems® 3730 DNA Analyser with a BigDyeTM Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit.
The exome sequencing results suggested that there was a synonymous mutation, c.648 G > T (p.L216 = , NM_000151.4), in exon 5 and a frameshift mutation, c.262delG (p.Val88Phefs*14, NM_000151.4), in exon 2 of the G6PC gene. According to the pedigree analysis results of first-generation sequencing, heterozygous mutations of c.648 G > T and c.262delG were derived from the patient’s father and mother . The location of these two mutations in the G6PC gene are a known mutation site of glycogen storage disease type Ia [, ].
The liver biopsy results showed that several pieces of punctured liver tissue could be seen under the microscope, one of which was about the length of a liver lobule. Moreover, one isolated arteriole could be seen, and hepatocytes were arranged in a single row without atypia. CK7 showed slight proliferation of fine bile ducts and no evidence of malignancy. Adenomas or regenerated nodules were not excluded. In other liver tissues, the cytoplasm of hepatocytes was obviously loose and lightly stained, with ballooning degeneration and increased hepatocyte volume. PAS revealed steatosis of approximately 45% of hepatocytes, with several focal necroses in the hepatic lobules and incomplete hepatic plates. A few lymphocytes and monocytes infiltrated the portal area. The patient was diagnosed with mild chronic hepatitis combined with hepatocyte steatosis . Combined with the clinical and genetic test results, the pathological changes were consistent with those of GSD.
Finally, according to the clinical manifestations, auxiliary examinations, tissue pathology and genetic testing, this patient was considered to have GSD type Ia.
After surgical evaluation and patient family consent, the patient underwent living-donor liver allotransplantation (donor from her brother) under general anaesthesia. Postoperative gross pathology revealed that the volume and weight of the liver were significantly increased (V = 28.5 cm × 17 cm × 8 cm, W = 2050 g), showing a greyish-yellow and greyish-red colour, with protuberant nodules in some areas and several solid greyish-red nodules (φ = 0.2 cm-4.2 cm) in the section . Light microscopy revealed that the solid nodules were hepatocellular hyperplastic lesions, and there was no evidence of atypia or malignancy. Immunohistochemical results revealed positive expression of CD34 (incomplete vascularization), L-FABP, and CRP in solid nodule hepatocytes and negative expression of β-catenin, glypican 3 and GS. Ki-67 staining revealed a proliferative rate of less than 2% without reticulin loss. Masson staining revealed the formation of wide fibrous septa. TERT gene promoter mutations at locus 250 and locus 228 were not detected. These features suggest multiple inflammatory hepatic adenomas . The surrounding liver tissue showed watery degeneration of hepatocytes, cytoplasmic swelling of some hepatocytes, mixed steatosis of approximately 10% of hepatocytes, and fibrous tissue hyperplasia in the portal area with scattered chronic inflammatory cell infiltration . PAS staining was strongly positive. However, PAS-stained hepatocytes were mostly digested by periodic acid-Schiff-diastase (PAS-D) .
After surgery, the patient was transferred to the PICU for antirejection, anticoagulation, anti-infection and symptomatic support treatment. At discharge, the patient’s liver function recovered well. Imaging revealed no significant abnormalities in the bile duct or liver blood flow. Laboratory tests revealed that liver function and glucose levels were approximately normal .