A 59-year-old man of Chinese ethnicity presented to our hematology unit with headache, lethargy, and exertional dyspnea for the past 1 month. He underwent an uneventful cadaveric renal transplant 20 years ago for chronic glomerulonephritis-induced end-stage renal disease. He had been on long-term immunosuppressants since then consisting of orally administered prednisolone 10 mg daily and orally administered cyclosporine A 50 mg twice daily. He is married with four children. He had no significant family history. He did not smoke tobacco and did not drink alcohol. He works as a contractor with a construction company.
On examination, he was pale. Cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were unremarkable. He had a palpable liver and spleen of 3 cm. There were no palpable lymph nodes. The renal graft was palpable and of normal size.
His complete blood count revealed normochromic normocytic anemia of 7.4 g/dL with leukocytosis of 54 × 109/L (predominantly lymphocytosis) and a normal platelet count of 202 × 109/L. The other laboratory parameters on presentation are tabulated in Table .
A peripheral blood film revealed a leukoerythroblastic picture with presence of abnormal mononuclear cells. A bone marrow smear showed a markedly hypercellular marrow with diffuse infiltrates of abnormal lymphoid cells which were pleomorphic, moderate to large in size, and contained multiple coarse chromocenters in convoluted nuclei with irregular nuclear outline and scanty cytoplasm. The trephine was consistent with T-PLL.
Marrow flow cytometry analysis showed 25% abnormal population of cells expressing CD2, CD3, CD7, CD52, and TCL-1. The cell population was negative for CD4, CD8, CD25, CD56, CD57, CD94, and cMPO.
In view of the bone marrow and flow cytometry findings, he was diagnosed as having T-PLL which is an aggressive form of a lymphoproliferative disorder.
He was treated with one cycle of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP) chemotherapy to which he failed to respond.
He was then started on orally administered venetoclax daily. Since he has a renal graft, the option of anti-CD52 (alemtuzumab) therapy was not suitable due to the risk of cytomegalovirus (CMV) activation and the renal toxicity of ganciclovir.
Subsequently, on day 15 of orally administered venetoclax, he developed severe auto tumor lysis syndrome which required mechanical ventilation and continuous veno-venous hemodialysis. His white cell count progressed to 174 × 109/L, predominantly lymphocytosis. He died 2 days later at our intensive care unit.