A healthy 14-year-old female presented to our emergency department (ED) with severe left knee pain and swelling following an all-terrain vehicle rollover crash. On evaluation, the ED assessment revealed a large left knee effusion and limited range of motion due to pain. Radiographic imaging, including plain films and subsequent computerized tomography (CT) scans, revealed a left lateral tibial plateau fracture with a split depression type fracture pattern . Additional imaging with CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) identified a bony fragment within the femoral notch adjacent to the origin of the PCL on the femur . The non-contrast MRI study confirmed a suspected PCL avulsion from the femoral origin with an intact tibial insertion . Evaluation of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and menisci showed no apparent damage, while partial tears of the medial and lateral collateral ligaments and bony edema in the lateral femoral condyle were observed.
To manage the injury, the patient was placed in a hinged knee brace locked in extension and made non-weight-bearing on the injured extremity. Considering the degree of PCL displacement and depression at the tibial articular surface, a delayed surgery was recommended to allow for swelling reduction. One week after the initial injury, the patient underwent surgery. A posterior drawer maneuver under anesthesia confirmed a Grade 1 PCL injury and diagnostic arthroscopy revealed detachment of the PCL from its anatomic location at the distal femur. The PCL avulsion was repaired using #2 FiberWire (Arthrex) through the PCL stump, with the free end passed through the PCL origin footprint and anchored to the medial distal femur cortex using a 14 mm suture button. The final position of the PCL was confirmed to be anatomical and stable. An anterolateral incision was made at the proximal left leg, followed by a sub-meniscal arthrotomy to visualize the articular surface of the proximal tibia. The fractured tibial plateau was restored to anatomic position and crushed cancellous allograft chips were used to augment the traumatic defect. A 4-hole T-plate (Synthes) was contoured to accommodate the patient’s proximal anterolateral tibia and secured with cortical screws to stabilize the articular fragments . Postoperatively, the patient remained non-weight-bearing with crutches and a hinged knee brace locked in extension. Progressive weight-bearing and rehabilitation exercises were initiated in the following weeks, leading to satisfactory bony healing and functional recovery.
At the 2-year follow-up, the patient reported a successful return to varsity high school soccer without any pain or instability in the left knee. Radiographs and physical examination revealed a normal joint with symmetrical strength and range of motion compared to the contralateral knee. The patient had completed a formal physical therapy program and had been released to full activity and athletic play without restrictions. The patient was asymptomatic with the tibia plate and there is no plan for removal unless she becomes symptomatic.