An otherwise healthy 50-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) via ambulance after a ground-level fall. She was a non-English speaking Ethiopian who spoke only a native dialect that could not be translated with our services. This language barrier rendered her unable to communicate with the emergency medical services (EMS) workers, emergency physicians, or staff. She had fallen and called her son, who was not at home but who called EMS for her. Upon EMS arrival, the patient was sitting up on the bathroom floor. She was hypotensive with a systolic blood pressure around 90 millimeters of mercury, which improved after intravenous fluid bolus en route to the ED.
The patient’s son eventually arrived in the ED and provided additional history. Per her son, the patient worked in a factory and two days earlier had walked in the rain for about 15 minutes. She had been complaining of left buttock pain since her walk and was now complaining of left lower quadrant (LLQ) abdominal pain since her fall. She had no contributing past medical or surgical history. On exam, she had no signs of external trauma, including no abrasions, contusions, or other skin changes. Her abdomen was soft with tenderness to palpation in LLQ. Neurovascular exam was normal. The pelvis was stable. Extremities exam was normal with soft lower extremity compartments. The remainder of the physical exam was unrevealing. Initial hematology report revealed mild anemia with hemoglobin/hematocrit (H/H) 10.6/33.9 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 11.2–15.7/34.1–44.9 g/dL), lactic acidosis of 4 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.4–2.0 mmol/L), and mild acute renal injury. Chemistry panel was otherwise unremarkable.
Initial computed tomography (CT) with contrast showed a pelvic hematoma with no associated fractures. Focused assessment with sonography in trauma exam was negative for free fluid; however, there was a large heterogenous-appearing mass in the suprapubic area with compression of the bladder similar to what was noted in the CT report .
An urgent surgical consult was placed and cystogram was recommended to investigate for possible bladder injury. A foley catheter was inserted with no gross hematuria. During her ED course, she continued to have refractory hypotension despite continued fluid resuscitation. Approximately two hours after arrival, she experienced a vasovagal episode while sitting up and moving around on her stretcher. On re-examination, she was newly diaphoretic, pallid, and altered. Repeat H/H showed significant drop from 10.6/33.6 to 8.0/26.2. Emergent transfusion of two units packed red blood cells (pRBCs) was administered.
The patient’s mental status improved, as did the physical finding of diaphoresis; however, she continued to complain of left lower extremity (LLE) pain. Repeat exam revealed new tense compartments of the entire left leg, with decreased sensation, motor function, and distal pulses in the left leg. On CT angiogram with runoff ordered to investigate arterial patency, the study revealed a significant increase in the size of the pelvic hematoma with mildly diminutive but patent caliber of the femoral arteries, tortuous external iliac, and common femoral veins, with findings suggestive of a likely venous or gynecological source . The patient continued to be hemodynamically unstable despite additional transfusion of two units of pRBCs.
The decision was made to transport the patient to the operating room (OR) for exploratory laparotomy due to concern for continued intra-abdominal hemorrhage with no identified source. Intra-operatively, she underwent multiple rounds of massive transfusion protocol, and transfusion of frozen plasma for coagulopathy. In the OR, large retroperitoneal, preperitoneal, and pelvic hematomas were confirmed. Approximately one liter of clotted blood was removed from the pelvis. Repeated attempts at hemorrhage control were unsuccessful. Further exploration identified the source of bleeding: The iliac vein was visualized and found to have a large defect in the posterior medial aspect. The iliac vein was ligated successfully with resolution of bleeding. After hemostasis was achieved, tenseness of the LLE compartments resolved, thereby negating need for fasciotomy. Shock due to intra-abdominal hemorrhage resolved on postoperative day three, and the patient was discharged to home on postoperative day nine, on prophylactic aspirin therapy.