The patient was a 14-year-old girl who visited her physician for chest pain that developed while exercising. Upon detailed examination, right-sided pneumothorax was identified, and chest drainage was performed . However, the symptoms associated with a collapsed lung did not improve, and she was referred to our hospital. Computed tomography revealed the presence of a 19 × 17-mm cyst with a thick wall in the apex of the right lung . She was tested for infectious diseases, namely tuberculosis, but the results were not definitive . Catamenial pneumothorax was also suspected because she was menstruating when she presented to our hospital. As a therapeutic diagnosis, we performed a thoracoscopic partial resection of the right upper lobe of the lung.
With the patient being under general anesthesia, at the left lateral position, we inserted a 5-mm port on the mid-axillary line at the sixth intercostal space, followed by a 5-mm port inserted on the posterior axillary line at the sixth intercostal space, and a 12-mm port on the anterior axillary line at the fourth intercostal space. The thoracic cavity was thoroughly observed via thoracoscopy. No blueberry spots were found on the visceral pleura or the diaphragm (catamenial pneumothorax was considered negative). A ruptured cyst with a thick wall was found at the apex of the right lung, and three small openings were identified inside the cyst, suggesting communication with the bronchiole. The margin was sufficiently secured from the cyst, the lesion was excised using an Endo GIATM ultra-universal stapler (purple) (Covidien Surgical, Norwalk, CT), and the specimen was collected with an Endo CatchTM Gold device (Covidien Surgical). A 20-Fr. thoracic drain was placed at the apex of the right lung through the first port to complete the operation. The operation time was 83 min, and the blood loss volume was almost negligible .
Pathological findings around the cyst wall included the infiltration of inflammatory cells, proliferation of fibroblasts, and the slightly dense distribution of mildly atypical spindle cells. Tumor cells proliferating around the cyst wall were anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) (+), pan-tropomyosin receptor kinase (−), smooth muscle actin (SMA) (−), transducer-like enhancer of split 1 (−), BCL6 corepressor gene (−), and alpha-internexin (−), using immunohistochemistry. In addition, no ALK split signal was observed using fluorescence in situ hybridization . Differential diagnoses were IMT and congenital peribronchial myofibroblastic tumor. However, congenital peribronchial myofibroblastic tumor is often identified and operated during infancy and has a different histopathology from IMT. Because SMA was negative in this case and ALK rearrangement could not be determined by fluorescence in situ hybridization, it was difficult to confirm IMT; nevertheless, the pathological diagnosis was an IMT-like lesion in our patient. Not all diagnostic materials were available for pathological diagnosis, so we based the final diagnosis of IMT on the clinical course including the patient background. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 3. We have followed her for the past 6 months and have not observed local recurrence or metastasis.