A 38-year-old female presented to outpatient clinic with known advanced degenerative changes of the left hip and was having worsening pain and difficulty with ambulation. She failed other non-operative modalities and thus elected to undergo THA. She has normal body mass index. She has a past medical history of rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and tuberculosis. Her medications are Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil) 200 mg daily and Ferrous sulfate 325 mg. She does not take any anti-platelet or anti-coagulation medications. She has a history of right THA that had an uncomplicated post-operative period.
The patient underwent a THA using a standard posterior approach to the hip and had Stryker Trident 2 Acetabular component and Stryker Accolade 2 placed. There were no intraoperative complications. Post-operative day (POD) 1, the patient was having appropriate amount of pain and denied any weakness, numbness, or tingling. Basic laboratories showed hemoglobin of 8.7 which is an appropriate drop from 10.7 preoperatively. She was able to work 30 min with physical and occupational therapy and ambulated 100 feet. She was discharged home POD1 with home healthcare. She was placed on Aspirin 325 mg twice daily.
On POD 11, the patient called the office complaining of increased swelling over the lateral hip, and numbness and tingling from her knee down for the past 4 days. She followed up in the ED that day and was noted to have left sided foot drop and paresthesia’s in the L5 and S1 distribution. She then followed up in the office on POD 15 after musculoskeletal US and was found to have a fluid collection along the posterolateral hip and it appeared to be compressing the sciatic nerve. Plan was for evacuation of fluid collection with sciatic nerve decompression due to progressive neurological deterioration. The goal was to remove compression of the sciatic nerve from the fluid collection and any other tethers to aid in recovery of the sciatic nerve palsy.
On incising the previous fascia lata closure a large, tense seroma was encountered and fully evacuated. No cultures taken as the seroma looked non-infectious. Attention was then turned to the sciatic nerve. There were several adhesions surrounding the nerve causing secondary compression and limited excursion of the nerve . Careful neurolysis with hemostats was performed proximally to the sciatic notch and distally to the gluteal sling. There was no evidence of tethering from previous posterior capsular repair. Manipulation of the hip through range of motion demonstrated overall improvement in excursion and mobility of the nerve . Otherwise, hardware was intact, and no other causes of nerve compression were identified. A 10 French drain was placed deep to the fascia lata and removed POD1 with minimal output. The patient was discharged on POD 2 without significant improvement in paresthesia’s or foot drop. She followed up consistently and was given an AFO. At the 12-month post-operative visit, the patients’ paresthesias were nearly completely resolved over dorsolateral aspect of the foot and she was able to perform active and maintained dorsiflexion to 5–10 degrees past neutral.