A 17-year-old male presented to the emergency department of Shaheed Suhrawardy Medical College & Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh with a one-day history of severe epigastric pain and episodes of vomiting that progressed to dry retching. Pain was sudden, severe, colicky, and non-radiating. It started during a highway journey, just after taking heavy meal, and exacerbated with movement. Pain was unrelieved by analgesics. The patient vomited a large amount of undigested food particles. He reported a similar episode of pain after a heavy meal 2 months prior.
Initial examination revealed tachycardia, tachypnoea, mild dehydration, and a tense, distended, severely tender epigastrium but otherwise no concerning signs. Nasogastric tube insertion was attempted several times, but all without success. The patient was kept nil by mouth and given intravenous crystalloids. Laboratory blood results were unremarkable, including normal amylase and liver function tests. Though our provisional diagnosis was bowel perforation, the presence of Borchardt’s triad, pain following heavy meal, and past history of similar episode kept gastric volvulus in consideration. With this rare and rapidly fatal diagnosis in mind, simultaneous investigations and preparations for surgery were promptly performed.
An abdominal X-ray, which was the most common investigation in our institution, showed a hugely distended bowel with large single air-fluid level in the abdomen . It also showed herniation of gas containing gut in the thoracic cavity. After consulting with the radiology department, diagnosis of acute gastric volvulus was confirmed.
Our working diagnosis was acute gastric volvulus secondary to para-esophageal hiatal hernia. Patient was immediately transferred to the operation theatre for urgent laparotomy under general anesthesia. The abdomen was opened by midline incision. On per-operative findings, stomach was hugely distended and rotated along long axis. After derotation of the stomach fundus of the stomach was found necrosed predominantly along the greater curvature up to the gastro-esophageal junction . Sleeve gastrectomy was done, and a feeding jejunostomy was kept in situ. After repairing the diaphragmatic hernia, anterior gastropexy was done.
We performed a contrast meal study of stomach and duodenum with fluoroscopy and spot diagnosis on the 14th post-operative day (POD), which outlined partially resected stomach, duodenum, and part of the small intestine . Mottle shadows were seen within opacified areas of the stomach. No ulcer, crater, or any mucosal abnormalities were identified. Initial gastric emptying was satisfactory. Duodenal cap was well-formed. The remaining duodenal loop appeared normal. Proximal jejunal loops were mildly dilated. Thick rogues were observed in the jejunum. After this report, slowly oral feeding was started in addition with jejunostomy tube feeding. Though the patient had some feeding difficulty in the early post-operative phase, he successfully advanced towards recovery throughout subsequent days.
Nasogastric tube was removed on 21th POD and feeding jejunostomy was kept in situ for 3 months. Patient eventually achieved full recovery from an otherwise acute, life-threatening emergency.