The patient had hematochezia for 12 d and slight abdominal pain.
A 75-year-old man with hematochezia presented to the emergency room in October 2022 due to a 12-d history of hematochezia. The patient’s stool was bloody and dark red. He produced bloody stools approximately 7-8 times per day, approximately 100 mL each time, with no accompanying symptoms of fever, vomiting, or abdominal distension. After visiting a local clinic and receiving antibiotic treatment, there was no significant improvement. Since the patient’s onset, these symptoms have recurred repeatedly. Three hours prior, the patient experienced an increase in the frequency of bloody stools, accompanied by abdominal pain.
The patient was diagnosed with hypertension 8 years ago. Initially, the condition was identified during a routine health check-up, during which the patient presented with persistently elevated blood pressure readings, averaging 160/95 mmHg. His medical history indicated a gradual increase in blood pressure over the years despite the initiation of antihypertensive therapy. The patient had been on a combination of levoamlodipine besylate and hydrochlorothiazide for the past 8 years, and his blood pressure was partially controlled. He says he usually takes his medication as directed, but sometimes he does not follow the recommended diet and exercise guidelines.
He had no personal or family history of artery aneurysm or any specific disease.
Upon arrival, his blood pressure was 165/107 mmHg, and his heart rate was 109 beats per minute. Abdominal examination revealed slight abdominal distension and a relatively soft abdomen. Tenderness was present in the lower abdomen, with no rebound tenderness or muscle rigidity. Vascular examination revealed normal arterial pulsations in both lower extremities, with no edema or muscle atrophy present. Digital rectal examination revealed normal anal sphincter function, with the rectal mucosa being soft and smooth. Insertion of the finger was unobstructed, and no narrowing or palpable masses were detected. Upon withdrawal, the glove was stained with blood.
Laboratory tests revealed a decrease in hemoglobin (Hb) (7 g/dL), an elevated white blood cell count (12.6 × 109/L), an increased percentage of neutrophils (88.2%), and an increased CRP level (22.7 mg/dL). There was no evidence of hematuria, with 0-4 red blood cells per high-power field observed under the microscope.
The chest X-ray, electrocardiogram, and cardiac ultrasound examination revealed no abnormalities. The patient underwent an enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the entire abdomen and pelvis. CT revealed an oval-shaped mixed-density mass on the medial side of the right IIA measuring approximately 9.5 cm × 8.5 cm × 7.0 cm. An enhanced scan revealed contrast agent entry inside, closely related to the right IIA, suggesting the possibility of aneurysm rupture and hematoma formation. Imaging also showed signs of hemoperitoneum and peritonitis. An illustration shows that the rectal wall was invaded by the right internal IAA, which led to rectal bleeding.