The Patient is a 40-years-old male farmer presented to our OPD with complaints of pain and deformity over RT elbow joint. He had a history of injury to right forearm due to fall from height with outstretched hand 4 month back, for which he received treatment from a local bone setter. He was not a known case of DM or HTN. Clinically, he had a varus deformity in his right elbow with restricted pronation and supination of the elbow. There was a palpable bony swelling over the lateral aspect just distal to elbow joint which tended to move upon forceful pronation and supination. The flexion and extension were up to full extent. There was no distal NVD. On measurement, right forearm was 2 cm shortened. He also had severe pain over the DRUJ. AP and lateral X-ray revealed a BADO Type 2 Monteggia fracture dislocation with the delayed union of ulna and anteriorly dislocated radial head ( and ).
The fracture was approached through extended BOYD’S approach. The deep fascia of the fore arm was identified. A strip of fascia around 14 cm in length and 1 cm in breadth was harvested carefully using a 15 mm BP blade with intact base over the olecranon . Joint was approached through ECU and anconeus muscle. The annular ligament was found to be completely disrupted. The radial head was carefully delivered. The soft tissues attached with the head and neck part were kept intact for ALR. Radial groove of ulna and capitulum was cleared. Radial head was relocated, and congruency was confirmed. Next, the fracture site was cleared and refreshened. The fracture ends were assembled and fixed with a 7-hole LCDCP after putting bone grafts at the fracture sites from ipsilateral iliac bone. After fixation of the bone and length restoration, the fascial sling was bound over the radial neck region keeping adequate tension and re-enforced with 3–0 proline . An additional transcapitular k-wire was applied at 90° elbow flexion. Wound was closed in layered over 12-size Romo Vac drain. Sterile dressing and above-elbow slab were given. After 1 month, slab and k-wire was removed, and gradual mobilization was started. The full extension and flexion, around 75° of external and internal rotation was restored within 2 months of gradual supervised physiotherapy . Good bony union was achieved , and the patient is now able to do all his daily living activities. The DASH score has improved to 56 and we are hopeful for gradual recovery and full restoration of movements with aggressive physiotherapy within the next 2–3 months.
Regular follow-up was kept of the patient. At the end of 1 year, his DASH score improved to 74 with complete radiological union of the fractures . He is currently able to perform his daily activities and livelihood without much difficulty.