A 39-year-old man visited the dental clinic due to the evolution of his worn teeth, in particular the maxillary incisors. His medical history revealed massive soft drink consumption. Clinical and radiological examinations showed the presence of amalgam at the maxillary right first molar, and resin filling with carious recurrence at the maxillary right first and second molars. Moreover, the mandibular left first molar was subject to carious recurrence below its metal-ceramic crown, requiring its reconstruction . The loss of non-carious substance affects the maxillary incisors, canines and pre-molars. Severe erosion of type “grade 2” was detectible, with the loss of enamel and dentin surface exposure. The occlusion study underlined that the prosthetic space left by substance losses was not sufficient to obtain the necessary thickness of reconstitution materials. The examination showed no pain during temporomandibular joint and muscular palpation. The patient didn’t report elements suggestive of bruxism. However, the necessary increase in the OVD was estimated at 1 mm inter-incisal. Facial and dental aesthetic analysis revealed no facial asymmetry and no deviation of horizontal facial lines. Analysis of the shape of the maxillary incisors confirmed the loss of substance at the free edge of the incisors and canines, which was the cause of the disturbances of the curvature of the aesthetic frontal curve .
In this clinical context, the complete rehabilitation of the mouth was proposed to this patient. After discussion with the patient, the decision was made to take a very conservative and reasoned approach to the treatment. The integrity of the residual dental tissues was preserved using adhesive techniques favouring minimalist preparations and restoring the substance losses, by adding the materials composing the restorations . The increase in the OVD to 1 mm was stabilized by the restorations and by passive dental overeruption [, ]. All these treatments were to be accompanied by stopping soft drink consumption.
The treatment plan was performed in three steps. The first clinical appointment was dedicated to maxillary and mandibular impressions (Hydrocolor 5; Zhermack, Badia Polesine, Italy) and the facial arc (Facial arc Quick; FAG Dentaire, France). The increase of the OVD was obtained on the semi-adjustable articulator (Quick Master 1000 B2; FAG Dentaire, France) and a bite wax recorded in centric relation. The first laboratory steps consisted in also making a wax-up of the OVD at + 1 mm on the anterior guidance pin. The technician performed a full-mouth wax-up in three steps (premolar/molar sector right and left; incisor-canine sector), excluding the second and third molars. For each wax-up step, a silicone key (Zetalabor and Zetaflow; Zhermack, Badia Polesine, Italy) was fabricated . Thus, a total of three-silicone keys per arch were prepared. This technique ensured optimal repositioning and thus high fidelity with the wax-up. On the second clinical appointment, each silicon key loaded with Bis-Acryl-resin (Luxatemp Star, DMG Fabrik GmbH, Germany) was positioned in the patient’s mouth to build the full mock-up. This Bis-Acryl-resin presented a high breaking and bending tolerances increasing mock-up’s clinical survival No teeth were touched during this clinical visit. Only etching points (Gel Etchant; Kerr Dental, California USA) were applied to obtain better adhesion and durability of the mock-up . A second mock-up visit enabled clinical validation of the aesthetic, phonation and occlusal functions . The patient and his family validated the new incisor morphology. Anterior guidance, teeth occlusion and the increase of the OVD were confirmed by the integrity of the mock-up and the conservation of the occlusal contact points. The absence of the mock-up at the level of the second and third molars caused an inocclusion that was compensated by teeth overeruption after 3 months of wearing. Once the new occlusion was confirmed, mock-up impressions were made to prepare a personalized acrylic resin incisor table (Pattern Resin LS; GC Corporation, Tokyo Japan) on the articulator . In this temporary time, patient involved a regular oral health check-up to certify the good dental and temporomandibular health.
The second step started by restoring the posterior teeth, notably by the left mandibular quadrant. After endodontic treatment, an inlay-core was cemented on the mandibular left first molar. The mandibular left second premolar was restored with resin composite filling (Tetric EvoCeram; Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Liechtenstein). Then, the final preparation of the molar was performed and impressions were made with a two-step putty-wash technique using addition silicone impression material (Express 2 PentaPutti and Express 2 Ultra-light BodyQuick; 3 M Espe™, St Paul, Minnesota USA) and casts were poured using type IV hard stone (Fujirock EP; GC Corporation, Tokyo Japan). The provisional crown was produced using a silicone key made from an intra-oral mock-up impression. The working casts were articulated and definitive restoration was completed on the model from a base metal alloy (Colado CC; Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Liechtenstein) and cosmetic porcelain (VITA VM 13; VITA Zahnfabrik, Bad Sackingen, Germany). Then, resin composite restorations were performed on the right mandibular first and second molars. The two maxillary quadrants were produced in the same way, meaning that the onlay preparation impression was made after preparing the cavity and the resin composite on the adjacent teeth. The ceramic onlay (Emax CAD; Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Liechtenstein) was bonded on the left maxillary first premolar and the right maxillary first molar (Multilink Automix; Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Liechtenstein). Previously, immediate dentin sealing had been placed on the prepared dental surfaces, and the resin composite fillings were placed on the right maxillary first and second premolars and the left maxillary second premolar. The set of adhesive restorations was carried out using a dental dam to ensure the best conditions of isolation (Nic Tone rubber dam; SC expert Tech Solutions SRL, Romania).
The third step consisted of functional prosthetic rehabilitation with palatal veneers and aesthetic restoration of the incisor edge with aesthetic resin composite. The preparations for palatal veneers consisted of simple conditioning of the dental tissue left by erosion. The working casts were articulated, and the incisor table resulted in the manufacture of the palatal restorations with CAD/CAM resin-composite blocks (Lava Ultimate; 3 M Espe™, St Paul, Minnesota USA) and a CAD/CAM system . The restoration design presented a portion resting on the incisor edge to guide correct positioning during bonding (Multilink Automix; Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Liechtenstein). This part was then removed to make room for the aesthetic composite (Estelite Asteria; Tokuyama Dental Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) . After these treatments, the patient was asked to wear a lower jaw gutter to protect the restorations. The patient acknowledged having improved function and aesthetics and was pleased with the results. Routine clinical assessments were made at 4 months and then at 6 months with visual, photographic and radiographic examinations.