A 59-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to hospital with slowly progressive muscle weakness and wasting of his posterior calf muscles. Neurological examination revealed normal cranial nerve function and intellectual status. Manual muscle testing showed weakness of Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 4+ out of 5 in his posterior calf muscles and marginal weakness MRC grade 5- out of 5 in his anterior calf muscles. His deep tendon reflexes were symmetrically preserved. His family history was suggestive for an autosomal recessive trait. Serum creatine kinase values were normal in our patient’s two children and one sibling.
On magnetic resonance imaging, T1-weighted turbo spin echo and short T1 inversion recovery (fat-suppressed) sequences revealed selective atrophy and fatty replacement of the medial heads of his gastrocnemius muscles and soleus muscles (Figure ). In follow-up magnetic resonance imaging two years later, this was also visible in his adductor longus muscles (not shown). Contrast-enhanced images showed areas of fatty degeneration next to areas with contrast enhancement and edema in the lateral head of his gastrocnemius muscles and the proximal part of his soleus muscles.
Needle electromyography of both gastrocnemius muscles showed sparse positive sharp waves. At voluntary effort, early recruitment of short and small motor unit action potentials compatible with a myopathic pattern was observed. Nerve conduction studies revealed normal sensory nerve action potentials and conduction velocities of his right median and sural nerve as well as normal compound muscle action potential amplitudes and nerve conduction velocities in his right median and tibial nerve. His serum creatine kinase level was markedly elevated up to 1700U/L (normal, less than 270U/L); lactate dehydrogenase, 264U/L (normal, less than 232U/L); alanine aminotransferase, 53U/L (normal, less than 35U/L); and aspartate aminotransferase, 67U/L (normal, less than 45U/L). His gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase level was normal.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining of serial frozen sections of his gastrocnemius muscle revealed characteristic myopathic changes including marked variation in fiber size, centrally localized nuclei, and necrotic and regenerating fibers. Furthermore, moderate endomysial fibrosis as well as some small perivascular inflammatory infiltrates was observed (Figure ). Immunohistochemical stainings were performed with antibodies against dystrophin (Dys1 and Dys3), γ- and δ-sarcoglycan, vimentin, desmin, dysferlin (all from Novocastra, Berlin, Germany), Dys2, spectrin II, utrophin, α- and β-sarcoglycan, α- and β-dystroglycan (all from Medac, Wedel, Germany), NCL-merosin (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA), laminin α5 and laminin β1 (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA), actin (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), and caveolin 3 (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany). Dysferlin immunoreactivity was markedly reduced at muscle fiber membranes but diffusely increased in the cytoplasm of many fibers (Figure ). Utrophin expression was slightly upregulated (data not shown). Immunoblot analysis was performed using a mini-Protean II Western blotting system (BioRad, Herts, UK). Immunoblotting analysis did not reveal any significant reduction of dysferlin (Figure ), dystrophin or calpain 3 (data not shown).
Molecular genetic analyses were performed after obtaining informed consent from our patient. DNA extraction and direct sequencing of the complete dysferlin gene was done as described previously . Molecular genetic analysis of fukutin-related protein, β-sarcoglycan, calpain-3 and caveolin-3, a putative interaction and membrane targeting partner of dysferlin, and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis of the dystrophin gene (MRC Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) ruled out underlying mutations with high probability. Finally, a novel homozygous splice mutation, c.762 + 5G > T, in the ANO5 gene was identified after direct Sanger sequencing of all coding exons of ANO5 (Reference sequence NM_ 213599.2). Splice prediction programs (Alamut mutation prediction program, version 2.1, Interactive Biosoftware, Rouen, France) showed a loss of the splice donor site. Whilst we could not determine the impact of this mutation at the protein level it is suggested that exon 9 could be skipped due to the identified splice donor site mutation in intron 8.