A 45 year old male presented to us with complaints of redness, discharge and foreign body sensation in his right eye since one month. He had undergone a scleral buckling procedure elsewhere 14 years back of which he had no records. There was no visual gain post-operatively. He had no history of trauma and is a healthy patient without any systemic diseases. On examination, he had no perception of light in the right eye. Mucopurulent discharge was present and conjunctival congestion was noted. A circumferentially placed and anteriorly displaced exposed solid scleral buckle explant was noted with black coloured deposit over the buckle in the superior quadrant , ). Anterior chamber was deep and quiet and lens was clear. Fundus examination revealed a visible buckle indentation superiorly and an inferior retinal detachment with disc pallor. No visible inflammatory reaction was noted internally. The left eye had a best corrected visual acuity of 6/6, N6 with a normal anterior segment and fundus picture. A diagnosis of exposed and anteriorly displaced infected scleral buckle was made. Removal of the infected buckle was planned. The conjunctiva was dissected and the buckle along with sutures was removed and sent for microbiological evaluation. The eye was cleared of the necrotic debris and discharge. A thorough subconjunctival wash was done with antibiotic (gentamycin) and antifungal agents (voriconazole) and the conjunctival peritomy was closed. The patient was started on empirical treatment with oral ciprofloxacin 750 mg twice a day, oral fluconazone 150 mg twice a day, eye drop moxifloxacin hourly, eye drop voriconazole hourly, eye drop atropine 3 times a day and eye drop carboxymethylcelluose 0.5% 6 times a day in the right eye. Both blood agar and Sabouraud’s dextrose agar grew blackish colonies with irregular boundaries. On microbiological evaluation of the growth, pigmented hyphae were noted along with the presence of conidiophores and conidia and a diagnosis of Curvularia species was made . The patient received oral ciprofloxacin for one week and fluconazole for three weeks. The patient was followed up closely and at 1 month after buckle removal he had no conjunctival congestion, the superotemporal sclera appeared thinned out , ). Topical medications were stopped. We presume that the inferior retinal detachment was exudative in nature as on subsequent follow-up at 2 months it was seen to have settled and no break was found.