Our patient is a 33-year-old married lady from the Tharu community of western Nepal. She is a known case of SCD [homozygous SS, diagnosed via hemoglobin (Hb) High-Performance Liquid Chromatography, with Hb sickle 60.2%]. She presented to our tertiary level hospital, with the complaint of abdominal pain of 2 days duration over the epigastric region with radiation to the back.
She had history of hospital admissions for abdominal pain in the past. Her previous ultrasonography reports revealed the presence of gallstones for which prophylactic laparoscopic cholecystectomy was contemplated on several occasions but was postponed due to episodes of hemolytic crisis. She was under the medications hydroxyurea: 500 mg twice daily, ursodeoxycholic acid: 300 mg twice daily and folic acid: 5 mg once daily, for 3 months and had history of multiple blood transfusions with no documented allergies. Her brother and father are known cases of SCD.
On examination, she was icteric and there was generalized tenderness and guarding of the abdomen. Her spleen was palpable up to the level of the umbilicus. Other systemic examinations were normal.
Following were the values of laboratory investigation during admission: Hb: 10.6 mg/dl, total leukocyte count: 4300/mm3, differential leukocyte count: neutrophil63, leukocyte30, platelets: 7500/mm3, red blood cells: 2.5 mil/µl, Mean Corpuscular Volume, 99 fl, serum amylase: 1847 U/l, serum lipase: 3373 U/l, serum bilirubin (total/direct): 9.0/2.2, Alkaline Phosphatase: 105 U/l, Alanine Transaminase: 32 U/l, glucose: 131 mg/dl, urea/creatinine: 20/0.5 mg/dl, Na+/K+: 142/3.6 mmol/l, serum Lactate Dehydrogenase: 313, reticulocyte count: 5.19%, Coomb’s test: negative. The reports showed findings of hemolytic, normocytic anemia with thrombocytopenia and features of obstructive jaundice with raised pancreatic enzymes, suggestive of acute pancreatitis, probably due to obstructive cause.
Contrast enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen was done which demonstrated bulky pancreas with peripancreatic fat stranding and ascites , yielding a total modified-Computed Tomography Severity Index-score of 6, along with prominent common bile duct and cholelithiasis ; findings suggestive of acute pancreatitis possibly due to biliary cause.
The differential diagnosis of acute abdomen such as acute appendicitis, acute cholecystitis, and vaso-occlusive crisis (VOC) were considered. A normal leukocyte count and the absence of localizing signs on examination ruled out acute appendicitis and acute cholecystitis. In view of contrast enhanced computed tomography reports a final diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was made. However, superimposed VOC could not be separately ruled out.
Our patient was initially treated conservatively with intravenous fluids, total parenteral nutrition, analgesics, and blood transfusions. Cholecystectomy was planned but since her Hb levels were constantly low despite blood transfusions, she was discharged with the plan of transfusion on outpatient basis after consulting hematologist and anesthesiologist, with the goal of reaching preoperative target Hb level of 10 g/dl or more prior to surgery.
But within a month of initial treatment, she returned to the hospital with similar symptoms. A diagnosis of RAP was made based on her previous history along with the clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings. Conservative management was done to stabilize the patient. But this time, optimization of Hb level was done with simple transfusion in our center itself and laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed without delay under general anesthesia by gastrointestinal surgeon with intraoperative finding of a distended gall bladder and common bile duct with a normal Calot’s triangle. The cut section of the gall bladder revealed multiple black pigment stones , the largest one measuring 3 mm in diameter. The postoperative period was uneventful and our patient was symptom free during follow-up at our center 2 months later.