A 9-year-old male neutered European Shorthair cat was referred for nodular skin lesions on the head, which had been recognised for 2 weeks. The current owner reported that the patient was found as a stray neutered cat 4 weeks prior to presentation and the previous owner remained unknown. Haematological and biochemical abnormalities prior to vaccination and dental cleaning were anaemia of 26% (reference interval [RI] 30.3–52.3%) and hyperglobulinaemia of 55 g/l (RI 28–51 g/l). The cat had negative blood test results for feline leukaemia virus (FeLV; SNAP FeLV [IDEXX]). The animal was alert and responsive during physical examination with a body condition score of 5/9 and vital parameters within RIs. Several hairless spots on the head and face and, additionally, a 4 × 4 cm nodule cranial to the tail base were observed . Owing to the unknown past medical history of the cat, a thoracic and abdominal laterolateral survey radiograph was taken on which no additional abnormalities were evident. A second blood analysis, performed 30 days later, did not reveal further abnormalities, apart from the above-described anaemia and hyperglobulinaemia. Results of FeLV and feline immunodeficiency virus tests were still negative (SNAP FIV/FeLV Combo Test; IDEXX).
Cytopathological findings of a fine-needle aspiration of the skin nodules on the head were inflammatory cell infiltrate with macrophages, lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophils. An eosinophilic granuloma was suspected and the patient was initially treated with 1 mg/kg prednisolone q24h for 2 weeks. The skin nodules reduced remarkably under treatment but remained hairless and recurred immediately to the initial size after discontinuation of the medication. Moreover, additional small lesions with similar morphological appearance were detected 6 weeks after the start of prednisolone treatment at the base of the ears, the lids, the left inguinal area and lateral on the left metatarsus. Owing to this development, biopsies were taken from the base of the left and right ear and sent for histopathological examination.
Histopathological findings were nodular lesions in the dermis extending into the upper subcutaneous tissue. The nodules replaced hair follicles and adnexa and were partially ulcerated. They consisted of numerous epithelioid macrophages, lymphocytes, plasma cells and scarce neutrophils . The described cell infiltrates were organised in round structures, supported by fine fibrous network, forming several granulomas. Neither multinucleated giant cells nor caseous necrosis was observed. By Ziehl–Neelsen staining, numerous acid-fast rod-shaped bacilli were detected within the cytoplasm of several epithelioid macrophages . Based on the histopathological findings, additional biopsies were submitted for mycobacterial culture in sterile saline and processed as previously described.
Growth of mycobacteria was first detected on liquid media tubes (BBL MGIT; Becton and Dickinson) supplemented with PANTA (Polymyxin B, Amphotericin B, Nalidixic acid, Trimethoprim, Azlocillin) antibiotic mixture after 3 weeks of incubation at 37°C. Subcultures on Middlebrook 7H10 showed growth of scotochromogenic colonies after 2 weeks. The sequencing results of 16S rRNA, rpoB and hsp65 genes were interpreted as M nebraskense species, with identity scores of 1431/1431 bp, 722/722 bp and 423/424 bp, respectively, compared with M nebraskense strain ATCC BAA-837. Phenotypic susceptibility testing was performed using a commercial broth microdilution method for slowly growing NTM according to the manufacturer’s instructions (SLOMYCO Sensititre; Thermo Fischer Scientific). SLOMYCO Sensititre plate was inoculated according to the manufacturer’s package insert guidelines and incubated for 14 days at 37°C under aerobic conditions. The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) was read manually and determined as the lowest concentration of the antibiotic showing 100% growth inhibition. As MIC values indicating resistance for testing M nebraskense are not available, interpretative criteria for M kansasii were used for clinical breakpoint interpretation, in accordance with Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines. No phenotypic resistance was detected for clarithromycin ⩽0.06 (>16 μg/ml), rifabutin ⩽0.25 (>2 μg/ml), ethambutol 4 (>4 μg/ml), moxifloxacin ⩽0.12 (>2 μg/ml), rifampin ⩽0.12 (>1 μg/ml), trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole 0.25/4.75 (>2/38 μg/ml), amikacin ⩽1 (>32 μg/ml), linezolid ⩽1 (>16 μg/ml) and ciprofloxacin ⩽0.12 (>2 μg/ml) (see ).
Once the diagnosis of granulomatous dermatitis caused by mycobacteria was confirmed by histopathological findings, the patient was treated with 10 mg/kg doxycycline and 5 mg/kg pradofloxacin PO q24h. In order to suppress the accompanying pruritus, hydrocortisone was added to the protocol. After 3 weeks of treatment, some of the lesions remained unchanged, whereas others had increased in size. Although the cat was still in a clinically good general condition, a moderate pruritus was observed during the course of the described treatment. Succeeding the identification of the involved pathogen and based on the available literature of mycobacterial treatment, therapy was changed to 62.5 mg total dose clarithromycin q12h. The pruritus subsided under the treatment with clarithromycin. The size of the lesions remained unchanged, but they were palpably softer 3 weeks into treatment.
During this period, a decrease in appetite and a stiff gait was noticed by the owner. The cat was uncomfortable while being caressed over the lower back region. During clinical re-examination, lameness of the left forelimb was described; in addition, pain during flexion of the left carpus and an effusion of the carpal joint was palpable. No radiographic abnormality of the bone structure was observed. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication (meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg q24h) for 1 week was added to the therapy regiment and the lameness subsided 1 week later. Owing to persistence of the skin nodules, a step-wise surgical debulking procedure was planned. During the first procedure, the nodular lesions around the tail base were removed completely. The abnormal tissue extended down to the spinous processes of the lumbar vertebrae and towards the left lateral aspect of the anal sphincter. Wide surgical margins were therefore not feasible. The defect was closed with a single pedicle advancement flap after lavage and haemostasis . The lesions on the head could only be surgically removed, in part, owing to the circular arrangement around the right ear . Despite the narrow margins and the remaining microbial granulomas, wound healing was uneventful. No spreading of mycobacteria along the tissue planes was observed.
The second debulking followed 3 weeks later. Three large lesions were removed from the right lateral aspect of the face; one of them involving portions of the facial nerve. The defect was closed with a single pedicle myo-cutaneous advancement flap containing part of the platysma . The right lateral retropharyngeal lymph node was clearly increased in size. Lymphadenectomy was performed and histological examination revealed intracellular acid–fast bacilli. A small nodule on the left upper eyelid was removed with a wedge excision. Based on the bacteriological diagnosis and the performed susceptibly testing, treatment with 75 mg rifampicin (Sandoz) q24h in addition to clarithromycin was started. After complete healing of the skin incisions on the face, the last remaining nodules on the right upper eyelid were removed and the defect was closed with a single pedicle advancement flap. One month after discontinuation of the antimicrobial the cat was mentally alert with a good appetite. By clinical examination, 9 months after initial presentation and 1 month after cessation of the antibacterials, the cat’s behaviour issues and its dermatological lesions were considered resolved. All wounds healed with almost no scar formation and no nodular lesions reappeared 1 year after treatment (, ).