A 29-year-old woman with an unremarkable personal medical history (including two complication-free pregnancies) was admitted to our intensive care department for the treatment of severe lactic acidosis related to myopathy. For the previous 9 months, the woman had experienced intense myalgia and muscle weakness. These signs and symptoms were initially limited to the quadriceps (she was unable to squat or climb stairs) but extended progressively to all four limbs—leading to major functional disability. Out-of-hospital laboratory tests had revealed moderate rhabdomyolysis, with a serum creatine phosphokinase level of 500 IU/L. The initial assessment was negative: there was no evidence of a drug-related etiology, thyroid disorder, viral infection (with negative serological tests for HIV, HBV, and HCV) or bacterial infection (with a negative serological test for Lyme disease).
Due to a major deterioration in the woman's general health status (with an estimated weight loss since symptom onset of 20 kg), aggravation of the motor impairment (preventing her from standing and confining her to a wheelchair), and the recent onset of a swallowing disorder, the patient was referred to our medical center's emergency department by her family physician. The clinical examination revealed symmetric upper and lower limb motor impairment (rated at 2 or 3 out of 5 on the Medical Research Council scale) and clear amyotrophy. Although neither sensory impairment nor involvement of the cranial pairs was noted, some deep tendon reflexes were absent. The laboratory test results highlighted uncompensated metabolic acidosis (pH: 7.28, pCO2: 28 mmHg, HCO3−: 14 mmol/L) due to hyperlactatemia (11 mmol/L). The rhabdomyolysis had worsened, with a serum creatine phosphokinase level of 8,700 IU/L and asymptomatic hypoglycemia (1.1 mmol/L) in the absence of ketosis. No inflammatory syndromes, renal impairments, and or electrolyte balance disorders were apparent. A blood test for elevated beta-hCG was negative. There were no cardiac impairments: the transthoracic ultrasound, electrocardiogram and troponin assay results were unremarkable, as was a whole-body computed tomography scan.
Given this context, the patient was transferred to our intensive care unit. Electromyography revealed myotonic bursts in all four limbs . The absence of myositis-specific autoantibodies ruled out a diagnosis of autoimmune myositis. The patient's parents told us that their younger daughter had died suddenly in the postpartum period at the age of 22, and that she was being monitored for a possible beta oxidation disorder. A complete metabolic assessment was carried out, for a suspected deficiency in glucose-lipid metabolism decompensated by the prolonged fasting induced by a swallowing disorder. A chromatographic analysis of urine organic acids and plasma acylcarnitine suggested the presence of multiple acyl-coA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) and (b)). Moreover, the venous blood ammonia level was normal, and a chromatographic analysis of amino acid profile was normal. A histologic assessment of a muscle biopsy showed clusters of sometimes confluent vacuoles within the muscle fibers; this observation was consistent with lipid overload in striated muscle .
Following a discussion with the medical team at the reference center for hereditary metabolic diseases (Necker Hospital, Paris, France), an appropriate treatment was initiated: the intravenous infusion of 10% glucose solution (3 liters over 24 hours) and supplementation with L-carnitine (6 g per 24 h), L-glycine (2 g every 6 h), and riboflavin (500 mg every 8 h). Initially, lipid consumption was formally contraindicated. The clinical and biochemical parameters improved ; the rapid disappearance of the swallowing disorder enabled the resumption of oral feeding (a low fat diet, with lipids accounting for no more than 5–10% of the recommended total energy intake). After normalization of the electrolyte balance and glycemia, oral treatment was initiated using the above-mentioned doses and the addition of coenzyme Q10 (200 mg three times a day). The patient's meals were enriched with omega 3 fatty acids (walnut oil). On day 14 postadmission to the ICU, the patient was transferred to a general medical ward and then to a rehabilitation center. On day 40, the patient returned home. There were no sequelae. The diagnosis of MADD was later confirmed by the identification of heterozygosity for the two inherited mutations (c.1448C>T (exon 11) and c.1601C>T (exon 12)) in the ETFDH gene coding for electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase (also known as electron transfer flavoprotein-ubiquinone oxidoreductase).