The patient was a 24-year-old woman with PAVMs diagnosed at 1 year of age because of hypoxaemia. She experienced increased exertional fatigue and chronic headaches and had New York Heart Association class II, although her resting sitting peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) remained unchanged at 83% over the past 20 years. She had a history of allergic rhinitis, for which she received antileucotriene agents. She also occasionally used nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for chronic headaches. We reconsidered the treatment indications because of the patient desired to conceive.
Physical examination revealed cyanosis and digital clubbing. Auscultation revealed normal cardiac and pulmonary sounds. Electrocardiography depicted normal sinus rhythm, whereas echocardiography showed normal biventricular function without any structural abnormalities. Chest radiography and computed tomography revealed PAVMs in the left inferior lobe . Left pulmonary angiography identified diffuse and multiple segmental feeding artery branches measuring 2–4 mm in diameter . All segmental arteries in the left inferior lobe were involved. No obvious lesions were observed in the right or left superior lobe. In the supine position, the arterial blood oxygen saturation (SaO2) was 91.8% (reference: 94–99%), and partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) was 54.3 mmHg (reference: 80–100 mmHg). The mean pulmonary arterial pressure was 11 mmHg. The SpO2 increased from 89 to 95% after the occlusion test for the descending branch of the left pulmonary artery. The pulmonary arterial pressure remained unchanged. The haemoglobin and haematocrit levels were 17.7 g/dL (reference: 11.6–14.8 g/dL) and 53.2% (reference: 35.1–44.4%), respectively.
Subsequently, five sessions of percutaneous embolization were performed over 8 months via the femoral vein under local anaesthesia. Heparin 2500 IU was administered intravenously for prophylactic anticoagulation immediately after sheath insertion, followed by an additional dose of 1500 IU hourly. A 4–6-F angiographic catheter with a 0.035-inch-diameter guidewire was advanced into the feeding artery as close to the venous sac as possible. An Amplatzer Vascular Plug 4 (AVP 4; AGA Medical, Plymouth, MN, USA) measuring 130–150% of the vessel diameter size was placed. An Amplatzer Vascular Plug II (AVP II; AGA Medical) was used if the guiding catheter could be inserted into the target site. Subsequently, a microcatheter with a 0.014-inch-diameter guidewire was advanced to the AVP and completely embolized with a hydrogel-coated coil (AZUR Peripheral HydroCoil Embolization System; Terumo Medical Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Device diameters of 4–7 and 6 mm were selected for AVP 4 and AVP II, respectively. A loop diameter of 2–6 mm and coil length of 4–20 cm were used for hydrogel-coated coils. Overall, 12 AVPs and 29 AZURs were used. No intra-procedural adverse events occurred. However, chest pain and C-reactive protein elevation occurred 6 weeks after the first session. One week after the second session, chest and back pain, C-reactive protein elevation, fever, and pleural effusion were observed. Mild chest pain occurred 2 days after the third session. All symptoms resolved with antipyretic medications. After the fifth session, oxygenation improved to an SaO2 of 97.7% and a PaO2 of 79.4 mmHg.
Fifteen months after the fifth session, she delivered her first child. Considering the residual right-to-left shunt, thromboprophylaxis with subcutaneous heparin calcium injection was initiated at 8 weeks of gestation. The exercise test showed SpO2 of <90%; therefore, oxygen therapy was continued. Antibiotic prophylaxis (cefazolin 1000 mg) was administered during delivery. A 3195 g male infant was born at 40 weeks of gestation without complications. Catheterization was planned for evaluation 1 year after the fifth session but was postponed to 1 year after birth due to pregnancy. Preprocedural SaO2 and PaO2 were 96.5% and 86.2 mmHg, respectively, which had not decreased since the fifth session 2 years ago. The mean pulmonary arterial pressure was 10 mmHg. Pulmonary angiography revealed no evidence of reperfusion or recanalization. The remaining small PAVMs were embolized with AZUR. She conceived again and delivered her second child (birth weight 2895 g) at 38 weeks of gestation, without complications. After 2 years, resting sitting SpO2 was sustained at 97%.