A 71-year-old man with a 63-mm infrarenal AAA underwent EVAR by using the Zenith Alpha Abdominal graft (Cook Medical; Bloomington, IN, USA) under general anesthesia.
AAA features covered the instructions for use (IFU) of the device including infrarenal aortic neck length (16 mm), maximum angulation (10°), neck diameter (23 mm), and absence of severe calcifications or thrombus. The diameters of the common iliac arteries were 16 mm on the right side and 14 mm on the left, respectively.
A main body ZIMB-26-84 was deployed via a bilateral femoral access with two iliac extensions (Zenith Flex ZSLE-16-56 ZT left side; ZSLE-20-56 ZT right side). No intraprocedural complication occurred. At completion angiography no endoleak was found after ballooning with Reliant balloon (Medtronic Vascular; Santa Rosa, CA, USA).
Hospital stay was uneventful. Patient was discharged on the 2nd postoperative day.
At 1 month computed tomography (CT) scan showed complete exclusion of the aneurysm without complications .
Follow-up duplex ultrasound (US) at 6, 12, and 18 months detected a significant shrinkage of the aneurysmal sac from 63 to 38 mm without any signs of endoleak. However, at 24 months Duplex US revealed sac enlargement (54 mm; + 16 mm) without any evidence of endoleaks.
CT-scan revealed a complete disconnection of the suprarenal stent from the main body of the endograft. The latter was distally migrated with a concomitant severe kinking of the left iliac extension. No endoleak was detected .
An endovascular relining procedure was planned and performed. The distance between the lowermost renal artery and the bifurcation of the previous bifurcated graft was 91 mm. A Zenith TX2 thoracic endograft (TBE-28-80-PF) was inserted and deployed via a redo surgical access on the right side. A Smart Control Stent 12 × 60 mm (Cordis, Cardinal Health; Dublin, Ireland) was placed into the left iliac extension via a percutaneous left femoral approach.
The postoperative CT-scan showed that the right renal artery was partially covered by the graft . On the 2nd postoperative day a bare metal stent (RX Herculink Elite Renal Stent System 5 × 15 mm; Abbott CardioVascular, Plymouth, MN, USA) was successfully inserted and deployed via a left brachial access. After 6 months, at Duplex US the aneurysm sac was stable and both iliac extension were patent without any signs of stenosis.
The patient gave his consent to the publication of this report.