A 4-year-old castrated male beagle weighing 11 kg underwent routine medical screening. The patient had no history of diseases other than chronic otitis externa and no clinical signs indicative of cardiovascular diseases. On physical examination, no abnormalities were observed (temperature, 38°C; heart rate, 110 beats/min; and systolic blood pressure, 150 mmHg); however, a mild right-sided basal continuous murmur of grades 1–2 was noted. Laboratory examinations revealed mildly elevated alanine aminotransferase levels. Thoracic radiography (HF-525 PLUS, ECORAY, Seoul, Korea; kVP 70, mA 200, exposure time 0.03 s) was performed, which revealed an increased vertebral heart score of 11.7 (reference range, 8.7–10.7) and a sternal contact of 3.5 (reference range, 2.5–3.0) on the right lateral view. Generalized cardiomegaly and a slight bulge at the 1–3 o’clock of the cardiac silhouette were identified in the ventrodorsal view. The diameters of the caudal vena cava and pulmonary vessels were within normal ranges.
Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiographic examination was performed using a 5-MHz 72 phased array transducer (Aplio 300; Canon Medical System, Europe B.V., Zoetermeer, 73 Netherlands), which revealed the following measurements: left ventricular end-diastolic internal diameter corrected for body weight (LVIDDn), 1.74 (upper limit; <1.7) ; left ventricular end-systolic internal diameter corrected for body weight (LVIDSn), 1.14 (reference range, 0.74–1.33) ; end-diastolic volume index (EDVI), 103.11 (upper limit;>100) ; end-systolic volume index (ESVI), 40.87 (lower limit;<30) . These measurements were calculated using the Teichholz method. Additionally, the following were noted: E peak velocity, 91.3 cm/s, 58-117cm/s. ; E/E’, 10.49 (reference range, 7.3–9.5) ; and LA:Ao, 0.97 (upper limit <1.6) . Collectively, these observations suggested mild left ventricular eccentric hypertrophy. No significant mitral, tricuspid, aortic, or pulmonic regurgitations were observed. From the right parasternal short axis pulmonary artery view, a continuous L-to-R turbulent shunt flow distal to the right pulmonary artery (RPA) showing a mosaic pattern was identified on color Doppler, with a peak velocity of 4.18 m/s and a pressure gradient of 69.89 mmHg on continuous wave Doppler (,). However, the orifice of the shunt at the typical location of the PDA or the orientation of the shunt could not be identified on echocardiography.
CT (Alexion, TSX-034A, Toshiba Medical Systems, Tochigi, Japan) was performed to further assess the orientation and anatomical features of the suspected shunting vessel. The CT scan was performed under general anesthesia induced using butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg (Butophan; Myungmoon Pharm Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea) and propofol 6 mg/kg (MCT/LCT 1%, Freefol-MCT; Daewon Pharm Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea) and maintained with 1.5% isoflurane (Isoflurane; Hana Pharm Co., Ltd., Hwaseong, Korea). The CT parameters were as follows: helical scan mode, 100 kVp, 150 mA, 256 × 256 matrix, rotation time of 0.75 s, and slice thickness of 1 mm. Pre- and post-contrast CT images were acquired. For the contrast medium, 900 mg iodine/kg of iohexol in a total volume of 28 mL (Omnipaque, GE Healthcare, United States) was injected intravenously at a rate of 3 mL/s using a power injector. Post-contrast CT scans were performed when the ascending aorta started to show contrast enhancement and 120 s after the first injection.
CT tomography revealed multiple L-to-R shunts . The first shunt (shunt 1) identified was a tortuous vessel originating from the brachiocephalic trunk that ran caudally and anastomosed with the peritracheal network (,). The second shunt (shunt 2) was caudal to the first one, originated from the thoracic descending aorta at the T8 level, and formed tortuous vessels that eventually connected to the periesophageal network (,,). Regarding the third shunt (shunt 3), the vessels arising from the right fifth and sixth dorsal intercostal arteries joined and formed a tortuous shunting vessel that ran cranially and connected to the peritracheal network (–,,). These three shunts were connected to either the peritracheal or periesophageal dense network and eventually anastomosed to a large tortuous vessel connected to the RPA. The measured size of the orifice was 4.1 mm at insertion (,).
After imaging, the shunts were surgically ligated. Midazolam 0.2 mg/kg (Midazolam, Bukwang Pharm Co., Seoul, Korea) and butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg (Butophan, Myungmoon Pharm Co., Seoul, Korea) were administered intravenously. Intravenous cefazolin 25 mg/kg (cefazolin sodium, Korus Pharm Co., Chuncheon, Korea) was administered as premedication, and general anesthesia was induced with intravenous propofol 6 mg/kg (Provive 1%; Myungmoon Pharm Co., Seoul, Korea) and maintained with sevoflurane (Sevofran, Hana Pharm Co., Seoul, Korea). The dog was positioned in left lateral recumbency, and the right thorax was prepared for aseptic surgery. An intercostal thoracotomy was performed at the 5th right intercostal space, and a shunt entering the right pulmonary artery branch was identified . The shunt was bluntly separated and ligated using a surgical clip (Hemoclip, Teleflex, Pennsylvania, USA) and 5-0 polypropylene (PROLENE, Ethicon, New Jersey, USA) (,). Next, the shunts connected to the brachiocephalic trunk and the right 5th-6th dorsal intercostal arteries supplying the periesophageal network were identified, and ligation was performed (–). Sutures were performed using a routine method, and the dog recovered from anesthesia without any complications. For postoperative analgesia, butorphanol–lidocaine–ketamine was administered (butorphanol at a dosage of 0.02 mg/kg/h, lidocaine [lidocaine hydrochloride, Jeil Pharm Co., Daegu, Korea] at a dosage of 1.5 mg/kg/h, and ketamine [ketamine hydrochloride, Yuhan Corp., Seoul, Korea] at a dosage of 0.6 mg/kg/h) via constant rate infusion.
Follow-up echocardiography and CT were performed at 3 weeks and 12 weeks postoperatively. On postoperative echocardiography at 3 weeks and 12 weeks after surgical ligation, no residual shunting of the right pulmonary artery was observed (,). Additionally, echocardiographic parameters showed a diminution of the left ventricular volume overload (preoperative LVIDDn 1.74 to postoperative LVIDDn 1.46; preoperative EDVI 103.11 to postoperative EDVI 67.41). Moreover, decreases in E peak velocity from 91.3 cm/s to 44.70 cm/s, and E/E’ from 10.49 to 6.67 cm/s were observed, which indicated a decrease in left atrial pressure. CT at 3 weeks postoperatively showed no residual enhancement caudal to the ligation site of shunt 1 originating from the brachiocephalic trunk or shunt 2 originating from the descending aorta. Shunt 3 originating from the fifth and sixth right dorsal intercostal arteries, showed no cranial or caudal residual flow to the clip at the two ligation sites; however, mild residual enhancement of the vessel connected to the peritracheal network was observed. The shunting vessel anastomosed from the three shunts and the peritracheal–periesophageal network were observed; however, no connection between the aorta and the RPA was identified . No remarkable changes or aneurysms were observed on the follow-up CT at 12 weeks postoperatively.