A 46-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital due to abdominal distension in January 2009. It was the second time that he was as an inpatient of our hospital. The patient had a history of hepatitis B for approximately ten years. Moreover, his mother, two older brothers, and older sister had histories of hepatitis B. Among them, one older brother died from HCC three years ago. He began to notice his weight loss since June 2006, and performed a health examination in local hospital in August 2006. Laboratory test results included the following: white blood cell count, 4800/μl; hemoglobin, 10.3 g/dl; platelets, 84 × 103/μl; aspartate aminotransferase, 42 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 30 U/L . Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B e antigen, and hepatitis B core antibody were positive. The level of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was elevated to 3350 ng/ml (normal level < 20 ng/ml), whereas serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) levels were within normal limits. Abdominal ultrasound examination revealed a solitary mass, which was determined to be HCC by liver needle biopsy. Sequentially, the patient underwent partial resection of the left anterior segment of the liver (about 2 cm in diameter) in local hospital in September 2006. After leaving the hospital, the patient received thymic peptide injections twice a week, but the dosage was not provided. About half a year after the initial operation, abdominal ultrasound examination revealed a mass in the right lobe of the liver, which was determined to be recurrent HCC . Thus, regular (one time/three months) radiofrequency ablation therapy (60W, 2 min/time; the total 3 times) and transarterial interventions (embolization or chemoembolization) were performed until September 2008. During therapy, the serum level of AFP was elevated (21.51-4689 ng/ml) (the details could be seen in table ). However, abdominal ultrasound examination also revealed multiple solid occupation in the liver . Thus, the patient underwent partial resection of the right anterior segment for HCC recurrence in our hospital on September 20, 2008. After operation, the patient was not received any antitumoral therapy due to his weakness. On December 23, 2008, he went to see a doctor for abdominal distension in local hospital. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the pelvic cavity revealed a mass (5.0 cm in diameter) with homogeneous enhancement in the seminal vesicle. Transrectal needle biopsy revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with histological characteristic similar to that of the original HCC. Considering the patient's history, the doctors diagnosed the mass in the seminal vesicle as a metastatic focus. Unfortunately, the CT image and biopsy were not obtained from the other hospital. In order to receive further treatment, he came to our hospital. During the operation, only a mass with the size of 4.8 cm in diameter was found in left seminal vesicle, but involved right seminal vesicle. Thus, bilateral seminal vesicle and prostate were resected. Macroscopically, the structure of the seminal vesicle was unclear and replaced by tumor tissues with hemorrhage. Histologically, the removed tumor was found to be compatible with the original HCC. Tumor cells arranged in trabecular, solid, or tubular patterns. Nuclei and nucleoli were prominent, and the cytoplasm was scanty and basophilic . Moreover, immunohistochemical examination demonstrated that the tumor cells were positive for glypican-3 (GPC3) , AFP , hepatocyte paraffin-1 (Hep Par 1), cytokeratin (CK)18, and hepatocyte antigen, but negative for CK7, CK20, placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), prostate-specific antigen (PSA), cancer antigen 125 (CA125), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cluster of differentiation (CD) 117, and CEA, which confirmed that the seminal vesicle tumor was metastatic HCC. In May 2009, a abdominal CT reviewing revealed multiple metastatic foci in the abdominal cavity in local hospital. Thus, the patient came to our hospital again in order to receive further therapy by the iatrotechnique of microwave. Two solid and bad mobility masses, with the size of 6 cm, were touched in the lower abdomen by physical examination. Laboratory test results included the following: white blood cell count, 4890/μl; red blood cell count, 4490 × 103/μl; hemoglobin, 13.3 g/dl; platelets, 174 × 103/μl; aspartate aminotransferase, 25 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 19 U/L. The level of serum AFP was elevated to 4689 ng/ml . Abdominal ultrasound examination revealed that there was a dense echo zone in right anterior lobe and right posterior lobe of the liver, respectively. Moreover, a low echo area with clear circumscription was found at the ahead of head of pancreas. Thus, all these foci were treated by microwaves. However, CT imaging revealed multiple metastatic foci in the abdominal and pelvic cavities in September 2009 . Of course, the Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.