A 46-year-old Japanese man with an advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor presented with right upper abdominal pain and later also experienced fever and chills. A pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor was treated with pancreaticoduodenectomy approximately 10 years earlier, and multiple liver metastases were identified intraoperatively. The patient was treated postoperatively with a chemotherapy regimen of everolimus for 1 year. Subsequently, lanreotide was administered for 3 months as part of a clinical trial. However, his liver metastases worsened upon switching to lanreotide, necessitating a return to everolimus treatment, with which he has been treated for approximately 9 years. He had a history of multiple episodes of cholangitis and stenosis of the choledochojejunostomy, for which a plastic stent was placed.
Four days before admission, the patient developed right upper abdominal pain, followed by a fever of 38.4 °C and chills 2 days later. Upon examination, he appeared in good condition, with a temperature of 36.7 °C, a regular heart rate of 104 bpm, a blood pressure of 139/82 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 16 bpm, and an oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. His abdomen was flat and soft, with mild tenderness in the right upper quadrant. The other physical examination results were unremarkable. Laboratory investigation results were as follows: white blood cell count 8,040/mL (neutrophil count: 5,740/mL), hemoglobin 14.2 g/dL, C-reactive protein 11.28 mg/dL (normal < 0.30 mg/dL), gamma-glutamyltransferase 136 U/L (normal < 30 U/L), alkaline phosphatase 283 U/L (normal 115–359 U/L), total bilirubin 0.5 mg/dL (normal 0.3–1.2 mg/dL), and direct bilirubin 0.2 mg/dL (normal 0.0–0.2 mg/dL).
Two sets of blood culture samples were obtained from peripheral blood and collected in BacT/ALERT FA PLUS culture bottles using the BacT/ALERT 3D system (BioMérieux Japan Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Empirical antimicrobial therapy with intravenous cefmetazole (CMZ) (3 g/day) was instituted for cholangitis. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography performed on the day of admission (day 0) revealed stenosis in the anterior segment branch, followed by anastomotic dilation. The stent was removed because of recurring episodes of stent dysfunction, suspected to be caused by the stent placement itself. No bile cultures were collected during this procedure.
Gram-negative rods were identified on examination of the culture of the blood samples from both sets of aerobic bottles collected upon admission at 18 h and 59 min and 19 h and 29 min, respectively . CMZ was changed to intravenous cefepime (CFPM) at a dose of 3 g/day owing to the possibility of non-fermenting glucose bacteria (day 3). Positive bottles were subcultured on sheep blood agar plates (Nissui Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and MacConkey II agar plates (Becton Dickinson Co., Ltd., Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). After 24 h of aerobic incubation at 35 °C, non-hemolytic white colonies of gram-negative bacilli were observed on the sheep blood agar plates and lactose-negative colonies of gram-negative bacilli on MacConkey II agar plates .
Attempts to identify bacteria using VITEK2 and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) with VITEK MS ver. 4.7.1 (bioMérieux Japan Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) were unsuccessful. Identification was achieved using MALDI-TOF MS with a MALDI Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics Co., Ltd., Billerica, MA, USA) and 16 S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing. The isolated strain was evaluated using MALDI Biotyper version 12, demonstrating P. nitroreducens with a 2.11 score value. The isolated colony from the blood culture was used to perform a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using universal primers 27 F and 1492R. The primer sequences were 27 F 5′-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3′ and 1492R 5′-CGGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3′. The PCR products were run on a gel, and the eluted DNA was further purified and sequenced. After performing a Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) for the 16 S rRNA sequence of the isolated strain, 99.66% homology (1451/1456 bp) with the standard P. nitroreducens strain DSM 14,399 (T) (GenBank Accession No.: AM088474) was identified. Owing to the 99.52% homology (1450/1457 bp) with the standard strain, P. nicosulfuronedens LAM1902 (T) (GenBank Accession No.: MN007089), a urease test was performed to distinguish P. nitroreducens from the standard strain . Owing to the positive result of the urease test, the organism identified in the blood culture was confirmed to be P. nitroreducens.
The patient was diagnosed as having cholangitis and bacteremia caused by P. nitroreducens. Antimicrobial susceptibility tests were performed according to the methodology recommended by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute document M100-Ed 33 (2023) for other non-Enterobacteriaceae isolates as there are no interpretive criteria for this strain. The P. nitroreducens isolates from blood cultures were susceptible to CFPM .
A thorough and careful interview of the patient revealed that he was deskbound and had no exposure to paddy drainage, oil field brine, or soil. On day 4, owing to persistent fever, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed early nonhomogeneous liver enhancement, consistent with cholangitis . Subsequently, his fever subsided. On day 6, he was switched to oral ciprofloxacin 400 mg/day and was discharged from our hospital. The duration of antimicrobial therapy was 16 days. At the outpatient follow-up on day 28, the patient was in good general condition, had no fever, and was confirmed to be cured of cholangitis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and the accompanying images.