This patient was a 55-year-old Chinese man who had a history of chronic hepatitis B and prediabetes. He had no family history of hypertension nor diabetes. He worked in a supermarket and had to carry heavy loads sometimes. He had been a smoker for over 40 years and seldom consumed alcohol. No medication was received previously. He suffered from a traffic accident with multiple ribs fracture and scapula fracture in September 2021. The initial blood pressure was 108/64 mmHg, and body temperature was 36 °C, while heart rate was 82 beats per minute. The patient was alert upon admission, with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of E4M6V5. Physical examination showed right shoulder and chest wound, with right arm and chest tenderness. Right shoulder range of motion was limited, while the sensation of right arm was intact. Sensation over other extremities was normal. There was no visual field defect, with normal pupil size, light reflex, eye movement, muscle strength, and muscle tone. He had normal gait and the deep tendon reflex was intact. Pituitary macroadenoma was incidentally noted on brain computed tomography (CT) . Sella magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 1.8 cm × 1.6 cm × 1.6 cm heterogeneously enhancing lesions in the right pituitary gland, resulting in a left shift of the pituitary stalk. Invasion of the medial portion of the right cavernous sinus was likely . No visual impairment was noted after the examination. The endocrine profile was presented in Table . Prolactin level was not diluted during the treatment course. Since elevated IGF-1 was noted, OGTT was performed, and GH was suppressed (0.45 µg/L). He mentioned that feet enlargement had been noted in the past few years. However, no facial difference was noted when compared with a previous photo. There was no frontal bossing, macroglossia, nor prognathism. Hence, elevated IGF-1 was initially suspected related to bone healing. Follow-up IGF-1 level decreased gradually but was still above the upper limit of normal (ULN) . One year later, he complained of dizziness, and laboratory test showed secondary hypocortisolism and elevated IGF-1 . The size of the pituitary macroadenoma was stationary. Repeat OGTT test showed a GH value of 1.44 µg/L . Stress dose of hydrocortisone 100 mg every 8 hours was given intravenously and an endoscopic endonasal approach to remove pituitary macroadenoma was performed smoothly . The tumor was soft, and extra-capsular dissection was used to remove the tumor completely. The normal pituitary gland was identified during the operation and kept intact without injury. The pathology report demonstrated focal positive levels of GH and prolactin . Acromegaly was diagnosed. Hydrocortisone 100 mg every 8 hours was given for 3 days, and then tapered to 100 mg every 12 hours for 2 days. Hydrocortisone was then shifted to cortisone 25 mg twice per day. IGF-1 level normalized 3 weeks after the operation. He visited our clinic every 3 months and there was no dizziness nor headache. Cortisone dosage was tapered down gradually and then discontinued since there was no symptom or sign of adrenal insufficiency and the cortisol level was normal. The IGF-1 level was 186 ng/mL and the GH level was < 0.03 µg/L 6 months after the operation. No recurrence of acromegaly was noted.