A 34-year-old Asian woman was admitted to our emergency department with complaints of progressively increasing abdominal pain. She had been unable to pass stool or flatus for two days. Our patient also had a history of chronic constipation that was attributed to irritable bowel syndrome, and had been treated with laxatives and prokinetics without lasting success. She was also reported to have pseudodextrocardia due to elevation of her left hemidiaphragm by dilated loops of bowel. Her medical history and family history were non-contributory.
A physical examination was significant for a distended abdomen with sluggish gut sounds. A digital rectal examination was normal. Initial laboratory test results were also within normal limits. Abdominal radiography demonstrated a massively distended sigmoid colon and rectum with dissipated faeces, giving a ground-glass appearance. There was no evidence of pneumoperitoneum. A computerized tomography (CT) scan demonstrated gross dilatation of the sigmoid colon (maximal diameter 14.3 cm) with swirling of mesenteric vessels in the left iliac fossa suggestive of sigmoid volvulus .
During an emergency laparotomy procedure, we observed megacolon with concurrent sigmoid volvulus with a twist at the mid-descending colon level. Figure shows the large sigmoid volvulus peri-operatively. The bowel was found to be viable and without contamination. After resection of the sigmoid colon, a side-to-side colorectal anastomosis was performed followed by an ileostomy 30 to 40 cm from the ileocolic junction. The sigmoidectomy sample was sent for histopathology analysis.
A post-operative CT scan showed no evidence of leakage and our patient remained well. The histopathology examination of sigmoid colon showed occasional ganglion cells and hypertrophied nerve bundles in the muscle layers, suggesting hypoganglionosis. Our patient underwent colonoscopy with biopsy to determine the extent of hypoganglionosis. The colonoscopy showed a dilated bowel with non-obstructing bezoars in the rectum and ascending colon and an anastomotic stricture 25 cm from the anal verge. Full-thickness biopsies were taken from the descending, transverse and ascending colon. The biopsy specimens showed hypoganglionosis in all parts of colon .
Our patient underwent total colectomy with an ileorectal anastomosis followed by reversal of the ileostomy. Figure shows her resected colon with two large bezoars. Our patient has been followed-up for over a year and has reported a dramatic improvement in her bowel function and quality of life.