A 65-year-old man presented with a 14-d history of numbness and pain in the left lower limb, which became aggravated after physical activity.
The patient had a 2-wk history of numbness and pain in his left lower limb when carrying heavy loads, which became aggravated during walking and showed intermittent claudication. The numbness and pain were mainly located on the medial aspect of the thigh and extended to the left knee. The patient could not sleep supinely due to the pain. He had previously visited a local hospital and received symptomatic treatment with painkillers for 2 wk. The pain, however, was still severe, and the patient’s quality of life was severely affected. For further diagnosis and treatment, this patient came to our hospital. The initial diagnosis was "left lower extremity pain of unknown origin with dyskinesia". The patient had a good general condition since onset.
The patient could not sleep supinely due to the pain. He had previously visited a local hospital and received symptomatic treatment with painkillers for 2 wk. The pain, however, was still severe, and the patient’s quality of life was severely affected.
The patient had no family history of genetic disease.
The physical examination revealed numbness and pain in his left groin and inner thigh, as well as tenderness on the medial side of the left knee joint. The visual analog scale (VAS) pain score was 7 (severe pain). The patient walked with an abnormal pattern and posture: He bent his back and put his left hand on his left thigh. The passive knee flexion test result was positive. This patient had a normal muscle tone, and the level of muscle strength was grade V in the right lower limb and IV in the left lower limb. The knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were normal, and the Babinski sign was negative on both sides.
No obvious abnormalities were found in laboratory examinations.
The plain X-ray scans of the two knees and right hip showed no obvious abnormalities except mild hyperosteogeny. The plain and dynamic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging scans showed slight disc bulging at the L4-L5 level . The pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan plus 3D reconstruction revealed bilateral sacroiliac joint osteophyte formation , and the left osteophyte was larger (arrow). The electromyography and nerve conduction velocity studies showed partial peripheral nerve damage in both lower extremities .
A CT-guided diagnostic obturator nerve local block was performed at the site of the left sacroiliac joint osteophyte[,] . Immediately after surgery, the patient felt that the pain had significantly reduced, and the passive knee flexion test result became negative. In addition, intermittent claudication disappeared. However, the pain recurred the next day after the local block and could not be relieved after conservative therapy for a week.