The patient was a 27-year-old female with the right 3rd metacarpal shaft fracture caused by falling down while riding a bicycle. On plain radiography, oblique fracture of the metacarpal shaft with shortening and mild rotatory deformity was noted ( and ). The patient was a professional ballet dancer and requested treatment enabling an early return to exercise and non-noticeable wound.
The locked wires fixator used, JuNction®, was comprised mini fixator pins (ARATA Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), which are wire, and a box connecting the pins, “JuNction” (ARATA Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). The concept of this medical device is the same as that of Meta-HUS® reported by Miyamoto et al. in 2015 , and it became available after approval by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare in October 2017 in Japan.
Surgery was performed under brachial plexus block 6 days after injury. A 1.2-mm mini fixator pin was percutaneously inserted antegradely from the base of the metacarpal bone as an intramedullary pinning and another 1.2-mm mini fixator pin was retrogradely inserted from a site proximal to the Metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint capsule of the metacarpal bone neck as intramedullary pinning ( and ). These pins were inserted through bone holes of cortex made of the same size pins. In addition, the inserted two mini fixator pins were connected using “JuNction” while retaining the manually reduced position to externally reduce and fix the fracture region ( and ). In this technique, the skin incision was not necessary because the pins were inserted percutaneously. The selection of wire diameter was dependent on the diameter of the medullary cavity of the metacarpal bone since two pins should be placed intramedullary. The c-arm is essential because intramedullary pinning was done by fluoroscopy. The operation time in this case was 30 min.
Post-operative immobilization was not necessary and the range of motion training was initiated with JuNction® attachment on the day following surgery. The JuNction and mini fixator pins were removed 6 weeks after surgery. On the final follow-up (12 months after surgery), bone fusion had been acquired without limitation of the range of motion of the finger joints including the MP joint, the patient had returned to a daily life and ballet dancing with VAS of 0/10 and Q-DASH of 2.27/100 without a problem (-).