A 77-year-old female patient experienced chronic cough and progressing dyspnea two months before the admission. Initial chest computed tomography (CT) showed no specific findings of infectious pneumonia, or interstitial pneumonia . Flowingly, transthoracic echocardiography exhibited right ventricular enlargement and significant PH (TRPG of 80 mmg). However, computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA) showed no specific findings of pulmonary embolism, instead of increased diffusive nodules and thickening interlobular septal . Accordingly, the blood coagulation tests showed a slightly hypercoagulative state (D-dimer of 19.38 μg/mL, and fibrin degradation products of 42.20 μg/mL). NT-proBNP level was also elevated (5748 pg/mL, normal 0–125 pg/mL). Additionally, no evidence of autoimmune disease was found.
The anti-PH therapy (macitentan, 10 mg/day) and Methylprednisolone (40 mg/day) started immediately, but the patient’s respiratory condition kept getting worse. It was suggested that PH might be secondary to other diseases. Considering it, the patient was performed with PET-CT. PET showed increased FDG uptake in the abdominal cavity near left pararenal, and the maximum SUV was 4.26. CT showed soft tissue mass in the corresponding location, and the maximum cross-sectional area was about 28 × 18 mm . And no abnormal FDG uptake was found in other sites.
Then, the patient was transferred to RICU for further pulmonary assessment and high-flow nasal oxygen (HFNO) therapy. In the next few days, CT-guided needle aspiration of abdominal mass and gastroscope were performed, which both suggested adenocarcinoma derived from gastric tissue composing of signet-ring cell carcinoma . Meanwhile, VEGF expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Most signet ring cell carcinoma cells were negative for VEGF, while some adenocarcinoma cells were positive .
In context of pathological diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma, we clinically diagnosed PTTM based on the following clinical findings, (1) acute progression of respiratory failure with severe PH, (2) no specific CT findings of pulmonary embolism, (3) multiple subsegmental peripheral perfusion defect, (4) activation of coagulation cascade and formation of fibrin clots. Then, Anlotinib (8 mg once daily) was started.
After the treatments, her respiratory condition was dramatically improved (Oxygenation index increased obviously) and the NYHA classification improved from IV to II. Serial TTE examination showed the disappearance of D-shaped left ventricle . Also, chest CT performed 2 weeks after oral anlotinib showed significant remission of diffusive pulmonary nodules . As shown in Fig. , clinical indicators of the patient during anlotinib therapy were serially present. In detailed, TRPG level was gradually reduced from 64 to 35 mmHg. D-dimmer was decreased from 20 to 0.81 μg/mL, and NT-proBNP from 9063 to 200.8 pg/mL.
We increased the dose of anlotinib to 12 mg/day after initial 1 week and continued macitentan (10 mg/day) and rivaroxaban (20 mg/day). She also received the combination of capecitabine and albumin-bound paclitaxel therapy.