A 30-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital in 1994 for hematuria. A papillomatous bladder tumor was diagnosed and removed during a transurethral resection. Histological examination showed a papillomatous transitional epithelium without cellular atypia. There was no evidence of infiltrative growth in the subepithelial connective tissue. This case was reviewed and graded according to the World Health Organization (OMS)/International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) Consensus Classification of Urothelial Neoplasms of the Urinary Bladder as a low grade papillary urothelial carcinoma. During the following (12 months (1995), 48 months (1999), 72 months (2001), 108 months (2004), and in 2006) a recurrent bladder tumor was resected. Histologically, the tumor showed the similar pattern. An infiltrative growth pattern was not seen on any occasion, and increasing cellular atypia with time did not occur.
On December 2007, a right ovarian tumor and a nodule of the left ovary were discovered and surgically removed. At the same time, some small papillomas of the urinary bladder were endoscopically removed. Macroscopically, the right ovary was changed into a monolocular cyst with a diameter of 30 cm, containing a bright yellow serous fluid. The outside of the cyst was smooth but the inside was partly covered with several papillomatous vegetations . Microscopic examination showed a cyst with endoluminal papillae covered by transitional epithelium, practically indistinguishable from the urinary bladder tumors , without stroma infiltration. These findings were similar to the proliferating Brenner tumor of ovary. The nodule of the left ovary showed close histological similarity with the previously described ovarian mass.
The uterus was normal. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that the ovarian Brenner tumor and the multiple recurrent urothelial carcinoma of bladder stained diffusely positive for cytokeratin 7, but both of these tumors were negative for cytokeratin 20 . The patient's post-operative course has been free of recurrence of the bladder tumor for 7 months.