A 42-year-old man presented with a 4-month history of hoarse voice and a 12-month history of intermittent high dysphagia and odynophagia. His symptoms started immediately after he accidentally swallowed an acrylic dental plate whilst eating. He presented to the emergency department of his local hospital: plain x-rays were performed and reported as normal. He was reassured and discharged. Over the next 6 months, his symptoms of high dysphagia and odynophagia persisted. His general practitioner referred him to the local ENT department. Flexible laryngoscopy was normal on two occasions. A barium swallow was also reported as normal. Two months later, after swallowing a piece of meat, he had an episode of complete dysphagia followed by severe odynophagia and a hoarse voice. Repeat flexible laryngoscopy demonstrated left recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy and he was referred for urgent computed tomography of the neck and chest. This showed thickening in the mid-oesophagus and a possible intraluminal foreign body . At oesophagoscopy, the dental plate was found to be impacted in the oesophagus at the level of the aortic arch (25 cm from the incisor teeth; Figure ) and could not be safely removed. He was referred to a specialist oesophagogastric unit for surgical intervention. Due to its location in the thoracic oesophagus, it was elected to approach the foreign body via a right posterolateral thoracotomy through the fourth intercostal space. At operation, the mid-oesophagus appeared thickened, and there was marked peri-oesophageal inflammation and fibrosis. There was no evidence of perforation or fistula within the right pleural cavity. After dividing the azygos vein, the dental plate was removed via a longitudinal oesophagotomy , which was closed in two layers with an absorbable 2/0 suture. He made an uneventful postoperative recovery. A postoperative water-soluble contrast study was normal, and he was discharged on day 8. At follow up, his swallowing had returned to normal, but he had a persistent hoarse voice due to recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy, for which he has been referred for injection laryngoplasty.