This newborn male, weighing 3100 g, was delivered at 38th week of gestation from a 33-year-old mother through normal vaginal delivery .The score of Apgar was 6 in 5 minutes. The patient was hypotone and had no dysmorphic features. There were acrocyanosis, subcostal, and intercostal retractions, and the acceleratory muscles were used for breathing that showed respiratory distress. Therefore, the infant was ventilated with ambo bag (O2 sat was about 75% - 80%) admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and finally connected to a ventilator at Baqiyatallah hospital in Tehran, Iran.
An early chest x-ray (CXR) showed bilateral (right more than left) pleural effusion with left-sided heart shift . Ultrasound revealed normal spleen, liver, and no ascites. Kidney, urinary tract, and bladder also were reported normal in ultrasound but the report confirmed bilateral pleural effusion (right prominent). Insertion of intercostal tubes (ICD) was performed and about 60 cc of pleural fluid was drained (First its color was light red and then gradually changed to white). Biochemistry analysis of pleural fluid showed following characteristics: glucose: 1.9425 mmol/l, protein: 11g/l, cholesterol: 1.295 mmol/l and triglycerides: 3.39 mmol/l. Counts of RBC and WBC were 10,000 and 2500 per Cu/mm.
After this, CC was diagnosed and TPN was initiated. After two weeks of begging TPN, accumulation of plural fluid was approximately stopped; therefore, we started feeding with a medium chain triglyceride (MCT). But plural effusion was seen once again and we had to restart TPN. Here we decided to start octreotide subcutaneously (1 μg/kg/day). With initiation of octreotide, bilateral pleural effusion was decreased, and respiratory status improved. Thus, after one week we started feeding again with MCT. No adverse effects of octreotide were seen. Ultrasound was performed daily and showed a decrease of pleural effusion in the right side. Moreover, there was no evidence of pleural fluid in the left side . After 20 days of using octreotide, the CXR and ultrasound did not show any pleural effusion accumulation in the both sides, and the patient was discharged. Follow-up physical examination and ultrasound done during 3 months showed no pleural effusion.