A 33-year-old male patient who was otherwise healthy and not on any medications presented to a community hospital with sudden and severe headache accompanied by hypotension, nausea, vomiting, bitemporal hemianopsia, and diplopia. Computed tomography scan of the brain revealed a hyperattenuating 2.0 × 2.8 × 1.5-cm mass at the sella turcica with extension into the right cavernous sinus and encasement of the right internal carotid arteries (
A). He was transferred to a tertiary care center for neurosurgical management with endocrinology consultation postoperatively.
In retrospect, he reported a 3-year history of ongoing symptoms of hypercortisolism, including increased central obesity, dorsal and supraclavicular fat pads, facial plethora, abdominal purple striae, easy bruising, fatigue, decreased libido, and erectile dysfunction. Notably, at the time of presentation, he did not have a history of diabetes, hypertension, osteoporosis, fragility fractures, or proximal muscle weakness. He fathered 2 children previously. His physical examination was significant for Cushingoid facies, facial plethora, dorsal and supraclavicular fat pads, and central obesity with significant axillary and abdominal wide purple striae . Neurologic examination revealed bitemporal hemianopsia, right third cranial nerve palsy with ptosis, and impaired extraocular movement. The fourth and sixth cranial nerves were intact as was the rest of his neurologic examination. These findings were corroborated by ophthalmology.
Initial laboratory data at the time of presentation to the hospital included an elevated plasma cortisol level (64.08 ug/dL; reference range [RR], 2.36-17.05), normal levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) (0.89 mIU/L; RR, 0.36-3.74) and free thyroxine (0.91 ng/dL; RR, 0.76-1.46), evidence of central hypogonadism with a low total testosterone level (28.8 ng/dL; RR, 219.2-905.6), inappropriately normal levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) (1 mIU/mL; RR, 1-12) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (3 mIU/mL; RR, 1-12), low prolactin level (<1 ng/mL; RR, 3-20), and normal insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) level (179 ng/mL; RR, 82-242). Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was not drawn at the time of presentation.
A pituitary gland dedicated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to further characterize the mass, which redemonstrated a 1.9 × 3.2 × 2.4-cm heterogeneous mass at the sella turcica extending superiorly and flattening the optic chiasm, remodeling the floor of the sella, and bulging into the sphenoid sinus and extending laterally into the cavernous sinus with encasement of the right internal carotid artery. As per the radiologist’s diagnostic impression, this appearance was most in keeping with a pituitary macroadenoma with apoplexy (
B and C).
The patient underwent urgent transsphenoidal surgery (TSS) and decompression with no acute complications. Pathologic examination of the pituitary adenoma showed features characteristic of a sparsely granulated corticotroph pituitary neuroendocrine tumor (adenoma), with regional hemorrhage and tumor necrosis (apoplexy). The viable tumor exhibited a solid growth pattern (
A), t-box transcription factor nuclear immunolabeling (
B), diffuse cytoplasmic CAM5.2 (low-molecular-weight cytokeratin) immunolabeling (
C), and regional weak to moderate intense granular cytoplasmic ACTH immunostaining (
D). The tumor was immunonegative for pituitary-specific positive transcription factor 1 and steroidogenic factor 1 transcription factors, growth hormone, prolactin, TSH, FSH, LH, estrogen receptor-α, and α-subunit. Crooke hyalinization was not identified in an adjacent compressed fragment of nonadenomatous anterior pituitary tissue. Ki-67 immunolabeling showed a 1.5% proliferative index (11 of 726 nuclei).
Postoperatively, he developed transient central diabetes insipidus requiring desmopressin but resolved on discharge. His postoperative cortisol was undetectable, and the following were noted: ACTH level, 36 pg/mL (RR, 0-81); TSH level, 0.07 mIU/mL (RR, 0.36-3.74); free thyroxine level, 1 ng/dL (RR, 0.8-1.5); LH level, <1 mIU/mL (RR, 1-12); FSH level, 1 mIU/mL (RR, 1-12); and testosterone level, 28.8 ng/dL (RR, 219.2-905.6) ( and ). One month later, he reported 15 lbs of weight loss and a 5-inch decrease in waist circumference. He also noted a reduction in the dorsal and supraclavicular fat pads, facial plethora, and Cushingoid facies as well as fading of the abdominal stretch marks. His visual field defects and right third cranial nerve palsy resolved on follow-up with ophthalmology postoperatively. Repeat MRI 6 months postoperatively showed minor residual soft tissue along the floor of the sella. He is being followed by neurosurgery, ophthalmology, and endocrinology for monitoring of disease recurrence, visual defects, and management of hypopituitarism.