An 81-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes and hypertension was on glimepiride 2 mg/day (twice a day, after breakfast and dinner), voglibose 0.6 mg/day (three times a day just before meals), telmisartan 40 mg/day (once a day after breakfast), and amlodipine 5 mg/day (once a day after breakfast). The four drugs were taken with good compliance for more than 6 months. Due to exertional dyspnea, she was admitted to our hospital emergency room. Her HbA1c level at admission was well-controlled at 6.1%. Her condition was diagnosed with aortic stenosis, and an aortic valve replacement was performed on an elective basis (day 0). Postoperatively, her respiratory status was good, and her circulatory dynamics were stable without the use of catecholamines. Meals were started on the evening of the first postoperative day. On the same day, ultra-rapid-acting insulin therapy was started using the sliding scale method, based on the pre-prandial blood glucose level. Glimepiride and voglibose were resumed on the second postoperative day, and warfarin was included to prevent thromboembolism. Warfarin was dose-adjusted using the prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR). Since the PT-INR was low (1.24) on postoperative day 9, 300 mg/day of bucolome was started to enhance the effect of warfarin. The medications used post-surgery are shown in Fig. , and the changes in laboratory values are shown in Table .
The PT-INR began to increase after bucolome administration was initiated, and a decrease in blood glucose level was observed from day 2 of bucolome administration. On day 6 of bucolome administration, the patient experienced hypoglycemia in the range of 56–57 mg/dL before lunch and dinner. We suggested the possibility of drug-induced hypoglycemia associated with the administration of bucolome, and asked the physician to reduce the dose of antidiabetic drugs. Voglibose was discontinued the next day and increased blood glucose levels were observed before lunch, dinner, and bedtime. Contrastingly, the blood glucose levels before breakfast remained unchanged at 70–90 mg/dL. The trends in blood glucose levels are shown in Fig. . Thereafter, the patient was transferred to another hospital because hypoglycemia below 70 mg/dL was not observed and her general condition was stable (day 19). Information regarding hypoglycemia and PT-INR fluctuation during the initial hospitalization was provided to the transfer hospital by documenting it in a medication notebook. A special diet for patients with diabetes (1600 kcal/day) was provided during hospitalization and the food intake was consistent throughout. Apart from meals, maintenance fluid (20 mL/h, 3.4 kcal/h) was administered through peripheral vessels from postoperative day 1 to postoperative day 15. No significant changes in liver and kidney function or albumin levels were observed. Furthermore, the pharmacist confirmed that there was no drug overdose or intake of supplements.