A 76-year-old man was referred to our urology department with repeated symptoms of dysuria, frequent urination, urgency, and painful micturition for one month. His past medical history showed no hypertension, diabetes, or any history of surgery.
Laboratory data on admission showed that the total prostate specific antigen level was 7.76 ng/ml, free prostate specific antigen level was 0.618 ng/ml, and white blood cell count was 10,750/mm3; however, urinalysis and blood chemistry were all within normal range. Digital rectal examination revealed an enlarged prostate, a prominent median sulcus, a smooth rubbery consistency with no palpable nodule, and elastic enlarged prostate.
Ultrasound scan showed an enlarged prostate (38 mm in anteroposterior diameter, 43 mm in longitudinal diameter, and 51 mm in transverse diameter), prostatic hyperplasia, and a gland of 43 g.
Patient’s pelvis was imaged in 3.0-T MRI (Discovery 750, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA) using a surface phased array coil. Conventional MRI sequences included both axial fast spin-echo T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and DWI. T2WI of the entire prostate and seminal vesicles was performed in axial, coronal, and sagittal planes. Conventional DWI with b-values of 0 and 1000 s/mm2 was also performed in the axial plane. The ultra-high b-value DWI was performed with b-values of 3000 s/mm2 in the axial plane. Both axial T2WI and DWI were obtained at the same slice location. Dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) MRI was also performed. Fifteen ml of Gadobenate dimeglumine (MultiHance; Bracco Sine, Shanghai, China) was injected intravenously at a rate of 3 ml/s using a power injector (Spectris; MedRad, Warrendale, PA), followed by a 20 ml saline flush. DCE-MRI was performed in the transverse plane at baseline (pre-contrast) and during arterial, venous, and delayed phases. MR imaging parameters are shown in Table .
Conventional MRI displayed a round tumor in the prostatic bottom protruding into the bladder with an isointense signal compared to the muscle on T1-weighted images (T1WI) with fat suppression and a homogeneous lesion with slightly hypointense signal on T2WI . Ultra-high b-value DWI (b = 3000 s/mm2) features showed slightly homogeneous hyperintense signal compared to the muscle, and the mean ADC value was 0.817 ± 0.016 × 10−3 mm2/s. The tumor was strongly and homogeneously enhanced during the arterial phase with continuous signal increase of mass in the venous and delayed phases (a persistent pattern). Normal prostatic glandular tissue with a non-enhanced capsule around the mass was clearly distinguished from the tumor as a homogeneous isointense signal compared to the muscle. No central necrosis was demonstrated in the tumor.
In addition, a low signal intensity area on T2WI showed significantly higher signal nodule on ultrahigh b-value DWI, and the mean ADC value was 0.517 ± 0.015 × 10−3 mm2/s. It was found in the left transition and peripheral zone. The tumor showed clear enhancement with an irregular boundary and without capsule on DCE . At the same time, prostate benign hyperplasia nodules were also found in the middle area of right transition zone, and these features were similar to the prostatic leiomyoma observed on T2WI, T1WI and DWI. The mean ADC value was 0.710 ± 0.049 × 10−3 s/mm2. The nodular was enhanced heterogeneously during the arterial phase with continuous signal increase of mass in the venous and delayed phases (a persistent pattern). There was no capsule. The preoperative MRI diagnosis revealed prostatic cancer with benign prostatic hyperplasia; however, the prostatic leiomyoma was not considered at the initial diagnosis.
Ultrasound guided systematic transperineal prostatic biopsy and subsequent histological analysis of biopsy samples confirmed prostatic cancer in the left zone (Gleason score 3 + 3 = 6).
A robot-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy was performed to remove the whole prostate. In addition, histopathological examinations revealed leiomyoma based on following features: firstly, the tumor was composed primarily of hyalinized connective tissue containing spindle cells; secondly, spindle cells were arranged with a fascicular and whorled manner in foci. The cancer was found in peripheral and transitional zones of the left posterior lobe.