This case presentation has been consented by the family and approved by the ethics committee of South Medical University Affiliated Maternal & Child Health Hospital of Foshan.
A 22-year-old G2P0 woman presented at weeks’ gestation for evaluation of a fetus with a left lung lesion. A detailed ultrasound examination considered pulmonary sequestration, but pulmonary cystadenoma could not be totally excluded. Serial ultrasonographic monitoring demonstrated an increasing size of the lesion of the left lung and the heart was shifted to the right. The ultrasound examination revealed a 5.6 cm × 5.0 cm × 5.0 cm mass at weeks’ gestation . The presentation was believed to be consistent with a CCAM. The cystic adenomatoid malformation volume ratio (CVR) was 2.8. Amniocentesis confirmed normal karyotype and no other anatomic abnormalities were present on detailed ultrasonographic survey.
Nonimmune hydrops were not found before operation, and the heart function was well preoperatively . Given the continued growth of the lung mass, the concern for the progression of hydrops and fetal demise, and the significant pulmonary hypoplasia believed incompatible with survival secondary to mass effect, multidisciplinary counseling was performed regarding open fetal surgery. After full evaluation and counseling by the fetal surgery team, the patient and her family wished to proceed with intrauterine surgery. Informed consent was obtained in accordance with the surgery protocol, and the open fetal surgery was approved by the ethics committee of South Medical University Affiliated Maternal & Child Health Hospital of Foshan.
A maternal hysterotomy, left fetal thoracotomy and CCAM resection were performed at weeks’ gestation (May 15, 2011) under deep maternal general anesthesia.[ The open fetal surgery techniques were performed as described below.
Indomethacin and antibiotics were given preoperatively, and ritodrine hydrochloride provided the necessary uterine relaxation. Sterile intraoperative sonography delineated both the fetal and placental position. The uterine incision (about 10 cm) was made at the edge of the placenta.[ The left fetal hand was delivered, intravenous access obtained, and a fetal pulse oximeter was placed. A left fetal thoracoabdominal incision was made based in the fifth intercostal space. Continuous fetal echocardiography assessed ongoing cardiac function and directed resuscitation requirements. After the thoracotomy, the mass was slowly delivered from the chest cavity and the CCAM resection was initiated. The fetal chest wall was closed and the fetus returned to the uterine cavity. An intrauterine dose of dexamethasone (10 mg) and ampicillin (4 g) were administered after the amniotic cavity was filled with warmed (37 °C) lactated Ringer solution. And the uterine and abdominal incisions were closed in layers. The mother tolerated the procedure well and was given atosiban and ritodrine hydrochloride after the surgery. Continuous fetal echocardiography confirmed recovery of fetal heart function after the intraoperative fetal resuscitation.
Postoperatively, the mother was treated with intravenous magnesium sulfate, indocin, and transitioned to nifedipine for the remainder of the pregnancy to maintain uterine quiescence. The pathology from the fetal excision demonstrated pulmonary mass hyperplasia consistent with CCAM-like changes . The mother presented at weeks after open fetal surgery with preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) and underwent cesarean delivery at weeks’ gestation. A vigorous woman infant of 1955 g (50th centile), with good Apgar score, was delivered. The baby's thoracoabdominal incision was well healed at birth without any evidence of fluid leakage. At 1 month, 4 years, and present, 5 years after birth, she has continued to do well without any obvious deficit and both respiration and circulation were well maintained .
Progression of the patient's condition and accompanying interventions are illustrated in a flowchart . The surgery and follow-up are displayed in supplemental video.