A 20-year-old Saudi female presented to a hospital with a painful swelling of her right hand. She denied a history of trauma and was thought to have arthritis, for which she received prednisolone and naproxen. When symptoms persisted for 2 months, a neurologist diagnosed CRPS. Symptoms still persisted with prednisolone and gabapentin. Thoracoscopic sympathectomy provided relief, but painful swellings recurred in her left hand and left leg 3 weeks later.
She was referred to our center where examination revealed a swollen and tender left leg with cold and sweaty skin . Left lower limb movements were restricted by hyperalgesia and allodynia. The left upper limb showed mild edema with normal sensorimotor functions, but the right upper and lower limbs were both normal.
Investigations which included serum electrolytes, urea, creatinine, fasting glucose, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, C-reactive protein, full blood counts, clotting profile, Proteins C and S, and anti-thrombin III assays were all normal. Serum rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, double-stranded DNA, and hepatitis B and C viral screening were negative. Radioisotope bone scan showed increased tracer uptake in the left knee, but nerve conduction studies, Doppler ultrasound scans, and brain and spinal magnetic resonance imaging were all normal.
She received oral clonidine 0.15 mg daily, but left leg swelling persisted. Two weeks later, she developed another painful swelling on her right leg. A pain specialist administered computed tomography-guided bilateral lumbar sympathetic block with lignocaine, which provided relief lasting only 4–5 days even after repeating it twice.
Radiofrequency ablation of lumbar sympathetic nerves at L2, 3, and 4 levels provided no relief, and she underwent bilateral lumbar sympathectomy with phenol injections, spaced 4 weeks apart. Symptoms resolved completely at this stage , but she developed urinary retention, paraparesis, and hypoesthesia below T4 levels, which improved over a course of 6 weeks. After 4 months of hospitalization, she was discharged home with no pain or swelling and muscle power of Grades 3–4/5 in the lower limbs.
Five months later, she was readmitted for the recurrence of symptoms in her right upper limb . When the stellate ganglion block provided only partial relief, she had an intrathecal infusion of baclofen with morphine, which provided sustained relief that lasted 10 months at her last visit to the outpatient clinic.