A 4-month-old male entire British Shorthair cat was referred with a 2 week history of
ptyalism, head pressing, ataxia, lethargy and constipation. On physical examination,
vital signs were within normal limits. The cat weighed 1.4 kg, was of small stature,
had a body condition score of 4/9 and was mildly obtunded. A bile acid stimulation
test was markedly increased (fasting 191 μmol/l, reference interval [RI] 0–16
μmol/l; postprandial 138 μmol/l, RI 0–25). Haematology and serum biochemistry were
within the RIs.
Abdominal CTA consisting of pre- and post-contrast scans was performed under general
anaesthesia with a 16-slice multi-detector CT scanner (Philips Brilliance, 16 Slice;
Philips Medical Systems). A soft tissue algorithm reconstruction filter was used.
The cat received 740 mgI/kg of an iso-osmolar iodinated intravenous contrast medium
(Omnipaque; GE Healthcare) using a concentration of 370 mgI/ml at 2 ml/kg
administered over 20 minutes via the cephalic vein by means of an automated injector
(Empower CTA; EZ-EM). A single, slightly tortuous, anomalous vessel was identified
arising from the portal vein junction between the left gastric and splenic vein.
This vessel coursed dorsally and slightly caudally before anastomosing with the left
side of the caudal vena cava. This vessel measured 4.2 mm at its widest point. A
single extrahepatic portocaval shunt (left gastric to caudal vena cava) was
diagnosed . A
retained left inguinal testicle was also noted. Medical management was commenced
with amoxicillin–clavulanate (12.5 mg/kg PO q12 h), lactulose (0.5 ml PO q12 h),
levetiracetam (20 mg/kg PO q8h) and a restricted protein prescription diet (Hill’s
k/d; Hills’ Pet Nutrition) for 2 weeks prior to surgery.
A routine midline coeliotomy was performed and allowed visualisation of the anomalous
vessel cranial to the right kidney, creating a communication between the left
gastric vein and the caudal vena cava. A band of commercial cellophane roll (10 cm
long × 1.2 cm wide) was prepared as previously described. Briefly, the band of cellophane was folded longitudinally to form a
three-layered strip (10 cm long, approximately 4 mm wide). The cellophane was placed circumferentially around the vessel and secured
with a single polymer-ligating clip (Hem-o-lok; Teleflex). The final internal
diameter of the cellophane band was based on portal pressure changes (portal
pressure ⩽16 mmHg) and changes in colour and motility of the small intestine and pancreas. A single polypropylene suture was placed around the shunt to serve as a
potential point of reference. Hepatic biopsies were collected via the guillotine
method. Open castration was performed (left inguinal, right scrotal testicle).
Opioid analgesia was provided intraoperatively (fentanyl 3–5 μg/kg/h IV via constant
rate infusion) and postoperatively (methadone 0.2 mg/kg IM q4h).
The cat recovered uneventfully and was discharged 3 days later on continued medical
management. Hepatic histopathology revealed moderate portal arteriole hyperplasia,
mild hepatocellular vacuolation, biliary hyperplasia and portal fibrosis, which were
all consistent with a congenital vascular anomaly, such as a PSS.
Two months after surgical attenuation, the cat was doing well, with a good appetite
and weight gain. Repeat abdominal CTA revealed significant reduction in the size of
the shunt vessel (2 mm diameter), moderate increase in size of the post-shunt portal
vein and improved visualisation of intrahepatic portal veins . Repeat serum bile acids were
within the RI (fasting <1 μmol/l [RI 0–11 μmol/l]; postprandial 2 μmol/l [RI 0–21
μmol/l]).
The cat re-presented 6 months postoperatively for recurrence of clinical signs
compatible with hepatic encephalopathy. Oral medications had been discontinued 6
weeks earlier and the cat had started to receive a non-protein-restricted commercial
diet. Serum bile acids were increased (fasting 33 μmol/l [RI 0–16 μmol/l];
postprandial 111 μmol/l [RI 0–25 μmol/l]). Abdominal CTA revealed the shunt had
enlarged (3.5 mm) compared to the study performed 2 months postoperatively (2 mm),
consistent with recanalisation . There was no evidence of the development
of acquired shunts. Medical management was recommenced prior to repeat surgical
attenuation.
Two weeks later, the cat underwent exploratory laparotomy. The previously attenuated
shunt vessel was identified and associated with fibrous adhesions. The polymer clip
was palpable and surrounded by fibrous tissue; however, the cellophane band was no
longer distinguishable. An attempt was made to ligate the shunt vessel, but there
was evidence of intraoperative portal hypertension. It was not possible to insert an
ameroid constrictor owing to the presence of the polymer clip and the short distance
between the caudal vena cava and the first vessel anastomosing into the shunt.
Cellophane banding was repeated as previously described, this time using pure
cellophane (Cello sheet, Clear Cello; Hallmark Cards) and a polypropylene ligature
was tied loosely over the shunt vessel as a reference. Opioid analgesia was provided
as described previously. Recovery from general anaesthesia and surgery was, again,
uneventful.
Four months later, serum bile acids were within the RI (fasting <1 μmol/l [RI 0–11
μmol/l; postprandial 12 μmol/l [RI 0–21 μmol/l]). Abdominal CTA revealed increased
liver volume and vascularisation, as well as nearly complete closure of the PSS
(<1 mm diameter) . Seven months postoperatively, clinical signs of hepatic
encephalopathy recurred. Serum bile acids were markedly increased (fasting 115
μmol/l [RI 0–11 μmol/l]). CTA findings were again consistent with recanalisation of
the shunt vessel (3 mm diameter) without evidence of acquired shunting . The cat again
underwent exploratory laparotomy, where it was possible to ligate the shunt using a
polypropylene suture and a titanium ligating clip (Hemoclip; Teleflex). There was no
evidence of intraoperative portal hypertension.
Two days postoperatively, the cat developed a chylo abdomen, suspected owing to mild
portal hypertension. The fluid leaked through the abdominal wall via the surgical
incision. The chyloabdomen resolved spontaneously after 5 days. The cat also
developed an oesophageal fistula following removal of an oesophageal feeding tube
(in situ for 3 days). The fistula was surgically explored and closed 1 week
following shunt ligation.
One month later, the cat was doing well with serum bile acids within the RI (fasting
1 μmol/l, RI 0–11; postprandial 4 μmol/l, RI 0–21). Abdominal CTA revealed closure
of the shunt . At
the most recent follow-up 5 months after the final surgery, the cat had had no
recurrence of hepatic encephalopathy.