A 28-year-old Sindhi man male presented to our facility with a history of typhoid fever and flaccid paraplegia, anorexia, weight loss and somnolence. He developed fever four months ago, which was continuous, low grade and gradual in onset, with a non-specific pattern with bouts but without rigors and chills. It was associated with generalized fatigue and generalized body pains. He was diagnosed as having typhoid fever. The fever continued for three months and then subsided after treatment with the second-generation fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin. Subsequently (one week later) our patient developed weakness of the left upper limb, which was gradual in onset. It was progressive and initiated distally. Over a period of four weeks, the weakness developed in a similar pattern in the remaining limbs, sufficient to inhibit our patient’s routine activities including walking, changing his clothes, buttoning clothing and combing his hair. Our patient also had pain and numbness in the hands and arms, with mild pain in the neck. There was no history of urinary or fecal incontinence. Our patient was of low socioeconomic status and his familial history was insignificant.
Systemic examination was unremarkable. Additionally, the results of a general physical examination were normal. Further, neurological examination was normal, with all the cranial nerves intact. A motor examination revealed wasting of the right thenar and hypothenar muscles and decreased tone in all four lower limbs, power 4/5 right upper limb, 4/5 left upper limb, 4/5 in right lower limb, 5/5 left lower limb, brisk reflexes, a positive Hoffman result, and bilateral plantars upgoing. Sensory, cerebellar and spinal examination results were normal, and there were no signs of meningeal irritation.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings showed an intra-medullary, intra-spinal, nodular, circumferential hypo-intense enhancement, seen in the cervical region. This was more marked at the C3 level, associated with compressive effacement of the spinal cord at that point . The cervical cord was swollen with T2 hyper-intensity secondary to edema .
Differential diagnoses included cervical myelitis, multiple sclerosis, spinal tuberculosis and space occupying lesions (SOL).
The leucocyte count in his cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was 595 cells per mm3, erythrocyte count 5 to 7 cells per high-power field (HPF), protein 2440mg/dL (normal range 20 to 45) and glucose was 29mg/dL (normal range 45 to 65). Results of an investigation of his CSF for Gram-staining bacteria, acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and the results of a mycological examination were all negative. A CSF sample was sent for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which gave a positive result. On the basis of all the above-mentioned findings, the diagnosis was confirmed to be acute tubercular myelitis. Our patient was given anti-tubercular drug therapy and responded remarkably well, with no surgical intervention required.
Our patient recovered fully despite the progressive nature of the disease, and he has not had any signs of paraparesis or relapse of the disease.