A 54-year-old female patient presented to the hospital with flank pain and an abdominal mass for 6 mo.
The patient presented with flank pain and an abdominal mass for 6 mo which had become worse in the previous 2 wk.
The patient had no history of any other diseases, and had no history of surgery.
The patient had previous normal menstruation, but was now menopausal. She denied any relevant family history.
General and physical examination results were normal. Abdominal examination revealed a large mass in the left abdomen.
The patient’s serum urea and creatinine levels were 3.37 mmol/L and 67 μmol/L, respectively. Urine examination revealed hematuria (grade 1+).
Ultrasound showed that the left kidney was enlarged with severe hydronephrosis and a thin renal parenchyma. A stone measuring approximately 8 mm was observed in the ureteropelvic junction. Two round masses were observed in the middle and upper parts of the left kidney. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed an 8-mm stone in the left upper ureter , and severe hydronephrosis was seen in the left kidney. The masses detected in the left renal parenchyma were quasi-circular, uneven, and had a slightly low-density shadow and uneven enhancement, and the largest measured approximately 9 cm × 10 cm .
A left radical nephrectomy was subsequently performed. Gross examination of the radical nephrectomy specimen revealed enlargement of the left kidney. There were several nodules in the renal parenchyma, 20 cm × 13 cm × 10 cm in size, most of which were diffuse flakes, and some were spindle-shaped and fascicular, a small amount of bone-like matrix was also observed. Scattered squamous areas were observed in the diffuse area, along with the formation of keratinized beads.
Microscopic examination revealed SCC of the renal parenchyma with dedifferentiated sarcomatosis . The proportion of sarcomatoid components was approximately 50%.
Immunohistochemistry revealed the following: Creatine kinase (CK) (squamous area +), Epithelial membrane antigen (squamous area +), Cluster of Differentiation (CD)10 (squamous area and diffuse area +), vimentin (squamous area +), CK7 (small focus squamous area +), Melanoma marker (human) monoclonal antibody (HMB45) (-), S100 (-), Carbonic Anhydrase ix (small amount +), Ki67 (hot spot area about 80% +), P40 (small focus squamous area +) , p63 (squamous area and diffuse area +) , CK20 (-), p53 (approximately 85% +), GATA-3 (squamous area and diffuse area +), CK18 (small focus squamous area +), Smooth Muscle Actin (-), CD34 (-), and desmin (-).