We present a consanguineous family of Qatari ethnicity. Patient 1 is now a 12-year-old girl born at term by caesarian section with a birth weight of 1.6kg. There was a history of gestational diabetes during the pregnancy but it was otherwise uneventful. At the age of 26 days she presented to the clinic with fatigue and investigations confirmed hyperglycemia with a blood glucose level of 33mmol/L and c-peptide of 0.29ng/mL. Based on ADA guidelines, she was classified as having neonatal diabetes mellitus since the age of onset of diabetes was less than 6 months. Treatment with insulin was started immediately and HbA1c improved. Thyroid peroxidase and celiac autoantibodies were negative. She is being treated with insulin Glargine 22 units daily and insulin Lispro 10 divided units daily. She has been on insulin treatment continuously for 12 years; however, she has had episodes of diabetic ketoacidosis needing hospitalization, which are mainly due to non-compliance to insulin dosage and diet restrictions as the child is an adolescent now. Current Hba1c is 12.1%.
Patient 2 is a 9-year-old girl born at term with birth weight of 2kg. She first presented to the clinic with dysglycaemia with blood glucose level of 17mmol/L at 2 years of age. She reported a history of polydipsia, polyuria, weight loss and fatigue. She is physically and developmentally within normal limits. Treatment with insulin was started immediately and she has been on insulin therapy for 7 years now. Autoantibody testing was performed to look for Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase 65 (GAD65), Insulin Autoantibody (IAA), Islet Antigen-2 Auto Antibody (IA-2A), and Zinc Transporter 8 (ZnT8A) and these were found to be negative; c-peptide was undetectable <0.08 ng/mL. Thyroid peroxidase as well as celiac autoantibody screening was negative. She is being treated with insulin Glargine 8 units daily and insulin Lispro 5 divided units daily. Current Hba1c is 8.2%. Liver function test and other metabolites were within normal limits. As per ADA guidelines, idiopathic type 1 diabetes is a rare form of type 1 diabetes with permanent insulinopenia without autoimmunity. MODY is classified as onset of DM at an early age due to mutations in 13 genes inherited in autosomal dominant pattern. Since these 2 entities are clinically not distinguishable, genetic testing was performed to accurately classify the patient.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood of all individuals and whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on Illumina HiSeq platform using a 150-base paired-end single-index-read format. Genomic variants in genes already known to be implicated in MODY and NDM were extracted. The analysis revealed a homozygous c.-331C > G in INS gene (NM_001185098) in both patients whereas the parents were heterozygous carriers of this mutation. To confirm the variant identified by WES, the genomic DNA was used for polymerase chain reaction (PCR using Sanger sequencing. Specific Primers (forward: 5’ GCTGACGACCAAGGAGATCT 3’ and reverse: 5’ TGCTTGATGGCCTCTTCTGA 3’, product size: 226bp) were designed using primer3 software . For PCR, a total of 25ul reaction (12.5uL of Amplitaq Gold master mix, 2uL of DNA, 2uL primer mix and 8.5uL of nuclease free water) was amplified with PCR conditions; 5 min, 95°C initial denaturation, 35 cycles of 30 sec, 95°C denaturation, 30 sec, 55°C annealing, 30 sec, 72°C elongation and 10 min, 72°C for the final elongation. The product was purified with PCR purification kit (Qiagen), followed by cycle sequencing PCR using a BigDye Terminator Sequencing v.3.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.,) and sequenced using a 96-capillary ABI 3500xl automated genetic analyzer. The results were analyzed using SeqScape (Applied Biosystems; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Sanger sequencing verified the c.-331C>G transversion homozygous point mutation in both patients and heterozygous state in both parents. The pedigree and Sanger sequencing electropherogram results of the whole family are shown in and , respectively.