A 33-year-old woman without any history of trauma presented with a 3-year-history of poor distant vision. She could not see distant objects sharply and felt as if a layer of vinyl covered her eyes. However, she could see near objects clearly. This occurred at least a few hundred times daily. She could see distant objects sharply by straining her eyes. She could voluntarily strain her eyes to see clearly at distance and actually, she constantly has been straining her eyes to see clearly at distance. Her uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 during staining, and 20/50 during relaxing. These ocular symptoms began after she experienced tremendous stress because of her frequent migration abroad.
Her uncorrected distance and near vision were 20/20. During manifest refraction (MR), an unusual reaction was observed. MR in both eyes in the relaxed state was approximately − 2.5 diopter (D). While focusing on distant letters, she grimaced and strained her eyes, following which, her MR changed to approximately − 0.5 D. These movements were constantly repeated throughout the MR assessment. Her response was contrary to the physiological accommodative response. The cover–uncover test for ocular alignment showed orthotropia at far and near and orthophoria at distance regardless of eye straining or relaxing. To exclude neurological abnormalities, she had tests including direct and indirect light reflex, visual field test using a Humphrey visual field analyzer, Ishihara color perception test, and visual evoked potential test. All test results were within normal limit. Basic blood test showed no abnormalities, however, brain imaging test was not performed due to cost.
Her refractive response and pupil change to accommodative stimulations were objectively evaluated with a WAM-5500 binocular autorefractor/keratometer (Grand Seiko Co. Ltd., Hiroshima, Japan). This instrument gives a binocular open view through a transparent acrylate panel, providing an unrestricted view of objects at all distances. The refractive and pupillary changes while gazing at a far object with relaxed (far relax) and strained (far strain) eye states, and at a near object (33 cm) with relaxed eye state (near relax), were measured. Next, we recorded refractive and pupillary changes at static stimulation and dynamic stimulation. Static stimulation was performed at five accommodative stimuli; 1 D (100 cm), 2 D (50 cm), 3 D (33 cm), 4 D (25 cm), and 5 D (20 cm). Dynamic stimulation was performed with a moving target at a speed of 300 mm/s from 100 to 33 cm. Two sets of measurements were performed on the same day. One set comprised 10 measurements, with sufficient rest between the examinations. The same examination was performed after 1 week. Finally, the mean value of 40 measurements with the standard deviation was plotted. The IOL Master 700 (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Jena, Germany) was used to evaluate the anterior chamber depth (ACD), lens thickness (LT), and pupil diameter with relaxed and strained eyes. Measurements were performed in four sets (one set of three measurements).
In the far relaxed state, the spherical equivalent (SE) was − 2.34 D in the right eye and − 2.50 D in the left eye; however, in the far strained state, for a sharp and clear distance vision, SE was − 0.22 D and 0.00 D in the right eye and left eye, respectively. In the near relaxed state, SE in the right eye and left eye was − 3.36 D and − 3.10 D, respectively. Cycloplegic refraction (CR) in the right eye and left eye was − 0.26 D and 0.13 D, respectively . Her pupil diameter was approximately 4 mm, without any significant difference in size while gazing at a distant or near object (Kruskal-Wallis test, P = .59) .
For strong static accommodative stimuli (1–5 D), the refractive responses were proportionately strong, similar to those elicited by healthy individuals . Contrary to physiological accommodation, she strained her eyes to see distant objects and relaxed her eyes to see near objects. Pupil diameters showed no difference despite strong accommodative stimuli, except between 33 and 25 cm in the RE (Kruskal-Wallis test, Dunn’s multiple comparison test; P = .005) . In the dynamic stimulation test, she could follow the moving target from 100 to 33 cm without any constraint, and her refractive response was similar to that during normal reaction. Similarly to that observed during the static test, her pupil diameter showed no change during the dynamic test .
Biometry results indicated that ACD deepened and LT flattened with maximal eye strain, compared with relaxed eyes, and her pupil diameter showed no significant change . These results were contrary to the physiological movements of ACD and LT.
We diagnosed these rare reverse eye responses to accommodation as paradoxical accommodation. She has provided informed consent for publication of the case.