A 65-year-old Chinese male with an eight-year history of KD was admitted to our hospital on October 16, 2018, with chief complaints of cough and dyspnea over the previous month. The patient was first admitted to the department of stomatology of our hospital due to an enlarged painless right submaxillary mass in August 2010. The histopathological examination of the submaxillary mass showed preserved nodal architecture, florid germinal center hyperplasia, and eosinophilic infiltration . The pathological findings were consistent with KD. The patient underwent surgery without any other treatment. Five years prior to admission, his right submaxillary mass reappeared and enlarged progressively. However, he did not attach importance to the symptom and did not seek any medical attention as his daily activities were not affected. One year before admission, the patient suffered from polydipsia (daily water intake around 5 L per day) and polyuria (urinary output around 6 L per day). Six months before admission, he experienced fatigue (unknown cause) and was anorexic. One month prior, the patient experienced cough and dyspnea. The cough and dyspnea were usually triggered by cold air. At this point, the patient was admitted to our hospital.
On admission, his vital signs were as follows: temperature, 36.0 °C; respiration rate, 18 breaths per minute; pulse, 73 beats per minute; and blood pressure, 120/60 mmHg. A painless, right submaxillary mass with a diameter of approximately 2 cm was palpable. He had reduced breathing sounds in both lungs without wheezing or rubs. No swelling was found in the lower limbs.
The main laboratory findings are shown in Table . Laboratory investigations showed elevated total serum IgE > 2500 IU/mL and peripheral eosinophil count of 0.62 × 109/L, that was slightly increased. Considering dyspnea accompanied by elevated serum IgE and eosinophil levels, pulmonary function tests were performed. The findings of pulmonary function tests revealed obstructive ventilation function disturbance with a positive bronchial dilation test. A diagnosis of bronchial asthma was considered. To further investigate the potential cause of hypereosinophilia, bone marrow biopsy was performed. It indicated active granulocytic proliferation and an increased proportion of eosinophils.
The level of serum D-dimer was elevated at 1109 μg/L. The patient had symptoms of dyspnea and elevated serum D-dimer level; therefore, we could not rule out pulmonary embolism. We performed chest enhanced computed tomography (CT), which showed filling defects in the right pulmonary artery and a nodule (1.4 cm × 0.9 cm) in the left inferior lobe basal segment . The brain natriuretic peptide and troponin I levels were within normal limits. There was no indication of right ventricular dysfunction on the echocardiogram. Additionally, the simplified Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index was scored as 0. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with pulmonary embolism with low risk for early mortality. We suggested a needle biopsy for the left lung nodule for further evaluation; however, the patient refused due to concerns that withdrawal of anticoagulants would aggravate pulmonary embolism and that puncture might cause additional trauma.
Urinalysis showed reduced urine-specific gravity at 1.003. However, the renal function (serum BUN and serum creatinine), blood glucose, serum electrolytes (sodium, potassium, calcium), and serum hormonal (free T4, thyroid-stimulating hormone, 08:00 serum cortisol, 08:00 serum adrenocorticotropic hormone, prolactin and growth hormone, and testosterone) levels were within normal limits. Polydipsia, polyuria, and reduced urine-specific gravity were indicative of diabetes insipidus. Further investigations indicated decreased urinary osmotic pressure (140 mOsm/kg), which was lower than the plasma osmotic pressure (288 mOsm/kg). Enhanced MRI examination of the head showed pituitary stalk thickening . Polyuria improved following treatment with desmopressin acetate. Based on clinical manifestations, enhanced MRI of the head, and desmopressin acetate responsiveness, the patient was diagnosed with central diabetes insipidus.
The patient’s recurrent submaxillary mass, respiratory system involvement, central nervous system involvement, hypereosinophilia, and elevated serum IgE made us suspect systemic diseases. Further investigation showed elevated serum IgG4 levels (32.900 g/L). Antinuclear antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies were negative. Salivary gland emission computed tomography dynamic imaging showed impaired function in both submandibular glands. Pancreatic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed a swollen pancreatic tail and a local stricture of the pancreatic duct section of the common bile duct . We highly suspected that the patient might suffer from IgG4-RD. However, the patient refused to undergo any additional histopathological examinations. Therefore, we performed additional immunohistochemistry examinations of the eight-year-old specimens, which revealed that (1) IgG- and IgG4-positive cells were present, (2) The IgG4-positive cells per high-power field were around 20, and (3) The ratio of IgG4 + /IgG + was around 43% per high-power field . The pathology manifestations met the diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD established in 2012 .
The patient was prescribed budesonide and formoterol (160/45 μg) twice daily for asthma. Rivaroxaban (15 mg twice daily for 3 weeks, followed by 20 mg per day for 3 months) was orally administered for pulmonary embolism. Desmopressin acetate tablets (Minirin®) were orally administered at a dose of 0.15 mg per day for central diabetes insipidus. We administered 30 and 50 mg per day of prednisone and iguratimod, respectively, for the IgG4-RD. The patient’s clinical condition improved significantly post-therapy, and the filling defects in the right pulmonary artery disappeared. Prednisone was gradually reduced. The serum levels of eosinophils, total IgE, and IgG4 decreased gradually.
One year after his discharge from our hospital, the left pulmonary nodule was enlarged. The positron emission tomography-CT showed a nodule (2.3 cm × 1.5 cm) in the left inferior lobe with hypermetabolism . The patient underwent a wedge-shaped excision of the inferior lobe of the left lung. Pathological analysis revealed lung squamous carcinoma . He was diagnosed with lung cancer, T1cN0M0 stage IA3. Currently, the patient is in stable condition under treatment with glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants for IgG4-RD and remains free from recurrence of lung cancer in the follow-up chest CT scan. The timeline of the main clinical events is shown in Fig. .