We present the case of a 60 year-old male smoker with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who presented with a two-week history of increasing shortness of breath and occasional wheezing. Review of systems was otherwise negative. Past medical history was remarkable for mild COPD, but the patient had otherwise been free of health problems. Physical examination of the chest revealed clear lung sounds bilaterally, and no other abnormal physical findings were evident. Chest x-ray demonstrated a right pneumothorax, and a subsequent CT scan confirmed a right pneumothorax (less than 10% of lung volume), a small right pleural effusion, and two large blebs in the right lung. No mass lesions were apparent. A nuclear medicine lung perfusion and ventilation scan showed retention of radiotracer consistent with COPD and heterogeneous patchy areas of perfusion, most likely related to air-trapping. It was decided to procede with surgical exploration and possible excision of the patient's emphysematous blebs. A right mini-thoracotomy was performed, and a large bleb was readily identified within the anterior chest, which was resected. A separate aarea of possible abscess was noted in the right apex, which on dissection by the surgeon contained yellow viscous fluid. Otherwise, no mass lesions or findings suspicious for carcinoma were encountered.
Histologic examination of the patient's bullous resection revealed emphysematous changes and mild subpleural fibrosis. Additionally, multiple glandular structures were noted within the pleural tissue . These structures were composed of plump epithelioid cells with mild nuclear enlargement, fine chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli. No mitotic activity was evident. The glands were surrounded by fibrovascular tissue and showed no evidence of vascular or lymphatic invasion. The majority consisted of irregular small acinar structures, and there was no evidence of cribriforming or formation of solid structures. Immunohistochemical stains revealed positivity for TTF-1 and CK7 , consistent with respiratory epithelial origin. Notably, calretenin was negative, arguing against mesothelial derivation. Stains for CK20 and CEA were also negative. The separately resected abscess showed fibrosis, subpleural bronchiectasis, and granulomata. There was no evidence of malignancy in any of the examined tissue.
Six months after resection, the patient is in stable health, with no clinical or radiologic evidence of bronchogenic carcinoma. His respiratory status remains compromised secondary to chronic lung disease. We feel that the identified epithelial inclusions represent a benign process, likely associated with the background of chronic obstructive lung disease.