In November, 2015, a 69-year-old female patient was admitted to Nanjing Second Hospital and received radical resection of gallbladder cancer. Postoperative pathology indicated a T3N0M0 adenocarcinoma with moderate differentiation . The patient recovered well after surgery and received no anticancer regimens. Regular follow-up visits were performed. In May 2017, positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) results revealed tumor recurrence with the right adrenal metastasis and local intrahepatic metastasis . The patient was then admitted to our hospital, and the treatment plan, the curative effect and adverse reactions were evaluated through a multiple disciplinary team (MDT).
From June 2017, this patient received radiotherapy (DT 60Gy/12f in tumor area and DT 30Gy/12f in prevention area) followed up by concurrent gemcitabine + capecitabine chemotherapy as first-line therapy. After six cycles of chemotherapy, the patient reached a best response of stable disease (SD). Progressive disease (PD) was observed in left kidney and lymph node in April 2018. Two cycles of GEMOX (gemcitabine combined with oxaliplatin) regimen chemotherapy was taken as second-line therapy since April 2018. Unfortunately, the disease progressed quickly with a new left hip metastasis. Third line palliative radiotherapy (total dose 30Gy/10f) was used for left hip lesions and disease progression was observed again with new occupancies in liver and lung in July, 2018.
To seek other potential therapeutic opportunities, the patient received next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis using a 381-gene panel (provide by 3D Medicines Inc.) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) detection of PD-L1 expression. NGS results indicated that the tumor mutation burden (TMB) was 4.03 Mutants/Mb and the microsatellite state was stable . IHC results indicated that the PD-L1 expression was 50% . TMB was defined as the number of somatic mutations per million bases in sequenced coding region. No other immunotherapy-related biomarkers were identified .
Combination of radiotherapy and immunotherapy was then considered. Hypofractionated helical tomotherapy (total dose 60Gy/12f) was administrated to new metastases in the left lobe of the liver, and the patient has received four times of nivolumab therapy (120 mg, every 2 weeks) since September 2018. Metastases in retroperitoneal lymph nodes, left hip and lung all disappeared. Lesions in liver and left kidney received significant response to the treatment . The patient was still alive with a progression free survival (PFS) exceeding 6 months, and no adverse events were observed.