A 40-year-Old married lady form Kabul presented to the physician with three months’ history of abdominal pain and constipation. No other clinically significant information from the personal, family and drug history was elaborated during the patient interrogation. Colonoscopy was done and showed ulcerative mass at 30 cm of the anal verge. The initial biopsy was done at another hospital and the biopsy specimen was unsatisfactory for evaluation, having no evidence of malignancy. In a private hospital, the patient subsequently underwent a segmental resection of the colon through an Abdominoperineal procedure by a general surgeon with extensive experience in surgical oncology. Accordingly, the specimen was sent to our institution for histopathological evaluation.
54 cm segment of colon was received. After opening, it showed an fungating mass with lobulated surface, measuring 11 × 6 × 4 cm in distal portion of the segment (A). Tissue sample from the mass was taken and submitted for microscopic slides examination. On microscopic examination of the sections, a neoplasm arranged in sheets with alveolar and rhabdoid patterns was noted. The neoplastic cells were pleomorphic having abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, enlarged hyperchromatic eccentric nuclei and prominent nucleoli (B–C). No conventional RCC pattern was seen. Based on examination of haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained sections, an impression with differential diagnosis of soft tissue sarcomas, melanoma, large cell neuroendocrine tumor, and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was made.
IHC stains were positive for Cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3, Cam 5.2, SATB2, Vimentin and PAX8 (D) and negative for TFE3, Desmin, MyoD1, S100 protein, Anti Smooth Muscle Actin (ASMA), HMB-45, Melan A, CK7, CK20, CDX2, CD34, CD117, Synaptophysin, and Hepar-1. The final diagnosis of metastatic RCC with rhabdoid features was confirmed. Upon further inquiry, the patient revealed history of undergoing a nephrectomy a year ago and the histopathology had been done in another private laboratory. The previous microscopic slides of nephrectomy were requested for review and the diagnosis of RCC with rhabdoid features was also confirmed in the renal mass.
Patient opted for colon Abdominal Perineal Resection, after the surgery, the patient felt well with no symptoms of abdominal discomfort and remained well in the following weeks. Patient didn’t receive chemotherapy after surgery and within the following months her health conditions deteriorated. She passed away 6 months after the diagnosis of metastatic RCC to the colon.