In January 2007, a 65-year-old female patient was admitted to our department with chief complaint of a soft mass in the tongue. The mass was initially noticed 35 years ago and gradually enlarged with age. Physical examination showed a port-wine stained mass measuring 5 cm × 5 cm on the right side of the tongue. The mass was soft to the touch, compressible, and nontender. No ulceration of the oral mucosa was observed, and no cervical lymph node was palpable. Considering the aforementioned clinical features, the patient was presumptively diagnosed with VM of the tongue. After that, the subsequent sclerotherapy plan was designed. Briefly, pingyangmycin (8 mg) was initially injected into the lesion under local anesthesia, followed by laser therapy (Nd:YAG laser) 2 months later with the purpose to enhance the treatment effect for superficial lesions. Then, the intralesional pingyangmycin injection (8 mg) was repeated two times alternating with a single sodium morrhuate injection (150 mg in 3 ml). The mass gradually hardened and decreased in size, and was surgically resected for the major part after 6 months. The pathological examination result of the removed lesion showed a typical manifestation of VM after sclerotherapy , as demonstrated by irregular venous-type channels, which were varied in size but surrounded by thickened lumen walls. The patient was satisfied with the outcome, with no recurrence during the 3-year routine follow-up.
The patient was again referred to our department for a painful mass in the tongue that gradually enlarged for 1 month in 2012. The patient had no history of alcohol abuse and smoking, and had no family history for malignant tumors either. After oral and facial examination, we found a 2.5 cm diameter poorly demarcated solid lesion with a cauliflower-like surface on the right side of the tongue . No cervical, submandibular, and submental lymphadenectasis was observed on both sides. The mass was biopsied under local anesthesia after complete systematic examination, and the result indicated a well-differentiated SCC. Then, the patient underwent right neck dissection, extensive resection of the SCC, reconstruction of the defect with forearm flap, microvascular anastomosis, and repair of the forearm defect with free abdomen skin graft . No evidence of recurrence or metastasis was found during routine follow-up.
The post-operation pathological examination not only confirmed the diagnosis of well-differentiated SCC with keratin pearls, but also revealed the surrounded residual VMs and phlebolith , which was probably due to the incomplete resection of original VM lesion, considering its benign nature as well as the normal appearance and function of tongue. Moreover, a large amount of mesenchymal-like cells, leading to formation of small tubular structures, were observed at the boundary area between SCC and residual VMs. In order to gain more insights into the possible relationship among original VM lesion, sclerotherapy and SCC development, we then performed the immunohistochemical analysis for several cell markers. Firstly, we found that N-Cadherin and vimentin, two well known mesenchymal cell markers, were strongly expressed in the present case, especially within the juncture between new-developed SCC and residual VMs . More importantly, during our attempt to understand the possible mechanisms underlying the increased mesenchymal components, we unexpectedly found that the expression of CD34 (endothelial cells) within residual VMs was damaged , and replaced by increased expression of α-SMA (smooth muscle cells) around the vessels and even invaded across the endothelial layers to fill the venous lumen . In addition, the nuclear location of slug could be frequently observed in the inner layer of the vessels , suggesting the occurrence of an EndoMT-like process after sclerotherapy. Meanwhile, we also revealed that α-SMA was also strongly expressed in the boundary area between new-developed SCC and residual VMs, as well as the invasive front of SCC .
For more evidences, several resected VM specimens without other treatment history were retrieved from the Department of Oral Pathology, Stomatology School of Wuhan University, and the activation status of EndoMT was evaluated by detecting the expression levels of CD34, α-SMA and slug. The representative immunohistochemical results were shown in Figure . Compared with pingyangmycin-treated VMs, the venous channels within untreated VMs were varied in size and covered by very thin lumen walls. Moreover, in most of untreated VM samples, the expression of CD34 at the intima of the vessels was demonstrated to be continuous , and the perivascular α-SMA+ cells were focally scant or even absent . In addition, the lumens of most vessels in untreated VMs contained blood, and the rest may be empty or contain only sedimented proteins or erythrocytes. Most importantly, positive nuclear location of Slug was nearly undetectable in these untreated VM samples . All these above findings suggested that the process of EndoMT was in an inactivated status in untreated VMs, and sclerotherapy with pingyangmycin might thereby increase the mesenchymal components through activation of the EndoMT process.