A 38-year-old man with past history of hypertension was admitted for a lumbosacral spine surgery. He had been taking Valsartan 160 mg a day for the past 4 years. He underwent two uneventful previous surgeries before diagnosis of hypertension and was not known to have prior drug intolerance or atopy with unremarkable family history. He had no history of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in the perioperative period.
The patient was admitted for an elective spinal fusion surgery at L5–S1. His vital signs, airway examination, other physical examination, and laboratory tests were unremarkable. On the next day, the patient was taken to the operating room; anesthesia was induced with intravenous fentanyl and propofol, smooth tracheal intubation was done using atracurium. The patient was turned to prone position and anesthesia was maintained with isoflorane and fentanyl. The patient was given 10 mg morphine and 1 g cefazolin intraoperatively.
At the end of the surgery and turning the patient into supine position, we noticed severe swelling in the neck and the face including the eyes lids, the checks, and the lips, Fig. . Direct Laryngoscopy revealed an edematous tongue, floor of the mouth, glottis, and supraglottic areas without rash association. On auscultation, there were no added breath sounds with normal vital signs. The patient was kept in prone position for 305 min.
A diagnosis of drug induced angioedema was made after exclusion of other causes and intravenous dexamethasone 10 mg, diphenhydramine 25 mg and ranitidine 50 mg were given. He was continuously monitored for progression of the edema and continued to have dexamethasone. The patient remained intubated and was transferred to the intensive care unit. The valsartan was suspected to be the precipitating factor for the angioedema and was therefore discontinued.
The swelling started to regress after 2 h and significantly within 24 h, Fig. . The extubation was done on the second day after a flexible fiberoptic examination revealed normal supraglottic and glottic structures. The facial and neck swelling has resolved completely by the third day, Fig. .
The patient was discharged home on the fifth post-operative day without any complications with no history of further attacks of angioedema during his follow up visits in spine clinic.