The patient is a 66 year-old woman with jejunal cancer near the ligament of Treitz diagnosed 20 months ago. The initial evaluation revealed metastasis in her para-aortic as well as suprapancreatic lymph node, thus diagnosed as stage 4, and 1st line therapy was chemotherapy. Due to tumor obstruction, a gastrojejunostomy was constructed prior to chemotherapy. FOLFOX + Bevacizumab was started 18 months ago. The regimen was changed 4 months ago to FOLFIRI + Ramucirumab due to disease progression. There was also a complaint of left epigastric pain 7 months ago suspected to be cancer-related, for which treatment with opioids was started. In the course of her treatment, she presented with vomiting and dehydration. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a dilated gastroduodenum and a collapse of the efferent jejunum loop, indicating obstruction at the gastrojejunostomy. This was thought to be caused by a disseminated tumor invading into the anastomosis (a, b). She was hospitalized on the same day. Gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an ulcer formation at the site of the anastomosis, which suggested tumor invasion into the lumen (c). Adenocarcinoma cells were detected in the biopsy of this ulcer. Stent placement was thought to pose a risk of perforation, and surgical intervention was considered.
Laparoscopic duodenojejunostomy was performed a week after admission. Decompression with a nasogastric tube was done for 3 days prior to surgery. A 5-port procedure (a) was taken with the operator on the left side of the patient. A 10 mm port was used for the operator’s right hand. Laparoscopic findings revealed no apparent peritoneal dissemination, and the jejunum anal to the gastrojejunal anastomosis was easily mobilized. The transverse colon was retracted cranially, and the third portion of the duodenum was visualized through the colonic mesentery. We divided the overlying peritoneum and the duodenum was separated from the colonic mesentery along the second and third portion. We chose to anastomose the jejunum about 30 cm anal to the gastojejunal anastomosis. The jejunum was brought to the exposed duodenum and anastomosed side-to-side (b), with a stapling device (Signia™ with 45 mm purple reload). The enterotomy was closed with a continuous absorbable V-Loc™ suture . No abdominal drains were placed, and the nasogastric tube was not removed. Operation time was 151 min, with trivial bleeding.
Anastomotic passage could not be confirmed in an assessment with gastrografin on post-op day 3, but since no significant reflux was observed for 2 days, oral feeding was started. Repeated vomiting occurred 5 days later and a nasogastric tube was placed . With the results seen in , bowel dysmotility was suspected, which was thought to be caused by stasis from opioid treatment.
Surgical intervention was thought to be essential for symptom improvement, and thus laparoscopic side-to-side jejunostomy of the jejunal loop and the jejunum anal to the duodenojejunal anastomosis was performed 30 days after the previous surgery. The EZ Access™ system was inserted into the umbilicus via the open method, and 3 trocars were used (a). The dilated jejunal and the jejunum anal to the duodenojejunostomy was brought to the wound site. A side-to-side anastomosis (b) was done outside the abdomen using a linear stapler (Echelon™ with 60 mm white reload for enterotomy, 60 mm blue reload for defect closure). Operation time was 66 min with trivial bleeding. Radiological studies were conducted on POD 2, but gastric motility was insufficient for a decent assessment. Re-examination on POD 4 revealed contrast material flowing into the anastomosed jejunum, and most of the accumulation was seen in the colon on a CT scan 4 h later . Meal consumption started on POD 10, and although intake was limited, there was no vomiting. The patient was discharged home 39 days after the second surgery with a follow-up by a home care physician. She required total parenteral nutrition (TPN), but was able to eat until her death 8 days after discharge.