In this article, we present the case of a 54-year-old woman suffering from severe obesity with a body mass index (BMI) of 47.5 kg / m2 (weight: 104 kg, height 148 m). In anamnesis, chronic bronchopathy treated with corticosteroids and laparoscopic cholecystectomy, no family history of cancer.
She contacted our institute for bariatric surgery. The cross-disciplinary pre-operative assessment included clinical psychology interview, dietary evaluation, oesophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsy, H. pylori identification and abdominal ultrasound. All the tests were negative for pathologies and, in agreement with the patient and the cross-disciplinary team, a surgical recommendation was given. A gastric bypass with fundectomy was performed laparoscopically.
At one and three postoperative months the patient showed a good weight loss: 95 kg at one month with 18.3% excess weight loss (%EWL) and 8.7% total body weight loss; 84 kg at 3 months with a 40.6% EWL and 19.2% total body weight loss.
At nine months she had an excellent weight loss: 72 kg with a 64.9%EWL and 30.8% total body weight loss, but she reported sporadic episodes of vomiting, asthenia and poor appetite.
The latter symptoms are common after bariatric procedures and are compatible with the normal outcome of the bypass procedure. For this reason, the patient was scheduled for the normal follow-up at one year.
One year after surgery, the patient contacted the department because of a worsening of her symptoms with vomiting and asthenia. Blood tests and X-ray with Gastrografin were carried out. Blood tests revealed slight anaemia (haemoglobin: 10.5 g/dl), and the X-ray with Gastrografin showed a regular progression of the contrast medium through the gastro-jejunal anastomosis and an absence of pathological findings .
In the context of initial uncertainty, it was possible to subject the patient to a full gastroscopy, thanks to this technique which allows for an easy exploration of the bypassed stomach. It showed the presence of a 6 mm antral ulcer on which biopsies were performed. The results indicated that it was an intestinal type G3 gastric adenocarcinoma. After this diagnosis, preoperative staging was performed with abdominal and thoracic CT scan with contrast dye, which resulted in negative metastasis and the gastric lesion was not visible. Cancer markers tested were in the normal range (CEA, Ca19.9 and alphafetoprotein).
The patient underwent laparoscopic degastroresection with D2 lymphadenectomy. The operation lasted 230 min, with no intraoperative complications. The post-operative period was normal and the patient was discharged on the fifth day.
The definitive histological analysis documented the presence of a gastric adenocarcinoma of the antrum pT1bN0M0 with 22 negative lymph nodes removed. After an oncological evaluation, the patient underwent standard follow-up without chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
The follow-up at two years showed no recurrence of disease.