A previously healthy 29-year-old man complained of dysphagia and gastroesophageal reflux symptoms for 3 mo.
A previously healthy 29-year-old man complained of dysphagia and gastroesophageal reflux symptoms for 3 mo.
The patient denied any specific personal past medical history. He denied alcohol or tobacco abuse. He had no history of Barrett’s esophagus.
The patient denied a family history of cancer.
All vital signs were stable and physical examination revealed no notable abnormalities. His body mass index was 20.22 kg/m2.
Preoperative serum tumor markers, such as a-fetoprotein, neuron-specific enolase, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen (CA)19-9, CA724 and CA50, were all within normal limits. Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) testing (13C urea breath test) was negative.
Endoscopic ultrasonography demonstrated a hypoechoic nodule without the sign of submucosal invasion. Neither distant metastasis nor lymph node involvement was seen on the thoracoabdominal enhanced computed tomography.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy in our hospital revealed an elevated small nodular lesion on the esophageal side of the GEJ line without involvement of the proximal gastric cardia under white-light endoscopy . The lesion was surrounded by a short stretch of salmon-red columnar metaplastic esophageal mucosa at a maximum distance of 1.6 cm above the GEJ line. The rest of the esophageal mucosa was unremarkable. No evidence of Barrett’s esophagus in the distal esophagus was noted. Preoperative narrow-band imaging endoscopy showed dilatation and irregular meandering of blood vessels in the lesion along with a demarcation line separating the neoplastic and non-neoplastic mucosae.
A biopsy of the lesion was performed and diagnosed histopathologically as high-grade glandular dysplasia. After preoperative routine workups, this lesion was completely resected by endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). In the ESD resected specimen, a type 0-IIa + IIc lesion measured 11 mm 6 mm grossly. Microscopically, the entire tumor arose in the columnar-lined esophagus (15 mm maximum length), which was confirmed by the presence of submucosal esophageal glands . The tumor was poorly differentiated in most parts, with only a minor component of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . A small portion of the tumor < 0.1 cm exhibited nuclear features of neuroendocrine differentiation , including sheets and nests of smaller cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, powdery chromatin patterns, and scant cytoplasm . No necrosis was noted. The mitotic rate was 4/high-power field. A few dysplastic glands with goblet cells were identified in the adjacent benign metaplastic mucosa . In the distal part of the specimen, benign gastric cardiac mucosa with a maximum length of 4 mm showed mild chronic inflammation, but no evidence of atrophy or intestinal metaplasia. By routine immunohistochemistry, caudal type homeobox 2 was weakly positive for moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, but negative for the poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma component . In contrast, mucin 5AC was diffusely positive for poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, but only focally positive for moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . Chromogranin and synaptophysin were diffusely positive for the cells with neuroendocrine features, but negative for adenocarcinoma . The Ki-67 proliferative index was approximately 90% for both adenocarcinoma and NEC components . p53 immunostaining was strongly positive in both components . The tumor retained nuclear expression of MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, and MSH6. The carcinoma was HER2-negative with a score of 1+. The tumor invaded only muscularis mucosae without the evidence of submucosal, gastric cardiac, lymphovascular, and perineural invasion. Both the lateral and vertical margins of resection were free of dysplasia and carcinoma.
Tumor genetic analysis by next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed using a 196-gene panel (Genenseeq Technology, 196-cancer-relevant-gene, Nanjing, China) on the Illumina MiSeq platform. NGS data analysis identified 12 genetic mutations; two of which were germline mutations. The novel germline mutation at ERCC3 c.2333A>G was identified, which is in the DNA repair pathway of gastric cancer. The scores of the SIFT and PolyPhen-2 analyses were 0.426 and 0.034, respectively, and predicted the impact of the amino acid substitution of lysine as tolerated and benign. Another germline mutation at RNF43 c.434G>A was also identified. In somatic mutations, pathogenic mutations in TP53 and CHEK2 genes were discovered with allele frequencies of 10.43% and 1.38%, respectively. Other somatic mutations in FANCD2, PALB2, ROS1, PIK3CA, RAD51B, PTEN and BRCA2 genes were found with allele frequencies < 3% .