A 19-year-old girl was referred to our endocrinology and metabolism department with elevated plasma calcium levels found 3 years ago and we had no documentation about it before that. She denied any abnormal complaints including specific musculoskeletal pain, polyuria, polydipsia, fatigue, anxiety, sleep disturbance, loss of concentration and cognitive dysfunction, decreased memory, headache and irritability. Moreover, she had no anorexia, constipation, findings related to pancreatitis, peptic ulcer and abdominal pain. She has had regular menstrual periods since puberty. She did not mention the history of drug use. She had no history of renal stone, bone fracture and cardiovascular disease as well as family history of parathyroidectomy. Her parents had normal calcium levels. Physical examinations were unremarkable. Vital signs and body mass index (BMI: 21 kg/m2) were normal and she never had high blood pressure or orthostatic changes. She had a perfectly normal face. She was quite alert and did not show any signs of depression. No skin lesions were observed. No evidence of muscle weakness, skeletal structural disorders or chondrocalcinosis were observed.
Her serum calcium levels ranged from 10.3 to 11.3 mg/dL (normal, 8.8–10.4, with serum albumin between 4 and 4.2 mg/dL in all assays). Inorganic phosphorus levels ranged from 2.8 to 3.4 mg/dL (normal, 2.5–4.5). Serum magnesium levels ranged from 1.8 to 2.5 mEq/L (normal, 1.7–2.2). Intact PTH levels ranged from 37.2 to 58.1 pg/mL (normal, 10–65) and urine CCCR ranged from 0.009 to 0.014 during these 3 years . Serum 25 OH vitamin D level at the first visit was 16.1 ng/mL that treated by vitamin D supplementation. Since then, all 25 OH vitamin D levels were in the acceptable range. Thyroid function tests did not show sub-clinical hyperthyroidism. Other laboratory findings were unremarkable .
Parathyroid SPECT- CT-MIBI revealed no evidence of parathyroid adenoma. Thyroid, neck, and renal ultrasonography evaluation were normal with no nephrolithiasis or other abnormal findings. On the lateral skull X-ray and both hands AP X-ray, there were no abnormal findings associated with chronic inappropriate high PTH level; including subperiosteal bone resorption, brown tumors, bone cysts, or sclerosis.
Genomic DNA was extracted from the submitted specimen and the Lon AmpliSeq114.Exome RDY Library Preparation Kit was used to amplify some targeted regions of gene panel. Among 19,073 known genes sequenced, variant analysis firstly focused on three genes associated with FHH, including CASR, GNA11, and AP2S1. The further variant analysis was carried out on MEN1, RET, CDKN1B, GCM2, CDC73, and other genes associated with PHPT induced hypercalcemia. None of the genetic studies in our case were informative.
Although bone mineral density (BMD) measurement is not appropriate at a young age, it was eventually done, because it may help to differentiate FHH from PHPT [, ]. BMD of the femoral neck, lumbar spines, and wrist showed normal values .