A 27-year-old woman came to our center due to aggravated abdominal distension and ascites for 1 mo.
Two months ago, she received rLT from a donation after cardiac death in our center for recurrence of SOS after LT. She recovered well and was discharged on postoperative day 25 under treatment with methylprednisolone, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and warfarin. One month later, she developed progressive abdominal distension and mild elevation of transaminase with no apparent cause. Abdominal ultrasound showed massive ascites without vascular abnormality.
Five years ago, she underwent a living donor LT for SOS . Initially she recovered well with an immunosuppressive regimen of cyclosporine A and mycophenolate mofetil. One year ago, she developed abdominal distension and ascites. She was diagnosed with recurrence of SOS by computed tomography (CT) and histopathology . She was treated with diuretics and anticoagulants, but her ascites and abdominal distension were aggravated, along with jaundice. She had no abnormal personal and family history.
Her body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate and breathing rate were within normal limits. Main positive signs were cutaneous and sclera icterus with abdominal bulge and shifting dullness.
Laboratory results suggested that alanine aminotransferase was 61 IU/L, glutamic oxaloacetylase was 39.9 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase was 90 IU/L, glutamyl transpeptidase was 103 IU/L, total bilirubin was 40.85 μmol/L, direct bilirubin was 31.7 μmoL/L and creatinine was 130 mol/L. Tacrolimus trough level was 12.4 ng/mL. Testing for thrombophilia showed that she was positive for anticardiolipin antibody (ACL). Protein C, protein S and homocysteine were negative.
Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly with heterogenous echoes and seroperitoneum. CT revealed hepatomegaly with patchy enhancement and ascites . Then transjugular venography and liver biopsy were performed. Hepatic venography showed no stenosis of the hepatic vein or inferior vena cava, but hepatic venous pressure gradient was 21 mmHg. Liver pathology showed sinusoidal dilatation and congestion .