A 53-year-old man with progressive abdominal pain and distention was admitted to our tertiary care center on October 15, 2013. Colonoscopy revealed a rigid circumferential neoplasm in the rectum about 8–9 cm from the anal verge, with an increased CEA level of 10.4 ng/ml. In addition, two sessile polys (2–3 mm) in descending colon were also found and removed by forceps during colonoscopy, which were pathologically confirmed as adenomas. MRI showed a circumferential thickening of the bowel wall (maximum thickness, 14 mm), suggesting the diagnosis of malignant tumor (cT3N0Mx). After three times of fruitless biopsies, which invariably revealing “inflammation”, a transrectal incisional biopsy under the general anesthesia was performed and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was diagnosed. The patient received the neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (long-term radiation of 50 Gy/25f with concomitant capecitabine) and followed by the radical abdominoperineal resection surgery. The postoperative pathology showed poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell features (staged ypT3N1b). Thereafter, the patient received six cycles of adjuvant single-agent chemotherapy (capecitabine), owing to his refusal of the recommended intensified regimens.
During regular follow-up, the patient was diagnosed with thrombocythemia and began to take hydroxyurea 1 g twice a day. Two years after surgery, the CEA level increased significantly from 2.9 to 18.4 (ng/mL). Colonoscopy revealed about ten polypoid lesions (about 5 mm in diameter), and the biopsies proved to be SRCC . Imaging examinations including full-body contrast enhanced CT, PET-CT and gastroscope were then performed, with no other primary or metastatic foci being identified. The patient refused further systemic chemotherapy, but insisted on surgery. Two months later, a laparoscopic total colectomy with permanent ileostomy was performed. By examining the gross specimen, more than 50 polypoid lesions were scattered throughout the colonic wall, ranging from 2 to 10 mm in diameter . Pathology showed multifocal signet ring cell carcinomas with some lesions involving the whole layer of colonic wall , as well as a large number of metastatic nodules throughout the mesocolon. All the 34 paracolic lymph nodes retrieved were involved. Immunohistochemically, the metastatic tumors were CEA (focal+), CK7 (−), CK20 (+), MUC2 (+), MUC5AC (−), MUC6 (−), E-Cadherin (+), MLH-1 (+), MSH-2 (+), MSH-6 (+), PMS-2 (+), Ki-67 index: 70%. After 4 months, diffuse abdominopelvic and multiple bone metastases were detected through the CT and the patient died of the disease 1 month later.
In additional investigation by targeted next generation sequencing using a 1021-gene panel, somatic mutations of ALK, EPHB2, ERBB4, GRIN2A, PTPRD, TP53 were detected in tumor tissue.
Informed consent documents were provided by patients’ surrogates.