A 36-year-old woman presented with mastalgia and yellowish discharge from her right breast. She reported family history (maternal lineage) positive for cancer. Her mother was diagnosed with BC at 33 and died, and maternal grandmother at 65 years, also from BC. Uncle who had been a smoker died of lung cancer at the age of 70. She has no other live relatives and siblings and has one 3-year-old son. Radiologic imaging found no suspicious lesions in the breast nor enlarged lymph nodes but showed solitary mediastinal mass which was surgically removed. Patohistological examination revealed fibrous tumor with increased mitotic activity, positive for CD34 and STAT6 by immunohistochemistry staining . Both tumors/breast cancer and solitary fibrous tumor have stained negative for p53 protein.
No further treatment was indicated and after 4 years of follow-up, a lesion in the upper left quadrant of the right breast was discovered. Needle biopsy suggested a luminal B-like invasive BC so she underwent mastectomy and axillary dissection. Surgical pathology specimen showed pT1bN1 grade 3 carcinoma (ER 100%, PR 80%, Her2 negative, Ki 67 26.5%, micrometastasis in 1 out of 11 lymph nodes).
Four cycles of adjuvant treatment with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide was administered followed by radiotherapy and tamoxifen with ovarian function suppression. The testing for BRCA1/2 was carried out and found no mutations.
One year later, during preoperative evaluation for breast reconstruction surgery, 4 pulmonary nodular lesions were discovered on chest computed tomography (CT) scan. A CT-guided biopsy of one of the suspected metastases was performed and pathohistological examination was consistent with metastasis of malignant fibrous tumor. Tamoxifen was switched to exemestane due to its possible proliferative effect on fibrous tumor. Chemotherapy for stage IV sarcoma with temozolomide and bevacizumab was initiated given the prior anthracycline chemotherapy.
In the light of the two known malignancies, the patient was referred to genetic counseling and in contrast to prior BRCA1/2 gene testing only, the multigene panel testing was performed. For the testing purposes, DNA was isolated from peripheral blood using TruSight Rapid Capture commercial reagent kit (Illumina Inc.). DNA sequencing was conducted on a MiSeq sequencing platform (Illumina Inc.) with obtained data analyzed using the Variant Interpreter software (Illumina Inc.) and by searching the OMIM, ClinVar, HGMD, dbSNP, COSMIC, gnomAD, and 1000 Genomes databases. The above methods confirmed a germline single nucleotide variant: (c.1101-1G>A) in TP53 gene. She was found to be heterozygous for single nucleotide variant (c.1101-1G>A) affecting the acceptor splice site at intron 10 in TP53 gene, consistent with LFS. This sequence is submitted to ClinVar database, accession number SCV001161439. There were no live siblings for additional germline testing and a 3-year-old son is not permitted for testing without father’s permission according to Croatian laws.
In order to gain additional insight into the genetic and molecular profile of the tumor, a comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) by a hybrid capture-based DNA sequencing platform was done from tumor tissue obtained from one of the pulmonary metastases. CGP performed by Foundation Medicine, Inc. identified two TP53 short variant events: Y163N at 19.4% allele frequency and splice site 1101-1G>A at 62.1% allele frequency. The report also revealed a microsatellite stable tumor harboring a relatively low mutational burden of 7 Muts/Mb associated with lower rates of clinical benefit from treatment with PD-1- or PD-L1-targeting immune checkpoint inhibitors [, ]. Furthermore, additional mutations in PTCH1 (subclonal), PDGFRB, and the NAB2-STAT6 fusion were confirmed as a somatic event in tumor tissue, none of which have reported therapeutic options with clinical benefit in patient’s tumor type. The list of genes tested has provided in the .