A 22-year-old obese (BMI = 38 kg/m2) man without other medical history was admitted to the emergency department (ED) for precordial chest pain worsening for 5 days and radiating to the back and shoulders. The patient had low dysphagia, progressive-onset dyspnea and unproductive cough for 2 days but without fever or shiver. This patient, usually living in Illinois, had worked as a teacher in France for the last 8 months and did not travel outside Western Europe and the USA.
On admission, the patient presented with fever (38.5 °C), tachypnea (RR: 30/min) and required 3 l/min of oxygen (SpO2: 97%) but had no signs of respiratory distress. Lung auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds in the right lower lobe. Blood pressure and heart rate were normal. There was no evidence for a dental, oro-pharyngeal infection, or cervical cellulitis. Second questioning of the patient highlighted a skin lesion described as an abscess in the back 3 weeks before admission which was successfully treated by Povidone-Iodine alcohol but it was absent on the current clinical examination. None of his relatives or colleagues described any signs of skin infection.
Blood tests were consistent with a marked inflammatory syndrome with a high leucocytes level (41,000 /mm3; 82% of neutrophils) and a CRP of 450 mg/l. Procalcitonin was 3.3 ng/ml and lactate was 1.31 mmol/l. Neck and chest CT-scan revealed an enlargement of the mediastinum due to a diffuse mediastinal infiltration with a moderate bilateral pleural effusion , without lung parenchymal, pharyngeal and neck abnormalities or jugular venous thrombosis. Esophageal perforation was ruled out by a Barium swallow test and esophagogastroduodenoscopy. Community-acquired mediastinitis being suspected, empirical antibiotic treatment with intravenous amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 1 g q.i.d. was started in the ED and the patient was transferred in the intensive care unit (ICU).
On ICU admission, right pleural tap evidenced purulent fluid with Gram positive cocci. Cultures grew for a PVL+ MSSA. The genomic analysis revealed that the Staphylococcus aureus strain belonged to a CC8 clonal complex. In addition to PVL, the strain exhibited enterotoxins K, Q, and an agr1 allele (Identibac S. aureus Genotyping DNA microarray, Alere Technologies, Jena, Germany). Blood cultures sampled at ICU admission were also positive for the same PVL+ MSSA.
Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography ruled out infective endocarditis. On day 2, the antibiotic regimen was switched to intravenous cloxacillin (2 g q.i.d.) and clindamycin (600 mg t.i.d.) as an anti-toxinic PVL adjunctive treatment. On day 5, a diffuse skin rash consistent with a toxidermia appeared and lead to the replacement of cloxacillin with fosfomycin (4 g q.i.d.) with no skin rash recurrence.
On day 4, cervicotomy and right thoracotomy allowed the evacuation of a right pleural empyema and mediastinal abscesses, and evidenced the presence of a fistula between the mediastinum and right pleural space . All surgical samples from the mediastinum and the right pleura grew for the same MSSA strain.
Blood cultures obtained systematically on days 8, 15 and 22 were negative. Subsequent echocardiography and chest CT-scan depicted the regression of both the mediastinal infiltration and residual abscesses . The patient was discharged from ICU on day 36 and from hospital on day 42 without any complication. Chest CT-scan performed two months later confirmed the complete disappearance of mediastinal abscesses .
On top of clindamycin, intravenous fosfomycin was carried on for 4 weeks, then switched to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole until hospital discharge (day 42). Clindamycin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole were continued for 6 more weeks for a total of 10 weeks of treatment.
No immunodepression was evidenced with normal immunoglobulin levels, no complement pathway defect, negative HIV testing and antibody titers of previously administered vaccines (diphtheria, tetanus, HBV) without any abnormal response.
Long-term antibiotics and early surgery benefited our patient which is now doing well and was able to go back to the United States of America (USA) on June 6th, 2019.