The patient was a 60-year-old Asian male, with no Leriche syndrome symptoms such as intermittent claudication, who was involved in a head-on collision with a dump truck while driving a passenger car. One hour after the accident, the patient was transported to our hospital in a helicopter with a physician onboard. On physical examination upon arrival, the patient had the following vital signs: respiratory rate, 23 breaths/min; SpO2, 98% under a 10-L/min administration mask; pulse rate, 133 breaths/min; blood pressure, 142/128 mmHg; Glasgow Coma Scale assessment, E3V5M6; and body temperature, 35.9 °C. The Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma result was positive in Morrison’s fossa and perisplenic region, and the patient’s hemodynamic status was approximately 1.0 on the shock index. We started a compatible blood transfusion 7 min after patient arrival. We suspected intra-abdominal hemorrhage, based on the mechanism of injury and physical examination findings. A trauma pan-scan CT performed 12 min after patient arrival demonstrated small bowel injury, mesenteric injury, and intra-abdominal hemorrhage that required damage control surgery (DCS). Laboratory blood test data on admission (shown in Table ) identified mild peripheral circulatory failure and renal dysfunction; however, the data did not indicate any progression of anemia or coagulopathy at the time. DCS was started in the emergency department (ED) 42 min after patient arrival with a crash laparotomy. A 5-point packing with suction was performed to stop massive hemorrhage in the abdominal cavity. The mesentery had been lacerated 210 cm from the ligament of Treitz, and an incomplete tear of the small intestine was found in the same area; however, the liver and spleen showed no obvious damage. Active hemorrhage occurred from the mesenteric laceration site, which was sutured. The injured portion of the small intestine was cut using a linear cutter. No hematoma was present in the retroperitoneum. After confirming hemostasis, the operation was completed after 48 min with open abdominal management (OAM) using vacuum packing closure without gastrointestinal reconstruction. The patient was admitted to the acute critical care center.
Additional imaging findings were bilateral mandibular fractures, bilateral multiple rib fractures, bilateral pneumothorax, sternal fracture, hematoma around thoracic spine, right clavicle fracture, right ankle debridement injury, and thrombotic occlusion from just above the abdominal aortic bifurcation to the bilateral common iliac arteries The intraoperative findings of DCS in the ED revealed no obvious traumatic aortic injury, and a CT scan showed the presence of collateral blood vessels, leading to the diagnosis of Leriche syndrome, which is a chronic arterial occlusive disease. We tried to improve blood flow with intravenous alprostadil (prostaglandin preparation) and continuous intravenous heparin administration.
Although we introduced acute renal replacement therapy to wash out creatine kinase (CK) due to the presence of acute kidney injury, grade 3 that was identified using the KDIGO criteria on day 3, the elevated CK and myoglobin levels did not improve . Open-abdominal management was completed on the same day . Furthermore, the findings of impaired blood flow in the right lower extremity gradually worsened. Contrast-enhanced CT of the lower extremities on day 4 showed heterogeneous hypoperfusion of the lower extremity muscles. Considering the patient’s poor general condition, the right lower limb was amputated to save the patient’s life on day 5. Thereafter, each blood test parameter began to improve, and the patient’s general condition improved. On day 14, the patient underwent tracheostomy. The patient was weaned from mechanical ventilation support on day 31, and was transferred to the general hospital ward on day 43. With rehabilitation therapy, the patient was eventually able to achieve a standing position at parallel bars under supervision and was transferred to another hospital on day 80.