On 2/12/2015, a 33-year-old female presented with a 2-year history of posterior neck pain and right C5 radiculopathy that failed conservative therapies. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large right posterior paracentral and foraminal C4-C5 disc herniation, and the patient underwent resection of the disc and replacement with ProDisc-C (DePuy Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA) without intraoperative complications. . She was seen at postoperative clinics 2 weeks and then 6 weeks after the surgery. Her symptoms completely resolved at 2 weeks postoperative and she remained asymptomatic at 6 weeks. She refused cervical spine x-ray because she was actively attempting to conceive and wanted to avoid any forms of radiation exposure.
On 4/16/2015, she presented to the clinic with a 2-week history of neck pain and spasms without focal deficits. She had experienced a paragliding accident on 3/29/2015 during which she fell, tumbled, and severely flexed her neck upon landing. Cervical spine X-ray obtained on 4/16/2015 now demonstrated a 4 mm anterior protrusion of the artificial disc . She underwent revision surgery 2 weeks later.
Anterior access to the C4-C5 space was obtained through the previous incision and the extruded artificial disc was encountered. After clearing the scar tissue superficial to the disc, the vertebral body distraction pins were inserted rostral and caudal to the disc and expanded. This opened the vertebral body and allowed decompression of the central disc core. The central polyethylene core was separated and removed [Figures and respectively], and then the endplates were removed with an endplate osteotome. Early bone growth was seen posteriorly in the disc space and this was removed with a high-speed drill to reconstitute the endplates. Foraminotomy was performed bilaterally and an interbody device with autograft material from bone shavings was placed and secured at C4-C5 using a ventral plate.
The patient's postoperative course was unremarkable. At 3-week follow-up she had no focal neurological deficits and all instrumentation was unchanged in position . She was seen in clinic again at approximately 4 months postoperatively and she endorsed resolution of her neck pain and radiculopathy.