A 48-year-old woman, with a medical history of a non-severe aplastic anaemia, was re-admitted to the haematology department. She recently had been treated with horse antithymocyte globulin (15 mg/kg/day intravenously for 5 days) in combination with high dose cyclosporine and prednisolone, in order to prevent acute serum sickness. Her current oral medication consisted of cyclosporine 350 mg bidaily (6 mg/kg bidaily), prednisone 60 mg once daily, ciprofloxacin 500 mg bidaily and fluconazole 200 mg once daily. At admission, she presented with stroke-like episodes; repetitive episodes of sudden loss of strength in the left leg and numbness on the left side of the face. The motor symptoms resolved within a few minutes to one hour, although a cold feeling in her left leg and left side of her face persisted. She reported no other symptoms. Her vital signs, including blood pressure (110/70 mmHg), remained within normal range during these episodes. Neurological examination directly after an episode, revealed no abnormalities besides the disturbed temperature sensations. Furthermore, she was bi-cytopenic (haemoglobin level of 6.1 mmol/l with no schistocytes and thrombocyte count of 48 × 109/l) with normal leukocytes (white blood cell count 4.4 × 109/l with 50% granulocytes). Besides the low thrombocyte count, there were no coagulation disorders. Serum calcium level was 2.07 mmol/L (normal range 2.10 mmol/L-2.55 mmol/L) and serum magnesium level was 0.56 mmol/L (normal range 0.70 mmol/L-1.00 mmol/L), for which replenishment was started. Serum cyclosporine concentration was too high (0.64 mg/l, normal range of 0.10-0.30 mg/l); all other laboratory findings, including renal function and cholesterol level, were normal. Electrocardiogram, 24-hour Holter registration and cardiac ultrasonography revealed no abnormalities. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed small hyperintense punctuate foci in the watershed region of the right semioval centre up to the subcortical area between the anterior and middle cerebral arteries . Some of these small foci showed restricted diffusion using diffusion weighted imaging sequences . Lumbar puncture was unremarkable. Extracranial duplex examination showed no abnormalities in the carotid and vertebral arteries. Transcranial Doppler ultrasound revealed segments of severely elevated flow velocities in several cerebral vessels, particularly both middle cerebral arteries . These findings were consistent with vasospasm. Based on the toxic cyclosporine concentration in absence of schistocytes (fragmented red blood cells) with no signs of acute serum sickness and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, cyclosporine was reduced with 20% and fluconazole and prednisone were withdrawn. Immediately after reducing the cyclosporine dose, the stroke-like episodes disappeared. One week after the dose reduction serum cyclosporine concentration had normalized to 0.29 mg/l, but blood flow velocities as measured with transcranial Doppler ultrasound were practically unchanged. Thereupon, cyclosporine was withdrawn. Six weeks after discontinuation of treatment the transcranial Doppler ultrasound abnormalities had fully resolved , the patient remained asymptomatic, and had remission of aplastic anaemia.