A 24-year-old female patient has obstetric history of one time 6-months-premature born, one time of miscarriage, and diagnosed with a double uterus. The patient has showed signs of dysphagia increasing gradually and losing 10 kg in weight for 2 months. The patient has entered our hospital in severe malnutrition state of Body Mass Index (BMI) was 16.4 (height 150 cm, weight 37 kg), grade-3-dysphagia (can only drink water), no difficulty in breathing. The blood test results were total leukocytes count of 19.07 G/L, the rates of neutrophils and lymphocytes were 85.7% and 8.9% respectively, the serum albumin result was 32.2 g/l, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRPhs) test was 20.78ng/dL, the levels of CEA and CA19-9 were 0.3 ng/mL and 17.6 U/ ml respectively, other tests were within normal limits. The upper endoscopic examination showed smooth submucosal swelling in the esophagus under 23 cm from the upper dental arch with a circumferential severe stricture which led to the endoscope does not passing, and the biopsy showed the pathological results were chronic inflammation and fibrosis . Barium swallow showed that the drug was circulating through the esophagus to the cardia but narrowing of the middle third of the esophagus in the 21 cm-long segment and stagnation in the upper segment . Computed tomography (CT) showed an irregular thickening of the esophageal middle and lower thirds segment around the circumference, the thickest part was 18 mm on the 10-cm-length, causing narrowing of the esophageal lumen, dilating the upper esophagus. Tumor lesions of the esophagus have regular borders, clear boundaries with some calcified nodules, strong non-homogeneous enhancement after injection, contact, push and cause slight narrowing of carina and left main bronchus, unknown invasion encroaching on the surrounding organs . A biopsy of the esophageal tumor under the guidance of computed tomography was proceeded, and the pathological results were chronic sclerosing inflammation. The preoperative diagnosis in this case was smooth submucosal tumor led to esophageal stricture. Because of weight loss and malnutrition, the patient had preoperative nutritional consultation and intervention. Before surgery, the patient gained 5 kg compared to the time of admission, BMI before surgery was 18.7.
An inter-department consultation of Gastroenterology - Radiology - Surgery - Pathology was proceeded. Due to the aggressive clinical symptoms and gross lesion characteristics, the patient underwent laparoscopic-thoracoscopic esophagectomy and reconstruction with a gastric tube. A large tumor, probably 12 × 5 cm in size, occupied the entire thoracic esophagus, and this mass was attached to the thoracic aorta, and the lymph nodes around the esophagus were enlarged and soft . The patient underwent laparoscopic-thoracoscopic esophagectomy and reconstruction with a large gastric tube, made an anastomosis of the cervical gastro-esophageal tube. After surgery, the patient was stable and discharged after 9 days. 4 months after surgery, the patient gained 4 kg, eating normally. Histopathological examination showed that the squamous epithelium of the esophagus had a small, benign nucleus, the submucosal layer and the smooth muscle layer increased fibrous, with infiltrating many lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages . Immunohistochemical staining was negative for CD68, CD34, Desmin and ALK markers. However, there was an increase in the number of IgG4-positive plasma cells . The final diagnosis was esophageal inflammatory pseudotumor.