A 40-year-old pregnant female, who was walking on the road was hit by a moving car. She was brought to the emergency room 2 h later, with a history of trauma to the pelvis. She was conscious and oriented, with a GCS of 15. She was vitally stable and did not report head, neck, chest, or abdominal trauma. On examination, her left lower limb was in flexion, abduction, and external rotation. The range of motion was restricted and painful. She also had tenderness bilaterally on the pelvic compression test. There was no distal neurovascular deficit in the lower limbs.
On obstetric examination, she had no per vaginal discharge, nor any abdominal tenderness or contractions with normal fetal heart sounds. On USG FAST, she had no free fluid in abdomen and pelvis and on obstetric scan gestational age was found to be 26 weeks. On Doppler ultrasound, fetal heart rate was normal and cardiotocography was also normal. A collective decision was taken to get a single anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis with both hips done, on which the left anterior hip dislocation and right superior and inferior pubic rami fractures were detected .
The patient was posted for closed reduction of hip dislocation under spinal anesthesia, which was successfully performed by hip extension, longitudinal in-line traction, and external rotation; all the while having an obstetrics team in the operating room. The concentric reduction was achieved which was confirmed radiographically . Fetal cardiotocography was continuously done for 4 h which was normal. She was observed for 48 h and, then, discharged and advised bed rest for one month. In-bed exercises and physiotherapy were taught to prevent venous thromboembolism. The patient came walking to outpatient department at 38 weeks of gestation without any pain in the hip and had a normal vaginal delivery. She delivered a full-term normal female child. At 1 year follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic and was performing all activities of daily living with ease. The child was also growing with normal milestones.