The 24-year-old male patient was hospitalized for 10 d due to lower back pain and numbness in both lower limbs.
The 24-year-old male patient was hospitalized for 10 d due to lower back pain and numbness in both lower limbs. On physical examination, thoracodorsal kyphosis was observed and the skin below xiphoid had hypoesthesia. Furthermore, the muscle strength of the right iliopsoas, quadriceps femoris and biceps femoris was graded as III, while the right tibialis anterior and extensor dorsi were graded as IV. At admission, the patient experienced radiating pain in his waist, which had a VAS score of 8.
The patient reported no other medical history such as hypertension and diabetes.
The patient denied any personal and family history of illness.
On physical examination, thoracodorsal kyphosis was observed and the skin below xiphoid had hypoesthesia. Furthermore, the muscle strength of the right iliopsoas, quadriceps femoris and biceps femoris was graded as III, while the right tibialis anterior and extensor dorsi were graded as IV. At admission, the patient experienced radiating pain in his waist, which had a VAS score of 8.
To differentiate DISH from ankylosing spondylitis, it is necessary to test for human leukocyte antigen-B27 (HLA-B27). The patient’s HLA-B27 index is within the normal range. Additionally, the patient’s erythrocyte sedimentation rate, blood routine test and other biochemical indicators are all within the normal range.
Anterior-lateral X-ray: Kyphosis of the thoracic spine is present, with calcification of the anterior longitudinal ligament and lamellar ossification/floating bone bridge on the medial-inferior and medial-superior sides of the anterior and lateral edges of vertebral plates. Additionally, there is a local wedge-shaped deformation of the lower thoracic vertebra .
Thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a kyphosis in the thoracic spine and calcification of the anterior longitudinal ligament of multiple vertebral bodies. The T8-12 vertebral body was wedge-shaped with a narrow front and wide back. The T5/6, T7/8, and T8/9 intervertebral discs were observed to protrude backward, resulting in compression of the corresponding horizontal segment dural sac. Furthermore, the adequate space of the spinal canal was constricted, and the spinal cord was compressed due to hyperplasia and sclerosis of the bilateral facet joints of the T7-9 vertebral body .
Results of a three-dimensional reconstruction revealed calcification of the anterior longitudinal ligament of numerous vertebral bodies, which has formed a bony bridge. The T8-12 vertebral body was found to be wedge-shaped, with a narrow front and wide back, as well as hyperplasia and sclerosis of both facet joints of the T7-9 vertebral body .
Thoracic magnetic resonance imaging showed kyphosis in the local thoracic spine. The T8-12 vertebrae have a wedge-like shape, with a thin anterior side and a wide posterior side. The intervertebral discs between T5/6, T7/8, and T8/9 protrude posteriorly and the adjacent dural sac is compressed. Additionally, no alterations in the spinal cord signal intensity were observed .