A 52-year-old woman with remote history of left facial nerve palsy presented with two days of progressive back pain, lower extremity paresthesias, and urinary incontinence. Her symptoms began three days prior to presentation when she awoke with severe mid-lower back pain extending to her abdomen. She subsequently developed burning paresthesias from her thighs to her toes and urinary incontinence. She presented to our institution on day 3 of symptoms, and her initial examination revealed decreased sensation to pinprick over the bilateral soles, lateral aspects of the feet, and first interspaces, as well as diminished vibratory sense in her great toes. There was trace pyramidal weakness of the left lower extremity and diffuse hyperreflexia without clonus. Ultrasound revealed bladder distension. MRI of the spine showed confluent T2 hyperintensity with patchy gadolinium enhancement in the central cord from T8 to the conus medullaris and thickening and enhancement of multiple lumbosacral nerve roots . Contrasted MRI and MR angiography of the brain were unremarkable. CSF showed mild lymphocytic pleocytosis without hypoglycorrhachia, with serum and CSF studies in Table a. She was treated empirically with intravenous acyclovir, which was discontinued when HSV/VZV studies returned negative. CT chest with contrast showed bilateral hilar and right paratracheal lymphadenopathy. The constellation of hilar lymphadenopathy, longitudinally extensive myeloradiculopathy with MRI enhancement, and mild CSF pleocytosis raised concern for sarcoidosis. Comprehensive ophthalmologic and dermatologic examinations including skin biopsies showed no evidence of sarcoidosis or other inflammatory or infiltrative processes. Endobronchial ultrasound-guided mediastinal lymph node biopsy was performed. Her neurological exam improved throughout her hospitalization, and symptoms had resolved completely by day 13 after symptom onset. At the time of discharge, lymph node pathology results were pending and outpatient follow-up arranged.
Following her discharge, the lymph node biopsy returned showing non-caseating granulomas; however, the patient could not be reached for expedited follow-up to address these findings. On day 27 after symptom onset, she presented to follow-up clinic reporting ten days of recurrent lower extremity weakness and numbness, urinary incontinence, and new constipation. Examination in clinic showed bilateral iliopsoas weakness (4/5 MRC scale) with intact distal strength, decreased sensation over the bilateral thighs and lower abdomen, and independent ambulation with unsteady gait. She was re-admitted for suspected neurosarcoid myeloradiculitis. Examination several hours later showed progression of her lower extremity weakness to 3/5 MRC strength in the bilateral iliopsoas and new pyramidal weakness (4/5) in the distal lower extremities. A T4 sensory level was appreciated and deep tendon reflexes were now absent at the left Achilles and patella. Anal wink was absent and sphincter tone was diminished. Within twelve hours of admission, she had lost the ability to stand or ambulate without two-person assistance. Repeat MRI of the spine showed radiographic progression from 24 days prior with increased intramedullary T2 hyperintensity extending from T4 to the conus medullaris. Again noted was patchy enhancement of the ventral cord and diffuse thickening and enhancement of multiple thoracolumbar nerve roots.
She was started on intravenous methylprednisolone. Twelve hours after her first dose, her examination had worsened to near-complete paraplegia with only trace muscle activation in the proximal lower extremities, as well as diffuse hyperreflexia with sustained ankle clonus bilaterally. Repeat CSF and serum analysis on day 28 are in Table b. Clinical deterioration following steroid administration raised concern for occult infection or SDAVF. Prior spinal imaging was reviewed to interrogate the working diagnosis of sarcoidosis and look for subtle evidence of SDAVF; no nodularity, subpial enhancement, or venous flow voids were appreciated. Ultimately, concern remained for neurosarcoid myeloradiculitis given prominent nerve root involvement and enhancement and tissue evidence of pulmonary sarcoidosis.
She received five days of intravenous methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisone 60 mg daily. Her examination improved gradually over several days with increased lower extremity activation noted by day 32 after symptom onset and subsequently to 3–4/5 MRC strength by day 35. MRI of the lumbar and thoracic spine was repeated on day 32 with thin sagittal sections using high-resolution 3D T2-weighted Sampling Perfection with Application optimized Contrasts using different flip-angle Evolutions (SPACE) sequences, which showed abnormal flow voids along the dorsal spinal cord surface from T5-T12 . This finding, occult on standard T2 sequences and appreciated only on SPACE sequences, increased concern for SDAVF and prompted spinal angiogram on day 35, which showed a right T10 epidural arteriovenous fistula supplied by ipsilateral T9 and contralateral T10-11 intercostal arteries . Steroids were discontinued. The fistula was not amenable to endovascular treatment and she underwent surgical ligation on day 41. Post-operative angiogram showed no residual fistula. She was discharged on day 50 to a rehabilitation facility for ongoing physical therapy. Upon hospital discharge, she could stand with assistance, and lower extremity strength had improved to 3/5 in iliopsoas, 4–5/5 in quadriceps/hamstrings, and 5-/5 in tibialis anterior. She underwent repeat spinal angiogram four months later that did not reveal any residual fistula. She was seen again in clinic 10 months following surgery. At this appointment, she had regained full strength in her legs, but continued to experience numbness from her bilateral knees extending to her feet, which limited her ability to walk, necessitating use of a walker. She underwent repeat MRI 12 months after her initial surgery that demonstrated decreased conspicuity and size of the long segment T2 signal abnormality throughout the thoracic spine.