A 54-year-old male patient presented with the chief complaint of an asymptomatic swelling in the midline of his hard palate, which he first noted about 2 months prior. The patient was not aware of any other oral mucosal problems. His medical history was essentially non-contributory. He suffered from allergic rhinitis and was taking systemic antihistamines and using a mometasone furoate nasal spray. He was a non-smoker but reported a brief past smoking history.
Intraoral examination revealed the presence of a discrete, raised, mid-palatal ovoid lesion with a bluish appearance, measuring 6mm by 4mm. Subtle reticular, erythematous lesions were also noted to affect the gingiva and the left buccal mucosa. These reticular, erythematous lesions involving his gingiva are shown in . No other abnormalities were identified. Extraoral examination was unremarkable.
An excisional biopsy was performed of the palatal swelling and a tissue sample measuring 12mm x 7mm x 4mm was submitted for routine histopathology. Fig. shows a post-operative photograph illustrating the site and extent of the excision.
The histopathology report indicated that the lesion was a leiomyoma. Immunochemistry for S100 was negative and smooth muscle actin was strongly positive. Incisional biopsy of the left maxillary buccal gingiva indicated the presence of oral lichen planus (WHO diagnostic criteria). In view of the mucosal lesions, the patient was also referred for a series of routine blood tests to ensure the absence of haematinic deficiencies. Fasting glucose levels and the presence of anti-skin antibodies was also ascertained. All results returned within normal limits.
A well-circumscribed, encapsulated mass was visible within the subepithelial collagen, as seen in Fig. . This was composed of interlacing fascicles of smooth muscle with small angulated vasculature lined by a simple endothelium. No evidence of malignancy was seen. summarizes the histopathological features of a solid leiomyoma.
Immunohistochemically, leiomyomas are reactive with vimentin, desmin, α-smooth muscle actin (SMA), and muscle specific actin . Desmin, actin, H-caldesmon and vimentin are diffusely and strongly positive in the neoplastic cells Most tumor cells are also positive for smooth muscle actin and Myoglobin. The Ki-67 index is usually >5% . The immunohistochemical technique is an important aid in diagnosis, in which these tumors usually express immunoreactivity for SMA and negativity for the S-100 protein. In this case, as seen in Figs. ( and ), immunochemistry for S100 was negative and smooth muscle actin was strongly positive.
The diagnosis reached from his left gingival biopsy was oral lichen planus (OLP). Direct immunofluorescence was performed and revealed no diagnostic features.