A 27-year-old woman with TN during 11 years in the left V2 and V3 divisions was submitted 6 years ago to microvascular decompression in the posterior fossa due to neurovascular conflict. Her symptoms disappeared for 4 years and she was resistant to standard drug therapy at the time. Percutaneous balloon rhizotomy was performed in another service. Massive bleeding during the procedure was described, and the patient presented with proptosis, eye pain, chemosis, and paralysis of extraocular movements in the left eye a few hours after the procedure, with worsening of symptoms over the following days. A brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed an oval structure of 14 × 13 × 11 mm adjacent to the left cavernous sinus. Moreover, a prominent and serpiginous tubular image in intraconal situation located caudal to the superior rectus muscle and cranially to retrobulbar segment of the optic nerve with significant hypointensity similar to that displayed in the cavernous portion of the ipsilateral ICA suggested a flow void compatible with vascular abnormality of high flow. This structure corresponded to the superior ophthalmic vein, which captured contrast and presented with ventral extraorbital insinuation and dorsal insinuation to the orbital apex through the superior orbital fissure with gradual reduction of its caliber. After 10 days, she was referred to digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the intracranial vessels, which confirmed the diagnosis of a high flow CCF. The fistula was indirect because it filled the cavernous sinus retrogradely through an abnormal communication between the final segment of the posterior petrous portion of the ICA and veins draining to the sinus (vidian artery communicating with the inferolateral trunk). There was no other vascular abnormality involving the right ICA and external carotid artery bilaterally or posterior circulation . Transarterial embolization of the fistulous orifice was performed using coils, with immediate cessation of early venous filling . The patient showed complete regression of ocular symptoms in a period of 5 days. During a 6-month follow-up, the patient confirmed complete remission of the TN.