A 58-year-old female presented to the emergency department due to severe headaches, altered mental status with minimal response, neck stiffness, and fever of 38.3 C. She was not alert or oriented to person, place, or time. She was arousable with sternal rub and did track to visual stimuli. Per family members, these signs and symptoms started 1 day prior to admission. Her past medical history was significant for right sphenoid meningoencephalocele with herniation of the right temporal lobe through a defect in the roof of the sphenoid recess. This was never surgically addressed in the past. She never had trauma to the skull, tumors, or mass lesions in the brain before. She also had meningitis 10 years prior that was treated with an unknown antibiotic course as well as a history of sinusitis and clear nasal drainage that was worse with leaning forward for 3 months in duration. The patient denied sick contacts and recent travel. On admission (Day 0), her white blood cell count was 28.5 cubic milliliter (reference range 3.8–10.5 cubic milliliter), with a neutrophil predominance of 91%.
On day 0, 2 sets of anaerobic and aerobic blood cultures were obtained. Chlorhexidine was used as an antiseptic on the right antecubital region and venous blood was obtained for one set of aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures. A second set of blood cultures were taken within 1 h. Aerobic cultures were collected first with Aerobic Bactec plus culture vials from Becton, Dickinson, and Company. 10 ml were obtained for each bottle. Anaerobic cultures were collected second with Bactec lytic anaerobic culture vials by Becton, Dickinson, and Company. 10 ml were obtained for each bottle. There was no manipulation of the oral cavity prior to these culture sets. Urinalysis was negative for signs of urinary tract infection. Chest x-ray was negative for signs of pneumonia.
On day 0, MR of orbit, face, and neck with and without intravenous gadolinium contrast showed right sphenoid meningoencephalocele with herniation of the right temporal lobe as shown in Figs. and . There was meningeal enhancement and ventricular debris present. Lumbar puncture was contraindicated secondary to prior herniation, but on day 7 magnetic resonance stereotactic imaging of head with intravenous gadolinium showed debris in lateral ventricle occipital horn and dural thickening/enhancement consistent with meningitis. Her neck stiffness, altered mental status, and fevers were also consistent with meningitis . On admission, empiric coverage with vancomycin 1 g every 12 h, ceftriaxone 2 g every 12 h, and ampicillin 2 g every 6 h was initiated based on guidelines, in addition to dexamethasone 2 g every 2 h .
On day 1, both sets of aerobic and anaerobic culture bottles had giemsa staining that was positive for gram positive cocci in pairs and chains. All four culture bottles grew Streptococcus oralis. The isolate was susceptible to penicillin and ceftriaxone. On day 2, vancomycin and ampicillin were discontinued. By day 4, patient slowly regained mental status. On day 5, white blood cell count was 9.5 cubic milliliter (reference range 3.8–10.5 cubic milliliter). On day 5, beta 2 transferrin from nasal secretions were positive, confirming cerebrospinal fluid leak. Despite ceftriaxone therapy, patient continued to have low grade fevers from admission to day 4.
Transesophageal echocardiogram was performed to rule out endocarditis. No vegetations were observed. Otolaryngologist were consulted. On day 7, patient had endonasal endoscopic repair of roof of the sphenoid bone was performed. She improved clinically through her hospital course with resolution of mental status to her baseline. Three months later she had no complications as a result. Magnetic resonance imaging of brain without contrast after 1 month of treatment was negative for brain herniation, and patient remained afebrile without complication.