A 37-year-old female patient known to have a posterior occipital lesion (low-grade glioma with pilocytic features) presented for occipital craniotomy followed by supratentorial approach for debulking of the tumor. The patient’s physical status classification was II according to the American Society of Anesthesiologists Classification (ASA II), her physical exam where unremarkable, and she was not known to have any allergies.
The patient had previously undergone left parietal craniotomy and partial excision of the tumor in December, 1999 followed by chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Later, she started to have an increase in intracranial pressure (ICP) and underwent external ventricular drainage device (EVD) insertion under general anesthesia with no complications. In 2013, the patient was diagnosed to have recurrence of the brain tumor, and a right occipital craniotomy in a sitting position was done under general anesthesia that lasted for 8 hours in a sitting position without any postoperative complications.
In August 2014 she started to complain of blurred vision and was diagnosed to have a metastatic sub-thalamic brain tumor and was planned for a navigation-assisted tumor debulking occipital craniotomy.
The surgical procedure lasted for around 10 hours and was performed in a sitting position with minimal head flexion and throat pack insertion. The procedure was invasively monitored, in which a left radial arterial line and right subclavian central line were inserted intra-operatively. Anesthesia was induced with propofol (2 mg/kg) and fentanyl (1.5 μg/kg). After muscle relaxation with cisatracurium (0.15 mg/kg) the airway was secured with a cuffed ETT with an internal diameter of 7.5 mm, with Cormack-Lehane grade 1 view obtained by direct laryngoscopy, and the patient was connected to a mechanical ventilator. Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane (1 MAC), cisatracurium (8 mg/hour) and remifentanil infusion. She was given intra-operatively 3.5 liters of Ringer lactate and one unit of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) and had an adequate urine output. Consequently, she had stable vital signs all through the procedure, systolic blood pressure around 100 mmHg, PaCO2 around 33 mmHg and oxygen saturation 99% all through the operation.
After the surgical intervention was finished, residual muscle paralysis was reversed with neostigmine (0.05 mg/kg) and atropine (1.2 mg), a big throat pack was removed and after achieving spontaneous breathing in a supine position with a tidal volume (VT) of 800–850 mL and respiratory rate between 10 and 12 breaths/min with stable vital signs, extubation was done alongside. After extubation, a bedside neurological exam was done, which revealed left-sided weakness, and the neurosurgery team was informed.
While the neurosurgery was re-doing the slipped head dressing, we noticed a gradual decrease in the TV and a rapid increase in her tongue size, O2 saturation decreased to early 90s%, and manual mask ventilation started with high resistance. Foreign body (throat pack, gauze) was thought to be the cause, so oropharynx was checked by laryngoscope, which showed enlarged tongue with an edematous soft palate. Moreover, epiglottis and vocal cords could not be seen (Cormack-Lehane grade 4), and the intubation was extremely difficult to be established. Mask ventilation became harder, the patient started to have inspiratory stridor and O2 saturation dropped transiently to the 80s%. We called for help while O2 saturation was kept at 93–94% by face mask manual ventilation. A fiber-optic trial was not done, because her airway needed to be secured in a time efficient fashion. The surgery team was consulted for urgent tracheostomy, while keeping bag-mask ventilation; though it was very hard to maintain manual ventilation due to increasing airway resistance. The tracheostomy was done without complications.
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) postoperatively, and kept on mechanical ventilation ), keeping her on sedation using propofol and remifentanil. She was also given antibiotics (cefuroxime, vancomycin, and levofloxacin), dexamethasone, and antihistamine regularly. Enteral feeding via a nasogastric tube was started and chest physiotherapy was done regularly.
Two days later –), she started to have more swollen tongue and neck. A mouth gag was applied, a magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) was ordered, but unfortunately could not be done at that time. Five days later, she started to have an increase in white blood cells (WBCs) count and septic work-up was done, which revealed gram negative bacilli.
Nine days later and ), her tongue began to increase in size again with ulcerations on the surface. Sixteen days later, she developed sepsis with multi-organ failure which ended with asystole and death was declared.