Our patient is a Caucasian woman aged 40 years. Symptoms now recognized due to SM occurred from the age of 13 years but were not severe enough to seek advice or a diagnosis. Symptoms became more severe after the birth of her first child. These consisted of body pain, stomach pains, headache, flushing, itchy spots, severe fatigue and difficulty in concentration. The diagnosis of ISM was made a year later following a bone marrow biopsy. Initially treatment was an antihistamine only. Despite this she continued to be very fatigued, with daily bone, muscle and head pain. She also had severe gastrointestinal symptoms, diarrhea and abdominal pain. At this time her serum tryptase was 49 μg/mL. She was referred to one of us (HH). At that time her treatment was changed to desloratadine 5 mg tablets, one to two daily, lanzoprazole 15 mg tablets, when needed, and acetylsalicylic acid 500 mg tablets, up to two tablets four times daily, and SCG oral solution (Lomudal GI™), 200 mg four times daily. This change in treatment resulted in an improvement in symptoms, particularly the gastrointestinal.
However, she still had symptoms specifically of bone pain and headache, it was decided to try the effects of adding inhaled SCG to her current treatment.
In order to monitor the progress of symptom control with the introduction of inhaled SCG, our patient recorded the severity each day of 21 symptoms using a daily diary card (see Additional File ). The severity of symptoms was recorded using a zero to four scale; 0 = no symptoms, 1 = mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe, 4 = very severe. Completed diary cards were returned to one of us (AME) via email on a regular basis together with any comments and advice on any dosage changes of the SCG products communicated in the same way. Our patient was also seen by one of us (HH) regularly at a specialist hospital clinic. At each visit blood was taken for measurements of serum tryptase.
Inhaled SCG was administered using gelatine capsules (Lomudal Caps.) each containing 20 mg of pure SCG powder. The initial dose was 20 mg (one capsule) inhaled four times daily using an Eclipse Inhaler.