A 40-year-old previously healthy woman complaining of slight nausea, vomiting, and anorexia was referred to our hospital. Physical findings revealed a flat abdomen that was soft, not tender, and no palpable mass. CT and MRI examination showed a left abdominal lesion on the retroperitoneal side (, ). CT showed a lobule mass of 107 × 42 mm in size, with internal inhomogeneity and mild delayed enhancement on the retroperitoneal side of the left abdominal lesion. MRI showed a mass with low intensity and partial high intensity on T2WI·In addition, PET-CT detected slight FDG accumulation (SUV max: 3.01) in the same lesion .
A retroperitoneal tumor, particularly a desmoid tumor, was suspected based on the abdominal MRI, abdominal CT, and PET-CT findings. A solitary fibrous tumor, malignant lymphoma, fatty tumor and neurogenic tumor were considered as differential diagnoses. Thus, total laparoscopic surgery was performed to resect the retroperitoneal tumor.
The operation was performed as follows. First, laparoscopic exploration was performed with five ports after inducing pneumoperitoneum . Secondly, mobilization of the jejunum and the ileum was conducted in the right-head-ventral side position . This mobilization was indicated to provide an optimal surgical view of the tumor. Dissection of the left side of the colon was performed using a medial-lateral retroperitoneal approach Thirdly, dissection of the tumor around the inferior mesenteric artery was performed. The tumor was adjacent to the left side of the aorta and the left lower vena cava, but no invasion was observed, and two feeding arteries were flowing into the tumor from the aorta and the IMA. Each artery was clipped (, ). In addition, two feeding veins flowing into the vena cava were clipped. The tumor specimen was removed via the umbilical wound.
The operative time was 124 min, and the operating blood loss was approximately 5 mL.
The size of resected tumor was 110 × 70 mm. A pathological examination of the tumor confirmed the diagnosis of ganglioneuroma with clear surgical margins (, , ). Since the patient recovered without complications, she was discharged on the 8th day after surgery. At the time of writing this report, the patient has shown no signs of recurrence and has been undergoing regular follow-up examinations as an outpatient for 1 year since resection.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of the present case report and any accompanying images.