The patient was a 77-year-old male who had not previously experienced small blisters or “blebs” around his mouth, nose, or genitals. He did not have any other diseases. However, he did have a medical history that included intermittent treatment for hypertension. On 9 May 2019, the patient started to suffer from a fever of 38.5℃. He also experienced an aversion to cold, sore throat, painful joints, and a headache with primarily bilateral temporal pain. The patient was treated in the emergency department of the GDTCM. However, his condition continued to deteriorate.
The patient was re-admitted to our hospital on 12 May 2019 due to the presence of a high fever, weakness of both lower limbs, and an unstable gait. After admission, the patient gradually developed weakness in both upper limbs, dysphagia, irritability, loss of comprehension and mental capacity, and disorientation. The patient was transferred to the Neurological Intensive Care Unit (NICU) from the emergency department on 13 May 2019. On neurological examination, the patient exhibited drowsiness, restlessness, decreased short-term and long-term memory, and decreased mental capacity. A cranial nerve examination revealed bilateral peripheral facial palsy, dysphagia, hoarseness, weakness of both sides of the soft palate, and loss of pharyngeal and palate reflexes. His eyes movements were normal. A motor function examination revealed flaccid limb paralysis, loss of tendon reflexes, level 2 muscle strength for both lower limbs, and level 3 muscle strength for both upper limbs. A CSF test revealed a strikingly increased protein level (1,002 mg/L, normative values: 150-450 mg/L) and a red blood cell count of 630/µL (normative values: 0µL ). While the patient’s blood pressure was normal, his glucose, leukocyte, and lymphocyte counts were also normal. The second lumbar puncture revealed an increased protein level (1,745 mg/L, normative values: 150-450 mg/L), a red blood cell count of 43/µL and slight elevated white blood cell (77/µL, normative values: 0–8µL). We initially considered the possibility that the patient had GBS due to the pre-infection, peripheral symmetric damage to his limbs and cranial nerves, and albuminocytologic dissociation. Therefore, we provided intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (IVIG, 0.4 kg/d) for five days.
The patient presented a worsening condition one day later, including lethargy, with a GCS score of 7. He developed hypoxemia caused by increased sputum secretion due to bulbar paralysis, which blocked his airway. The patient underwent tracheal intubation and was placed on a ventilator. Subsequently, the patient experienced status epilepticus, and we provided anti-epilepsy treatment. We considered the patient might have experienced CNS damage due to the presence of considerable advanced neurological dysfunction. We carried out MRI imaging and an electroencephalogram (EEG) on the patient. We also performed autoimmune antibody tests on CSF and serum samples. The MRI revealed hyper-signal lesions in the right temporal lobe, right hippocampus, right insula, and right cingulate gyrus . The EEG revealed epileptiform discharges in the right temporal region and right frontal region, which were consistent with a diagnosis of viral or autoimmune encephalitis. Therefore, the patient was treated intravenously with 10 mg/kg acyclovir every eight hours for eight days. In addition, methylprednisolone (MP, 1 g/d) pulse therapy was administered for five days, followed by a decreased MP dosage (0.5 g/d) for five days, then with oral prednisolone (60 mg/d). During this time, the second-generation sequencing of the CSF sample and the autoantibody spectrum for peripheral neuropathy were evaluated. The CSF was positive for HSV PCR (HSV-1, specific sequence 17,870). The immunologic tests were performed on the serum and CSF samples, including those for anti-ganglioside antibodies associated with peripheral neuropathy and antibodies associated with autoimmune encephalitis. The CSF samples were negative for antibodies of autoimmune encephalitis. The serum samples were positive for CASPR2 antibodies (antibody titer:1/10) and anti-GM3 immunoglobulin G (IgG) (+) using the indirect tissue immunofluorescence and cell-based assays. These tests verified the diagnosis of HSVE but were only suggestive of the presence of autoimmune encephalitis.
Progressive improvement in consciousness, motor function, and respiratory function was observed during the second week of treatment. The patient was removed from the ventilator and transferred out of the NICU. When the patient was discharged from the hospital, he was completely conscious but had poor cognitive ability (a modified Rankin Scale [mRS] score of 2). The CSF autoimmune encephalitis antibodies and serum anti-GM3 IgG were negative before the patient was discharged. Six months later, this patient presented with fever and delayed reaction was admitted again in GDTCM. His peripheral white blood cells and procalcitonin(2.52 ng/ml, normative values: 0-0.05 ng/ml) were elevated. Chest X-ray showed inflammation of the left upper lingular segment and both lower lungs. There was no abnormal EEG activity. However, the patient refused to undergo a lumbar puncture and we were unable to assess the CSF. On treatment, ceftriaxone, levofloxacin and piperacillin sodium sulbactam were given. Subsequently, the patient’s temperature returned to normal and his mental status improved. At the one-year follow-up examination, despite a deficit in his short-term memory, the patient had not experienced any relapse of the HSVE or occurrence of seizures. He had regained the necessary skills associated with daily life (a mRS score of 1). The whole progress of diagnosis and treatment were shown in Fig. .