A 63-year-old female presented with sepsis and recurrent extended-spectrum beta-lactamase Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteremia.
Our patient initially presented to her local hospital with hypotension and sepsis in late August 2019 and completed a 10-d course of ertapenem while hospitalized for E. coli bacteremia. She presented locally with similar symptoms a few days after discharge from the initial admission and was found to have recurrent E. coli bacteremia with the identical susceptibility pattern. Imaging demonstrated TIPS occlusion, and the patient was transferred to our institution with recurrent E. coli bacteremia from an unidentified source.
Our patient with a MELD-Na score of 23 underwent orthotopic liver transplantation in 2009 for hepatitis C cirrhosis. Her transplant course was complicated by recurrent hepatitis C infection resulting in bridging fibrosis/early cirrhosis despite viral eradication in 2011. She eventually developed portal hypertension related to a non-occlusive portal vein thrombosis and anastomotic stenosis of the hepatic vein and inferior vena cava. In 2014, she suffered acute gastric variceal bleeding and underwent semi-urgent treatment with balloon-occluded anterograde obliteration of a gastrorenal shunt and TIPS creation with a self-expanding poly-tetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE)–covered stent-graft.
Medical history included hepatitis C, gastric varices, hypertension, well-controlled diabetes mellitus type 2, iron deficiency anemia and fibromyalgia. Family history included hypertension, lung cancer, and prostate cancer.
The patient was afebrile and displayed right upper abdominal tenderness.
Laboratory findings included hemoglobin 8.6 (12-16 g/dL) (baseline of approximately 9-10), white blood cell (WBC) 5.39 (4-11 × 103/µL), platelets 89 (150-450 × 103/µL), alanine transferase 16 (< 55 U/L), aspartate transferase 19 (< 35 U/L), total bilirubin 0.5 (0.3-1.2 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase 88 (40-150 U/L) and creatinine 1.2 (0.7-1.3 mg/dL). Gastrointestinal pathogens panel polymerase chain reaction was negative for enteroaggregative E. coli, enteropathogenic E. coli, enterotoxigenic E. coli, shiga-like toxin-producing E. coli, E. coli O157, and shigella/enteroinvasive E. coli. Histopathology of cecum and ascending colon biopsies obtained a few days prior revealed extensive ulcerated colonic mucosa with fibrinopurulent exudates, consistent with active colitis. There was no evidence of cytomegalovirus associated inclusion bodies, microorganisms, granulomas, or malignancy. Bacterial culture of the extracted thrombus during thrombectomy did not grow any organisms. Urine analysis showed no bacteria and rare white blood cells per high power field with no growth on culture.
Thickening of the cecum and ascending colon, and TIPS occlusion that extended into the distal right portal vein were noted on abdominal computed tomography (CT) . Magnetic resonance imaging did not show significant hepatic biliary dilatation or biliary leak. Chest CT suggested multiple pulmonary septic emboli. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) obtained a few days prior showed mild reduced systolic ejection fraction and no obvious vegetations, though aortic, tricuspid, and pulmonic valves were not well visualized due to restricted patient mobility and excessive abdominal air.