In December 2010, a 61-year-old man was referred to our academic center for the management of a localized right clear cell RCC, without synchronous metastases. It was an upper polar lesion, measuring 2.5 cm long axis, essentially exophytic, posterior, entirely above the polar lines, without vascular contact, classified 5p RENAL score.
An open right partial nephrectomy was performed by an experienced surgeon and histological results highlighted a 2.5 cm clear cell RCC, Furhman grade III, classified pT3aN0R0 due to the extension to perinephric tissues, but not beyond Gerota Fascia.
According to EAU (European Association of Urology) guidelines , a surveillance has been validated including semi-annual monitoring by CT scan in the 1 st year, then annual monitoring by CT scan in the following 2 years and every 2 years thereafter.
In Mars 2012, a localized homolateral recurrence has been highlighted at CT scan. It was a lower polar lesion, measuring 4.3 cm long axis, essentially endophytic, anterior, close to the collecting system, with polar line crosses and venous contact, classified 9 ah RENAL score, Supplemental Fig. 1. There was no evidence of metastasis on this CT scan.
An open right radical nephrectomy was performed and histological examination reported a 3.5 cm clear cell RCC, Furhman grade III, classified pT3aN0R0 due to the extension to the renal sinus fat.
According to EAU guidelines , a surveillance has been validated.
In September 2018, a metachronous gastric metastasis was found on CT scan. The lesion was located on the lesser curvature of the stomach, measuring 4.5 cm long axis. No other secondary lesions were identified, Supplemental Fig. 2. The patient had no digestive symptoms, no hematemesis, no melena.
A surgical procedure has been validated: a laparoscopic wedge resection, converted to laparotomy has been performed.
Histological examination reported a proliferation of atypical cells containing round clear nuclei and irregularly shaped nuclei with prominent nucleoli using hematoxylin-eosin staining. Immunostaining revealed negativity for all epithelial markers (CK7, CK20) and positivity for proximal tubular epithelial markers (CD10, Vimentine). These characteristics led to the conclusion of gastric metastasis of a clear cell RCC with 30 % sarcomatoid contingent, with negative resection margins.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on the 8th day.
Two years later, in September 2020, a CT scan was performed, revealing a 17 mm adenopathy behind the hepatic hilum and a surgical management was performed, by an experienced surgeon, including a lymph node dissection of the hepatic hilum and the hepatic artery. Histological examination reported a node metastasis of the clear cell RCC, in hepatic artery lymph node dissection. Actually, he remains healthy.
This case has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .