A 49-year-old man with confirmed HIV-1 infection 14 days before treated with lamivudine, tenofovir and efavirenz was admitted with a 3-month history of fatigue, weight loss and fever. He smokes occasionally but denies any alcohol or illicit drug use. He also reported unprotected sex. He has splenomegaly and generalized lymphadenopathy occurred in the neck, axilla, mediastinum and celiac on physical examination and computed tomography scan. A detailed clinical work-up for infection, immune and malignant diseases were performed. His CD4 count was 48 cells/μl and HIV viral load was 8596 copies/ml. Laboratory tests showed pancytopenia, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein, polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia and hypoalbuminemia. Serological testing for cryptococcus, Epstein Barr virus, cytomegalovirus was unrevealing . Furthermore, peripheral blood cultures incubated for 5 days were also negative. Hemophagocytosis could be seen on bone marrow smears , complied with fever, splenomegaly, three-line cytopenia, high level of serum ferritin and soluble CD25, supporting the diagnosis of HPS. A lymph node biopsy with the highest standardized uptake value (SUV = 6.0) provided by a positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) scan revealed nonspecific lymphocyte proliferation. Pathological imaging of lymph node biopsy showed nonspecific lymphocyte proliferation and excluded malignancy.
To find the cause of HPS, a MGS assay of plasma was performed and the result revealed a HHV8 viremia of 5621 unique reads with coverage of identified viral genes 94.93% . HHV8-associated diseases were further considered. No Kaposi’s sarcoma evidence was found on the skin, oral and gastrointestinal mucosa by endoscopy. Then the evidence of HHV8 viral load test positive demonstration of in situ hybridization and histopathology evaluation on the lymph node tissue confirmed HHV8-associated multicentric Castleman disease (HHV8-MCD). It was characterized by the presence of sheets of plasma cell in the interfollicular zone. Prominent high endothelial venules could be observed in the interfollicular region. Moreover, the lymphoid follicles were dissolved, with atrophic germinal centers . Treatment with 6 cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone and combined with ganciclovir for anti-HHV8 treatment in the context of HIV infection, improved the patient’s condition. Nevertheless, the Charlson Comorbidity Index was 8, which suggests poor prognosis.