A 68-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension and hyperuricemia was incidentally found to have unruptured aneurysms of the ACoA and right internal carotid artery (ICA) – posterior communicating artery (PCoA) bifurcation. His head computed tomography (CT) and MRI/A showed no abnormal findings except for the aneurysms. The ACoA aneurysm had a maximum diameter of 7 mm . Because the aneurysm was protruding upward, located over 10 mm above the frontal base [ and ], we planned to clip the ACoA aneurysm through an interhemispheric approach. DSA was performed for closer investigation of the aneurysm, including the perforators and bridging veins. Immediately after the procedures, slight right hemiparesis and aphasia appeared, and his National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 4 points. MRI/A was performed 10 min after the onset, and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed left M3 occlusion, which was patent on 3D-DSA previously [ and ]. In addition, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) revealed no apparent infarction at that time . Because of the presence of MRA-diffusion mismatch, we considered recanalization therapy. The incidence of early complete recanalization in the distal middle cerebral artery (MCA) after intravenous thrombolysis was reported to be not high, at 38%. Because the endovascular team was not available at this time, we decided to perform emergent surgical embolectomy for MCA occlusion as reported previously. We also planned to clip the ACoA aneurysm using a pterional approach when it was possible without difficulty in addition to embolectomy.
Neuroanesthesia was induced, and the patient was placed in the supine position. The operation was started 80 min after onset. Motor evoked potentials of the right upper limb were monitored. The left frontotemporal craniotomy was performed, and the Sylvian fissure was opened widely from the distal portion under the operating microscope. The M2 superior trunk was identified, and the M2-3 bifurcation was obstructed by an embolus . Arteriotomy was performed, and the embolus was removed . However, M3 was still occluded. There was also an embolus at the distal M3, and it was removed in the same manner . The embolus was white and slightly soft. After suturing the site of arteriotomy, recanalization of the MCA was confirmed by microvascular Doppler. Recanalization was performed 150 min after onset and 70 min after the start of surgery. Subsequently, the Sylvian fissure was widely opened to expose M1, ICA, and A1. The interhemispheric fissure was widely opened from the base, and the ACoA complex and the aneurysm were confirmed . Bilateral A1s were temporarily blocked, and the aneurysm was detached from the surrounding structures. After confirming that there were no perforators, a straight clip was applied to the aneurysm and reinforced with a bayonet clip [ and ]. We confirmed that the blood flow on both sides of A2 was maintained by a Doppler flowmeter, and the operation was completed. No significant change in neuromonitoring was observed throughout the procedures .
The postoperative course was good. Postoperative MRA revealed recanalization of the occluded MCA and DWI demonstrated a small infarction of the left frontal lobe and insula . The NIHSS score after a week was 1 point. Pathological investigation revealed that the embolus was a fresh thrombus containing a very small amount of red blood cells, and no vascular wall component was identified. The patient underwent rehabilitation for mild aphasia and was discharged home on foot with a modified Rankin scale score of 1. The unruptured aneurysm of the right ICA was treated at a later date. The patient has been followed at an outpatient clinic over 4 years, and he is doing well with no symptoms and no signs of stroke.