A 27-year-old Black African Ugandan woman living with HIV, on antiretroviral drugs for 10 years, was referred to Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital (MRRH) with a 2-month history of worsening right lower abdominal pain and low grade fevers. She had no history of cough, weight loss, or night sweats and had normal bowel and micturition habits.
Prior to her referral, she had been managed at a peripheral clinic as a case of a psoas abscess, and 2 years earlier at another peripheral clinic as a case of lumbago when she presented with mild lower back pain. She had been given supportive treatment that included amitriptyline and paracetamol (doses not specified), in addition to self-medication with local herbs. She reported to have initially experienced relief on the local and supportive medication, only to later develop lower abdominal pain that worsened with time. No diagnostic imaging had been carried out during that time.
She had been on tenofovir/lamivudine/efavirenz (TLE) (300 mg/300 mg/600 mg) and septrin (960 mg), then later transitioned to tenofovir/lamivudine/dolutegravir (TLD) (300 mg/300 mg/50 mg) in 2020, as per Uganda’s HIV treatment guidelines, and completed 6 months of TB preventive therapy (isoniazid for 6 months) in 2019. She had good ART adherence with suppressed viral loads (VLs) for the last two consecutive years. The most recent VL was 95 copies/mL (June 2021).
An abdominal ultrasound scan done at a peripheral clinic revealed an echo-complex, predominantly cystic mass of ~ 790 cc in the right lumbar region that was suspected to be a psoas abscess. This led to initial management of the patient as a case of a psoas abscess.
She had no other known chronic illness such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, heart disease, or renal disease.
She had no history of trauma, blood transfusion, or surgical procedures.
She was a mother of one child, born by spontaneous vaginal delivery and had no history of pregnancy losses.
She was separated from the husband, a tailor by profession, and lived with the mother. There were no known familial illnesses.
No history of cigarette smoking or alcohol intake.