A 44-year-old Turkish woman presented to our clinic with the complaint of a 3-year history of a slow growing palpable mass in her right shoulder. She had no other documented or reported condition.
Her physical examination revealed a palpable, mobile, painless, partially fluctuating mass, 5×5cm in size, in her deltoid muscle, extending to the lower lateral part of her right shoulder and proximal lateral part of her right arm.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a lobular contoured mass lesion, cystic in nature and measuring 34×23×37mm at its largest that was located caudal to the lateral compartment of her deltoid muscle and an interstitial edema in the adjacent deltoid muscle (Figure ). A complete blood count, biochemical and other laboratory tests revealed normal values.
During her surgical operation, the mass was approached via a longitudinal incision over the mass in the deltoid area of her right shoulder, sensory neural branches of the axillary nerve were preserved, and the encapsulated gelatinous mass 4×5cm in size was easily separated from the muscle tissue and then excised. A macroscopic pathological examination of the mass revealed a nodular lesion cream-beige in color, 2.5×2.5×3cm in size and capsular in appearance that was adjacent to the deltoid muscle. The sectioned surface of the mass was pink-beige in color and solid bright myxoid in appearance. The surgical margin was tumor-free.
A microscopic examination showed that the mass consisted of a small number of spindle or stellate cells, a small number of vessels, thin collagen fibers and a small number of loose reticular fibers embedded in an abundant myxoid stroma (Figure ). The cells had a small, pyknotic slightly hyperchromatic nucleus and scanty cytoplasm. Some presented multiple stellate-shaped cytoplasmic extensions. Cellular pleomorphism, cellularity and vascularity were low. There was no mitosis, necrosis or cystic degeneration. At the periphery of the lesion, the skeletal muscle adjacent to the tumor was atrophic with interspersed edema fluid or infiltrated tumor cells (Figures and
).
An immunohistochemical examination of the mass showed diffuse positivity for vimentin in tumor cells (Figure ), focal and weak positivity for CD34 in peripheral regions and was negative for S-100. The Ki-67 proliferation index was less than 1%. In the light of pathological data obtained, the mass was concluded to be intramuscular myxoma (Figure ).