A 25-year-old Iranian woman (weight: 57 kg; body mass index: 20.54 kg/m2) was admitted to the hospital emergency room in Tehran, Iran after being discovered unconscious and unresponsive to sensory and pain stimulation. She was a medical intern at the same hospital in the internal medicine ward, and the episode happened at 3 a.m. at the end of her shifts, while she was sleeping in the doctors’ room. Because other colleges were unaware of her previous medical history, the protocol for unconscious patients was immediately implemented. Vital signs of the patient upon arrival in the emergency room were: blood pressure = 140/70 mmHg; heart rate = 110 bpm; oxygen saturation level = 98% on the right atrial; respiratory rate = 16 and temperature was 36.8 °C. The patient’s BG level was 25 mg/dl by self-monitoring blood glucose (SMBG) device. Since the patient was unconscious, she received an intravenous (IV) bolus of 50% dextrose. Laboratory tests were run, including thyroid, kidney and liver function tests; the results are shown in Table . All tests revealed no abnormalities, despite a low BG level. The insulin level was high with a low C-peptide level.
Uptake of the IV bolus of dextrose improved the patient's level of consciousness, but she still had focal neurological symptoms, including hemiparesis and aphasia. Fifteen minutes after the initiation of treatment with serum dextrose, she was responsive to pain and stimulation. She remained in the emergency room for monitoring, and after 1 h all neurological symptoms had disappeared, satisfying Whipple’s triad of hypoglycemia. Thus, a CT scan to rule out vascular events was deferred. After regaining consciousness, the patient mentioned having T1DM since the age of 18 years and receiving regular treatment with insulin and Neutral Protamine Hagedorn insulin (NPH). In this setting, non-beta cell tumors are unlikely to be diagnosed. The patient also claimed experiencing HU for the previous 2 years. She also mentioned at least three episodes of severe hypoglycemic episodes weekly during the last 3 months that may have necessitated the assistance of others. These episodes mostly happened at night.
The patient claims that she was very active during her work shift and did not have time to eat adequately, but she injected insulin at the usual dose.
The injection regimen of the patient consisted of multiple insulin injections day: regular insulin, 10 U before breakfast and dinner, and 6 U before lunch; NPH insulin, 25 U in the morning and 10 U at night). Her dose had been adjusted at her last visit to her endocrinologist 3 months previously, but she has had several severe hypoglycemic attacks during the last 4 weeks. The patient’s lifestyle had also changed in the last 6 months, as she had begun routine gym exercise to manage her insulin needs and glycemic control.
She was examined by a neurologist in the morning for her focal neurological symptoms, and the examination revealed no deficits. Her medical history was also concerning for hpoglycemia-associated autonomic failure (HAAF), and she was recommended to have this condition evaluated as outpatient. To avoid recurrent hypoglycemia, further laboratory tests and a follow-up evaluation with an endocrinologist were recommended, as well a switch from human insulins to analog insulins.