An 8-month-old girl was transferred from an Albanian hospital to the tertiary care ICU of the Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital in Rome (Italy) for respiratory failure following viral bronchiolitis, with unremarkable prenatal and perinatal history. Three days after hospital admission, the patient required veno-arterial ECMO support due to severe cardiac dysfunction and pulmonary hypertension. The child also exhibited severe fluid overload associated with anuria, thus requiring CRRT. CRRT was conducted in tandem with veno-arterial ECMO and anticoagulated with heparin.
A CVVHDF modality was used with the following settings: blood flow rate 40 mL/min, reinfusion flow rate 240 mL/h (200 mL/h pre and 40 mL/h post), dialysate flow rate 300 mL/h, and effluent flow rate 25–30 mL/h modulated according to fluid balance and hemodynamic parameters.
Screening for multidrug-resistant organisms performed at ICU admission revealed stool colonization by VIM-producing P. aeruginosa. After one week of hospitalization, a VAP with bilateral consolidations, interstitial involvement, and pleural effusion was diagnosed. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) culture showed a high bacterial load of PA . Its phenotypic antibiogram highlighted resistance to meropenem (MIC > 16 μg/mL) and ceftazidime/avibactam (MIC > 16/4 μg/mL), intermediate susceptibility to aztreonam (MIC = 1 μg/mL), and susceptibility to amikacin (MIC = 8 μg/mL) and colistin (MIC = 1 μg/mL). A molecular antibiogram confirmed the genotypic detection of VIM metallo-β-lactamase. Combined therapy with ceftazidime/avibactam (50 mg/kg of ceftazidime q8h) plus aztreonam (120 mg/kg/day divided q8h) was promptly started. After one week of treatment, the patient experienced worsening of the clinical condition. BAL cultures still showed significant growth of P. aeruginosa with an increasing MIC for aztreonam from 1 to 32 μg/mL and, simultaneously, the blood cultures were positive for the same pathogen . Given the evidence of uncontrolled infection, source control was performed by removing central venous and arterial catheters. Susceptibility of PA to cefiderocol was evaluated through the use of an antibiogram. According to the EUCAST defined susceptibility breakpoints for PA , this pathogen was considered susceptible to cefiderocol (MIC = 1 μg/mL). Thus, the combined antibiotic therapy previously administered was discontinued and switched to the siderophore cephalosporin. We obtained written parental consent for the off-label use of cefiderocol.
Based on a few studies available on cefiderocol dosing strategies in pediatric subjects, a regimen of 60 mg/kg infused every 8 h (over 3 h) was chosen [,,].
A post-oxygenator blood sample collected on day 3 of treatment resulted in a cefiderocol C value of 51.39 mg/L, achieving the suggested pharmacodynamic target attainment of Cmin/MIC ratio > 4 . The bioanalytical method used to measure cefiderocol blood levels is described in the .
Over the following days, blood inflammatory markers and the radiological picture quickly improved ; thus, ECMO assistance and CRRT were discontinued. Lower respiratory and blood cultures tested on the patient resulted negative.
Therefore, cefiderocol was interrupted after 14 days of therapy. During treatment, no elevation in liver tests or other adverse effects were observed. Regarding renal toxicity, the patient was initially supported by CRRT for severe acute kidney injury, as mentioned above. After four days of treatment with cefiderocol, CRRT was discontinued, and renal clearance remained within the normal age-specific ranges throughout the remaining course of therapy.
The patient was discharged from the pediatric ICU after 27 days of hospitalization.
No hospital readmission within 28 days was observed. Three months after discharge, the patient was in good clinical condition, and she was still colonized by VIM-producing PA in her stool.
The patient’s clinical course is summarized in .