A 73-year-old man was evaluated at the neurosurgical outpatient clinic with an 18-month history of intermittent back pain and progressive gait disturbance due to diminished strength in both legs. Seven years before, the patient had similar neurogenic claudication as main symptom and a lumbar CT scan was done solely, which showed stenosis at the L4-L5 level as the key feature. He underwent lumbar decompressive laminectomy in another institution, with transient improvement at that time.
During the following months, the symptoms slowly progressed and the patient became unable to walk without assistance. He also developed urinary sphincter disturbance with incontinence episodes. The neurological examination showed a bilateral lower extremity motor weakness with a motor strength grade 3/5 bilateral in hip flexion and extension, and a Grade 4/5 bilateral in knee extension, ankle dorsiflexion, knee flexion, great toe extension, and ankle plantar flexion. The patient also had hypoesthesia from L4 dermatome downward bilaterally, abnormally increased patellar and ankle reflexes bilaterally, and extensor plantar reflexes.
A lumbar MRI was performed, demonstrating prominent vascular voids near conus medullaris but no significant high T2 signal involving the spinal cord [ and ]. Further evaluation was undertaken with CT angiogram and digital subtraction angiography (DSA). These examinations identified a FTAVF which was fed by the filum terminale artery that arose from the ASA and were supplied by the left D10 segmental artery [ and ]. The patient also had an electromyographic study done that reveals chronic neurogenic changes of L3, L4, L5, and S1 bilaterally.
Therapeutic options were discussed with the patient, who decided to undergo surgery. Reopening and extension of the previous laminectomy down to S1 was performed, to expose the fistula. After durotomy, the direct connection between the artery of the filum terminale and the arterialized vein was evident, forming the arteriovenous fistula (AVF) at the level of L5-S1 . With the aid of intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring, we confirm the filum terminale due to the absence of sensory-motor potentials on it [ and ]. An intraoperative angiography with indocyanine green (ICG) was performed to identify the exact shunt location . After confirmation of the AVF, a clip was placed interrupting the fistulous path, followed by the observation that the draining vein was no longer arterialized . This interruption was confirmed with the ICG video angiography .
Surgery and immediate postoperative period were uneventful. Over the following weeks, both sensory and motor deficits, progressively improved. Ten days after surgery, the patient recovered the voluntary control of the urinary sphincter and the urinary catheter was removed. He underwent physiotherapy and was able to walk unassisted 6 months after surgery.