A 78-year-old male presented to us with a history of progressive severe knee pain and deformities over the last 10 years . The local practitioner managed this case with oral non-steroidal anti- inflammatory medications. However, the pain progressed gradually and led to significant reduction of mobility over the period of 10 years. The patient was forced to use a stick while walking but developed insidious onset swelling and pain in both ankles (left > right) in the past 6 months. The gradual onset of pain in the ankle forced the patient to be immobile and wheelchair-ridden. The patient was also suffering from hypertension and benign prostate hypertrophy, both of which were medically controlled. On examination, he was in good general condition but had fixed flexion deformity of both knees at 20° and varus deformity of 30°. The knee range of movement was 20°-90° bilaterally. He had diffuse swelling of both medial malleoli. There were a bilateral medial joint line and patellofemoral tenderness. There was palpable crepitus while knee range of motion. There was localized tenderness in bilateral medial malleoli along with a soft tissue swelling.
The long leg hip-knee- ankle (HKA) radiograph showed severe varus deformity to both knees (left > right). There was a gross distortion of mechanical axes on both the sides (Right: 157° and Left: 151°) with lateral deviation of the mechanical axis (Right: 7.15 cm and Left: 8.45 cm) . His biochemical blood tests were within normal limits, including serum Vitamin D levels. The dual energy X-ray absorptiometry scan revealed moderate osteopenia with T scores of -2.0 in the lumbar spine and -1.8 in the hip bones. The plain anteroposterior (AP) and lateral knee radiographs showed severe varus deformity, gross destruction in the medial tibiofemoral and patellofemoral compartments, lateral subluxation of the tibia, and large posterior osteophytes . Plain radiograph of the ankle showed an ununited fracture of the left medial malleolus with hypertrophic callus at the fracture site . There was no visible fracture line at the right medial malleolus.
All the routine pre-operative workup was normal along with a normal Dobutamine Stress Echo. The patient was planned for simultaneous bilateral TKA, along with the fixation of the left medial malleolus.
Bilateral simultaneous TKA, under spinal-epidural anesthesia, was done using the modified Insall’s exposure. Intraoperatively after the resection of the proximal tibia, a large medial bone defect was identified, and this was filled up using medial metal wedge augments (5 mm on the right side and 10 mm on the left side). To offload the augments and to compensate for the long- term ligamentous imbalance, semi-constrained posterior stabilized TKA components (Scorpio TS™, Stryker) with tibial stem extenders were used . The patient was started on thromboprophylaxis in the form of injection enoxaparin 0.4 mg subcutaneously once a day for 3 weeks and DVT stockings for 6 weeks.
The left medial malleolus was exposed, and the hypertrophic callus was cleared. After the freshening up of the fracture ends, it was fixed using two 4 mm 60 mm cancellous screws . The hypertrophic callus was used as bone graft after the fixation.
Postoperatively, the patient was managed for pain relief and was mobilized using a pneumatic shoe walker for the left ankle on the third post-operative day. The stress fracture united uneventfully in 3 months . Post-operative HKA radiograph showed restoration of mechanical axes (Right: 179° and Left: 178°) on both the sides . Both the knees remained pain free and with the good functional outcome, at 1- year follow-up. The knee society score improved from 24 (preoperative) to 77 (at 1-year follow-up).