A 19-year-old female was brought to the emergency department (ED) by emergency medical services (EMS) with complaints of generalized weakness, an inability to move her extremities, and near syncope. The patient stated that she began feeling generalized weakness that morning, which she initially attributed to her “sleeping position.” Over the day the weakness worsened, culminating in difficulty or inability to move her extremities and a near syncopal episode. The patient stated she had attempted to stand up from a seated position when she “felt like [she] was going to pass out.” The patient called 911 for assistance. On further discussion, the patient revealed she had experienced one similar episode of weakness earlier in the year, but this had resolved spontaneously and was not as severe. She does not have a primary care physician and she had never sought care for this complaint. The patient said she noticed generalized abdominal pain, nausea, and constipation, associated with each of these episodes of weakness and lightheadedness. She denied any recent illnesses. She stated she treats her bipolar disorder with daily cannabis and consumes alcohol daily as well.
The patient had a history of anxiety, depression, migraines, and normocytic anemia. Surgical history included an adenoidectomy and tonsillectomy as a child. She had no pertinent family history. Her social history included daily alcohol use, drinking a total of 1.75 liters of vodka over a two-week period. She started smoking when she was 16 years old, smoking a pack per day, but quit a year prior to presentation. The patient smoked cannabis daily. Her only medication was ferrous sulfate 325 milligrams (mg) daily. She had no known drug or environmental allergies.
On physical exam, the patient was alert and in no acute distress but appeared tired. She was able to stand unassisted. At the time of triage, she was afebrile (36.6o Celsius), her heart rate was 40 beats per minute, she was breathing 20 times per minute, her blood pressure was 115/90 millimeters of mercury, and she had an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. She weighed 77.3 kilograms and was 1.65 meters tall (body mass index = 28.3). She was well developed, well nourished and speaking in complete sentences without accessory muscle use. She was oriented as to person, place and time. She was without sensory deficits and had normal muscle tone. Her strength was 4/5 with elbow flexion and extension, hand grip, knee flexion and extension, and ankle dorsi- and plantar-flexion bilaterally. Deep tendon reflexes were 2+ for the bilateral brachioradialis and patellar reflexes. No clonus could be provoked.
She did not have any cranial nerve (II–XII) defects, and she had a normal gait and station. She had normal range of motion of all four extremities, and she did not have any edema. Her lower extremity compartments were soft in both the thighs and the lower legs bilaterally. She exhibited tenderness around her bilateral shoulders and shins. Her head was normocephalic and without signs of injury. Her oropharynx was clear and moist, and her pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light. Her conjunctiva and extraocular motions were normal. Her neck was supple and had a full range of motion, without jugular venous distention or adenopathy.
On cardiovascular exam the patient was bradycardic with a regular rhythm, and she had a normal S1/S2 without gallops, friction rubs, or murmurs. On auscultation her breath sounds were clear without wheezes, rales or rhonchi. Her abdomen was non-distended, soft and non-tender throughout with normal bowel sounds. Her skin was warm and dry, and her capillary refill was less than two seconds. She did not have any rashes. Her mood, affect, and behavior were normal. The patient’s electrocardiogram (ECG) is shown . The results of the patient’s initial laboratory evaluation are shown in . A test was ordered, and a diagnosis was made.