A 42-year-old morbidly obese Pakistani female with, a body mass index (BMI) of 41.8 kg/m2, with a recent history of sleeve gastrectomy done 2 weeks prior, presented to our hospital with persistent vomiting, abdominal pain, fever, and dyspnea. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension. She has been a full-time housewife for the past 12 years. She has not been pregnant and has not used any form of contraception. She resides in an urban area and had a sedentary lifestyle. She reports no history of smoking, drinking or illicit drug use. She had a history of emotional eating and lack of social support for weight management. No known history of exposure to environmental chemicals. The family history was significant for obesity, diabetes, and hypertension. Her medication included tablet amlodipine 5 mg and telmisartan 40 mg orally once daily. She reported to be on these medications for last 5 years.
Vital signs revealed a body temperature of 38.5 °C, heart rate of 114 beats per minute, blood pressure of 110/54 mmHg, respiratory rate of 32 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 93% on room air. On examination, she was dehydrated. Chest auscultation had decreased breath sounds over the left lung base. On abdominal examination, scar marks from recent surgery were seen which were clean and dry. It was soft and non-tender with no viscera palpable. Rest of the general physical investigations and systemic investigations were unremarkable. Relevant laboratory investigations were done which are as follows; hemoglobin level 10.9 g/dl (12.3–16.6), MCV 87.6fL (78.7–96.3), white blood cell count 12.3 × 10*3/L (4.8–11.3), platelet count 507 × 10*9/L (154–433), serum blood urea nitrogen 21 mg/dl (6–20), serum creatinine 0.8 mg/dl (0.9–1.3), serum sodium 135 mmol/L (136–145), serum potassium 3.9 mmol/L (3.5–5.1), serum chloride 98 mmol/L (98–107), serum bicarbonate 25 mmol/L (20–31), PT 12.2 s (9.3–12.8), APTT 33.9 s (22.9–34.5), total bilirubin 0.4 mg/dl (0.1–1.2), GGT 41 IU/L (< 55), SGPT 18 IU/L (< 45), alkaline phosphatase 126 IU/L (45–129), AST 20 IU/L (< 35), Albumin 3.2 g/dl (3.5–5.2). Contrast-enhanced CT scan abdomen was done which showed a peri-gastric collection with an air-fluid level due to gastric fundus leakage, evident by contrast trickling from the sleeve gastrectomy site. Patient was started on intravenous (IV) hydration with 0.9% normal saline at 75 ml per hour, empiric IV antibiotic amoxicillin 1.2 g every eight hourly, IV antiemetic metoclopramide 10 mg every eight hourly. She was also administered on IV analgesic paracetamol 1 g and IV tramadol 50 mg as per need. The patient underwent CT-guided percutaneous drain placement for the abdominal collection and also left-sided pigtail catheter placement for left pleural effusion. Pleural fluid analysis was exudative. The culture of fluids from drains had bacterial growth of streptococcus species and Klebsiella pneumonia. The patient was started on susceptible antibiotic IV ciprofloxacin 400 mg every 12 hourly and continued IV amoxicillin 1.2 g every eight hourly.
Due to persistent symptoms repeat contrast-enhanced CT scan was done which not only showed a fistulous tract between the collection and the skin with an external opening at the left lower chest wall but another fistulous tract was also seen communicating with the left pleural cavity resulting in empyema. These findings were suggestive of gastro-cutaneous fistula and gastro-pleural fistula formation . The radiology, surgery, and gastroenterology teams' combined decisions were taken for the management of this case. For gastro-pleural fistula thoracotomy with decortication was done. Thoracoscope was inserted, and loculi were broken and drained. The drain culture had a growth of gram-positive and negative bacteria for which the patient was already on susceptible antibiotics.
For gastro-cutaneous fistula, endoscopy and fluoroscopy-guided fistula closure were done. Gastroscope was negotiated into the stomach which was found to be long and tubular along the lesser curvature. The angle of the incisura was narrowed. Guidewire was placed in the gastric lumen through the working channel of the gastroscope. The endoscope was removed, leaving the guidewire in place, the position was confirmed with fluoroscopy. Through the guidewire, 230 mm long and 28 mm wide, mega self-expandable fully covered Niti-S metallic stent was inserted. The endoscope was reinserted and under direct visualization, the stent was opened by its delivery system and was deployed in the proximal end of the surgically repaired gastric lumen. It was extending from the mid-esophagus to the pylorus . The position of the stent was confirmed via fluoroscopy.
Post-procedure, the X-ray showed no evidence of pneumo-thorax or pneumo-mediastinum. The patient was started on a liquid diet, which she tolerated well, and gradually progressed to a soft diet. She was discharged on oral medications, ciprofloxacin 400 mg twice daily, amoxicillin 625 mg thrice daily, esomeprazole 40 mg before breakfast, paracetamol 1 g and metoclopramide 10 mg for pain and vomiting respectively, as per need.
The patient was called for a follow-up after 6 weeks. She had a good recovery. Esophagogram was done which was negative for contrast leakage. Therefore, she underwent repeat gastroscopy for stent removal. The previously placed mega stent was seen in situ. The stent was removed successfully with the help of alligator forceps. Post-procedure no contrast leakage was seen . At the time of the 6-month follow-up, the patient was doing well with no complaints. Also, she had lost 5 kg of weight from her baseline. This case report describes the successful management of gastro-cutaneous fistula post-LSG via endoscopic techniques.