A 64-year-old female was referred to the hospital by her gastroenterologist after a same-day colonoscopy revealed a large rectosigmoid mass resulting in near total rectal occlusion. She had a past medical history of tobacco smoking and NSCLC (T1bN3M0 stage IIIB), diagnosed 1 year prior . She was thought to be in remission following radiation and immunotherapy with pembrolizumab.
On admission, she complained of progressively worsening abdominal pain and constipation. Vital signs and measurements were unremarkable. Physical examination was primarily benign. Notable laboratory findings only included elevated carcinoembryonic antigen of 4.2 ng/dL. Computerized tomography (CT) imaging showed a severe colonic stool burden and a soft tissue left upper lobe lung mass consistent with patient’s NSCLC history. A single large soft tissue mass with possible mucosal invasion in the rectosigmoid colon was noted . She underwent urgent diagnostic laparoscopy that was quickly converted to open exploratory laparotomy due to numerous bowel-to-bowel and bowel-to-anterior abdominal wall adhesions. At that time, a rectal mass appeared to be invading into the small bowel. Ultimately, colostomy, ileocecectomy and anastomosis, and rectosigmoid mass resection with tissue sampling were performed. She tolerated the procedure well, and her immediate postoperative course was uneventful.
Rectosigmoid mass biopsies revealed positivity for high-grade NSCLC and favored metastatic poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of lung origin. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining showed rectosigmoid mass tissue exhibiting extensive necrosis, focal mucosal involvement, and negativity for regional lymph node carcinoma. Also, normal appearing colonic glandular cells were surrounded by atypical cells infiltrating the colonic stroma. To evaluate these high-grade and poorly differentiated malignant changes further, properly controlled routine immunohistochemical (IHC) stains for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), Napsin-A, epithelial specific antigen/EpCAM (Moc-31), Ber-EP4, p63, cytokeratin 5 or 6 (CK5, CK6), caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), and cytokeratin 20 (CK20) were performed not only based on the patient’s age, gender, and past medical history, but also her recent clinical, radiologic, and operative findings. Additional properly controlled IHC stains for leukocyte common antigen (CD45), melanoma antigen recognized by T cells (MART-1), gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15), estrogen receptor (ER), synaptophysin, neural-cell adhesion molecule (NCAM/CD56), and chromogranin were performed due to the unusual presentation and nature of the case. The malignant cells exhibited strong positive immunoreactivity for CK7, and positive TTF-1 Napsin-A, Moc-31, and Ber-EP4, while showing only minimal focal staining for p63 and cytokeratin 5 or 6 (CK5, CK6). The tumor was negative for CDX2, CK20, CD45, MART-1, GCDFP-15, ER, synaptophysin, NCAM/CD56, and chromogranin . Mucicarmine staining was equivocal for intra-cytoplasmic mucin. This IHC staining profile (strongly positive CK7 and positive TTF-1/Napsin-A with negative CDX2/CK20) supported metastatic adenocarcinoma of lung origin, rather than primary colorectal adenocarcinoma. This hypothesis was supported by numerous colonic and regional lymph node samples lacking malignant carcinoma cells and properly controlled IHC stains of right colon and ileum biopsy cells exhibiting negative immunoreactivity for CK7, TTF-1 Napsin-A, Moc-31, and Ber-EP4.
Her postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged home. The patient was started on systemic chemotherapy with carboplatin and pemetrexed followed by radiation to the pelvic region for metastatic NSCLC. She did not tolerate chemoradiation therapy well. During the treatment period, she developed considerable pelvic pain resulting in a significant performance status decline. She also experienced multiple prolonged hospitalizations due to infections. Subsequent positron emission tomography–CT (PET-CT) scans suggested refractory pelvic tumor growth. Additional radiation for palliation of pain by reducing pelvic tumor size was determined reasonable. However, the patient experienced a debilitating stroke and was transitioned to hospice care.