A 73-year-old man underwent periodic surveillance for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and asymptomatic PAD at the Division of Cardiovascular Surgery in our hospital. The patient was a skilled, active dentist. His resting ankle–brachial index (ABI) was 0.55 and 0.52 for the right and left sides, respectively. Computed tomography (CT) indicated an AAA of 38 mm, PAD, the possibility of rectal arteriovenous malformation, and the increased wall thickness of the sigmoid colon with regional lymph node swelling . The IMA was well developed and measured more than 5 mm in diameter on CT angiography. Colonoscopy revealed advanced sigmoid colon cancer , and our initial diagnosis was cT4aN1bM0, cStage IIIB sigmoid colon cancer according to the 8th edition of the Union for Cancer Control TNM classification. The patient also had dilated cardiomyopathy. Echocardiograms revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35–40% with regular administration of β-blockers, angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors, and diuretics. Two major concerns were related to successful cancer treatment. First, ligation of the IMA or superior rectal artery (SRA), which is a vital procedure in CME for advanced sigmoid colon cancer, could result in insufficient blood flow and ischemia of the lower limbs. Second, the procedure could result in insufficient blood supply to the remaining rectum and increase the risk of leakage in the remaining rectosigmoid anastomosis. In the treatment of symptomatic PAD, CT angiography is a potentially less invasive and adequate technique to plan for the provision of additional blood supply during surgery. However, evaluation of blood distribution after shutting off the IMA blood flow was not sufficient, and further angiographic work-up using a balloon-occlusion catheter by interventional radiologists revealed that his lower limbs were receiving collateral blood flow from the internal iliac branches, with the flow being worse in the left limb. The flows of the internal iliac arteries were sustained by the prominent IMA blood flow through the collateral mid-rectal arteries and collateral lumbar arteries . In a multidisciplinary conference with interventional radiologists and cardiovascular surgeons, a left axillofemoral bypass graft was preferred to avoid ischemia of the lower limbs. Because of the low patency rate of an axillofemoral bypass graft , a “Y-shaped” connection to the bilateral femoral artery was not proposed to preserve the right femoral artery in case of graft occlusion. Additionally, the possibility of conversion from laparoscopic surgery to laparotomy requiring a median hypogastric incision traversing the Y-shaped bypass could not be ruled out. The patient underwent surgical angioplasty of the left common to the superficial femoral artery and axillofemoral artery bypass . Another multidisciplinary conference was held among cardiovascular physicians, anesthetists, perioperative nurses, and gastrointestinal surgeons. Retrograde blood flow through the obturator artery to the remaining rectum can be expected after IMA ligation. However, taking the patient’s comorbidities into consideration, the cardiovascular physicians warned that his heart would not overcome the pan-peritonitis if an anastomotic leak occurred. Although indocyanine green fluorescence imaging (ICG-FI) was used intraoperatively to confirm blood supply to the remaining rectum, we proposed Hartmann’s procedure and obtained the patient’s consent. A month after the bypass, the patient underwent laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy and D3 lymph node dissection with IMA preservation, composed of preservation of the IMA to the left colic artery and ligation of the SRA . Anesthetists and perioperative nurses proposed oxygen saturation monitoring of both feet during laparoscopic surgery, which required extended lithotomy in the Trendelenburg position . The mobilization of the rectum was limited down to the peritoneal reflection so as not to damage the middle rectal artery (MRA), which provided collateral blood flow. The MRA fed the patient’s lower limbs until ligation of the SRA and provided retrograde flow to the remaining rectum after the sigmoid colectomy. Although ICG-FI revealed good perfusion of the remaining rectum, anastomosis was omitted as planned. The cardiovascular surgeon evaluated the blood flow at both feet by Doppler echo immediately after surgery in the operating room and confirmed sufficient blood flow to the lower limbs. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 10 days postoperatively. Pathological examination of the specimen showed a pT3N0M0, pStage IIA tumor. The patient resumed work a month after the resection and was followed up for a year with no evidence of tumor recurrence.