We report a 29-year-old Thai woman who had dust mite ingestion-associated, exercise-induced anaphylaxis who tolerated the same bag of contaminated flour without exercise. She had moderate to severe, persistent allergic rhinitis since the age of 5, which was controlled by intranasal corticosteroid. Before the anaphylactic event occurred, she ate 10 pieces of fried coconut rice cake using mixed cooking flour (Gogi®) . Sixty minutes later, she began to jog along the road as a daily routine. Twenty minutes after jogging, she developed itchy palms and feet, followed by bilateral nasal congestion. She immediately sought medical attention for these symptoms. She then developed swollen eyelids, eye redness, watery rhinorrhea, chest tightness, and difficulty breathing.
In the emergency room, her vital signs were a blood pressure of 94/62 mmHg, a heart rate of 110 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 24 times per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. Physical examination revealed angioedema of eyelids as well as generalized wheals and flares. The lungs were clear to auscultation. She was diagnosed with anaphylaxis, and food was suspected as a causative agent. Intramuscular epinephrine was administered. All symptoms improved on the first day. She had a biphasic reaction with mild recurrent eyelid angioedema the next day, which completely recovered within 24 h.
She was generally well the day before the anaphylactic event. She denied taking medications and denied history of drug allergy. She could take ibuprofen and diclofenac without any adverse reaction. One week before the anaphylactic episode, she could tolerate 15 pieces of fried coconut rice cake using the same bag of mixed cooking flour which had been opened and stored at room temperature for 2 months.
A sample of contaminated cooking flour was examined under a light microscope. Living mites, Dermatophagoides farinae, were detected by a medical entomologist based on the morphology . We performed skin test to both mite-contaminated and newly opened Gogi® cooking flour, common aeroallergens, food allergens, and all other ingredients in the fried coconut rice cake 5 weeks after the anaphylactic episode. Specific IgE tests, using ImmunoCAP (Phadia AB, Upsala, Sweden), were also performed. The results of allergologic tests are summarized in Table .