A 54-year-old Chinese female non-smoker admitted to the hospital in June 2020 for progressive dyspnea. The patient had no family history of cancer. Chest computed tomography (CT) identified a right upper lobe mass with interlobular pleural metastasis and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. No distant metastasis was revealed by bone scan, head, and abdominal CT. CT-guided trans-thoracic core-needle biopsy of the right lung mass demonstrated poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining revealed the pulmonary tumor was positive for TTF-1 and negative for VENTANA ALK (D5F3) and P40. Tumor proportion score (TPS) for programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) was 2%. A DNA-based next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay showed negative for driver gene alterations, microsatellite stability (MSS), and tumor mutation burden (TMB) was 6.7 Muts/Mb in the pulmonary tumor. The patient was diagnosed with poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of right upper lobe, stage IVA (cT1cN2M1a).
The patient received pemetrexed plus carboplatin combined with PD-1 inhibitor toripalimab and switched to pemetrexed plus toripalimab as maintenance therapy between July 2020 and February 2021, which achieved partial response (PR). In March 2021, CT scans showed disease progression in both primary tumor and pleural metastases. She received paclitaxel and toripalimab as second-line therapy. However, CT scans showed pleural metastases increased after two cycles of treatment. She was transited to toripalimab and anlotinib, as third-line treatment since May 2021, and the best response was stable disease (SD). Both primary tumor and pleural metastases progressed in December 2021.
In December 2021, the patient received biopsy of pleural lesion, followed by a targeted DNA and RNA based NGS testing which encompasses 654 cancer-related genes (Berry Oncology). Targeted NGS assay showed a NPTN-NRG1 fusion and CCND1 gene copy number variations without other driver mutations . The breakpoints and fusion sequence were confirmed using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), followed by Sanger sequencing . NGS detection showed MSS and TMB was 6.27 Muts/Mb. PD-L1 expression was negative (TPS < 1%). In order to reduce the risk of adverse events from PD-1 inhibitor followed by epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), the patient completed two cycles of navelbine plus bevacizumab. However, pleural metastases still increased. Afatinib 40 mg/day was initiated since February 3, 2022. In March 2022, PR was achieved and the chest CT scan showed significant decrease of both primary lesion and pleural metastases . Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) decreased from 36.2 ng/mL before afatinib to 12 ng/mL in March 2022 and decreased to normal level since June 2022 . The patient was well tolerated with afatinib and only experienced grade 1 diarrhea and rash. Delayed immune-related adverse events and recurrence were not observed until now (April 6, 2023), reflecting a progression-free survival (PFS) of 14 months.