A 4-years-11 months old boy presented to our consultation for a 5-day history of fatigue and a 3-day-history of fever. Since 5 months of age, he was presenting chronic cutaneous candidiasis, persistent despite administration of antifungals; he also had a 3-month history of dysphagia, bilateral and symmetrical inflammatory joints pains without joint deformation but progressive functional impotence treated by bed rest, massages and oral antalgics.
At the emergency unit, the patient was in pain and unable to walk. He had a hyperpigmented, disseminated non pruriginous macular rash, subcutaneous tender nodules on both limbs and an aphthous gingivolabial lesion. The diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever had been ruled out by laboratory tests, normal echocardiography, and no improvement on trial treatment. 10 days later, the case was reviewed by the pediatric endocrinologist, who diagnosed adrenal insufficiency, confirmed by 8 am cortisol levels of 15 ng/mL. Unfortunately, auto-antibodies levels could not be assessed due to financial constraint. After initiation of hydrocortisone, asthenia subsided and melanodermia reduced markedly. One month later, the patient developed global hypotonia and subcutaneous nodules reappeared in greater number (Gottron’s signs), as well as joints pains. These signs, in addition to the symmetrical and proximal muscle weakness of the pelvic girdle, bilateral and symmetrical inflammatory joints pains, dysphagia and elevation of serum levels of muscle-associated enzymes (LDH: 926 UI/L, CPK: 900 UI/L), were typical of dermatopolymyositis, our associated diagnosis. 2 months later, a multidisciplinary staff was held and the association of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, adrenal insufficiency and dermatopolymyositis was in favor of APS type 1. Identification of mutations of AIRE (Auto-immune Regulator) gene could not be done due to limited finances. 6 months later (the patient was lost to follow up), the patient was readmitted with severe sepsis and died in the 1st day of admission.