A 54-year-old gravida 1 para 1 African American woman with a history of hypertension, uncomplicated diverticulitis, and multiple uterine fibroids status post UAE presented to the emergency department (ED) with 3 days of severe, colicky abdominal pain, inability to tolerate oral intake, and bilious emesis.
The patient’s uterine fibroids were originally diagnosed in the setting of heavy menstrual bleeding and intermenstrual bleeding. Prior to intervention, her uterus measured 10.8 × 11.3 × 17 cm and exhibited three predominant, viable fibroids, the largest of which was 6 × 6 × 6 cm. She underwent UAE with polyvinyl alcohol in 2009. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis the day following her UAE demonstrated appropriate infarction of all fibroids. Three months following the UAE, her uterus had decreased in size, her fibroids appeared necrotic, and she reported complete cessation of her intermenstrual bleeding as well as lighter, more regular menstruation. Ten years following UAE, her intermenstrual bleeding recurred, and MRI suggested the presence of one viable subserosal leiomyoma. She was offered hysterectomy but declined because of personal preference. In the subsequent year prior to presentation, she developed drainage from the vagina consistent with enteric contents but declined further workup.
On presentation to the ED, the patient was not obstipated. She was diffusely tender to palpation without rebound or guarding, leukocytosis, acute kidney injury, or lactic acidosis. Her abdominal surgical history included laparoscopic cholecystectomy and cesarean section. She had an unremarkable colonoscopy within the year prior to presentation. She underwent computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast, which demonstrated an SBO from an obstructing intraluminal fibroid that had migrated through a uteroenteric fistula . Additionally, a pelvic MRI with gadolinium was obtained to assess for malignancy and demonstrated persistent viability of a 3.7 × 3.5 × 3.8 cm subserosal fibroid. There was no imaging evidence of leiomyosarcoma.
Following 36 hours of nasogastric decompression and intravenous hydration, she underwent lower midline laparotomy that revealed a broad-based fistula between the distal small bowel and uterus . An obstructing calcified mass was palpated intraluminally proximal to the ileocecal valve and was resected within a 35-cm specimen of small bowel en bloc with the uterus . Another uterine fibroid was adherent to sigmoid colon mesentery and was removed with sharp dissection without injury to the sigmoid colon or its mesentery. A primary side-to-side small bowel anastomosis was created. She was extubated in the operating room with a nasogastric tube remaining in place to allow for ongoing decompression prior to return of bowel function.
Postoperatively, she had prerenal acute kidney injury (creatinine maximum 2.2 mg/dL) that was fluid-responsive and resolved within 3 days. She had complete return of bowel function by postoperative day 5 and was subsequently discharged home on a regular diet. She was seen at 1- and 2-month intervals following her operation and was found to be tolerating her preoperative diet and having regular bowel function with cessation of her transvaginal enteric discharge.
Gross pathology of the intraluminal mass revealed a 4.9 cm hyalinized leiomyoma with calcified shell. The small bowel was found to have edema, vascular congestion, and focal hemorrhage, consistent with ischemic changes secondary to small bowel obstruction. On gross examination, the uterus demonstrated a leiomyoma and adhesion to the small bowel, which contained the uteroenteric fistula . Microscopically, the fistula tract showed continuation between small bowel mucosa and ulcerated endometrium with granulation tissue .