A 16-year-old neutered female domestic shorthair cat was presented with a history of
progressively worsening lameness of 8 months’ duration. The lameness gradually
worsened, despite the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
At presentation, the cat was reluctant to walk but showed an overall stiff gait. On
video excerpts made by the owner, moderate lameness of the right thoracic limb was
observed. On initial physical examination, the cat was bright and alert. The cat was
obese, with a body weight of 5.6 kg and a body condition score of 6/9. Body
temperature (38.1°C) was normal and further general clinical examination revealed no
abnormalities. No deficits could be observed on neurological examination. Abnormal
findings on orthopaedic evaluation included a decrease in muscle mass of the infra-
and supraspinatus muscles of the right thoracic limb, a decreased range of motion
(ROM) of the right and left carpus and a decreased ROM, with pain on manipulation,
of the right shoulder. Medial, lateral, cranial and caudal stability of both
shoulders was assessed and deemed normal.
In accordance with the owner’s wishes, conservative therapy was first elected. The
patient was given cage rest, nutritional supplements (Hill’s Prescription Diet j/d
Feline), caloric restriction and continued treatment with meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg lean
body weight (Metacam; Boehringer Ingelheim) for 1 month.
One month later at the follow-up examination, no improvement of the clinical signs
was noted.
Despite caloric restrictions, the cat’s weight had increased to 5.8 kg. This was
attributed to poor owner compliance. Neurological and orthopaedic examinations were
as before and the patient was scheduled for radiography under general anaesthesia.
Pre-anaesthetic blood screening was unremarkable.
The patient was sedated with an intravenous administration of 1 mg midazolam
(Midazolam Actavis 5 mg/ml; Actavis), 20 mg ketamine (Ketamine 100 inj.; ASTfarma)
and 0.12 mg buprenorphine (Buprecare multidosis 0.3 mg/ml; AST Farma). Radiographic
examination included a mediolateral and craniocaudal view of the right and left
carpal and glenohumeral joints. No abnormalities were noted in the right and left
carpal joints. Radiographic findings indicated a bilateral UCG ( and ). In the right shoulder a large mineralised
body caudal to the humeral head, probably located inside the caudal pouch of the
glenohumeral joint, was observed .
An arthrogram of the right glenohumeral joint was performed . The skin over the right shoulder
was aseptically prepared and 2 ml of iodine contrast agent (Iohexol, OMNIPAQUE
140 mg I/ml; GE Healthcare) was injected intra-articularly. The mineralised body was
completely obscured by the contrast agent, indicating the intra-articular position
of the joint mouse. Also, a small filling defect was seen opposite the UCG,
indicative of impingement on the glenohumeral joint by the UCG. Based on the
clinical and radiographic findings, an arthroscopy of the right glenohumeral joint
was recommended to the owner.
At the time of arthroscopy, the cat was premedicated with the same protocol.
Anaesthesia was induced with 8 mg alfaxolone (Alfaxan 10 mg/ml; Dechra) and
maintained with isoflurane (Isoflo 100% isoflurane/ml; AST Farma) in oxygen. A
standard arthroscopic approach of the right shoulder was performed. Arthroscopic
inspection using a 2.4 mm-wide, 30°-angled arthroscope of the joint revealed
synovitis of the joint capsule, an unstable UCG, severe cartilage wear (modified
Outerbridge scoring 4) of the humeral head opposite the UCG, and a large free-floating mineralised
body, which was attached to the UCG by a string of fibrous tissue . No other
abnormalities were noted inside the joint.
The UCG was embedded in, and connected to, the glenoid with fibrous tissue. It
consisted of necrotic bone with a characteristic yellow crumbly appearance. It was
unstable on gentle probing.
Cartilage wear of the humeral head was only localised opposite the UCG and showed a
focal severe loss of cartilage with the appearance of subchondral bone. It is
described as a kissing lesion with a modified Outerbridge scoring of 4.
Under arthroscopic visualisation, the UCG was carefully dissected free and both it
and the mineralised body were removed via the arthroscopic portals.
Skin closure was routine and 2.5 mg of bupivacaine (Marcaine 5 mg/ml; Astra Zeneca)
was injected intra-articularly after closure.
The patient was sent home with activity restrictions and a 3-week course of meloxicam
0.05 mg/kg lean body weight (Metacam; Boehringer Ingelheim).
A follow-up examination was performed 3 weeks after surgery. The two incisions for
the arthroscopic portals had healed without complications. The owner reported that
the patient had markedly improved. NSAIDs were discontinued and a follow-up
appointment was made for 3-weeks later. The owners did not meet this appointment and
were interviewed by telephone 2 months later. By then, the patient was not on any
medications and showed no lameness. Three years later, the patient was euthanased
because of signs related to chronic kidney disease, having shown no recurrence of
the lameness.