A forty-year-old female was referred to our department for evaluation of elevated liver enzymes in May, 2004. She had no systemic symptoms. A year before, she had had a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Since then, she had been on hormone replacement therapy with estrogen. Six months ago, during her routine follow-up, elevation of transaminase levels was noted. This elevation persisted for the next 6 months. She was then referred to our department for further investigation.
Laboratory features of the patient regarding this period are shown in Table . Detailed questioning of the patient revealed no history of past alcohol abuse. Screening for viral antigens and for antibodies against them, as well as screening for viral nucleotide-acid sequences (including HCV-RNA/-cDNA PCR), found no evidence of infection. Levels of auto-antibodies, serum transferrin saturation, serum ferritin, serum ceruloplasmin, serum copper, serum α1-antitrypsin, and 24-hour urinary copper excretion were either negative or within normal limits. Abdominal ultrasonography was unremarkable. Doppler ultrasound imaging of portal and hepatic veins and the hepatic artery revealed no thrombosis.
A liver biopsy was performed. Histopathological examination revealed focal necrosis and mild fibrotic activity. Macrovesicular steatosis affecting 5% of hepatocytes, in addition to several foci of prominent nuclear pleomorphism and hyperchromasia were also noted. However, the most remarkable finding was the presence of abundant intracytoplasmic, sharply bordered, pale eosinophilic inclusions that exhibited a ground-glass appearance . Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), diastase-treated PAS and colloidal iron stains were applied. Immunohistochemistry for hepatitis B surface (mouse monoclonal antibody clone: Tg, Neomarkers) and core (mouse monoclonal antibody clone: Tordji-22, Signet) antigens, α1-antitrypsin (rabbit antibody, Zymed), fibrinogen (rabbit anti-human antibody, Dako), α fetoprotein (rabbit polyclonal antibody, Signet), complement 3 (mouse monoclonal antibody clone: HAV 3–4, Dako) and complement 4 (rabbit anti-human antibody, Dako) were performed. A three-step streptavidin biotin method using AEC as chromogen was applied in the immunohistochemical procedure. The inclusions were negative to PAS and colloidal iron. No reactivity with antibodies against hepatitis antigens, α1-antitrypsin and complement 3 was observed. Diffuse and strong positivity was observed for fibrinogen in cytoplasmic inclusions . We also detected less positivity for complement 4 and α-fetoprotein.
Paraffin-embedded tissue was processed for electron microscopic examination. Ultrastructurally, the inclusions were found to be moderately electron-dense, finely granular, homogenous bodies that are encircled by membranes, corresponding to a dilated endoplasmic reticulum . There were no parallel arrays of tubular structures in the inclusions.
Serum fibrinogen level was within normal limits. We performed tests for qualitative fibrinogen function. Prothrombine time, partial thromboplastin time and thrombin time were also within normal limits. The patient had no history of prolonged bleeding episodes, menorrhagia, or epistaxis. Since infectious, auto-immune or metabolic diseases were excluded, a drug effect was suspected. Therefore, estrogen therapy was ceased and the patient was followed monthly in order to check transaminase levels. Her serum transaminase levels decreased gradually at each monthly visit and normalized at the third month. Then we decided to perform a control liver biopsy. Parenchymal and portal inflammation, steatosis and necroinflammatory activity were remarkably reduced in the second liver biopsy . Again, the same staining procedures were applied. Compared to the first biopsy, fibrinogen positive inclusions decreased dramatically to the point where only one hepatocyte contained an inclusion. Fibrotic activity and nuclear dysplastic findings remained almost the same.