A 60-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital because of severe upper gastrointestinal bleeding. An endoscopy was performed, revealing bleeding from gastric varices in the subcardial region. Due to the large variceal size, endoscopic therapy with variceal ligation could not be performed. She was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU).
She had a history of similar episode of massive gastrointestinal bleeding from gastric varices six years previously. Evaluation at that time with liver function tests, portal venous flow and magnetic resonance angiography did not reveal an identifiable cause.
On admission to the ICU our patient initially showed no signs of hypovolemic shock. Laboratory results again did not indicate impaired liver function. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy again revealed bleeding from subcardial gastric varices in the absence of evidence of esophageal varices .
Endoscopic treatment with histoacryl glue only resulted in a temporary reduction of the bleeding. To reduce the portal venous pressure the vasopressin analog terlipressin was administered. Despite this therapy, there was another severe episode of upper gastrointestinal bleeding with signs of shock. In all, 10 units of red blood cell concentrate and four units of fresh frozen plasma were transfused. Sufficient endoscopic therapy could not be achieved. An abdominal sonograph showed she had an enlarged spleen (15.9 × 5.4 cm; liver size and structure were normal, with normal flow in the portal vein). A computed tomography (CT) scan showed total occlusion of the splenic vein. Despite the limited data on urgent splenic artery embolization, she was subsequently referred for interventional radiological procedures. A successful splenic artery embolization was performed via the transcatheter approach, depositing coils into the splenic artery resulting in immediate cessation of variceal bleeding .
No recurrence of bleeding was noted post-embolization. After embolization, our patient complained of mild left upper abdominal discomfort, which was effectively relieved by routine analgesics.
At two weeks after admission our patient was fully recovered and was released from our department. There were no further bleeding complications for 18 months. Follow-up endoscopy was performed two months and eight months after the intervention, showing only mild gastric varices without signs of bleeding.