A 58-year-old Caucasian woman complaining vaginal bleeding and a cervical mass was admitted to our hospital. She reported menopause at 52 years. She had a history of mantle cell NHL. She had no comorbidity, did not take drugs, denied smoking and the use of alcohol, and denied any family history of cardiovascular diseases and neoplasia. The result of her neurological examination was negative. Clinically, the patient was in good general condition and reported weight loss in the last year following her diagnosis of NHL. At admission, her vital signs were good; her pulse was 76 beats/minute, her blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, and her body temperature was 36.5 °C.
Briefly, in March 2018, she presented with right groin and thoracic lymph node involvement (stage IIIa). Treatment consisted of chemotherapy with R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) and R-DHAP (rituximab, cisplatin, cytarabine, dexamethasone) for six cycles, alternating. For central nervous system prophylaxis, four lumbar punctures with methotrexate were performed. In October 2018, she received chemotherapy with FEAM (fotemustine, cytarabine, etoposide, melphalan) sequenced by infusion of autologous peripheral stem cells. The transplant was complicated by septic shock and atrial fibrillation. In November 2018, the patient was discharged in good general condition. She had regular negative follow-up results until January 2019, when positron emission tomography–computed tomography (CT) showed a hypercaptation at the level of the uterine cervix (maximum standardized uptake value 11.8) .
In April 2019, the patient was admitted to our department for a gynecological examination. She complained of postmenopausal vaginal bleeding in the last 2 months, bladder pressure, and rapid growth of a cervical lesion.
An irregular tumor mass of the cervix was visualized during gynecological examination, highly suggestive of locally advanced cervical cancer. However, the surface appeared smooth with no exophytic or erosive components, and the lesion was measured as 5 cm in diameter. The disease extended into the right paracervical and parametrial tissue, invading the proximal two-thirds of the vaginal submucosa. Ultrasound examination showed a 5-cm highly vascularized cervical tumor extending into the right parametrium and bladder without mucosal infiltration. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, showing a locally invasive tumor with heterogeneous high-intensity signaling on T2-weighted images, most likely originating from the cervix, measuring 50 × 33 mm . Invasion into one-third superior of the vagina, bladder, and bilateral parametria was visualized. The CT scan showed a similar extent of cervical tumor. No enlarged lymph nodes or lesions in the liver, lung, or bone were visualized.
Surprisingly, the biopsies revealed a neoplastic cell with a positive test result for CD20 and Ki67 100% and negative test results for CD3, CD5, CD10, BCL2, S100, and cytokeratin. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of a relapse of MCL with cervical localization.
She was referred to the hematology department and was started on ibrutinib 560 mg/day from July 2019 to October 2019. Transvaginal ultrasound in September 2019 documented persistence and augmented volume (41 × 30 × 33 mm) of the cervical lesion.
The patient is still under treatment with ibrutinib, but a whole-body CT scan showed persistence of disease, and her general condition is poor, with severe asthenia and loss of hearing.