A 68-year-old woman with a history of coronary artery disease and coronary artery bypass graft surgery in 2001, presented with dyspnea (The Canadian Cardiovascular Society Functional Class IV) and chest pain. The echocardiography (ECG) findings included normal sinus rhythm, normal axis, heart rate of 72 beats/min, ST depression, and T inversion in leads I, AVL, and V1-V6. Echocardiography revealed BAV with severe AS and moderate thickening and calcification and trivial aortic insufficiency. In addition, the ascending aorta was mildly dilated to 3.9 cm with mild left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, diastolic LV dysfunction, good LV size and systolic function, and good right ventricular size and function. The aortic annular diameter and aortic valve area were about 2.3 cm and 0.6 cm respectively .
On her coronary angiography in December 2011, the left anterior descending artery had significant stenosis in the proximal portion with a good competitive flow from the left internal mammary artery. The left circumflex artery was cut-off at its distal portion, and the right coronary artery was diffusely diseased. The saphenous vein graft on the posterior descending artery was patent, and so was the left internal mammary artery on the left anterior descending artery. The saphenous vein graft on the obtuse marginal was occluded based on its stump on aortography. Multi-slice computed tomography angiography showed the left internal mammary artery graft was exactly behind the sternum suggesting a possible risk of compromising the left internal mammary artery during surgery.
The patient had moderate asthma, for which she had been on corticosteroids for quite a long period of time. She had repeatedly denied any suggestion for open heart surgery during the previous years. Considering the patient’s past medical history and her clinical conditions, our cardiac surgeons refused to perform open-heart surgery, and she was referred for TAVI.
The details of the TAVI procedure, especially drawbacks of this technique for patients with BAV were described for the patient and her family, followed by written consents from them. General anesthesia, transesophageal echocardiography, pre-implantation balloon aortic valvuloplasty, and rapid ventricular pacing were carried out as a routine standard protocol. Arteriotomy was performed to obtain an appropriate femoral access. An 18 French 26 mm Nova flex Edwards-Sapien XT valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Inc., Irvine, California) was selected and all the stages of implantation were evaluated via intra-procedural transesophageal echocardiography ( and ).
Pre-implantation balloon valvuloplasty was done with a 20-40 balloon, and full balloon expansion could be achieved. The above-mentioned valve was thereafter successfully implanted. The peak pressure gradients (PPG) and mean pressure gradients (MPG) by echocardiography decreased from 57 mm Hg to 13 mm Hg and from 43 mm Hg to 6 mm Hg, respectively. No obvious aortic insufficiency was detected. A 30 day follow-up showed significant improvement in clinical and hemodynamic findings in that the patient had milder dyspnea (The Canadian Cardiovascular Society functional Class II), prosthetic aortic valve PPG of 13.1 mm Hg, MPG of 6.5 mm Hg, mild tricuspid regurgitation, and systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 35 mm Hg .