A 62-year-old man suddenly fell into a coma, and was admitted to our hospital. At birth, he had a right-sided facial port-wine stain typical of SWS that involved the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve. He had no history of ophthalmological or neurological clinical features including glaucoma, seizures, or stroke-like episodes, except for visual impairment in his right eye. His intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. A fundus examination of both eyes showed no hemangiomas. He had not received any anticonvulsant or antiplatelet therapy, and had no history of heart disease or malignant tumors. On admission, his blood pressure was 191/96 mmHg and heart rate was 66 beats per minute in normal sinus rhythm. His body temperature was elevated to 37.1 °C and his body mass index was 25.6. His neurological status was assessed as GCS 6 (E1V1M4) with right-sided hemiparesis, and the National Institute of Health Stroke Scale score was 35 points. Laboratory findings suggested that he was dehydrated; hemoglobin 15.8 g/dl, hematocrit 46.3 %, blood urea nitrogen 31.7 mg/dl, and creatinine 1.70 mg/dl. Platelet-activating and coagulation factors were normal; platelet count 14.2 × 103/μl, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio 0.94, and activated partial thromboplastin time 26.6 s. His serum D-dimer concentration was increased to 5.9 mg/dl. Computed tomography (CT) on admission showed left thalamic hemorrhage and ventricular hemorrhage with acute hydrocephalus . Bilateral choroid plexus enlargement and subcortical calcification in the right temporo-occipital lobe were also detected . Emergency ventricular drainage was performed. His disturbance of consciousness gradually improved to GCS 15 (E4V5M6) 7 days after the procedure, and right-side hemiparesis gradually subsided. We speculated that intracranial hemorrhage may have been derived from sinus thrombosis; therefore, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI showed left thalamic hemorrhage, leptomeningeal enhancement in the right temporo-occipital lobe, and choroid plexus thickening with enhancement on both sides . Magnetic resonance venography showed steno-occlusion of the straight sinus, left internal cerebral vein (ICV), and superior sagittal sinus (SSS) . Rehydration therapy was performed to prevent sinus thrombosis. Two weeks after the onset, three-dimensional CT angiography revealed the patency of the straight sinus, left ICV, and SSS . His disturbance of consciousness gradually improved to GCS 15 (E4V5M6) 3 weeks after the procedure. Right-side hemiparesis gradually subsided, and he started to walk with the assistance of a side rail. The patient was referred to another hospital for further rehabilitation 28 days after the onset.