Forty-five years old Albanian male, smoker, was admitted to our department with multiple skin nodules localized in the head, neck, back and chest. The nodules were firm, tender, skin-colored and measured 5-15 millimeters in greatest dimension . They occurred two weeks before being admitted. In addition, the patient exhibited signs of weight loss, anorexia and fatigue, but no symptoms related to respiratory system. Excisional biopsy was performed to one of the lesions. Histopathology confirmed metastatic nature of the lesion namely, malignant tumor of neuroendocrine phenotype consistent with small-cell carcinoma (SCC). The pattern consisted of grouped small cells, oval or fusiform, with large hyperchromatic nuclei. In immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were positive for Pan Cytokeratin (CK-MNF), CD-56 and Synaptophysin. There was no expression of Cytokeratin 7 or Cytokeratin 20. Leukocyte Common Antigen (LCA, CD45) was positive in scattered inflammatory cells of the tumor stroma . Proliferative index as measured by Ki-67 was high (approximately 99% of tumor cells). The bronchoscopic biopsy was nondiagnostic.
Subsequently, chest X-ray (CXR) showed obliteration of the left costophrenic angle and increased inhomogenous density in the left perihilar zone .
Computed tomography (CT) revealed an expansive process in the left lung, left hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and a suspicious secondary initial deposit in the left adrenal gland. Bone scan was unremarkable. Laboratory results were within normal limits, except values of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) which was slightly elevated namely, 556 U/l (230-460) and C- reactive protein (CRP) with values of 15.4 mg/l (0 to 5.0). The patient was referred to the department of oncology where he underwent chemotherapy with cisplatin 130 mg and etoposide 180 mg with poor clinical response. Meanwhile, skin metastases increased in number and occurred also in the region of the face.
After the third cycle of chemotherapy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple brain metastases located in the cortex of the temporal lobe, left cerebellum, orbital adipose tissue, bilateral extraocular muscles and left lacrimal gland region . The patient passed away four months after the lung cancer diagnosis. Skin metastases were the first sign.