A 40-year-old gravida 1 para 0 Caucasian woman presented at 39 + 6 weeks gestational age with a 3-day history of new onset pain in an otherwise uncomplicated pregnancy. At 39 + 1 weeks gestation she had started outpatient cervical ripening with dinoprostone (Cervidil) because of her advanced maternal age. She described the pain along her right torso as severe, shooting, and sharp, but at times pleuritic in nature. It rapidly progressed from her right trapezius to encompass the entirety of her right torso, from her upper abdominal quadrant and epigastrium, radiating to her back, chest, shoulder, and neck. Her pain was initially attributed to possible radiculopathy, as she had a previous history of the same. Her vital signs at initial presentation were normal, with no hypertension noted, and there were no concerns regarding the fetal status. No further investigations were ordered and a full neurological examination was not documented.
She represented less than 24 hours later at 40 + 0 weeks gestational age, and was found to be hypertensive at 157/101 and 164/112 mmHg. Oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. She had sinus tachycardia on arrival, ranging from 110 to 140 bpm and persisting throughout the peripartum period. She was tender in the right upper quadrant, however there were no peritoneal signs, and no hepatomegaly was appreciated in the presence of the gravid uterus. She was tender from the right side of her neck through to her right lower back. Her reflexes were 3 + bilaterally with no clonus. The fetal heart rate was normal. Her blood investigations revealed a hemoglobin of 105 g/L, platelets 156,000 g/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 193 μ/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 111 μ/L, and uric acid 429 μmol/L. White blood cell count, creatinine, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and coagulation profile were within the normal range. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with no abnormal features, apart from the previously noted tachycardia.
After diagnosing preeclampsia, induction of labor was started, as was an infusion of magnesium sulfate. Due to the unusual but significant pain that she was experiencing, a range of differential diagnoses were considered by the obstetrical and anesthesia team. Preeclampsia with HELLP syndrome was the working diagnosis, however differential diagnoses included fatty liver, radiculopathy, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, and pyelonephritis. The patient requested labor analgesia be initiated and a combined spinal epidural was placed when the patient’s cervix was 2 cm dilated. Analgesia was maintained via programmed intermittent epidural bolus with patient-controlled epidural analgesia as needed, in keeping with our institutional practice. The patient reported satisfactory analgesia with regard to her labor pain, but still complained of severe pain in her right torso that was unresponsive to acetaminophen and opioids. Blood investigations monitored every 4 hours remained stable with hemoglobin of 103–102 g/L, platelets 158,000–165,000 g/L, ALT 176–169 μ/L, AST 100–97 μ/L, and uric acid 400–420 μmol/L. The LDH, creatinine, and coagulation profile remained normal. Labor progressed to full dilation with oxytocin augmentation, but as a result of torso pain she was unable to exert adequate effort with pushing. Ultimately, the obstetrical team consented the patient for a trial of forceps and possible cesarean delivery.
In the operating room, the obstetrics team performed an examination under anesthesia, which revealed the fetus to be in an occiput-transverse position at station zero, and the decision was made to proceed to cesarean delivery as the station was too high to perform a trial of forceps. A nonvigorous male infant was delivered with Apgar scores of 3 and 8 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. Placental delivery was uneventful. Atonic postpartum hemorrhage was treated with a bolus of 2 units IV oxytocin and carboprost 250 mcg intramuscular (IM), in addition to an oxytocin infusion. As per our institutional practice, a bolus of oxytocin is only used when the patient has multiple risk factors for intraoperative hemorrhage or is experiencing uterine atony. This low dose was chosen to prevent potential side effects (nausea, vomiting, chest pain) and complications (hypotension, hypertension, ST segment changes, myocardial ischemia, bronchospasm) that can be associated with higher dose boluses when given at the time of cesarean section [, ]. Prior to fascial closure, the obstetrics team manually explored the abdomen to the extent possible through the Pfannenstiel incision. No gross abnormalities were identified. The patient’s right torso pain persisted throughout her time in the operating room, with only a slight improvement after surgical anesthesia obtained via the epidural. After delivery, 2.5 mg of epidural morphine was given for postoperative analgesia. The patient was hemodynamically stable throughout the operation, although remained tachycardic. Estimated blood loss was approximately 900 mL. Postoperatively, the patient was sent for a computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis, including contrast for a pulmonary embolism protocol to investigate the abdominal pain and persistent tachycardia. No pulmonary embolus was found and a small right pleural effusion with subsegmental atelectasis was noted. However, the most impressive feature on the scan was a large but intact subcapsular liver hematoma that measured approximately 16 × 7 × 14 cm . Portal hypertension was suggested by the presence of portosystemic varices. The general surgery team was consulted and recommended conservative management with strict blood pressure control requiring oral labetalol, frequent complete blood count (CBC) monitoring, and 48 hours of bedrest. If, however, the SCH had been diagnosed antepartum, labor would have been avoided and delivery would have been expedited via immediate cesarean section. The SCH is at risk of rupture with active pushing, convulsions, or abdominal trauma, including vigorous palpation of the right upper quadrant . In this case, prophylactic antibiotics were not used as there were no signs of infection and the underlying etiology was noninfectious. Interventional radiology was on standby to perform hepatic artery embolization if the SCH significantly increased in size or there was concern about imminent rupture. Serial monitoring of blood work revealed a hemoglobin of 70 g/L and 56 g/L on postoperative days 1 and 2, respectively, prompting transfusion of two units of packed red blood cells on day 2. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5 with her hemoglobin stable at 85 g/L.
An early postoperative follow-up visit was arranged 15 days postpartum and at that visit the patient was noted to be pale, tachypneic, and upon questioning she stated increasing shortness of breath and a persistence of her pleuritic chest pain. She was sent back to the IWK Health Centre where her vital signs were as follows: heart rate 110–130 bpm, blood pressure 112/66 mmHg, oxygen saturation 97% on room air, respiratory rate 40–48, temperature 37.9 °C. Blood investigations revealed a white cell count of 6, hemoglobin 97 g/L, platelets 650,000 g/L, ALT 75 μ/L, AST 88 μ/L, LDH 1310 μ/L, and coagulation profile remained normal. A repeat abdominal CT scan reported an increase in the size of the liver hematoma to 14 × 8.5 × 18.3 cm . Although there was no evidence of active intralesional bleeding or rupture, the liver capsule was difficult to visualize in the superior aspect, and could suggest significant thinning and imminent rupture. The CT scan of the chest reported a large right pleural effusion with mediastinal shift .
The patient was urgently transferred from the stand-alone maternity hospital to a nearby hospital under the care of the thoracic surgery team, with the general surgery team on standby. A chest tube was placed, but ultimately the patient required video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS), with right partial decortication of an infected, loculated pleural effusion prior to her discharge home. The pleural effusion aspirate showed no growth. The right pleural effusion was felt to be exudative in nature and secondary to the adjacent large SCH. Throughout the admission she remained normotensive and her hepatic hematoma remained stable with no signs of active bleeding. She was discharged home on day 2 following the VATS procedure, coinciding with day 21 following her cesarean section. At discharge, her hemoglobin was 74 g/L and her platelets were 884,000 g/L.
She continued to receive follow-up with general surgery and obstetrics as an outpatient. A CT performed 4 weeks postpartum showed the hepatic hematoma had decreased in size to 12.6 × 6.4 × 15.1 cm and at 6 months postpartum had decreased to 3.8 × 2.2 × 3.1 cm and did not require any further follow-up.