A 46-year-old woman (height, 158 cm; weight, 58 kg) was diagnosed with thyroid cancer and admitted for left thyroid lobectomy.
The patient visited our clinic after the diagnosis of thyroid cancer at a health checkup. She had not complained of any symptoms related to thyroid disease and her thyroid hormone levels were within the normal range.
The patient had no underlying disease, past medical history, or history of medication use, including health supplements.
The patient had no family history of thyroid cancer or essential hypertension.
Physical examination revealed that the patient’s general health condition was good. There were no apparent abnormalities. She had regular heartbeats, clear lung sounds, and no thyroid enlargement.
The preoperative laboratory results, including thyroid function tests and electrolytes, were normal.
Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm. There was no active lung lesion on chest radiography.
A 46-year-old woman with no medical or family history was diagnosed with thyroid cancer and admitted for left thyroid lobectomy. After routine preoperative examinations and anesthetic evaluations, there were no problems with her physical, laboratory, and radiological examinations. The patient had not complained of any anxiety or stress before the surgery, and the mean preoperative BP at the ward was 19.3/10.5 (15.2-22.4/9.6-10.9) kPa. No premedication was needed because the patient was comfortable. The initial BP and heart rate (HR) after entering the operating room were 18.8/11.3 kPa and 52 beats/min, respectively.
Anesthesia induction was initiated with propofol and remifentanil at target concentrations of 6 μg/mL and 3 ng/mL, respectively, using a target-controlled infusion pump. After confirming the loss of consciousness and the availability of manual bagging, 6 mg of vecuronium was administered intravenously. As the BP increased from 18.8/8.8 kPa to 22.0/10.7 kPa, the concentrations of propofol and remifentanil were increased to 7.5 μg/mL and 4.5 ng/mL, respectively. After confirming the decrease of the bispectral index (BIS) to 35 and disappearance of all twitches from the train of four stimulations, intubation was performed using a video laryngoscope. Immediately after induction, the HR decreased to 41 beats/min and atropine (0.5 mg) was administered intravenously, followed by glycopyrrolate (0.2 mg). No further events were observed during induction, and the concentrations of propofol and remifentanil were decreased to 3 μg/mL and 1 ng/mL, respectively, to prevent a drop in BP and HR before surgery.
Immediately before surgery, the concentrations of IV anesthetics were increased to 5 μg/mL of propofol and 3 ng/mL of remifentanil; however, BP remained high at 22.7-24.0/13.3-14.7 kPa. Accordingly, the concentrations of propofol and remifentanil were gradually increased from 5 to 7 μg/mL and from 4 to 5 ng/mL, respectively. At this time, the HR was stable at 60-70 beats/min but systolic BP remained above 22.7 kPa. When the concentrations of propofol and remifentanil were increased to 9 μg/mL and 6 ng/mL, respectively, the BP suddenly increased to 26.7-28.0/13.3-14.7 kPa while the BIS decreased from 24 to 8. Although labetalol (10 mg) was administered twice at 5-minute intervals, only a slight decrease in BP was observed.
The surgery was suspended owing to unexplained hypertension. Following the administration of sevoflurane 5 vol%, a slight decrease in systolic BP from 26.7 kPa to 23.9 kPa was observed. The BP returned to the normal range after suspension of propofol administration and maintenance of anesthesia with sevoflurane 3 vol% and remifentanil 3 ng/mL. Surgery was resumed after catheter insertion into the left radial artery to initiate invasive BP monitoring. BP remained stable at 13.3-16.0/8.0-10.7 kPa until the end of surgery. The total amount of 2% propofol administered was 900 mg (45 mL). The patient was discharged without any adverse events.