A 15 year old girl was brought to the emergency department with a history of sudden onset of paresthesia, involving initially the right leg, then, the right arm, the face and, subsequently the entire right side of the body, increasing during activity (walking) and ceasing during sleep, of two days duration. The patient described this as „the feeling of pins and needles“. There was no previous history of fever, headache, and neurological illnesses. She did not receive any medication. She was non-smoker. Clinical examination revealed a normal developed young girl, with normal memory, speech and orientation, with normal physical exam.
The preliminary impression of the emergency staff was of a functional disorder, and the patient was discharged home, with the recommendation to take calcium and magnesium supplements, being well known that the paresthesia of the mouth, hands, and feet is a common, transient symptom of the related conditions of hyperventilation syndrome and panic attacks. The patient was called back for a formal neurologic assessment scheduled for the next day. On the same day, the patient came back, with repeated involuntary movements involving her right side (foot, arm and face). She was admitted in the Intensive Care Unit and a diagnosis of Hemichorea-Hemiballismus (HC-HB) was made.
Hypotonia of muscles with normal power and normal deep tendon reflexes were present symmetrically. Her blood pressure was 110/55 mm Hg. Keyser Fleischer ring was absent at slit lamp examination.
This clinical symptom of spontaneous hemichorea was considered secondary to a poststreptococcal neurological disease, Sydenham's chorea, but was not associated with other clinical features of rheumatic fever (carditis, arthritis, erythema, rheumatic nodules) and neuropsychological features (dysarthria and emotional disorders). Also, the choreiform movements are rather more continuous in chorea Sydenham than paroxysmal as observed in the described case and the serum anti-streptolysin-O titre was < 200 IU.
Also, the possibility of continuous focal seizures (epilepsia partialis continua [EPC]) causing unilateral movements and CNS involvement (the contralateral basal ganglion, the thalamus and the subcortical areas) was considered. As a result, electroencephalography and brain CT and MRI scanning were scheduled.
Ischaemic and haemorrhagic strokes are the cause of chorea in most elderly patients, and these etiologies were excluded in our patient, based on the neuroimaging studies. Other differential diagnosis considered were: encephalitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, basal ganglia calcifications, Wilson's disease, thyroid disease and tuberous sclerosis. CSF was normal, anti-nuclear antibodies were negative, and serum ceruloplasmin and thyroxine levels were within the normal range. Also, the CT of the head did not reveal any lesion in the basal ganglia, as well as brain MRI exam. EEG was normal, even during the ictal recording, excluding the possibility of epilepsy [Fig. , Fig. ].
Multiple medications in different combinations were tried, including haloperidol, phenobarbital, clonazepam, diazepam, with minimal immediate benefit. Severe pain from the continuous right arm jerking was treated with perfalgan.
Other laboratory tests revealed: haemoglobin of 13 g%, total count of 8,800/mm3, differential count of N 60 E1 L29, and normal liver function tests. Her urea and serum creatinine were 20 mg% and 0.8 mg% respectively. Urine exam: glycosuria, without ketones. Blood glucose concentration was 367 mg% and glycosylated haemoglobin A1C was 13.9%. Estimated blood osmolality was 294 mosm/L and ketones were absent. Serum sodium: 132 mEq/L; potassium: 4.2 mEq/L; serum calcium and magnesium levels were normal. The diagnosis of diabetes was made and the patient was started on rapid analog insulin subcutaneous, until her blood sugar was brought below 250 mg%, following which long-acting insulin was started and continued for the first day. At the end of 24 hours, her blood sugar was 148 mg% and the involuntary movements had completely disappeared. She remained asymptomatic during her hospital stay and was discharged home on a combination of rapid-acting analog, before meals and long-acting analog insulin (subcutaneous) before dinner.
GAD antibodies were positive and C-peptide was low. Based on the presence of glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies (9,000 U/ml; normal < 1. 4 U/ml), low C-peptide and high insulin requirements, we diagnosed type 1 diabetes mellitus.