A 13-year-old boy presented to us an hour after sustaining an injury to his left eye from a red neuter pen. On examination, uncorrected visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and finger counting at 50 cm in the left eye. Corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) was 20/20 with a refraction of − 1.50-2.00 × 001 in the right eye, and no improvement in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination of the left eye showed a full-thickness corneal laceration from 4 to 8 o’clock, inside the limbus, with iris prolapse. Anterior chamber depth was shallow, and an exudative membrane was noted on the anterior lens surface . This patient underwent emergency repair of the corneal laceration under general anesthesia. The laceration was repaired using an interrupted suture technique with 10–0 nylon sutures, and the exudative membrane was removed using microscopic tweezers. The anterior lenticular capsule appeared intact. Post-operatively, the patient received conventional topical steroid therapy (Tobradex eyedrops 4 times a day and Tobradex eye ointment at bedtime) to reduce inflammation. Three days after surgery, a rosette-shaped PCC was observed in the left eye, while the anterior capsule and lens nucleus were still intact and transparent . The lens of the right eye was normal. Within another 3 days, the PCC increased in density and covered the whole pupillary area. The CDVA was 20/133 in the left eye (refraction of Pl-4.00 × 070). Ophthalmic B scan ultrasound examination showed increased echo of the lenticular posterior capsule with artifacts . Fundoscopic examination of the left eye were difficult to perform secondary to the cataract, however, no gross abnormalities were noted . Options for management of the cataract, including cataract surgery, were discussed with the patient’s father. Considering his age and good visual development, we agreed upon conservative observation. The patient returned for cataract follow-up bi-weekly, and waited for an appropriate time for surgery. At the one-month follow-up, we observed that the size of the PCC began to decrease . Nine months later, only a faint imprint of the original cataract remained and CDVA was restored to 20/25+ 3 with a refraction of Pl-1.50 × 070 in the left eye .