A 59-year-old Sindhi female patient, with known interstitial lung disease (ILD) and hypertension, presented to the emergency department with complaints of abdominal pain and constipation for 1 week, vomiting for 5 days, and abdominal distension for 2 days. Abdominal pain was centrally located, gradual in onset, continuous, dull in character, severe in intensity, nonradiating, and associated with seven episodes of bilious vomiting and constipation. The patient passed no flatus and stool for 1 week. Past medical history consisted of hospital admission 7 years before presentation because of uncontrolled hypertension that caused her to become unconscious and receive ventilatory support.
On examination, the patient was hemodynamically stable with pulse rate 110 beats per minute, blood pressure 140/90 mmHg, temperature 98°F, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, and O2 saturation 93% at 5 l O2. Her abdomen was distended with generalized tenderness, guarding, dull percussion notes, and sluggish bowel sounds. Chest was bilaterally audible with crackles in whole lung field.
Blood investigations showed elevated total leukocyte count (TLC) with neutrophils 84%, serum ferritin level of 366.9 ng/ml, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 41 mm per hour, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 3.24 ng/ml. Radiological investigations including chest x-ray (CXR), x-ray abdomen (AXR), and contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) were requested and performed, which suggested the clinical diagnosis of subacute small bowel obstruction .
An exploratory laparotomy was performed through a midline incision showing impending perforation, with petechiae on the wall of terminal ileum, 15 cm proximal to ileocecal valve. A hard intraluminal mass was suspected to be obstructing the small bowel at the site of impending perforation. The gut was cut opened at this location from antimesenteric border and a 5 cm phytobezoar along with a polyp was found . Resection of the affected segment was performed, which was then followed by ileoileal anastomosis, and a drain was left.
The patient was discharged 1 week later, and was found to be well with no complaints at 3 weeks follow-up.