A 30-year-old young man was hospitalized for chest tightness, extreme fatigue, palpitation and impaired activity tolerance. Laboratory examination revealed that myocardial enzymes were slightly elevated: high-sensitivity troponin T (cTnT) was 0.037 ng/ml (<0.014 ng/ ml), myoglobin (MYO) was 91.75 ng/ml (28–72 ng/ml), creatine kinase isoenzyme (CK-MB) was 7.86 ng/ml (0.1–4.94 ng/ml), and creatine kinase (CK) was 468 U/L (40–200 U/L). The N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was 302 ng/L (<125 ng/L). Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed rapid atrial arrhythmia (atrial rate was approximately 180 beats per min) and sustained third-degree atrioventricular block with junctional escape beat (ventricular rate was approximately 43 beats per min, and the QRS duration was approximately 90 ms) . There were no malignant ventricular arrhythmia events recorded by 24-h Holter monitoring. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) indicated cardiac dilatation (the left atrial diameter was 44 mm, and the left ventricular end diastolic diameter was 60 mm), and the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was preserved (58%) . Late midmyocardium gadolinium enhancement appeared in cardiac magnetic resonance perfusion imaging , which was consistent with the imaging findings of DCM.
To solve the problem of arrhythmia, an electrophysiologic study was performed. Atrial activation sequence was earliest in the coronary sinus ostium . During the process of atrial activation mapping, tachycardia was self-terminated and could no longer be induced by high-frequency atrial stimulation. As a matter of experience, it was considered more likely to be a cavotricuspid valve isthmus-dependent macro-reentry atrial tachycardia; thus, liner ablation along the cavotricuspid valve isthmus was performed. The normal atrial rate was only 40–63 beats per min together with atrioventricular dissociation . Permanent pacemaker implantation was extremely urgent. His-Bundle pacing (HBP) was first tried; unfortunately, the pacing lead was not only difficult to fix, but also, the capture threshold was higher than 3.0 V. As an alternative, biventricular pacing was successfully performed, and a triple-chamber pacemaker (model C2TR01, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, US) was implanted with a QRS duration of approximately 120 ms .
After operation, further physical examination found some specific manifestations, including mild muscle wasting of limbs, scoliosis, and disorders of upper-limb extension and neck flexion (the muscle strength was grade 2), which were also present in his father, who suffered from sudden death at the age of 42 years old. According to the above clinical features, inherited cardiomyopathy should be considered. Thus, genetic sequence analysis and pedigree investigation were performed, and a novel variant in the LMNA gene was found. The patient carried a c. 1325 T>C heterozygous LMNA gene variant resulting in a missense variant of amino acid 442 (p. Val442Ala) .
After follow-up for more than 1 year, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was observed with a burden of 35–40%, although no ventricular arrhythmia had occurred, and there was no further deterioration trend of the cardiac function. Oral drugs prescribed included candesartan, metoprolol and amiodarone.