The patient was a 21-year-old female with type 2 SMA. Neurologists who had been seeing the patient made a plan for her to receive nusinersen, which needs to be intrathecally injected consecutively possibly for the rest of her life. She had a surgical history of growing rod implantation at the age of six which was lengthened 3 times and was removed 4 years later because of infection. She had severe deformity with scoliosis and vertebrae rotation. CT images and plain x-ray images were obtained for preprocedural investigation . A CT image revealed tight bony fusion in the posterior segment from lower thoracic vertebrae down to L3. The documented Cobb angle was 60° (T5–L5). Because of these complicating factors, she was referred to the anesthesiology department for IT injection of nusinersen. To avoid excessive exposure to radiation, we planned ultrasound-assisted puncture over a CT-guided procedure while taking into consideration the patient’s age.
The procedure took place in a standard operating room. Under sedation with midazolam 1 mg, the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position, and the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position. Neither the spinous process nor any other part of the spine was palpable in the position. Preprocedural ultrasound scanning was conducted using a 3–8-MHz curved array transducer (LOGIQ e Premium; GE Healthcare, Japan) to find a possible access to the IT space at L3–L4 and L4–L5 . After local anesthetic infiltration, a 25-G Quincke spinal needle was inserted about 45° to spinous process (paramedian approach) . On the second attempt after a slight change of course from the first attempt, the needle tip was successfully placed in the IT space with confirmation of a backflow of cerebrospinal fluid. Nusinersen (5 mL, 12 mg) was then injected in approximately 120 s.
No complication was observed during or after the procedure. The patient was later discharged from the hospital. As of May 31, 2020, the patient has successfully received three IT injections in the same way with no trouble (the second and third injections were conducted at 1 and 3 months after the first). The intrathecal administration of nusinersen is planned to continue in half-year intervals throughout her life.