A 11 year old girl presented to the Clinic for Pediatrics, University Clinical Center Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina in January 2008 with pain in abdomen and abdominal wall hardness. Physical examination showed a large abdominal mass. The patient did not have menarche. The basic laboratory findings were with in normal limits. CT revealed a 12x10x11 cm heterodense, solid as well as cystic mass. Left ovary was unremarkable. There was a large amount of ascites. Right sided salpingoophorectomy, omentectomy, biopsy left sided ovary was done. Postoperative serum AFP level was 765,64μg/L, CA-125 was 242.3U/mL, LDH was 1858U/L. Gross examination revealed a large mass of 11x10x7 cm, soft to firm consistency like a fish meat, lobular or nodular cut surface, with solid grayish white, cystic gelatinous areas with haemorrhage. Microscopic examination reveal tumor with infiltrative growth, polygonal cells with vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli focally. Cells are arranged in sheets and nests with focal gland differentiation.
Pathohistology diagnosis was: Carcinoma embrionale partim necroticum et haemorrhagicum infiltrativum textus fibroadiposae . Omental tissue was positive for tumor. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed positive staining for CD30, PLAP, kreatin wide, very focaly CK7, but negative staining for GFAP, vimentin, calretinin, EMA, CEA, Her 2, desmin which would also contribute to the embryonic carcinoma morphologically and by immunophenotypic cells . Ascites was negative for malignant cells on cytological examination. Biopsy of left sided ovary was negative for tumor. Patient had FIGO stage III c disease.
After the surgical removal of the tumour, the patient underwent six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with BEP. After two years of laparotomy she got menarcha. Regular follow up was carried out with tumor marker, ultrasonography, CT and MRI. Seven years after chemotherapy the woman got married. Within six months she conceived spontaneously. Pregnancy was confirmed by positive urine pregnancy test as well as a dating ultrasound scan showing five weeks gestational sac. The patient went through regular antenatal checkups in a consultation with a gynecological oncologist. In addition to all regular examinations and controls, monthly monitoring of CA 125, HE 4, Roma Index is also recomended. Congenital malformation excluded at 20 weeks of gestation by level III ultrasonography.
Approximately eight year after the completion of chemotherapy, the woman spontaneously conceived. During the pregnancy patient had no clinical symptoms till the end of pregnancy. At 39th gestational week, laparotomy as well as a C-section was done and the patient was managed successfully in giving birth to a healthy female baby (birth weight and length 3,430 gm/53cm, Apgar score: 9 in first minute and 9 in fifth minute). Three months after delivery, the woman was recurrence free and the infant did not show any problems. At the last follow-up visit (May 5, 2018), all the tumor markers were negative, and the control MRI and ultrasound examinations did not reveal tumor recurrence or pathological lymph nodes.