A 44-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a 12-day history of fever and abdominal pain radiating to the epigastrium. She had a previous diagnosis of cholelithiasis, but no other pathological and personal antecedents. Her physical examination revealed jaundice, a temperature of 38 °C and pain in the right hypochondrium. A positive Murphy’s sign was elicited. Laboratory studies showed a white blood cell count of 6300 / mm3; hematocrit 39.1%; hemoglobin 12.8 g / dL; and platelets 314,000 cells / mm3; Total bilirubin: 5.1 mg / dL; ALP: 284 IU / L; SGOT: 88 IU / L; and SGPT: 169 IU / L. Ultrasound revealed a distended gallbladder with thick walls containing stones. The extrahepatic bile duct was dilated and contained stones. She was diagnosed with acute cholecystitis and choledocholithiasis, and admitted to the surgery department for a surgical intervention and postoperative care.
An open cholecystectomy and a bile duct exploration via choledochotomy were performed. The surgical findings were: distended gallbladder with thick walls and a dilated bile duct. Both the gallbladder and the bile duct contained stones. A choledocorraphy was performed and a closed suction drain (Hemovac®) was placed in the liver bed. The patient was managed with analgesics and antibiotics (ceftriaxone 2 g IV) for 24 h until discharge.
Six days after hospital discharge, the patient returned to the Emergency Department with a 3-day history of a subjective fever and dysuria. Palpation of the suprapubic region revealed slight pain. The hemogram showed leukocytosis of 11,400 cells/mm3, with predominant neutrophils. Urinalysis revealed a high white blood cell count and a positive leukocyte esterase. The patient was evaluated by the surgical team who found a healing surgical wound with a functional drain and distinct biliary material, ruling out the existence of associated surgical complications. After taking a urine sample for culture, empiric ambulatory antibiotic therapy was established .
Three days later the patient returned with a fever of 39.5 C° accompanied by chills, pain on right flank palpation and positive bilateral renal percussion. A new blood count revealed an elevation of the WBC count to 13,200 / mm3 with a left shift. The urinalysis showed no abnormalities. The urine culture, taken 3 days earlier, showed growth of Escherichia coli resistant to cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones, and sensitive to aminoglycosides, carbapenemics and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Hospital admission was indicated. Antibiotic coverage was changed to amikacin (1 g IV).
The patient showed marked improvement in her general condition and a complete resolution of her urinary symptoms in the following 48 h. However, she continued with a fever of 39.5 C°. She was re-evaluated by the Internal Medicine Service, reporting the persistence of pain in the right flank, so a new abdominal ultrasonography was performed, which ruled out intra-abdominal fluid collection and confirmed the correct placement of the drainage system. A broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage with Imipenem (500 mg IV) was started.
To further investigate the cause of the patient’s continuing fever, abdominal computed tomography was undertaken. It revealed diffuse inflammation of the right iliopsoas muscle with a 15 ml fluid collection. A diagnosis of psoas abscess was made. Given the persistence of fever for 72 h despite conservative management, percutaneous drainage of the abscess was performed. Purulent material was obtained. Culture of the material revealed Staphylococcus aureus sensitive to carbapenems, vancomycin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin and moxifloxacin. Following the percutaneous drainage, the patient showed marked improvement, and complete cessation of fever. After 7 days of hospitalization she was discharged home with moxifloxacin (400 mg).