A 4-year-old boy from Saudi Arabia was diagnosed with hemophilia A at the age of 15 months, with an initial presentation of gum bleeding following direct trauma. First-degree consanguinity was reported; however, there was no family history of bleeding disorders. Since diagnosis, he has experienced more than three episodes of bleeding annually. He previously received multiple doses of standard recombinant FXIII, and high titer inhibitors were detected, reaching 167 BU/mL. Due to the parent’s poor compliance, prophylaxis treatment was delayed, and he frequently missed doses of recombinant factor VIII Fc fusion protein. Furthermore, immunological tolerance induction (ITI) was not initiated, as it needed frequent injections and his parents refused the central line procedure, or to administer injections independently. Accordingly, he received a subcutaneous emicizumab loading dose of 1.5 mg/kg for 4 weeks, followed by a maintenance dose of 6 mg/kg once every 4 weeks.
The patient arrived at the emergency department 2 hours after experiencing head trauma from falling on wet ground. He suffered from post-traumatic headaches and acute vomiting. On arriving at the emergency department of Maternity and Children’s Hospital, Alhassa, he was conscious, attentive, agitated, and with stable vital signs, including heart rate, blood pressure, temperature, and respiratory rate. Laboratory investigations showed that his hemoglobin was 9.7 g/dL, hematocrit was 30.7%, mean corpuscular volume was 54 fL, reticulocyte count was 1.1%, and white blood cell count was 9.86 × 109/L. On clinical examination, there were no neurological deficiencies regarding reflexes, sensation, mental, cognitive, visual, speech, gait, or motor functions. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain was requested as a part of the routine evaluation and revealed a left-sided posterior fossa cerebellar epidural hematoma . The patient was admitted and closely monitored in the intensive care unit and received 24 doses of rFVII (120 µg/kg) for the first 2 days, then six doses daily for 4 days, with tranexamic acid (10 mg/kg) given every 6 hours. Brain CT scans were repeated after 2 days, revealing bleeding cessation. Accordingly, no interventional neurosurgical procedures were recommended. The patient showed stable vital signs and normal neurological examination throughout his admission. The patient was discharged after 10 days, in good health, with no neurological complications. One week after discharge, the patient was followed up by the hospital’s neurosurgeon for reassurance.