A 37-yr-old woman presented at the Royan Institute with a chief complain of sudden onset of pelvic pain. She had a history of 10 yr of infertility and hypothyroid. Her past history of surgery was diagnostic laparoscopy, hysteroscopy, and myomectomy. She became pregnant with in-vitro fertilization procedure. Three weeks after a positive pregnancy test, she came to the Royan Institute with sudden pelvic pain. Although she had moderate vaginal bleeding, she was hemodynamic ally stable and her laboratory test was normal. The β-Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (β-HCG) level on admission was 6550 mIU/mL, so she was admitted for two-dimensional ultrasound (2DUS). The 2DUS findings showed a gestational sac (GS) with live embryo and yolk sac which was located high in the fundus and eccentric to the endometrium . The suspicion of IEP was raised by the 2D ultrasonography findings.
Next, images by the 3DUS were obtained with the Medison A30 machine and the findings were reported as follows: GS with regular margin was seen at the left fundal portion of the uterus which was surrounded by myometrium. Also, the decidual reaction of endometrium was seen in the uterine cavity. Fetal pole and yolk sac could be detected in the GS. Gestational age was about six weeks and five days .
Based on the patient's condition, it seemed that the case would be managed laparoscopic ally. The patient underwent laparoscopic left corneal resection. There were adhesions around the uterus due to the previous myomectomy and all of the adhesions were resected.
Harmonic scalpel used for fallopian tube. Thickness and vascularity were seen in the junction of the uterine and fallopian tube. Bleeding was coagulated with bipolar cautery. Hemostasis was secured with bipolar cautery and the tube removed.
The removed tube was put in anterior cul-de-sac and the corner of uterus was stich with 1-0 vicrryl. .Then the specimen was removed with adobos and was saved for pathology examination. Finally, the gas existed through umbilical trocar. All trocars were removed under the vision, the incision were closed with a Monocryl. The procedure lasted 2 hr. Considering that pre- and postoperative hemoglobin and another hemodynamic index of the patient were normal, there was no need for blood transfusion. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged after two days and her β-hCG achieved complete resolution ( 5 mIU/mL) after two weeks' follow-up.
A written consent form was obtained from the patient for presenting this case.