The patient was a girl aged 2 years and 10 mo. She was hospitalized because of walking disorder for > 40 d.
Forty days ago, she presented with unstable walking and was suspected of having synovitis and stayed in bed at home. She had an episode of fever 30 d prior to that, and the fever spike was 38°C. Blood examination in the outpatient clinic showed leukocytosis, and the fever subsided after oral administration of cephalosporin for 1 wk. During this period, the patient did not leave bed or walk again. Two weeks ago, she developed binocular movement disorder, slow eyeball pursuit, and slight drooping eyelids. Gradually, the patient had wobbling in sitting, and resisted sitting, and cried when urinating, so she was admitted to hospital.
There was a sudden suspicious episode of choking during a meal 3 mo ago, with gaze, unconsciousness, and clenched teeth for 6-7 min, which was relieved after patting on the back and vomiting. There was no abnormality in computed tomography (CT) examination of the head and chest in the local hospital. She was scratched by a cat 2 mo ago and was injected with rabies vaccine three times in 2 wk. Fifty days ago, she suddenly developed generalized weakness and bowed her head during playing, and then her limbs became stiffer, which lasted for about 1 min, followed by vomiting and incontinence. The follow-up was as usual, and the parents made an appointment for a video electroencephalogram examination, which was not done because the patient was immobilized at home.
There was no special personal history, and the milestone of intellectual and motor development was normal since childhood. Her parents were in good health and denied any consanguinity. The 11-year-old brother also was in good health.
There was no special personal history, and the milestone of intellectual and motor development was normal since childhood. Her parents were in good health and denied any consanguinity. The 11-year-old brother also was in good health.
After admission, blood routine tests were done. Biochemical studies, blood ammonia, blood lactic acid, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, procalcitonin, six items of coagulation, complete set of autoantibodies, cellular immunity, humoral immunity, four items of infectious diseases, and seven items of thyroid function tests were normal. Screening of hereditary metabolic diseases in hematuria was not abnormal. Four items of tumor: nonspecific enolase was 40.33 ng/mL (0–16.3 ng/mL), a-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid biochemistry showed: protein 0.27 g/L and glucose 4.82 mmol/L. Routine cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed: nucleated cell count 3 × 106/L; cerebrospinal fluid-MP, epidermolysis bullosa, cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus deoxyribonucleic acid was negative; cerebrospinal fluid and blood autoimmune encephalitis antibody, central demyelination antibody, and peripheral nerve disease spectrum antibody were negative; and cerebrospinal fluid pathogen macro gene was negative.
Plain CT of the chest and abdomen showed no abnormalities, with normal abdominal contents and obvious bladder filling. No abnormality was found in skull magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), magnetic resonance (MR) angiography and MR venography on day 2 after admission, and spinal MRI showed T2 high signal in the spinal cord at the T7–10 level (poor coordination, heavy artifact) . Electroencepholography showed background moderation, poor rhythmicity and responsiveness, with spike waves and spike slow waves in bilateral anterior and middle temporal regions during sleep, which were not synchronized between left and right.
With the approval of the Medical Ethics Committee of the hospital (approval number: 202111116-1) and the informed consent of the guardians of the child, 2 mL peripheral blood from the patient and her parents were taken for whole exome sequencing (Beijing Zhiyin Dongfang). The whole-exome library was constructed using xGen ®Exome Research Panel v1.0 (IDT, United States) capture probe, and the NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina, United States) series sequencer was used for high-throughput sequencing. The compound heterozygous mutations c.733A>C (p.Lys245Gln, dbSNP: rs770023429) and c.370G>T (p.Gly124Cys) in NAXE (APOA1BP) inherited from her parents were identified and verified by Sanger sequencing . According to the American Society of Medical Genetics 2015, Lys245Gln (reported in the PS1+PM1, gnomAD East Asia MAF: 0.0019, PEBEL1 case) was likely pathogenic and Gly124Cys (PM1+PM2+PP3, no MAF record) was annotated as unknown pathogenicity variation. The variant amino acid residues were analyzed using VarSite ; a variant analysis tool provided by European Institute of Bioinformatics, and the two variants were both highly evolutionarily conservative . The conservatism of Lys245Gln in 174 homologous sequences was 0.5, which was lower than that of Gly124Cys in 190 homologous sequences (0.1). Using SWISS-MODEL and Swiss-pdb Viewer software to predict the pathogenicity of the mutation sites, the protein structure, the residues of the mutation site, and the functional sites nearby, it is suggested that the possible pathogenicity, c.733A>C site is shown in Figure , c.370G>T mutation site is shown in Figure .