A 51-year-old white man presented with left thigh pain and inability to bear weight after a ground level fall. This was an isolated injury, which he described as a twisting mechanism with his knee contacting the floor after slipping. Prior to this injury, he was independently ambulant. His past medical history was significant for type-1 diabetes mellitus, retinopathy, and hypertension. His past surgical history was significant for a left corneal transplant 10 years prior, as well as a successful cruciate-retaining TKA 8 years prior. He also had remote history of ACL reconstruction in his twenties; unfortunately previous operative details for this procedure were not available. Radiographic examination revealed a left distal femoral periprosthetic fracture with a well-seated and well-aligned cruciate-retaining implant. A short oblique supracondylar fracture line originated distally from one of his previous ACL ligament augmentation staples .
In our operating room a direct lateral approach through the previous incision was utilized to directly visualize the ACL staple. The staple was visible through the fracture site, and was removed easily . The lateral femoral cortex was intact and had no significant cortical defects from the previous ACL tunnel. The total knee implant was then visualized using the original midline approach. After confirming the stability of the implant and reducing the fracture, cement in the intercondylar fossa was removed to establish the starting point for the intramedullary (IM) nail . The previous ACL tunnel could not be identified. An 11 × 360 mm IM nail was inserted in a retrograde fashion with three locking screws placed distally and one proximally.
Postoperatively, our patient did well and achieved radiographic and clinical union after approximately 4 months. He underwent hardware removal of a symptomatic distal locking screw 5 months postoperatively without complication . At the final 6-month follow-up, he was ambulating independently and back to preoperative functional capacity.