A 29-year-old man with known familial LQT3 syndrome was admitted to our department with recurrent episodes of syncope. He was diagnosed with LQT3 syndrome at age 6 during evaluation of syncope. Initially, he was treated with Metoprolol and subsequently with Flecainide since his QT interval remained prolonged despite beta-blockers treatment. Baseline ECG demonstrates typical features of LQT3 syndrome including prolonged ST-segment, late onset of T-wave and prominent U-wave (lead C2 and C3).
Three weeks before admission, he was hospitalized in another hospital due to syncope following discontinuation of Flecainide. Electrocardiogram revealed prolonged QT interval of more than 500 ms. Treatment with Flecainide was reinitiated with adequate QT shortening and he was discharged home after refusing an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implantation.
His present admission was due to recurrent syncope despite Flecainide treatment. He felt dizziness and then collapsed. Physical examination was unremarkable. Blood pressure was 119/73 mm/Hg in supine position, with no evidence of orthostatic hypotension. Heart rate was 58 b.p.m., temperature was 36.6°C, and saturation was 99% in room air. Laboratory tests including potassium, sodium, calcium, and magnesium levels were all within normal range. Unexpectedly, ECG showed typical findings of Brugada type 1 pattern with right bundle branch block and ST-elevation in V1–3 leads . Echocardiography revealed normal left and right ventricular size and function without any valvular disorder. Due to recurrent syncope, difficulty in medical management of both Brugada and long QT syndromes, and relative bradycardia attributed to the medical treatment and LQT3 , a dual-chamber ICD was implanted. Notably, subcutaneous ICD was not chosen due to the need for atrial pacing. Finally, he was discharged with Propranolol sustained release 80 mg daily, and the ICD was programmed to DDD pacing mode at a rate of 70 b.p.m., to facilitate QT shortening. The successful combination of atrial pacing and beta-blockers treatment resulted in a QTc interval of 450 ms and only a subtle Brugada ECG pattern .
Genetic analysis was positive for SCN5A 1790D>G mutation, which is associated with the overlap syndrome of LQT3 and BrS. The patient’s mother and a brother were also found positive for this specific mutation . The mother’s ECG was remarkable for prolonged QTc interval of 460–480 ms, and appearance of Brugada type 2 pattern after Flecainide initiation, and the brother’s ECG was significant for sinus bradycardia, prolonged QTc of 470 ms and alternate Brugada pattern. During 6 months of follow-up, our patient remained asymptomatic, without evidence of further arrhythmias or syncope.