A 51-year-old female individual with Cystic Fibrosis (CF), homozygous F508del, presented to the Minnesota Cystic Fibrosis Center Gastroenterology Clinic with persistent abdominal bloating and loose stools worsening over several months. The patient underwent bilateral lung transplantation almost 20 years prior to clinic presentation for progressive pulmonary function decline related to CF. Her post-transplant course was complicated by chronic kidney disease progressing to renal failure associated with calcineurin inhibitor use for which she underwent two living donor kidney transplantations, six years and ten years after lung transplantation. Her immunosuppressive regimen on presentation included tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisone, and she had excellent ongoing lung and renal graft function. The patient also had CF-related diabetes (CFRD) and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI), both well-managed with subcutaneous insulin injections and pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy (PERT).
The patient was evaluated for similar symptoms three years prior to the current presentation. Diagnostic evaluation at that time included a negative upper endoscopy and ileocolonoscopy; a bowel preparation adequate for lesion detection was achieved utilizing a “multiple-wash” aggressive approach per the University of Minnesota CF protocol . Family history was negative for gastrointestinal malignancies and associated syndromes. The patient had not undergone any prior screening or diagnostic endoscopic evaluations. Following this evaluation, with a slight increase in her PERT supplementation (though total PERT dosage remained well less than 10,000 units of lipase/kg/day), and in concerted effort with a CF nutritionist for oral nutritional supplementation, the patient progressively improved with a plan for as-needed follow-up in the Gastroenterology Clinic.
At her current presentation, a detailed History & Physical Exam was performed which was otherwise unchanged compared to her clinic visit three years prior, with the exception of the patient reporting the presence of small amounts of bright red blood intermittently with passage of some stools. A colonoscopy was recommended in view of the new symptom (overt rectal bleeding) and her post-transplant immunosuppressed state, which has been associated with a greater risk of colorectal cancer .
The colonoscopy revealed two separate masses located in the cecum and distal transverse colon. The cecal mass, characterized as an ulcerated invasive nodule, was 1.2 cm in size; the transverse colon mass was partially circumferential, fungating, friable, and measured 5 cm in length. There was reasonable concern raised whether the transverse colon lesion could have represented a “missed” interval cancer despite the normal prior exam (false-negative result). Images from the first exam performed three years prior (photo-documented through the terminal ileum, cecum, right colon, transverse colon, left colon, and rectum) were compared to images from the subsequent exam. No obvious lesions or mucosal abnormalities were noted in the transverse colon or other colonic segments in retrospect (though this was not definitively excluded), and the cecal lesion was definitively confirmed by photo comparison to be a new lesion not previously present in either adenomatous form or mucosal abnormality on the prior exam. Quarterly adenoma detection rates (ADR) for the endoscopists for the periods when each exam occurred ranged between 50 and 70% for both male and female patients (standard-of-practice acceptable ADR is at least > 25% for both male and female patients). A multi-day/multi-wash split bowel preparation was utilized per the University of Minnesota CF Bowel Preparation Protocol, and was documented in the procedure reports (and confirmed on image review) as of “good quality” to identify polyps ≥5 mm in size. Colonoscopic withdrawal inspection time was > 12 min for both exams (standard-of-practice acceptable withdrawal inspection time is at least > 6 min). While the risk of a false-negative result with any screening or surveillance regimen is not zero, confirmation of adequacy of these endoscopic benchmarks would typically indicate a diminished risk for this possibility [–].
Biopsies of each of the masses confirmed synchronous, separate, invasive, moderately-to-poorly differentiated (cecal mass) and moderately differentiated (transverse colon mass) adenocarcinomas. Staging computed tomography (CT) scan did not reveal overt evidence of metastases and a referral was made to the Oncology and Colorectal Surgery services with anticipation of treatment with curative intent. Subtotal colectomy with splenic flexure mobilization and ileal descending anastomosis was subsequently performed. The cecal nodule demonstrated moderate-to-poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with submucosal invasion. The transverse colon lesion revealed visceral peritoneal and lymphovascular invasion with clean resection margins; three of 60 lymph nodes returned positive for tumor involvement. Mismatch repair protein expression was normal in both lesions. Initial post-operative recovery was relatively uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on postoperative day (POD) seven. She was readmitted, however, on POD 11 with hypoxic respiratory failure and septic shock of unclear etiology; lung (bilateral infiltrates on chest radiograph) and intra-abdominal sources (peritoneal free air following recent surgery) were suspected. After a complicated hospitalization, she was ultimately transitioned to comfort cares and passed away with her family at her bedside.
This may be the first case of post-transplant CRC in a long-term multi-transplant survivor reported following publication of the recent CF CRC screening consensus recommendations from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (Bethesda, MD, USA) . The authors feel that this case may contribute to the ongoing multi-national discussions and prospective monitoring of outcomes under the currently recommended CRC screening and surveillance intervals in individuals with CF, particularly in those individuals with CF who have undergone prior lung (or other solid organ) transplantation.