A 35-year-old female with no past medical history was admitted to the Heart Hospital in Qatar, a cardiology-specialized facility, with typical chest pain that began 2 h before admission. She described the pain as a pressure-like sensation radiating to her left arm and back and was associated with sweating. She was not a smoker or alcohol consumer and reported no illicit drug use; however, laboratory confirmation was not pursued as the suspicion of drug abuse was low. She had no history of miscarriages and no family history of coronary artery disease. She was married and using a third generation low dose combined oral contraceptive, Marvelon (ethinylestradiol 30 mcg and desogestrel 150 mcg), for 6 months.
Her vital signs and body mass index were within normal range, as follows: heart rate: 71/min, blood pressure: 126/73 mmHg, respiratory rate: 17/min, oxygen saturation on room air: 100%, and body mass index: 23 Kg/m2.
Upon admission, the 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment elevation mainly in leads I and aVL in addition to minimal elevation in V2 and V3 and associated poor R wave progression as shown in Fig. . The patient’s cardiac enzymes (high sensitive Troponin-T) was elevated upon admission, and it continued to rise in the first day to 8026 ng/L as demonstrated in Fig. .
Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was performed and showed a big thrombus in the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery and an occlusion in the mid LAD. Thrombus aspiration was done, and post aspiration coronary angiography showed residual thrombus, however, TIMI II- III flow was established, as demonstrated in Fig. .
She was admitted to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit (CICU) with 48 h of eptifibatide infusion along with dual antiplatelet agents (aspirin and clopidogrel) as a case of thrombotic anterior wall myocardial infarction. Her echocardiogram showed hypokinesia of the antero-septal area with akinesia of the apical region. Ejection fraction (EF) was estimated to be 48%. Thrombophilia workup was negative, including lupus anticoagulant, protein S and protein C. Protein C activity was 103.5% (70–140) and protein S activity was 66.5% (56–126). Autoimmune disease screening was negative, including rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody (ANA).
On the fifth day of admission, she had re-look coronary angiography (CAG) which showed residual thrombus again, with no change in size, as shown in Fig. . However, thrombus aspiration was not performed because of risk of distal embolization. Therefore, she was kept on therapeutic enoxaparin at a dose of 1 mg/kg subcutaneous twice daily until her Troponin-T normalized and discharged home on day 17th of admission. The patient was seen in the follow-up clinic 2 months post discharge and was found to be asymptomatic.