A 26-year-old man with a history of consanguineous parents (cousins) was referred with weight loss, fever, hepatosplenomegaly and coughing. He had previously been diagnosed with lymphadenopathy in the neck at age 8 and prescribed anti-tuberculosis treatment. At 12-years of age he was diagnosed with pulmonary sarcoidosis and corticosteroid treatment was initiated.
On examination on the day of admission to our hospital the patient was pale with low-grade pyrexia (37.5 °C). Cardiovascular examinations were normal but he had cervical lymphadenopathy. A chest radiograph revealed extensive right-sided consolidation along with smaller foci of consolidation in left lung . Crackles were heard on the left side.
Moxifloxacin treatment for 2 weeks did not alleviate his cough, hypoxia or night sweats and fevers of up to 40 °C. Thoracic computed tomography demonstrated mediastinal lymphadenopathy and bilateral consolidation that was greater in the right lung. Non-specific inflammation was shown in a lung biopsy . Full blood counts were normal and liver function tests and autoimmune and virology screens were negative.
Whole blood was examined with specific laboratory tests for neutrophil NADPH oxidase activity i.e. nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) and DHR tests [–]. Low, subnormal levels of ROS were produced following stimulation of purified peripheral blood neutrophils (PMN) with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) .
BAL and serum galactomannan (GAM) tests were negative but the BAL sample was sent for microbiological analysis. 48-72 h culture of the BAL sample on sabouraud dextrose agar at 30 °C resulted in the appearance of smooth light yellow powdery colonies that became darker over time . Lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB) mounting medium slide culture was performed for microscopic species identification . Microscopic analysis revealed septate and hyaline hyphae with biseriate phialides extending from the upper portion of the vesicle and covering 2/3 of the plate. Hyaline, globose or oval and thick-walled chlamydoconidia were also seen . The isolates were identified by phenotypic (macroscopic and microscopic) characteristics as Aspergillus terreus, and this identification was confirmed by DNA sequencing.
The fungal culture was disrupted with glass beads in a grinder and DNA was extracted with phenol chloroform. DNA was suspended in 50 μl of double distilled water and stored at − 20 °C for future use [, ]. The beta tubulin gene was amplified with forward (Bta2a: 5′-GGTAACCAAATCGGTGCTGCTTTC-3′) and reverse (Bta2b 5′-ACCCTCAGTGTAGTGACCCTTGGC-3′) primers and sequenced. The DNA sequence results were compared against the NCBI Genebank database, which showed a 99% similarity with an Aspergillus terreus isolate in the Gene Bank fungal library with accession no 1168 [, ] .
Genomic DNA was extracted from the blood mononuclear cell fraction using a Gentra Puregene Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA sequencing was performed at the Sanquin Research Laboratory (Amsterdam, The Netherlands). GeneScan was used to determine the ratio between the number of exon 2 sequences of neutrophil cytosolic factor 1 (NCF1) gene, which encodes p47phox, and the number of Ψ-NCF1 exon 2 sequences . This revealed a homozygous GT deletion (c.75_76delGT) at the start of exon 2 in NCF1, resulting in the introduction of a frame shift and a premature stop codon (p.Tyr26HisfsTer26) predicting a truncated and inactive p47phox protein.
The patient was treated with meropenem, vancomycin and liposomal amphotericin b for 2 weeks. After obtaining the results of fungal characterization, voriconazole was started and other antibiotics were removed from the treatment strategy. After 3 months, the patient had recovered as confirmed by chest imaging and clinical manifestations. The patient gained 10 kg in weight and is on maintenance treatment with voriconazole.