The patient was a 32-year old woman with a one-year history episodes of cholecystitis treated conservatively. She did not have any other disease history. After an abdominal magnetic resonance imaging that confirmed multiple gallbladder stones , an elective LC was performed without intra-operative complications. The recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged two days after operation. On the second day after discharge, the patient developed severe right upper abdominal pain and she was sent to our emergency department at 8:30 pm. At arrival, her heart rate was 110 bpm and the blood pressure was 80/55 mmHg. The hemoglobin dropped to 86 g/l from 127 g/l. The CT scan showed a 10.9 × 12.5 × 6.6 cm ISH in the right liver without obvious free fluid in abdominal cavity . Two hours after fluid resuscitation including 2 U red blood cell, the hemoglobin further declined to 78 g/l and the hemodynamics remained unstable. The abdominal pain was not relieved, after intravenous analgesics. A Doppler ultrasound was performed, two hours later and it found the hematoma had increased in size. Active intrahepatic bleeding was suspected. We called radiologist for consultation, however, the interventional angiography and embolization was not available at mid night. We explained the potential risk of sudden rupture of hematoma during conservative methods which may cause sudden death, to the patient and her relatives. After careful consideration of the continuous decline of hemoglobin, unstable hemodynamics after fluid resuscitation, we explained our surgical plan to the patient and her relative. We planned to perform laparoscopic exploration at first, if the hematoma continued to expand, we would evacuate or drain it, if not, we would put a drainage tube under liver which could serve as an early warning of rupture. The patient requested surgical method to reduce the risk of sudden death. Therefore, an emergency laparoscopic exploration was performed under general anesthesia. The ISH was confirmed . Four U red blood cell and 400 ml fresh frozen plasma were transfused. After fluid resuscitation and blood transfusion, her hemodynamic became stable. During the 3-h intra-operative observation, the hematoma did not expand. Therefore, a non-sucking drainage tube was placed under the liver and she was sent to ICU ward. Next morning, she was transferred to the ordinary ward. The upper abdominal pain gradually relieved. Five days after the laparoscopic exploration, another CT scan showed that the hematoma was largely resolved and we removed drain tube . She was discharged, 10 days after readmission.
Totally, 13 papers, including 16 cases of ISH after LC were reported from 1994 to 2015 . Nearly half of the patients had instability of hemodynamics. All of the cases were female patients. Age of patients ranged from 25 to 78. All hematomas were mainly located in the right lobe of liver, and some of them extended to the left lobe of liver. Only one case was ruptured at diagnosis. Hepatic capsule laceration was found in two cases, one of whom also took NSAIDS (non-steroids anti-inflammatory drugs) to control the pain after operation. Totally, 58.8% of patients took NSAIDS to control the post-operative pain, and most of them used Ketorolac, however, 35.3% of the patients still did not have definitive risk factors. The time interval to diagnose ISH after LC ranged from seven hours to six weeks. They were diagnosed most commonly (35.5%) within one day after LC. All patients had abdominal pain and 47.1% of the cases developed hypovolaemic shock.
Treatment strategies included: conservative treatment (antibiotics, blood transfusion, strict bed-reset), percutaneous drainage under CT or B ultrasound guidance, selective embolization of the bleeding vessel, laparoscopic exploration and laparotomy. Eighteen percent of patients had stable condition without fever and underwent conservative treatments. The only case of angioembolization was complicate by infection and required percutaneous drainage. For the patients with stable condition, fever and serious compression of inferior venal cava (IVC) always were indications for percutaneous drainage under CT or B ultrasound guidance. In these 17 cases, 29.4% of the patients underwent percutaneous drainage. For the patients with hemodynamic instability, emergent reoperation was adopted. Totally, nine cases underwent reoperation, including two case of laparoscopic operation and seven cases of laparotomy. For our case, we only performed laparoscopic exploration and did not perform evacuation or drainage of the hematoma, since the hemodynamic became stable after plenty fluid resuscitation and the hematoma did not expand, during the 3 h of intra-operative observation. For another case, laparoscopic exploration found small capsule laceration, and hemostasis was performed. In the seven cases of laparotomy, six patients underwent evacuation and drainage of hematoma, only one case underwent only laparotomy without evacuation or drainage.
All patients survived. Most of patients stayed one to two weeks after readmission, however, the longest hospital stay was up to 31 days after reoperation.