The patient was a 26-year-old woman with a medical history of only asthma in childhood. She ate a sushi roll with squid a week ago and then had abdominal pain and was admitted to our emergency department. On physical examination, no allergic reaction, such as hives or bronchospasm, was observed, and her lower abdomen was flat and hard with tenderness and guarding. Laboratory examinations showed an elevated white blood cell count of 17,160/μl (leukocyte fraction could not be examined after hours in our hospital). Laboratory examinations showed increases in IgE-RIST levels (0.89 UA/ml; normal range < 0.34 UA/ml). There were no other abnormal findings. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed ascites, the whirl sign, localized submucosal edema of the intestinal wall, and a dilated small bowel segment with edema .
We suspected the strangulated small bowel obstruction based on the CT-scan findings.
The presence of acute abdominal guarding and the CT-scan findings indicated that strangulated small bowel obstruction could not be ruled out completely, and a laparoscopic examination was performed. A 12 mm port was placed in the navel, and two 5 mm ports were placed in the left and right flanks. Bloody ascites in the pouch of Douglas and severe inflammation and bloody ascites were observed in 20 cm of the ileum. Neither the oral side nor the anus side of the inflamed intestinal tract was narrowed, and the intestinal tract suddenly changed from a normal appearance to an inflammatory appearance. No cords that caused strangulation were observed. The Anisakis worm body was found to have punctured through to the outside of the intestine, and the worm was found alive and moving in the mesentery. The umbilical wound was extended to 2 cm, and the ileum was placed outside the body cavity. Strong inflammation of the intestinal tract was observed. A segmental resection of 20 cm of the inflamed bowel, located 40 cm from the ileum end, was performed. The small intestine was reconstructed with a functional end-to-end anastomosis .
The resected specimen was associated with a high degree of ischemia along the entire thickness, and the living Anisakis worm body was confirmed in the mesentery. Histological examination revealed the presence of parasites in the mesentery, phagocytosis of neutrophils in the surrounding area, and granuloma formation. The mucous membrane of the intestinal tract was extensively degraded, and the muscular layer showed severe bleeding. Eosinophilic infiltration was not remarkable, and the phagocytosis of neutrophils was often observed .
The patient was discharged 9 days after surgery.