A 56-year-old Turkish man with no history of illness or drug use was treated with plate and screw osteosynthesis because of a right femoral fracture after a vehicle accident in 1998. He had been living with and feeding a dog for the past 16 years. Two years prior to the current presentation, he noticed a slight swelling on the proximal lateral aspect of his right thigh, but he did not pursue evaluation. However, the symptoms had been increasing during the most recent six months, and he was admitted to our clinic. His C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 3.7mg/dl and his eosinophil concentration was 12.4%. A biopsy specimen was taken from the area of swelling because of suspected infection. The biopsy specimen was considered to involve greater trochanter bursitis. However, because of increasing swelling and pain during the three months following the biopsy, he was re-evaluated in our clinic. A 25×12cm mass was present on the proximal anterolateral aspect of the right thigh, starting at the greater trochanter and spreading both distally and posteriorly. There was no warmth or redness associated with the mass. A diagnosis of bursitis of the greater trochanter was made due to the swelling, which was particularly severe on the greater trochanter and the screw heads on the proximal greater trochanter. To identify the causative organism, the mass was punctured again. The culture grew methicillin-sensitive, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (Staphylococcus epidermidis), which was determined to be due to contamination. Tests for a potential infection were taken. His test results showed a sedimentation rate of 107mm/h, CRP of 1.38mg/dl, a white blood cell count of 7.8×103/mm3, and eosinophils of 2.4. He was diagnosed with bursitis of the trochanter major, and removal of the bursitis and an implant operation were planned. The excised mass started from the lateral aspect of the distal femur (next to the implant) and spread postero-superiorly to the level of the greater trochanter, which was 15×12×6cm in diameter. The mass was filled with a 1×1cm cystic structure that appeared to be comprised of hydatid cyst vesicles (Figures and
). During surgery, the mass was excised with preservation of the sciatic nerve as the cyst had burst. Bone tissue had not developed on the implant and the plates and screws were removed from the patient. Intra-operatively, we considered that the mass might have been a hydatid cyst or a sarcoma, and thus post-operatively, the patient underwent contrast-enhanced abdominal and thoracic computed tomography (CT). His CT scan revealed neither a primary focus nor any other area of involvement. An abdominal ultrasonography examination was unremarkable. A direct parasitic examination of the specimens taken intra-operatively showed no protoscoleces within the cyst. Samples were taken intra-operatively and sent for pathological examination. The diagnosis was verified and the soft-tissue reaction evaluated. Twelve months after the procedure our patient was fully mobilized and determined to be in a good general condition. A follow-up CT scan of his abdomen, chest, and right thigh revealed no secondary focus.