A previously well 24-year-old Caucasian man was evaluated for a six-month history of episodes of passing dark colored urine. Each episode typically followed a djembe drum playing session . Despite playing these drums for many years, he was playing them with increased frequency and duration over the past six months since joining a new djembe drum circle. He would typically play these drums intensely for two hours at a time. He used the palm of his hands to percuss and of late observed his hands to be bruised after each session. Recently, he also noticed blisters on his fingers and thumbs with the formation of calluses.
His urine turned reddish brown in color, the intensity of which correlated to the duration and intensity of his drum playing. His urine returned to normal color within 12 to 24 hours. He had associated myalgia, and on two occasions experienced back pain. Activities such as heavy weightlifting, or working out on a treadmill did not change the color of his urine nor did these changes in urine color occur in association with a viral upper respiratory tract infection. He denied flank pain, abdominal pain, dysuria, frothy urine or passing stones in his urine. He denied fever, easy bruisability, jaundice, prior blood transfusion, skin rash, itching or angioedema.
He had an unremarkable past medical or surgical history, and he was not taking any medications. He denied any family history of renal disease or hematuria. He drank alcohol and smoked cigarettes socially. He denied any active drug abuse.
On physical examination, he was afebrile with a blood pressure of 122/72 mmHg, a pulse rate of 68 beats/min and a body mass index of 24 kg/m2. A physical examination was remarkable for a lack of costovertebral angle tenderness and peripheral edema. He had multiple calluses on the palmar aspect of both thumbs and palms.
His pre-drum playing serum chemistry, complete blood count, reticulocyte count and RBC (red blood cell) osmotic fragility test were normal. His urine was clear, and urine analysis was normal. On urine microscopy he had occasional granular casts but no RBCs or cellular casts. His 24-hour urine analysis revealed a protein excretion of 165 mg/24 hr without microalbuminuria and his creatinine clearance was normal. Abdominal imaging was pursued for his complaint of back pain and was negative for nephrolithiasis. His kidney size was normal without anatomical abnormalities.
Post-drum playing, his urine sample was reddish brown in color with a specific gravity of 1.030, pH 5.5, 1+ protein, 3+ blood, 0 to 2 RBC/high powered field (HPF) and 0 to 2 white blood cells/HPF with negative nitrite and leukocyte esterase. His urine microscopy revealed 1 to 2 RBC/HPF. His urine was negative for myoglobin and his serum creatine kinase was mildly elevated at 407 mg/dL. Plasma haptoglobin and lactate dehydrogenase measured 12 hours post-exercise was normal.
Our patient informed us of other members who had similar discolored urine following strenuous drum playing. In the words of our patient, "in the culture of drum players, if the urine does not become dark after a drum playing session, one has not played hard enough".
His myalgia, back pain and reddish urine resolved when he abstained from vigorous participation in his djembe drum circle.