A 51-year-old female presented to the emergency department of our institute complaining of bilateral eye redness, foreign body sensation and crusting around the eyes on awakening. She had been diagnosed with Marfan syndrome during childhood, and had developed cardiovascular and ophthalmological manifestations including: 1. Lens subluxation 2. High myopia 3. Aortic root dilation 4. Mitral valve prolapse and 5. Mild tricuspid insufficiency. Her ophthalmologic history includes high myopia of – 19.00 D in the right eye and -20.00 D in the left eye with use of hard contact lenses since 1975. Primary open angle glaucoma that required topical treatment with timolol 0.2 % b.i.d., brimonidine 0.1%b.i.d., and dorzolamide 2%b.i.d. She had also received laser photocoagulation for multiple retinal holes. In april 2006, she presented nasal superior lens subluxation and opacity on the right eye. She underwent phacoemulsification surgery in another institution, with placement of a capsular tension ring and subsequent surgical aphakia. In 2008, she also presented nasal superior lens subluxation of the left eye with lens opacity, a visual acuity of 20/400 (LogMAR) and a refraction of -20.00 diopters. She underwent phacoemulsification with insertion of a capsular tension ring along with an intraocular lens inside the bag.
On ophthalmologic examination the visual acuity of her right eye was 20/200 (1.00 LogMAR) that corrected to a visual capacity of 20/60 (0.48 LogMAR). Her refraction of this eye was of -2.00 diopters. On the left eye her visual acuity and visual capacity were 20/50 (0.40 LogMAR) and 20/25 (0.10 LogMAR) respectively, with a refraction of -1.00 diopter. The Intraocular pressure measured at that moment was 10 mmHg on both eyes. On slit lamp examination of both eyes she presented eyelashes debris, with lid margin erythema, and increased yellowish secretion of the meibomian glands. On the right eye she presented a capsular tension ring embedded in a ruptured capsular bag and aphakia . On the left eye there were a capsular tension ring with an intraocular lens, both in the bag, which was displaced nasally and superiorly . On fundus examination of both eyes there was an oblique insertion of the optic disc, and one myopic crescent surrounding the optic nerve, posterior staphyloma, with optic nerve cupping and a concentrically diminished neuroretinal rim Figs. (, ). There were also macular pigmentary abnormalities with a visible choroidal fundus in the posterior pole as well as in the periphery with a retinal hole surrounded by laser photocoagulation on the inferior half of the retina at 6 o’ clock of the right eye and at 3 o’ clock on the left eye.
The patient was diagnosed with surgical aphakia of the right eye, pseudophakia and intraocular lens subluxation of the left eye. Blepharitis, high myopia and primary open angle glaucoma of both eyes.
Her treatment consisted on rubbing the eyelid margins twice a day with shampoo, warm compresses b.i.d., topical artificial tears and topical erythromicin ointment q.i.d. She continued on her glaucoma medication: timolol 0.2% b.i.d., brimonidine 0.1%b.i.d., and dorzolamide 2% b.i.d. Due to her good visual capacity on both eyes she was decided to be left under observation, her refraction was prescribed, and no additional surgical treatment was decided.