An 83 years-old male patient with a medical history of atrial fibrillation was undergoing apixaban anticoagulation therapy. The only known preexisting conditions were alcohol abuse and chronic folic acid deficiency. He was admitted to an external hospital for acute dyspnea and was diagnosed with suspected pulmonary embolism. However, computed tomography (CT) angiography of the thorax negated the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism as the cause of the patient’s dyspnea. The plasma clotting was normal during the initial assessment.
Further examination was necessary after the patient experienced sudden left-sided hemiparesis that fluctuated in severity following elimination of a pulmonary embolism. There was no sign of a traumatic event at any point during clinical presentation. A non-contrast cranial CT scan was conducted, which indicated a low-volume subdural hematoma localized to the right parietal hemisphere . Importantly, no evidence of other intracranial pathologies was detected in the initial CT scan. In addition, the patient reported no relevant headaches, nausea, or vomiting.
Owing to the severity of the patient’s neurological findings, he was transferred to our tertiary referral hospital for specialized care. A twist-drill craniostomy was performed, and a subdural drain was inserted parietally in the right hemisphere due to the size of the subdural hematoma and its neurological symptoms. In preparation for the surgical procedure, 3,500 international units of prothrombin complex concentrate were administered to safely reverse the effects of anticoagulation therapy.
After the patient underwent successful surgery, he was transferred to the standard ward for postoperative monitoring. Nevertheless, the following morning, the patient displayed new neurological symptoms, such as dysarthria and exacerbated left-sided hemiparesis. A subsequent cranial CT scan verified the correct positioning of the subdural drain and revealed a decrease in the size of the subdural hematoma . Sudden onset of dysarthria and worsening hemiparesis on the left side during the postoperative phase necessitated further imaging. Follow-up cranial CT revealed a decrease in the size of the subdural hematoma; however, this could not explain the aggravated neurological symptoms. An MRI scan of the brain revealed the coexistence of an ischemic stroke in the hyperacute phase of the right corona radiata in the supply area of the right anterior choroidal artery. It exhibited increased brightness on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and reduced apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values . Further neurological assessment revealed moderate stenosis of the left middle cerebral artery in the distal M1 segment. A pivotal clinical challenge that has emerged is the lack of clear guidelines on the timing of antithrombotic restart following the occurrence of SDH. This challenge was further compounded by the high risk of very early stroke (within 24 h) in our patient, who presented with recurrent TIAs suggestive of CWS. Given this high risk, the immediate initiation of secondary prevention is a critical consideration. However, considering the recent surgery and the absence of large intracranial artery occlusion, no antithrombotic treatment was initiated.
This limitation highlights the challenges posed by the sequential occurrence of these two neurological conditions and their associated therapeutic decisions (see ).