A healthy 5-year-old girl developed acute respiratory distress and became unconscious. On arrival at the Emergency Room, venous blood gas analysis showed type II respiratory failure and respiratory acidosis (pH 7.011, partial pressure of O2 93.7 mmHg, partial pressure of CO2 112.0 mmHg, serum bicarbonate concentration 27.0 mmol/l, base excess − 7.3 on room air). She was mechanically ventilated under midazolam sedation. Initially, anaphylactic shock of unknown origin was suspected. Epinephrine (0.03 mg/kg) was administered subcutaneously, leading to partial improvement in tidal volume. Serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) concentration was elevated (166 IU/ml, normal < 70 IU/ml for her age), and specific IgE to house dust mites was strongly positive (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus 91.8 UA/ml; Dermatophagoides farinae > 100 UA/ml).
Although the patient had no history of BA, a first asthma attack was suspected, and methylprednisolone (2 mg/kg/day) and ampicillin/sulbactam (100 mg/kg/day) were given. Serologic tests for infection on the 2nd day after the onset of respiratory distress, including echovirus, enterovirus, coxsackievirus, poliovirus, herpes simplex virus, and Mycoplasma were negative. On the 4th day after symptom onset, she was weaned off mechanical ventilation and extubated. At this time, when her level of consciousness improved, her legs showed no paralysis. However, a few hours later when she woke from sleep, both her legs were paralyzed except for weak motor activity in the right anterior tibialis muscle. Patellar and Achilles tendon reflexes were diminished; there were no pathologic reflexes. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis on the 21st day after symptom onset showed 7 cells/μl (100% mononuclear cells), elevated protein concentration (120 mg/dl, normal 15–40 mg/dl), and normal myelin basic protein concentration. Virus isolation culture did not detect any viruses in the CSF. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on the 21st day after symptom onset identified T2-hyperintense lesions with spinal cord edema, mainly involving the anterior horns bilaterally from T11 to L1, with left side dominance extending to the left posterior horn . On the 23rd day after the onset, HS was suspected and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) (400 mg/kg/day for 5 days) followed by intravenous methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg/day for 3 days) were administered, but there was no improvement over the next 3 weeks.
On the 47th day after symptom onset, she was transferred to our institution. She was alert and orientated, and her cranial nerves were intact. She had diffuse muscle atrophy in the left lower limb, with diminished tone but no fasciculation. Marked muscle weakness was evident in iliopsoas (Medical Research Council [MRC] scale grade right/left 0/0), the thigh adductors (0/0) and abductors (0/0), gluteus maximus (0/0), quadriceps femoris (0/0), biceps femoris (0/0), anterior tibialis (3/0), gastrocnemius (3/0), and dorsi- (3/0) and plantar-flexors of the toes (3/0). Tendon reflexes in the lower limbs were diminished. The Babinski sign was positive on the right. Sensation was normal in all modalities, and there was no uro-rectal disturbance. Complete blood count, including eosinophil count, blood biochemistry, coagulation status, and the concentrations of D-dimer, proteins S and C and lupus anticoagulant were normal. Serum myeloperoxidase and proteinase-3 anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative, and autoantibodies against aquaporin-4 and phospholipid-bound β2–glycoprotein I were absent. Enterovirus D68 was detected in endotracheal aspirates (obtained on the 2nd day after symptom onset), but not in the CSF (obtained on the 21st day after onset), using a consensus-degenerate hybrid oligonucleotide primer polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method with direct sequencing,. Nerve conduction studies identified decreased compound muscle action potential amplitudes in the left tibial nerve (0.04 mV, normal > 2.9 mV). There was no evidence of arteriovenous malformation or arteriovenous fistula on spinal MR angiography. With parental permission, an acetylcholine (ACh) bronchial stimulation test was undertaken by a pulmonologist, which showed that inhalation of 5000 μg/ml ACh provoked wheezing and a rapid reduction in forced expiratory volume from 0.86 l/min to 0.50 l/min and a flow-volume loop typical of peripheral airway obstruction, both of which were reversed by 1.0 mg inhaled salbutamol. These findings were diagnostic of BA, and consequently HS.
Intravenous immunoglobulin 0.4 g/kg was administered for five consecutive days a month for 4 months, based on previous case reports showing its efficacy in HS [, ]. After treatment, power in the right anterior tibialis, dorsi- and plantar-flexors of the toes and gastrocnemius muscles improved to MRC grade 4, but power remained MRC grade 0 throughout the left lower limb. Spinal MRI undertaken on the 103rd day after symptom onset showed atrophy of the left anterior horn. She was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation.