A twenty-two-year-old Iranian woman arrived at our institute with a complaint of severing back pain at the level of T5-T6 vertebrae since two months ago. There was no definite initiating cause and the pain was not associated with the activity. The pain did not radiate into any other part. She did not consume alcohol or illicit drug and had no history of underlying diseases.
Laboratory data were all within normal ranges except slightly elevated ESR.
The radiological study was performed. The Thorax spiral CT scanning without contrast injection was done and demonstrated an expansible bony lesion involving posterior arc of the right 6th rib, costovertebral joint and a portion of the T6 vertebrae. It was measured about 68*44 mm. In MRI, Right D5, D6, and D7 paravertebral mass were seen. The intervertebral foramen was also involved by the enhanced lesion .
Then CT-guided biopsy and fine needle aspiration of the lesion was taken. A lobulated and irregular margin without cortical destruction was present. Macroscopic appearance of lesion was suggestive of benign osseous mass but extension into the body and right side of posterior elements of the adjacent vertebra was also seen. The specimen was sent for further evaluations. It contained multiple tiny pieces of brown soft tissue. The histopathologic finding was suggestive of norm cellular bone marrow. There were no malignant or atypical cell .
Based on previous cases we decided to perform thoracostomy under general anesthesia by an expert spine surgeon. At the operating room, we performed resection of the proximal parts of right 6th rib and partial T5 and T6 corpectomy. During the surgery, we completely excised the lesion and a safe margin to avoid local recurrence. Intra-operatively frozen section was sent for rapid analysis to determine the safe margin from the lesion in surrounding parenchyma and minimize tissue damage. Although the mass had only involved the rib, and not the surrounding area, we gently removed reactive parts of the cortex for safety. Thus, intraoperative observation also helped in determining the margin of excision to decrease excessive tissue damage.
Then she was admitted at the Neurosurgery Intensive Care Unit for three days under our close observation. The post-operative period was uneventful. Wound healing occurred without infection or inflammatory response.
During one-year follow-up, she did not experience any abnormality. General physical exams were normal. Laboratory evaluations were all within standard ranges. However, we performed spiral chest and abdominopelvic CT scan; no lesion or any sign of remission was found.
Based on our review on literature, there were seven similar cases of Focal Hematopoietic hyperplasia reported in articles. Here we also compared our findings with their reports and discussed similar features.