The patient (female, 72 years old) was admitted to the outpatient clinic due to “gross hematuria for one day”. She had a history of hypertension and no family history of tumors. The patient developed hematuria without obvious inducement, which was characterized as full-course, painless, without obvious blood clots, with slightly frequent and urgent urination. After admission, relevant examinations were completed. Cystoscopy showed space-occupying lesions in the bladder. Chest CT examination suggested space-occupying lesions in the lower lobe of the lung, suggesting peripheral lung cancer with cervical, mediastinal and hilar lymph node metastases . There were multiple small nodules in both lungs with possible metastasis and a left pleural effusion. Possible diagnoses included primary lung cancer, primary bladder cancer, or bladder metastasis from lung cancer. To solve the hematuria problem, transurethral cystoscopic resection of the bladder tumor was performed. Pathological examination of the bladder mass indicated the following: poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and a tendency toward lung adenocarcinoma metastasis based on combined clinical and immunohistochemistry findings. Immunohistochemistry revealed the following: CK7 (+), TTF-1 (+), NapsinA (+), CK20 (-), GATA3 (-), Syn (-), CgA (-), S-100 (-), PAX-8 (-), and Ki-67(+) of approximately 40% . For the left pleural effusion, puncture and drainage were performed and sent for pathology. Pathological examination of the pleural effusion cell block revealed tumor cells that were consistent with adenocarcinoma, and immunohistochemical lung markers TTF-1, NapsinA, and CK7 were all positive. The lung adenocarcinoma was possibly large. In view of the partial positivity of the immunohistochemical marker Villin and the crossover phenomenon, the gastrointestinal tract was further examined. The immunohistochemistry findings were as follows: tumor cells: CK7 (+); TTF-1 (+); NapsinA (+); Villin: partial cells (+); CK20: few cells (+); GATA3 (-); CR (-); CK5/6 (-); CD163 (-); and PAX-8 (-). Given the patient’s medical history, pathological findings and immunohistochemistry, bladder metastasis of lung adenocarcinoma was considered. Color ultrasound-guided thoracentesis and drainage of pleural effusion were performed, and the bladder mass was submitted for genetic testing. The results showed that there were no genetic mutations in EGFR, ALK or ROS-1. According to the results of genetic testing, there was no corresponding targeted drug, so we administered 6 cycles of pemetrexed combined with carboplatin chemotherapy. The patient agreed to the treatment and achieved one-year survival , which was better than expected based on other studies.