A 13-year-old male patient with a history of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in two of his second-degree relatives, referred to our clinic to evaluate a possible cardiac disease. He also had mental retardation from birth. The presenting symptoms were relatively mild and non-specific and included shortness of breath and chest discomfort. The patient’s hemodynamic condition was evaluated through a physical examination and an assessment of his vital signs. The physical examination identified grade II systolic murmurs. Electrocardiography (ECG) analysis showed a normal sinus rate and rhythm, right axis deviation (110°), and a low precordial voltage with poor R-wave progression.
Transthoracic echocardiograms showed moderate to severe left ventricle (LV) systolic dysfunction. In addition, mild tricuspid regurgitation was presented. Besides enlargement of the left atrium and moderate mitral regurgitation, other cardiac valves showed no significant abnormality.
Since the LV apex was not clear in the four-chamber view of the echocardiographic evaluation and to study the kinetic features of the congenital malformation and its morphological characteristics, we performed contrast-enhanced cardiac MRI, using a 1.5 T whole-body scanner (Avanto, Siemens, Erlangen). For signal reception, an eight-element cardiac phased-array receiver surface coil was used. We performed retrospective ECG-triggered steady-state free precession (SSFP) sequence for the evaluation of LV myocardial thickness, as well as kinetic, parietal segmental, and the global contractility. We oriented the sequences to the short-axis and long-axis (atrium-ventricular and four-chamber axes) using parameters as follows: TR 3.8 ms; TE 1.8 ms; flip angle (FA) 70°; matrix scan 256 × 256; field of view (FOV) 400; thickness 8 mm; gap 2 mm; 25 cardiac phases per cycle; and retrospective synchronization. Cine cardiac MRI with a four-chamber view showed a truncated appearance of the spherical LV with a bulging of the interventricular septum (IVS) toward the right ventricle (white arrow). It also indicated invagination of fatty material and elongation of a normally functioning right ventricle around the deficient LV apex .
The stack of the axial view using SSFP sequences showed a small cavity indicating contractile myocardial out pouching located in the mid-posterolateral LV wall and containing all three layers of the ventricular wall, which suggested LV diverticulum. Furthermore, LV volumes were enlarged, and the ejection fraction was decreased.
Black-blood T1-weighted sequences with and without fat saturation on short-axis and long-axis views were performed to assess alterations of the myocardial signals . Finally, late gadolinium enhancement MRI (LGE-MRI) was performed by means of magnitude-reconstructed and phase-sensitive inversion recovery prepared using a fast gradient echo sequence. After 10 minutes from the administration of 0.2 mmol/kg of gadoterate meglumine (Dotarem®, Guerbet, France), LGE-MR images were obtained along the same axis plane and with the same slice thickness as in the cine MRI. The acquisition parameters were as follows: TR = 600 ms; TE = 3.4 ms; FA = 25°; acquisition matrix = 156 × 256; FOV = 320 × 400 mm; slice number = 10 slices; and cardiac phase = mid-diastole. There were no signs of fibrosis or necrosis tissue presenting in the circumferential wall of the diverticulum showing by the delayed enhancement images .