A 54-year-old female presented with progressive pain in both upper extremities. Her past medical history mentioned a lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL), diagnosed three years prior to presentation, for which she had received intravenous rituximab, cyclophosphamide and oral dexamethasone. A relapse one year after diagnosis of LPL was treated with intravenous rituximab, fludarabine, and cyclophosphamide. Because of this relatively early relapse, rituximab (once every three months) was continued as maintenance therapy. Two months prior to presentation, she received oral antibiotic treatment for a recurrent enterocolitis with stool cultures positive for C. jejuni. The first culture showed no antibiotic resistance and the patient was treated with oral ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily for five days). Two subsequent cultures, taken because of remitting symptoms of diarrhoea, showed antibiotic resistance to fluoroquinolones and susceptibility to erythromycin and tetracycline. The patient was treated with oral azithromycin (500 mg once daily for three days) and diarrhoea subsided. Two weeks prior to presentation, polymyalgia rheumatica was suspected because of pain in upper extremities. In spite of empiric treatment with oral prednisolone (20 mg once daily for three days), pain persisted.
On presentation, the patient was afebrile and normotensive, with a heart rate of 80 beats per minute and an oxygen saturation of 99% on ambient air. Palpation of the left quadriceps femoris muscle was painful. Laboratory testing showed elevated C-reactive protein of 122 mg/L (normal value < 5.0 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 71 mm/hour (normal value < 20 mm/hour), and normal red cell count and white blood cell differential count. Levels of calcium, alkaline phosphatase, creatine kinase, and lactate dehydrogenase were within normal range. Recent gamma globulin levels were low: IgM < 0.05 g/L (normal range 0.40–2.30 g/L), IgA 0.12 g/L (normal range 0.70–4.00 g/L) and IgG 4.2 g/L (normal range 7.0–16.0 g/L) without presence of a monoclonal gammopathy. Differential diagnosis consisted of transformation of LPL to a large B cell lymphoma, or osteomyelitis. A fluorine-18 fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (F-18 FDG) positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography (PET/CT) was done to determine the preferred site for biopsy. Images showed increased FDG uptake in both distal femora .
A biopsy of the left femur was performed and histology was negative for B lymphocytes, but showed necrotic and fibrous tissue with T lymphocytes and macrophages in clusters. CD20 immunostaining was negative. Meanwhile, blood cultures taken on admission showed growth of C. jejuni in both aerobic bottles (BacT/ALERT), with a strain resistant to fluoroquinolones and susceptible to tetracyclines and carbapenems. The diagnosis C. jejuni osteomyelitis was confirmed with positive 16S ribosomal RNA gene polymerase chain reaction of Campylobacter spp. on prior femoral bone biopsy. Treatment was started with intravenous imipenem combined with cilastatin (500 mg / 500 mg four times daily) and concurrent intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) Privigen® (20,000 mg once monthly). Rituximab was discontinued. After two days, intravenous imipenem/cilistatin was substituted for intravenous doxycycline (100 mg twice daily). Because of a suspected sufficient oral bioavailability and bone penetration, oral doxycycline (100 mg twice daily) was started after four days of intravenous antibiotic treatment. However, blood cultures taken after eight days of oral doxycycline were again positive for C. jejuni with a cultured strain susceptible to imipenem, meropenem, erythromycin and tetracycline. Femoral pain recurred. A transoesophageal echocardiography showed no vegetation, making an endocarditis less likely. Intravenous doxycycline was started and after three days, blood cultures were positive again with unchanged susceptibility. When therapy with intravenous meropenem (1000 mg three times daily) was started, pain in upper extremities subsided and blood cultures on follow-up were negative. Antibiotic treatment was continued intravenously for a total duration of six weeks. The patient was doing well on follow-up one year later.