A 25-year-old Japanese woman was referred to the Department of Oral Surgery of Tokai University Hospital with an intractable, sclerotic lesion in her lower lip that was thought to be a malignant tumor. She had been healthy until she noticed a painless nodule in her lower lip 4 weeks ago. She visited a local dental clinic and had been diagnosed with cheilitis by bite trauma of the lip. Antimicrobials were not prescribed.
She had no history of tobacco smoking or alcohol use. She reported a history of unprotected orogenital contact with a steady male partner approximately 3 weeks before the onset of a painless tumor. A physical examination revealed that she had a nodule in her lower lip, which was approximately 2.0 cm in diameter. It had an ulcer-like lesion in the center and a slightly elevated erythematous and indurated margin . Further examinations, including genital and rectal examinations, revealed no evidence of malignancy. Fever or apparent cervical lymphadenopathy was absent.
A complete blood count (CBC) and biochemical tests were within reference ranges, except for an elevated C-reactive protein level of 6.48 mg/dL (reference value < 0.30 mg/dL). The blood tumor markers squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were not elevated. Tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) I/II antibodies, hepatitis B (HB) antigen, and hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibodies were negative; these test results were additionally confirmed to be negative 1 month later.
An ultrasonographic examination was performed to determine the invasion range of the mass. The examination was performed by a well-trained sonographer (who was specialized in ultrasonography and was licensed as a special sonographer) using an Aplio instrument equipped with a high-resolution 7–14 MHz linear-array transducer PLT-1204BT (TOSHIBA; Tochigi, Japan). The lesion revealed an oval-shaped tumor measuring 17 × 11 × 12 mm in size, with heterogenous internal echo and unclear border . Color Doppler sonography showed very abundant blood flow signal, except for in the center of the tumor . Pressure testing with a probe revealed that the tumor was soft, suggesting an inflammatory mass, rather than neoplastic. It was not possible to perform multiple resonance imaging (MRI) because one of her front teeth had a metal crown.
The ultrasonographic findings taken together with a history of unprotected orogenital contact with a steady male partner and a social background with an increased prevalence of syphilis among young women in Japan prompted us to make a differential diagnosis for a syphilitic mass.
Syphilis serology tests were added following ultrasonography. A quantitative antibody test for Treponema pallidum (anti-T. pallidum antibody) was high at 115.1 U/mL (reference value, < 5 U/mL). A reactive rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test was strongly positive with a titer of 2060 RU. A fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorption (FTA-ABS) test was strongly positive (1:320).
A biopsy of a small part of the sclerotic lesion was performed. A histopathological examination showed lymphoplasmacytic infiltration around vessels and appendages in the subepithelial region . T. pallidum was not found by using Warthin–Starry staining and immunostaining.
A diagnosis of syphilis was made, with lower lip induration as the primary lesion. Amoxicillin (AMPC) 1500 mg was administered orally for 4 weeks according to the guidelines of the Japanese Journal of Sexually Transmitted Infections . Her lip lesion had almost resolved after 3 months . She did not show antibacterial side effects. An RPR test became negative with a titer of 0.3. Her sexual partner, who had multiple partners and engaged in casual sex, was also diagnosed as having genital syphilis and received treatment from another hospital. Our patient’s timeline is shown in Fig. . This study was approved by the Ethics Review Board of Tokai University (18R-192).