A 65-year-old male patient in reduced general condition (52 kg/180 cm/BMI 16) presented with severe dyspnoea, cardiac decompensation, and hypotension and was referred to our cardiac centre. The risk of mortality was 36.1% using EuroScore II and 10.6% using Society-of-Thoracic-Surgeons (STS) Score. Cardiovascular comorbidities included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with pulmonary hypertension, chronic kidney disease, severe peripheral artery disease, and a cerebral stroke. Since several years, the patient received permanent supplemental oxygen due to COPD GOLD IV (according to the Global initiative of Obstructive Lung Disease criteria). In 2013, he received a surgical mechanical bileaflet aortic valve St. Jude Medical (SJM AHPJ) 23 mm (inner diameter 20.4 mm) made from pyrolytic carbon coated and tungsten impregnated graphite substrate . In addition, a left internal mammary artery (LIMA) graft to the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) was made.
Transthoracic echocardiography and transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed extremely poor left ventricular function with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 15% and a mean pressure gradient of 45 mmHg above the mechanical aortic prosthesis and moderate regurgitation. The aortic valve region presented with a hyperdense mass and only minor movement of probably one tilting disc and no paravalvular leakage. There was no evidence for an acute thrombosis being responsible for the pressure gradient. Also, the patient was under well-adjusted oral vitamin K antagonist anticoagulation. Fluoroscopy and coronary angiography confirmed the fixation of one tilting disc in 33° position with nearly full movement of the second disc (opening angle 40°). Right coronary artery (RCA) left main artery and left circumflex artery showed no critical stenosis and left internal mammary (LIMA)-graft on left anterior descending artery (LAD) was fully functioning.
Cardiothoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed 3 mm between the ring of the mechanical valve and the ostium of the RCA, probably due to the supra-annular implantation of the prosthesis. After the heart team declined open surgery due to extremely high surgery-associated mortality, we discussed a new approach to fracture the tilting discs and implanting a transcatheter aortic valve. We discussed with the patient all potential complications caused by the embolization of the fragments such as stroke, bowel infarction, acute kidney injury, acute limb ischaemia, and death.