A 26-year-old woman with suspected IE was referred to us from a previous hospital. She had been experiencing exertional dyspnea and fatigue for approximately four months with no change in intensity and intermittent fever for a month and had given birth via cesarean section two weeks before admission to our hospital. On admission, her body temperature, pulse rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation in room air were 37.0 °C, 90/min, 114/67 mmHg, and 98%, respectively. The physical examination findings were unremarkable except for spontaneous right groin pain. Blood cultures obtained at the previous hospital were positive for Staphylococcus lugdunensis. The entry site of these bacteria was unknown.
Laboratory studies revealed an elevated leukocyte count (10.0 × 103/µL, normal 3.5–8.5 × 103/µL), elevated C-reactive protein level (10.69 mg/dL, normal < 0.30 mg/dL), slightly elevated brain natriuretic peptide level (64.6 pg/mL, normal ≤ 18.0 pg/mL), and decreased hemoglobin level (8.1 g/dL, normal 11.5–15.0 g/dL). Chest radiography showed an enlarged left atrium with a straightening of the left heart border .
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed the following: a 1.2 cm × 2.4 cm mobile mass that originated from the atrial septum touching the mitral valve cusps, protruding through the mitral valves into the left ventricle in diastole, and drifting in the atrium in systole; severe MR from the affected site with thickened and contracted leaflets; and left atrial and left ventricular dilatation. The mobile mass originating from the atrial septum moved back and forth between the atrial and ventricular sides of the mitral valve .
Torso contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed an occluded right profunda femoris artery with an embolus. IE was a plausible explanation of the entire situation. The diagnosis was IE associated with a mobile vegetation with high embolic risk, severe MR due to valve destruction, and a right profunda femoris artery embolism with an infected embolus.
Urgent surgery was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass, with mild hypothermia and antegrade cold hyperkalemic cardioplegia. The left atrium was approached with a standard left atriotomy, which revealed the mass originating from the atrial septum touching the mitral leaflets, which were partially thickened and partially destroyed by the vegetation .
The mass was resected, including the surface of the involved left atrial wall. The defect was repaired using the pericardium. Large parts of the leaflets were lost in resecting the vegetation completely, making mitral valve repair difficult. Subsequently, mitral valve replacement with a 27/29 mm On-X valve(On-X Life Technologies Inc., Austin, TX, USA) was performed. We also performed an embolectomy and removed the embolus in the right profunda femoris artery. The histopathological examination confirmed that the mass initially thought to be a vegetation was a PF .
A blood culture obtained on admission grew S. lugdunensis, the same bacterium that grew in the blood cultures obtained at the previous hospital. A culture of the affected mitral leaflet also grew S. lugdunensis. The histopathological study of the PF specimen did not show evidence of bacterial infection in the PF specimen. Gram staining of the PF specimen was performed. However, bacterial infection was not found. In addition, the culture of the PF was negative. Following the surgery, the patient was treated with cefazolin for seven weeks and gentamicin for two weeks to treat IE. Postoperatively, the patient developed pericarditis and was discharged after it was resolved. She was discharged with bisoprolol 0.625 mg daily, lansoprazole 15 mg daily, colchicine 0.5 mg daily, warfarin 3 mg daily, and aspirin 500 mg three times daily. The patient did not show evidence of recurrence at one-year follow-up after being discharged.