A 58-year-old Caucasian man with an extensive history of injection drug use was hospitalized with a diagnosis of infective endocarditis (IE); eight months earlier, he had experienced an episode of IE that was treated surgically with a bioprosthetic valve. Blood cultures taken during the current admission revealed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a 2 cm linear vegetation on the prosthetic aortic valve and a possible ring abscess without evidence of aortic insufficiency. Therapy with intravenous ciprofloxacin, gentamicin and levofloxacin was initiated.
On the third day of hospitalization, our patient experienced an acute onset of left upper quadrant abdominal pain. No history of recent trauma could be elicited. Our patient's vital signs were as follows: temperature 40°C, blood pressure 85/48 mmHg, heart rate 104 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/minute, and an oxygen saturation of 99% breathing room air. On physical examination our patient was found to be in mild distress and diaphoretic with dry mucous membranes. The skin of the upper and lower extremities was indurated at sites of frequent subcutaneous injections, but without erythema, exudate or abscess. No petechiae of the skin or nail beds were identified. A cardiac examination revealed a III/VI crescendo/de-crescendo systolic ejection murmur radiating to the apex and to the carotid arteries. An abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen and tenderness to palpation in the left upper quadrant. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed an enlarged and fractured spleen with surrounding hematoma, but no evidence of liver laceration, infarct or intra-abdominal abscess .
Our patient underwent an emergency splenectomy. A subcostal incision revealed approximately 2L of blood inside the abdominal cavity, an enlarged spleen with grade IV disruption , and an aneurysmal splenic artery. The spleen was freed at its attachments and the arteries and veins at the hilum were ligated. The aneurysmal splenic artery was dissected medially for sufficient proximal exposure and was then ligated. Abdominal exploration revealed no further gross pathological findings. A histopathological evaluation of other organs for evidence of amyloidosis was not performed. Our patient's early post-operative recovery was uneventful. However, he later died from complications of endocarditis and ring abscess.
When the gross spleen was sectioned along its short axis in the operating room no abscess was found. Microbiological examination revealed few polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), many red blood cells, and rarely S. aureus bacteria. A pathological examination revealed very few PMNs and none of the acute inflammation expected in cases of splenic infarction. The splenic red pulp was almost totally replaced by plasma cells. Staining for amyloid was strikingly positive . Characteristic talc crystals were observed inside the splenic parenchyma .