An 83-year-old man was brought to our emergency department with vomiting and loss of consciousness. Four months earlier, he had visited a nearby clinic after an episode of loss of consciousness, where electrocardiogram showed left bundle branch block. He was kept under observation. He had no other past medical history or coronary risk factors such as smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes, or family history of heart disease.
On arrival, he was haemodynamically unstable. His vital signs were as follows: Glasgow coma scale score 7 (E1V1M5), blood pressure 64/24 mmHg, heart rate 30 b.p.m., oxygen saturation 87% (on room air), and respiratory rate 8 per min. Chest and heart sounds were clear, the extremities were cold, and the lower extremities were oedematous. Electrocardiogram demonstrated complete atrioventricular block . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 20%, diffuse severe hypokinesis, and left ventricular hypertrophy (interventricular septal and posterior wall thickness at diastole, 17 mm/19 mm) without significant valvular abnormalities. Laboratory workup did not reveal elevation of inflammatory markers (white blood cell count 5.90 × 103/μL, C-reactive protein 0.05 mg/dL) or myocardial enzymes (creatine kinase 220 U/L, creatine kinase-myocardial band 7 U/L, troponin I 0.029 ng/mL), but brain-type natriuretic peptide was elevated at 192.5 pg/mL.
The patient experienced cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) in the emergency department. After two cycles of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), there was return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC). He was immediately taken to the catheter lab for insertion of temporary pacemaker and had another episode of CPA. Given the patient’s critical condition, he was intubated and placed on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) with an intra-aortic balloon pump. We suspected myocardial infarction, myocarditis, or cardiomyopathy from the patient’s acute presentation. Urgent invasive coronary angiography demonstrated no significant coronary stenosis . A myocardial tissue biopsy was taken from the left ventricle to investigate for myocarditis and cardiomyopathies.
On Day 6 of admission, the patient became increasingly haemodynamically unstable and developed atrial fibrillation. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a mass in the left atrium that had not been seen when TTE was performed on admission. However, the image was unclear, so transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed on Day 8. Transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated a large tumour-like mass (diameter 6 cm) in the left atrium that filled almost the entire left atrial space (, , ) and decreased cardiac output, leading to haemodynamic instability. Congo red staining of the myocardial tissue biopsy obtained on Day 1 of admission showed diffuse amyloid deposits throughout the extracted myocardium. The diagnosis was CA. Due to his underlying condition, old age of 83, and progressive multiorgan failure, we decided to withdraw life-sustaining treatment when the ECMO circuit could no longer be maintained. The patient passed away on Day 11 of admission.
Autopsy showed diffuse myocardial wall thickening. There was a 3.3-cm laceration in the external posterior wall of the left atrium with an intramural haematoma (major axis, 6 cm) pushing into the left atrial space . The internal left atrial lining was intact. Pathology revealed diffuse amyloid deposition in the myocardium, including the region surrounding the LAIH . Amyloid deposits were visible within the walls of the blood vessels in the myocardium and in the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes. Amyloid deposition was confirmed in various other organs, including the gastrointestinal and urinary tracts and the blood vessels of the lungs.