A 25-year-old female presented to an outside cardiology clinic with complaints of multiple syncopal episodes with subjective weakness. The syncopal episodes started 12 months prior, occurring at different times of the day, and were triggered by minimal physical activity.
The patient’s past medical history included anxiety, psychogenic seizures, and migraines. She drank socially but did not smoke or report the use of illicit drugs. Her family history was non-contributory.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) in the outside hospital clinic showed sinus rhythm with first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block, atypical right bundle block, and Brugada-like pattern . Echocardiography performed at the time showed normal left and right ventricular size and function with no significant valvular abnormalities. Due to recurrent syncopal episodes, an event monitor was ordered. It revealed episodes of first-degree AV block with junctional escape, right bundle branch block. No high-grade AV block was noted. Further workup included cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, which showed right ventricular outflow tract dilation but was otherwise unremarkable. Given the Brugada-like pattern seen on the ECG, an electrophysiology study was conducted with isoproterenol. By pacing with a drive train of 600 ms and one extra stimulus, VT with a left bundle branch morphology was induced. During the study, there were difficulties mapping VT to a specific position, and the decision was made to place a transvenous implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. In addition, during the procedure, there was difficulty with device capture despite high threshold voltages.
On the day after the procedure, the patient began complaining of light-headedness and shortly afterward became hypotensive. Device interrogation during the episode showed VT with a slow ventricular rate for which sotalol was started. Echocardiography showed biventricular failure with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40%, severely reduced right ventricular function, and no pericardial effusion. Computerized tomography with pulmonary embolism protocol did not show evidence of a clot. Repeat device interrogation after treatment initiation did not show VT. Despite aggressive resuscitative efforts, she continued to deteriorate requiring pressor support. She was intubated and transferred to our tertiary care cardiac intensive care unit for further management.
Labs on admission to our hospital are mentioned in . Right heart catheterization showed elevated right-sided filling pressures and reduced cardiac indices consistent with cardiogenic shock . Initial differential diagnoses included autoimmune/infiltrative cardiomyopathy and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, other considerations included ischaemic disease, Lev-Lenegeres disease, sodium channelopathies, and cardiomyopathy secondary to toxic/metabolic causes.
Dobutamine was initiated for cardiogenic shock. The electrophysiology team was consulted. Device interrogation showed Torsades when the device basal rate was dropped to 70/min from 90/min.
Sotalol was discontinued, intravenous amiodarone (150 mg followed by 1 mg/min) and magnesium (2 g over 15 min) were initiated for arrhythmia control. The basal pacing rate was increased, and the detection thresholds were widened. The patient recovered well with supportive measures and was weaned off the dobutamine on Day 2. She was transferred to the telemetry floor for cardiomyopathy workup. Treadmill testing was ordered to investigate exercise-induced changes; however, the patient was unable to complete the test due to pre-syncopal symptoms.
On the 6th day of admission, her clinical condition worsened, and she developed shock requiring pressors, inotropic medication, followed by cardiac arrest. The initial rhythm was pulseless electrical activity which then culminated in monomorphic VT requiring synchronized cardioversion. Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved. Labs following cardiac arrest are mentioned in . Urgent left and right heart catheterization with endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) were performed . This showed elevated right and left filling pressures, and severe cardiogenic shock. The EMB showed normal myocardium with no myocarditis or morphological abnormalities.
Given the unclear cause for her collapse, upon further questioning family revealed that she had been taking at least 100–150 tablets of 2 mg loperamide (maximum recommended dose is 16 mg/8 tablets) per day. Loperamide levels were elevated at 190 ng/mL, and its metabolite, desmethyl-loperamide was 520 ng/mL. Repeatedly, she had been using loperamide since 2019 after gastric ulcer surgery for chronic diarrhoea.
Management involved the prompt treatment of both ventricular arrhythmias and cardiogenic shock. Torsades as mentioned above were treated with intravenous magnesium, and amiodarone, and her basal rate pacing rate was increased to 90/min. She required multiple pressors and inotrope medications for haemodynamic support, filling pressures were optimized with diuresis. Intravenous lidocaine was loaded at 1.5 mg/kg for ventricular arrhythmias. The decision was made to treat empirically with intralipid emulsion therapy given the severity of her presentation and strong suspicion for loperamide toxicity. Her pressors, inotropic support was weaned over 72 h. Repeated studies showed improvement of the first-degree AV block, resolution of arrhythmias, and recovery of right and left ventricular function within 72 h of treatment. Anti-arrhythmic medications were stopped. Loperamide was undetectable in repeat labs 6 days after lipid emulsion therapy. Unfortunately, during counselling regarding loperamide cessation patient left against medical advice and was lost to follow-up.