The patient is a 26-year-old woman who was diagnosed with classical MSUD presymptomatically within the first days of life due to an older affected brother. She has been on a low-protein diet with supplementation of a BCAA-free amino acid mixture since birth with good metabolic control and normal intellectual development. A number of short hospitalizations had been necessary during childhood because of mild metabolic decompensations during intercurrent illnesses. The highest leucine concentration ever measured was 1145 μmol/L within the neonatal period. Leucine tolerance prior to pregnancy was 700-800 mg per day. Genetic analysis revealed a homozygous mutation in the BCKBHD gene, c.721A > T, p.K241*.
The patient presented in the metabolic outpatient clinic as early as week 7 of gestation. This was the first pregnancy of the patient. No relevant problems such as nausea or hyperemesis gravidarum occurred during the first trimester. Pre-pregnancy weight was 74 kg, and body mass index was 27.2 kg/m2. Weight gain during pregnancy was 15 kg (0 kg during 1st trimester, 7 kg during 2nd trimester, 8 kg during 3rd trimester). Serum amino acids were monitored weekly throughout pregnancy and the diet was adapted regularly according to BCAA concentrations. Target concentrations of BCAAs were: leucine 100-300 μmol/L, isoleucine 100-300 μmol/L and valine 200-400 μmol/L. During the first trimester, these goals were hard to achieve and leucine levels ranged between 87 and 609 μmol/L. From the second trimester protein tolerance increased significantly to up to 2400 mg (= 27 mg/kg/d) leucine per day prior to delivery. Details of the prescribed diet including leucine intake, total protein, synthetic protein as well as isoleucine and valine supplementation are shown in Fig. . Additionally, examples of dietary protocols with different amounts of leucine are given in Additional file : Table S1, Additional file : Table S2, Additional file : Table S3. From the third month of pregnancy, a bedtime snack was introduced. The BCAA-free amino acid mixture was divided to 4 to 5 daily doses. BCAA levels during pregnancy are outlined in Fig. . Laboratory values including whole blood count, iron status, total protein, albumin, transaminases and creatinine were checked regularly and remained normal throughout pregnancy. A pregnancy-specific vitamin supplement containing folic acid, jodine, vitamin B1, B2, B6, B12, C, D3, E, biotin and niacin was given during the first trimester according to routine gynecological recommendations. From gestational week 15 the patient additionally received progesterone. Later in pregnancy, magnesium and iron were substituted to prevent premature contractions and pregnancy-related anemia, respectively, and omeprazole was added due to gastroesophageal reflux.
Pregnancy was uneventful, and no major problems occurred. Mild proteinuria was present within the second trimester, but resolved spontaneously. Fetal arrhythmia was noted in week 17, but considered non-pathological by a cardiologic specialist. During pregnancy the patient was followed by the metabolic team of the University Children’s Hospital for treatment of MSUD in collaboration with the Obstetric Department of the University Hospital. As the patient lived quite far from the metabolic center delivery was planned as Cesaerean section to ensure maximal safety for the patient. A treatment plan was tailored for the peripartal period, including infusion therapy to prevent perioperative catabolism, dietary management and necessary monitoring of mother and child. The Cesaerean section was performed in week 38. The patient was admitted 1 day in advance, and a triple-lumen central venous catheter was inserted. Few hours before surgery, when she had to be nil per os, parenteral nutrition containing 5 g glucose per kg body weight per day (G40%) and 1 g fat per kg body weight per day (20% intravenous fat emulsion) was given together with 1.5 l per day of an isotonic electrolyte infusion. Surgery was without complications, and the patient delivered a healthy female infant with a birth weight of 2795 g, birth length of 47 cm and a head circumference of 34 cm. Apgar scores at 5 and 10 min were 9 and 10, respectively. Newborn screening results were normal including that for MSUD.
On the day of delivery nutritional leucine intake was reduced to 200 mg/day due to concerns about postpartum catabolism and protein turnover associated with uterus involution. The dietary protocol with details on food intake on that day is shown in Additional file : Table S3. Oral intake, especially supplementation of the BCAA-free amino acid mixture was possible few hours after delivery. As the patient was in a good condition and able to take the targeted caloric amount orally, parenteral nutrition was already reduced to 50 and 25% within the following 3 days, and could be stopped on day 5 after birth. BCAA concentrations were measured daily during the postpartum period, and BCAA intake (protein intake, isoleucine and valine supplementation) was adjusted accordingly. Vigilance was checked every 8 h, and blood gases, electrolytes and glucose levels were monitored 2-3 times per day as were ketone bodies in urine. The patient was encouraged to take additional nonprotein calories orally from food and beverages. Lactation was well-established, and dietary leucine intake was gradually increased. The patient could be discharged from hospital on day 7 postpartum. The clinical course during breastfeeding remained stable with leucine levels ranging between 91 and 340 μmol/L. The leucine tolerance during lactation was 1700 mg/day (at 2 months after birth), around twice the pre-pregnancy intake. Her weight postpartum decreased by 9 kg within 2 months. Infant growth and development was normal at 7 months (body length 66 cm (22nd percentile), body weight 7460 g (40th percentile), head circumference 43 cm (47th percentile) and BMI 17,1 kg/m2(62nd percentile)).