Our patient is a 31 year old male teacher, who was brought in by ambulance to the Emergency Department. Two weeks earlier he had sustained an injury to the right side of his neck due to a rugby tackle, with a fierce "hand off" to the jaw extending his neck and rotating it to the left. He continued to play the game without any ill effects. A week prior to admission he was seen by his family physician and given an antibiotic for "swollen gland" in the right side of his neck. On the day of presentation he had sudden onset of right sided neck swelling with pain in the neck and shortness of breath.
His vitals were stable (Pulse 54, Respiratory Rate 24 and O2 saturation of 100%). He was conscious with GCS of 15/15. There was an obvious right sided neck swelling with trachea deviated to the left without any stridor. There was no neurological deficit or any evidence of Horner's syndrome. Our initial clinical impression was that he had a ruptured aneurysm.
He was promptly intubated in resuscitation rooms and taken for CT scanning. CT angiogram of the neck vessels showed active extravasation of contrast from his right CCA resulting in the formation of a large haematoma extending superiorly into the parapharyngeal space and inferiorly into the superior mediastinum. It resulted in compression and marked displacement of the airway to the left . The thyroid gland was also displaced and Internal Jugular Vein was effaced due to compression. Our impression was that he had ruptured pseudo aneurysm of the Right CCA and he was brought forward for emergency surgery.
His neck was opened on the right side using a lazy S incision. On opening his platysma, there was a bulging haematoma which was rapidly expanding. Control of the Right common carotid was obtained proximally at the level of sternal head of sternomastoid by deflecting it, and distally at the level of bifurcation of common carotid. Omohyoid muscle was also divided for access. He was heparinised and the right CCA was clamped above and below the site of injury. Haematoma site was exposed by reflecting the internal jugular vein laterally and taking its multiple branches medially between clips. Vagus nerve was identified and protected. The point of perforation was in the posteromedial aspect of the artery, with surrounding adventitia appearing somewhat ragged, suggesting a stretch injury . This appearance was consistent with rupture of a pseudo aneurysm. The arterial perforation site was extended in a cranio-caudal fashion to expose normal vessel wall. Examination of rest of the arterial wall appeared relatively normal with no evidence of true or mycotic aneurysm. Primary closure of the extended defect was carried out with polypropylene 6-0 suture in two layers (first layer – full thickness wall, second – periadventitia as reinforcement). The sternal head of sternocleidomastoid muscle was reattached.