A 28-year-old healthy left-handed man was transferred to our emergency room 6 h after having his left hand crushed once in a box flattening machine at a winery warehouse. He reported increasing severe left hand pain, numbness, and difficulty moving his fingers and wrist. On physical examination, the patient had a diffusely swollen left hand with firm compartments. He had significant tenderness throughout and a palpable mass on the dorsum of his hand at the ulnar border. He maintained his hand in the intrinsic minus position and experienced extreme pain with passive stretch of his digits. There was a palpable radial pulse with 2–3 s capillary refill of each distal digit. He had significantly increased pain with passive extension of all four fingers and thumb. He described paresthesia and decreased sensation to light touch in ulnar, median, and radial nerve distributions of the left hand. Two-point discrimination was not intact up to 15 mm on the radial or ulnar border of all five digits. X-rays from the transferring hospital were available for review which demonstrated an isolated dorsal ulnar dislocation of the hamate with a volarly displaced hook fracture fragment. There was no metacarpal fracture, and the metacarpals did not dislocate dorsally and ulnarly with the hamate body .
Due to the presentation consistent with acute compartment syndrome of the left hand, the patient was immediately taken to the operating room. The dislocated hamate could be palpated on the dorsum of the hand. Using radial and downward pressure, while the wrist was flexed and brought into extension, the hamate was reduced with a palpable clunk and concentric reduction of hamate capitate and hamate metacarpal joints was confirmed on fluoroscopy. Two diverging 1.5 mm Kirchner wires were inserted under fluoroscopy guidance to stabilize the hamate to the capitate without violating the scaphoid . Then, a standard carpal tunnel release was performed without evidence of the hook of the hamate being incarcerated. Finally, the standard fasciotomy release of all 10 compartments of the left hand was performed through two dorsal incisions to release the dorsal and volar interossei compartments and two volar incisions for the hypothenar and thenar compartments. All the wounds were irrigated, and the carpal tunnel release incision was closed, while the fasciotomy incisions were left open and covered. The patient was placed in a splint in the intrinsic plus position. He had a full return of sensation and resolution of pain on re-examination 1 h later. Four days later, the patient returned to the operating room for the closure of his wounds, and the splint was discontinued. At 6-week clinic follow-up, the wounds had fully healed, the Kirschner wires were removed, and he was referred to hand therapy. At 6-month clinic follow-up, the patient’s left hand had no neurologic deficits, and the patient had restored the full range of motion of his fingers and wrist ( and ). Radiographs at his 6-month clinic follow-up demonstrated a reduced hamate bone with mild widening of the hamate capitate joint and 3–4 metacarpal interspace . However, the patient was pain free with no evidence of instability on history or physical examination and no tenderness to palpation.