In January 2016, a 68-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, old cerebral infarction, and mild dementia was admitted to the emergency department with unconsciousness, disquiet, and severe anasarca. She had been bedridden and living alone. On the particular day with an outside temperature of approximately 0°C, she was lying on the bed at home without heating. Her relatives noticed that she was unconscious and called for an emergency. Her initial heart rate was 15 b.p.m., respiration rate was 8/min, blood pressure and O2 saturation could not be measured, and urinary bladder temperature was 25.4°C. Respiratory acidosis (pH 7.092, PO2 65 mm Hg, and PCO2 80 mm Hg) was observed in arterial blood gas. The following laboratory results were obtained: white blood cell count 15.4 × 103/μL, hemoglobin 10.8 g/L, platelet count 446 × 103/μL, C-reactive protein 4.57 mg/mL, total bilirubin 0.5 mg/mL, aspartate transaminase 69 U/L, alanine transaminase 52 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 266 U/L, blood urea nitrogen 30.0 mg/mL, creatinine 1.06 mg/dL, sodium 140 mEq/L, potassium 4.7 mEq/L, and chloride 104 mEq/L.
According to her initial vital signs, she immediately underwent tracheal intubation without anesthesia and given i.v. atropine 0.5 mg to improve breathing and cardiac output, respectively. After an i.v. injection of atropine, an ECG revealed 85 b.p.m. with indeterminate rhythm, wide QRS complexes, and prominent J waves at the end of the QRS, with the highest amplitude recorded in limb leads I and II and precordial leads V3–6 . External and internal heating (2°C per hour) was immediately applied using an electric heat blanket, a forced-air warming device, and a respiratory warming/humidifying device, because there were no extracorporeal circulation circuit devices in the hospital at this time. Consecutive ECG monitoring during external heating showed that the J-wave amplitude decreased with the increase in the urinary bladder temperature, and the J wave disappeared at 32°C . Rewarming by external heating was continued until the core body temperature reached 36°C. After the patient regained consciousness, she was extubated the next morning. During rewarming therapy, ventricular premature contractions were observed, but no lethal arrhythmia was observed. The patient had severe systemic edema. A diuretic was used to reduce the body fluid for a while, and she was discharged after complete recovery after 1 month.