A 70-year-old male was hospitalized with intermittent chest pain. He had no background diseases and his physical examination was unremarkable. The computed tomographic (CT) scan showed an anterosuperior mediastinal mass surrounded large blood vessels, and positron emission tomographic (PET) scan revealed no evidence of a metastatic tumor. The thoracic CT angiography showed the shape of the vessel wall was still regular, and there was no obvious sign of filling defect. Thymoma was the most likely diagnosis and could be directly surgically resected post discussion and evaluation by our multidisciplinary team. As the patient had no signs of MG at that time, anti-AChR antibodies test and electromyogram were not performed. His lung function was normal. In April 2020, he received a median sternotomy, thymothymectomy, pericardiectomy and left upper lobectomy were performed to ensure a complete resection. Histology of the tumor showed a thymoma type B2 (WHO classification), Masaoka stage III. 9 days later, he was discharged without any postoperative complications. However, 14 Days after the surgery, he complained of dyspnea and fever, thoracic CT showed no evidence of tumor reccurence, but increased patchy density was seen in both lower lungs. He had a sudden loss of consciousness in the emergency room, and the blood gas analysis showed a type II respiratory failure with the level of partial pressure of carbon dioxide over 100 mmHg, endotracheal intubation and ventilator assisted ventilation were performed immediately. Severe pneumonia was diagnosed according to the clinical outcome, confirmed by the result of bacterial culture of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, acinetobacter baumannii. With sensitive antibiotics treatment, the lung infection was controlled and his condition was markedly improved. However, we failed to wean him off ventilation. Neostigmine test was negative in this patient, but repetitive nerve stimulation test was positive and the titer of anti-AChR antibody was slightly elevated, at 0.43 nmol/L (cut-off value for positive: > 0.5 nmol/L, questionable positive: 0.4–0.5 nmol/L, negative: < 0.4 nmol/L), the neurologist suggested that PTMG should be taken into consideration, as patients with MG often require prolonged ventilatory support, we did tracheostomy to facilitate his weaning of the ventilator on day 10 after endotracheal intubation. With the administration of pyridostigmine bromide (180 mg/d), he could gradually wean off the ventilator. Nevertheless, he suffered form refractory diarrhea, a serious side effect of pyridostigmine bromide, then we discontinued the medications, leading to his ventilation requirement again, therewith, he was referred to neurology care unit for specialist treatment. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was suggested as an optimal treatment, but was refused for its high cost at first. Steroid pulse therapy was initiated instead, unfortunately the effect was slow and poor, so plasmapheresis and IVIG were administrated successively. At 4 months after his admission, he was eventually removed from the ventilator with a low dose tacrolimus of 1 mg/day.