Our patient was a 26-year-old woman with blood in the stool and thinning for 2 months, with a feeling of urgency and heaviness. No family history of cancer. Laboratory findings revealed a hemoglobin concentration of 101 g/L. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 levels were 2.2 ng/ml and 7.8 U/ml, respectively. Colonoscopy revealed a cauliflower-like neoplasm in the lower part of the intestine, with necrosis and hemorrhage on the surface, hard and poorly mobile, and the lower margin adjacent to the anal dentate line, invading most of the perimeter of the intestinal lumen . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed: The lower margin of the tumor was about 1.9 cm from the anal margin, the tumor invaded the left anal levator muscle, and the left internal iliac artery lymph node was enlarged; CRM (circumferential resection) (+), EMVI (extra-mural vascular invasion) (-) . No distant organ metastasis was observed on computed tomography (CT) , and the lesion was preoperatively classified as stage T4bN1bM0 IIIC according to the Chinese CSCO guidelines for colorectal cancer .
The original treatment plan we considered was CRT in anticipation of tumor shrinkage, followed by radical rectal cancer surgery (Miles) (, ), but considering that the patient was young and had a strong desire to preserve the anus, we decided to perform total neoadjuvant therapy (TNT) after multidisciplinary team discussions. This is not a routine treatment for high risk LARC in our hospital, however, we expect to make the preoperative treatment more effective with immunotherapy + TNT, we used a short course of high-dose radiotherapy plus the immunotherapy drug camrelizumab, as follows: a short course of radiotherapy (5 Gy, 5 days) followed by XELOX ((capecitabine 1500 mg/m2 bid for 14 days and L-OHP 130 mg/m2 on day 1))+ camrelizumab was administered every 3 weeks for 3 cycles. Review after three cycles suggested that the lesions were significantly smaller and the left internal iliac vessel parietal lymph nodes were smaller than before the treatment . However, multiple patchy shadows were observed in both lungs . We concluded that this might be due to immune-related pneumonia caused by camrelizumab; therefore, camrelizumab was discontinued and XELOX alone was administered every three weeks for three cycles. It is worth mentioning that chest CT was reviewed one month after discontinuing camrelizumab. Most multiple patchy shadows on the lungs disappeared .
After completion of TNT, the review CT suggested that the original tumor was only seen as a few low-signal foci of fibrosis, MRI suggested that the stage was Tx N1a, CRM (-), EMVI (NA), and the primary tumor MR TRG grading (standard) was about grade 1 (grade 1: completely low-signal fibrotic component, no residual isosignal tumor tissue) , rectal finger examination is about 7 cm into the finger, no mass is found, half circle of tumor scar can be found at about 3 cm–4 cm from the anus. laparoscopic ultra-low rectal anterior resection + lateral lymph node dissection + temporary ileostomy was performed with robotic assistance. No intraperitoneal dissemination or distant metastasis was observed. Low anterior resection (LAR) was used to ensure adequate tumor margins by means of rectal finger examination with the assistance of an assistant during distal bowel dissection, and the specimen was sent for frozen biopsy and this suggested that there were no tumor cells in the distal rectal cut margin. The patient was discharged 9 days after the surgery without major complications or postoperative events. Pathological examination of the resected specimen revealed no significant residues in the intestinal canal. No cancerous involvement was observed at the distal or radial cut edges. No cancer metastasis was observed in the internal or lateral iliac lymph nodes (0/1/0/6), and no metastasis was observed in the mesorectal lymph nodes (0/13). Therefore, the rectal cancer was diagnosed using PCR, and the anus was successfully preserved. Three months later, she underwent ileostomy closure surgery and was discharged five days after surgery. The patient was followed up without adjuvant chemotherapy and survived without recurrence at the 9-month follow-up.