A 51-year-old Caucasian man being treated with ipilimumab (3 mg/kg) and nivolumab (1 mg/kg) for metastatic melanoma presented to the emergency department with profound polydipsia, polyuria and increasing fatigue. Clinical workup led to the diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), presumed secondary to immune-therapy induced type-1 diabetes. Further, the patient was also noted to have a normocytic anemia (88 g/L, MCV 82 fL), and neutropenia (0.06 × 109/L). The platelets were measured within normal limits at 346 × 109/L, and reticulocytes were 2%. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for DKA management—including intravenous fluid resuscitation and insulin therapy—and evaluation of the bicytopenia.
The patient had originally been referred to our cancer centre 8 years previous with a diagnosis of BRAF-wildtype stage III malignant melanoma of the left thigh. Initial therapy consisted of surgical resection, partial local lymph node dissection and interferon for 11 months. Two years later the disease recurred, involving contralateral groin lymph nodes. Bilateral lymph node dissection was performed and adjuvant radiotherapy was administered. One year later, a metastatic lesion to the right orbit was discovered and subsequently resected, followed by adjuvant radiotherapy.
The patient remained well until this year, when a suspected subcutaneous metastasis at the level of the C7 spinous process was discovered and confirmed on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI also showed a left parieto-occipital lobe lesion measuring 2.1 cm. The recommended therapeutic strategy was radiosurgery to treat the intracranial metastasis, as well as systemic therapy in the form of dual ICB with ipilimumab and nivolumab. The first cycle was administered without incident (day 0) and on day 19, cycle two was administered. On day 35, the patient presented to the emergency department with symptoms of DKA. A formal assessment of disease response to ICB was not undertaken, as the patient hadn’t completed the induction phase. However, a brain MRI undertaken at admission suggested stable disease based on RECIST criteria.
Although the DKA was controlled in the ICU, the cytopenias persisted. As such, the patient was transfused with 1 unit of packed red blood cells (PRBC) on day 41 for symptomatic relief of their anemia. Blood counts on day 42 demonstrated Hb 98 g/L, neutrophils 0.6 × 109/L and platelets 518 × 106/L. The mild thrombocytosis was thought to be reactive, since ferritin was also elevated (1228 pmol/L) at this time. Parvovirus serology was performed and was negative, whilst a positive direct antiglobulin test (DAT) was noted. However, DAT have reported to be positive in patients receiving monoclonal bodies like ipilimumab and nivolumab . Further, although there was a nonspecific rise in LDH, there were no noted abnormalities in haptoglobin or bilirubin. As such, the DAT was not felt to be indicative of an autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Further, the patient had no prior history of autoimmune diseases, cytopenias or congenital bone marrow failure. Family history was non-contributory.
On day 48 a bone marrow biopsy was performed, which showed a markedly hypocellular marrow (< 10%) with trilineage hypoplasia . There was no morphological evidence of excess blasts or myelodysplasia, and no immunophenotypic evidence of elevated myeloid/lymphoid precursors or a B cell neoplasm. The lymphocyte fraction was composed of 84% T cells with an inverted CD4+:CD8+ ratio (1:2). Furthermore, flow cytometry showed an absence of hematogones, consistent with AA. Taken together, the presumed etiology for the clinical presentation was AA secondary to immunotherapy.
From day 49 to day 55 the patient was administered intravenous methylprednisone 1 mg/kg q 12 h, which was reduced to 1 mg/kg q 24 h from day 55 to day 63. The patient responded well to the steroid therapy, with a marked recovery in both hemoglobin and absolute neutrophil count , providing support for the presumed diagnosis. The patient was discharged with the plan to continue the prednisone taper over the following 7 weeks with bi-weekly blood panels. Due to the development of two presumed grade 3/4 drug-mediated auto-immune complications, the patient was not restarted on ipilimumab or nivolumab. Follow-up completed to date has demonstrated continued stability in hemoglobin, neutrophils and platelets. As such, a repeat bone marrow biopsy has not been undertaken. The patient has since received stereotactic radiation to the intracranial metastasis and surgical resection of the subcutaneous lesion. At this time, there are no other sites of metastatic disease, and the patient is under active surveillance.