A 65-year-old man referred to the emergency department for evaluation of the lower extremity swelling associated with pain for four days. Physical examination demonstrated an overweight man (BMI 29.6 kg/m2) with extensive pitting edema of the left lower limb from the groin to the knee joint with calf tenderness. Color Doppler ultrasound revealed an extensive DVT involving common iliac, external iliac and common femoral vein as well as superficial femoral down to popliteal vein. He was treated by bed rest, elevation with bandaging of left leg, 6000 IU of low molecular weight heparin subcutaneously twice a day and further evaluation was performed to find the underlying etiology. Investigations including hematological, immunological, biochemical, lipid profile, protein S and protein C were normal. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound (US) showed incidental finding of severe left hydroureteronephrosis with almost lost of cortical thickness, for that abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed marked left-sided hydroureteronephrosis and an impacting stone measuring (18 × 10 × 10 mm) at the level of L5/S1 with signs of DVT affecting left iliac and femoral vein below the above mentioned region . Next day percutaneous nephrostomy was performed to decompress the hydronephrotic kidney. He was kept as an inpatient for one week under observation then after discharged home on oral anticoagulation in the form of rivaroxaban 20 mg daily. Six weeks later, color Doppler US showed complete recanalization of the superficial femoral, popliteal as well as the proximal segment of deep veins of the leg but common iliac, external iliac and common femoral veins and proximal superficial femoral vein were still partially thrombosed. Under spinal anesthesia, left ureterorenoscopy showed an impacted stone at the level of iliac vessel pulsation causing edema and external compression of the iliac vessels. Through pneumatic lithotripsy, the stone was fragmented and JJ stent inserted . Next day the patient discharged home and continued on taking his antithrombotic treatment (rivaroxaban 20 mg). The JJ stent was removed 3 weeks later. Three months after that, Doppler US showed complete recanalization of iliac vessels.