A 23-year-old male with a history of alcohol abuse and splenomegaly of unknown etiology presented with the chief complaint of abdominal pain. The patient provided information of intranasal cocaine use on the day prior to his presentation to the hospital. His pain was associated with multiple episodes of vomiting. At the initial evaluation, the patient was awake and alert with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15, a heart rate of 120 bpm, and a systolic blood pressure of 130 mmHg. On physical examination, the patient was found to have signs of peritonitis. Computed tomography (CT) scan imaging revealed hemoperitoneum and a possible splenic laceration (, ). Hemoglobin was low at 11 mg/dL. A urine test was positive for cocaine use. The patient denied any recent history of trauma.
The patient presented with signs of peritonitis and free fluid in the abdominal cavity with a suspicion of splenic injury, and was taken to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy. Upon entering the abdomen through a midline incision, a large amount of blood was identified in the abdominal cavity. The blood was evacuated, and all four quadrants were packed with laparotomy pads. The spleen was palpated, and blood was found oozing from the hilum. Inspection from the diaphragm to pelvis revealed no other pathology. We proceeded with a splenectomy beginning with dissection of the lateral and posterior attachments to the spleen. Once the spleen was mobilized and brought to the abdominal incision, the short gastric arteries were ligated. The splenic artery and vein were then tied off with silk sutures. Smaller vessels entering the hilum were occluded with surgical clips and ligated. After all vessels were successfully divided, the spleen was removed.
The splenic bed was inspected, and hemostasis was secured. The liver was re-inspected, and the bowel ran from the ligament of Treitz to the ileocecal valve. The colon was inspected as well. All looked normal. A JP drain was left in the abdominal cavity, and the incision was closed. The patient was taken to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) for further management.
Approximately 1.5 liters of blood were lost during surgery prompting the administration of 2 units of Packed Red Blood Cells (PRBCs) and 3.5 liters of crystalloids. An additional unit of PRBCs was transfused on post-operative day (POD) 3 to correct a low hemoglobin of 6.9 g/dl. A nasogastric (NG) tube was placed for management of ileus. On POD4, the patient was downgraded from the SICU to a medical-surgical unit. The NG tube was removed on POD 6, and the patient was encouraged to ambulate and use his incentive spirometer. On POD8, the JP drain was removed, and the patient was discharged home following post-splenectomy vaccines. During his hospital stay, differential diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis was excluded based on negative Monospot test. However, a review of the patient’s history showed that years ago the patient was positive for immunoglobulin G (IGG) titers for Epstein bar virus (EBV), which may explain the patient's past history of splenomegaly. Upon pathology review of the spleen, the spleen was 210-gram, 12.0 cm × 7.0 cm × 4.5 cm and intact. The capsule was intact and remarkable for a 4.3 cm × 1.3 cm area of adhesions on the central posterior surface adjacent to the hilum. Hilar structures were clamped. The parenchyma beneath the capsule adhesions were focally disrupted with mild accumulated blood clots. Areas of intraparenchymal hemorrhage, infarcts or mass formation were not identified. Upon microscopic evaluation, sections of the spleen showed capsular disruption with hemorrhage and adhesions.