A 57-year-old woman with a history of diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia visited a clinic, complaining a cough that had persisted for a month. Chest radiograph showed bilateral infiltrative shadows, and she was referred to our hospital. Blood tests showed a mildly elevated C-reactive protein of 2.61 mg/dL, but no other abnormalities were noted. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal cardiac wall motion. Chest CT showed multiple diffuse patchy infiltrative shadows in the bilateral lung fields ; she was hospitalized with suspected idiopathic organizing pneumonia. Additionally, a left kidney tumor approximately 90 mm in diameter was incidentally identified by the same CT scan, and she was referred to the department of urology.
Methylprednisolone 80 mg/day was started, but no improvement in lung shadow was observed. Dynamic CT showed an 85 × 83 mm enhanced mass at the upper pole of left kidney , and RCC was suspected. A transbronchial lung biopsy showed many atypical rhabdoid cells , and malignancy was suspected. Additional immunostaining revealed CK AE1/3 positive, CD68 negative, CD10 focal positive, and PAX8 positive tissue, diagnosed as RCC metastasis. Percutaneous renal tumor biopsy revealed high-grade clear cell RCC ; thus, we made a diagnosis of stage cT3aN0M1 left RCC and lung metastasis complicated by carcinomatous lymphangiosis, with IMDC intermediate risk. She was started on ipilimumab and nivolumab combined systemic therapy. After the introduction of first course, her respiratory condition temporarily worsened and she was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit; however, her condition gradually improved. Four courses of combination therapy followed by seven courses of nivolumab monotherapy were administered. After achieving CR for lung metastasis and PR for primary tumor, which shrunk to 54 mm in diameter , she underwent RAPN for the primary tumor. Surgery was performed using a transperitoneal approach. Renal parenchyma around the tumor was whitish and inflammatory, and the tumor was resected using enucleoresection, preserving as much normal tissue as possible. Inner suture or renorrhaphy were not used, and hemostasis was achieved by soft coagulation with a ball electrode and application of Tachosil® to the resection surface as previously reported. No perioperative complications were observed. Histopathological findings showed a residual 8 × 6 mm viable cancer cells of Fuhrman grade 3 in the mostly necrotic tumor, with marked inflammatory cell infiltration in the surrounding renal parenchyma . Renal function was unchanged, with pre- and postoperative estimated glomerular filtration rate of 63 and 60, respectively. After eight courses of postoperative nivolumab monotherapy, complete remission was maintained, and systemic therapy was terminated. One year postoperatively, CT scan showed no recurrence .