A 74-year-old Japanese woman presented with a chief complaint of blurred vision and elevated intraocular pressure in her right eye during the previous month. She had a 20-year history of type 2 diabetes and hypertension. She had no known cancer, malignant lymphoma, or ocular manifestations of cancer. Her physical examination findings were unremarkable. Her treating ophthalmologist diagnosed acute iritis with secondary glaucoma. She underwent a trabeculectomy because topical corticosteroids and antiglaucoma medications had been ineffective in lowering the intraocular pressure. However, postoperatively, she still had diffuse thickening of the iris and white masses resembling frog spawn in the anterior chamber. An iris biopsy was performed, and immunocytochemistry analysis showed that the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK)-CAM5.2 and CDX2 and negative for CK7, CK20, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). These findings indicated a primary epithelial tumor, most likely from the gastrointestinal tract. She underwent positron emission tomography/CT to locate a primary tumor, but no abnormality was seen. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy demonstrated multiple irregularly shaped ulcerative lesions, multiple erosions, and thickened folds in the corpus of her stomach . A biopsy of a gastric tissue specimen revealed poorly differentiated carcinoma with signet ring cell features . CT revealed diffuse, low attenuation thickening of the gastric wall with punctuate calcifications . There were metastases to the para-aortic and mesenteric lymph nodes and peritoneal seeding. She was diagnosed as having poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma metastatic to the iris, peritoneum, and lymph nodes.
She received a total of seven courses of TS-1, a novel oral fluoropyrimidine derivative that comprises the 5-fluorouracil prodrug tegafur (Ftorafur, FT) and two enzyme inhibitors, 5-chloro-2,4-dihydroxypyridine (CDHP) and potassium oxonate (OXO) in a molar ratio of 1(FT):0.4 (CDHP):1(OXO) (40 mg/m2, twice a day, on days 1–21) and intravenously administered cisplatin (60 mg/m2, on day 8) every 5 weeks (SPIRITS regimen) . The white masses in the anterior chamber had slightly diminished after three cycles of chemotherapy and remained stable for seven cycles. A CT scan after six cycles of chemotherapy revealed no evidence of disease progression, although serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels gradually increased from 6.8 ng/mL at diagnosis to 28.4 ng/mL after six cycles. After seven cycles, CT revealed massive ascites that had accumulated since cycle 6. Serial follow-up CT revealed successive increases of calcifications in the gastric wall during the course of chemotherapy . She ultimately died of aspiration pneumonia 8 months after presentation. An autopsy revealed an ulcerated, invasive tumor involving the entire thickness of the wall of the stomach . It had also spread into the esophagus and the para-aortic and mesenteric lymph nodes. Mucinous adenocarcinoma is diagnosed when more than half of the tumor area contains extracellular mucin pools; signet ring cell carcinoma is diagnosed when adenocarcinoma is seen with a predominant component (> 50%) of isolated tumor cells that contain mucin . Histologic examination revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma containing signet ring cells beneath a preserved surface epithelium and calcifications among the mucous lakes in the deep layers . Other areas showed scattered signet ring cells floating in the abundant mucin . The final diagnosis was mucinous gastric adenocarcinoma metastatic to the iris, peritoneum, and lymph nodes. The calcifications were present in extracellular mucin pools in the submucosa, corresponding to the thickened, low-attenuating middle layer seen on CT.