A 50-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital for thoracic surgery on March 24, 2020, because of chest tightness and shortness of breath for more than 6 months. The symptoms of chest tightness were not obvious when the patient was calm, but worsened when he was active 6 months ago, the results of the CT scan showed no abnormality at the local hospital. The symptoms of the patient was not relieved after taking antimicrobial drugs (the specific drug name and dosage were unknown).
The patient was admitted in our department for further treatment. There existed no obvious abnormality on physical examination, but fiberoptic bronchoscopy and puncture biopsy revealed an adenoid cystic carcinoma in the left main bronchus on March 25, 2020 CT . Because the tumor invaded the carina and inferior segment of the trachea, and the large tumor body located behind the major cardiac vessels, the left lung function of the patient was almost lost. But the coronary angiography showed no obvious abnormality. The electrolytes, serum chemistry, liver and kidney function tests, clotting studies, electrocardiogram, immunohistochemistry, and other relevant tests were performed before the operation. The patient reported no surgery history but a history of smoking and drinking for almost 25 years.
Low-dose oxygen therapy was given to relieve the symptoms of dyspnea, and atomization inhalation, antiasthmatic, expectorant, and antitussive drugs were administered intravenously to relieve cough and sputum symptoms. Considering the risk of traditional left thoracic approach cause by aorta block, the oncology, radiotherapy, intensive medicine, anesthesia, and pathology department were combined for multidisciplinary consultation. A sequential right-left bilateral thoracic approach was chosen for the surgery after discussion. On April 2, 2020, the patient underwent a thoracoscopic-assisted and ECMO-supported right-left sequential bilateral thoracic approach to the lower tracheal carina and left pneumonectomy for lung cancer radical surgery, pleural adhesion, and cauterization, as well as fenestration of pericardium under general anesthesia. During the operation, the VV-ECMO (veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) mode of the femoral vein and internal jugular vein was used. Firstly, the patient was under a right lateral position, then the carina and the lower segment of the trachea were dissociated, and 3 cm above the carina, the lower segment of the trachea was separated. After the right main bronchus was fully exposed, the lower position of it was severed from the carina. The 4-0PDS (Polydioxanone) line was used to anastomose the trachea with the right main trachea to ensure the continuity of trachea. After anastomosis, no air leakage was found in the water test, and lung swelling was good, then one thoracic tube was retained. Secondly, the patient was shifted to the left lateral position, and separated the left superior pulmonary vein and the left pulmonary artery trunk in sequence, while the pulmonary artery trunk was blocked for 10 min. The proximal end of the pulmonary artery was cut off when respiratory circulation was stable. After ligated the distal then cutt off the blood vessel, the left pulmonary vein and the left main bronchus, and finally taken out of the left lung specimen. With one thoracic closed drainage tube in a clamped state.
The ECMO was evacuated with the left and right thoracic drainage tubes closed, when the respiratory circulation was stable, and transferred to ICU (Intensive Care Unit) after central venous catheterization and endotracheal intubation. An invasive ventilator was used for ventilation, and the tracheal intubation was removed on April 3, 2020, when the patient’s condition was stable. Then the patient was transferred from ICU to thoracic surgery, and received continuous ECG (electrocardiogram) monitoring and nasal catheter oxygen therapy for 2 L/min. The symptomatic support treatment, such as anti-infection, antitussive, expectorant, analgesic, parenteral nutrition were given, and the liquid drip rate was closely monitored. Considering his age and bedridden time, anticoagulant therapy was given to him. The patient discharged safely on the 17th day after surgery .