A 50-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our otolaryngology outpatient clinic with a two-month history of persistent dysphonia, dysphagia and odynophagia with radiating pain to the right ear. In addition, he had experienced recurrent aspiration of liquids and had lost 3 kg in weight. His prior medical history was unremarkable. He had been a tobacco smoker for 40 years, but there was no history of alcohol abuse. Laryngoscopy revealed an ulcer on the right false vocal cord with an extension to the epiglottis. Oedema and decreased mobility of the right true vocal cord were observed as well as the diffused swelling of both arytenoids. There was no lymphadenopathy as confirmed by an ultrasound sonography of the neck. The initial anteroposterior chest X-ray, being part of the routine diagnostic work-up, showed miliary nodules that were predominantly bilaterally distributed in the upper parts of the lung parenchyma . The axial contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck demonstrated an enhanced mass in the right false vocal cord with an obliteration of the paraglottic fat, extending into the anterior commissure and cranially, obliterating the right piriform sinus . A full blood count and electrolytes were within normal limits. Direct laryngoscopy performed under general anaesthesia revealed a tumour covering the entire right, false vocal cord with an extension to the laryngeal side of the epiglottis without affecting the glottis. The tumour was clinically staged as a T3N0 supraglottic laryngeal carcinoma.
Histopathological examination, however, revealed a necrotising granulomatous inflammation without signs of malignancy . Ziehl-Neelsen staining of the tissue biopsies and sputum revealed acid-fast bacilli . Sputum culture turned out to be positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. An additional axial high resolution CT scan of the chest demonstrated diffuse interstitial nodular alterations with the formation of central cavities, indicative of pulmonary TB .
Treatment commenced with isoniazid 300 mg/day, rifampicin 600 mg/day, pyrizinamide 1500 mg/day and ethambutol 1400 mg/day for a period of 2 months. Sputum cultures became negative after a 3-month follow up. Because of cavity formations, as revealed by the chest CT, treatment with isoniazid and rifampicin was prolonged for another 3 months.
Because the patient was discharged from hospital a day after a direct laryngoscopy, there was ample opportunity for the patient to infect his healthcare providers. Contact surveys revealed that the resident and nurse, who both assisted in performing the laryngoscopy, two of the patient's relatives and two of his friends all tested positive in their purified protein derivative tests (PPD). They were all preventively treated with tuberculostatics.