A 51-year-old male patient presented with 5years history of a lump on the front of his left knee. The lump was about 5 cm in size around the tibial tubercle, subcutaneous, firm and mobile, not tender, and not translucent, there were no associated dilated veins, and the patient had full and pain-free range of movements of his left knee. It had the clinical features of a benign tumor. It was thought to be an infrapatellar bursa related to the knee. Hence, a “watch and wait” policy was initially adopted as the patient was asymptomatic. No medications or other treatments were provided. There was no change in the size of the lump, but a year later as the lump became itchy and, therefore, symptomatic, the patient decided to follow the surgical intervention route. Therefore, further investigations were advised. A plain radiograph of his knee showed medial joint space narrowing with small osteophytes . A small effusion was present but no chondrocalcinosis. There was no periosteal involvement, no cortical irregularity, and no local osteopenia, but a soft tissue swelling was apparent on the anterior part of the knee. A magnetic resonance imaging scan showed a well-defined lump measuring 2.7 cm × 1.7 cm × 4.1cm within the subcutaneous fat just medial to the tibial tuberosity, did not involve the pes anserinus, neither the underlying bone nor the knee joint, and there was no evidence of infection . It was low signal on T1 and high signal on T2. No STIR images were performed. The features were otherwise non-specific. An ultrasound was suggested for further information regarding its nature. The ultrasound scan showed a solid/soft tissue looking hypoechoic lesion at the area of interest measuring 3 cm × 1.9 cm ×4.1cm . A small 5mm cystic component was seen within it. The lesion was highly vascular on Doppler. No obvious connection to the surrounding bone or joint space or blood vessels. The patient was referred to the regional orthopedic oncology service and the differential diagnosis included a soft tissue chondroma, a giant cell tumor of tendon sheath, and a synovial sarcoma. As such, he was consented for a Tru-cut biopsy which was performed in the outpatient department by an orthopedic oncology surgeon. The histological examination showed features compatible with a high-grade leiomyosarcoma (LMS). A computerized tomography scan of his chest performed after biopsy did not show any metastases. A positron emission tomography image was not deemed essential. Furthermore, all his blood investigations were within normal limits. Following discussion at the weekly multidisciplinary meeting, he underwent a formal surgical excision of the lump with marginal margins achieved and he received post-operative radiotherapy. The patient had an uneventful recovery and 18 months postoperatively he remains disease free.