An 83-year-old Caucasian woman originally presented with a 3 cm anal mass at the 3-o'clock position of the anal verge. She underwent a wide excision of the mass with pathology revealing Bowen's disease with clear margins six months prior. She was monitored closely on follow-up every two months. During a re-evaluation approximately six months after surgery, a 1.2 × 0.8 cm lesion was discovered on the left side of her anus verge. The mass looked similar to the previous lesion on the right. The lesion had spread into the anal canal. A biopsy of the mass with anal mapping was performed, and the mass was consistent with Bowen's disease. In addition, 2 of 17 specimens from the anal mapping were positive for squamous cell carcinoma in-situ, one of which was in the anal canal. Our patient denied any abdominal or anal pain, had no abnormal bowel habits. She stated that she had seen occasional blood stains on toilet paper, but denied fresh blood per rectum.
Because this was considered a recurrence in an adjacent region, it was believed that a repeat wide surgical excision would leave our patient with a dysfunctional anal sphincter. For quality of life concerns, additional local therapeutic options such as topical Fluorouracil (5-FU) cream and XRT were discussed with our patient. Since the tumor was in the anal canal, chemotherapy was not considered her best option. Radiotherapy, on the other hand, could deliver a therapeutic dose of radiation to the entire anus and anal canal with margin. Our patient agreed and began treatment accordingly.
Our patient was treated with conformal therapy via the right posterior oblique and left posterior oblique field to the anus. The field size measured 5.5 × 8.3 cm. Sixty degree wedges were used to modify the beam, and customized blocking was used to block out normal tissue. Our patient received 25 fractions at a 180 centigray (cGy) fraction per day, with a total of 4500 cGy. Our patient tolerated the XRT well with minimal complaints and no change in defecation. A physical exam revealed some mild epidermitis during the course of the XRT, but she was otherwise free of complications. During follow-up visits, our patient's perianal irritation resolved. She maintained normal anal sphincter tone, and had a complete resolution of her Bowen's disease. Two years after the radiation treatments, our patient is disease free, with good anal sphincter control.