A 40-year-old woman presented with over 10 years of axial back pain. Her pain significantly worsened with her last pregnancy a year prior, was refractory to maximal pharmacologic therapy and to repeated corticosteroid injections, which only provided her with a few days of relief, and limited her ability to ambulate and perform activities of daily living. On physical examination, paraspinal palpation at the level of the lumbosacral junction elicited severe pain, worse on the left compared to the right. Her bilateral lower extremity strength and sensation were preserved. Computed tomography (CT) of her lumbar spine revealed six lumbar vertebrae, bilateral L6 TP hypertrophy with aberrant degenerative changes at sites of articulation with the posterior superior iliac spine . Her aberrant connection between L6 and the pelvis was complex and multiplanar. To illustrate the patient’s unique anatomy and aid in surgical planning, we produced a 3D-printed model of her lumbosacral spine ( and ). After informed consent and discussion of risks, benefits, and alternatives, she underwent staged left and right MIS L6 TP resections using tubular retractors . The left side was treated first, followed by the right side after significant improvement of her pain. We staged the procedure to ensure that the patient would respond to surgery before performing bilateral approaches. Postoperatively, the patient’s pain improved significantly, and imaging revealed disconnection of the TP-pelvic articulation bilaterally, with a small residual connection on the right side which was surgically inaccessible. To aid in post-operative patient counseling, post-surgical 3Dprinted spine models were also produced to illustrate the magnitude of bony removal . Spine models were produced using standard 2 mm axial cuts from CT scans using open source software for quantitative image analysis and model generation and refinement. The models were made from polylactic acid with a polyvinyl alcohol scaffold, and each model took 9 days to produce using <$40 off raw materials.