A 23-year-old woman was referred from New Caledonia because of complications from thrombosis of a mechanical mitral valve during pregnancy.
In 2003, at the age of 9 years, she underwent a mechanical mitral valve replacement (ATS 26 mm) following endocarditis complicated by an embolic stroke. Later that year, she developed a thrombus on the prosthetic valve, while on warfarin and this was treated with thrombolysis. Valve function remained satisfactory until the first pregnancy. Her obstetric history was unfavourable. The first pregnancy in 2015 was complicated by premature labour at 20 weeks and foetal loss. The second pregnancy in 2016 was complicated by retroplacental haematoma and foetal loss in the second trimester.
At 22 weeks in her third pregnancy, whilst on subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) (Enoxaparin) commenced early in pregnancy, she presented with a middle cerebral artery stroke, which was treated by thrombolysis and clot retrieval at the major referral hospital in New Caledonia (Centre Hospitalier Territorial-Medipole). The patient had signs of heart failure. A transoesophageal echocardiogram showed a mitral mean gradient of 20 mmHg and two non-obstructive thrombi on the valve. Fluoroscopy showed apparently normal leaflet motion. Intravenous unfractionated heparin was commenced and the patient was transferred to a teaching hospital in Sydney with cardiothoracic services.
On admission, blood pressure was 95/60 mmHg, rhythm sinus with heart rate 85 b.p.m., and there was no clinical heart failure. A mitral diastolic murmur was heard. There was no residual neurological deficit. Transoesophageal echocardiogram was repeated and showed persisting valve thrombus and severe valve obstruction with a mean gradient of 18 mmHg and mild pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery systolic pressure 40 mmHg) . Treatment with intravenous unfractionated heparin was continued with target activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) in the high therapeutic range and Metoprolol and oral Furosemide were maintained. Aside from a daily clinical assessment, the patient had weekly transthoracic echocardiograms and weekly foetal ultrasounds. Despite frequent aPTT measurements, maintaining therapeutic anticoagulation was challenging and the dose of heparin very variable . A multidisciplinary team, consisting of cardiologists, an obstetrician, cardiothoracic surgeon, obstetric, and cardiothoracic anaesthetists and a neonatologist, was involved in her treatment.
At 29 weeks of pregnancy, symptomatic heart failure developed in the setting of sinus tachycardia and frequent atrial ectopic beats and was treated with increasing diuretics and beta blockers. Foetal growth and wellbeing was monitored with regular clinical assessment, CTG monitoring and scans to assess growth and wellbeing. Steroid cover was achieved to improve foetal lung maturity. At 30 weeks, as the patient’s heart failure was rapidly progressive despite an increase in medical therapy, she proceeded to emergency Caesarean section. Prior to delivery, the patient was receiving Metoprolol 100 mg BD orally and Lasix 40 mg orally with IV boluses as required. Delivery was for maternal reasons and there was no foetal compromise. Heparin was stopped 6 h prior to Caesarean section. Intravenous magnesium was given (loading dose of 4 g IV over 15 min and maintenance of 1 g/h) to reduce the risk of foetal brain injury at delivery in a preterm infant but was ceased when sinus tachycardia worsened significantly after 2 h of the maintenance infusion. At this stage, the patient was gravely unwell, tachycardic, sitting upright in bed with acute pulmonary oedema despite accelerated medical therapy and oxygen through a Hudson mask at six litres per minute. Femoral venous and arterial access was obtained before the start of the Caesarean section for rapid institution of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) if needed. Intra-operative transoesophageal echocardiography showed thrombus on the mechanical mitral valve and in the left atrial appendage with severe pulmonary hypertension , and this rapid progression of thrombus may have been promoted by heparin cessation. The Caesarean section was uncomplicated but the patient’s haemodynamics deteriorated over the next 2 h requiring institution of ECMO, without heparinization. Six hours after Caesarean section, when full anticoagulation could be used without prohibitive bleeding risk, an emergency mitral valve replacement was performed on cardiopulmonary bypass. The thrombosed mechanical valve was excised and a 25 mm Perimount Tissue Valve was implanted. A bioprosthetic valve was selected to facilitate a further planned pregnancy. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was ceased after 24 h and the patient was extubated 2 days after surgery.
Apgars were 3 and 7 at 1 min and 5 min. The neonate required continuous positive airway pressure for 2 weeks for hyaline membrane disease and a patent ductus arteriosus was treated with oral Ibuprofen. Bedside ultrasound confirmed normal appearance of the neonatal brain and no haemorrhage. There was a normal clinical neurological examination of the baby prior to discharge at 19 days (32 weeks and 5 days corrected for gestational age) into the care of her mother. The mother was discharged 2 weeks after surgery, on aspirin.