In February 2013 a 56-year-old female was referred to our institution due to obstructive jaundice. Laboratory tests showed increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) serum levels (206 UI/ml and 656 UI/ml, respectively), and total and conjugated hyperbilirubinemia levels (9.5 mg/dl and 8.1 mg/dl, respectively). Tumor markers, namely carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), cancer antigen15-3 (CA 15-3) and cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) were within normal ranges. An abdominal ultrasound (US) and computed tomography (CT) scan showed severe non-lithiasic hydropic gallbladder with intra- and extrahepatic dilatation of the biliary tree and thickening of the common bile duct wall. There was no evidence of growth in the head of pancreas, liver or peribiliary tissue. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 2-cm stenosis of the middle portion of the common bile duct, while the distal tract was apparently disease-free .
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) confirmed the presence of marked dilatation of the biliary tree that started from the proximal portion of the common bile duct and involved the confluence of the hepatic ducts. Cytology of the brushing from the bile duct showed no malignant cells.
In the patient’s past medical history there was a right radical mastectomy with axillary lymph node dissection for breast cancer performed 13 years earlier. At that time there was no evidence of distant metastasis. Pathology of the primary breast cancer revealed a 2-cm invasive ductal AJCC grade 2 carcinoma. Nipple, surgical borders and all of the 16 lymph nodes removed were free from malignancy. Essays for hormonal receptors were weakly positive, with estrogen receptors at 4.2 fmol/ml and progesterone receptors at 1.5 fmol/ml; a human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)/Ki-67 test was not performed. After a mastectomy, the patient received adjuvant chemotherapy based on six cycles of CMF regimen (cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2, methotrexate 40 mg/m2, 5-fluorouracil 600 mg/m2 intravenously on days one to eight, every four weeks), and was treated for the following three years with adjuvant hormonal therapy based on luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) antagonist (triptorelin) only. Regular oncological follow-up were instituted and no recurrence had been detected through the years.
As the presumed diagnosis was that of primary bile duct tumor, in March 2013, the patient underwent a laparotomy . In addition to the mentioned abdominal imaging, the preoperative work-up included a chest X-ray that showed no lesion.
At surgery, there was no evidence of peritoneal or hepatic tumor spread. A retropancreatic lymph node was removed and sent for extemporaneous histological examination which showed the presence of metastatic adenocarcinoma; it was not possible to define the origin of the adenocarcinoma on the frozen section. The bile duct was thickened and of hard consistency at palpation up to the confluence of the main hepatic ducts. After a cholecystectomy, the whole extrahepatic biliary tract was resected, including both right and left ducts. An extemporaneous histological examination of the resected biliary ducts showed an absence of malignancy in the mucosa, while there was infiltration of the external wall from the adenocarcinoma, with cells disposed in honeycombs. Because of the undetermined origin of the malignancy and its wide extension, it was decided to avoid any hepatic or pancreatic resection and the bile drainage was restored through a double hepaticojejunostomy. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, with rapid return of normal liver function, and the patient was discharged after seven days.
The definitive pathological study described solid honeycombs of malignant epithelial cells, localised only in the external side of the biliary duct wall, while the mucosa was free from infiltration . Several images of perivascular and perineural invasion were described. Lymph nodes were extensively metastatic. An immunohistochemistry analysis of the tumor in the bile duct and the lymph nodes showed high proliferative activity (Mib-1 < 32%); cells were strongly positive for estrogen receptors (90%) and also positive for progesterone receptors (20%), mammaglobin and cytokeratin-7 (CK-7). Staining was negative for HER2/neu and cytokeratin-20 (CK-20) markers. These findings were in keeping with hormone receptor positive, HER2/neu negative metastatic breast cancer.
The patient was referred to an oncologist who decided on a treatment course of denosumab (120 mg subcutaneously every four weeks) and letrozole (2.5 mg per day), which are still ongoing and well tolerated. At present she is alive and well and there is no evidence of relapse in the liver or bile ducts.