We report the case of a 21-year-old woman who in August 2011 was diagnosed with RRMS. She had no previous relevant medical conditions, nor family history of immune diseases. The disease onset was on May 2011 with acute cerebellar-related balance problems and spontaneously recovered after 3 weeks (EDSS 1.5). Shortly after the diagnosis, in October 2011, she was enrolled in the DECIDE study (double blind randomized controlled trial with IFN-beta 1a and Daclizumab 150 mg (DAC-HYP). However, she withdrew at early stages from this study (July 2012) due to the occurrence of two MS-relapses, both characterized by bi-ocular diplopia and blurred vision (EDSS 3.0). She completely recovered from this relapse after high dose of i.v. steroids. An MRI scan performed on May 2012 showed important radiological disease activity in the brain (25 T2-weighted and 7 T1-weighted/gadolinium-enhanced lesions) as well as in the spine (9 T2-weitghed and 2 T1-weighted/gadolinium-enhanced lesions). In August 2012, she started i.v. NAT 300 mg every 28 days. She was seropositive for JC-virus antibody status. During the 2 years of NAT-treatment, she was free of clinical activity and had a stable disability level (EDSS 1.5). She also underwent serial brain and spine MRI scans every 6 months, which showed no radiological disease activity as shown in Fig. . However, after 24 NAT-infusions (August 2014), administration of NAT was interrupted due to the risk of PML.
A single pulse of i.v. cyclophosphamide 750 mg was administered in September 2014. Following this, in October 2014 she was switched to DMF, starting with 120 mg twice-a-day for the first 2 weeks, and then switching to DMF 240 mg twice-a-day. Shortly, after the change of dosage, she started to complain of adverse effects in the region of gastro-intestine, which was mainly characterized by nausea and weight-loss – by January 2015, she lost 15 kg. On 15/01/2015, she started to complain of new symptoms characterized by lower limb weakness, dizziness and gait ataxia, followed by bilateral blurred vision, in the absence of fever and other infection signs. When she arrived to our clinic, the neurological examination revealed an EDSS of 6.0 since the patient was able to walk only with a unilateral support for about 100 m. A new brain MRI showed massive progression in T2 lesions and lesions with ring gadolinium-enhancement numbers (>20 gadolinium-enhanced lesions, Fig. ). A 5-day steroid course was then administered intravenously with great clinical benefit. The MRI performed 1 month later showed a reduction of the number of gadolinium-enhanced lesions in the brain. After one additional month, she recovered completely from the relapse and the neurological examination showed an EDSS of 1.5. On 24/02/2015 she re-started the treatment with NAT. The new JC-virus antibody status index was three.
The young MS patient reported in this case had a severe clinical and radiological rebound after NAT-interruption, although she was being treated with DMF, which in turn was started as after a “bridge” therapy with cyclophosphamide.
DMF, an oral treatment for RRMS with immunomodulatory and cytoprotective effects , was not able to stop the clinical and MRI activity after NAT-interruption. Recent preliminary results on the effect of DMF on minimizing disease activity related to NAT-interruption have been reported with inconclusive results. Two studies reported on beneficial effects [, ], and one showed higher disease activity (frequency of patients with relapse) during DMF treatment period compared with NAT period treatment . However, no rebound activity of MS has been shown so far. The AFFIRM, SENTINEL and GLANCE studies showed no rebound , but the RESTORE reported a high rate of disease activity after NAT-interruption despite a new drug was started . Since this study proved the superiority of continuing NAT in comparison with its interruption despite switching to first-line disease modifying drugs or methylprednisolone, we decided to restart therapy with NAT. Despite her risk of PML, which was likely higher due to the single pulse of immunosuppressant we administered as a bridge therapy. We however started an accurate and strict monitoring of clinical and radiological activity including MRI scans every 3–4 months.
Yet, the best treatment of patients who withdraw from NAT independently from the interruption reasons does not exist. Several strategies applied in clinical practice, such as “bridge” therapy with methylprednisolone, switching to glatimarer acetate or interferon-beta are likely not effective . However, more promising results came from several small [, ] and large retrospective [, ] and prospective studies with fingolimod (FTY), but long-term data about its efficacy and safety after NAT are urgently needed. Finally we cannot exclude that the single pulse of cyclophosphamide we used as “bridge” therapy to DMF might have delayed the occurrence of a rebound of another 3 months.