A 79-year-old man had suffered from dizziness for 5 months. He had severe coronary heart disease for 20 years, but he had not been treated with oral anticoagulants. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the brain revealed an intrasellar pituitary incidentaloma . His pituitary hormone test results were normal except for a low level of testosterone (0.20 ng/mL). No treatment was initiated at that time, because there were no pituitary-related symptoms.
Two months after the discovery of the pituitary tumor, the patient suddenly had severe headache, left diplopia, eyelid ptosis and visual dysfunction. On neurological examination, restriction of medial, downward and upward movement of the left eye was observed, indicating left oculomotor nerve palsy. His left pupil was enlarged (approximately 5 mm) and unresponsive to light. Visual acuity in his left eye was significantly decreased and visual field defects were present, indicating optic nerve compression. Laboratory tests of the patient’s pituitary hormones revealed that the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH, <5.00 pg/mL), cortisol (0.71 µg/dL) and testosterone levels were all low. His testosterone level (0.18 ng/mL) was similar to the results 2 months earlier. The levels of his other pituitary hormones, such as growth hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and prolactin (PRL), were normal. The patient’s pituitary hormone test results improved after he was treated with hydrocortisone as described in the following paragraphs.
T1-weighted MRI showed a large soft tissue mass with high signal intensity, and T2-weighted MRI showed a hybrid intensity mass in the saddle area, suggesting apoplexy . The mass compressed the left cavernous sinus. Contrast-enhanced MRI showed that the mass had an uneven enhancement pattern. These imaging findings indicated that the patient had PA.
The symptoms of oculomotor palsy and optic nerve compression were serious in this patient. Due to his poor health and coronary heart disease, the risk of surgery was very high for this patient. His hormone levels improved (cortisol, 4.14 µg/dL), and his ophthalmological deficits were nonprogressive with medical treatment and hormone replacement for hypopituitarism. Therefore, after multidisciplinary consultations and according to his family’s wishes, we continued the conservative treatment and monitored the patient closely for any change in his condition. During a 6-month follow-up period, the patient’s treatments were administered as follows: 100 mg of hydrocortisone intravenously once a day initially, then 2 weeks later changed to 20 mg of oral hydrocortisone two times per day, and then gradually reduced to his ongoing oral hydrocortisone dose of 20 mg daily. The patient’s MRI scans taken after 2 months and 5 months of conservative treatment showed gradual improvement in the PA. His symptoms also gradually improved.
After 6 months of conservative treatment, the patient’s symptoms of headache, oculomotor nerve paralysis, pupillary defect and reduced vision had completely disappeared, without new complications. The patient’s current cortisol levels are normal with ongoing oral hydrocortisone.