A 36-year-old South Asian female was on surveillance and clinic follow-up for SLE complicated with class IV lupus nephritis and hypertension since 2012. She had no other significant medical, surgical, allergic, or family history of significance. She was on oral prednisolone 10 mg once daily and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 1 g twice daily as maintenance immunosuppressive treatment along with oral enalapril 10 mg once at night, oral diltiazem 30 mg three times a day, oral hydroxychloroquine 100 mg once daily, oral alendronic acid 35 mg once a week, and oral omeprazole 20 mg once a day. Throughout her follow-up, she maintained good hemodynamic parameters, being normotensive and with heart rates within reference ranges. Her whole blood analysis demonstrated a white cell count of 6.9 × 109/L (4–11 × 109/L), hemoglobin of 11.3 g/dL (11–15 g/dL), and platelet count of 222 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L). Her remaining blood tests including renal function and inflammatory markers, as well as urinalysis, were normal . She was in clinical remission. However, in view of possible conception following a multidisciplinary discussion, her MMF was converted to oral azathioprine 50 mg twice daily based on both safety profile and feasibility of treatment. Her hydroxychloroquine was continued. Though therapy was changed in expectation, she failed to conceive, and subsequently she showed clinical regression with persistent proteinuria. In view of that, she was recommenced on MMF and on a tapering-down regimen of oral prednisolone to treat the relapse. Despite appropriate dose and compliance, the proteinuria persisted, and a repeat renal biopsy was done to exclude class shift. Renal biopsy revealed a single crescent was present with 17 glomeruli visualized and corresponded to a responding class IV nephritis with acute index of 6/24 and a chronic index of 1/12. In light of this and failure to respond to MMF and steroids, a clinical decision was taken to step up therapy and try rituximab in addition. The patient was given the first dose of intravenous rituximab at 375 mg/m2. However, 10 days after the rituximab therapy, she presented to the emergency department with complaints of spontaneous bleeding from the mouth and nose of 1-day duration along with new-onset patchy ecchymotic lesions throughout the body.
Other than the stated symptoms, she had no additional complaints. Further questioning failed to reveal other sites of bleeding. Clinical examination revealed blood oozing from the gums and two blood blisters on the hard palate ; blood was noted on the alar nasi without any crusting. She was also noted to have multiple ecchymotic patches throughout her body. The tip of the spleen was palpable, being soft and nontender on examination of the abdomen. Remainder of the systemic examination was normal. Initial evaluation with whole blood analysis revealed severe thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of only 5 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L) with hemoglobin 10.2 g/dL (11–15 g/dL), and white cell count of 6.8 × 109/L (4–11 × 109). The blood picture during admission showed severe thrombocytopenia without any abnormal cells, and other cell lines were normal. Serum creatinine was 98 μmol/L, serum albumin was 4.03 g/dl, international normalized ratio was normal at 0.92 (< 1.0), and C-reactive protein was only 0.6 (< 5.0 mg/dl). Coombs direct agglutination test was negative.
Due to the severe thrombocytopenia considering the high risk of intracerebral hemorrhage, she was given platelet transfusion (five pooled packs) and was empirically given 5 days of intravenous immunoglobulin (IG) at 0.4 g/kg body weight along with intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 3 days suspecting immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). On the subsequent day, the platelet counts remained at 7 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L) , and repeat whole blood analysis with manual counting done 6 hours later further confirmed a platelet destructive process. Given her background of SLE, a bone marrow biopsy was performed, which demonstrated adequate number of megakaryocytes in the bone marrow compatible with a platelet destructive process [Fig ]. She was kept under observation with daily whole blood analysis. This revealed gradually rising platelet counts, and 10 days following admission when her platelet count exceeded 100 × 109/L, she was discharged from hospital care. Oral prednisolone dose was tailed off as per guidelines and brought down to her maintenance dose for nephropathy of 7.5 mg once daily, and the patient maintained platelet counts above 200 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L) on follow-up 1 month later. Although rituximab-induced thrombocytopenia was entertained as a differential, the platelet destructive process, lack of previous reported similar cases in SLE patients, and the necessity of treating the class IV nephritis was weighed and a clinical decision was taken to resume rituximab treatment considering it was a less likely etiology. Her bloods done before infusion showed a platelet count of 283 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L). She received her second dose of rituximab 375 mg 3 months after her initial presentation to the Accident and Emergency (A & E). Four days later, she again presented to the emergency department with recurrence of oral bleeding. Complete blood count showed severe thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 10 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L). The rest of her blood work was within normal limits. In view of her previous admission and rapid response to treatment, she was started on intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 3 days to be followed by oral prednisolone, along with a 5-day course of intravenous IG at 0.4 g/kg body weight. By day 3, the platelet count started to rise and reached 110 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L) on day 5, and the patient was discharged from ward and reviewed in clinic a week later (platelet trends presented in Table ). Whole blood analysis revealed platelet counts within normal reference range, and she was given a plan for rapid taper on a weekly interval to bring the prednisolone dose down to her maintenance value of 7.5 mg/day, and MMF was reinitiated. Given the association between rituximab-induced thrombocytopenia and lymphoma and the patient’s past history of SLE and immune-modulatory drug use, a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed and revealed a normal-sized spleen and no significant abnormality.
The patient was planned for monthly follow-ups with a review of counts and monitoring of peripheral lymph nodes and ultrasound examinations to check for paraaortic lymph nodes. Follow-up for 3 months showed no lymphadenopathy, and cell counts remained within normal margins. The final working diagnosis was rituximab-induced isolated thrombocytopenia with mucocutaneous hemorrhagic manifestations.