A 58-year-old man, presented to the emergency department with 2 days of sharp, substernal chest pain which worsened during inspiration. The patient was previously known with hypertension and a transient ischaemic attack and was on clopidogrel, atorvastatin, and valsartan at admission. He presented with a temperature of 36.2°C, a blood pressure of 131/78 mmHg, a regular pulse of 98 beats per minute, and a saturation of 98% on ambient air. Clinical examination was unremarkable without pericardial or pleural friction rub. The electrocardiogram was normal without repolarization disorders or signs of pericarditis. Laboratory examination showed normal leucocyte count, elevated C-reactive protein of 44 mg/L (reference value < 10 mg/L), and mildly elevated high-sensitivity troponin T of 20 ng/L (reference value < 14 ng/L) with a rise to 30 ng/L. Polymerase chain reaction of a nasopharyngeal sample was negative for coronavirus. Our differential diagnosis included (myo)pericarditis, non-ST elevation myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, pleuritis, and acute aortic syndrome. The patient was hospitalized for further analysis. Obstructive coronary artery disease was ruled out by invasive coronary angiography. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) angiography showed no pulmonary embolism, aortic dissection, pericardial effusion, or intrapulmonary abnormalities, but revealed an inhomogeneous epipericardial mass . The chest pain resolved spontaneously the following day and the patient was discharged without any treatment.
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was performed 5 days later using a 1.5 Tesla clinical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner, which showed normal anatomy and myocardial function. On cine MRI, the epipericardial mass had an inhomogeneous signal intensity without infiltration of surrounding tissue and absence of pericardial effusion (Video 1). Further tissue characterization of the mass by means of parametric mapping showed very low native T1 relaxation times (283 ms) consistent with fat. T2 relaxation times (100 ms) were elevated and T2-weighted oedema imaging revealed hyperintense areas of the mass both consistent with oedema. Late gadolinium enhancement imaging demonstrated hypo-enhanced areas surrounded by areas of hyperenhancement . In conclusion, the mass showed fibrofatty inflammatory markers, suggestive of EFN. Follow-up CT 3 months after admission showed a marked regression of the epipericardial mass which confirm the diagnosis EFN . The patient remained asymptomatic and no further follow-up was indicated.