A 36-year-old man, originally from Latin America, presented at our outpatient department with complaints of abdominal pain that had persisted for 2 months. The patient had first noticed right lateral abdominal pain 2 months prior to the visit, and the pain was gradually worsening. The abdominal pain was localized in an area ranging from the right upper to the right lateral abdomen. The patient had undergone cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis as a 32-year-old in Latin America and had moved to Japan for work approximately 3 years prior to his initial visit to our hospital. He had returned to Latin America once about 6 to 7 months before presenting at our clinic. When he went back to Japan, his weight had increased from 130 kg to 145 kg. He did not experience abdominal pain immediately after his return to Japan, but, as noted above, he started to gradually feel pain in the right lateral region about 2 months prior to presentation.
He first visited another hospital emergency department 1 month after onset of the pain. Initially, gastrointestinal tract spasm was suspected, and he was treated with tiquizium bromide. Though the medication partially relieved his abdominal pain, most of the pain persisted. The result of a workup by a urologist was negative, even though nephrolithiasis was suspected. His abdominal pain was exacerbated upon changing posture, and thus it was suspected to be of somatic rather than visceral origin. Abdominal pain persisted despite treatment with loxoprofen sodium hydrate, and any cause of abdominal pain was not detected on further evaluations, including hematologic laboratory analysis, urine analysis, gastroscopy, or abdominal computed tomography (CT). Finally, he was referred to our hospital for further examination.
The results of screening for depression were negative, and the patient did not have symptoms such as loss of interest, depressed feelings, or any specific changes of surrounding conditions, such as family or work environment changes. He had no history of sexually transmitted infection, and his vital signs were within normal limits. His physical examination result was positive for Carnett’s test, and a prior surgical scar of approximately 18 cm was apparent at the right subcostal region. The patient experienced strong pain surrounding the surgical scar that was exacerbated by tapping. There were no skin rashes localized surrounding the pain. His pain exacerbated to 8 on a pain scale when he moved, such as during standing up or rolling over simultaneously. When he stopped moving, pain was partially relieved within 1 minute (3 on a pain scale). When he moved again, abdominal pain was again exacerbated. Hence, he was awakened by the abdominal pain when rolling over. No inflammation was detected (leukocyte count was 8580/mm3 and C-reactive protein was 0.10 mg/dl), and other laboratory findings were nonspecific, including liver/kidney function, blood glucose, and electrolytes. Urinary analysis indicated red blood cell count < 1/high-power field, white blood cell count 1–4/high-power field. Additionally, no abnormality was detected for Chlamydia trachomatis IgG/IgA, and no abnormality was apparent on the electrocardiogram. Enhanced CT revealed bilateral renal stones and fatty liver.
We first considered abdominal wall pain due to nerve entrapment because the Carnett’s test result was positive; therefore, we scheduled a trigger point injection at the site of tenderness. About 2 weeks later, the patient visited the emergency department of our hospital, reporting that his prior abdominal pain had decreased but that he was experiencing right inguinal pain. Loxoprofen administration had no effect on the pain. Costovertebral angle pain was apparent on tapping, the result of urine analysis was positive for occult blood, and abdominal CT revealed a urinary stone at the right urinary duct to the bladder. After pentazocine hydrochloride was administered for pain relief, the urinary stone was passed the following day. However, the patient’s right lateral abdominal pain was not relieved.
He felt that lying in the lateral position mostly relieved his pain. He had occasional vomiting. The abdominal pain was exacerbated by movements, such as rolling over, standing up, walking, and coughing. Injection of 1% xylocaine 10 ml at a trigger point of the right lateral region led to about 30% relief in pain. The patient was referred to an anesthesiologist for further evaluation and treatment, who performed transverse abdominal plane block and administered multiple analgesic medications (tramadol hydrochloride, pregabalin, celecoxib, and scopolamine butylbromide). These medications decreased the patient’s pain somewhat, and he reported that scopolamine butylbromide was most effective when the pain worsened. Because the patient’s symptoms were not relieved after trigger point treatment to the abdominal wall, we considered potential causes that might be associated with the location between the abdominal wall and visceral wall or related to other sources, including psychosocial, physiological, and other anatomical factors. We rechecked the abdominal CT scan for a suspected adhesion or abdominal hernia at the region of tenderness due to the prior surgical procedure, and we asked a radiologist to reevaluate the right upper abdomen in more detail. The radiologist confirmed a slight abnormality in the right upper abdomen and suggested the possibility of an adhesion around the surgical scar . We referred the patient to a gastrointestinal surgeon for laparoscopic evaluation and adhesiolysis. The patient underwent additional investigations, including cholecystocholangiography and colonoscopy for suspected postcholecystectomy syndrome, biliary dyskinesia, or colon abnormality. However, no cause of the abdominal pain was identified. On laparoscopic evaluation, a broad adhesion was observed. Adhesiolysis was performed 6 months after the patient first visited our hospital. Figure a shows adhesion between the peritoneum and omentum, liver, and ascending colon; Fig. b shows the condition after adhesiolysis. One month after adhesiolysis, the patient’s right abdomen pain level during movement improved from 8 to 2–3 on a pain scale. Therefore, he was able to move with less pain, and he did not feel pain when rolling over. The result of Carnett’s test was negative. After the patient started walking around his house, he felt abdominal pain about 5 minutes after walking. Hence, he was afraid of recurrence of abdominal pain and felt a little depressed and frustrated because he was unable to return to work early. We recommended a gradual increase in activity. He went on a trip 4 months after the operation without problems due to abdominal pain and then resumed his job 6 months after the operation.
However, his abdominal pain deteriorated within 1 month after he resumed working. He presented with bleeding at the umbilicus, which was the laparoscopic port site, and abdominal incisional hernia was confirmed on the basis of CT. Repair of the abdominal incisional hernias and laparoscopic adhesiolysis were performed 8 months after the first operation. After the second operation, although it took time for some symptoms to improve because of surgical site infection, the patient’s symptoms were ultimately relieved, and he resumed his job again 5 months after undergoing the second operation. Although he reported mild abdominal pain and required analgesic medication, his weight decreased to 133 kg, and he was able to walk normally and work full-time, 2 years after he initially visited our hospital. The timeline of interventions and outcomes is shown in Additional file .