The case of a six-year-old boy who was previously healthy, but had a family history of Huntington's disease (five relatives affected, of whom two had the juvenile form of the disease) is presented here. His mother had not been screened but was asymptomatic.
He was brought to the outpatient clinic of a tertiary-care hospital in Portugal because of migratory arthralgia (without arthritis), asthenia, depressed mood and rapid, abrupt and unintentional movements of his right arm and leg (leading to severe incapacity to eat and write). The symptoms had begun three weeks earlier and he had a history of febrile syndrome, which had occurred approximately one month before the onset of his symptoms. He had not received any specific treatment and there was no history of drug use or medication allergies.
On physical examination, he presented a grade III/VI systolic murmur at the left sternal border and choreic movements in both right limbs.
Laboratory tests revealed that his complete blood cell count and blood chemistry panels were normal, but he presented elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (63 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (25 mg/l). The antistreptolysin O titer was 1824 U/ml and the antineuronal antibody test was negative. The cardiac evaluation showed mild aortic insufficiency and moderate mitral insufficiency, and a prolonged PR interval.
Other tests performed presented normal results, including brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), autoimmunity evaluation (anticardiolipin antibodies, antinuclear antibodies and complement levels), viral serological tests (human immunodeficiency virus, parvovirus B19, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus and hepatitis C and B viruses), venereal disease research laboratory test (VDRL), blood culture and thyroid function.
The clinical picture of migratory arthralgia, rheumatic carditis and hemichorea made a diagnosis of Sydenham's chorea/acute rheumatic fever very likely. The patient was treated with benzathine penicillin (1,200,000 U), haloperidol (0.5 mg per day on the first three days and then 1 mg twice a day), captopril (12.5 mg three times a day) and furosemide (10 mg three times a day). He was discharged five days after the beginning of the treatment, with improved mood and better control over the choreic movements. One month later, he was back to his baseline behavior and the choreic movements and hypotonia had practically disappeared.