A 66-year-old man with type 2 diabetes mellitus and a history of cough and asthma suddenly developed massive hemoptysis of more than 1L while smoking 2 days before. After then, he was brought to an emergency room in our institution because of repeated bloody sputum. His smoking history was 60 pack years. At the time of admission, the patient was taking 50 mg of vildagliptin for diabetes mellitus. His height and body weight were 168 cm and 52.9 kg, respectively. His blood pressure, pulse rate, and respiratory rate were 120/50 mmHg, 97 beats per minute, and 18 beats per minute, respectively. In chest auscultation, there were no fine or coarse crackles, and there were no other physical findings of note. The findings of blood tests at the time of emergency transport are shown in . His hemoglobin level was 15.7 g/dL and there was no anemia. His coagulation functions are all in the normal range. Liver and renal functions were almost within the normal range. Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was mildly elevated to 0.40 mg/dL. Diabetes markers were as follows: blood glucose level, 112 mg/dL; HbA1c, 7.5%. Sputum cultures did not reveal any pathologic micro-organisms. A chest radiograph on admission demonstrated reticular shadows in the right lower lung fields. Sputum cultures did not reveal any pathologic micro-organisms. A chest radiograph on admission demonstrated reticular shadows in the right lower lung fields (, upper left panel). Chest computed tomography (CT) on admission showed frosted shadows in the dorsal left upper lobe and left lower lobe. The left lower lobe showed ground-glass opacity and fibrotic and cystic changes (, upper right panel). In contrast-enhanced CT, however, there were no abnormal vessels or neoplastic lesions in the bronchial wall. To examine the cause of massive hemoptysis and subsequent repeated bloody sputum, bronchoscopy was performed on the day of admission. As the results, a polypoidal elevated lesion was observed in the left upper lobe bifurcation (, upper left panel). There were no exposed blood vessels in the tracheal lumen, but passage of the bronchoscope revealed pulsatile bleeding from the periportal area of the polyp (, upper right panel). Thrombin was applied under bronchoscopy and hemostasis was achieved. To minimize recurrence of bleeding from mechanical irritation and cough, the patient was empirically treated with anti-tussive and anti-secretory agents such as carbazochrome (90 mg/day), carbocisteine (1500 mg/day), cloperlastine (60 mg/day) with symptomatic relief. There was no sign of infection, and considering the risk of hyperglycemia, we decided not to administer antimicrobial agents and steroids. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 7th day after admission because hemoptysis was not observed at all after the start of medication.
The patient underwent a follow-up bronchoscopy on day 25 post discharge which showed no evidence of active bleeding. The polypoidal nodule appeared less pronounce and an endobronchial biopsy was performed. Histopathology demonstrated a foci of reactive myofibroblast growth from the bronchial mucosa to the endobronchial palace suggestive of a bronchial inflammatory polyp . The patient was instructed to quit smoking and after then he did not experience hemoptysis. To examine the alteration of the lesion, bronchoscopy was performed 106 days after the initial hospitalization. As the results, the bronchial inflammatory polyp completely disappeared although this polyp previously caused massive hemoptysis and repeated bloody sputum in this subject (, lower panel). On follow-up chest imaging, the lower lobe infiltrates had resolved with residual underlying fibrotic changes that are currently being evaluated for suspected smoking-related interstitial lung disease (, lower panel).