A 60-year-old White woman was admitted as an outpatient for autologous fat transfer as part of her breast reconstruction. She underwent 2 years earlier a left total mastectomy followed by a delayed autologous reconstruction with a deep inferior epigastric perforator (DIEP) free flap performed 6 months ago. Medical history also included treated hypertension and diabetes mellitus. There was no history of abnormal bleeding during previous surgeries. Before liposuction, tumescent infiltration of the subcutaneous fat compartment of the flanks and internal thighs was done with a mixture of 2 mg of epinephrin in a 1-L saline solution. Liposuction was performed with a 3-mm blunt cannula in the deep subcutaneous layer. The total volume of fat harvested was 200 mL per thigh and flank. Fat was processed and filtered through the PUREGRAFT system (Bimini HealthTech, Solana Beach, CA, USA) and reinjected to the left breast. No peroperative event occurred. After 30 min of recovery, the patient complained of pain in the right internal thigh with a rapidly growing mass. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan was performed immediately and showed a voluminous subcutaneous hematoma with active bleeding in contact with the muscle plane .
The patient was immediately transferred to the interventional radiography department for selective embolization. Access to the left common femoral artery was performed using a 5-French vascular long sheath under local anesthesia. The initial angiogram was conducted in the right common femoral artery and showed active bleeding from a profunda artery perforator . After careful selective catheterization of the feeding artery using a 2.0-French microcatheter, 0.3 mL of Onyx 34 (Medtronic Inc, Dublin, Ireland) was injected. Control angiography showed no immediate complication and confirmed the exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm. No postoperative event occurred. Blood pressure and hemoglobin levels remained stable throughout the episode. The thigh hematoma was left to spontaneous resorption, and antibiotic prophylaxis with amoxicillin–clavulanate 3 g/day was given for 7 days. The patient was authorized to walk on postoperative day 1, and she was discharged home on postoperative day 2. No further complication occurred, and the hematoma was completely resolved after 3 weeks .