The patient, a 29-year-old female, complained of cough and sputum that had aggravated for 1 month with fever for 5 days. The patient was engaged in civilian work in a township government building, and had no history of smoking, dust and other harmful environmental exposure. After anti-infective and symptomatic treatment at the local county hospital, the patient’s temperature decreased, but the cough and sputum did not resolve. She had a previous cesarean section and no history of other specific diseases. Initial vital signs were a temperature of 36.4 °C, heart rate of 77 beats/min, blood pressure of 104/72 mmHg, oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 92%, and respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min. Physical examination revealed hypopnea and scattered wet rales in the right lower lung, while other physical examination results showed no abnormalities. Subsequently, chest computed tomography (CT) was performed, which revealed a mass shadow in the right lower lobe near the hilar region, with obstructive atelectasis and obstructive pneumonia . Routine blood tests showed significantly elevated leukocyte (11.88 × 109/L), neutrophil (9.13 × 109/L), platelet (425 × 109/L), and C-reactive protein (77.74 mg/L) levels and mildly decreased hemoglobin levels. Sputum smear revealed gram-positive cocci (2+) and gram-negative bacilli (3+). Pulmonary function tests suggested mild restrictive ventilatory dysfunction, mild obstruction of small airway airflow, and mildly reduced ventilatory reserve function. To further clarify the diagnosis, enhanced CT was performed again after admission, and the results suggested a mass shadow in the lower lobe of the right lung near the hilar region , suggesting a possible central lung cancer with obstructive pneumonia changes, with mediastinal and right hilar lymph node enlargement. Bronchoscopy revealed mild congestion of the bronchial mucosa in the basal segment of the lower lobe of the right lung, smooth mucosa, white mucous secretions in the lumen, sharp interstitial ridges, and no neoplastic growth or active bleeding . The metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) test of alveolar lavage fluid showed R. mannitolilytica, sequence number 3271. Moreover, no cancer cells or Mycobacterium tuberculosis were detected. After a comprehensive evaluation, spherical pneumonia due to Ralstonia solani infection was considered. We used symptomatic treatments such as moxifloxacin for anti-infection, amiloride to dissolve sputum, compound ipratropium bromide to dilate the bronchi, and Suhuang Zhike Capsule (a widely used Chinese patent medicine with cough relieving and phlegm resolving properties) for evidence-based treatment. The patient’s clinical symptoms were significantly relieved after treatment, and repeat chest CT performed 10 days after admission showed significant absorption of the lesion . The patient was subsequently discharged from the hospital and has shown no specific discomfort during follow-up to date.