A 47-year-old African American male with a past medical history of asthma presented to the emergency department with complaints of intermittent chest pain, shortness of breath, and worsening confusion. The patient was afebrile. In the emergency department, vitals showed an oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, a heart rate of 122 beats per minute, and a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute. On physical examination, the patient appeared ill and drowsy. While able to answer questions, he required repeated arousing as he was somnolent. Lungs were clear on auscultation, and no murmur was appreciated. The abdomen was soft and non-tender. He denied any history of alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drug abuse. There was no family history of confusion, dementia, or kidney disease. However, he reported exposure to COVID-19 in the past week.
While hemodynamically stable on admission, labs were remarkable for acute kidney injury with a serum creatinine of 31 mg/dL (normal 0.7–1.3 mg/dL), blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 210 mg/dL (normal 6–24 mg/dL), potassium level of 7.6 mmol/L (normal 3.6–5.2 mmol/L), and a calcium level of 21.5 mg/dL (normal 8.6–10.3 mg/dL). Urinalysis showed significant proteinuria with levels equal to or greater than 500 mg/dL, white blood cells (WBC) of 21–50/hpf, and red blood cells of 6–10/hpf. Urine studies were done, which showed a urine protein level of 8700 mg/dL. Urine protein electrophoresis was interpreted as a glomerular pattern with no monoclonal bands seen, often seen in nephrotic and nephritic syndromes. A serology panel was sent, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), antinuclear antibodies (ANA), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and hepatitis panel were negative. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm with peaked T waves.
Further workup showed patient positive for COVID-19 by antigen test. As a result of the patient’s labs and condition, he was admitted and taken for emergent dialysis. A renal biopsy was performed, and light microscopy showed collapse of basement membranes in some glomeruli, along with severe tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and dilated tubules filled with hyaline and protein casts. Direct immunofluorescence did not show evidence of immune complex disease. Electron microscopy showed widespread effacement of foot processes, which correlated with proteinuria. These findings correlated with collapsing glomerulopathy . Computed tomography (CT) of the head and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were done, which did not show any acute findings. After dialysis, his encephalopathy showed significant improvement. He was more awake, more alert, and able to have extended conversations. Unfortunately, his kidney function did not improve, and he continues to require outpatient hemodialysis after discharge. Understandably, this has frustrated him, however, he has been compliant with follow-ups and dialysis appointments.