We admitted a 20-month-old boy with an abnormal right lower leg morphology since birth, accompanied by complex ipsilateral preaxial polydactyly. Consent for publication of the data was obtained from the family before the start of the study. There was no pain in the child’s right leg, normal growth in height and weight, and no abnormalities found in other parts of the body, such as the skin, hair, and face . There were no abnormalities in the mother’s pregnancy and delivery and no other similar conditions in other family members. As he grew, the abnormalities of his right lower limb gradually worsened. At the time of his clinic visit, the patient had not yet learned to walk but was able to crawl normally. Physical examination revealed that the right tibia was anterolateral angulated and approximately 8.0 cm shorter than the left tibia. The right foot was internally rotated, with limited abduction and no dorsal extension at all. There was complex polydactyly on the lateral aspect of toe 1, and those toes could not move.
Radiological examination of the right leg revealed shortening, widening and thinning of the tibial stem, slender fibula, dislocation of the ankle, complex polydactyly of the right toes, and a redundant metatarsal forming an articulation with the superfluous toes . A complete blood count, urine, blood biochemistry, chest radiograph, and ECG were within normal limits.
The child underwent polydactylotomy and right tibiofibular osteotomy reconstruction in our hospital. During the operation, we found that the morphology of the right tibia was changed from “tubular bone” to “flat bone”, and the medial margin of the tibia had a cartilage-like structure with localized thickened periosteum. The medullary cavity was not visible after cutting up the midshaft of the right tibia, but the bone hardness was basically normal. The prognosis of the child after surgery was favorable, and he is now able to stand on his own after 8 months of follow-up.
After searching the published reports, we considered this child’s case to be tibial hemimelia, which might be associated with genomic mutations. After obtaining informed consent (protocol conformed to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board and Ethical Committee at the West China Hospital of Sichuan University in China), we collected peripheral blood samples from the proband, his father and mother, extracted DNA, and performed next-generation whole exome sequencing (NGS) using the Illumina platform.