A 24-year-old native Japanese man presented to our hospital after developing high-grade fever. He had travelled to Vietnam and Cambodia for 14 days. After leaving Japan, he visited the beach in Halong Bay, the forest region near the border of China, and Siem Reap in Cambodia. During his stay, he had participated in forest trekking tourism and had stayed in a youth hostel. For dietary intake, he ate home-cooked food and drank beverages with ice, in a similar manner to local people. Fourteen days after he returned to Japan, he developed a mild headache, chills and malaise, and 2 days later, he developed a high fever with chills and rigors. He did not have any abdominal pain or diarrhoea. His past medical history, family history and social history were unremarkable. On examination, his temperature was 39 ℃, his blood pressure was 128/68 mmHg, his pulse was 101 beats per minute, his respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute and his oxygen saturation was 98 % with room air. He did not present a rash, lymph node swelling, abdominal tenderness, or hepatosplenomegaly. His laboratory examination demonstrated elevated serum C-reactive protein (5.1 mg dl−1; normal range, 0–0.3 mg dl−1). The blood cell counts and the other biochemical tests were normal (WBC 6900 µl−1, AST 20 U l−1, ALT 19 U l−1). The HIV test result was negative, while contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed ileocecal lymphadenopathy. We did not detect enterocolitis, arthritis, or abscesses. We also did not detect an aneurysm or abscess via brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Based on his travel history and clinical findings, we suspected primary bacteraemia from typhoid fever. He was admitted to our hospital for observation and treated with antibiotics. On the day of admission, ceftriaxone (2 g/day) and minocycline (200 mg/day) were administered. On hospital day two, the initial blood cultures yielded Gram-negative bacilli, which were identified as by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. The bacterial subspecies could not be identified by biochemical testing at our hospital. Antibiotic susceptibility testing revealed that the organism was not resistant to the following antibiotics: ampicillin, piperacillin, cefotiam, cefotaxime, ceftizoxime, ceftazidime, cefepime, imipenem, meropenem, azythromycin, levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin and fosfomycin. Only minomycin had an MIC90 value of >8 µg ml−1.
After 1 day of ceftriaxone and minocycline, his fever, malaise and headache remitted. We discontinued minocycline, and ceftriaxone was continued for 14 days. The patient was discharged on day 10 and had an uneventful recovery with no recurrence of fever.
Further testing using commercial O and H antisera (Denka Seiken Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) according to the Antigenic Formulae of the (9th ed.) identified the organism as serovar Corvallis (at Hokkaido Institute of Public Health, Sapporo, Japan). Thus, serovar Corvallis was likely to have caused the primary bacteraemia in this patient, as described.