A 51-year-old woman who had been administered oral contraceptive pills for menstrual pain was transferred to our hospital because of altered consciousness, disorientation, and urinary incontinence. Her initial Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 14 (E4V4M6) on admission. Plain computed tomography (CT) showed a hyperdense signal at StS without parenchymal hemorrhage, and CVT caused by oral pills was suspected. CT angiography revealed defects in the basal vein of Rosenthal (BVR) and StS , and the bilateral transverse sinuses (TSs) were not occluded. Although systemic unfractionated heparin anticoagulation therapy for CVT had been administered immediately, her neurological condition deteriorated (GCS: 11; E3V3M5). Moreover, CT demonstrated venous ischemia at bilateral basal ganglia on the following day , and it was decided that she would undergo MT to improve cerebral venous circulation.
MT was performed under local anesthesia with sedation. A 6Fr guide sheath was inserted into the right femoral vein and positioned in the left jugular vein, and a 4Fr diagnostic catheter was inserted into the left femoral artery and positioned in the left internal carotid artery. Bilateral carotid and vertebral angiograms demonstrated venous flow defects in the BVR and StS and deep venous congestion . A Trevo track 21 (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) microcatheter was navigated into the occluded StS through the left TS using a 0.014" microguidewire, and a REACT68 (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) aspiration catheter was located at the confluence of the sinuses. Venography at the StS revealed a filling defect near the confluence . Following deployment and anchoring of a Trevo NXT (6 × 37 mm, Stryker) stent retriever through the microcatheter at the StS, the REACT68 catheter was navigated into the StS near the proximal end of the deployed Trevo NXT . Using a combination technique with clot aspiration from the REACT68 catheter and Trevo NXT stent retrieval methods, a significant clot was captured. A total of four passes were performed through the combination technique, and a visible clot was captured in each session. Although not all thrombi could be removed completely and complete recanalization was not achieved, partial recanalization of the StS was obtained , and the procedure was terminated at this point.
After MT, unfractionated heparin (dose: 10,000–20,000 units per day) therapy was continued for 1 week followed by oral anticoagulation medication. Her consciousness level improved tremendously (GCS: 15) the day after MT. Neuroimaging performed 2 weeks after MT demonstrated improvement of venous ischemia and complete recanalization of the BVR and StS without deep venous congestion . She was discharged 3 weeks later, following MT with no neurological deficits with oral anticoagulant therapy.