The patient is a 14-year-old female diagnosed with generalized epilepsy after presenting with early morning involuntary jerking of her upper extremities and an electroencephalogram (EEG) with occasional generalized spike and slow wave discharges. She later had frequent staring spells, suspected to be absence seizures, along with increasing memory loss and poor academic performance. Notably, she had no history of fevers, rash, arthritis, or serositis. Her brain MRI was normal aside from a single nonspecific dorsal thalamic T2 lesion that has remained stable. Over 2 years, she seized on average 4–15 times daily despite multiple AED. Upon presentation to our neuroimmunology clinic, she was treated with levetiracetam 1500 mg twice daily (later increased to 2000 mg twice daily), ethosuximide 250 mg in the morning and 500 mg in the evening, lamotrigine 100 mg twice daily, and topiramate 100 mg twice daily; clonazepam 0.25 mg was later added also without dramatic reduction in seizure frequency. An extensive laboratory evaluation is summarized in Table . Notably, she had negative testing for all autoantibodies but had persistently elevated C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) . Serum levels of S100A8/A9 and S100A12 alarmin proteins, which serve to amplify innate immune responses and inflammation, were also elevated . Both epiSeek Infancy and Childhood Epilepsy Panel and Genetic Periodic Fever Syndromes Panel including NLRP3 was negative. Cerebral spinal fluid studies showed no elevation in her white blood cells or protein, absent oligoclonal bands, and a normal IgG index and synthesis rate. Cytokine levels in the CSF showed only a mild elevation in IL-1β (25 pg/mL; normal ≤ 10 pg/mL); however, it is unknown how CSF sample processing could affect IL-1 levels. Serum IL-1β was within normal limits, but circulating IL-1 levels are frequently normal even in active systemic autoinflammatory disorders . Finally, a PET scan showed no areas consistent with inflammatory foci.
Due to a suspected systemic inflammatory process related to her epilepsy, she was empirically treated with oral dexamethasone 120 mg daily for 5 days, leading to a dramatic but transient response, with no seizures for 1 week followed by regression to her baseline seizure frequency. After a lengthy discussion, treatment with the recombinant IL-1RA anakinra 100 mg daily was initiated, upon which she experienced a rapid approximately 80% reduction in seizure frequency to about four per week. She had rapid normalization in her inflammatory markers . Anakinra was later increased to 100 mg twice daily, resulting in 2 months without clinically evident seizures. She also noted profound improvements in her fatigue, general malaise, quality of life, and academic performance, now allowing her to work and consider pursuing higher education. Repeat EEG testing showed occasional generalized spike and slow wave discharges with increased frequency in sleep. Repeat CSF examination was not performed. The patient was changed to the anti-IL-1β monoclonal antibody canakinumab 300 mg every 4 weeks, and she enjoyed long periods of being seizure-free, currently averaging one seizure per several months. She was weaned off lamotrigine and ethosuximide, and her clonazepam changed to clobazam.
In order to define the systemic immune activation in this patient, PBMC gene expression profiles were determined both before and after initiation of anakinra treatment and compared to three healthy, age-matched controls using AmpliSeq Transcriptome . Full sequencing details are shown in the supplemental information. Compared to the mean of healthy controls, pre-treatment patient PBMC showed 178 genes upregulated and 260 genes downregulated > 2-fold . Pathway analysis of the upregulated genes showed multiple significantly enriched gene pathways suggesting systemic immune activation, including focal adhesion (p = 9.1 × 10−5), platelet activation (p = 0.0011), Rap1 signaling (p = 0.0028), and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction (p = 0.018). Of particular note, Rap1 signaling is an upstream regulator of IL-1β production and plays a key role in NLRP3 inflammasome activation . In addition, 83% (148/178) of upregulated genes showed lower expression in patient PBMC after anakinra treatment, including 87.5% (7/8) of elevated Rap1 pathway genes (Additional file : Table S4). Regarding downregulated genes, the most significantly enriched GO term was type I interferon signaling pathways (p = 8.8 × 10−8), strongly supporting the absence of an interferon-induced gene signature in this patient. Indeed, full analysis of the interferon-induced signature described in autoinflammatory interferonopathies shows no evidence of interferon activation before or after anakinra treatment .
To further examine for the presence of an autoinflammatory signature responsive to IL-1 blockade, we utilized well-characterized PBMC gene expression profiles that could clearly distinguish patients with CAPS, regardless of underlying disease activity . As shown in Fig. c, this patient showed increased expression of a broad spectrum of immune response genes activated in CAPS patients, expression of which was largely extinguished with anakinra treatment. Taken together, these findings suggest that this patient displays features of IL-1-driven systemic autoinflammation, which were markedly reduced with anakinra treatment.