A 57-year-old Mexican woman was referred to neurosurgical consultation after being reviewed by the Clinical Neurology Department at our hospital. She assisted complaining with a 36-week history of moderate lower limbs pain, cramps, and gait disturbances, no sphincter problems were referred.
The initial neurologic evaluation demonstrated a dissociated sensory disturbance below Th11 level and decreased deep tendon reflex in both lower limbs. Strength was 4/5 on the left iliopsoas and quadriceps muscles associated with negative extensor plantar reflex. Gait disturbances were prominent preventing her to perform Tandem, Romberg sign and walking instability were evident as other proprioceptive alterations.
Magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the thoracolumbar spine exhibits a remarkable intramedullary isointense lesion on T1-W sequence expanding the thickness of the spinal cord and filum terminalis, a moderate homogenous enhancement was noticed after Gadolium injection . T2-W sequences confirmed an hyperintense lesion occupying almost the whole diameter of the spinal cord with foamy-like well-defined characteristics that extended from the superior border of Th11 to the inferior border of Th12, remarkable spinal cord, and filum terminalis vasogenic edema could be observed. Cranial syrinx was evident immediately adjacent to the tumor and extended from Th11 to Th4 with an important intramedullary cystic cavity [-].
The patient was scheduled to a Th9-Th12 laminectomy, tumor resection, and laminoplasty, which was performed under neurophysiological monitoring with motor evoked potentials (MEP’s) and microsurgical techniques. After identifying the posterior medullary sulcus and performing a midline myelotomy, we could observe a highly vascularized grayish lesion that was firmly attached to the ependymal walls. Despite having a firm texture, no clear plane of cleavage was evident except in its upper pole where a cystic cavity containing xanthochromic fluid was emerging. An estimated 95% resection of the tumor could be achieved with ultrasonic aspiration assistance without eventualities. Medullary pia was slightly closed just to juxtapose the posterior columns using 7–0 non-absorbable stitches and allowing the syrinx to drain into the subarachnoid compartment. While the tumor was manipulated, a moderate and transient decrease in MEP’s amplitude was detected, however progressive recovery of the registry allowed us to continue with the procedure. Postsurgical evolution was satisfactory and the patient did not show any increase of her previous neurological manifestations. After the 5th postoperative day, she was discharged from the hospital to her home under a physical therapy program for her legs. Tumor recurrence is discarded after 24 months of follow-up MRI .
For histological purposes, 3–4 μm-thick sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, finding an extensive proliferation of monotonic round to oval cells with clear fibrillary cytoplasm and large central round nucleus with indistinct nucleoli disposed in a diffuse pattern and scarce mitotic activity than normal tissues. Entrapped blood vessels showed moderate perivascular hyalinization and the presence of pseudorosettes suggesting; thus, the diagnosis of CCE without anaplasia . Immunohistochemical analysis results consisted in a strong positivity (3+) to anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) with a Ki67 (MIB-1) labeling index at 1%, and negative for both chromogranin A and anti-epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) antibodies .