The recipient was a 32 years old male (weight-90 kg, height − 165 cm, BMI-32 kg/m2) diagnosed with ethanol related ESLD, decompensated with jaundice, ascites, and hydrothorax (MELD Score- 34, CTP Score − 11/C) . He was evaluated as per our standard recipient evaluation protocol and placed on the deceased donor waiting list. Liver anatomy was evaluated by computed tomography (CT) triple phase abdomen which showed features of chronic liver disease with portal hypertension with a patent portal vein without any space occupying lesion in the liver. The patient was counselled for LDLT in view of a long waiting list for deceased donor liver transplant (DDLT). The patient needed dual lobe living donor liver graft due to inadequate partial liver graft volumes of individual donors.
Donors were found to be fit for donor hepatectomy after clinical examination and laboratory tests .
Hepatic Artery: Hepatic artery proper was dividing into the left hepatic artery (LHA) and right hepatic artery (RHA). RHA had an extra-hepatic length of 27 mm. Segment 4 artery was arising from LHA and there were no other accessory arteries identified . Portal Vein: Portal vein anatomy was Nakamura Type A . The length of right portal vein was 11 mm. The significant crossover of the portal drainage was absent. Hepatic Veins: Two inferior right hepatic veins measuring 4.1 mm and 4.5 mm in diameter were noted draining into inferior vena cava. Significant size segment V (3.4 mm) and VIII (2.8 mm) veins were draining into MHV . Bile Duct – Bile duct anatomy was Huang Type A4B1 .
Hepatic artery: Hepatic artery proper (HAP) was dividing into LHA and RHA. LHA was arising from HAP immediately at its origin and supplied segments 2 and 3. Segment 4 artery was arising from RHA . Portal Vein: Portal vein anatomy was Nakamura Type A . Segment 4 portal vein (measuring 4.4 mm) was arising from the left portal vein. No significant crossover of the drainage was noted. Hepatic veins: There was a short common channel between left hepatic vein (LHV) and Middle hepatic vein (MHV) measuring 5.8 mm in length . Left hepatic vein measured 6.5 mm near its ostium. A segment II/III vein measuring 9 mm in diameter was joined by segment III vein measuring 4.5 mm in diameter to form LHV. Another segment III vein (3 mm diameter) joined the LHV. Bile Duct – Bile duct anatomy was Huang Type A1B1 .
CT Volumetric analysis of either donor livers showed a relatively small right liver lobes and calculated graft recipient weight ratios (GRWR) were 0.63 and 0.62 respectively. As neither of the two probable donors were suitable as a single donor , the decision was made to perform LDLT using dual liver grafts. In this case, we chose the right liver lobe of Donor I together with the left lateral Sector of Donor II to get an adequate GRWR. Future liver remnants (FLR) were adequate in both donors (donor I − 39% and Donor II-70%).
Risks and benefits of the surgery were discussed and informed consents were obtained from both donors and recipient. Recipient and both donor surgeries were started simultaneously.
Surgical access was through a right sub-costal incision extended vertically in the midline till the xiphoid process. Recipient’s cirrhotic liver was explanted as per standard hepatectomy procedure. Recipient received a 10 mg/kg dose of injection methylprednisolone immediately after liver explantation.
Right lobe without MHV graft was harvested from Donor I after the division of right anterior and posterior sectoral ducts (RASD and RPSD), right hepatic artery (RHA), right portal vein (RPV), right hepatic vein (RHV), and right inferior hepatic vein (RIHV). Left lateral lobe graft was harvested from Donor II after the division of the left hepatic duct, left hepatic artery (LHA), left portal vein (LPV) and LHV.
Actual harvested graft weights were 503 g (right lobe without MHV graft) and 374 g (Left lateral sector graft) giving GRWRs of 0.55 and 0.41 respectively (Total GRWR 0.96) .
Operative time for Donor I and Donor II hepatectomy was 360 min and 310 min respectively with a blood loss of 450 ml and 370 ml.
Grafts were perfused with UW solution. As hepatic vein tributaries of segment V and VIII were less than 3.5 mm diameter, venous drainage of these segments was not established. In both grafts, no other back table reconstruction was needed.
The right lobe without MHV graft was orthotopically implanted on the right side of IVC. IVC was clamped using a side biting clamp. Cavotomy was performed at the orifice of RHV. Hepatic venous anastomosis Graft RHV was anastomosed to recipient IVC in an end to side manner with 5–0 polypropylene continuous suture. Graft RIHV was anastomosed to recipient IVC in an end to side manner with 6–0 polypropylene continuous suture. Portal Venous anastomosis Graft RPV was anastomosed to recipient RPV (end to end manner) using a 6–0 polypropylene continuous suture with appropriate growth factor. Graft reperfusion was immediate and uniform. Arterial anastomosis: Graft RHA anastomosed with recipient RHA with 8–0 polypropylene interrupted suture under three time’s magnification. After arterial reperfusion intra-operative doppler ultrasound showed regular portal venous, hepatic venous and hepatic arterial flow.
Hepatic venous anastomosis Graft LHV was anastomosed to cavotomy made on recipient IVC at the orifice of LHV and MHV (end to side manner) with 5–0 polypropylene continuous suture. Portal Venous anastomosis Graft LPV was anastomosed to recipient LPV (end to end manner) using a 6–0 polypropylene continuous suture Graft reperfusion was immediate and uniform. Arterial anastomosis: Graft LHA anastomosed with recipient segment IV hepatic artery with 8–0 polypropylene interrupted suture under three times magnification. After arterial reperfusion intra-operative doppler ultrasound showed regular portal venous, hepatic venous and hepatic arterial flow in the left lateral graft as well. Biliary anastomosis Number of graft ducts: two in right lobe graft (RASD and RPSD) and 1 in left lateral graft Number of anastomosis: 3 Anastomosis no 1: Graft RASD was anastomosed to the recipient right hepatic duct (RHD) with 6–0 Polydioxanone in an interrupted manner. Anastomosis 2: Graft RPSD to the recipient cystic duct anastomosed with 6–0 Polydioxanone in an interrupted manner. Anastomosis 3: Graft left hepatic duct (LHD) to the recipient LHD with 6–0 Polydioxanone in an interrupted manner. .
Recipient recovered well postoperatively. He received standard triple immunosuppressant. The patient was discharged on the eleventh postoperative day with normal liver graft function and good general condition.
Both donors recovered well postoperatively. They were discharged in good general condition and with normal liver function tests.
The recipient was followed up weekly for the first 2 months and then every monthly. During follow up the patient was examined clinically and by laboratory tests including liver function tests, renal function tests, and serum tacrolimus level. A radiological assessment of hepatic vasculature was done whenever indicated. The long-term outcome, evaluated after a 48-month follow-up, was optimal with normal graft function, good general condition and superior quality of life.