A 37 year-old United Arab Emaerite woman gravida 4, para 3, was referred to our emergency department, as a case of missed miscarriage following 14 weeks amenorrhea. The patient's obstetric history included three Cesarean sections last one 9 years back. The first Cesarean section was done at 7 month gestation due to placental abruption, the second was done for placenta previa and the third was done electively. The patient presented with history of lower abdominal pain and bleeding per vagina for the last 12 days. Vaginal examination revealed an enlarged uterus of 8 weeks size that is slightly tender on movement. The cervical os was closed with no vaginal bleeding. Trans-abdominal ultrasound in transverse scan shows enlarged uterus, empty uterine cavity and cervical canal and a gestational sac (4.57 × 4.36 cm) situated in the lower part of the anterior uterine wall at the site of the Cesarean section scar. In a longitudinal scan the sac is seen protruding through the anterior uterine wall and pushing towards the bladder with a thin layer of myometrium (0.8 cm thick) separating them. A non viable embryonic echo was observed inside the sac measuring 3.5 cm at Crown Rump Length (CRL) corresponding to 10 weeks plus three day gestation. No fluid was seen in the cul-de-sac. With these ultrasound criteria present an ectopic implantation in the previous Cesarean section scar was considered. The mother was counselled regarding the treatment options, but due the possibility of prolonged follow up period with medical treatment she preferred to go for surgical intervention.
A laparotomy was performed with Pfannenstiel incision under general anesthesia. The bladder was adherent to the lower part of the uterus so the peritoneum was incised and the bladder was dissected down to the cervix. The gestational sac was seen bulging and thinning out the uterine wall anteriorly at the scar site . Most of the scar was in fact disrupted except for a thin layer of fibro-muscular tissue. When this layer was gently incised the sac bulged out with its bluish color . Approximately 4-5 cm intact gestational sac was delivered followed by a placental tissue. The implantation of the ectopic pregnancy caused dehiscence of the previous Cesarean section scar. A trial to identify the cervical canal by retrograde probing was not easy as there was a thin layer of uterine tissue separating the implantation site from the uterine cavity. When this layer was overcome a communication was created between the implantation site and the uterine cavity. The dehiscent scar was then repaired, haemostasis was assured and bilateral tubal ligation was done according the request of the patient and her husband. The estimated blood loss was less than 500 ml and there was no need for blood transfusion. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 5.