A 52-year-old female patient was admitted to hospital with pale skin and numbness of the left second to fifth fingers.
The patient’s symptoms started unprovoked about 1 d before when she rose in the morning. The left hand swelled quickly and showed a clear oblique blood supply boundary line . Thus, the patient attended the emergency department.
The patient had no other medical history but was an asymptomatic carrier of hepatitis B virus for nearly 10 years. The patient had no history of hypertension or type 2 diabetes.
The patient married at a young age and had two daughters as well as no history of vascular thrombosis and pregnancy morbidity.
The patient’s vital signs were stable and oxygen saturation in room air was 99%, but left digital oxygen saturation was not detectable by the finger pulse oximeter. The skin temperature of the left second to fifth fingers decreased. The pulse of the left radial artery could be felt, but not that of the ulnar artery.
Blood analysis during hospitalization showed a persistent mild to medium thrombocytopenia, with normal red blood cell and white blood cell. The changes in platelet count during hospitalization are presented in Figure . D-dimer was increased at 0.82 mg/L, with normal prothrombin time, international normalized ratio, fibrinogen, and activated partial thromboplastin time. Serum C-reactive protein was also normal and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was at 36 mm/h. Serological tests for human immunodeficiency virus and syphilis were negative. Serum complement and immunoglobulins were abnormal. aPL testing showed positive results: High titer (> 120 GPLU/mL) IgG anticardiolipin (aCL) antibodies, high titer (57 APLU/mL) IgA aCL, high titer (> 200 AU/mL) IgG anti-β2-glycoprotein-I (anti-β2 GPI), and high titer (90.10 AU/mL) IgA anti-β2 GPI. However, IgM aCL (4.24 MPLU/mL) and IgM anti-β2 GPI (2 AU/mL) were normal. Antinuclear antibody was also positive. However, lupus anticoagulant (LA) and Coombs’ test were negative. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen and CA 19-9 were within normal limits. However, serum a-fetoprotein level was dramatically increased to 1210 ng/mL. Electrocardiography and chest X-ray were normal. The laboratory values are shown in Table .
Arteriovenous color Doppler ultrasound of the upper extremity revealed that the blood flow signal of the proper digital artery was poor. The left upper brachial artery was further evaluated with computed tomography (CT) angiography. The latter revealed uneven thickness at the bifurcation of the left ulnar artery with severe local lumen stenosis, leading to slender branches, delayed imaging, and light imaging. It suggested that digital necrosis was mainly caused by a decrease in blood supply. Left hand X-ray showed no obvious bone destruction. On abdominal CT, dimensions of the liver were normal but contours were irregular. There were several mass lesions that appeared as mixed contrast in the arterial phase and lost their contrast in the portal venous phase . Color Doppler ultrasound in the abdomen showed liver cirrhosis with multiple solid masses in the liver, and high enhancement in the arterial phase .