A 72-years-old Caucasian Greek male patient presented with epigastric pain of low intensity, jaundice and loss of appetite for the past 30 days. The patient was a heavy smoker (50 cig/day) and consumed alcohol (wine) occasionally, in small quantities. Physical examination revealed a distressed male patient with a body temperature of 37°C, blood pressure of 130/85 mmHg and pulse rate about 85/min. Painless jaundice was the presenting symptom and Courvoisier sign was present. The patient had no sings of ascites, or gastrointestinal obstruction. Hematocrit was 31%, white blood cells 10630/μL with neutrophil prevalence 77% and platelets 341.000/μL. Biochemical profile showed Tbil: 7.50 mg/dl, Dbil: 5.50 mg/dl, SGOT: 109 U/L, SGPT: 145 U/L, γGT: 517 U/L, ALP: 467 U/L, LDH: 503 U/L, CA125: 244, 50 U/L, CA19.9: 51.30 U/L. The patient was receiving digoxin and warfarin for chronic atrial fibrillation. Thin section computer tomography showed dilatation of the gallbladder and intra/extrahepatic biliary tree, while a 5 cm mass of the uncinate process of the pancreas was identified to invade the intrapancreatic portion of the bile duct, as well as the 2nd and 3rd portion of the duodenum . There was no extrapancreatic disease, no extension to the superior mesenteric artery and celiac axis. The superior mesenteric-portal confluence was patent. The decision for surgical intervention was taken, and a pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed after exploratory laparoscopy. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and discharged on the 11th day.
Histological evaluation of the pancreatic tumor showed an adenosquamous carcinoma which was extensively infiltrative with perineural invasion, involvement of peripancreatic lymph nodes and all the thickness of the duodenum wall. The tumor elicited an intense desmoplastic stromal reaction and areas of necrosis . Focal areas of high grade pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia were seen. The tumor exhibited a biphasic malignant growth identified as, well to moderate differentiated adenocarcinoma and well to poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma . The adenocarcinoma component contained ductal or glandular structures with focal intracellular or extracellular mucin . Squamous differentiation was characterized by irregular and infiltrative nests or sheets of polygonal cells with distinct cellular borders, intercellular bridges, eosiniphilic cytoplasm and varying degrees of keratinization . These two different patterns could be seen separated topographically within the substance of the tumor or intimately admixed. Six of the 15 resected lymph nodes were positive for metastatic tumor which was composed of squamous carcinoma only .
The immunohistochemical study showed that the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1 and AE2. Cam 5.2 and Ker 7 were reactive predominantly in the adenocarcinoma component and in few squamous cells . Immunoreactivity for CK 5/6 was restricted to the squamous component, while the glandular component was negative . A few number of tumor cells were immunoreactive with CEA and Ca 19-9. All tumor cells were negative for Ker 20, chromogranin and synaptophysin.
The patient received adjuvant therapy (5-FU in combination with radiation). He received 40 Gy in two 20 - Gy courses and 500 mg per m2 5-FU by intravenous bolus delivered daily for the initial 3 days of each radiation course and then weekly. The patient 24 months postoperatively, remains disease free.