A 57-year-old man with a history of chondrosarcoma of the Os sacrum was treated 1985 by a R1 resection at another institution. To support stabilization, implantation of an Universal Spine System (USS, Synthes, Inc., West Chester, PA) was followed by osteosynthesis of L4/pelvis and additional spongiosaplasty with fibula chips. Post-operatively neutron irradiation was started due to intralesional surgical margins. Ten years later (1995), the patient developed a fulminant osteomyelitis ending up with soft tissue defect of 38 × 26 cm. Following radical debridement with removal of both iliac crests, the fibula chips and the USS system. After extended wound treatment a new USS system with fixation at the arcus root of L4, L5 and the lateral mass of the sacrum was implanted for stabilization of the sacrum. The large lumbal soft tissue defect with exposed vertebrae and hardware was covered with a free flap. For vascular supply the complete saphenous vein graft (76 cm long) was served as an arterio-venous loop and was anastomosed end-to-side to the superficial femoral artery as previously described . The large wound was covered with a latissimus dorsi free-flap and anastomosed to the AV-loop . After uneventful postoperative period the patient could be discharged and the wound conditions have remained stable for over 10 years with a small fluid drainage from a cephalic sinus.
In 2004 the patient presented with a recurrent inguinal hernia on the left side outside of our sarcoma center. The Shouldice repair of his hernia was uneventful. Three weeks after the operation hematological laboratory findings and blood chemistry values showed signs of infection. A CT-scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a massive inflammatory infiltrate with air trapping contiguous to a large abscess in the right iliacal muscle (7 × 5 cm) and a collateral infiltrate of the psoas muscle. Additionally extended osseous destructions of the sacrum were documented. To differentiate between postoperative defects, the previously diagnosed sequestrating chronic osteomyelitis or a possible relapse of his chondrosarcoma was hardly possible . After antibiotic treatment of a urinary tract infection the patient developed an antiobiotic-associated diarrhea. The patient was then referred to us for further therapy of his life threatening hematogenous dissemination of bacteria from his multiple abscesses. By the time of referral in addition to the previously described ilacal and psoas abscesses he had developed an active discharging praesternal/mediastinal abscess and bilateral intracarpal infections. The abscesses were surgically drained and a bacterial smear revealed Escherichia coli in massive numbers. Antibiotic therapy was initiated with Imipenem and Metronidazol. Methylene blue dye was injected into the sacral fistulas, and multiple fistulectomys and a sequestrectomy were performed .
After ensuring sufficient dorsal drainage a gastrographin enema was performed to determine the site of a possible gastrointestinal perforation which was suspected as a possible source of infection. The contrast medium was shown to be leaking from the ascending colon and the caecum into the iliacal and psoas muscle, reaching to the sacral lacunae . A right hemicolectomy was performed. During the operation a perforation of the dorsal wall and the basis of the caecum were found. After clearing out a fecal abscess drainage was established and covered by split omentum-plasty followed by multiple rinses, using polymeric biguanide-hydrochloride (Lavasept®, Fresenius Kabi AG, Bad Homburg, Germany). Additionally the sacral and praesternal abscesses were once more debrided in the operating room. The right ureter was adherent to the abscess formation and was mobilized. Postoperatively the patient was referred to an intensive care unit. The bilateral septic inflammations of the carpal joints were successfully treated with high dose antibiotics after surgical excision and drainage (Imipenem and Metronidazol). After multiple irrigations of the large wounds and decreasing inflammation, granulation tissue developed. In order to further minimize the dead space of the large wounds, microdeformational wound therapy by means of Vacuum Assisted Closure (V.A.C.-Therapy®, KCI Medizinprodukte GmbH, Wiesbaden, Germany) was applied to the bilateral sacral wounds. Despite four weeks of intensive care his latissimus dorsi free flap was saved and the patient was discharged with wounds showing no signs of infection and a tendency towards good granulation . A control MRI in 2008 showed a stable fistula with no signs of recurrence.
Universal Spine System (USS, Synthes, Inc., West Chester, PA)
Polymeric biguanide-hydrochloride (Lavasept®, Fresenius Kabi AG, Bad Homburg, Germany)
Vacuum Assisted Closure (V.A.C.-Therapy®, KCI Medizinprodukte GmbH, Wiesbaden, Germany)