An 83-year-old woman presented with severe abdominal pain and nausea at the emergency department of the hospital. She had undergone sigmoidectomy, followed by total mastectomy of the left breast 2 years ago. Pathological examination revealed that each lesion was a primary cancer; the colon cancer was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (pT4aN0M0), whereas the breast cancer was an invasive ductal carcinoma with apocrine differentiation (pT2N1M0). After mastectomy, she received follow-up care, which included six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil. In the emergency room, she was treated with scopolamine butylbromide because abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed mild dilation of the small intestine ; she went home showing no symptoms. The next day, she returned to the hospital with relapse of the abdominal symptoms. The in-house radiological department noticed that the previous CT images showed an obstructed ileus arising from the nodule detected on a 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scan 3 months ago . No postoperative adhesion or constriction seemed to be related to the bowel obstruction. Radiological findings and history led to the diagnosis of small bowel obstruction due to the mural nodule, which probably recurred from the colon or breast cancer. Subsequently, she was admitted to the digestive surgery department and received laparoscopy-assisted small bowel resection.
Macroscopically, the resected small intestine was found to contain an ulcerated tumor , which was located 170 cm from the ligament of Treitz. Slices of the tumor suggested that the estimated tumor depth was up to the serosal surface of the intestinal wall . Histologically, infiltrative growth of colonic dysplastic glands was observed . Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were diffusely positive for tumor protein 53 (p53) , caudal-type homeobox 2 (CDX2) and special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2 (SATB2) , positive for cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and negative for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), androgen receptor (AR) , gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15), estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Collectively, these findings were indicative of intestinal rather than mammary gland differentiation of the tumor cells. Thus, this lesion seemed to be compatible with metastatic colon cancer, albeit its gross and histological appearance mimicking primary small intestinal cancer.
To investigate the origin of the cancer cells, we reviewed the preparation of the past surgical specimens. The immunohistochemical findings of the small intestinal, colon, and breast cancer are summarized in Table .
The breast cancer specimen consisted of glandular and nested cells with high-grade nuclear atypia and eosinophilic granule-containing abundant cytoplasm . Immunohistochemically, the breast cancer cells were diffusely positive for AR and GCDFP-15 , positive for CK7 , weakly and partially positive for p53 , and negative for CK20, CDX2, SATB2 , ER, PgR, and HER2. On the other hand, the colon cancer was an ulcerated tumor with diffuse bowel wall thickening . The histology of the tumor was compatible with typical colonic adenocarcinoma . Furthermore, the immunohistochemical findings of colon cancer were quite similar with those of small intestinal cancer, except for Ki-67 expression .
As a similar abnormal p53 immunophenotype was found between the small intestinal cancer and the colon cancer , we analyzed the TP53 mutation status of these two tumors by direct sequencing, as described previously with minor modifications [–]. Consistent with the immunohistochemical findings, both cancers harbored an identical missense mutation, which was located on the codon 211 of the TP53 gene . Therefore, we concluded that the small intestinal cancer in the present case was a metastatic adenocarcinoma arising from a past colon cancer.
Additional molecular tests were then performed in order to check the status of colon cancer biomarkers in the relapsed lesion. A PCR-based RAS/BRAF genetic test revealed KRAS G12D mutation in the small intestinal tumor, whereas the microsatellite instability test rendered a negative result. Owing to these results, we decided to investigate the genetic status of the KRAS gene in the three cancers by direct sequencing . Consistent with the previous molecular findings, both the small intestinal and colon cancer specimens harbored the G12D mutation, whereas the breast cancer specimen only harbored wild type alleles .
The patient is alive and under watchful waiting, 18 months after the last surgery.