Our patient, a primigravida 30-year-old Caucasian woman, noted an enlargement of her left breast, associated with an asymptomatic lump during the first trimester of her pregnancy but she only reported the finding to her doctor during the third trimester. She reported no history of breast cancer in her family and no personal history of breast pathology or any other remarkable medical facts. She had received no hormonal treatment in the past. Physical examination revealed a retroareolar lump, moderately deforming the skin profile in the upper quadrants of the left breast and soft in consistency. The mass was not fixed to the chest wall, but the overlying skin was slightly retracted. No regional adenopathy in the axillary and supraclavicular basins was detected.
A first ultrasound evaluation, performed during the last weeks of gestation, demonstrated a retroareolar hypoecoic heterogeneous solid mass, with regular margins, an oval configuration and measuring 3·7 cm. On Doppler sonography, a large number of vascular branches inside the lesion and a slight posterior acoustic enhancement were detected . Axillary lymph nodes appeared to be normal. After delivery, she began to breast-feed, but only from her right breast, since no milk could be elicited from the breast containing the mass. A repeat ultrasound on postpartum day three revealed a slight increase in the size of the mass (4 × 1·7 cm).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then performed, using a 1·5 T MRI system and a dedicated breast coil. The imaging was obtained before and after intravenous administration of gadolinium, using SPGR and STIR sequences, completed by MIP and MPR reconstructions. The high-resolution images after contrast medium showed dense breast tissue with diffuse enhancement, and a marked asymmetry between the two sides due to the asymmetrical lactation. The left breast showed much less blood flow and permeability compared to the contralateral breast, while the mass, containing ipointense septa, was seen displacing the normal breast parenchyma and the nipple-areolar complex inferiorly, compressing almost completely the galactiferous ducts, which appeared slightly widened in the inferior part of the gland .
The overall aspect of the lesion was considered benign, highly suggestive for giant fibroadenoma, but an open surgical biopsy was advised by the radiologist.
A percutaneous fine needle biopsy was then proposed, but the patient refused; the intervention was planned approximately 2 months after delivery, under local anaesthesia. A periareolar superior approach was performed and the mass was removed trying not to interrupt the surrounding galactiferous ducts displaced and narrowed by the lesion. By remodelling the gland, the normal shape of the breast was restored .
At excisional biopsy, the mass appeared brown in colour, well circumscribed, with a lobulated surface, measuring 3·5 × 2·5 × 2·5 cm. Microscopically, a proliferation of benign ducts separated by sparse intervening stroma with preservation of lobular architecture was found.
Within 10 days of the surgery, a small amount (approximately 10 cc/die) of milky serum was drained through the surgical wound; 1 week later, the secretion stopped without any sequela on the scarring and subsequent healing of the breast and the patient continued to breast-feed for the next 6 months after surgery.