A healthy 23-year-old female presented with increased gingival display (>7 mm) during maximum smiling. She was diagnosed with a class II skeletal dentofacial deformity due to an increase in the lower facial height and a high mandibular angle. She had no significant medical problems in the past. No drug history or relevant genetic or psychological abnormalities were reported. Upon physical examination, the patient had a Mallampati-I airway, and her mental-hyoid distance and mouth opening were normal. She weighed 71 kg and was 1.78 m tall (BMI, 22.4 kg/m2). Intraorally, she presented with generalized mild periodontal Class II dental occlusion. Preoperative evaluation revealed that her blood pressure was 110/80, and her heart and lung examinations (electrocardiogram and chest radiography) were normal.
A single jaw osteotomy was planned for the case, resulting in a maxillary differential impaction of 6 mm anteriorly with partial inferior turbinectomy, and autorotation was applied to the mandible to correct her mandibular prominence.
Preoperatively, in the waiting area, the patient received 2 mg of midazolam. After routine monitoring, rapid sequence induction of general anaesthesia was performed with intravenous fentanyl, lidocaine, and propofol. Following tracheal intubation, a 9 French thermistor temperature probe (Model VER400-9, VHA Inc., Irving, TX, USA) was inserted approximately 12 cm into the nasopharynx.
The surgery started by marking the reference point using a K-wire near the nasal bone. Then, consecutive measurements were taken from the orthodontic brace to the reference point. Then, two incisions were made 6 mm superior and inferior into the maxillary bone at the left I level. The incisions were achieved using a surgical saw and a handheld motor (Stryker, Germany). The incisions started at the lateral nasal wall, passed the pyriform area, extended back to the pterygomaxillary buttress and reached the junction.
This step was followed by a maxillary down-fracture with a pterygomaxillary disjunction using a curved Obwegeser osteotome; no difficulties or injuries occurred. An inferior turbinectomy was performed bilaterally. After achieving the desired occlusion guided by a surgical stent, the bone was fixed using two plates and 6 screws on each side at the buttress (pyriform and pterygomaxillary). A cinch suture was placed at the alar base to maintain the inter alar distance, followed by soft tissue suture for the surgical sites using 3/0 Vicryl suture material.
After maintenance inhalational anaesthesia was stopped, the patient was given 100% oxygen. The throat pack was removed by the surgeon with proper Yankauer suctioning of the oropharynx. The surgery was performed by a senior consultant and senior and junior residents in the department. The patient was extubated, and the shortened nasopharyngeal temperature probe was not observed upon removal from the other nostril. The patient was transferred to another ward without any complications.
On the second postoperative day, the patient started to complain of mild throat discomfort on the lateral side and occasional cough. She was encouraged to follow an oral fluid diet. The patient tolerated the surgical procedure well and was discharged on the 2nd day after surgery without any other complaint except for mild cough and throat discomfort. After one week, the patient returned with increasingly severe symptoms of cough and throat pain, which were very irritating to the patient. The patient was referred for endoscopic evaluation to explore her pharynx. The endoscopic report was negative and showed a normal supraglottic area and an unremarkable laryngeal examination.
The patient was monitored closely with a frequent follow-up. At two weeks postoperatively, the patient was interviewed in the outpatient clinic, and she still complained of mild discomfort in her neck while speaking and inhaling, and she described feeling a foreign body. Three weeks after surgery, the patient started regular food habits, and the discomfort persisted. She reported one attack of a severe cough and concomitant vomiting where she noticed that a long plastic-covered object came out of her mouth . Close inspection of the item confirmed our diagnosis; it had a bevelled cut end and was 12 cm long, indicating that it was part of the nasopharyngeal temperature probe. The inspection confirmed that it had been cut during the inferior turbinectomy procedure and that it was probably dislodged in the lateral pharyngeal wall for a long time without any remarkable gag reflex.
The patient immediately felt relief from the irritating symptoms in her throat. The patient was sent for PA chest X-ray radiography, which showed no remarkable findings. The patient’s follow-up course was uneventful, and she was satisfied with the result of the surgery. She was discharged after an 18-month follow-up period.