A 76-year-old male was referred in 2014 with a 6-month history of progressively worsening right foot drop and balance impairment. He had a previous history of abdominal sarcoma treated with surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy in 1980. He had no neurological symptoms at that time.
Neurologic examination was normal except for 2/5 strength in the right tibialis anterior and 1/5 strength in the right extensor hallucis longus. Light touch and vibration sensations were intact. Straight leg raise test was negative, and there were no pathological reflexes. The initial MRI showed numerous small (2–3 mm), contrast-enhancing intrathecal lesions involving the cauda equina nerve roots at the levels of the L2 and L3 vertebrae . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed elevated protein of 273 mg/dL and glucose of 60 mg/dL with 7 RBCs/μL and 3 WBCs/μL without carcinomatous cells. Multiple CSF studies and cultures ruled out viral, fungal, and bacterial infections. Repeat CSF cytology did not show malignant cells.
Three months after initial evaluation, the MRI was repeated and appeared stable. The patient underwent L2-L3 laminoplasty with intradural exploration for suspected leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. Intraoperative ultrasound revealed multiple hyperdensities along the cauda equina in the exposed field. The dura and arachnoid were opened under magnification, and the subarachnoid space and cauda equina were examined. Multiple small, mulberry-like nodularlesions associated with dilated vessels were discovered to be intimately involved with the cauda equina . A biopsy was not possible due to the close association of the vascular lesions with the nerve roots. There was no evidence of tumor, infection, or arachnoiditis.
The patient was conservatively managed with bedrest, opiates and muscle relaxants and was discharged home with physical and occupational therapy. Spinal angiogram performed at three months and at two years post-operatively showed no abnormal findings. An aortogram was also performed to ensure that no other feeding vessels were identified because of the concern that his prior radiation could have induced stenosis of the vascular supply. This study was also negative. Postoperative MRI was repeated at 6 months, 9 months, and 2 years with stable appearance of the vascular malformations. His current functional status is that he still has the right foot drop and some mild distal weakness on his left.