A 6-year-old boy who was the front passenger in an automobile accident was brought to the hospital by an ambulance and presented with vomiting and abdominal pain. The patient underwent a pan CT without contrast, showing small right-sided parietal subdural hematoma and free fluid in the peritoneal cavity. The patient was then transferred to King Salman Hospital for further management. On arrival at the hospital, the patient was fully conscious, tachycardic, and had generalized abdominal pain. After initial resuscitation, an abdominal CT scan with contrast showed free fluid in the peritoneal cavity with pneumoperitoneum . All solid viscera were intact, but there was a radiological impression of duodenal perforation [, ]. The patient did not have a history of drug use or a significant family history.
The patient underwent exploratory surgery immediately by the attending surgeon. After initial optimization, the intra-operative findings consisted of approximately 500 ml of free intra-abdominal blood and a nasogastric tube (NGT) protruding outside the stomach [, ]. It was found that the first duodenal segment was completely transected from the pylorus with healthy margins, and a 90% transection between the 3rd part of the duodenum (D3) and 4th part of the duodenum (D4) was seen with healthy margins. After abdominal irrigation with normal saline, primary anastomoses for the first part of the duodenum with pyloric exclusion were performed. Then, primary repair with controlled fistula for the second transection at D3 and D4 and a gastrojejunostomy were performed. Three abdominal drains were placed, one subhepatic, one paraduodenal, and one pelvic. A size 10 Foley's catheter was placed for a controlled fistula in the second part of the duodenal repair.
The patient was transferred postoperatively to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) at King Saud Medical City. On arrival, he had some confusion and vision problems, for which a CT scan of the brain was performed. The CT scan showed a stable small right-sided parietal subdural hematoma. The patient had also developed a partial collapse of the right upper lobe, which improved with assisted ventilation. The patient was treated by maintaining nothing by mouth (NPO), total parenteral nutrition (TPN), intravenous (IV) antibiotics, and replacing the drain fluid. The total drain output of all the four drainages was initially between 210 and 230 ml/day, which gradually decreased over ten days. Likewise, NGT output was around 250 ml/day and gradually reduced to a minimum over ten days. During the course of the illness, the patient had elevated serum amylase on the third postoperative day. In addition, an ultrasound (US) abdomen was performed, showing minimal peri-pancreatic fluid with pancreatic thickening and mild dilatation of the pancreatic duct, suggestive of acute pancreatitis. The patient improved clinically with conservative treatment within a week with a reduction in serum amylase to normal levels.
The contrast meal follow-through was performed with no evidence of contrast leakage or obstruction. Oral feeding resumed ten days postoperatively. The patient had a laparotomy wound infection with wound dehiscence, which was repaired after the infection resolved and the wound culture and sensitivity swab was negative. The patient was discharged with no further complaints.