We present a 70-year-old woman, with no relevant familial history, who presented with a 3-day symptomatology consisting of epigastric, colic, diffuse, abdominal pain, of moderate intensity, which progressed till reaching a severe intensity, also referring abdominal distension, nausea, and 4 gastrointestinal-content vomits. Upon physical examination at arrival, the patient was found conscious, oriented, with skin paleness, poorly hydrated; thorax with adequate vesicular murmur, without wheezing or rattles, adequate amplexion and amplexation, cardiac sounds with only S1 and S2, without aggregated sounds; soft, distended abdomen, with increased-frequency peristalsis, diffuse pain upon palpation, and rebound tenderness (Blumberg sign); and adequate peripheral pulses.
While in the Emergency Room, laboratorial tests reported values of hemoglobin at 16.7 g/dL, 51.2% hematocrit, 551,000 mm−3 platelets, 23,800 mm−3 leukocytes, 88% neutrophilia, and blood chemistry within normal parameters. Because of the frank leukocytosis and signs of acute abdomen, a computed abdomen tomography (CT) was performed, with reported findings suggesting ileo-colic intussusception, with a tumoral image of pedicle aspect adjacent to the terminal ileum, with probable secondary intestinal oclusion, nodular images of unknown origin on the liver, and Bosniak category I cystic images on the right kidney .
Considering this CT result, coagulation times and tumor markers (CEA, AFP, CA 125, and CA 19–9) were submitted, finding normal results.
The patient was submitted to an exploratory laparotomy, with findings of a 6 cm tumor on the ileo-caecal segment, responsible for an intussusception of that segment, as well as multiple bilateral hepatic metastases . A radical right hemicolectomy, with resection of the terminal ileum tumor (20 cm), and side-to-side ileotransverse anastomosis was performed, in addition to a hepatic biopsy.
The surgical samples were sent to Pathology department, which reported a massive, ileo-caecal, transmural, classical carcinoid tumor, with extension to pericaecal tissues (confined tumor of 6 cm × 4 cm × 4 cm) and accentuated ileo-caecal valve and caecum stenosis, metastatic carcinoid in 2 of 14 ileo-caecal lymph nodes, and metastatic carcinoid of a less differentiated morphology in the hepatic biopsy .
After surgery, chromogranin A levels were measured and the results were reported in the normal range. The patient was referred to the oncologist for the follow up of the liver metastases, with medical treatment during eighteen months. Until today the patient is clinically stable, with normal levels of CgA and without new hepatic lesions or changes of the known ones.