A 9-year-old boy injured his right knee in a fall while riding a motorcycle. He complained of pain and swelling, and was admitted to our hospital 7 days after the incident. Detailed physical examination was difficult to carry out due to the pain. Plain radiography did not reveal femoral avulsion fracture of the PCL. X-ray images of the right knee showed a displaced femoral avulsion fracture of the PCL . On the magnetic resonance image (MRI), a bony avulsion of the PCL was observed at the femoral insertion and a meniscus tear was found in the body of medial meniscus . An arthroscopy examination of the knee joint was performed 14 days after the injury.
Anesthesia and Position. General anesthesia was executed in the operation with the patient being placed in a dorsal position. His right knee showed a positive result of posterior drawer test under general anesthesia, and >1 cm posterior sagging was observed in comparison with the left knee.
A thigh tourniquet was typically used to control bleeding and improve visualization. Routine anterolateral and anteromedial portals were created for intraarticular surgery. The arthroscopic view was obtained from an anterolateral portal. Hematoma and large blood clots in the joint were carefully removed to expose the femoral avulsion fracture of the PCL. Partial synovectomy was performed to ensure adequate visualization and facilitate the reduction of the avulsed bone fragment into its bed.
Meniscus tear was identified and probed with a small metal hook . There was no damage to the articular cartilage or substance of the ACL. The fracture fragment, which was approximately 1 cm × 1 cm in size , restricted full flexion of the knee, and was attached with all the fibers of the PCL in the notch. This loose fragment was separated from the medial femoral condyle. Corresponding defect in the medial femoral condyle was found .
The radial tear in the body of medial meniscus was repaired with the Fastfix meniscus repair device before reduction of the femoral avulsion fracture . Then, the fragment was probed and elevated, allowing the surgeon to inspect any comminution that might influence reduction or fixation. Two tunnels were drilled by using a 2-mm K-wire toward the medial epicondyle (one from the upper inner area of the fracture edge and another from the outside area of the fracture edge) while sparing the epiphyseal plate, and a guide pin connected with a double stranded looped PDS was inserted into the anterolateral portal. The guide pin was then removed. Thereafter, two strands of No. 2 Ultrabraid sutures (Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA) were placed into the joint and the sutures were crossed from the back of the PCL to the front. The white suture loop was pulled through the PDS loop out of the anteromedial portal with a line grasping forceps. A 2-cm-long medial incision was then made and the white sutures were pulled into the incision by the double-stranded, looped PDS . Finally, the avulsed PCL was reduced in 90° of knee flexion and the sutures were tightened and tied onto the medial condylar bone surface . We regard this kind of suture technique as the “figure-of-eight” suture, as it visually resembles the shape of the numeral “8” .
After the surgery, the patient was required to wear a plaster cast for 2 weeks to heal the fracture , and functional exercises were enabled after removing the plaster cast. Early recovery of muscle strength was encouraged for the first 6 weeks, and full weight bearing was allowed at 6 weeks postoperatively. The follow-up time points were specified as 1, 3, 12, and 24 months after operation. The main contents of follow-up include symptom evaluation, stability, joint range of motion, and complications.
The operation lasted for about 90 min with a total bleeding loss of about 15 ml. It was found that the osteochondral fracture was stable in full range of motion (ROM) after being fixed, the articular surface had recovered its smoothness under arthroscopy, and the PCL reattachment held tension on testing . A posterior draw-sign was attempted, which showed a negative result. No major perioperative complications were reported during the study period.
At 1 month postoperative, the pain and claudication symptoms had completely disappeared. Flexion of the knee was approximately 110° at 1 month , 125° at 2 months , 140° at 3 months , and recovered to normal at 24 months after surgery. At 3-month follow-up, the patient had returned to normal life activities without pain or restrictions, and the Lysholm score had been improved from 31 points preoperatively to 84 points. Meanwhile, physical examination showed a negative sign of posterior drawer test, and MRI demonstrated consolidation of osteochondral fragment . Neither bone tunnels nor sutures passed through the epiphysis. At 12-month and 24-month follow-up, the patient feedback was that he was satisfied with the operation outcome.
Forty-six similar cases were found from the literature search and six cases involving femoral attachment avulsion fractures in children were retained (an overview was given in Table ).