A 38 year-old male referred from the Nephrology unit in July 2019 for testing for alterations in collagen genes. The patient, with chronic kidney disease (CKD) attributed to basement membrane disease, underwent transplantation in 2014 and subsequently developed hearing loss. Without a relevant familial history, he was the only child of nonconsanguineous parents
At 3 years, he had low-grade fever and was diagnosed with asymptomatic urinary tract infection. At 4 years, he had two urinary tract infections with microhematuria and low-grade fever. At 5 years, the patient had recurrent tonsillitis and some episodes of dysfunctional voiding with microhematuria. From 5 years of age, the patient had recurrent macroscopic hematurias. Urine sediments contained granular casts and granular red blood cell casts with a high percentage of dysmorphic erythrocytes. Kidney biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulopathy. Recurrent hematurias and nephrotic-range proteinurias persisted, with normal renal function .
Subsequent radiological studies showed signs of kidney disease, highlighting a megalic spleen with ectasia of the return vessels and an adenomatous/hyperplastic image. At kidney level, bilateral renal cortical hyperdensity was observed. At 29 years, despite treatment, the patient exhibited a progressive reduction of glomerular filtration and proteinuria. A repeat renal biopsy was performed including an ultrastructural study. Histological analysis showed thinning of the basement membrane of the glomeruli in the kidneys and images of splitting consistent with inherited kidney disease. The disease progressed into CKD confirmed by ultrasound (kidneys with preserved morphology and diminished corticomedullary differentiation). In a context of CKD progression and availability of a donor (his 65 year-old father, who did not show signs of kidney disease), the patient underwent kidney transplantation from a related living donor, with improvement of kidney function .
In 2020, upon request of his nephrologist, targeted exome sequencing was performed in DNA extracted from an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) peripheral blood sample by NGS (NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain) to test for potential variants in a panel of 10 genes associated with Alport syndrome and other syndromes for differential diagnosis (BSND, COL4A1, COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5, COL4A6, GATA3, MYH9, NPHS1, and NPHS2). The variants identified were collated with the information contained in specific databases of other variants associated with a known phenotype (HGMD, ClinVar) and in databases of population frequencies (dbSNP, Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD), 1000 Genome Project, NHLBI-ESP 6500 exomes). Additionally, the pathogenicity of the identified variants was estimated using eight prediction tools included in ANNOVAR (SIFT, PolyPhen2, LRT, MutationTaster, MutationAssessor, FATHMM, MetaSVM, and CONDEL) software and two additional (PROVEAN and Align GVGD) software packages for missense variants. To analyze gene conservation across species, sequence alignment was performed to compare nine amino acid sequences reported in collagen α3 (IV) chains of different species.
Genetic testing and segregation analysis revealed that the patient was compound heterozygote for two missense variants (trans configuration) in COL4A3: A likely pathogenic variant c.4981C>T (p.Arg1661Cys) in exon 52 inherited from the mother (described elsewhere), and another variant of uncertain significance, c.943G>A (p.Gly315Ser), in exon 17 inherited from the father that has not been previously reported in the literature or found in relevant databases . The c.4981C>T (p.Arg1661Cys) variant was recorded in the HGMD database (CM014049) as associated with AS. Likewise, this variant had been previously included in the ClinVar database (Variation ID: 287915), with an interpretation conflict between pathogenic, likely pathogenic, and variant of uncertain significance. The c.943G>A (p.Gly315Ser) variant had not been recorded as associated with any specific phenotype.