A 43-year-old woman consulted the Centre for Ophthalmic Specialised Care (COS) in Lausanne, Switzerland, because of bilateral decreased visual acuity, photophobia, and eye tenderness. One month earlier she had started to experience headaches, increased scalp sensitivity, neck stiffness and a red eyes treated with drops containing an antibiotic and dexamethasone for two weeks. We saw the patient 5 weeks after the prodromal symptoms. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was reduced to 0.7 (OD) and 0.8 (OS) (Snellen chart). Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 9 mmHg ODS. Significant non-granulomatous anterior chamber inflammation was noted with laser flare photometry (LFP) values of 137.5 ph/ms OD and 148.2 ph/ms OS (normal values 4–6 ph/ms) and there were 1+ (OD) and 2+ (OS) cells in the vitreous. Optical coherence tomography showed retinal folds and subretinal fluid and enhanced depth imaging OCT (EDI-OCT) showed such an increased choroidal thickness that no measurement was possible . Fluorescein Angiography (FA) showed exudative retinal detachments which were also seen on Indocyanine angiography (ICGA) that also showed numerous hypofluorescent dark dots (HDDs) .
Because this initial-onset VKH disease was beyond the 3–4-week interval considered to be within the therapeutic window of opportunity for cure of the disease , we decided to apply vigorous and sustained treatment inflammation suppressive treatment. We started with intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day) for 3 days followed by oral prednisone with concomitant cyclosporine (4.5 mg/kg) and mycophenolic acid (Myfortic®, 720 mg twice daily). Upon tapering oral prednisone, subclinical choroiditis recurrence was noted on ICGA and infliximab (5 mg/kg) was added followed by resolution of all choroidal inflammation 3 months later.
Under this treatment ocular findings, including anterior chamber and vitreous inflammation, exudative retinal detachments and choroidal thickness reversed to normal 9 months after the start of disease. Except for infliximab, all other treatments were stopped, including oral prednisone within 9 months, cyclosporine within 13 months and mycophenolic acid within 22 months. Infliximab infusions were given every 6 weeks for 30 months and every 10 weeks during the 3 subsequent years, all disease parameters being under control with no disease activity, no occult choroiditis, and no sunset glow fundus .
However, 6 weeks after the second dose of the Pfizer anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccine administration, the patient presented a severe reactivation of disease almost as pronounced as during initial-onset disease. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) remained full at 1.0 ODS. There was substantial anterior segment inflammation with laser flare photometry (LFP) values of 34.8 ph/ms OD and 64.2 ph/ms OS and this time, 3–4 small mutton-fat keratic precipitates OD were present . There were retinal folds and subretinal fluid on OCT and choroidal thickness was markedly increased and not measurable on EDI-OCT . There were again numerous HDDs visible on ICGA . After 5 days of oral prednisone (1 mg/kg), LFP anterior segment inflammation quasi normalised to 9.1 ph/ms OD and 7.0 ph/ms OS and choroidal thickness had again diminished substantially and increased thickness could again be measured with a mean of 506 ± 56 μm OD and 454 ± 28 μm . The last infusion of infliximab having been administered 3½ weeks before the first vaccination and 7½ weeks before the second vaccination, this probably explains the fact that reactivation occurred only after the second vaccination. Infliximab was again administered following again a loading dose scheme with positive short-term evolution.