A 52-year-old Hispanic female presented to the Emergency Room with complain of left-sided chest pain radiating to her left arm associated with nausea but no vomiting. According to the patient, the pain began 2 hours before presentation when she was having breakfast; she reported no previous similar episodes. She did not recall any change in her daily routine and had no stress at work or home. Her past medical history included hypertension, for which she was taking enalapril 2.5 mg, and chronic back pain secondary to disc budge at L4–L5 level, for which she was taking oxycodone. She never had any cardiac catheterization or echocardiography done in past. She had no known drug or food allergies. She was recently started on venlafaxine 75 mg for her depression 4 weeks ago. Upon arrival to the Emergency Department, her blood pressure was 128/85 with a pulse of 94 beats per minute. The physical examination including cardiovascular examination was essentially normal. Electrocardiography done in the emergency department showed sinus tachycardia with rate of 118/min with no ST segment changes but diffuse symmetric T-wave inversions in the limb and precordial leads . Patient was given Asprin (ASA) 325 mg, plavix loading dose of 600 mg, and nitroglycerin with some improvement in chest pain. Her cardiac biomarkers were increased at 1.85 ng/ml. Patient was diagnosed with non-ST elevation myocardial infarction, admitted to telemetry floor, and started on heparin drip. Her chest pain improved overnight and troponins in morning were 1.7 ng/ml, with normal complete blood count and metabolic profile. Patient was taken for cardiac catheterization, which showed normal coronaries , with left ventriculogram in right anterior oblique projection showing diffuse dyskinesis/ballooning of the left ventricular apex (both anterior and inferior aspects) and ejection fraction of 45% [ panel A/B]. Echocardiography was also done that showed hyperkinesia of the basal segment of the left ventricle with akinesis and ballooning of the apical segment of the left ventricle, with ejection consistent with the morphology of TTC [ panel A/B].
Patient was diagnosed to have TTC secondary to SNRI venlafaxine. She was discharged home on ASA, enalapril, and metoprolol, and was asked to discontinue venlafaxine therapy. Follow-up echocardiography after 6 weeks showed complete resolution of wall motion abnormalities and normal ejection fraction.