A 59-year-old African American male with end-stage cryptogenic cirrhosis presented to the emergency room (ER) endorsing progressive fatigue and confusion for 4 days. At baseline, the patient could complete all activities of daily living but lived with three family members who helped him with instrumental activities of daily living such as cooking and shopping. Per his niece who had accompanied him to the ER, he was now rarely leaving his bed due to fatigue, and his confusion had progressed such that he was now answering basic questions incorrectly.
His cirrhosis had been characterized as cryptogenic after a transplant evaluation failed to reveal an etiology. It had been classified as “end-stage” due to a Model for End-stage Liver Disease (MELD-Na) score of 27 (estimated 90-day mortality of 20%) and a Class C Child–Pugh Score (life expectancy 1–3 years) . He required monthly paracenteses and, in the past, required treatment for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP), hepatic encephalopathy, and gastrointestinal bleeds (GIBs) secondary to esophageal varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy.
In the ER, he was noted to be somnolent and oriented only to self. A physical exam revealed a distended abdomen with shifting dullness, and a lower extremity exam revealed +2 pitting edema. Labs were remarkable for ammonia of 106 µmol/L and a hemoglobin of 7.0 g/dL, down from a baseline of ~ 9 g/dL. He denied melena or any outright bleeding. Because of his ongoing ascites and altered mental status, he underwent a combined diagnostic/therapeutic paracentesis in the ER. Additionally, two blood cultures were drawn from separate venipuncture sites. He was initiated on treatment for suspected GIB (two large bore intravenous drips, intravenous pantoprazole, intravenous octreotide, intravenous ceftriaxone) and hepatic encephalopathy (lactulose and rifaximin titrated to 3–4 bowel movements per day) and admitted to the general practice unit.
The next day, he underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which revealed grade one varices and diffuse portal hypertensive gastropathy, but no active bleeding. Octreotide was discontinued at this point. Peritoneal cultures obtained in the ER revealed no evidence of SBP, but both blood cultures grew Streptococcus cristatus. Minimal inhibitory concentration using the ETEST method reveal antibiotic susceptibility to ceftriaxone, clindamycin, erythromycin, tetracycline, and vancomycin. The patient had an ongoing history of poor oral hygiene and dental caries, which were likely the source of this bacteremia.
Because of his positive blood cultures, we assessed for the presence of IE. We did not appreciate any cardiac murmurs on physical exam or other findings suggestive of IE such as Roth’s spots, Osler’s nodes, or Janeway lesions. However, transthoracic echocardiogram revealed new mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation compared with prior echocardiograms, without other evidence of IE, in other words no vegetations, abscesses, or perforations. This new-onset aortic regurgitation with positive blood cultures indicated “possible endocarditis” per the modified Duke Criteria . As such, a transesophageal echocardiogram was obtained to further assess for IE. This echocardiogram similarly showed mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation without other findings of IE. Per Duke’s Criteria guidelines, we used clinical judgement at this point and elected not to treat him for IE.
He was treated for bacteremia with a two-week course of cephalosporins. He received 8 days of 1 g/day intravenous ceftriaxone, which was started on day one for prophylactic treatment of suspected upper GIB. Upon discharge, he was transitioned to 400 mg/day of oral cefpodoxime for 6 days. Despite his advanced comorbidities and ongoing GIB, the infection was mild, and he recovered well. He did not exhibit any constitutional symptoms or any Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS) criteria throughout his entire hospital stay. His mentation improved after lactulose, and subsequent blood cultures remained negative. The infection did not delay his discharge, which was determined primarily by the stability of his hemoglobin. His clinical course is summarized in Table .