A 55-year-old man presented to our university hospital complaining of general fatigue for the past several months. 13 years earlier, he had undergone aorta valve replacement at our hospital for severe aortic regurgitation caused by infective endocarditis with aortic valve vegetations and had been receiving oral warfarin as an anticoagulant since that time. He was 167 cm tall, weighed 60 kg, and had a body mass index of 21.7. Laboratory investigations revealed severe anemia with hemoglobin of 4.4 g/dL, so he was admitted to the internal medicine department of our hospital for blood transfusion. He also reported a 5-year history of untreated right ankle pain that had worsened in the previous month. During this hospitalization, he was referred to our department for the assessment of the right ankle pain. On physical examination, there were tenderness, local warmth, and redness over the right ankle, especially on the anterior aspect, and range of motion at the ankle joint was limited to 0°of dorsiflexion and 5° of plantarflexion. Laboratory investigations revealed evidence of inflammation(white blood cell count 8600 cells/µL and C-reactiveprotein 8.44 mg/dL). Clinical examination showed no feature ssuggestive of congenital connective tissue disorder. Radiography and computed tomography images revealed osseous destruction and diffuse narrowing of the right ankle joint space ( and and , ). Synovial fluid culture from the right ankle was negative. After 18 days of hospitalization, when the anemia had improved (hemoglobin 10.7 g/dL), we performed anterior ankle arthroscopic surgery with heparin cover. The procedure included irrigation, extensive debridement, synovectomy with the removal of loose fragments, and curettage using standard anteromedial and anterolateral portals. Intraoperatively, dense fibrous tissue, aggressive hypertrophic synovitis, extensive severe chondral fibrillation, and subchondral erosion were seen in then arrowed ankle joint space ( and ). A sample of synovial tissue was obtained for culture and pathologic examination . Postoperatively, he was allowed to bear weight on his right foot as tolerated. Histological examination indicated chronic synovitis with infiltration of neutrophils and lymphocytes, angiogenesis, and accumulation of hemosiderin, suggesting chronic inflammation with infectious etiology . Culture yielded Staphylococcus capitis(subspeciescapitis), and appropriate antibiotic therapy was started based on the results of sensitivity. 6 days after ankle arthroscopy, the patient accidentally twisted the right leg, and his full body weight became suddenly supported entirely by the right foot. Soon afterward, he developed pain and swelling behind the medial aspect of the ankle and reported decreased sensation over the plantar aspect of the right foot. 7days postoperatively, we noticed a painful pulsatile mass behind the medial malleolus. A Tinel’s-like sign was positive at the level of this pulsatingmass, although motor function of the toes and ankle was normal. The patient was then referred to the cardiovascular surgery team at our hospital. Color and duplex Doppler ultrasonography showed dilation of the posterior tibial artery behind the medial malleolus . Enhanced three-dimensional computed tomography showed a dilated posterior tibial artery that measured 25mm × 13mm . The final diagnosis was true aneurysm of the posterior tibial artery with paresthesia due to nerve compression similar to tarsal tunnel syndrome. The decision was taken to perform arterial reconstruction to prevent rupture of the aneurysm and progression of the ankle pain, swelling, and paresthesia. Thus, 19 days after arthroscopic surgery, cardiovascular surgery team performed reconstruction of the posterior tibial artery again under heparin cover. Curved incision was made along the posterior tibial artery behind the medial malleolus. The artery was found to be dilated with severe adhesion between the aneurysm and the surrounding connective tissue, likely due to inflammatory reaction to infection. The expanded aneurysm was seen to be compressing the tibial nerve, but the flexor hallux longus was intact, as was the tibial nerve, which excluded the possibility of the aneurysm in the posterior tibial artery being caused iatrogenically during the previous anterior arthroscopic debridement procedure. The posterior tibial artery was isolated and clipped proximally and distally, followed by resection of the aneurysm and interposition of a reversed saphenous vein segment while preserving blood flow in the posterior tibial artery (, ). 3 weeks after the vein graft surgery, the patient was allowed to bear weight on his right foot as tolerated. Histological examination of the aneurysm wall showed fibrosis, loss of elastic tissue, and formation of capillaries, along with infiltration of neutrophils and lymphocytes into the dilated aneurysmal wall with thrombus , suggesting a true septic aneurysm that already existed before the anterior ankle arthroscopic surgery rather than a pseudoaneurysm caused during anterior arthroscopic debridement. Subsequently, the post-operative course was uneventful, and the pain and paresthesia on the plantar aspect of the foot disappeared. Antibiotic treatment was continued for 6 weeks after the vein graft surgery and white blood cell count decreased to 3300 cells/μLand C-reactive protein decreased to 0.05 mg/dL. The patient was discharged on antibiotics 4 weeks after the vein graft surgery, but still occasionally felt minor pain during prolonged activity and had a limited range of motion at the ankle. However, he unfortunately suddenly died because of acute ruptured infectious intracranial aneurysm after approximately 6 months after vein graft surgery.swelling, and paresthesia. Thus, 19 days after arthroscopic surgery, cardiovascular surgery team performed reconstruction of the posterior tibial artery again under heparin cover. Curved incision was made along the posterior tibial artery behind the medial malleolus. The artery was found to be dilated with severe adhesion between the aneurysm and the surrounding connective tissue, likely due to inflammatory reaction to infection. The expanded aneurysm was seen to be compressing the tibial nerve, but the flexor hallux longus was intact, as was the tibial nerve, which excluded the possibility of the aneurysm in the posterior tibial artery being caused iatrogenically during the previous anterior arthroscopic debridement procedure. The posterior tibial artery was isolated and clipped proximally and distally, followed by resection of the aneurysm and interposition of a reversed saphenous vein segment while preserving blood flow in the posterior tibial artery (, ). 3 weeks after the vein graft surgery, the patient was allowed to bear weight on his right foot as tolerated. Histological examination of the aneurysm wall showed fibrosis, loss of elastic tissue, and formation of capillaries, along with infiltration of neutrophils and lymphocytes into the dilated aneurysmal wall with thrombus , suggesting a true septic aneurysm that already existed before the anterior ankle arthroscopic surgery rather than a pseudoaneurysm caused during anterior arthroscopic debridement. Subsequently, the post-operative course was uneventful, and the pain and paresthesia on the plantar aspect of the foot disappeared. Antibiotic treatment was continued for 6 weeks after the vein graft surgery and white blood cell count decreased to 3300 cells/μLand C-reactive protein decreased to 0.05 mg/dL. The patient was discharged on antibiotics 4 weeks after the vein graft surgery, but still occasionally felt minor pain during prolonged activity and had a limited range of motion at the ankle. However, he unfortunately suddenly died because of acute ruptured infectious intracranial aneurysm after approximately 6 months after vein graft surgery.