In December 2013 a 51 years old woman presented to our Gynecologic Oncology Unit, for the presence of a pelvic mass originating from the left ovary, occasionally detected in the ultrasound imaging during a routine check. She was 1 gravida, 1 para, with no previous gynecological pathology in her history. She referred that in 2004, following diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma, she underwent a total thyroidectomy in another hospital. The histological examination revealed a papillary thyroid carcinoma, follicular variant, involving the left thyroid lobe. She received a radio-iodine metabolic adjuvant treatment by administration of 120 mCi 131I.
No evidence of disease was detected during follow up until December 2013 when an ovarian mass was revealed by ultrasound imaging and at the magnetic resonance it measured 76 × 46 × 62 mm . Normal value resulted for Ca125 and HE4 (respectively 23.9 UI/ML and 100 pmol/L), while thyroglobulin was detectable (0.2 ng/ml). She underwent laparoscopic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. The histological exam showed a papillary thyroid carcinoma involving left ovary. The ovarian tumor measured 10 × 5 × 6 cm and weighed 700 g. The section surface was solid and brown. We have performed one sample per centimeter of maximum dimension. Microscopic examination showed that ovarian parenchyma was nearly entirely occupied by thyroid-type neoplasm characterized by round follicles, of any size, and papillae . Many follicles were lined by cuboidal, epithelial cells with moderate amounts of cytoplasm and round to oval and ground glass nuclei that exhibited frequent mitotic figures . These cells were also positive to TTF-1 and Thyroglobulin antibodies . Moreover, Keratin-19 (CK-19) e HBME-1 were positive while Galectin-3 (GAL-3) was negative .
This neoplasm was suggestive for a metastasis because there was no evidence of benign struma ovary and the others teratomatous component.
Unfortunately, in March 2014 the CT/PET detected a left pelvic lymph nodes recurrence (SUV 10.8) and a paramedian nodular mass in proximity of the uterus (SUV 10.6). A laparoscopic evaluation showed left pelvic peritoneal carcinomatosis and a large left pelvic adenopathy . A left pelvic lymphadenectomy and a left pelvic peritonectomy were performed. Definitive histological examination showed a metastasis from papillary thyroid carcinoma. Actually, the patient is undergoing biological treatment with multikinase inhibitors.