A 72 year old Caucasian female was admitted to our clinic with unilateral chronic symptoms of blurred vision, increased tearing, and foreign body sensation. The clinical examination revealed periocular dermatochalasis, lower eyelid laxity, dry eye disease, chronic blepharitis, chronic conjunctivitis, and superficial punctate keratopathy. A diagnosis of right eye upper eyelid ptosis and lower eyelid involutional entropion was made. A decision for the synchronous surgical treatment of both conditions followed, by using the lateral tarsal strip procedure and the levator resection technique. During the preoperative assessment the levator muscle's function and the severity of the ptosis were evaluated. The levator function was good and the severity of the ptosis was moderate (3mm). In addition, the clinical evaluation of the lower eyelid showed no punctum horizontal displacement.
The surgical procedure for both conditions was carried out under local anesthesia. The lower eyelid entropion was treated first. A lateral canthotomy and transection of the lateral canthal tendon were performed. The eyelid was then divided into anterior and posterior lamellae. A tarsal strip was fashioned from the posterior lamella and was then sutured to the periosteum at the lateral orbital wall, by using 5-0 ethibond double spatula sutures. Wound closure was achieved, by using absorbable 6-0 sutures (Vicryl), first for the orbicularis muscle and finally for the skin tissue.
Then the levator resection technique was performed in order to correct the ptosis. An incision, through the skin and orbicularis muscle, along the eyelid crease, was made. Dissection through the orbital septum followed. A double armed 5-0 ethibond suture was then placed through the anterior surface of the upper tarsus. Each of the needles was then placed through the healthy/homogenous part of the levator aponeurosis. The procedure led to the augmentation of the levator function.
The patient received topical antibiotic and corticosteroid treatment postoperatively for 10 consecutive days and was clinically assessed thereafter for the following 2 years.
The procedure performed resulted in the restoration of the upper and lower eyelid normal anatomy as well as in a significant reduction of the patient's discomfort and symptoms. During the 1-year and 2-year follow-up clinical assessments no clinical signs of recurrency were found. The pre- and postoperative (at 1 year follow up) VFQ-25 questionnaire revealed significant improvement of the patient's quality of life (questionnaire developed by RAND and funded by NEI and translated and validated in the Greek language according to the instructions by RAND).