A 65-year-old woman was admitted to our department with epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting for 3 d.
The patient underwent gastroscopy because of epigastric pain, which showed a huge bezoar and a gastric ulcer 10 d prior . The bezoar could not be removed by endoscopy due to its large size and hardness. The patient was discharged with a prescription of drinking 1 L Coca-Cola daily for the following 6 d. However, she did not accept re-examination by gastroscopy to observe the efficacy of dissolution therapy. Subsequently, the patient was admitted to our department with epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting for 3 d. Follow-up medical history showed that she had been ingesting persimmons frequently in the recent 2 mo.
No significant medical history was recorded such as previous gastric surgery, hyperlipidemia, or alcohol consumption.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
The clinical abdominal examination revealed epigastric tenderness and distension without rebound tenderness. All other vital signs were stable.
Abnormally elevated laboratory findings at admission included a leukocyte count of 14830/mm3, aspartate transaminase 60 IU/L, alanine transaminase 64 IU/L, -glutamyl transpeptidase 418 IU/L, and alkaline phosphatase 167 IU/L. Serum amylase and lipase were > 3 times higher than the upper limit of normal, at 507 IU/L and 745 IU/L, respectively.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed mild inflammation of the pancreas . Subsequent magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed no abnormalities in the pancreatic duct or common bile duct.
After symptomatic treatment, including gastrointestinal decompression, fluid resuscitation and antibiotic therapy, the abdominal pain was relieved. The levels of serum transaminase, amylase and lipase were gradually reduced. However, the nasogastric tube showed drainage of > 1.6 L of dark fluid each day after admission. Abdominal CT re-examination demonstrated gastric distension and loops of small intestine with multiple gas-fluid levels, which suggested intestinal obstruction .