A 65-year-old man presented with a chief complaint of daily, persistent holocranial headaches and blurry vision. Upon review of systems, the patient manifested having a cranial mass located in the parieto-occipital region for the past 13 years , which he believed had developed after head trauma he suffered in a motor vehicle accident.
The mass grew slowly and progressively over the years. It had never caused him any significant discomfort until approximately one year prior to presentation, when he started experiencing daily headaches which worsened with time and developed blurry vision. The patient's medical history also included essential hypertension, and he had no pertinent surgical, family or social history. On physical examination, an abnormally shaped head was noted due to a mass in the calvarium, as well as bilateral papilledema. There were no neurological deficits or changes in the skin overlying the cranial mass. The mass was not tender to palpation. Laboratory tests were within the normal reference range.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed a large midline permeative calvarial lesion measuring 14 × 11.7 × 5.4 cm, with extensive periosteal reaction, subjacent dural thickening, extension into the subcutaneous soft tissues and intracranial extension into the bilateral parietal extra-axial space .
CT-Angiography revealed invasion and occlusion of a 9.5 cm segment of the superior sagittal sinus. There was no evidence of infarction. Digital subtraction angiography reported a highly hyper-neovascular destructive bone tumor with exuberant blood supply from the bilateral occipital, superficial temporal, and middle meningeal arteries and pial supply from the posterior internal frontal branches of the left anterior cerebral artery.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) post-gadolinium fat-saturated T1 sequence showed a large intraosseous mass with demonstration of intracranial extension, invasion into the superior sagittal sinus and regional dural thickening and enhancement . The favored pre-operative clinical diagnosis was osteosarcoma.
The patient underwent super selective embolization of dural supply using n-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) and bilateral parietal circumferential craniectomy to excise the abnormal calvarium, followed by cranioplasty and reconstruction with titanium mesh.
An ovoid fragment of flat bone was received for pathologic examination. The outer surface of the specimen was nodular and had attached soft tissue, while the inner surface appeared flattened, irregular, and hemorrhagic. Sectioning revealed an ill-defined intraosseous mass expanding the bone. No areas of necrosis were grossly identified .
Microscopic examination of H&E-stained sections revealed a predominantly intraosseous meningioma with overall features of meningothelial-type meningioma, WHO grade I, composed of cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and regular, ovoid nuclei with fine chromatin and small nucleoli arranged in syncytia and whorls, with extension into soft tissue .
Brain invasion was absent. Few mitotic figures were identified reaching up to 2 mitoses per 10 HPF. Atypical features were focally present, including a minute focus of incipient necrosis and an area of small cell change, and some cells showed mildly enlarged nucleoli. However, the findings were considered insufficient for a diagnosis of atypical meningioma, WHO grade II. The Ki-67 proliferation index was estimated to be less than 5% in average; however, it was noted that it was higher than expected for a usual WHO grade I meningioma reaching up to 10% in the most proliferative areas. The gross and microscopic histopathologic features were those of an en plaque meningioma with extensive bone invasion, or possibly a primary intradiploic (intraosseous) meningioma.