A 3-year-old girl with a 1-month history of sustained conjunctival injections of both eyes was presented to a local eye clinic. After failure of treatment with an anti-allergic eye drop, she was prescribed with eye drops (0.5% levofloxacin, 0.1% betamethasone, and 0.5% tropicamide/0.5% phenylephrine) and was referred to the Department of Ophthalmology at Kobe University Hospital for the treatment of bilateral panuveitis.
She had an unremarkable medical and family history and denied any other ocular or systemic symptom including ocular pain and headache. We confirmed that she had no history of penetrating trauma or surgery preceding this initial onset of uveitis. On examination, best corrected visual acuities (BCVAs) were 20/200 OD and 20/125 OS, and the intraocular pressure was 7 mmHg in the left eye (a reliable value was not obtained in the right eye). Slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed posterior synechiae of the iris in both eyes. Detailed information on the anterior chamber was not obtained due to poor patient cooperation (she looked to be sensitive to light). Funduscopy revealed bilateral optic disk swelling and tortuous retinal vessels, and optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed serous retinal detachment with choroidal thickening in both eyes . The results of blood test, electrocardiography, and chest X-ray were all normal. Fluorescence angiography (FA), indocyanine green angiography (ICGA), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination were not performed, considering her age and cooperation and due to the parents’ will. As she did not exhibit any neurological or auditory finding on presentation, she was diagnosed with probable VKH disease based on the international criteria . A pediatrician consulted her, and she was admitted to the hospital on the day of the referral.
On the following day, high-dose intravenous corticosteroid therapy (methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg/day for three consecutive days) was started. She received three courses of high-dose intravenous corticosteroid therapy given at a 1-week interval because subretinal fluid remained on OCT after two courses of therapy . Subretinal fluid completely disappeared after the third intravenous corticosteroid therapy, but BCVAs improved to 20/50 OD and 20/40 OS with disorganized ellipsoid zone (EZ) on OCT . Oral prednisolone was administered at a daily dose of 0.4 mg/kg, which gradually tapered off over the following 6 months. An experienced pediatrician had monitored the patient’s health and growth throughout the treatment period. One year after treatment, she recovered her vision (20/16 OU). Ultra-widefield fundus imaging revealed no apparent sunset glow fundus in the right eye and a limited depigmented area around the optic disk in the left eye. OCT revealed intact EZ in both eyes . Neither relapse of ocular inflammation nor side effect of treatment such as cataract formation, intraocular pressure (IOP) rise above 20 mmHg and growth retardation was observed during the 18-month follow-up period (17-month follow-up period after the third course of high-dose intravenous corticosteroid therapy).