A 56-year-old man with history of hypertension presented with acute onset of altered mental status, slurred speech, and right hand numbness of 45 min duration. Patient was not using any medications at home. Initial vital signs were remarkable for bradycardia with heart rate 36/min, respiratory rate 20, saturating 95% on 5 L nasal cannula and blood pressure 136/72 mmHg. Physical exam was only significant for decreased sensation for light touch on right hand with National Institute of Health (NIH) scale of 1. Transient confusion resolved. Electrocardiogram showing marked sinus bradycardia with prolonged PR interval, prolonged QRS duration, a right bundle branch block, and left axis deviation. No evidence of ischaemic changes or ST elevation . Chest X-ray was unremarkable.
Initial computed tomography (CT) head did not show any acute abnormalities. Due to the possibility of acute ischaemia with initial neurological symptoms, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) was initially considered for emergent thrombolysis in stroke. Patient declined tPA with improvement in symptoms and due to the risk of bleeding. The patient was admitted for telemetry monitoring. Overnight, during the first 12 h of hospitalization, there were no new neurological events and telemetry revealed persistent sinus bradycardia (heart rate 30–50) without AV block. Echocardiogram was performed 14 h after admission and was of limited quality due to poor echo windows and revealed normal chamber dimensions with an left ventricular ejection fraction of 60–65%. The aortic valve and aortic root were not well seen and no pathological aortic insufficiency was seen on Doppler. Sixteen hours after admission, the patient complained of new weakness in left upper extremity. On examination, dysmetria and pronator drift were noted in left upper extremity and bilateral upper limbs were cold to touch. Non-invasive blood pressure discrepancy was measured in the arms with right arm 44/23 and left 114/83 mmHg. He underwent immediate CT angiography chest showing Type 1 aortic dissection with extension into the brachiocephalic artery and right common carotid artery (RCCA) with thrombosis in RCCA . Patient was emergently taken for surgical repair of aortic dissection with placement of Dacron graft and resuspension of aortic valve. Post-operatively, no further pathological bradycardia or AV block was detected. Patient was not screened for inflammatory or infectious conditions, e.g. giant cell arteritis and syphilis as these causes seemed unlikely with the history and presentation. Follow-up brain imaging confirmed multiple ischaemic stroke with large acute infarctions of the right cerebral hemisphere and basal ganglia predominantly within the internal watershed distribution and tiny acute infarctions of the left basal ganglia and left frontal lobe. The patient had persistent neurological deficits with bilateral hemiparesis, slurred speech and was discharged to an acute rehabilitation facility.