A 36-year-old female presented with a recurrent right upper extremity STS. Two years prior to initial presentation at our facility, she was diagnosed with an 11-cm right axillary, intermediate-grade pleomorphic spindle cell neoplasm. She underwent neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy followed by a resection of the tumor. Microscopic margins were positive following the surgical resection and adjuvant chemotherapy was initiated. She developed a local recurrence 3 months after resection which ultimately progressed to invasion of the brachial plexus with paralysis of the right upper extremity as well as a pathologic humeral fracture. She was placed on low molecular weight heparin after developing a right subclavian vein thrombosis. Additionally, she developed distant metastatic disease in the left upper lobe of the lung. She perused several experimental modalities that were unsuccessful at reducing the tumor burden.
She presented to our institution 2 years after the initial diagnosis with debilitating pain of the right upper extremity. An MRI revealed a 25-cm shoulder mass involving the proximal arm muscles with encasement of the axillary artery, vein, and brachial plexus . After a multidisciplinary discussion, a palliative forequarter amputation was performed. Tumor thrombus was evident within the axillary artery and vein during ligation.
Ten hours after completion of the operation, she developed an acute onset of dyspnea with a resultant increase in her supplemental oxygen requirement. A chest x-ray was obtained which revealed bilateral atelectasis. Suspicion of a pulmonary embolism remained high and confirmatory testing was performed with a computed tomography (CT) chest . A pulmonary saddle embolism was present on the CT scan and she was started on an intravenous heparin infusion. A bilateral lower extremity venous duplex study did not reveal a deep vein thrombosis. Her blood pressure subsequently decreased, and she was unresponsive to crystalloid intravenous administration; therefore, she was placed on vasopressor support. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed and revealed an elevated pulmonary artery pressure (49 mmHg), tricuspid regurgitation, right heart dilation, and reduced right heart systolic function consistent with acute cor pulmonale. The patient declined a median sternotomy with pulmonary artery embolectomy. She went into cardiopulmonary arrest and expired within 24 h of the operation. An autopsy was declined but TE was presumed to be the source of PE due to the presence of tumor invasion into the vein.
The final pathology of the primary tumor revealed a 25 × 16 × 13 cm high-grade myxofibrosarcoma. The tumor invaded the bone, skin, and neurovascular bundle and contained tumor thrombus.