A 61-year-old woman presented with an 8-month history of intermittent headache, vertigo, right peripheral facial palsy, and left hemiparesis. Neurologic examination revealed right sensorineural hearing loss. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed two lesions: a supratentorial paraclinoid lesion that occupied the left frontotemporal region and a right infratentorial solid extra axial mass, suggestive of a tentorial meningioma [ and ]. The patient underwent a two-phased surgical intervention, to approach both lesions.
Meningiomas are common and mostly benign tumors arising from the arachnoid cap cells, they represent 15% of all intracranial tumors and are more prevalent in aging women. Tentorial meningiomas of the posterior fossa, however, represent 3–5% of all meningiomas. These lesions tend to have an indolent course and are lately diagnosed. Resection must be performed and complete excision pursued. There is a risk of local recurrence, depending on the extent of resection. The most common cause of recurrence is due to invasion of the dural venous sinuses. Differential diagnosis includes epidermoid cyst, chondroma, chordoma, and sarcomas. This lesion was initially approached in the first stage through a right paramedian suboccipital craniotomy, with no further complications, achieving gross total resection.
The giant posterior communicating aneurysm was initially misdiagnosed as a cavernoma due to its popcorn-like appearance and a low-signal intensity rim on MRI. However, various substances such as methemoglobin, melanin, lipid, protein, calcium, iron, copper, and manganese can cause intrinsically high-signal intensity on T1 weighted image (T1WI). The presence of a hyperintense halo around the lesion on T1WI is a useful finding to differentiate cavernous malformations from hemorrhagic tumors and other intracranial hemorrhages such as giant aneurysms, which are those with a diameter >2.5 cm and often present as large intracranial lesions causing signs and symptoms due to the mass effect. The reported incidence of aneurysms presenting as mass lesions rather than subarachnoid hemorrhage is rare and has also been reported to mimic arteriovenous malformations and brain tumors in imaging studies.[,] This lesion was treated through a left pterional approach, through which the aneurysmal dome was resected and, as clipping was not deemed possible due to a wide neck, en bloc resection, with the remodeling of the parental internal carotid artery (ICA) with a termino-terminal anastomosis termino-terminal anastomosis was performed. Unfortunately, due to complications related to cerebral vasospasm, multiple cerebral infarcts occurred and the patient had a fatal outcome.