An 84-year-old man, with a history of hypertension and chronic kidney disease, was referred to the emergency room with a complaint of dysphagia and hand clumsiness on his left side since the previous day. He had no history of smoking and alcohol drinking. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 2. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed an acute infarction in the right frontal insuloopercular area . MR angiogram demonstrated stenosis of the bilateral cervical carotid artery. He had already been taking aspirin (81 mg/day), so clopidogrel (75 mg/day) was added, and argatroban was administered intravenously with no early neurological deterioration and recurrence.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) found a normal sinus rhythm. The man had no history of atrial fibrillation (AF) or bradycardia. ECG monitoring did not capture any episode of AF. His baseline serum low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level was 59 mg/dl, and his high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level was 121 mg/dl.
A computed tomography (CT) angiogram found bilateral carotid artery stenosis, which was more severe on the left side (right: 47%, left: more than 90%, on NASCET criteria), with the distal nontapering portions of the internal carotid artery serving as the reference segment [ and ]. CT of the neck demonstrated non-circumferential but severe calcification of bilateral carotids . MRI of the plaque was carried out to determine the consistency and vulnerability of the plaque. The plaque components in the T1- and T2-weighted images showed with iso- and hyper-intensity, respectively.
Since the symptomatic right side demonstrated stenosis <50%, we proposed to manage the right IC stenosis conservatively. For the asymptomatic side, showing severe stenosis, carotid angioplasty was planned to prevent a further ischemic stroke.
After obtaining written informed consent from the patient and his family, we performed CAS for the left high-grade carotid stenosis, because of preexisting dysphagia.