In March 2017, a 32-year-old woman without any systemic disease or ocular traumatic event presented to us with the chief complain of left proptosis, left eye soreness, and diplopia on upper right gaze without decline of visual acuity since January 2017. Noncontrast computed tomography (CT) of orbit done at an outside hospital showed a left intra-orbital tumor with intracranial invasion. Orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was arranged and it disclosed a mass lesion about 3.8 cm × 3.7 cm × 3.3 cm in size, located in the left frontal base, orbital roof, and upper medial orbital region. This mass lesion showed relative intermediate intensity on T1-weighted image and T2-weighted image, and the postcontrast study showed good enhancement with adjacent dural tail sign causing mass effect on the left eyeball as well as the left frontal brain parenchyma, which favored meningioma . On admission, her neurological examination showed impairment of the left eye ball movement to upward gaze and medial gaze, otherwise essentially negative finding. Under general anesthesia, she was put in the supine position and underwent a left supraorbital pterional craniotomy with the gross total removal of tumor and dura reconstruction. Grossly, the tumor was hypervascular, relatively firm in consistency, which destructed the left orbital roof thoroughly and invaded the dura of the left frontal base causing the compression of the left frontal lobe and displacement of the left eye ball. This tumor also extended to ethmoid sinus. Histology examination showed that the tumor consisted of evenly distributed osteoclast-like giant cells in a background of round or spindle-shaped mononuclear cells. By immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells showed CD68(+), GFAP(−), EMA(−), p63(−), S100(+scattered), CD1a(+scattered), and p53(−) . Proliferation index was about 6% by Ki-67 immunostain. Giant cell tumor of bone was diagnosed based on the morphology of the tumor cells and the result of immunohistochemical stains. The resected left orbital roof remnant and diseased dura showed focal involvement by the tumor. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. After surgery, her left proptosis and limitation of the left eye ball movement were resolved. The postoperative orbital MRI showed some postoperative change without definite residual tumor . Considering giant cell tumor of bone is locally aggressive with high recurrent rate, postoperative adjuvant therapy with Denosumab was introduced after full explanation. She is doing well and is undergoing regular follow-up at our outpatient department.