In January 2019, a 35-year-old man presented with a 6-month history of a painless mass (3 × 2 cm) at the base of his penis. Sonographic examination revealed a hyperechoic structure with perfusion. MRI of the pelvis showed a hyperintense mass in the pelvic region without associated lymphadenopathy . Suspecting a malignant lesion, incisional biopsy of the tumor was performed in January 2019. Histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of a high-grade chondrosarcoma of the corpus cavernosa . A board-certified pathologist with expertise in sarcoma reviewed the pathology to re-confirm the diagnosis. To rule out penile metastasis and a primary bone tumor, CT of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis and bone scan were performed, and no primary lesion could be identified. The patient’s sexual and erectile functions were not affected. The Erection Hardness Score was 4. The inguinal lymph nodes were not enlarged on physical examination. The case was presented to the tumor board to discuss further treatment. The patient and his family were counseled extensively about the disease and treatment options, including surgical intervention, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. Surgical intervention in the form of a total penectomy was declined by the patient because of his age. Alternatively, chemoradiotherapy followed by the resection of the tumor and implantation of a penile prosthesis was discussed. Although the risk of recurrence and of infection were considerably high, the patient opted for this treatment modality. Inductive chemotherapy was started with four cycles of doxorubicin and ifosfamide analogous to the IAWS registry protocol over 10 weeks, followed by two cycles of chemoradiotherapy over 5 weeks (5 × 1.8 Gy/week to 50.4 Gy target volume dose. 6/15 MV photons). Concurrent radiosensitizing chemotherapy was administered (ifosfamide, 3 g/m2). The chemotherapy was tolerated without any side effects being experienced. MRI of the pelvis after the third cycle of chemotherapy showed a regression of the primary tumor by ~1 cm . Six weeks after the completion of chemoradiotherapy, a tumor resection (R0) with implantation of a penile prosthesis was carried out. During the tumor resection, three frozen sections were obtained to ensure tumor-free resection margins (proximal nerve bundle 5 mm, distal nerve bundle 2 mm, and urethral margin 1 mm). While the pathology was consistent with the primary diagnosis of 50% regression of the tumor (vital tumor 50%), the tumor grade after chemoradiotherapy could not be identified. The patient is under regular and intense follow-up every 3 months with MRI of the pelvis and CT of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis every 12 months. Currently, there is neither local recurrence nor distant metastasis.