The patient was a 26-year-old Caucasian Greek male (178 cm, 75 kgs) was admitted to the Cardiology Department for the evaluation of a retrosternal constant pain of 3 hours duration. The pain started abruptly without any preceding symptoms. The pain was excruciating retrosternal pain and radiating to his right arm with a 8/10 intensity. The examination of the patient was unremarkable and his medical, surgical and family history was negative. The patient had no clinical features of Marfan syndrome. His biochemical values were normal.
On examination, the patient was now in moderate pain (4-5/10) but he was very anxious and worried because he had never experienced this type of pain. He actually was in active duty in the army until recently (15 days before) and he was extremely active to all the exercises he had to perform. He never had any form of disease or hospitalization. His pulse was 100/min and his blood pressure was 130/65 mmHg. No murmurs or extra sounds were audible on cardiac examination. Chest x-ray was essentially normal . ECG was on sinus rhythm without any abnormalities. Cardiac ultrasound set the question of aortic dilatation with the possible presence of hematoma in the aortic wall or a small intimal flap in the proximal ascending aorta. Although there was an intact aortic and mitral valve function. No pericardial effusion was noted. A chest computerized tomography showed the presence of an ascending aortic aneurysm at 6 cm and a circumferential aortic tear with the possible presence of an intimal tear in the ascending aorta as well .
The patient was emergently operated. We performed ascending aortic replacement under the support of cardiopulmonary bypass and moderate hypothermia. Intraoperatively a complete circumferential aortic tear was noted just above the sinotubular junction. The entry and exit point of the dissection were confined in the ascending aorta. Ascending aorta was replaced with a 26 Dacron graft. The patient recovered well and discharged on seventh postoperative day. Pathology revealed no specific findings in the resected aortic segment. A three years follow up showed that the patient was negative and in excellent clinical condition.