An otherwise healthy 18-year-old Thai female housewife at 31 weeks gestation, presented to our clinic complaining of fever and painful swollen wrists, hands, and feet for 6 hours prior to presentation. She could not make a fist and complained of difficulty walking. The patient complained of a headache but denied suffering nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or myalgia. A pruritic, erythematous rash on her abdomen was noted. She denied recent hospitalization and was not taking any medications. No family members had similar conditions. The patient stated that several of her neighbors also suffered fever and arthralgia within the past week. Her vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 38.1 °C; blood pressure, 100/40 mmHg; pulse rate, 126 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; and O2 saturation of 98% on room air. She was hospitalized due to suspected septic shock.
On examination at admission, the patient had maculopapular rashes on the cheeks, nose, forehead, and abdominal wall . Cervical lymph nodes were not palpable. Her heart and lung examinations were unremarkable. The uterus was palpated at three fingers above the umbilicus. Exam of her extremities revealed arthritis of both wrists and ankles as well as all metatarsophalangeal joints. Arthrocentesis of the left wrist yielded clear yellow synovial fluid with high viscosity (0.1 CCS). Gram staining did not reveal the presence of organisms. Complete blood count revealed a hemoglobin count of 10.8 g/dL, hematocrit of 33%, white blood cell count of 9300 cells/mm3 (neutrophils, 91%; leukocytes, 5%; eosinophils, 0%; monocytes, 4%; basophils, 0%), and platelet count of 180,000/mm3. Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were found to be 8.3 mg/dL and 0.38 mg/dL, respectively. Liver function testing revealed total protein of 6.2 g/dL, albumin of 3.5 g/dL, globulin of 2.7 g/dL, total bilirubin of 0.4 mg/dL, and direct bilirubin of 0.1 mg/dL. Levels of aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were 15 U/L, 8 U/L, and 102 U/L, respectively; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 52 mm/hour.
Serology for dengue nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) antigen, immunoglobulin M (IgM), and immunoglobulin G (IgG) was negative. The patient was initially diagnosed with viral arthritis, but septic arthritis could not be ruled out. Thus, she was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g once daily on the first day of admission, and her hypotension was managed with intravenous fluid loading. On the second day of admission, her arthralgia improved greatly, but she still had a high-grade fever and worsening hypotension. Ceftriaxone was subsequently switched to intravenous meropenem 1 g every 8 hours. The patient also developed hypoxemia while administering oxygen via a nonrebreather mask at 10 L/minute. On auscultation, her lungs were clear; a chest X-ray revealed no abnormalities. Imaging by computed tomography (CT) angiography showed no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Bilateral pulmonary consolidations at the superior–lateral–posterior basal segments associated with diffuse ground-glass infiltration and bilateral pleural effusions with a fluid-filled right minor fissure were noted. Sinus tachycardia was reported on electrocardiography. On the third day of admission, noradrenaline was administered to manage worsening hypotension. Echocardiography revealed good ventricular systolic contraction, no regional wall motion abnormality, and no pericardial effusion. The inferior vena cava was 1.8 cm in diameter with an inspiratory collapse of < 50%. We initially considered the diagnosis of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema; differential diagnoses included viral pneumonia and tropical infection. Thus, azithromycin 500 mg intravenous once daily and oseltamivir 75 mg twice daily were added to her treatment regimen. The patient suffered progressive tachypnea and hypoxemia (O2 saturation 93–95%) on high-flow oxygen. A further chest X-ray revealed airspace opacifications with bronchogram presence in the perihilar and lower lung areas bilaterally. No cardiomegaly was demonstrated , and she was intubated on a mechanical ventilator. As the PaO2:FiO2 ratio was less than 300, ARDS was diagnosed. A vesicular rash was found along both thighs, legs, and abdomen with bullae formation on the perineum and buttocks . Tzanck smear did not reveal the presence of multinucleated giant cells. After 3 days of invasive ventilation, the patient was extubated. No adverse or unanticipated events occurred. Body temperature returned to normal baseline levels, and she fully recovered from arthralgia within the next 3 days. The skin lesion on the abdomen and both thighs became crusted hemorrhagic vesicles 6 days later , and return of normal skin color was observed on follow-up. She proceeded to deliver a healthy infant at full term.
Additional laboratory tests were performed during the patient’s time in the hospital. A positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for CHIKV RNA was reported 1 week after the admission date because CHIKV PCR could not be accessed in the secondary care hospital. Skin biopsy revealed subepidermal vesicles containing acantholytic cells and reepithelization in the epidermis. Superficial and deep perivascular infiltration with lymphocytes in the dermis was noted .
Skin biopsy analysis revealed CHIKV RNA, and phylogenetic analysis revealed that the virus belonged to the ECSA genotype (A226V E1 protein mutation; Fig. ). Blood and urine PCR for Zika were negative. Scrub and murine typhus IgM and IgG were also negative. Testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative. Antinuclear antibody staining was 1:40 (homogeneous and finely speckled).