In August 2019, a 77-year-old woman residing in an elderly health care and rehabilitation facility was hospitalized with chronic respiratory insufficiency caused by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and pulmonary emphysema in the Internal Medicine ward of San Paolo Hospital in Bari. While hospitalized, she developed a urinary tract infection; P. aeruginosa was isolated from a urine sample. No antibiotic was administered. The patient became febrile 3 days later, and P. aeruginosa was isolated from blood cultures. She received colistin (a 9 million unit (MU) loading dose, followed by 4.5 MU twice per day) and fosfomycin (6 g every 3 h). Following initial improvement, the patient showed a rapid clinical deterioration and died from sepsis in early November.
The biochemical characteristics and antibiotic susceptibility profile of the P. aeruginosa isolate were assessed using the automated VITEK 2 system (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The interpretative breakpoints for minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were based on the criteria of the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) . The MIC for colistin was determined using the broth microdilution method, as specified by EUCAST guidelines. The phenotypic resistance patterns of P. aeruginosa isolated from urine and blood cultures were identical; except for colistin, all isolates were extensively resistant to all tested antimicrobial agents . Strain serotype, corresponding to O11, was determined using monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal antisera (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Milano, Italy). The main carbapenemase-encoding genes (blaKPC, blaVIM, blaNDM, blaIMP and blaOXA-48) were detected using a commercial multiplex real-time PCR kit (GeneXpert platform, Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), which revealed the presence of an NDM gene.
Genomic DNA isolated from a single colony of P. aeruginosa was extract using the Qiagen DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Copenaghen, Denmark) and whole-genome sequencing was performed using MiSeq (Illumina San Diego, CA, USA), with a paired-end run of 2 × 250 bp, after Nextera XT paired-end library preparation. De novo genome assembly was performed using SPAdes genome assembler (version 3.12) . The draft genome was approximately 6.941 Mbp in size, with approximately 80× coverage. The multilocus ST was determined by submitting the assembly to the MLST on-line database . The isolate was assigned to ST235 and named UNIBA_ST235PA (GenBank accession number JAABOY000000000).
The resistome and virulome of the genome were analyzed using ABRicate . With this tool, a BLAST search of genes included in the Resfinder 3.0 database and in the Virulence Factors Database (VFDB) was performed on de novo whole-genome assembly.
ResFinder 3.0 analyses showed that the chromosome of the P. aeruginosa isolate harbored several antibiotic resistance genes . In addition, the isolate encoded many clinically significant multidrug efflux pump complexes belonging to the resistance nodulation cell division family of P. aeruginosa.
Comparative genomic analysis of the NDM-1 regions (12,732 bp) of UNIBA_ST235PA and the P. aeruginosa HIABP11 strain (Acc. No. KC170992) using Geneious R10.2.6 (Biomatters Ltd., USA) showed that these regions were > 98% identical. The genetic environment surrounding the blaNDM-1 gene of UNIBA_ST235PA is displayed in the Fig. . An ISCR1 element was located immediately upstream of the chromosomal blaNDM-1 gene, followed by the aminoglycoside resistance gene aphA6; this is identical to that in the HIABP11 strain isolated in France in 2012. In addition, the expression of blaNDM-1 of UNIBA_ST235PA was under the control of a promoter belonging to the IS30 family transposase ISAba125. Two short deletions were observed in the mapped sequence of UNIBA_ST235PA: an 8 bp deletion in a non-coding region at position 4564 and a 5 bp deletion at position 5699 in the sul1 gene .
The PlasmidFinder tool showed that no plasmids were present in UNIBA_ST235PA.
The virulome of the draft genome identified several virulence determining genes, including the type III secretion system effector ExoU phospholipase, which is associated with a high cytotoxic phenotype, as previously reported [, ].