A 9-month-old male patient was referred to our neurosurgical department due to a coccygeal dimple. The sacral hollow was 3.5 cm from the anus, above the gluteal cleft, with no redness or drainage. The patient had no neurological deficits. MRI was performed to check for possible spinal cord tethering and revealed a thickened fatty filum with a 3 mm diameter area of T1 hyperintensity . Voiding cystourethrography showed no bladder morphology abnormalities or vesicoureteral reflux. After considering the treatment options for this patient, the parents agreed to spinal cord untethering.
The patient underwent surgery in the prone position. Neurophysiological intraoperative electromyographic (EMG) monitoring and monitoring of the bulbocavernosus reflex (BCR) were used. A midline 1 cm skin incision was made at the L4/5 vertebral level . The procedures were performed using two types of endoscopes (2.7 mm diameter, 30 degrees, Olympus, Japan; Oi HandyPro, Storz, Germany). A subperiosteal dissection of the muscles on the caudal side of L4 lamina and cranial side of L5 lamina was done, and the dissection was extended to the adjacent interspinous ligament to expose the ligamentum flavum .
Next, the interspinous ligament and partial lamina were removed and the epidural fat was exposed. The epidural fat was dissected and moved into the space under the surrounding bone and ligaments . We used a 6 mm diameter Smart Needle Sheath (Fujisystems, Japan) as a tubular retractor. After sheath cannulation, a midline durotomy of 6 mm was performed with a bipolar coagulation electrode and scissors .
The key to incising the arachnoid membrane was limiting the deviation of the normal cauda equina nerve roots using the sheath edges and irrigation . The filum terminale was identified by its thickness and pale appearance. . We placed a small green rubber sheet as an underlay to anchor the filum and protect the normal caudal nerve roots. . We stimulated the filum to confirm the absence of a motor response. The filum was resected cranial side first, carefully maintaining hemostasis . After releasing the filum, it retracted rapidly cranially. The caudal side of the filum was cut, and part of the filum was removed and sent for pathological examination. . After removing the sheath, the dura and arachnoid membrane were sutured together with 4 − 0 nylon. . The wound was closed in layers. .
For extradural procedures, excellent image quality and a spacious working environment are indispensable, especially for tasks involving the excision of tough tissues like bone and ligaments, as well as dural suturing. Therefore, we employed a 30-degree Olympus endoscope .
On the other hand, intradural procedures, though relatively straightforward in terms of manual techniques, necessitate precise control of cerebrospinal fluid. To address this need, we utilized a Storz endoscope, which enabled us to perform the procedure while simultaneously infusing artificial cerebrospinal fluid .
The postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative MRI revealed that the filum terminale had resected and the spinal conus level had shifted cranially. . A comparison of pre- and postoperative 3-dimensional computed tomography images demonstrated that the L4,5 vertebral arches were less affected . The patient remained neurologically intact and was discharged 4 days after surgery.