A 57-year-old Albanian man admitted to the emergency department presented with a 10-day history of right-sided epigastric and chest pain, together with a mild cough, distension of the abdomen, and constipation. The pain had been treated with analgesics. The patient had had a traffic accident seven years previously. After the accident, in the emergency room, he had undergone drainage to the right side of the thorax because of pleural effusion and the splinting of his upper arm due to a humerus fracture on the same side. An abdominal ultrasound examination, at that time, had confirmed no evidence of organ injury.
On arrival at the emergency department, the presence of gallstones was suspected, but none of the preclinical results supported this diagnosis. He was afebrile; his abdomen was inflated and insensitive to palpation. All laboratory results were within normal limits except for leucocytosis. The initial chest X-ray showed elevation of the right hemidiaphragm, an infiltrative shadow in the basal lobe of his right lung, and multiple radiolucencies over his right hemithorax . The stones in the gallbladder were invisible. Black pigment or mixed gallstones may contain sufficient calcium to appear radiopaque on plain films. Only 15 to 20 percent of gallstones are visible on simple radiographs .
The definite diagnosis was made through a thoracic-abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, which revealed intrathoracic displacement of his liver and part of the colon, and his gallbladder with regular walls and with three 17mm stones around its neck .
The patient underwent surgical intervention via an abdominal approach. Intraoperative findings confirmed that the omentum, colon, gallbladder and 70 percent of his liver had herniated into the thoracic cavity. The organs were placed back into the abdominal cavity. The omentum was dissected off its adhesions and retrieved. A cholecystectomy was performed, and three stones were found in the gallbladder. The defect in the diaphragm, measuring 13cmx8cm, was repaired with a prolene mesh graft. A right-sided chest tube was inserted for drainage. The patient remained stable during the intraoperative phase. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and he was well at the follow-up. The chest drain was removed on the fifth day after the surgery. The patient was discharged 10 days after the surgical procedure without any problems.