A 7-year-old boy (born in 2011) was referred to the Outpatient Department of Ophthalmology at our tertiary care facility in July 2018 for photophobia, tearing and blurred vision in both eyes. This was the third attack. During the events, he reported no fatigue and did not have systemic diseases. In addition, he denied contact with anyone with influenza or a cold. No indications were noted in his birth history, growth history and family history.
He had a history of ocular irritation in both eyes twice. The first time was 4 months prior (in March 2018). The boy suffered from ocular pain, tearing and photophobia for 1 month. The ocular examination showed pin-like nebula in both corneas. In addition, he was diagnosed with viral keratitis. The symptoms were not significantly relieved after 2 week of local antiviral treatment. However, his symptoms dramatically disappeared after the withdrawal of the eye drops. No follow-up was performed because the patient was symptom free. The second attack occurred 2 months ago (in May 2018). The main complaints were photophobia, tearing, and a foreign body sensation, and the boy was observed repeatedly rubbing his eyes. The ocular examination showed anterior lid margin telangiectasia and scattered punctate nebula in the centre of the cornea. The boy was diagnosed with blepharokeratoconjunctivitis (BKC) and prescribed erythromycin and tobramycin dexamethasone. The symptoms were significantly relieved, and the cornea was transparent after 1 month.
Smears and cultures of bacteria and fungi and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for herpes simplex virus were performed during the first visit at the local hospital, and the results were negative.
The ocular examination performed during this visit revealed that the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of the right eye (OD) and the left eye was 20/20 and 20/25, respectively. The anterior segment, including the lens, anterior chamber and palpebral conjunctivae, appeared normal in the slit lamp examination. Multiple slightly raised lesions were observed in the pupillary area within the epithelium of both corneas. These lesions were whitish-grey, coarse, and oval-shaped, and some lesions were stained with fluorescein . The lesions involved the epithelium and subepithelium without invasion of the stroma or endothelium. The corneal sensitivity was intact and equal in each eye according to a cotton swab test. The tear breakup time (TBUT) in both eyes was reduced to 6 seconds. The IOPs were 17 mmHg (OS) and 18 mmHg (OD). The eye movements were normal in both eyes (OU). Abnormalities were not found in the posterior segment evaluation.
The boy was diagnosed with active TSPK in OU. Tobramycin dexamethasone drops, 4 times per day, were prescribed for 7 days. The patient’s symptoms of tearing, photophobia, and foreign body sensation were relieved at the one week follow-up visit. His BCVA was restored to 20/20 OU. Although fluorescein sodium staining remained in the cornea, the number of lesions decreased. The IOPs were 18 mmHg in both eyes. In the second week, fluorometholone 0.1% (FML 0.1%) and artificial tear drops (polyvinyl alcohol), 4 times per day, were prescribed for 7 days. The boy showed good compliance with this regimen. The symptoms disappeared in the second week. The BCVAs were 20/20 OU. The corneal lesions disappeared with no fluorescein staining. The IOPs were 19 mmHg (OD) and 17 mmHg (OS). During this visit, the child and parent were ordered to gradually reduce the frequency of FML 0.1% to 3 times a day for the first week, 2 times a day for the second week, and once a day for the following 6 months. They were requested to attend follow-up examinations in 1 month, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months. There was no recurrence after the withdrawal of FML 0.1%, and the IOPs were normal in both eyes at the one-year follow-up visit.