A polymorbid, 68-year-old man with a solitary left kidney and an ejection fraction of 25% underwent percutaneous insertion of a bifurcated SG into the subrenal AAA (sac width of 58 mm). Considering the short subrenal neck (12 mm in length, 24 mm in diameter), a type of SG with a suprarenal fixation of 28 mm in diameter (Endurant, Medtronic Inc., USA) was selected. The inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) and the L4 lumbar artery were embolized with coils to prevent the development of type II EL. The procedure was uneventful, the left solitary renal artery (RA) remained patent and no EL or progression of AAA sac size was evident on follow-up CTA (1 and 3 years after treatment). CTA examinations at 1 and 3 years after EVAR were negative without endoleak and even showed a reduction of the AAA sac from 58 to 55 mm. Subsequently, the patient was monitored annually by ultrasound, which showed stable AAA size until the 6th year after treatment.
At a 7-year follow-up, the patient presented with sudden onset of severe abdominal pain and shortness of breath. Ultrasound examination showed enlargement of the AAA sac and blood leakage at the proximal SG end. Urgent CTA demonstrated a type IA EL and distal migration of the SG along with marked progression of the AAA sac diameter to 91 mm . Due to high risk of sac rupture, urgent endovascular therapy under analgosedation was indicated. Using a percutaneous approach from the right femoral artery, a 36 × 70 mm tubular SG extension (Endurant, Medtronic Inc., USA) was introduced via a 22F sheath. The distance between the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and the RA was 30 mm. Simultaneously, a 70 cm long 7F sheath (Cook, Holland) was percutaneously introduced via the left brachial artery. A Rosen guidewire (Cook, The Netherlands) was used to ensure a stable position in the RA. In the lateral projection, the proximal aortic SG extension was first released, starting its covered portion just below the SMA origin and overlapping the left RA origin. Subsequently, in the anteroposterior projection, a 7 × 58 mm balloon-expandable SG (Advanta V12, Atrium Medical Corp., USA) was inserted into the RA parallel with the proximal end at the upper edge of the covered portion of the aortic SG extension. After simultaneous dilatation of the aortic extension and the renal SG, angiography was performed to demonstrate free patency of the RA and elimination of the EL at the proximal abdominal SG portion .
On CTA examination 4 days after the procedure, EL (30 × 30 mm in size) was detected in the dorsal aspect of the AAA sac. The washed-out residual at the lumbar artery origin was suggestive of a type II EL. Considering the EL extent, we opted for immediate treatment. Under local anesthesia with US guidance, the AAA sac puncture was performed through a transabdominal approach, and 1000 units of thrombin (Tisseel Lyo, Baxter, Germany) were injected sequentially . A follow-up CT angiography (CTA) examination 2 months later showed complete thrombosis of the AAA sac with a slight regression in size and a patent renal SG. The patient remained free of AAA specific clinical complaints aside from an abdominal bulge and passed away 13 months after treatment due to cardiac failure.