A 63-year-old woman was admitted into our hospital due to epigastric pain lasting one month. The pain radiated to the back and worsened after meals, but the patient did not present with fever, vomiting, or jaundice. In 1989, the patient was diagnosed with cholecystolithiasis following upper abdominal pain and underwent cholecystectomy. The patient was diagnosed with choledocholithiasis in 1991 and 2017, and underwent cholangiolithotomy twice.
Physical examination revealed multiple surgical scars and mild tenderness in the right upper abdomen, with no signs of rebound tenderness.
Routine blood tests, liver function tests, blood amylase, and tumor markers were normal.
A CT report from the other hospital that the patient previously visited described a communication between the bile duct and duodenal bulb, as well as a high-density shadow inside the communication. On MRI, axial T2 weighted image showed dilatation of the bile duct, as well as a fistula connecting the bile duct and duodenal bulb. Inside the fistula, there was a hypointense lesion. Axial T1 weighted image contrast enhanced showed no enhancement of the lesion.
Gastroscopy revealed the presence of a bile duct stone incarcerated in the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb . After the stone was removed with an MWB-2 X4 Memory Basket (Wilson-Cook Medical Inc., Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States), we observed a fistula with a proximal diameter of 1.2 cm . The bile duct in the hilar area was observed when the gastroscope was inserted upwards through the fistula , and the terminal part of the common bile duct was observed when the gastroscope was inserted downwards . A 0.4-cm flat protruded lesion was seen in the lower portion of the common bile duct. The surface of the lesion appeared red under white light and brown under narrow band imaging . The descending duodenum and duodenal papilla were normal. Pneumatosis and dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts were noted in the intraoperative plain abdominal radiography. Contrast agent was injected via the gastroscope into the bile duct through the fistula, but the observation was severely interfered due to pneumatosis.