A 42-year-old male patient underwent a living-donor liver transplantation (LDLT) for progressive hepatitis B, cirrhosis with 7 points on the Child-Turcotte-Pugh scale and a model for end-stage liver disease score of 10. He was placed on the waiting list for transplantation because of suspected hepatocellular carcinoma. He had no history of psychiatric disorder. The donor was his 43-year-old brother who had no major medical problems. The clinical match was appropriate (see Table ), there were no contraindications and after further evaluation recipient and donor were found to be suitable for LDLT.
The donor underwent standard right lobectomy with preservation of the middle vein. In the recipient a standard total hepatectomy was performed, but due to successive intimal dissection of the hepatic and celiac artery complex arterial reconstruction was necessary. Due to the small diameter of the donor hepatic artery a direct anastomosis to the recipient supraceliac aorta was not feasible so an allogenic iliac artery conduit was required. The interposition graft was obtained from a heart-beating donor of a previous OLT and stored in histidine-tryptophane-ketoglutarate solution at +4°C for 10 days. Anastomosis of the bile duct was performed by duct-to-duct anastomosis to the donor right hepatic duct remnant.
At the time of transplantation the patient received induction immunosuppression consisting of 500 mg methylprednisolone and 20 mg basiliximab, the latter was repeated on the 4th post-operative day (POD). Immunosuppression was maintained with oral mycophenolat mofetil from the first POD at 2 × 1 g daily and oral prednisolone with an initial daily dose of 75 mg. The latter was tapered by 5 mg every two days. On the 5th POD oral tacrolimus was added to the immunosuppressive regimen starting with 0.5 mg on the first day and increasing daily dose by 1 to 2 mg to achieve trough plasma level of 4-10 μg per liter. After surgery the recipient received continuous intravenous infusion of 5000 units of unfractioned heparin per day for anticoagulation. For prevention of (re-)infection the patient also received 103 units of hepatitis B immunglobuline at reperfusion and intravenous infusion of piperacillin/tazobactam at surgery until the 3rd POD but no antimycotics or prophylactic CMV therapy (both donor and recipient had experienced CMV infection).
In the postoperative course serum transaminases peaked on the first and 4th POD but then decreased continuously as prothrombin time increased (coagulation factors were not substituted). Albeit a gradual increase in total bilirubin plasma levels only a mild graft dysfunction was suspected because bile flow over the T-drain increased. Daily doppler sonography of hepatic vessels showed unaltered graft perfusion. Overall the patient had an uncomplicated postoperative without signs for infection or organ dysfunction. The clinical course and laboratory findings did show mild a graft dysfunction but neither rejection nor acute graft failure were indicated.
On the 9th POD the patient suffered from acute paranoid psychosis, being alert but agitated and physically aggressive. He was mistrustful and afraid of being harmed by people around him. The patient became unmanageable and had to be sedated with an intramuscular injection of 5 mg haloperidol and an intravenous injection of 20 mg diazepam. Due to this unusual presentation of postoperative delirium a diagnostic workup was initiated. Patent hepatic artery could not be shown in doppler sonography and subsequent angiography. Explorative laparotomy on the same day revealed a complete thrombosis of the donor hepatic artery and gross ischemic infarction in all liver segments. Because progression of infarction and subsequent graft loss was to be expected the patient was placed on the transplant waiting list for re-OLT.
An acceptable organ was offered from an 18-year-old heart-beating donor on the following day and the patient underwent re-OLT 10 days after the LDLT. The hepatic artery of the new graft was reanastomosed to the old conduit. The immunosuppressive regimen was reinitiated as described above including tacrolimus (see Figure ). Emergence from anaesthesia was uneventful and the psychiatric symptoms did not recur in the postoperative course. Furthermore a clinically suspected episode of acute rejection indicated by rising transaminases was treated with a course of methylprednisolone (see Figure ). Daily doppler sonography of hepatic vessels showed an unaltered graft perfusion. Examination of the explant revealed thrombotic occlusion of the hepatic artery with anaemic infarction of all liver segments.