A 41 year old male presented at the emergency room reporting abdominal pain in the hypogastric region and in the lower right limb with neurogenic characteristics (paresthesia and burning mainly in the L2 dermatome) one week prior to admission. The patient had a history of papilliferous tumor of the thyroid, resected two years previously without need for complementary therapy. The patient underwent computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen , which revealed a hypodense and circumscript nodular formation, located in the right median presacral region, at the level of vertebrae S1 and S2, measuring approximately 4.4 × 3.9 × 3.4 cm. There were no other abdominal abnormalities. The decision to perform an excision surgery was based on the symptoms (associated with the topography of the tumor) and the need of diagnosis since the CT was inconclusive. There was no suspicious diagnosis related to the previous tumor.
The tumor found in laparoscopic surgery was a hardened nodular mass with a yellow surface and a elastic consistency. Its capsule was thickened by a significant adipose tissue layer firmly adhered to its surroundings. A colon liberation and meticulous dissection was performed in order to expose the tumor and to remove the adherences without harming important structures as the iliac vessels and the inferior hypogastric plexus .
The lesion was completely removed, without signs of bleeding or remaning lesions. Histopathological examination revealed dimensions of 5.0 × 3.5 × 2.6 cm . The surgery lasted 260 min and was performed through 4 incisions (right lumbar region, left and right iliac regions and infra-umbilical). The discharge was made after less than 24 h of hospitalization. The patient reported alteration in intestinal routine, retrograde ejaculation and pain in the lower right limb in the immediate postoperative phase, with spontaneous resolution after approximately one month. The patient was followed up for 4 months and there were no further complications.
The microscopy showed cells with elongated nuclei, arranged in vertices or in a wave pattern, next to areas with few cells (Antoni B areas) with edema, some containing microcysts and signs of previous hemorrhage. In the more populated areas (Antoni A), structures were characterized by nuclei present in two rows including almost homogeneous anuclear matter.
The immunohistochemical examination, carried out with antigen retrieval with moist heat (PT Link-Dako), revealed that the tumor was a schwannoma, positive for protein S-100, GFAP, AE1 and AE3 (these last two in rare cells) and negative for CD34. KI-67 was positive in less than 1% of cells, characterizing a benign schwanomma. Immunohistochemical investigation was carried out for melanocytic schwannoma for suspected Carney Complex , which returned a negative result (HMB45, Melan A, negative smooth muscle actin, positive vimentin).