A 73-year-old woman (height 146 cm, body weight 32 kg) with a history of hyperlipidemia and asymptomatic cerebral infarction was referred to our hospital for congestive heart failure due to mitral regurgitation (MR) and tricuspid regurgitation. She underwent mitral valvuloplasty with artificial tendon cords and annuloplasty and tricuspid annuloplasty through a small right thoracotomy. MR recurrence due to a rupture of the artificial tendon cord was noted 2 days after surgery, and mitral valve replacement with a median sternotomy and extracorporeal circulation was scheduled.
The patient was preoperatively medicated with carvedilol, tolvaptan, azosemide, atorvastatin, and perindopril. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed severe MR with a ruptured artificial tendon of the posterior papillary muscle of the mitral valve. Blood tests revealed anemia (hemoglobin 8.8 g/dL), and 12-lead electrocardiogram indicated monofocal supraventricular paroxysmal contraction, LV hypertrophy, and left atrial overload.
After the induction of anesthesia with midazolam, fentanyl, remifentanil, and rocuronium, we intubated the patient’s trachea and inserted a TEE transducer. We placed a 9-Fr sheath via the right internal jugular vein under ultrasound guidance and attempted PAC insertion under TEE guidance. However, the PAC could not pass the tricuspid valve, possibly because of the narrow tricuspid area after the annuloplasty. We therefore decided to start surgery with the PAC tip remaining in the right atrium (RA) and asked the surgeon to reposition it intraoperatively into the RV.
After the mitral valve was replaced (with a 27-mm tricuspid bioprosthetic valve), the surgeon manually advanced the PAC from the RA into the RV. At this time, the balloon at the tip of the PAC remained deflated. After closure of the RA, we initiated pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) monitoring, which showed higher systolic blood pressure and lower diastolic blood pressure than arterial blood pressure (ABP) at the left radial artery . The transgastric short-axis view of the TEE showed an inflated balloon at the tip of the PAC in the LV, indicating that the PAC had perforated the ventricular septum and migrated from the RV to the LV .
After discussion with the surgeon, the PAC balloon was first deflated, and the tip of the PAC was pulled out into the RV without much resistance. The PAC was then advanced to the right pulmonary artery under TEE guidance. At that time, the PAP value was 38/8 (18) mmHg [systolic/diastolic (mean)], indicating within the normal range. Using TEE, we evaluated the shunt blood flow through the ventricular septum. Initially, we observed a colored flow through the ventricular septum, but it gradually decreased and finally disappeared . We performed blood gas analysis to confirm no oxygen step-up between the right and left hearts. The partial pressures of oxygen were 49.9 mmHg and 47.4 mmHg at the RA and pulmonary artery, respectively. We concluded that there was no significant residual ventricular septal shunt; therefore, cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was weaned, the patient’s chest was closed, and the operation was terminated. The duration of CPB and surgery was 169 min and 301 min, respectively.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) under sedation and positive-pressure ventilation. After we confirmed there was no postoperative bleeding or circulatory problems, the patient’s trachea was extubated on the same night. On the first postoperative day, the PAC was removed after we reconfirmed that there was no oxygen step-up (37.3 mmHg and 35.2 mmHg at the RA and pulmonary artery, respectively). One week after surgery, postoperative TTE showed no residual shunt at the ventricular septum. The patient was discharged from the ICU on postoperative day 2 and transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on postoperative day 13.