A 25-year-old woman presented in the endocrinology clinic, in October 2013, with eyelid swelling, redness and retrobulbar pain with suspected Graves’ orbitopathy after ophthalmological examination, 4 months after delivery . Symptoms started during the third trimester of her pregnancy, in April 2013, which were considered pregnancy related phenomena and thus remained untreated. The patient did not have diplopia at the first visit, however, she complained about intermittent double vision starting 1 month later. In addition, she complained of a palpable “nodule” in the left side of her face.
The patient has had bronchial asthma and recurrent skin rashes of unknown aetiology for the past 10 years. Repeated examinations failed to find any evidence of an autoimmune disorder. Total IgG level was normal, while IgA and IgM were lower in 2008; with follow-up being recommended . Dacryoadenitis was diagnosed by ophthalmological examination and MRI in 2009 . Her symptoms disappeared within a few days after using a steroid containing eye drops.
On arrival at the endocrine unit in 2013, no signs or symptoms of hyperthyroidism were present. The thyroid gland was of normal size and without nodules. The palpable nodule on her face was identified, by ultrasound, as an unusual swollen limb of the left parotid gland, while thyroid ultrasound revealed no abnormalities. Physical examination revealed rashes on her legs. Proptosis values (measured by Hertel’s exophthalmometer) were 24 mm on the right side, and 21 mm on the left side. Visual acuity was 1.0 in both eyes, intraocular pressures were 16 mmHg and 20 mmHg on the right and left sides, respectively. Pupils were isocoric, equal and had normal reaction. Digital retropulsion did not suggest a mass or tumor in the retrobulbar space. Upon examination both the lower and upper eyelids were found to be markedly swollen and a swollen lacrimal gland became visible after the right upper eyelid had been lifted.
Orbital MRI showed enlarged lateral and superior rectus muscles, and eyelid oedema and swollen lacrimal gland in both orbits while the typical MRI features of Graves’ orbitopathy (proptosis, enlarged extraocular muscles, most frequently the inferior and medial rectuses, excessive amount of orbital connective tissue) were missing . Serum levels of TSH and thyroid hormones were in the normal range. TSH receptor antibody and thyroid peroxidase antibody levels were not elevated . Based on her medical history, laboratory and imaging results, the possibility of IgG4-rd was suspected. A markedly elevated IgG4 level was observed . Histological examination of the right lacrimal gland confirmed the diagnosis of Ig4-related orbitopathy, with both CD138 (the unique cell surface marker of plasma cells) and IgG4 immunohistochemical stainings showing plasmacytic infiltration in the same localisation , and excluding other IgG4 positive conditions thereby confirming the diagnosis of IgG4-related orbitopathy.
Placed on oral corticosteroid administration (methylprednisolone, 16 mg daily) a rapid improvement in both the eye symptoms and skin rashes was observed within a few days . However, after gradual tapering of the corticosteroid therapy (from January to March 2014), her ocular symptoms relapsed. After a second course of oral methylprednisolone for 8 weeks (from April to June 2014), the parotid gland enlargement disappeared and she remained asymptomatic for the next 24 months. However, IgG4 level started to rise during follow-up and in April 2017, periodic skin rashes appeared on the legs. As IgG4 level rose, skin biopsy was suggested, which she did not consent to. Her skin symptoms are currently under control with glucocorticoid-containing ointments. Should systemic treatment for the IgG4-rd be necessary in the future, rituximab therapy could be considered, since she has already rejected any future steroid courses fearing weight gain as one of its side effects . We assume that the swollen parotid gland and skin symptoms are additional manifestations of IgG4-rd, however, without biopsy this remains unproven.