A 70-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department of St. Camillo Hospital in Rome, suffering from neurological symptoms including dizziness and postural instability. A brain computed tomography (CT)-scan showed a subdural haematoma and the patient underwent surgical haematoma evacuation. Some days later, he experienced acute pulmonary insufficiency associated with fever and dry cough. Physical examination revealed hypotension (80/50 mmHg), sinus tachycardia (120 b.p.m.), and oxygen arterial desaturation (SpO2 of 63%), associated with tachypnoea and intercostal recession. The cardiac auscultation was normal. There was no lower limb pain or oedema. The pulmonary physical examination revealed an increased tactile fremitus and basal coarse crackles. A subsequent CT angiography scan performed excluded pulmonary embolism. The CT thorax showed multiple parenchymal areas at basal lobes compatible with pneumonia. Two SARS Cov-2 nasal swabs were performed both with a negative result. The worsening of patient clinical status required admission to intensive care unit and intensive care management including endotracheal intubation, inotropic drugs treatment (epinephrine), antibiotics (chloramphenicol, levofloxacin, linezolid, and cotrimoxazole), and anticoagulation therapy (enoxaparin). Oxygen arterial blood saturation levels tended to worsen in the upright position while they became better in supine position . Two weeks later, despite pneumonia resolution (negative blood cultures and no radiological evidence of pneumonia), the patient’s dyspnoea became worse, experiencing deep hypoxia as soon as the patient sat up with a partial resolution on recumbent position. Transoesophageal echocardiography with bubble-test showed aortic root dilatation and a lipomatous interatrial septum characterized by the presence of tunnel-like PFO with large ASA resulting in a big right-to-left shunt at rest (Videos 1–3, , and S).
The diagnostic hypothesis was a PFO-related POS due to anatomical factors like the ASA and the aortic root dilatation and exacerbated by the ventilation/perfusion mismatch caused by previous pneumonia. The patient was scheduled for PFO percutaneous closure intervention. The right heart catheterization excluded pulmonary hypertension and confirmed the presence of an intracardiac right-to-left shunt (Qp/Qs 0.81) . An Amplatzer PFO occluder device 25 mm was successfully implanted under intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) guidance without any residual shunt (, ). Device implantation was challenging due to the simultaneous presence of three complex anatomical features of the interatrial septum (ASA, long tunnel PFO, and lipomatous interatrial septum). A few days later, oxygen therapy was reduced and the patient was discharged. The 2-week follow-up echocardiography showed a well seated PFO closure device without any residual shunt either at rest and during Valsalva manoeuvre. The patient reported a better exercise tolerance without any limitation of daily physical activity (New York Heart Association I).