A 12-year-old Caucasian boy was admitted with painful redness in the conjunctiva and acutely blurred vision in his right eye. He referred a history of recurrent buccal aphthosis and nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms, such as abdominal pain and diarrhea. At admission, decreased visual acuity in the right eye (20/200) was observed. A slit lamp examination showed diffuse and painful episcleritis with injection in the superficial episcleral vessels ; the fundus examination revealed a right hyperemic disc with blurred margins . Inflammatory markers were increased (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 31 mm/1 h; C-reactive protein, 0.7 mg/L). The laboratory tests for infectious diseases, C3 and C4, rheumatoid factor, anti-double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and anti-Smith antigen antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Human leukocyte antigen typing was negative for B51, showing A02, A68, B44, B39, DRB1 and DRB3. A pathergy test, performed using an intradermal 21-gauge needle puncture on the skin of the forearm, was positive. According to the criteria of the International Study Group for Behçet's Disease, we diagnosed right optic neuritis and episcleritis secondary to Behçet's disease and commenced corticosteroid therapy with oral prednisone 1 mg/kg and dexamethasone eyedrops six times daily in the right eye. The patient's fundal and conjunctival appearance returned to normal within one week, with his visual acuity returning to 20/20. Therapy was therefore stopped. After this initial manifestation, the disease relapsed four times in the following six months in both eyes. The patient was therefore commenced on oral cyclosporine 100 mg twice daily, but another two episodes were noted, and the therapy was stopped after four months. He was then switched to endovenous infliximab, a chimeric anti-tumor necrosis factor-α (anti-TNF-α) monoclonal antibody, in an attempt to control the disease. Infusions of 5 mg/kg infliximab were administered at zero, two and six weeks and then at intervals of eight weeks. There was a remarkable response soon after the first infusion and a complete resolution of the inflammation after the second infusion. The patient remains well one year later and continues to enjoy remission on continued therapy with infliximab at intervals of eight weeks.