A 41-year-old female patient presented with bilateral conjunctival masses for more than six months, and the previous treatment with tobramycin eye drops was not effective. The patient had no contributory history of ocular trauma, family history of tumor and drug allergy. The mass on the conjunctival surface of the upper right eyelid was obvious, with telangiectasia and brown lesions on the surface, and was covered by a pseudomembrane . We observed pseudomembranes and deposits of yellowish-white lipid-like substances on the conjunctival surface of the lower eyelid . The conjunctiva of the left upper eyelid was covered with mucus and pseudomembranes, the conjunctival mass was prominent, and the surface vessels were hyperplasic . The conjunctival surface of the lower left eyelid was red, with yellowish-white lipid-like deposits on the surface . Eye movement in both eyes was normal: visual acuity—right eye, 1.0; left eye, 1.0; and intraocular pressure—right eye, 13 mmHg; left eye, 14 mmHg. We saw no abnormalities in the anterior and posterior segments of the eyes. Orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination showed slight thickening of both eyelids and no abnormalities in the lacrimal glands, extraocular muscles, or nerves . The preoperative diagnosis was a conjunctival mass in both eyes.
The patient was worried that the lesion might be malignant and requested surgery to clarify its nature. Therefore, we performed conjunctival mass resection on both eyes at the same time and removed as much diseased tissue as possible. Histopathological results showed severe chronic inflammation of the polypoid mucosa of the conjunctival mucosa, infiltration by comprised predominantly of neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells, fibrous-tissue hyperplasia, non-keratinized squamous epithelium or column epithelial papillary hyperplasia covering the fibrotic mucosa, and a great many visible inflammatory exudates in the lamina propria . Immunohistochemical staining results were positive for 34ßE12, cytokeratin, IgG, IgG4, and P63 and negative for Congo Red. IgG4+ cell count was approximately 100/HPF, IgG+ cell count was approximately 200/HPF, and the IgG4/IgG ratio was > 40%. Taking the patient’s clinical and pathological features together, we consider this is a case of IgG4+ LC. After surgery, the patient received tobramycin and dexamethasone eye drops at localized points in both eyes for 14 days. In the 10 months’ follow-up, the disease had not recurred in the patient’s eyes.