The patient, a 36-year-old woman, was diagnosed in 1985 with IgG lambda MM after presenting with tiredness and recurrent infections. She was found to be anaemic with a haemoglobin level of 73 g/l and thrombocytopenic with a platelet count of 85 × 109/l. Further testing revealed a markedly raised paraprotein of 62 g/l with positive urinary Bence-Jones protein. There was evidence of immunosuppression with reduced levels of uninvolved IgA (0.1 g/l) and IgM (0.2 g/l) immunoglobulins. Her renal function was reduced as evidenced by a creatinine clearance of 57 ml/min. A skeletal survey revealed multiple lytic lesions in both her humeri and femora. A bone marrow biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of MM.
Since the patient met the established criteria for symptomatic MM with end organ involvement as demonstrated by her anaemia, bony lytic lesions and immunosuppression with recurrent infections, she was commenced on standard chemotherapy advocated at the time. This comprised three cycles of melphalan 10 mg with prednisolone 60 mg for 4 days orally. After 1 cycle of chemotherapy the patient’s paraprotein had fallen to 26 g/l. She subsequently received two further cycles of melphalan and prednisolone which led to a further reduction in her paraprotein level to 7 g/l. This was followed by a high-dose melphalan (140 mg/m2) and autologous stem-cell transplant. Three months after her bone marrow transplant the patient’s paraprotein was undetectable and has never been detected again (Fig. ).
The patient had been annually reviewed since diagnosis and has remained in complete remission 30 years later with no further chemotherapy for her MM. Specifically, in April 2017, she continued to have a normal haematological profile with a haemoglobin of 135 g/l, white cell count of 9.1 × 109/l, and a platelet count of 191 × 109/l)). She is no longer immunosuppressed with an IgA of 0.6 g/l and IgM of 0.5 g/l. She also has no detectable paraprotein with a normal light chain ratio as assessed by serum protein electrophoresis and serum free light chain assay last assessed in April 2017. A repeat bone marrow biopsy 25 years ago showed that the patient was in complete remission. Imaging by whole body MRI in 2016 revealed no evidence of MM.
Five months prior to being diagnosed with MM she had been diagnosed with a superficial spreading malignant melanoma on her right leg, which was successfully treated by wide excision. She was subsequently diagnosed with three further primary melanomas at ages 53 (right buttock), 58 (right flank) and 62 (right forearm), all also successfully treated by surgical excision. While there was at that juncture no family history of melanomas or early onset pancreatic cancer, a diagnosis of hereditary melanoma syndrome which can be caused by germline mutations in the cyclin-dependent kinase Inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A) gene was considered in view of the history of multiple melanomas. Genetic testing of constitutional DNA extracted from EDTA venous blood was performed by genomic DNA PCR amplification using primers described previously of the 4 exons of CDKN2A (exons 1α, 1β, 2 and 3) . PCR fragments were isolated by agarose gel electrophoresis and purified prior to Sanger sequencing using QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Paisley, UK). This revealed the patient was a heterozygous carrier of the pathogenic c.213C > A mutation in the CDKN2A gene. This mutation results in a missense substitution of the amino acid asparagine to lysine in the expressed INK4A protein at position 71(N71K) and a leucine to methionine substitution in the expressed ARF protein (L86M) (Fig. ). The patient’s son has since been diagnosed with melanoma at the age of 34 years but he has yet to be genetically tested (Fig. ). Otherwise the patient’s family history is unremarkable and specifically there is no evidence for propensity to pancreatic cancers in family members.
Aside from MM and melanoma the patient has also been diagnosed with two other cancers. Firstly, in situ breast cancer at the age of 50 incidentally discovered during routine breast screening and which was treated with a mastectomy. Secondly, stage T2bN1M0 adenocarcinoma of the lung at the age 66 which was diagnosed following whole-body diffusion-weighted MRI investigation, performed as part of her MM follow-up investigation of hip pain. Her lung carcinoma has been treated by lobectomy, adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and vinorelbine in addition to radiotherapy (Fig. ). Mutation testing of the patient’s lung cancer tissue by PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing as described above revealed a loss of heterozygosity of the C.213C > A allele compared to the patient’s germline DNA (Fig. ). Paradoxically her MRI did not show any signs indicative of active MM.