A 70-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital complaining of a 12-h history of paroxysmal chest distress and chest pain. He had a past medical history of midbrain hemorrhage 6 years ago. He denied a history of hypertension, diabetes, paroxysmal headache, palpitations, or profuse sweating. He denied a history of drug abuse or recent intense emotional stress. His family history was unremarkable. The patient, without obvious inducement, suddenly experienced chest tightness and pain while in bed at 1 a.m. The paroxysmal chest pain lasted about 1 h each time and was accompanied by a feeling of crushing in the precordial region, sweating, shortness of breath, orthopnea, and nausea. Upon admission, a physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 185/122 mmHg, a heart rate of 100 beats/min, and a respiratory rate of 32 breaths/min. A pulmonary examination showed diffuse moist rales in the lungs. The initial results of laboratory findings showed elevated white blood cell count, myocardial enzyme, and troponin I levels. The extremely high levels of brain natriuretic peptide and arterial blood gases suggested that the patient might have heart and respiratory failure. Electrocardiography findings suggested sinus tachycardia and mild ST-segment depression in leads V4-V6. A pulmonary computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral pulmonary edema and a massive lesion in the left adrenal area. Transthoracic echocardiography showed left ventricular regional wall (apical wall and mid septal wall) motion abnormalities with an ejection fraction of 34%. The clinical diagnosis was ACS, heart failure, and respiratory failure. The patient was given a venturi mask for oxygen inhalation, morphine for pain relief and vasodilation, furosemide for diuresis, isosorbide nitrate for coronary artery dilation, aspirin combined with clopidogrel for antiplatelets, low molecular weight heparin for anticoagulation, and atorvastatin for lipid- lowering.
The next morning, the patient experienced severe chest distress and shortness of breath. His blood pressure fluctuated from 200/100 mmHg to 55/30 mmHg. An electrocardiogram showed ST- segment elevation in leads II, III, aVF, and V4–V6 and paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia. The levels of myocardial enzyme and troponin I increased progressively. Coronary angiography was performed to investigate possible acute myocardial infarction; however, the coronary arteries appeared normal. Based on the coronary angiography results, we stopped the antiplatelet and anticoagulation treatments.
At this time, we noticed that the patient had a left adrenal area mass that was accidentally discovered on a CT scan of the lung. An abdominal and pelvic CT scan revealed a left adrenal mass with an inhomogeneous density measuring 9.6 × 8.3 cm, and a contrast-enhanced CT scan demonstrated heterogeneous enhancement and multiple internal septum changes ). The apparent ACS and labile blood pressure associated with the enormous left adrenal mass raised the suspicion of pheochromocytoma, which was further supported by markedly elevated levels of catecholamine metabolites, plasma normetanephrine> 10,000 pg/mL (reference value, 19–121 pg/mL), and plasma metanephrine levels of 6356.17 pg/mL (reference value, 14–90 pg/mL). Subsequent laboratory tests were performed, and the following results were obtained: 24-h urinary epinephrine, 139 μg (reference value, 0–20 μg); 24-h urinary norepinephrine, 377 μg (reference value, 15–80 μg); serum calcitonin< 2.0 pg/mL (reference value, 0–8.4 pg/mL); and parathyroid hormone 27.8 pg/mL (reference value, 12–65 pg/mL). Intravenous urapidil hydrochloride was administered for hypertension, while endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were initiated for respiratory support. His blood pressure and levels of myocardial enzyme and troponin I gradually recovered to normal. On day 5 of admission, a repeat echocardiogram showed no obvious segmental abnormalities in the left and right ventricular wall, with recovery of the ejection fraction to 63% and normal systolic function.
After the patient’s condition improved, some examinations were carried out. Plasma aldosterone/renin activity ratio, sex hormones, and 17-hydroxyprogesterone tests were in the normal range; No abnormalities were found in 24-h urinary free cortisol excretion and 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test. Thyroid ultrasound and cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results were unremarkable. Considering that contrast-enhanced CT of the chest and abdomen and cranial MRI scans did not indicate suspicious metastases or extra-adrenal lesions, we decided to perform a left adrenalectomy. Terazosin was administered and titrated over approximately 3 weeks to provide an adequate alpha blockade before the surgical procedure. A histological examination of the adrenal gland mass confirmed that it was a pheochromocytoma . Postoperatively, the patient’s condition drastically improved. His blood pressure normalized, and he experienced no chest distress or pain. During the 9 months of regular follow-up, he had no symptoms and was in good condition. His levels of metanephrine, normetanephrine, parathyroid hormone, serum calcium, and calcitonin were in the normal range. His electrocardiogram and echocardiogram findings were normal. No suspicious lesions were found on the abdominal and pelvic CT enhanced scans.
At this point, we reviewed his past medical history of a midbrain hemorrhage 6 years prior. The patient was referred to the hospital with a 7-day history of suddenonset diplopia and dizziness. A cranial CT revealed a high-density lesion in the midbrain. An abnormal patch signal was found in the midbrain on cranial MRI, high signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging, a higher signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging, a slightly higher signal intensity on a diffuse weighted imaging sequence, and a heterogeneous intensity on a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequence. The results of the cranial MRI suggested a small midbrain hemorrhage . No abnormalities were found on CT angiography (CTA) of the vertebrobasilar artery. After medical treatment, the symptoms of diplopia and dizziness gradually improved. At that time, a lung CT revealed a mass (4.4 × 4.0 cm) in the left adrenal area [Fig. ]. We believed that the left adrenal mass that existed six years prior was the pheochromocytoma currently confirmed by histological examination.