A twelve-year-old boy with no medical history nor known ocular history complained of bilateral progressive visual loss and severe photophobia. There was no consanguinity reported no similar cases in the family. His best-corrected visual acuity was 2/10 in the right eye (RE) and 3/10 in the left eye (LE).
Fundus examination showed macular fibrotic-pigmented lesion associated with yellowish punctuate deposits in both eyes with heterogeneous patchy central autofluorescence and increased perifoveal autofluorescence on blue fundus autofluorescence (FAF) (Heidelberg, HRA2, Heidelberg, Germany). The peripheral retinal examination was normal. The optic disc appearance was normal in both eyes .
Swept source structural optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Topcon, DRI OCT Triton, Tokyo, Japan) revealed bilateral subretinal hyperreflective lesions, associated with focal areas of outer retinal atrophy and intraretinal pigment migration, without any subretinal fluid accumulation .
Early phases fluorescein angiography (FA) (Heidelberg, HRA2, Heidelberg, Germany) showed window defects at the level of areas of atrophy, followed by dye filling of the central fibrotic lesions, in both eyes. Bilateral perifoveal capillary dye leakage was observed in late FA phases .
On infracyanine green angiography (ICGA) (Heidelberg, HRA2, Heidelberg, Germany), we noted a speckled appearance of the macula with heterogenous areas of hypo and hyperfluorescence, in both eyes .
Swept source OCT-A (Topcon, DRI OCT Triton, Tokyo, Japan) confirmed the presence of bilateral inactive macular CNV within the fibrotic scars, showing a well-defined high-flow vascular network on en face imaging, at the level of the outer retina (OR) slab with a projection in the choriocapillaris (CC) slab. Cross-sectional OCT-A showed a high-flow signal within subretinal hyper-reflective lesions .
En face OCT-A highlighted the presence of typical MacTel in both eyes, revealing perifoveal markedly dilated telangiectatic and rarified capillaries in the deep capillary plexus (DCP) associated with perifoveal tortuous capillaries and vascular voids in the superficial capillary plexus (SCP). Foveal avascular zone (FAZ) was distorted in both SCP and DCP, and vascular anomalies were mainly temporal on the RE and more circumferential on the LE (A). Hyporeflective cystic cavities were noted on structural OCT within the inner foveal layers, around areas of vascular anomalies, which is consistent with MacTel (B).
Goldmann visual field (GVF) revealed reduced isopters associated with central scotomas in both eyes. We noted an enlarged blind spot associated with a temporal superior defect with exclusion of the blind spot and the central field in the RE and an exclusion of the blind spot in the LE .
Full-field electroretinogram (ff-ERG) (Metrovision, Perenchies, France) was within normal limits in both scotopic and photopic conditions. Indeed, the rod response amplitude and peak time were within the normal limits in scotopic conditions; oscillatory potentials were normal indicating a preserved macular function; photopic response amplitude and peak time were within normal limits as well; and finally, a flicker ERG showed regular periodic responses reflecting preserved M- and L-cones function (A).
Electro-oculogram (EOG) (Metrovision, Perenchies, France) revealed an Arden ratio within normal limits in both eyes (B).
In the presence of macular dystrophy, we asked for genetic analysis starting with BEST1 and PRPH2 genes sequencing. However, no pathogenic variant was found in either gene.
We completed our assessment with a whole exome sequencing (WES) that identified a known homozygous pathogenic variant in CYP2U1 gene (c.1168C > T, p.Arg390*), which is a disease-causing mutation in SPG56 . Bioinformatic analysis of the reads containing the c.1168C > T variant did not show any CNV, and it is likely that the patient is homozygous for the pathogenic variant (c.1168C > T, p.Arg390* pathogenic variant). However, compound heterozygous variants, including the c.1168C > T together with a deletion of exon3 cannot be excluded.
Our patient was neurologically asymptomatic; however, anamnesis revealed a history of walking and speech delay according to his parents. The specialized neurological clinical examination was unremarkable, electromyography (EMG) was normal, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine was unremarkable as well . On optic disc OCT, the peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness was within normal limits in both eyes.
Whole exome capture was performed on the index patient using the Roche NimbleGen version 2 (44.1–megabase pair) paired-end sample preparation kit and Illumina HiSeq2000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) at a mean coverage ×31 by Otogenetics Corporation (Norcross, GA, USA). Sequence reads were aligned to the human genome reference sequence (build hg19), and variants were identified after many steps of filtering (Habibi I., 2020). The pathogenicity index for the identified missense mutations was calculated in silico using ClinVar ( (accessed on 5 October 2021). Pathogenic variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing; however, segregation analysis was not done for the family.
Comprehensive ophthalmic examination and ocular assessment was performed in both parents and was strictly normal.