A 61-year-old male in good health with a history of mild low back pain over several years began developing subacute onset of worsening of back pain and lower extremity pain over six weeks. He had a lumbar steroid injection 18 months prior. He was initially evaluated at an outside institution where a magnetic resonance (MR) imaging study of the spine was obtained which was interpreted as normal. Due to unremitting back pain, he presented to our institution where a repeat MR imaging study was obtained demonstrating abnormal intradiscal signal between the L3 and L4 vertebral bodies consistent with disc space infection and adjacent vertebral osteomyelitis . In addition, a small amount of enhancing phlegmon was noted. The patient underwent a CT-guided biopsy of the disc space which was nondiagnostic with negative cultures. At the time of his initial presentation, his white count was 7.2 with C-reactive protein of 84 and a sedimentation rate of 84. Blood cultures were obtained and were negative. The patient was initially placed on broad-spectrum antibiotics. With ongoing symptoms and no identifiable pathogen, an open L3 disc space biopsy was performed three days later. Fungal culture revealed growth of Aspergillus nidulans. Susceptibility testing was performed. Serum Aspergillus antigen and Fungitell assays were significantly elevated. He was started on voriconazole 200 mg orally twice per day with excellent serum levels.
Initially, the patient's back pain began to improve. However, 4 weeks after the disc space biopsy and initiation of antifungal treatment, his symptoms rapidly progressed. The patient's laboratory studies revealed a sedimentation rate greater than 100 and his C-reactive protein was elevated at 25. His Aspergillus antigen was 3.75 which was a slight increase from his level of 3.37 about 4 weeks earlier. In addition, his voriconazole level was 0.9 which was down from 4.1 3 weeks prior. A follow-up MR demonstrated persistent T1 and STIR sequence signal abnormalities involving the L3 and L4 vertebral bodies. There was progressive bony destruction of the L3 and L4 vertebral bodies as well as focal progressive kyphosis. In addition, new wedge compression deformities of L1, L2, and L5 had developed in the interim. Presumably these were related to poor bone density. Although the patient had only undergone six weeks of antifungal therapy, the progression of symptoms, laboratory markers, and radiographic deterioration prompted recommendation for surgical intervention. The significant risk of mortality with Aspergillus nidulans spinal osteomyelitis treatment was the key factor in the recommendation for surgical debridement [–]. Treatment recommendations for spinal osteomyelitis and suspected treatment failure may be guided by unchanged or increasing inflammatory markers after four weeks of treatment [, ]. Infectious Disease Society of America recommendations in cases of suspected treatment failure include follow-up MR imaging and additional tissue samples . In cases of radiographic evidence of treatment failure, surgical debridement should be considered . Given that all of these findings were present in our patient, aggressive surgical debridement and spinal stabilization was advised. The patient underwent an anterior lumbar discectomy at L3-L4 with partial corpectomies of the adjacent L3 and L4 vertebral bodies. After complete debridement of the infected disk and adjacent bone, an expandable titanium corpectomy cage was used for reconstruction. It was noted that the L3 disc material was very fibrotic, and intraoperative microbiology testing confirmed fungal hyphae consistent with aspergillosis. Anterior lumbar fusion procedures were also performed at L4-5 and L5-S1 using lordotic polyetheretherketone cages containing integrated screws. The anterior fusion construct corrected lumbar lordosis-pelvic incidence mismatch, stabilized the anterior and middle spinal columns, and provided a favorable arthrodesis environment. Circumferential spinal fixation was also desired due to the patient's poor bone quality and placement of the expandable cage . The patient was repositioned and then underwent a posterior bilateral pedicle screw and rod fixation from T11-S2 with iliac screws. We recommended a multilevel anterior and posterior fusion in order to maximize the chance of successful arthrodesis and reduce the chance of the need for further stabilization in the setting of this potentially fatal disease. The patient tolerated the surgical procedure well and reported immediate improvement in his back and leg pain. After surgery, he was initiated on voriconazole 300 mg twice daily along with caspofungin 50 mg daily for 6 weeks.
After 6 weeks, caspofungin was stopped and he received oral voriconazole at 300 mg twice daily for 7 months with adequate serum levels. Voriconazole was subsequently discontinued after the patient developed severe photosensitivity, and posaconazole 300 mg per day was initiated. Follow-up MR studies demonstrated resolution of the signal abnormality at the L3-L4 level without evidence of residual or recurrent infection. There was no evidence of spinal canal compromise. Due to the severity of the patient's pain on presentation, the patient could not tolerate standing X-rays preoperatively. However, standing spine X-rays at one year confirms good sagittal balance. The study demonstrated T11-S1 posterior fusion with pedicle screws and posterior stabilization rods with bilateral iliac screws, anterior discectomy with interbody grafts at L4-5 and L5-S1, and partial L3 and L4 corpectomies with an expandable cage. Imaging at two and three years is planned for deformity correction assessment. Serum Aspergillus antigen and Fungitell assay trended down and have normalized. His sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein levels are also normal. His back pain has significantly improved without any residual neurologic defects. Since he is now a year out from his extensive surgery without any evidence of persistent or recurrent infection, the plan is to discontinue posaconazole and monitor him closely.