A 40-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital because of poorly controlled hypertension for more than a decade, recently culminating in a month of chest tightness. Physical examination showed a temperature of 36.4 °C, pulse of 71 beats/min (bpm), respiration rate of 18 breaths/min, and blood pressure (BP) of 197/98 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa). Auscultation revealed clear breath sounds in both lungs, without dry or wet rales. The heart expanded downwards to the left, the heart rhythm was regular, and the heart rate (HR) was 70 bpm without pathological murmurs. ECG showed abnormal inferior-wall Q wave and ST-T change . Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed that the left-anterior descending (LAD) artery and the right coronary artery (RCA) were 90–95% narrowed. The patient was given clopidogrel (75 mg, qd), aspirin (100 mg, qd), atorvastatin (20 mg, qn), and antihypertensive drugs (amlodipine and carvedilol) before percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).
Coronary, renal angiographies, and PCI were performed on the radial artery path. Heparin (120 U/kg) was used during PCI. The LAD artery was 90% narrowed in the proximal and middle segments. The D1 was 95% narrowed in the proximal and middle segments. The right renal artery (RRA) was 80% narrowed at the opening , and the left renal artery (LRA) was 70% narrowed in the middle segment . A 6F EBU 3.5 guide catheter and SION wires were used. Two drug-eluting stents, Firebird 3.0 × 18 mm and 3.0 × 23 mm, were implanted in the proximal and middle segments of the LAD artery . The stent release pressure was 12–14 atm. Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) with a Sprinter 2.0 × 15 mm compliant balloon was performed in the D1 proximal end . Angiographic results were satisfactory .
Three hours after PCI, the patient manifested vomiting, heavy sweating, and wet and cold limbs with irritability. An emergency bedside cardiac ultrasound indicated a small to medium amount of effusion in the pericardial cavity. Pericardiocentesis was performed, and 20 mL of bloody fluid was drawn. An emergency coronary angiography (CAG) re-examination, performed to confirm the cause of pericardial effusion, showed no coronary perforation or contrast agent leakage or retention; the amount of pericardial effusion was small, which ruled out the possibility of coronary rupture or perforation (Supplementary Fig. ).
On the third day after PCI, the patient was conscious with respiratory distress and hypoxemia. SaO2 was about 85%. Pulsus paradoxus could be palpated. ECG showed bow-back downward ST elevation in leads I, II, III, and V4–V6 . Pulmonary artery CTA showed a large amount of pericardial effusion and a small amount of pleural effusion, insufficient dilation of both lower lungs, and no significant thrombosis in the bilateral pulmonary arteries . Emergency pericardiocentesis and catheter drainage were performed, and 190 mL of bloody liquid was drained. Administration of aspirin (100 mg, qd) was stopped, and the patient was only given clopidogrel (75 mg, qd).
On the fifth day after PCI, the patient’s chest tightness and pain could not be alleviated. SaO2 was about 85%, PCO2 was 28.3 mmHg, and PO2 was 64.3 mmHg. Biochemical test results showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 67.9 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 231.37 mg/L . Ultrasound results showed a small amount of effusion in the pericardial cavity and a large amount in the left thoracic cavity. We performed a left thoracic cavity puncture, and drained 500 mL of bloody fluid. The patient’s condition deteriorated, and bloody pericardial and pleural effusions occurred simultaneously. To rule out the possibility of aortic dissection, we performed an emergency CTA examination of the thoracic and abdominal aorta under tracheal intubation and mechanical-assisted ventilation. The results showed a peripheral hematoma of the ascending aorta, without dissection in the thoracic and abdominal arteries, and pleural effusion . As the patient had PCIS, prednisone 20 mg/d was administered for anti-inflammatory treatment.
On the seventh day after PCI, the patient’s complaint was decreased mobility of the left lower limb. Physical examination showed left-lower-extremity muscle power 0–1. A cranial CT showed cerebral infarction anterior to the anterior horn of the right ventricle . Aspirin (100 mg, qd) was added, and dual antiplatelet therapy was used. Prednisone (20 mg/d) anti-inflammatory treatment was continued. The muscle power of the left lower extremity was restored to normal at the twentieth day after PCI. A cardiac ultrasound recheck showed no effusion in the chest and a small amount in the pericardium (supplementary Fig. ). The prednisone was gradually reduced to 15 mg/d. After tracheal intubation, ventilator breathing support, pericardial and pleural drainage, and adrenocortical steroid (prednisone) treatment, the patient gradually recovered and was discharged 20 days later.