A 64-year-old female presented with chronic severe headaches, blurriness of vision, diabetes insipidus (DI), and an MRI finding of a sellar cystic lesion. She was originally diagnosed with DI at a different institution when she presented with symptoms of polyuria and polydipsia in 2011. At the time, she had a normal MRI of the brain and was treated with desmopressin 100 mcg/day. In 2016, she developed severe, achy bifrontal headaches 2–3 times a week with no associated symptoms. These headaches were managed with ibuprofen and sumatriptan with some benefit. Then, in December 2017, she began experiencing generalized fatigue and blurring of her left-sided vision that caused her to bump into objects on her left side. She also had a single episode of generalized tonic-clonic seizure that led to the identification of a new nonenhancing 9.4 × 9.2 × 6.3 mm sellar cystic lesion on MRI of the brain consistent with a SAC . She underwent testing of her pituitary function and a neurosurgical evaluation at a different institution. The managing team recommended a 1=year follow-up with a new MRI. She then presented to our institution for a second opinion. On examination, the patient had left-sided monocular temporal hemianopia. The pituitary function test revealed low levels of follicle- stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) for the patient’s age. Due to the severity of the patient’s headache and the presence of visual field defect, a surgical fenestration of the cyst was offered as an option. After discussing the risks and benefits in details, the patient elected to proceed with surgery.
The patient underwent a right-sided orbitofrontal craniotomy for the fenestration of the SAC through an eyelid crease incision [-]. With the patient in supine position, the head was rotated about 20° toward the contralateral side to provide a straight trajectory toward the sella. A single-piece orbitofrontal craniotomy was done extending from the keyhole laterally to the supraorbital neurovascular bundle medially with 3 cm superior extension. A U-shaped durotomy was done with the base toward the orbital rim. A sharp arachnoid dissection was performed to free the frontal lobe from the anterior skull base. Then, the optic nerves and anterior cerebral arteries were identified and the chiasmatic cistern was opened. The pulsating SAC was identified, and a large window was created into the cyst wall to create a direct communication with the subarachnoid space. A watertight dural closure is important to eliminate the risk for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak.
The patient postoperative course was complicated by a palpebral abscess, which was drained by ophthalmology and treated with oral clindamycin and erythromycin eye drops. At 6-month follow-up, she reported significant improvement of her headaches (1–2 times a month with less severity) with resolution of visual field deficit. In addition, her DI had resolved and was confirmed with laboratory testing and the desmopressin was discontinued by her endocrinologist. Postoperative MRI showed that the cyst was smaller in size with less deformation of the pituitary gland and the stalk .