A healthy 20-month-old Saudi girl was referred from a general pediatric clinic to an oculoplasty clinic with a slowly progressing mass in the lateral corner of the left eye. The mass had been present since birth and had gradually increased in size with developmental growth. The mother denied any history of trauma, pain, constitutional symptoms, other lesions, or changes in the lesion itself. According to the mother the lesion did not affect the patient’s vision, lacrimation, or quality of life.
The child had been delivered prematurely in week 36 by emergency cesarean section. Her birth weight was 1,900 g, and she had no history of birth injuries or congenital anomalies. She was healthy, fully immunized, meeting her age milestones, and growing normally. Prenatal and postnatal histories were unremarkable.
The patient’s vital signs were stable, and she appeared healthy with no dysmorphic facial features. Visual acuity examination revealed fix and follow in both eyes. External ophthalmic examination revealed a solitary well-defined pedunculated yellowish-white mobile mass measuring 9 × 6 × 3 mm occupying the left lateral canthus of the left eye, with a connecting stalk, firm consistency, and smooth surface . The mass was not attached to the orbital rim, and no ulceration, telangiectasia, eyelash loss, signs of inflammation, or other skin lesions were evident. Orbital imaging was not performed because of the external location of the mass and non-adherence to the underlying tissue. Due to the cosmetic appearance and growth noted by the family, they elected to have the lesion excised. An excisional biopsy was planned, and written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s family.
The procedure was performed under general anesthesia. The patient was prepared and draped under sterile conditions. The base of the lesion was then marked, and a local anesthetic solution of 1% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine was infiltrated to ensure good hemostasis. The skin over the marked area was incised using a #15 blade, and careful dissection was performed until a single piece of skin with firm underlying tan tissue was removed. The skin over the area was closed using 6 − 0 rapid vicryl sutures and skin adhesive tape (Steri-Strips™). The patient was in good physical condition when she left the operating room and was discharged from the hospital with instructions to have tobramycin-dexamethasone ointment applied twice daily for 2 weeks.
Histopathologic examination revealed a well-circumscribed, mature bony lesion beneath the subcutaneous tissue, with osteocytes in lacunae arranged concentrically around a central canal of fibrovascular tissue . The overlying epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue appeared unremarkable. These findings are consistent with osseous choristoma. Six months postoperatively the patient was doing well, and there was no recurrence of the lesion in the same area or any other areas. The appearance of the surgical site was acceptable .