A 46-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with melena.
The patient complained of melena over the previous 2 weeks. Gastroscopy performed successively in our emergency department revealed severe esophageal and gastric varices.
In 2008, the patient was diagnosed with cholecystolithiasis, cholecystitis, and a choledochal cyst causing persistent right upper abdominal pain for which she underwent cholecystectomy and choledochal cyst excision with Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. The abdominal pain did not recur after surgery. Abnormal liver function accompanied by slight bile duct dilatation was observed during physical examination in 2015. A liver biopsy revealed an intact hepatic lobule, mild hepatocyte edema with punctate necrosis, slight fibrosis in the portal area with lymphocytic infiltration, and no inflammation at the interface. Thereafter, diammonium glycyrrhizinate and ursodeoxycholic acid were regularly administered. However, her liver function remained abnormal, which manifested with continuous increase of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT).
The patient had no history of habitual alcohol consumption and no significant history of liver injury–inducing drug exposure. She had no chronic or familial inherited diseases.
The patient's temperature was 36.7°C, heart rate was 89 bpm, respiratory rate was 17 breaths/min, blood pressure was 125/65 mmHg, and oxygen saturation on room air was 98%. The patient had mild anemia, erythema of the palms, and splenomegaly with a medium-hard texture on percussion.
Blood examinations indicated moderate anemia (hemoglobin 81 g/L) with low leukocyte (3.24*109/L) and platelet counts (61*109/L). The prothrombin time and D-dimmer was normal. Liver function tests showed increased levels of several transaminases, especially ALP and GGT, with a normal bilirubin level and a mildly decreased albumin level; the renal function and the blood fat was normal. Liver tests were negative for hepatitis viruses, autoimmune liver diseases, and metabolic liver diseases including hepatolenticular degeneration and hemochromatosis. Exon sequencing revealed a substitution in CYP7B1.
Enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen showed a relatively regular liver contour, enlarged spleen (splenic length 20.2 cm, thickness 5.7 cm), slightly widened portal vein (diameter 1.4 cm), and varices in the lower esophagus and gastric fundus. The intrahepatic and hilar bile ducts were dilated and the upper segment of the common bile duct was not clearly visualized . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed dilated bile ducts in the hepatic region with unclear visualization of the common bile duct . Anastomotic stenosis was confirmed in subsequent digital subtraction angiography of cholangiography .
Liver biopsy was performed and the pathology showed essentially intact liver lobules, an orderly liver plate arrangement, and a slightly enlarged hilar region with interfacial inflammation. Mild fibrosis was observed in the interstitium and around the hepatic sinusoid. The epithelium of most small bile ducts showed an irregular pattern, and the hyperplastic portion of the marginal bile ducts was accompanied by mild neutrophil infiltration. Moreover, dilatation of a single bile duct was observed. Immunostaining revealed that some hepatocytes were CK7-positive, indicating chronic jaundice. Therefore, the final pathological diagnosis was chronic mild hepatitis with fibrosis (G3S2) and cholestasis .