Our patient was a 15-year-old Iranian boy with a 2-year history of skin ulcer compatible to pyoderma gangrenosum. From the onset of his skin problems, he had been receiving a low dose of steroids, which was increased to 1 mg/kg 2 months prior to admission. He was referred to our hospital following development of muscle weakness and severe dyspnea. History-taking revealed a 1-year history of discoloration of his fingers in cold temperatures. A physical examination showed scleroderma-like signs of acrosclerosis and a small mouth orifice with difficulty in opening. Blood tests showed a remarkable elevation of muscle enzymes (creatine phosphokinase [CPK] >3000, aldolase 39.4 and lactate dehydrogenase [LDH] 1510) and electromyogram-nerve conduction (EMG-NCV) tests indicated chronic moderate to severe myopathic process. We performed a muscle biopsy of his left deltoid muscle that revealed multiple necrotic fibers and extensive inflammatory endomysial foci. The laboratory findings showed antinuclear antibodies (ANA) 1:2500 positive, anti-double-stranded (ds) DNA 198 positive, anti-SM >200 positive, anti-SCL-70 >200 positive, anti-centromere >2 positive, anti-U1 RNP 178.4 positive, white blood cells (WBC) (from 3500 to 6900 during the hospitalization), hemoglobin (Hb) 12.3, platelets (PLT) 128,000, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 56 (normal range <30). His anticardiolipin, anti-beta 2 glycoprotein I and lupus anticoagulant antibodies were negative and also his complement 3 (C3) and complement 4 (C4) levels were in normal range. Our patient fulfilled the Alarcon-Segovia diagnostic criteria with positive serology and three of the five clinical criteria especially Raynaud’s phenomenon, acrosclerosis, and myositis. Our patient also met the Kasukawa diagnostic criteria with one common symptom of Raynaud's, positive serology, and mixed findings of leukopenia/thrombocytopenia, acrosclerosis, and muscle weakness. A chest X-ray showed diffuse pulmonary infiltration and a computed tomography (CT) scan reported a bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) reaction. Further tests also showed heart failure (ejection fraction [EF] = 30%) and pulmonary arterial hypertension (pulmonary artery pressure [PAP] = 75 mmHg). Pulmonary embolus was ruled out by CT angiography. According to the criteria, our patient was diagnosed with mixed connective tissue disorder (MCTD), and 1 g intravenous methylprednisolone was administered. Then our patient received 500 mg cyclophosphamide pulse therapy, and was discharged with prednisolone 70 mg daily and hydroxycholoroquine 200 mg daily. Our patient received the second pulse of 500 mg cyclophosphamide 2 weeks later. Three days after the second cyclophosphamide pulse when he was receiving prednisolone 70 mg/day, he developed several generalized tonic-colonic seizures. After admission to the intensive care unit, he developed another seizure that lasts 3 minutes. At this time, his blood pressure was 170/130. Therefore, phenytoin and antihypertension drugs were prescribed. An MRI scan of our patient revealed high signal intensities on T2-weighted images and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences in the subcortical white matter of the occipital, posterior parietal, and posterior temporal lobes, and the cerebellum . After 8 days, the brain MRI abnormalities had completely been resolved. These observations have been indicative of PRES.
From the first day of his second admission, our patient presented fever, cough and dyspnea and the laboratory tests showed creatinine 2.35 mg/dL, urea 182 mg/dL, WBC 3500, and platelets 75,000. A chest X-ray revealed extensive pleural effusion. In a peripheral blood smear, there was no evidence of thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura. The serial blood test showed a progressive increase in his creatinine level and decrease in his platelet count. Therefore, we started rituximab 500 mg for 2 weeks to control the disease flare-up. However, rituximab was not efficient and we started intravenous immunoglobulin (IV Ig) for 5 days. IV Ig did not improve our patient and we had to initiate plasma exchange. However, his creatinine level increased and respiratory symptoms became worse. Dialysis prevented the worsening of his condition and relieved our patient’s symptoms. The results from bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showed infection to cytomegalovirus (CMV), Gram-negative bacillus, and candida. Although our patient received broad-spectrum antibiotics and antifungal agents, his respiratory manifestations were not improved and he was intubated. After 5 days of intubation, our patient developed heart arrest and, following 45 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CRP), our patient died.