A 53-year-old man, working as a male nurse in a local hospital, was diagnosed with HCV infection after detection of abnormal liver function tests in 2010. His past medical history was unremarkable. He denied intravenous drug abuse or history of blood transfusions. In January 2011 he presented to the Outpatient Infectious Diseases clinic for evaluation: he was in good clinical condition and did not complain at all of articular or muscular pain; liver was palpable 3 cm below the right costal margin. No splenomegaly was present. His Body Mass Index was 27. HCV RNA was 660,000 IU/mL (TaqMan Real Time PCR); HCV genotype was 3a (INNO-LiPA HCV; Innogenetics, Ghent, Belgium). Liver biopsy showed a chronic active hepatitis, with Metavir A2 necroinflammatory grading and F2 fibrosis. FibroScan value was 6.1 kPa. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was over two times the upper limit of normal; thyroid hormones were normal as well as serum autoantibodies. After a psychiatric exam, which was negative for depressive disorders, the patient was considered eligible for antiviral treatment.
Table illustrates in detail biochemical and virological parameters prior to antiviral treatment initiation.
In March 2011 antiviral therapy was started with PEG-IFN-α-2a (180 mcg per week subcutaneously) and ribavirin (1000 mg per day orally). This therapy was prolonged for as long as 24 weeks. HCV-RNA became negative by the fourth week and persisted undetectable up to treatment completion. Similarly, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) persistently normalized within the first 3 weeks of treatment. Treatment was well tolerated, with the exception of flu-like symptoms, easily controlled by paracetamol, and a mild thrombocytopenia (platelet count nadir of 88,000/μl). In September 2011, the patient started the post-treatment follow up which confirmed the persistence of normal ALT and negative HCV RNA throughout 48 weeks up to September 2012. In September 2012, a new liver biopsy showed a mild reduction of Metavir grading and staging (A1 and F1, respectively).
Nine weeks after the cessation of PEG-IFN and ribavirin (November 2011), the patient developed symmetrical polyarthritis, with pain and edema in the wrists, knees, shoulders and metacarpophalangeal joints, associated with prolonged morning stiffness. Distal interphalangeal joints were spared. Hand X-ray showed no remarkable findings, but magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected bone erosions with juxta-articular osteopenia in wrist, knee and hand joints. Laboratory exams revealed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 7,200 cells/μl, haemoglobin level was 12.8 g/dL, creatinine was 0.9 mg/dL. Post-treatment biochemical, virological and immunological data are summarized in Table .
A diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) was made on the basis of clinical features, MRI evidence of juxta-articular bone erosions, Rheumatoid Factor (RF) and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody positivity.
The patient was initially treated with prednisone 25 mg/day orally and Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) for as long as two months; in April 2012 he was switched to methotrexate (6 mg/week) and sulfasalazine (2 grams/day), due to the persistence of joint pain, obtaining a quick favorable response to treatment.