A 30-year-old gravida 3, para 3 presented with low back pain, seven months after her third delivery.
Her first two deliveries were normal vaginal deliveries without any problems. In both pregnancies, low back pain occurred from the second trimester, and spontaneously improved after delivery. She was naturally healthy with no history of metabolic bone disease, menstrual abnormalities, previous fractures, or eating disorders. She also had no reported family history of osteoporosis or malignancy.
During her third pregnancy, she again became aware of low back pain from the second trimester. She had no problems with walking or activities of daily living. As it was similar to the lower back pain of previous pregnancies, it was thought to be pregnancy-associated low back pain and was not specifically examined. The pregnancy course was good, with a normal vaginal delivery at term. Her baby was healthy.
However, her low back pain persisted after 5 months postpartum. She visited an orthopaedic clinic and was treated conservatively with analgesics. Her low back pain worsened sharply 7 months after delivery, so she went to another orthopaedic clinic. She had no episodes of trauma. A spinal X-ray and MRI were taken to rule out spinal lesions. Multiple compression fractures were observed at Th11, L1 and L5 . She was referred to our hospital to investigate the cause.
The patient was 162 cm tall, weighed 69 kg, and had a body mass index of 26 when she visited our hospital. The pain was localized to the mid-lumbar region above the sacrum and was accompanied by tenderness. She had difficulty walking due to back pain and used a wheelchair at the time of her visit. The pain was exacerbated by flexion and activity and was partially relieved by rest. Analgesics had limited effect. No sensory or movement impairment was observed in her lower limbs. She continued to breastfeed. Both breasts were rather firm, which was thought to be attributable to the breastfeeding period. No difference between the left and right breasts was observed, and the patient reported no changes in skin (e.g., indentations), secretions other than milk, or pain in her breasts.
We suspected pregnancy- and lactation-associated osteoporosis (PLO) as the cause of the multiple compression vertebral fractures. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry revealed a bone mineral density (BMD) of 0.854 g/cm2, T-score: −1.4 for the lumbar spine (L2–L4), and BMD: 0.801 g/cm2, T-score: 0.2 for the femoral neck, which are within normal ranges.
Blood test results are shown in Table . They indicated hepatic dysfunction and elevated serum calcium. The bone resorption marker was high. We decided to perform systemic CT because of her unexplained hepatic dysfunction. It showed multiple contrast-enhanced masses in both breasts, multiple lymph node metastases, multiple bone metastases in the spine, lung metastasis, and liver metastasis . We suspected advanced breast cancer. Bilateral needle biopsies of her breast tissue revealed invasive HER2-positive ductal carcinoma . Her low back pain was caused by a compression fracture from spinal metastasis of breast cancer. She started chemotherapy with paclitaxel and trastuzumab at 8 months postpartum. Two and a half years after the start of treatment, she is in complete clinical remission.