A 6-year-old girl presented with low-grade fever for 1 month, with progressive increasing bitemporal swelling and bilateral proptosis (right greater than left) . On examination, she was markedly cachexic and had significant loss of appetite and weight. She had bilateral proptosis with normal visual acuity and extraocular movements. There was an ill-defined, nontender, firm swelling in the bilateral temporal region with the skin over the swelling being normal. Her neurological examination was normal. There was no palpable abdominal organomegaly and no lymphadenopathy. The contrast-enhanced axial Computed Tomographic (CT) images showed an enhancing infiltrate occupying the lateral wall of the orbit pushing the globe outwards and manifesting as proptosis. The infiltrate extended toward the bilateral temporal fossae beneath the temporalis muscle. There were extradural infiltrates extending bilaterally beneath the frontal and temporal bones. On both sides, small lobules were extending into the cortex of the frontal lobes and causing perifocal edema [Figures and ]. The coronal CT showed that the left maxilla was also filled by the lesion . Her hemoglobin was 9 gm% and the total leucocyte count was 34,800/mm3. Her differential leucocytic count showed 5% neutrophils, 14% lymphocytes and 1% reticulocytes. The rest of the cells were immature and deformed cells. The FNAC from the bitemporal swelling showed clusters of atypical cells with a high nuclear–cytoplasmic ratio. The cells contained an irregularly shaped nuclei, with two to three nucleoli and scanty cytoplasm. The cytology was suggestive of a leukemic infiltrate. The bone marrow aspirate and biopsy showed hypercellular marrow smears with proliferation of blasts (approximately 25–30%). The blasts were positive for myeloperoxidase; erythroid cells and megakaryocytes were reduced. The findings were suggestive of AML [Figures –].
Following diagnosis, she undertook two cycles of intensive chemotherapy, including cytosine arabinoside (100 mg/m2) and doxorubicin (30 mg/m2) in a 7-day cycle at her local hospital, with consequent remission of the disease. She did not report for a subsequent follow-up at our center.