A 67-year-old man with a 2-month history of progressive hoarseness of voice, odynophagia, dysphagia, and exertional dyspnea presented to our hospital. In addition, he complained about a new growing skin lesion on his back. The patient had a previous history of smoking, but he reported ongoing abstinence from nicotine for 17 years. In the clinical examination, several subcutaneous nodules located on the right chest, on the head and on the back were found. Laryngoscopy revealed a fixed right hemilarynx with an immobile right vocal fold and a normal left vocal fold. Magnetic-resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck showed a large mass protruding into the right hemilarynx (, arrow). On suspicion of laryngeal carcinoma with cutaneous metastases, a positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) scan with F-18-fluordeoxyglucose (FDG) was performed. The right piriform sinus and adjacent cervical lymph nodes showed significant tracer uptake (, arrow). Subsequently, a pharyngeal pan-endoscopy revealed the presence of a large tumor mass originating from the right piriform sinus, which was highly suggestive of carcinoma. Histopathological examination, on the other hand, disclosed infiltrates of atypical blastoid cells growing incohesively beneath an intact epithelial layer. Within those blastoid cells, immunohistochemistry demonstrated high expression of CD45 and myeloperoxidase (MPO). The pan-cytokeratin antibody only reacted with squamous epithelial cells, indicating that squamous cell carcinoma was not present. Similarly, skin biopsies removed from the back confirmed infiltrates of blastoid cells that expressed CD45, chloroacetate esterase, and MPO . Collectively, the lesion suspicious for larynx carcinoma and the skin lesions were identified as leukemic infiltrates, termed chloromas, of an acute myeloid leukemia. For further diagnostic and therapeutic steps, the patient was referred to the department of hematology. At admission, blood counts, coagulation parameters and LDH were within normal limits [white blood cell count: 6.50/nl (normal range: 4.23-9.1), hemoglobin level: 16.3 g/dl (normal range: 13.7-17.5), platelet count: 156/nl (normal range: 163-337)]. No blasts were found in the peripheral blood. The ensuing bone marrow examination yielded equivocal results: While neither microscopy nor flow cytometry immunophenotyping could confirm the presence of leukemia in the bone marrow aspirate, histopathological examination of the bone marrow biopsy revealed a significant infiltration with 50% myeloid blasts. Remarkably, the bone marrow morphology exhibited a strict dichotomy between areas exclusively covered with blastoid cells expressing MPO and areas with normal hematopoiesis consisting of chloroacetate esterase expressing granulocytes, CD61-positive megakaryocytes and confluent clusters of regular erythropoesis. Furthermore, 20% of the blastoid cells were positive for CD34 , but no CD45, CD61, CD68 or chloracetate esterase expression could be detected. The blastiod cells were embedded in CD68-positive reticulum cells, and reticular fibres. Using nested PCR weak signals of PML-RARA fusion transcripts were found. The cytogenetical analysis yielded a normal male karyotype with no apparent alterations. Notably, no translocation t(15;17) could be detected via fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Due to the low signal intensity of PML-RARA, additional molecular genetic examinations of peripheral blood and skin chloromas were performed. The PML-RARA fusion was detected by nested PCR in both blood and skin samples, confirming the diagnosis of APL with cryptic PML-RARA rearrangement.