A 53-year-old female renal allograft recipient with a history of hypertension presented to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a septic shock and multi-organ failure. In the past, left nephrectomy had been performed due to kidney dysfunction. Seven years before admission, she underwent deceased-donor renal transplantation due to pyelonephritis of the right kidney. The immunosuppressive regimen included methylprednisolone, mycophenolate mofetil (1000 mg-0-1000 mg) and cyclosporine (25 mg-0-50 mg).
Since 7 months, the patient had been re-admitted repeatedly to other hospitals because of recurrent fever, however without demonstration of an infectious agent. One month earlier she had been admitted to the hospital because of dyspnoea and dry cough. Atypical right bronchopneumonia was suspected based on computed tomography (CT) of the lungs and treated empirically with antibiotic therapy including piperacillin/tazobactam, metronidazole, and fluconazole. Since the patient was deteriorating, she was admitted to the pulmonary ICU of our hospital.
Because of a history of weight loss and the patient starting to complain of abdominal pain at the pulmonary ICU, and the presence of anemia and intestinal hemorrhage, an abdominal CT was performed. The CT revealed ascites, enlarged uterus with wall thickening, enlarged left ovarium, as well as enlarged mesenteric and retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Further, the low thoracic area showed bilateral pleural effusion and hydropericardium.
Because of the massive intestinal hemorrhage, surgery was needed four days after admission to the pulmonary ICU, during which a right-sided hemicolectomy with side-to-side ileotransverse anastomosis was performed. Additionally, left adnexectomy was performed, because inflammatory tumor lesions were found. As her condition deteriorated post-operatively, the patient was intubated, analgo-sedated to Glasgow Coma Scale 3 (GCS 3) and artificially ventilated with inspired FiO2 0.65-1. Norepinephrine was administered for hypotension. The patient was transferred to our ICU after 24 h of mechanical ventilation in the pulmonary ICU, because of progression of multiple organ failure, including acute renal failure.
On admission at 9:15 a.m., under norepinephrine administration (0.4 μg/kg/min), blood pressure was 110/50 mmHg, HR was 117/min, temperature 37.2 °C, and the patient was anuric. Laboratory analyses revealed combined metabolic and respiratory acidosis (pH 7.136, pCO2 7.8 kPa, BE −11 mmol/l, pO2 12.65 kPa, HCO3 16.1 mmol/l, O2 saturation 93.4%, paO2/FiO2 94, arterial lactate 2.13 mmol/l), and hyperkalemia (6.29 mmol/l), hyperchloremia (121.7 mmol/l), elevated blood urea and creatinine (13.11 mmol/l and 179.5 μmol/l, respectively), AST 346.4 U/l and elevated C-reactive protein (196.2 mg/l) and procalcitonin (2.14 μg/l). Blood analyses corroborated massive blood loss (Hb 82 g/l, Ht 0.24, RBC 2.77 × 1012/l) and showed WBC 14.2 × 109/l and PLT 147 × 109/l. After the admission, cannulation of left subclavian vein and the left radial artery was performed. Left thoracic drainage was performed due to an iatrogenic left anterior pneumothorax, confirmed by CT, which also showed extensive diffuse bilateral infiltrates . At 12 a.m., blood culture from a blood sample taken upon admission was found positive for Staphylococcus haemolyticus. Moreover, Staphyloccocus aureus was cultured from the abdominal cavity. Subsequently, linezolid was added to the therapeutical regimen.
Histology tissue specimens obtained from the abdominal cavity revealed granuloma, indicative of tuberculous enteritis, peritonitis, adnexitis and lymphadenitis. Ziehl-Neelsen staining revealed an abundance of gram positive bacterial pathogens type Mycobacterium. A final diagnose of systemic mycobacteriosis, with superinfection due to the chronic immunosuppressive therapy was made. Antimycobacterial therapy was initiated with rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol and pyrazinamide. Intravenous administration of ciprofloxacin, piperacillin/tazobactam and linezolid was continued. Following the advice of the nephrologist, mycophenolate mofetil was discontinued and immunosuppressive therapy was continued with hydrocortisone. Later that day, the patient was turned to the prone position because of severe ARDS , for seven hours without improvement in oxygenation .
On day 2 of admission to the ICU, oxygenation improved (paO2/FiO2 185), while norepinephrine was continued (up to 0.5 μg/kg/min.). As oliguria persisted, intermittent hemodialysis was indicated (4 h/day). Prior to dialysis, laboratory analyses showed urea 21 mmol/l, creatinine 261.9 μmol/l, potassium 6.22 mmol/l and metabolic acidosis.
Day 3. Intermittent hemodialysis was maintained (4 h/day) and spontaneous diuresis increased to 760 ml/24 h. Norepinephrine infusion rate was gradually lowered.
Day 4. Final intermittent hemodialysis was indicated (4 h/day).
Day 5. Norepinephrine was discontinued.
Day 6. Tracheostomy was performed. Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Day 11. Mycophenolate mofetil was re-added to the immunosuppressive regimen.
Day 15. The analyses of sputum revealed filamentous fungi without further specification – the clinical pharmacologist prescribed anidulafungin for yeast superinfection following sensitivity testing (initial dose 200 mg i.v., then 100 mg i.v. every 24 h).
Day 16. Anidulafungin resistant Aspergillus flavus was confirmed in sputum, prompting addition of voriconazole to the current treatment (initial dose 300 mg i.v. every 12 h, then 200 mg i.v. every 12 h). The pulmonologist was consulted because of interaction between antimycotic agents and rifampicin. Because of the invasive aspergillosis, rifampicin was stopped.
Day 21. Because of low voriconazole serum level, the dose was increased to 400 mg i.v. every 12 h.
Day 23. Due to the Pseudomonas aeruginosa in the sputum, meropenem i.v. was added to the antimicrobial regimen.
Day 34. The patient was weaned from mechanical ventilation and breathed spontaneously through the tracheostomy tube with O2. The tracheostomy tube was removed four days later.
Day 42. The patient was discharged to the pulmonary ward, with the following medication: methylprednisolone, cyclosporine, hydrocortisone, rifampicin, isoniazid and pyrazinamide.