We report a 64-year-old Japanese woman with no past medical history, no family history of PoLMT or PLMT, and no obesity who did not smoke or drink alcohol. She felt uncomfortable but did not have pain in her left foot about 3 months before onset. Although she did not hit her foot, did not have joint deformities, and did not have morning stiffness, she developed a slight swelling and a hot feeling in the dorsolateral part of the left foot that resolved spontaneously over several days about 2 weeks before onset. Upon neurological examination, she presented with repetitive involuntary toe movement of the left foot in the absence of pain. The movement comprised nonrhythmic extension, flexion, abduction, adduction, and torsion, and was most prominent in the 4th and 5th toes (video). She was able to consciously suppress the movement to some extent, but not completely. The movement was exacerbated when she was distracted. This occurred throughout the day at rest and disappeared during sleep. She had no sensory disturbance, reduced tendon reflexes, weakness, or muscle atrophy, which indicated that she had no other neurological deficits. CT and MRI did not show tumors, infarction, hemorrhage, or any other lesions. Whole spinal cord MRI did not reveal compression or any other lesions. Nerve conduction studies and somatosensory evoked potentials were within normal limits. Cerebrospinal fluids and blood examination, including vitamin B1 and B12, ceruloplasmin, iron, thyroid function, and autoantibodies indicating collagen diseases and rheumatic arthritis, were also all within normal limits. The patient's movement did not fulfill either periodic limb movement or restless legs syndrome because of the absence during sleep and the lack of urge to move her legs and toes, respectively. We excluded psychogenic movement disorder because she had no secondary gain and spontaneous remissions, her onset was not sudden, and the movement had no variability over time. Considering the form of the movement without pain and other clinical points, we diagnosed her with idiopathic PoLMT. The patient was treated with a low dose of clonazepam (0.5 mg/day). Thereafter, the involuntary movement improved and disappeared completely several days after treatment. She discontinued clonazepam because of the complete resolution. PoLMT recurred several days after the withdrawal, although to a lesser extent. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.