In July 2018, a 63-year-old male patient received an emergency referral to our department from his primary care physician; on the previous day, the patient had noticed a feeling of numbness of the left lower lip and chin while eating his breakfast. The patient compared the sensation to that after being given anesthetic by the dentist. He reported that when getting up that morning, he had already experienced a feeling of uncertainty and a slightly unsteady gait, but that these had completely cleared after a short time. The patient’s medical history revealed Lyme disease with Bannwarth syndrome in 2017, a pulmonary embolism in 2017, a right vestibular neuropathy in 1998, arterial hypertension, nicotine consumption of 80 pack years, as well as a tonsillectomy in 1982. With regard to medications, the patient took 2.5 mg/d of ramipril for the treatment of arterial hypertension. The neurological examination revealed an approximately 2 × 3 cm area of hypoesthesia in the area of the chin and left lower lip. The patient’s sense of taste and smell were intact and the nerve exits were not painful on palpation. Otherwise, the cranial nerve status presented as normal and the muscles were normal in tone and eutrophic without paresis. The muscle reflexes were symmetrical and in the lower half of the normal range. The sensitivity to touch was normal, and coordination was intact. The cranial MRI revealed an acute ischemia in the right thalamus. Over the further course of the inpatient stay, further cerebro- and cardiovascular diagnostics were conducted with Duplex sonography of the brain-supplying arteries, long-term ECG and blood pressure monitoring, laboratory diagnostics, and transesophageal echocardiography. These revealed an increased risk of arteriosclerosis without indications of an embolic etiology of the ischemia. The patient was put on 100 mg of acetylsalicylic acid for cerebrovascular secondary prevention, a cholesterol-lowering treatment with 20 mg of simvastatin was initiated, and the patient was urgently advised to refrain from further nicotine consumption.