Epigastric pain for 5 d and acute onset oliguria.
A 39-year-old man with diabetes mellitus was admitted at Seoul National University Bundang Hospital for evaluation and management of acute kidney injury (AKI). He consulted at the emergency room due to epigastric pain that started five days prior and decreased urine volume noted on the day of the visit. There was no accompanying vomiting, diarrhea, or fever.
The patient has been on insulin for diabetes mellitus since 5 years ago and has a history of being hospitalized for chronic pancreatitis and alcoholic hepatitis one year ago. He had no previous surgeries. He denied use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker, and herbal or dietary supplements.
The patient had recently travelled to Japan. He worked as a chef, and upon detailed history taking, the patient claimed his diet only consisted of tomato meatball pasta and carbonara for nine consecutive days prior to his hospitalization. Each serving of meatball pasta contained 100 g shredded mozzarella cheese (656 mg phosphorus/100 g) and 1 slice of cheddar cheese (936 mg phosphorus/100 g), while each serving of carbonara included 100 g mozzarella cheese and 125 g camembert cheese (347 mg phosphorus/100 g). Pasta also has 253 mg phosphorus for every 100 g. The amount of phosphorus he consumed is estimated to be more than twice the recommended intake for adult men.
Upon admission, vital signs were normal. Physical examination showed signs of volume overload.
Laboratory test results showed azotemia (serum creatinine 12.85 mg/dL and urea nitrogen 85 mg/dL) and elevated potassium (6.7 mmol/L), uric acid (9.0 mg/dL) and phosphorus (3.62 mmol/L) levels. Patient was hypocalcemic at 1.65 mmol/L (corrected calcium 1.79 mmol/L). Serum magnesium (0.66 mmol/L) was normal. Parathyroid hormone was within acceptable limits for chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients. He also presented with uncompensated metabolic acidosis (pH 7.147, bicarbonate 11.8 mmol/L). Patient’s latest serum creatinine before hospitalization was 1.68 mg/dL three months prior (estimated glomerular filtration rate 50.8 mL/min per 1.73 m2). Due to the rapid deterioration of renal function, further work-up was requested to establish other possible causes of AKI and/or CKD progression. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), fluorescent antinuclear antibody (FANA), and anti-streptolysin O (ASO) were negative. Patient had normal C3 and C4 levels (95 mg% and 26.30 mg%, respectively). Random urine protein/creatinine ratio was 1322.81 mg/g.
On ultrasound, the kidneys were normal-sized (right 12.1 cm and left 11.6 cm), with increased cortical echogenecity. No suspicious focal lesions or signs of urinary obstruction were noted.
Kidney biopsy under ultrasound guidance was performed on the fourth hospital day. The kidney biopsy revealed normal to mildly enlarged glomeruli, but with partially shrinked glomerular tufts; marked focal atrophy, tubular cell injury with some transparent crystal casts. There was also marked focal interstitial fibrosis and focal infiltration of mononuclear cells and a few eosinophils. Fibrointimal thickening of blood vessels were also noted. The immunofluorescence was negative for immunoglobulins and complement factors. The tubular crystal materials were positive for von Kossa staining, which established the diagnosis of APN .