A 68-year-old woman arrived at our emergency room complaining of dyspnoea, abdomen pain, and muscle weariness that had persisted for a month. Only during physically demanding tasks, such as climbing stairs, did dyspnoea occur. Two months prior, she had a history of COVID-19 infection with the saturation of 90%, and she was very anxious because of the COVID-19 infection at the time of her admission, which returned to baseline within a few hours after proper counselling and oxygen therapy. She spent a week in the hospital; her stay was uneventful. She has a history of four years of diabetes mellitus (DM), 10 years of hypertension (HTN), and occasional episodes of gastritis, for which she is taking omeprazole 20 mg as needed. For her DM and HTN, she takes 500 mg of metformin once daily and 5 mg of amlodipine once daily, respectively. There was no history of cardiorespiratory disease in her family. Her blood pressure was higher (140/90 mmHg) during the assessment. Vital signs, including O2 saturation, were normal. Examining the chest, typical vesicular sounds were heard.
The results of the lab tests were normal, and the chest X-ray revealed minor opacification around each lung’s periphery, which was assumed to be a result of COVID-19 alterations. Proton pump inhibitors were used to treat the patient’s abdominal pain, the post-COVID syndrome was identified, and the patient received status counselling. A month later, the patient had the same symptoms: ongoing muscle weakness, chest pain, exertional dyspnoea, a productive cough for a week, and 2 days of fever. Her temperature was 101.8 °F, and her saturation was 92% upon physical examination. During the physical examination, the right lower lobe’s bronchial breathing and the bilateral lung fields both showed coarse crackles. A chest X-ray revealed consolidation on the lower lobe of the right lung. She was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia and was treated with antibiotics and oxygen therapy. After clinical and radiological improvement, she was discharged after 8 days.
The patient complained of dyspnoea, ongoing muscle fatigue, multiple joint pain, difficulty swallowing, pursed and tightened lips with increased visibility of teeth , burning sensations in all four limbs, and pale fingers when exposed to cold after 2 weeks. The patient eventually made an appointment with our general outpatient department. We were reminded of some autoimmune conditions when we were discussing post-COVID syndrome during this presentation. The results of the lab study indicated a positive rheumatoid factor and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 90 mm/h. The level of vitamin B-12 was low, may be because of her vegetarian diet, and she also had a recurrent history of low vitamin B-12 in the past. An X-ray of the chest showed bilateral lungs with fibrotic alterations and reticular opacity, along with an elevated left hemidiaphragm. Due to persistent dyspnoea, the patient was scheduled for a spirometry and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of the chest. Spirometry revealed a restrictive pattern of lung disease, and the HCT scan showed a honeycombing pattern with fibrotic and traction bronchiectatic changes on bilateral lungs suggestive of interstitial lung disease (ILD) . Anti-CCP and uric acid levels were within the normal range. The autoantibody profile showed positive Ro-52 recombinant and centromere B (CB) antibodies, whereas Scl-70 was negative .
The diagnosis of SSc was made following “The American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism criteria for the classification of systemic sclerosis (SSc)”. The patient was referred for an ophthalmologic consultation and a normal Schirmer test. She was started on a decreasing dose of prednisolone, starting at 30 mg for 2 weeks, and then continued on 10mg. Vitamin B-12 and calcium supplements were also started, and the Raynaud phenomenon was managed with nifedipine. Follow-up after a month showed her symptoms of muscle weakness and dysphagia reduced significantly, and her vitamin B-12 level returned to a normal level after supplementation. The patient and her family were counselled regarding exposure to cold weather and the status and nature of her disease. Her blood sugar level was slightly high. Her serum is still positive for autoantibody, but with clinical improvement. She had increased dyspnoea with an oxygen saturation of 85% after 1 month of her initial follow-up, for which she was admitted for 2 more days and was started on azathioprine 50mg daily at discharge. She is currently stable and is on regular monthly follow-up.