A 35-year-old woman was admitted to Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine of our hospital for shortness of breath for 1 mo and sleep apnea for 3 d.
The patient had shortness of breath without any obvious reason approximately 1 mo ago. The antibiotic treatment and oxygen therapy by local hospital did not improve her symptoms. She presented with orthopnea and was forced to sleep in sitting position 3 d before her admission.
The patient had mild limb weakness for almost 4 years. The patient denied a history of speech disorders, hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, blood transfusion, or drug and food allergy.
The pedigree of this patient (Ⅲ8) showed her father had 5 siblings; and her mother had 9 siblings . Her mother (Ⅱ10) had a history of “leg weakness” and slurred speech for 10 years. Her third-oldest uncle (Ⅱ13) on her mother’s side had a history of limb tremor and slurred speech for 8 years, and he was suspected of having “Parkinson’s disease”.
The patient looked tired and haggard. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 104/68 mmHg, apical heart rate 78 per minute and regular, respiratory rate 24 per minute and somewhat labored, temperature 36.6 °C. The patient had clear consciousness, mild dysarthria, and a slightly shallow right nasolabial fold. Her respiratory pattern and effort were normal, with symmetrical respiratory movements and a bilateral speech tremor. Percussion and auscultation showed normal speech conduction and breath sounds in both lungs, and without dry or wet rales or pleural friction sounds. Additionally, her limb muscle strength was low, with grade 4 right limb muscle strength and grade 3–4 Left limb muscle strength using the Oxford Scale (AKA Medical Research Council Manual Muscle Testing scale). Her left-hand grip was weaker than that of the right side, and the right foot was hyperalgesic. Her plantar dorsiflexion was weak, and limb tendon reflexes could not be elicited.
Blood gas analysis results on admission (without inhaled oxygen) were pH: 7.32 (7.35-7.45), PaCO2: 69 (35-45) mmHg, PaO2: 55 (80-100) mmHg, HCO3−: 35.6 (22-27) mmol/L, and BE: 7.8 ± 3 mmol/L). The blood oxygen saturation was 55% without oxygen inhalation and reached 89% with oxygen inhalation during sleep. In addition, the b-type natriuretic peptide was 175 (0-100) pg/mL, creatine kinase 253 (40-200) U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 270 (120-250) U/L, a-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase 223 (72-182) U/L, and D-dimer was 2.9 (0-1.00) μg/mL. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, and thyroid function were within normal range.
Cardiac ultrasound reported a normal heart with a normal ejection fraction, and mild pericardial effusion. The electrocardiogram (ECG) results showed a normal sinus rhythm. Lung computed tomography (CT) showed normal mediastinal structures with no evidence of any mediastinal mass. No evidence of pleural lesions or pulmonary artery was demonstrated. A CT scan of her brain did not report abnormal sign.
Considering that the patient may have neuromuscular diseases, we performed electromyography (EMG). The results showed that myotonia potentials were visible in the resting state of the examined extremity muscles and the orbicularis oris muscles, with shortened motor unit potential (MUP) time limit, and the decreased amplitude. The results of motor nerve conduction velocity and sural nerve conduction velocity studies showed that peripheral sensory nerve conduction in both lower extremities was not elicited, and that peripheral motor nerve conduction in both lower extremities was difficult to elicit. There was no abnormality in the peripheral motor and peripheral sensory nerve conduction of the examined nerves in both upper extremities. There was also no abnormality in the F waves in bilateral median nerves and the H reflex of the tibial nerves. The results of repeat attenuation testing showed that the high and low frequency results of bilateral median nerves showed a decreasing trend, and the high frequency results of the right tibial nerve were decreased. There was no abnormality in the low frequency results. The patient's general condition was poor, and some examinations could not be performed. The above results indicated that the patient may have had myotonic myopathy, and further evaluation was recommended.