A 32-year-old male was referred to our hospital for elevated level of serum creatinine (Scr) (3.71 mg/dl) and proteinuria (3+) following a previous deceased cardiac donor-derived KT due to an unidentified cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Laboratory workups and results of diagnostic procedures performed are summarized in Table . He underwent a successful KT 26 months ago with Scr at discharge 0.9 mg/dl with an immunosuppressive protocol consisting of prednisone, mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus. Renal allograft function remained stable and urine analyses were always normal from discharge to 24 months after operation. Two months prior to this admission, he was hospitalized for fever and cough at another hospital. He was diagnosed with mild pulmonary infection and treated with azithromycin and ceftazidime. His pulmonary symptoms abated after a week antibiotic treatment while his serum Scr increased and proteinuria (3+) occurred. Furthermore, his blood platelet count also decreased to 34 × 109/L. Forty days prior to this admission, a renal allograft biopsy was performed. He was managed with intravenous antibiotics and immunosuppression enhancement by increasing the dosage of mycophenolate mofetil. His Scr level decreased initially with a nadir of 1.58 mg/dl, but elevated progressively with increased proteinuria (11.38 g/24 h). He denied family history of any kidney diseases or inheritable illnesses. A repeat kidney biopsy was performed in our hospital. Written informed consent to publish this case was obtained from this patient.
Light microscopy showed multiple periodic acid-Sciff stain (PAS)-positive materials in the capillary lumens . Capillary wall duplication was obvious and diffuse . Masson trichrome stain revealed extensive fuchsinophilic deposits in the subepithelial, subendothelial and mesangial spaces . There were no peritubular capillaritis, endotheliatis, tubulitis nor glomerulitis, excluding the possibility of antibody and T-cell-mediated rejection. Histological signs of calcineurin-inhibitor toxicity, such as band-like fibrosis, isometric vacuolization of the tubules and hyaline deposits in the arterioles were not present.
Immunofluorescence study indicated prominent C3 positivity (3+) along the basement membrane and in the mesangium in all the 6 glomeruli examined, while IgA, IgG, IgM and C1q and C4d staining were all negative.
Electron microscopy examination of 2 glomeruli showed widespread foot process effacement and electron-dense deposits in the subendothelial and subepithelial spaces . Furthermore, mesangial proliferation which protruded into capillary basement membrane caused the double contours observed in PAS staining. Subendothelial lucency, which is characteristic of TMA, was also present . No signs of chronic antibody-mediated rejection (ie. peritubular capillary multilayering), Based on these findings, a diagnosis of C3GN combined with TMA was rendered.
Retrospective review of the 1st biopsy slides (X.F.) indicated similar light microscopy findings . Immunofluorescence showed only prominent C3 staining with negative staining for other immunoglobulins and C4d. No electron microscopy study of the first allograft biopsy was performed.
Genetic testing for the major genes in complement pathway related with renal disease (C3, CFB, CFH, CFHR1, CFHR3, CFHR4, CFHR5, CFI, DGKE) [, ] were performed. We found two rare missense variants in compound heterozygous form, c.848A > G (p.Asp283Gly) and c.1339C > T (p.Pro447Ser) in the CFI gene (NM_000204.3) in the patient while his father and mother were found to harbor only the c.848A > G and c.1339C > T respectively . Both parents were phenotypically normal. This patient’s unaffected sister had neither of the 2 variants. No variants were identified in the other complement cascade protein genes commonly screened. Nevertheless, quantitative measurement of plasma CFI of the patient and his unaffected family members showed that their plasma CFI levels were all in normal range .
Our patient was treated with 2 sessions of plasma exchange, but no clinical improvement was achieved as indicated by persistent nephrotic-range proteinuria and progressive elevation of Scr. After approximately one-year follow-up, this patient was in dialysis.