A 68-year-old woman, no known drug allergies; with ESRD stage 5D secondary to chronic glomerulonephritis on hemodialysis in later 3 years. She had medical history of hypertension; a history of morbid obesity (body mass index [BMI]= 41.5), she underwent gastric bypass 13 years ago (current weight 56 ​​Kg), type 2 diabetes mellitus, primary hypothyroidism, secondary hyperparathyroidism and mitral insufficiency. She was an ex-smoker, stopping smoking 18 years ago, without any known toxic habits. She suffered a pulmonary thromboembolism 22 years ago, which was treated with acenocoumarol. In addition, the patient receives treatment with sevelamer, paricalcitol, cinacalcet, epoetin alfa, levothyroxine, folic acid, antidiabetic treatment and omeprazole.
In May 2017, a painful nodule on her left posterior thigh was observed, which was diagnosed as a lipoma by ultrasound. Two months later, the patient reported a significant increase in pain and the nodule size and between 3 and 4 new nodules appeared on her left front and back thigh . These nodules are firm, adherent and painful on palpation.
Dermatology Service was interconsulted, and a skin biopsy was performed obtaining anatomopathological findings compatible with calciphylaxis .
On a chest and abdominal radiography showed vascular calcifications of arteries.
In view of calciphylaxis diagnosis and by ruling out other disorders that may mimic CUA, the following measures were taken:
Acenocoumarol therapy was discontinued and instead low molecular weight heparin therapy was started, still maintained today. VDRA (Vitamin D Receptor Activator -paricalcitol) was also discontinued, maintaining the rest of treatment. Metabolic acidosis was corrected, vitamin k plasma levels were determined, and dialysis bath calcium was lowered. The administration of intravenous sodium thiosulfate 12.5 g after each hemodialysis session was started simultaneously as calciphylaxis treatment.
After the skin biopsy a deep ulcer without granulation tissue (1.0 to 1.5 cm diameter) was formed, with no infection which resolved after 5 months of cures and usual follow-up satisfactorily.
Three months after diagnosis, due to an unfavorable evolution and the increase in plasma calcium levels, a bisphosphonate therapy was started (intravenous pamidronate 30 mg weekly) because of its ability to inhibit vascular calcification and its anti-inflammatory effect.
Due to poor digestive tolerance, cinacalcet was replaced by etelcalcetide at an ascending dose of 5 mg intravenously injection after each hemodialysis session due to its lower incidence of gastrointestinal effects.
Three weeks later, because of the marked decrease in the serum calcium and phosphorous concentrations, we occasionally added a treatment with paricalcitol 1.0 mcg after hemodialysis, thus controlling the elevated levels of parathyroid hormone (iPTH).
Two months after initiating treatment with etelcalcetide, the dose was increased to 10 mg after each hemodialysis session due to lack of control in iPTH levels and one month later treatment with Pamidronate was stopped due to the appearance of severe maintained hypocalcemia. (Ca = 7.5 mg / dL) .
Finally, after 6 months of treatment, sodium thiosulfate was suspended due to favorable evolution of the wounds and pain reduction.
The patient currently continues on hemodialysis, stable, without painful lesions and with size reduction of the nodules, making it necessary to increase the dosage of etelcalcetide to 15 mg 3 times a week due to poor control and maintenance high levels of iPTH .
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report.