A 50-year-old woman native of Haiti presented to the Cayenne hospital in French Guiana with complaints of persistent fever, mild cough, asthenia and anorexia. She reported medical consultation three months before for febrile nasal obstruction and cough treated by amoxicillin-clavulanic acid without ameliorations. She lived in French Guiana for 20 years.
Diagnosis of HIV infection was further achieved, showing a high viral replication level (HIV viral load = 7,300,000 copies/mL) along with a deeply immunocompromised status (CD4 count = 22 cells/mm3). A full-body computer tomography scanner (CT scan) showed a complete opacification of right maxillary sinus filled with flocculent calcifications . This typical aspect along with an absence of osteolysis or osteocondensation was evocative of an Aspergillus spp. fungus ball. Additionally, CT scan showed bilateral inferior alveolar opacities (also visible during chest radiography), hepatosplenomegaly and disseminated lymph nodes up to 2 cms.
Diagnosis protocol included for microbiological examinations: sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), maxillary sinus puncture, bone marrow, osteomedullar, node and hepatitis biopsies. Potassium hydroxide (KOH) direct examination and May-Grünwald Giemsa (MGG) stained smears were negative except for the sputum and the BAL. They showed an association of yeast and a gram-negative bacterium further identified in culture as Candida albicans, Klebsiella pneumonia and Pseudomonas fluorescens. Histopathology examination including Gomory Methenamine-Silver Grocott (GG) and Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS) staining have been practiced on the liver, the osteomedullar biopsy and the BAL fluid and were negative. Serologic analysis revealed no detection of Aspergillus spp. galactomannan antigen nor specific antibodies for Histoplasma or Leishmania.
Patient suddenly developed a respiratory distress syndrome along with a severe sepsis-like infection, after a prolonged well-supported fever. Antifungal therapy with Voriconazole was introduced due to presumption of an Aspergillus spp. maxillary infection that may be associated with pulmonary aspergillosis. Antimicrobial therapy with Piperacillin-tazobactam was introduced to cover a potential bacterial pulmonary infection (Klebsiella spp. and Pseudomonas spp.). Finally, the patient rapidly died of a respiratory distress syndrome, three days after the beginning of the pharmacological treatment and before the H. capsulatum infection was diagnosed.
Indeed, H. capsulatum was isolated from the sinusitis aspirate and from cervical adenopathy biopsy after 20 and 15 days of culture, respectively using Sabouraud/chloramphenicol/gentamicin agar media at 30 °C. The other fungal cultures (bone marrow, liver biopsy, blood, urine, BAL and expectorations) remained sterile after 2 months of incubation. Retrospectively, after a slide discoloration, a GG staining was performed on sinus aspirate and allowed to identify ovoid 2–4 μm yeasts evocative of Histoplasma capsulatum var. capsulatum, previously not visible during MGG staining . Additionally, a H. capsulatum real-time PCR analysis developed by the Academic Laboratory of Parasitology and Mycology, Cayenne Hospital, French Guiana was retrospectively performed on expectorations, BAL fluid and node biopsy and tested positive, confirming the diagnosis.
Several underlying pathologies have been revealed during post-mortem analysis. First, lymphoma diagnostic was evocated following direct examination of bone marrow, osteomedullar and node biopsies and was confirmed as a B lymphocyte-depleted Hodgkin’s disease by immunophenotyping (CD20+ CD3+ CD30+ ki67+). Then, disseminated Mycobacterium avium infection was diagnosed by PCR on positive culturing of BAL, bone marrow, liver biopsy and node biopsy.
A search for published cases of H. capsulatum sinusitis was conducted in PubMed database using the keywords “Histoplasma capsulatum”, “sinusitis”, “rhinosinusitis”, “histoplasmosis”. Only cases in which imaging confirmed sinusitis and H. capsulatum was documented by histopathologic direct examination or culture were included in the review. Studies in any language were considered and reviewed. Extracted data included age and gender, patient origin, underlying disease, clinical signs, symptoms duration, site of infection, direct examination and culture results, CT scan images of the sinus, treatment and outcome.
Eight articles reporting 8 cases of H. capsulatum sinusitis from 1993 to the present were included. These cases are summarized in Table [, –].