A 33-year-old Chinese female complained of sudden onset of a para-central large scotoma in her left eye seven days after the third intramuscular administration of rabies vaccine (Rabipur, Novartis) according to standard vaccine time schedule (days 0, 3, 7, 14 and 28) for a stray cat scratch. The type of the rabies vaccine is embryonated-egg vaccine. She has not been administered with other vaccines recently and it was the first time she had symptoms after vaccination. The stray cat was not available for observation of rabies symptoms. Otherwise healthy, the patient has no remarkable medical history or underlying pathology. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at the time was 20/20 in both eyes with − 9.0 D right eye and − 8.5 D left eye. An ophthalmoscopic examination of the left eye revealed nothing to explain her complaints. During the follow-up, she developed photopsia in the left eye.
Visual field testing showed an enlarged blind spot and decreased sensitivity superiorly and nasally . Fundus fluorescence angiography (FFA) and autofluorescence (AF) revealed hyperfluorescence corresponding to the area of the retina in the region of ellipsoid zone abnormalities. FFA showed right eye the normal appearances in arteriovenous phase and late phase , and early choroidal background hyperfluorescence and mild diffuse leakage of fluorescein was noted in the late phase of the left eye. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated disruptions in the ellipsoid zone of the posterior retina . Fundus AF demonstrated multiple ill-defined spots of markedly increased AF in the posterior pole .
Initial work-up for a complete blood cell count, immunological test, syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and brain computed tomography (CT) were all negative. MEWDS was high in the differential diagnosis. As the patient refused to take oral steroid, she received local steroid injection (retrobulbar injection of triamcinolone acetonide 40 mg). At the follow-up examination 2 months after the initial evaluation, symptoms, OCT , Fundus AF , and the visual field were partially resolved. Three years later, the patient was examined again, the fundus was completely restored to normal both on fundus photograph and OCT and the BCVA was 20/20 and all symptoms disappeared.