A 56-year-old male patient visited our emergency room due to melena of duration one week. History taking revealed no particular issues other than antihypertensive medication after a diagnosis of hypertension five years previously. He did no smoke, but consumed a small amount of alcohol regularly. No specific features arose from his family or social history. He did not experience nausea or vomiting at the time of hospitalization, and only complained of mild indigestion. Furthermore, he showed no epigastric soreness, abdominal pain, or weight loss, and his vital signs at hospitalization were stable. His physical examination was uneventful. His hemoglobin was 10.4 g/dL, and renal and liver function, as determined by blood tests, were also normal. No lesions were found in the esophagus or stomach by esophagogastroduodenoscopy. However, an exophytic tumor with a bleeding surface ulcer was observed luminally in the ampulla of Vater in the second portion of the duodenum . An endoscopic biopsy was performed on the tumor and bleeding from the ulcer was controlled endoscopically. And abdominal computer tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a hypoattenuating mass of diameter 1.6 cm in the second portion of the duodenum. The pathological result later revealed atypical chronic inflammation and regenerative atypia. Although no malignant cells were observed, surgery was performed based on the judgment that gross findings indicated that the possibility of malignancy was high. During surgery, a papillary 2.5 × 2.0 × 0.7 cm sized mass was found in the ampulla of Vater. Distant metastasis or any of lymph node enlargement were not observed. Pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD) was performed. The pathological result of the excised specimen showed that the tumor was limited to the mucosa and proper muscle layer and had not invaded the pancreas or common bile duct. Furthermore, no lymph node metastasis was detected. The submucosal tumor was found to have a triphasic pattern in low power fields, whereas high power fields showed that the tumor was composed of nests of endocrine cell and ganglion cells with abundant cytoplasm, and spindle cells were found to surround tumor cells . Immunohistochemistry showed that tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin, neuron specific antigen, and S-100. In addition, focal positive responses were observed for chromogranin, but no cytokeratin response was observed . Based on the above features, the mass was diagnosed as a gangliocytic paraganglioma. During on-going regular follow-up visits no evidence of recurrence or metastasis was observed from December 2007 to April 2009.