A 36-year-old male patient was hospitalized for 6 months due to progressive right shoulder swelling accompanied by pain. The patient was previously in good health. Physical examination showed that the right shoulder joint had a hard lump behind it, accompanied by obvious tenderness, no ecchymosis on the skin, low skin temperature, and no other related symptoms.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass located in the posterior part of the right shoulder joint and the deep part of the deltoid muscle measuring 13.2 × 4.1 × 7.8 cm with uneven long T2 and long T1 signals . The mass had a clear boundary and obvious enhancement on the edge of the enhanced scan and was considered to be a malignant tumor. Ultrasound examination of the reproductive system showed no abnormalities.
Subsequently, the right shoulder tumor was removed entirely. Gross pathological examination showed that the size of the tumor mass was about 14 × 10 × 6 cm. The boundary between the mass and the surrounding tissue was unclear; no capsule and the section had two components. Biopsy was conducted on the tumor mass, and the results revealed the color of the solid area of the mass was gray white and gray yellow , medium in quality, and had a fish-like appearance. The cystic area contained dark red liquid. Postoperative histopathological diagnosis was MGCT in the right shoulder.
After the surgery, the patient received six courses of chemotherapy. However, 7 months later, the patient complained of chest pain and was hospitalized again. MRI was again performed on the patient. The MRI results showed cystic and solid mixed abnormal signals in the medial soft tissue of the right shoulder and the upper segment of the right humerus, with uneven enhancement, predicted to be the recurrence of MGCT. Chest enhanced CT showed a round-like mass in the upper lobe of the right lung near the hilum, suggestive of MGCT metastasis to the lung. Resection of the right scapular mass and surrounding tumor tissue was performed, and the postoperative pathology confirmed the recurrence of MGCT.
The sections were stained using H & E staining to study the morphology of the tumor. Histological analysis revealed that the tumor tissue had diverse morphology, and the lesions were mainly of immature teratoma. The tumor mass was mainly composed of the cartilage of embryonic origin, which was diffusely distributed in immature nerve tissue. Primitive neural tubes and daisy-shaped clusters were found in the neural component of tumor tissue , with overlapping, over-stained cells and many nuclear divisions were observed in the tumor. The tumor cells stained positive for CD56 , CD99, and S-100, and negative expression of Glypican-3, NSE, SYN, and CGA was observed using immunohistochemical analysis. Further, the second tumor detected was the yolk sac tumor. The tumor tissue is irregular and acinar like structure, lined with single-layer flat or cubic cells , papillary structures can be observed . Immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor tissue was positive for Glypican-3 and AFP expression . Additionally, positive expression of SALL4, PLAP, and CK was observed in both the tumor regions, while OCT4, HCG, and CD117 expression were negative. Ki-67 accounted for about 80% of staining. Mutations were observed in ENPEP (4q25), ZCCHC11, RREB1 (6p24.3), CKAP4 (12q23.3), and other genes were detected by whole exome sequencing.
To conclude, the histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis revealed MGCT on the patient’s right shoulder was composed of two types of tumors, of which 70% was made of immature teratoma, which was classified as grade III and yolk sac tumor accounted for the remaining 30%.