A 61-year-old white woman with a history of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia presented with 1-h duration of sudden onset pain and numbness in both legs, associated with lightheadedness, dyspnoea, and diaphoresis. Upon evaluation patient was afebrile with a temperature of 98.6°F, blood pressure of 160/110 mmHg, regular heart rate of 70 b.p.m., respiratory rate of 24, and oxygen saturation of 95% on ambient air. On physical examination, she was in acute distress due to pain in both legs. There was no jugular venous distention. Lungs were clear to auscultation and cardiac examination revealed a normal rate, regular rhythm, and normal heart sounds without a murmur. Abdomen and neurological examination were unremarkable. Her lower extremities were mottled, pale and cold to touch from mid-thigh down. Right femoral, bilateral popliteal, dorsalis pedis, and posterior tibial pulses could not be palpated. Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed normal sinus rhythm with T-wave inversion in Lead I, V2, V3, and V4 . Laboratory investigations were significant for leucocytosis of 20.7 × 103/µL and peak troponin of 2.08 ng/mL (<0.03 ng/mL). Basic metabolic panel and liver function test were normal.
Doppler ultrasonography of the lower extremity arteries was done immediately, which demonstrated thrombosis of the right iliac and bilateral common femoral arteries. To further characterize the extent of thrombosis, computed tomography angiography of abdomen and pelvis was obtained which showed emboli with acute infarcts involving the spleen and kidneys, acute embolic occlusion of right external and internal iliac arteries, and the left distal common femoral artery . Computed tomography angiography of the chest did not show pulmonary emboli but revealed a 3.4-cm solid ovoid filling defect in the left atrium concerning for thrombus vs. myxoma . The patient was taken to the operating room for emergent bilateral femoral cut-down and thrombectomy.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed an ejection fraction of 50–55% with apical and septal wall motion abnormalities and a large echogenic mass attached to the interatrial septum. The patient was immediately started on heparin infusion. A day after, transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) suggested the mass to be consistent with myxoma and there was resolution of the previously seen wall motion abnormalities. Coronary angiography revealed normal coronaries and the patient underwent successful resection of left atrial myxoma with autologous pericardial patch repair of the atrial septal defect. Pathology report subsequently confirmed the diagnosis of myxoma. She recovered well from surgery and follow-up transthoracic echocardiography 1 year later did not show recurrence of myxoma.