A 37-year-old man with chief complaint of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain for 3-day duration associated with diarrhea.
The patient arrived at the emergency department with complaints of abdominal pain, characterized as burning, non-radiating and constant, 7/10 in severity, which he attributed to his gastroparesis as he has had multiple admissions with gastroparesis flares. Patient has a past medical history of type 1 diabetes, diabetic gastroparesis, major depression, anxiety, smoking (1 pack per week), 1 g of marijuana consumption and right 4th toe cellulitis recently treated with IV antibiotics. Admits to intermittent depressive episode; during which he stops taking his medication including insulin but denied suicidal ideation and intent.
Diabetic gastroparesis, type 1 diabetes mellitus, peripheral artery disease, and right toe cellulitis on antibiotics.
A noteworthy familial background of cardiovascular disease is documented, encompassing the father, parental uncle, and grandfather, each of whom underwent double bypass surgeries. The father's bypass operation was performed at the relatively young age of 40.
In the physical exam the abdomen was non-distended, tenderness on palpation of the 4 quadrants, positive bowel sounds, no organomegaly appreciated. The blood pressure on admission was 129/99 with heart rate of 124 bpm. Chest symmetry with respiration, no crackles or wheezing noted and normal vesicular breath sounds. Normal S1, S2 and no pathological murmur heard. The patient was euvolemic, and no bilateral lower extremity edema was noted.
Urine toxicology is positive for marijuana. Given the atypical presentation, high sensitivity troponin was not ordered. Uncontrolled diabetes, Hyperlipidemia and hypoxia noted .
Patient was admitted for diabetic gastroparesis, bedside point of care ultrasound; was significant for inferior vena cava (IVC) dilation and Kerley B lines. A chest X ray was ordered, which shows acute pulmonary edema . Given acute and sudden onset of hypoxia, echocardiogram (ECHO) was ordered , after notable elevation in cardiac enzyme (elevated high sensitivity troponin). The first electrocardiogram (EKG) was then ordered .