A 78-year-old female was admitted to our department for sudden-onset painless vision loss, central scotoma, and an “earthworm-shaped” floater in her left eye. These symptoms were noticed after she had a hard bowel movement the prior night. Examination demonstrated the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/40 in her right eye and finger counting in her left eye. Intraocular pressures were 16 mmHg and 14 mmHg in her left and right eye, respectively. A history of hypertension for 15 years was reported and she had been on oral antihypertensive medication. Her blood pressure at presentation was 146 over 83 mmHg. She had persistent atrial fibrillation for 5 years, so she was on long-term oral rivaroxaban (10 mg QD; Xarelto, Bayer Pharma AG). Moreover, 2 years ago, the patient had two coronary stents implanted due to coronary heart disease and she was taking oral aspirin (100 mg QD; Bayaspirin, Bayer Pharma AG). The patient also had a history of untreated constipation for more than 10 years. Any history of ocular disease or trauma was denied. Her eye movements, pupillary responses, and anterior segment examination were unremarkable in both eyes. Dilated fundus examination of the right eye showed drusens scattered at the posterior pole and examination of the left fundus showed the presence of asteroid hyalosis, vitreous hemorrhage (VH), as well as subretinal and sub-inner limiting membrane (sub-ILM) hemorrhage. Color fundus photographs (CFP) revealed that the strand-shaped appearance of VH was consistent with the patient's chief complaint of an “earthworm-shaped” floater . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed the presence of retinal blood vessels in the upper part of the hemorrhage while those in the lower part were covered, representing subretinal and sub-ILM hemorrhage, respectively . These two retinal hemorrhages were also clearly identified in Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT; Spectralis HRA + OCT; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) . In addition, the epiretinal membrane (ERM) and a rupture of the inner limiting membrane (ILM) were noted at the junction of the VH and the sub-ILM hemorrhage in the macula . Blood chemistry tests show elevated triglycerides (2.1 mmol/L). Her blood cell count was normal, but the prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thrombin time (APTT) were delayed (30.1 s and 45.8 s, respectively). The international normalized ratio (INR) was elevated (2.82). Based on her clinical presentation and history, a preliminary diagnosis of epiretinal membrane and Valsalva maneuver-related retinal hemorrhage and VH was made.
Because part of the retinal hemorrhage had drained into the vitreous cavity through the rupture of ILM, and considering the advanced age and concomitant diseases of the patient, regular follow-up examinations on ocular condition were advised. A careful dilated fundus examination was performed at each visit to observe the absorption of the hemorrhage and to facilitate the timely intervention for any adverse progression (All follow-up examinations were performed by Y.M., L.L., and L.H.). The patient was simultaneously referred to the department of cardiology for regulatory medication to control blood pressure, triglycerides, and the risk of bleeding. After six weeks, most of the retinal hemorrhage had been absorbed, with the exception of a small amount of the sub-ILM hemorrhage which was left in the supranasal macula . The infrared (IR) and OCT B-scan images revealed a retinal arterial macroaneurysm on the temporal side of the optic disc at the posterior pole, with a large area of ERM covering the posterior pole and minor sub-ILM hemorrhage . The BCVA was 20/40 in her right eye and 20/80 in her left eye. The patient and her family required quick and safe recovery of vision. After comparing the potential risks, benefits, and costs of surgery with laser and other treatments, they chose laser treatment. To speed up the regression of the RAM, 577-nm yellow laser photocoagulation (NIDEK MC-500 Vixi, Nidek, Gamagori, Japan) with 180 mW power was carefully performed at the RAM (by Y.X.). The duration was 0.2 s and the spot size was 200 μm using a single pulse. The patients did not report any discomfort after laser treatment.
Nine weeks after her initial visit, all retinal hemorrhages had been absorbed , and the patient's BCVA also improved to 20/40 for both eyes. CFP and SD-OCT showed a significant regression of the RAM following the laser photocoagulation . FFA confirmed the closure of the RAM without affecting the surrounding retinal vessels . Although ERM had been found since her first visit, it was observed without recommendation for treatment because it was not the main problem threatening the patient's vision at the current time. Six weeks after her initial visit, the formation of a lamellar macular hole was found just at the junction of the previous VH and sub-ILM hemorrhage. The ERM and lamellar macular hole remained stable during her subsequent follow-up visits . Thus, the main diagnosis of this patient was RAM rupture induced by the Valsalva maneuver. Her ophthalmological manifestations remained stable for 8 months after the final diagnosis . No adverse or unanticipated events had been observed till her latest follow-up. The patient was satisfied with the treatment effect.