The patient was a 52-year-old female with well-controlled hypertension. Two years ago, she had undergone a mastectomy for a breast tumor, which was pathologically diagnosed as MPNST associated with NF-1. In a chest computed tomography (CT) follow-up scan for the breast tumor, multiple lung tumors were noted. Although there was no enhanced CT scan, neither intracardiac mass nor intrapulmonary vein mass was detected. The brain was out of the scan range in this CT. She was then scheduled to undergo a video-assisted right lung partial resection for the lung tumors. She had no past medical history of cardiac dysfunction or arrhythmias. Preoperative physical examination was normal. She showed no abnormal neurological findings and performed normal activities of daily living. Preoperative laboratory data were unremarkable.
On the day of the surgery, she walked on her own into the operating room. General anesthesia was induced with propofol, remifentanil, and rocuronium, and her trachea was intubated with a double-lumen tube. Anesthesia was maintained at 2.5 to 3 mcg/ml with effect site concentration of propofol predicted by a target control infusion (TCI) device and continuous infusion of remifentanil at 0.05 to 0.23 mcg/kg/min. Her mean arterial pressure was maintained between 65 and 100 mmHg without significant hemodynamic changes. Atropine was administered during induction due to bradycardia, but no other vasoactive agonists were necessary afterwards. The patient state index (PSI) showed between 30 and 55 under SedLine™ (Masimo Corporation, Irvine, CA, USA) monitoring without any specific findings of electroencephalography. Total dose of fentanyl during anesthesia was 200 mcg. At the conclusion of the surgery, 20 ml of 0.375% ropivacaine was injected as an intercostal nerve block. The surgery was completed in 68 min, and we discontinued intravenous anesthetics and administered sugammadex. We confirmed that train of four ratios was over 90%, and that effect site concentration of propofol was below 1 mcg/ml. She could not respond to verbal commands or move her limbs, but she opened her eyes by verbal stimuli, and her minute volume was sufficient by spontaneous ventilation. We then extubated her trachea, noting that it was 3 h after the anesthesia induction. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further observation. In the ICU, we excluded hypercapnia, hypo/hyperglycemia, hypo/hypernatremia, and hypothermia as causes of impaired consciousness. She was still drowsy for 2 h after the extubation, and her neurological examination revealed conjugate eye deviation to the left, right hemiparesis, and aphasia. We suspected a stroke and performed a brain CT scan which revealed a small size of high-density area surrounded by low density in her left frontal lobe . However, her symptoms were not explainable with this finding, and we thought another lesion must have existed. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated a high-intensity area of her left frontal lobe in the diffusion-weighted image , whereas the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image of the MRI showed no high-intensity area . These findings indicated acute cerebral ischemia. In addition, MR angiography demonstrated total occlusion of her left internal carotid artery . She was directly transferred to the angiography suite, and she underwent endovascular thrombectomy under monitored anesthesia care with continuous administration of dexmedetomidine and local anesthesia without any complications such as hypoxemia due to upper airway obstruction or hemodynamic instability . The largest aspirated embolus was approximately 3-cm length. Immediately post-thrombectomy, she began to pull her limbs away from painful stimulus. At this point, we listed three other differential diagnoses for her acute embolism: Trousseau’s syndrome (also known as cancer-associated thrombosis), cardiogenic thrombosis, and paradoxical thrombosis. We then checked D-dimer and performed an electrocardiogram echocardiography. D-dimer was not high, and there was no evidence of perioperative arrhythmia in the electrocardiogram throughout the perioperative period, intracardiac mass, or right-left shunt in the echocardiography. In addition, the removed emboli were white, which suggested that the emboli consisted of tumors and not blood.
On postoperative day (POD) 1, we administered edaravone infusion without anticoagulants due to the possibility of intracranial bleeding. On POD 6, her follow-up CT scan demonstrated slight intracranial bleeding. We did not induce antithrombotic therapy as a prevention for systemic embolism. Her hemiplegia and aphasia gradually improved through daily rehabilitation, and she was transferred to the ward on POD 7. Consequently, on POD 15, pathological diagnosis revealed that the emboli were MPNST, the same pathology of the lung tumor and the breast mass previously resected.