A 74 year-old female, with a history of percutaneous closure of an ASD years ago and permanent atrial fibrillation, was admitted for evaluation due to dyspnoea with mild efforts and signs of right heart failure (peripheral oedema, abdominal distension) despite treatment with diuretics (furosemide, spironolactone) and low-dose beta-blockers (for rate control). She was also receiving enalapril and dabigatran.
The patient did not have a clinical report of the intervention, and follow-up revisions afterwards had been irregular. Clinical status had deteriorated progressively in the last months, and at the time of the visit she was in NYHA Class III.
The electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with controlled ventricular response. A TTE confirmed a normal left ventricular function, moderate right chambers dilatation (right ventricular end-diastolic volume 116 mL/m2), the presence of a septal occluder device in the interatrial septum (IAS), and a significant left-to-right shunt in the anterior part of the device (estimated Qp:Qs 2.2:1), which showed a slight misalignment . A moderate tricuspid regurgitation was detected, and the estimated systolic pulmonary pressure was 60 mmHg.
A TEE was performed to better examine the IAS and the device position, and to identify the cause of the shunt. A clear misalignment of the device was observed, with a slight protrusion towards the right atrium in the anterosuperior part (, see , ). A significant left-to-right shunt was evident, but the rest of the device was correctly anchored in the septum. 3D-TEE showed a ‘watermelon slice’ morphology of the defect between the device and the septum .
The case was discussed in the Heart Team meeting. The patient was considered high-risk for surgery (age, pulmonary hypertension, and chronic heart failure), so a percutaneous procedure was planned. The strategy was to implant a second device between the remanent IAS and the device. Preprocedure planning, based on imaging techniques (TEE and CT), suggested that going through the defect with a wire from a femoral access would pose an extreme angle to later cross with a delivery sheath, due to the protrusion of the device into the superior part of the right atrium. Thus a good support for a controlled deployment of the new device would be difficult to achieve. So the plan was to try from the transjugular approach first, and have the femoral access prepared as an alternative in case of failure, and use deflectable sheaths and high-support wires if needed.
Under general anaesthesia, the internal right jugular access was punctured and an 8F sheath was inserted. Pulmonary pressures and cardiac output were recorded and measured (54/21 mmHg, mean 34 mmHg, cardiac output by Fick method 4.2 L/min, Qp/Qs 1.9:1) and no evidence of elevated pulmonary resistances that could contraindicate the procedure was found. Then a 260 cm long 0.035″ hydrophilic wire was advanced through the defect with the help of a 5F multipurpose catheter and positioned in the inferior left pulmonary vein, with 3D-TEE guidance. The multipurpose catheter was exchanged for a 9F sheath and a 27/30 mm Figulla® Flex II PFO device was mounted in the delivery system and advanced into the left atrium . Careful and controlled deployment of the device was performed until a stable and adequate overlapping position was achieved (see , ). TEE showed a good position of the new device, without any interference with other intracardiac structures, and a very significant reduction of the shunt (see , ). After stability manoeuvres were performed (Wiggle test), the device was released. A negligible residual flow was observed with TEE. Successful haemostasis was achieved by manual compression after retrieval of the sheath.
The patient was discharged two days after the procedure. Three months later she was in NYHA Class I, and diuretics had been reduced. A follow-up TTE showed a marked reduction of right chambers size, a mild tricuspid regurgitation and an estimated systolic pulmonary pressure of 45 mmHg. There was a very small residual shunt between both devices, no pericardial effusion and no device impingement on the aorta. A cardiac CT confirmed a correct position of both devices, which remained unchanged from the obtained at the end of the procedure .