A 68-year-old man with a history of coronary artery disease reported stable angina and exertional dyspnoea. Medical history revealed hypertension, endovascular treatment of lower extremity peripheral vascular disease (percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of the left superficial femoral artery), and a two-vessel CABG including a LIMA to the LAD and venous graft aorta-obtuse marginal (aorta-OM) and a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the left main stem. No hyperlipidaemia, diabetes, or smoking was reported. On physical examination blood pressure was 166/85 mmHg (no bilateral arm measurement was performed), heart rate 90/min. Resting ECG shows signs of left ventricle hypertrophy with strain and increased elevation in V1–V3. Echocardiography showed dilated left ventricle with hypokinesia of the anterior wall, with a decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 25%. To determine myocardial perfusion, non-invasive imaging using Rb-82 PET was performed, demonstrating extensive ischaemia in the anterior wall (myocardial territory supplied by the LAD) and decreased LVEF (20% after Regadenoson and 23% in rest). Following the results of the Rb-82 PET, the patient was scheduled for a coronary angiography. An emergency coronary angiography was performed after the patient presented with an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Coronary angiography via the right femoral artery was performed showing no stenosis in the LIMA or other coronary arteries . However, selective arteriography of the left subclavian artery demonstrated a plaque that is hazy, ulcerated, and causes a severe stenosis of the proximal part of left subclavian artery. Percutaneous revascularization was performed successfully using an 8.0×39 mm self-expandable bare metal stent . Predilatation was performed using serial balloon inflations of 10 mm and 12 mm. Treatment of the subclavian artery stenosis was enough to restore antegrade perfusion of the LAD territory via the LIMA graft.
After 2-years’ follow-up, patient reported again atypical chest pain and fatigue. Follow-up Rb-82 PET was performed (2 years after percutaneous intervention of the left subclavian artery) showing no myocardial ischaemia and normalization of left ventricle systolic function (57% after Regadenoson and 52% in rest).