A 32-year old male was admitted to our hospital because of 6 days of unexplained fever on January 29, 2020. The patient’s chief complaint was fever, nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, fatigue, and myalgia. He had no cough, hemoptysis, headache, sore throat, shortness of breath, nausea or diarrhea. Five days before this admission, the patient presented to fever clinics with a fever. Leukocyte count and lymphocyte count were within normal range. No abnormality was noted in Chest Radiography (CXR) . The initial nasopharyngeal swab test for the SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid (real-time RT-PCR Kit provided by Shanghai ZJ Bio-Tech Co, Ltd., Shanghai, China) was negative. The patient was treated with ibuprofen for alleviating fever. Two days before this admission, he still had a fever (up to a maximum of 39.0 °C). He had no underlying medical conditions and was in general good health. He disclosed that he had arrived at Zhangzhou on January 19, 2020 from Wuhan city.
The patient’s physical findings on admission were as follows: body temperature, 38.4 °C; respiratory rate, 22 breaths/min; blood pressure, 124/82 mmHg; pulse rate, 113 beats/min. Physical examination of the lungs was normal. His laboratory findings on admission revealed leukopenia, lymphopenia, and mild liver injury . Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple ground-glass opacities (GGOs) in right lower lung field . Nasopharyngeal swab specimens were collected on January 29, 30 and February 1 for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test (real-time RT-PCR Kit provided by Shanghai ZJ Bio-Tech Co, Ltd., Shanghai, China), however, none of the specimens were positive.
Given the patient’s travel history, clinical manifestations, imaging characteristics, and laboratory tests, COVID-19 was suspected and treatment with lopinavir/ritonavir, recombinant human interferon alfa-2b inhalation, methylprednisolone commenced. Another nasopharyngeal swab test was performed on February 2. Finally, the Centers for Disease Control confirmed that the fifth SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid assay (real-time RT-PCR Kit provided by Shanghai ZJ Bio-Tech Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China and confirmed by another Kit provided by Jiangsu Bioperfectus Technologies Co., Ltd., Jiangsu, China) was positive and the diagnosis of Covid-19 was established according to the diagnostic criteria in China (General Office of National Health Commission, 2020). The procedure of real-time RT-PCR Kit was showed in Additional file .
On days 2 through 5 of hospitalization, his vital signs remained stable with improvement of symptoms including nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, fatigue, myalgia, and fever. The patient had no fever since day 6. He became free of symptoms afterward. On day 5 of treatment, methylprednisolone was withdrawn. From day 7, his laboratory results including liver enzymes and leukocyte count, lymphocyte count got better improvement and then kept stable until entire treatment . The repeat CT imaging (day 8) displayed larger areas of GGOs in both lower lungs with a pronounced peripheral distribution . Given a progression of pneumonia evidenced by chest imaging, arbidol was administrated. Repeat chest CT was performed, which showed that both lung lesions diminished on the day 17 . According to the persistent negative results of SARS-CoV-2 on day10, 13, and 16, as well as the lung lesions diminished, the patient was discharged on day 18.