A 52-year-old man, with a history of diabetes and hypertension for 9 years, had been diagnosed with ischaemic cardiomyopathy and had undergone coronary artery bypass grafting 1 year earlier. After surgery, there was mild improvement in symptoms but no improvement in LV systolic function, with an LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 15–20%. Moreover, he continued to have New York Heart Association Class III dyspnoea despite being on adequate medication. An electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm heart rate of 78 b.p.m. and left bundle branch block, with a QRS duration (QRSd) of 180 ms.
Cardiac resynchronization therapy was performed under local anaesthesia and intravenous sedation with midazolam and fentanyl. After dissection of the subclavian pocket in the prepectoral fascia, the right ventricular (RV) lead was positioned in the RV apex, followed by a selective CS angiogram with a coronary sheath. A superselective 5 F Headhunter catheter was used to enter the lateral vein. Contrast injection revealed a single small lateral branch with angulation and proximal stenosis . The branch was wired with a 0.014″ coronary guidewire (RunThrough NS Floppy, Terumo Corporation, Tokyo) and pre-dilated with a 2.5 × 12 mm balloon (Sprinter Legend, Medtronic, MN, USA) at 14 atm for 1 min. An attempt to negotiate an LV lead was not possible due to an unfavourable angle. A venovenous loop was therefore formed to support lead tracking.
The 0.014″ coronary guidewire wire was passed into the distal segment of the lateral vein. The collateral connecting the lateral vein and the middle cardiac vein (MCV) was identified after injection of contrast. The wire was subsequently advanced into the collateral while rotating (clockwise-anticlockwise) to ensure that the tip was freely moving. An adequately sized, less tortuous collateral was identified for wiring. The wire was tracked via the collateral into the MCV and eventually into the CS. It was pushed gently at the wall to form a knuckle and then advanced into the right atrium, and then further into the superior vena cava . Advancement of the wire did not need any extra-support tools as it was not very tortuous and could be tracked easily. The distal end of this guidewire was caught with an indigenous snare in the high right atrium . This indigenous snare was prepared using a 6 F Judkins JR3.5 guide, a 0.014″ coronary guidewire (RunThrough NS) and a 2 × 15 mm angioplasty balloon (Sprinter balloon, Medtronic, MN, USA). The second guidewire was passed with the balloon and its distal end was reintroduced into the tip of the guide catheter to form a loop. The balloon was inflated at the tip to entrap and fix the distal end of the coronary guidewire .
The distal end of the first coronary guidewire was snared, pulled out through the left subclavian vein and externalized through a separate sheath (, Video S1) in the infraclavicular pocket, forming a venovenous loop . Both ends of the guidewires were placed under the control of the operator. The LV lead could then be advanced easily over the venovenous loop and positioned very stably in the vein ahead of the tortuous segment . After implantation of the LV lead, the guidewire was carefully pulled out from the leads under fluoroscopic control. Fluoroscopy confirmed good separation of both RV and LV leads , with the thresholds of the right atrial, RV, and LV leads after implantation being 0.9, 0.7, and 1.5 V, respectively, at pulse widths of 0.4, 0.4, and 1 ms, respectively. The patient was asymptomatic and did not complain of any pain or palpitations during the procedure, nor were any arrhythmias observed. The total fluoroscopy time was 13 minutes and the total volume of contrast agent was 120 mL.
Eleven months later, the patient is being maintained on heart failure medications. He showed significant symptomatic improvement after the procedure. His QRSd had improved to 90 ms with good R wave in V1. Echocardiography showed improved LVEF (25–30%).