A 47-year-old woman was found to have an increased carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) level with no symptoms observed during a health checkup in June 2007. Positron emission computed tomography (PET) was suggested and revealed an obvious high uptake in the gallbladder. Gallbladder carcinoma was suspected. A radical cholecystectomy was performed in July 2007. The postoperative pathology was adenocarcinoma with invasion of the serosal layer, and no positive peripheral lymph nodes were detected. The tumor stage was T3 N0 M0. At 3 months after the operation, abdominal ultrasonography demonstrated retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy. Radiotherapy was administrated at a total dose of 3500 cGy in 14 fractions at the left gastric artery, pancreatic duodenum, and posterior region of the pancreatic head.
The patient had an uneventful course thereafter until she visited our department 2 years after radiotherapy. She complained of a mild backache triggered by bending and twisting with no numbness or weakness of the lower limbs. She had no history of a recent trauma. Careful physical examination showed no tenderness on the lumbar spinous process. There was no decreased sensation of the lower limbs. Muscular strength and tendon reflexes of two lower limbs were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was scheduled. T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) revealed a small hypointense area at the end plate of L1 and L2 , whereas T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) revealed a hypointense signal change at the end plate of L1 and high-low mixed signal change at the end plate of L2 . The abnormal signal changes on MRI mimicked the Modic changes. A diagnosis of lumbar degenerative disease was the first consideration, and the patient was treated conservatively with medication (Celecoxib 200 mg, orally, twice daily and Eperisone 50 mg, orally, three times daily) and physical therapy.
Unfortunately, the patient complained of persistent backache that was aggravated after conservative therapy for 6 months. Physical examination revealed reduced lumbar motion and tenderness at the spinous process of L1 and L2. The sensation, muscular strength and tendon reflexes of two lower limbs were normal. Laboratory investigations including white blood cell counts, fraction of neutrophils, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and tumor markers were normal. MRI revealed expansive hypointense signal changes with enhancement on T1WI and T2WI at the vertebral body of L1 and L2 . In addition, computed tomography (CT) revealed an osteolytic lesion with surrounding sclerotic bone in the vertebral body without expansion to the vertebral pedicle or laminae . Radionuclide bone imaging indicated a radioactivity concentration on L1 and L2. Thus, the impression of primary or metastatic tumor cannot be excluded. A CT-guided biopsy of L1 and L2 vertebral bodies was applied, and histological examination revealed fragments of bone and fibrous connective tissues with focal necrosis . Definitely, no evidence of metastatic carcinoma was found. We concluded that the definite diagnosis was lumbar spine ORN secondary to the radiotherapy 2 years earlier. The patient received conservative treatment including medication (Celecoxib 200 mg, orally, twice daily and calcium carbonate 600 mg, orally, daily) and orthosis. The patient was followed up every 3 months. Her back pain was completely relieved after conservative treatment for 6 months.
At 9 years after radiotherapy, the patient fall from 3 m-high balcony, and visited our emergency department. She complained of back pain, and physical examination revealed tenderness at the spinous processes of T11 and T12. MRI revealed hypointense signal changes of T11 and T12 vertebrae on T1-weighted imaging and hyperintense signal changes on T2-weighted imaging . Compression fractures of T11 and T12 were diagnosed, and conservative treatment including bedrest for 6 weeks and medication (calcitrol 0.25 μg, orally, daily and calcium carbonate 600 mg, orally, daily) was applied. At the last follow-up (10 years after radiotherapy), no backache or other symptoms were observed. Mild thoracolumbar kyphosis was observed on physical examination. Radiographic images showed sclerotic bone in the L1 and L2 vertebral bodies and compression of the L2 vertebral body that induced a mild thoracolumbar kyphosis . CT scanning demonstrated calcification or sclerotic bone with no obvious osteolytic lesion in the L1 and L2 vertebral bodies .