The patient was a 41-year-old woman with no relevant medical history. The patient’s chief complaint was acute abdominal pain. One week before admission, a bulge in the left lower abdomen was detected and the patient lost her appetite. Laboratory data revealed anemia and elevated C-reactive protein level. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a well circumscribed large tumor, with a maximum size of 13 × 13 cm, occupying the left lateral abdomen . The tumor directly invaded the small intestine and the descending colon. The tumor showed low intensity on T1-weighted image (WI) and heterogeneous high intensity on T2WI. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed that the intratumor was strongly enhanced in the early phase . The tumor was suspected to have ruptured because of the irregularity of the tumor surface with a small amount of ascites. The left ureter was dilated because of tumor compression. After admission, a ureteral stent was inserted to prevent intraoperative injury. Severe anemia and localized peritonitis due to rapid progression and laceration of the tumor were observed; therefore, an emergency surgery was performed, on the suspected diagnosis of gastrointestinal stromal tumor or retroperitoneal sarcoma, instead of chemotherapy. Intraoperative findings revealed massive, bloody ascites. The tumor directly invaded the small intestine and descending colon and penetrated the retroperitoneum. A left hemicolectomy and partial resection of the small intestine were performed. The intraoperative bleeding was 1650 mL. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 10, without any postoperative complications. Macroscopically, the tumor was predominantly located in the descending colon and penetrated the retroperitoneum; therefore, the origin of the tumor was believed to be the descending colon . Microscopically, pleomorphic spindled cells arranged in fascicles intersected at a right angle, and these pleomorphic spindle cells occupied most of the tumor. The nucleus was centrally located, blunt-ended, and appeared to be cigar shaped. Immunohistochemical examination revealed that the cells tested positive for α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and desmin . On the basis of these findings, the final pathological diagnosis was a PLMS. The results of elastica van Gieson (EVG) and hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining led to the suspicion that the intravessel well-differentiated tumor originated from the mesocolon . Therefore, the tumor was considered to have originated from the mesenteric vein.
The patient was scheduled for adjuvant systemic chemotherapy with doxorubicin and ifosfamide; however, she was hospitalized with suspected urinary infection one month after the operation. A large intra-abdominal tumor and ileus due to a recurrent tumor appeared. The patient died 2 months postoperatively because of uncontrolled tumor progression and sepsis.