A 28-year-old female presented with a 2-month history of progressive numbness in her distal limbs. The numbness initially appeared in her left toes and gradually progressed to her right toes, followed by the onset of numbness in both hands, with greater severity on the left side, and subsiding symptoms in her toes. The patient reported that symptoms worsened after physical activity and improved with rest.
She was initially evaluated by the Department of Peripheral Neurosurgery and was scheduled for admission with a diagnosis of peripheral neuritis. A hyperdense mass about 15 × 12 mm2 was noticed in the spinal canal during routine lung computed tomography (CT) screening for COVID-19. Then, the patient was transferred to the Department of Spinal Cord and Spine Neurosurgery. Physical examination revealed mild hypoesthesia below the feet. The remaining examination including strength, and cranial nerves was normal and McCormick Grade I.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 15 × 12 mm2, mulberry-shaped intramedullary mass at the T1-2 level. T1-weighted imaging demonstrated high signal intensity, while T2-weighted imaging showed low signal intensity with spinal cord edema and no evidence of gadolinium contrast enhancement. A peripheral hyperintense lesion on T1-weighted imaging revealed subacute hemorrhage . This patient was diagnosed with ISCMs.
The patient underwent intramedullary tumor resection via the posterior median approach in the left lateral recumbent position under general anesthesia as well as intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring (INM) and intraoperative ultrasound.
Based on preoperative MRI and CT findings, the laminotomy and myelotomy were performed at the T1 to T3 level. The vertebra was removed using a high-speed drill, after which intraoperative ultrasound was employed to further define the tumor location and reveal a strong echogenic shadow behind the tumor.
Due to high dural tension, an incision was made in the dura and arachnoid membrane under routine microscopy, followed by a posterior midline myelotomy measuring 3 to 5 mm in size. Dorsal column mapping was utilized to minimize the potential for injury to the fasciculus cuneatus and fasciculus gracilis [, ].
The surface of the spinal cord is brownish yellow. The tumor was located in the ventral spinal cord of the T2 vertebral segment to the left. It was gray-red and very hard with a clear boundary, capsule, mild adhesion with surrounding tissues, and medium blood supply. The tumor envelope and the spinal cord were gradually separated along the upper pole of the tumor. The tumor in size of 1.5 × 1 × 1 cm was completely removed. The pia mater was fixed with a 7–0 PROLENE polypropylene suture (Ethicon), a duroplasty and laminoplasty, followed by a titanium microplate.
Muscle motor evoked potential (mMEP) and somatosensory evoked potential (SEP) were monitored throughout the procedure. During the tumor resection, mMEP from the left abductor hallucis disappeared and the right abductor hallucis mMEP decreased by more than 90% of the baseline amplitude.
When almost all of the tumor was removed, SEP amplitude decreased by 20% from the baseline. By the end of the procedure, SEP recovered and left mMEP was still absent. Immediately after the surgery, the patient was found with McCormick Grade III with a transient worsening of both legs. Postoperative muscle strength was grade III in the lower extremities, and methylprednisolone and hyperbaric oxygen were treated during hospitalization. On the 5th day after the surgery, the patient can stand briefly with help from others and can move her lower limbs against gravity.
On the seventh day following surgery, the patient reported acute abdominal pain, distension, and dysuria. Physical examination revealed abdominal bloating and mild hypogastrium tenderness. Abdominal ultrasound or CT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed constipation in the colon, leading to a diagnosis of fecal impaction and acute urinary retention. Treatment measures were implemented, including fasting, enema, bowel rest, intravenous rehydration, and urethral catheterization. Within 2 days, the patient’s abdominal distension significantly improved and she was discharged on the ninth day after the operation.
Postoperative gadolinium-enhanced MRI showed complete removal of the tumor . Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of cavernous malformations with bone tissue and hyaline cartilage hyperplasia . At the 12-month follow-up, the patient had recovered her strength and her symptoms had subsided, with no signs of recurrence.