A 12-year-old girl was referred to Genetic Research Center of Welfare organization, Yazd, Iran, in June 2008, because of short stature. She was the second child of the first cousin marriage. All the other members of her family – parents, the first and third brothers – were healthy. At birth, the ages of her mother and the father were 23 and 28 years, respectively. There was no history of infections or medications during pregnancy. Family history revealed that two of her maternal cousins had similar signs and symptoms, though their features were comparatively worse .
She was born by vaginal delivery at 38 weeks of gestation with a low birth weight of 1700 g (<3rd centile), height of 44 cm (< 3rd centile), and a head circumference of 32 cm (10–50 percentile). She was discharged from hospital without any problem. Her developmental milestones were normal. At nineteen weeks of birth, for the first time, a urinary tract infection occurred and then she had to be repeatedly hospitalized for recurrent urinary, respiratory, and gastrointestinal infections.
Clinically, she was of slender frame weighing 25 kg (< 3rdcentile), with a height of 133 cm (< 3rdcentile), and a head circumference of 49 cm (<3rdcentile). She had a long narrow face with prominent nose, and malar, and mandibular hypoplasia . There was sun-sensitive erythema affecting the butterfly area of the face. Also, there were spots of hyper and hypo pigmentations (café au lait spots) on the trunk and limbs. Telangectasia spots were observed in some areas of the trunk. Additionally, there was a generalized hirsutism throughout the body. Ophthalmic and otic examinations were normal, except that conjunctivitis was seen in both eyes. Also, the teeth were normal. The structure and growth of the hair was abnormal. Her hair was fragile and fine. No deformity was observed in her fingers, toes, and joints. The external genitalia were unremarkable. Her intelligence quotient was normal.
Her neurological, cardiac, and para clinical (brain CT scan) examinations were all unremarkable. Her bone age was two years deficient of her chronological age. Routine biochemical tests and abdominal ultrasound were normal.
GTG-banded analysis of over 50 metaphases was abnormal. The following structural chromosome abnormalities were seen in four of the observed cells: 46, XX; chrb(1) (q42); 46, XX; chrb(X) (q21); 46, XX; chrb(7) (p22); and 46, XX; chrb(9) (q13). The final diagnosis was: 46, XX (46)/ 46, XX; chrb(1)/46, XX;chrb(X)/ 46, XX;chrb(7)/ 46, XX;chrb(9).
shows a distinctive symmetrical quadriradial chromatid interchanges in one of the observed cell.
Also, sister chromatid exchange (SCE) analysis showed a mean of 80 SCE per cell in comparison to a mean of seven per cell for the normal control .