A 16-year-old male presented with progressive numbness and weakness of lower limbs for 3 months. His development is normal and has no previous disease nor recent trauma history. On admission, he had proximal and distal weakness of lower limbs with muscle power scores of 4 on Medical Research Council Scale, and there was also decreased sensation to light touch and pin-prick below L1 dermatome. He denied incontinence or retention of stool and urine passage. Spinal Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed a longitudinal serpentine flow voids along the perimedullary space from cervical to lumbar spine on T2-weighted images. A circumscribed tumor was also found at right L1/L2 segment, which was heterogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted image and diffusely enhanced by contrast media .
Under the impression of spinal arteriovenous fistula, spinal angiography was performed. A SDAVF was found, which was fed by radicular arteries from right L2 segmental artery with a retrograde drainage through an arterialized radicular vein into ventral and dorsal perimedullary veins.
Transarterial embolization was performed under general anesthesia. A guide catheter was placed at the orifice of right L2 segmental artery. A microcatheter was advanced using a micro guidewire into the radicular artery to approach the fistula point. Embolization was performed by using 25% N-butyl cyanoacrylate to occlude the feeder and proximal draining vein. Post-embolization angiography showed total obliteration of the fistula .
The fistula was found being present around a tumor at right L1/L2 intervertebral foramen. The white, elastic extradural tumor was then surgically removed. The patient recovered uneventfully after the embolization and surgery, and the numbness and weakness disappeared.
Histology examination of the surgical specimens showed fibrohistiocytic tissue and spindle cells with mild nuclear atypia. No mitotic activity and necrosis were found. Immunohistochemical studies showed the tumor was positive for smooth muscle actin and H3K28me3, and was negative for S100, ALK, EMA, beta-catenin, desmin, MUC-4, myogenin, Pan-Trk, and SOX10. The diagnosis was nodular fasciitis .