A 55-year-old Han Chinese male presented to a local hospital with abdominal fullness and a palpable right inguinal mass. Both symptoms had been present for a year, but only worsened in the past few weeks, prompting the patient to seek medical attention. The patient had a history of intracerebral hemorrhage secondary to ruptured venous aneurysm 25 years ago. He recovered well and his activity of daily living was totally independent.
At first, the clinical impression following physical examination was incarcerated inguinal hernia. However, during the course of herniorrhaphy, bulging cord and scrotum were noted. Without prior computed tomography (CT) imaging studies, only the part of the tumor that was exposed during the surgery was excised. The excised specimen was sent for pathology studies. Subsequent abdominal and pelvic CT imaging revealed a right retroperitoneal mass with a maximum diameter of 44.5cm, protruding into the right inguinal space . Histological examination of the surgical specimen showed the tumor to be composed of mature adipocytes with substantial size variation, which was appreciated alongside nuclear atypia in fat cells or stromal spindle cells. Scattered hyperchromatic and pleomorphic stromal spindle cells were easily identified within fibrous septa or blood vessel walls. Moreover, the neoplastic cells were immunoreactive for CDK4, p16 and MDM2 . The final diagnosis was retroperitoneal WDLPS (FNCLCC, grade 1), cT2bN0M0, stage IIb . Following the excision of the right scrotal tumor, the patient developed abdominal fullness with vomiting and fever up to 38.5 degree Celsius. Physical examination revealed abdominal distension with tenderness and redness surrounding an oozing surgical wound. Laboratory tests revealed marked elevation in CRP and leukocytosis. Abdominal wound infection with abscess was diagnosed. Fortunately, the infection resolved after proper wound care, drainage, and antibiotic treatment.
Due to the extensive nature of this tumor, complete surgical resection of this giant tumor was considered difficult, and primary chemotherapy was not recommended by medical oncologists. He was referred for radiotherapy at our cancer center. The organ at risk that needed to be considered first was the kidneys. Radiotherapy of 10MeV photon energy was delivered using manually chosen portals in order to maximally avoid the right kidney and completely avoid the left kidney. Thirty-five fractions of 2Gy were prescribed to the 95% isodose line. The radiation oncologist manually contoured on cross-sectional CT simulation images and measured target volume using segmentation tool programs, Eclipse and Pinnacle . The patient was monitored weekly. During the radiotherapy course, the patient reported less abdominal fullness and better digestion, which coincided with a reduction of the target volume from 6300cc to 4800cc, as noted in the adaptive treatment planning. Later on, the residual tumor mass in the right scrotum also received a total dose of 70Gy in 35 fractions . There was a grade 2 radiation-induced dermatitis in the scrotal area per the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4.0. Radiotherapy was well-tolerated without acute toxicities greater than 2. In addition, his kidney function, as measured by creatinine clearance, remained mostly the same throughout radiotherapy.
After significant volume reduction from the well-tolerated radiotherapy treatment, the patient became a candidate for surgery. He was referred to our surgical department where conversion surgery was carried out. A midline laparotomy incision was made to remove a yellowish soft, circumscribed retroperitoneal mass that measured 32cm in the greatest diameter and weighed 4.5kg. The surgery lasted around 3 hours and the blood loss was 200mL. The recovery process was smooth and no complication occurred after the surgery. However, microscopic examination revealed positive margin. Abdominal CT survey also suspected residual tumor (ycT2bN1M0, stage III) in the right inguinal area and the right pelvic wall . Adjuvant chemotherapy was thus performed. At first, the patient received 4 cycles of AIM (ifosfamide, Mesna and doxorubicin) regimen. Then it was followed by 2 cycles of MAID regimen with Mesna, doxorubicin, ifosfamide and dacarbazine. During chemotherapy, the patient suffered from an episode of tumor site bacterial infection which was successfully treated with antibiotic and C-GSF injection. Otherwise, he mostly experienced grade 1 nausea/vomiting side effect per the CTCAE v4.0. At the completion of adjuvant chemotherapy , the maximum tumor diameter decreased from approximately 11 cm to 8 cm. Debulking surgery for the remaining right inguinal tumor mass was thus performed. The resulting tissue fragments were 6.5cm in the greatest diameter without visible tumor cells in the section. Following the surgery, the patient developed poor wound healing, which resolved after proper wound care with Aquacel Tamponade and antibiotic use. Unfortunately, abdominal CT performed 20 days after the debulking surgery showed a 7-cm residual tumor mass in the right inguinal area and the pelvic peritoneum. This time, however, due to concern for doxorubicin’s cumulative dose-dependent cardiotoxicity , the patient was started on ifosfamide monotherapy only. Fortunately, after 18 cycles of ifosfamide monotherapy, no evidence of recurrence was found on abdominal CT . He experienced infection as a chemotherapy complication early on in the ifosfamide therapy. The infection was treated promptly without major sequala. At the time of the writing of the manuscript, the patient has remained cancer free for more than 26 months.