A 60-year-old Caucasian male patient was brought to the resuscitation bay of our Emergency Department after a syncopal episode and was noted to be in shock. His initial observations include Heart Rate 126/min, Blood Pressure 102/79 mmHg, Respiratory rate 32/min, temperature 36.8C and oxygen saturation of 98% on 2 L of nasal prongs. The patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14 and was clinically dehydrated. Abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen that was tender in the left upper quadrant with no evidence of peritonism. Laboratory tests showed polycythaemia with Haemoglobin of 189 g/L and white cell count of 20.3 × 109/L with preserved renal and hepatic functions. Arterial blood gas analysis was consistent with normal anion gap metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.28 and lactate of 4.5. The patient responded to initial fluid resuscitation.
Further history was obtained: he had a 2-day history of progressively worsening upper abdominal pain associated with multiple episodes of dark coloured emesis and loose bowel motions. The pain was exacerbated by oral intake. He had a background of ulcerative colitis diagnosed at the age of 40 which required one course of oral steroid with no further follow up or treatment.
As the patient remained in a stable state, a CT abdomen was performed which demonstrated a long segment of superior mesenteric vein (SMV) thrombus extending into the portal vein. This resulted in venous engorgement with associated thickening of jejunal wall and extensive mesenteric stranding suggestive of intestinal ischemia. There is also a moderate amount of free fluid with no evidence of intramural gas or perforation (, ).
Acute mesenteric venous thrombosis was diagnosed and management options were explored. Although the CT appearances were sinister and suggestive of intestinal ischemia, the patient had no signs of peritonism. Thus, decision was made for conservative management. Heparin infusion was commenced, nasogastric tube was inserted and the patient was placed on bowel rest. Central venous line, arterial line and a urinary catheter were inserted and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Serial abdominal examinations were performed. Over the subsequent 24 h, the patient remained clinically stable and showed improvement in his metabolic acidosis. His abdominal examination was consistent with ileus with no peritoneal signs. Total parenteral nutrition was commenced in anticipation to delays in re-establishing enteral nutritional intake.
The patient was stepped down from ICU on day 6, his abdominal tenderness improved and showed signs of resolving ileus. Episodes of melaena were observed with no haemodynamic changes and with stable haemoglobin levels. Oral intake was slowly introduced and gradually upgraded. He was subsequently discharged on day 17 post admission after transitioning onto oral anticoagulation with warfarin.
The patient was followed up in the outpatient clinic one month after discharge. He had returned to his baseline function with no gastroenterological symptoms. Extensive investigations were performed to assess for underlying causes of the patient’s SMV thrombosis. These included thrombophilia and myelodysplasia screens, malignancy screens and an echocardiogram. Unfortunately, no specific causes were detected. His initial polycythaemia also resolved after adequate fluid replacement and was attributed to severe dehydration on presentation. A follow up colonoscopy was performed which showed no evidence of mucosal inflammation or features to suggest inflammatory bowel disease.