An 11 year old boy was admitted to our department in January 2012 because of polyarthritis, hepatopathy and Raynaud syndrome. The symptoms first appeared one year before admission when parents noted white fingers on both hands. In September 2011, eight months after the first symptom, the main complaint was fatigue and loss of appetite. He was not gaining weight. No significant fevers above 38 °C were noted, but he was occasionally having mild temperature from 37–38 °C. Gradually his fingers became blue when he was in a cold environment. The change of color became fixed in time and other manifestations developed including headache and joint pain in fingers, wrists, arms, neck, knees and ankles. The worst pain was in fingers in the morning and gradually improved during the day.
Family and his past medical history were unremarkable. At the time of diagnosis he was not receiving medications nor herbal or other products.
On admission he appeared tired and pale. Delayed capillary refill was found, his fingers were livid and cold. Dermatoscopy showed distorted and widened nail fold capillaries. He had swellings of proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints of both hands and swollen knees and ankles. Limited range of motion was found in fingers and thoracolumbar spine. He was not able to touch the ground with fingers. When he bent the distance from his fingertips to the floor was 15 cm. On palpation pain was also induced by performing pressure on patella on both legs and in elbows.
Laboratory investigations showed elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, elevated liver function tests, elevated muscle enzymes, elevated lactate dehydrogenase and elevated serum immunoglobulin G, blood cell counts were normal . Pancreatic enzymes were also normal. Investigations for metabolic liver diseases and celiac disease were normal. Serological markers for viral etiology of hepatitis were negative (hepatitis A, B and C, Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus). He was previously vaccinated against Hepatitis B and had positive antibodies against hepatitis B surface antigen.
He was evaluated for kidney disease. Urine was normal, protein/creatinine ratio was 7 (normal upper limit is 20). Serum urea and creatinine level and kidney ultrasound were normal.
Immunoserologic tests were positive for antinuclear antigen antibodies (ANA) titer 1:640 and anti-U1 RNP antibodies with a titer 1:256. Liver specific antibodies, anti-ds DNA, antiphospholipid antibodies (anticardiolipin, antiβ 2 glycoprotein) were negative, lupus anticoagulant was not present. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were also negative. Complement activation was normal.
Muscle function testing including Kendall test and Childhood myositis assessment scale testing, were normal. On skeletal X-ray osteopenia was seen in both hands. Ultrasound of hips showed effusion in his left hip.
Pulmonary function test showed decreased carbon monoxide diffusion capacity of the lungs (DLCO) to 56 % of normal value. Lung CT was normal and there were no signs of ILD.
Abdominal ultrasound showed mild hepatomegaly. Liver biopsy and endoscopic examinations were performed. Gastroscopy revealed Helicobacter pylori infection and he received eradication therapy. Colonoscopy did not show any inflammatory changes.
Liver biopsy revealed a preserved normal architecture. The majority of the portal tracts were slightly expanded and contained mild inflammatory cell infiltrate composed of lymphocytes and plasma cells, extending focally into the liver parenchyma . Lobular activity was mild and was composed mainly of lymphocytes at the sites of hepatocyte drop-out . An increased number of apoptotic hepatocytes were also noted. The histological features were consistent with mild autoimmune hepatitis.
Based on the clinical signs and laboratory results our patient fulfilled the Kasukawa diagnostic criteria for MCTD including Raynaud’s syndrome, polyarthritis, reduced DLCO, elevated serum levels of muscle enzymes and positive anti-U1 RNP antibodies. Elevated liver enzymes, positive ANA, high titers of serum immunoglobulin G and negative serology for viral hepatitis indicated a diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis, which was confirmed by liver biopsy. On revised scoring system for autoimmune hepatitis he scored 16 .
The patient was treated with three daily pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone 15 mg/kg BW followed by oral glucocorticosteroid which was slowly tapered. Mycophenolate mofetil and chloroquine were also started. Significant clinical and laboratory improvements were achieved in one month . The score on revised scoring system for autoimmune hepatitis fell to 11. Two months after the treatment was started his lung function tests were better but DLCO decreased from 56 % to 49 %. No symptoms or signs of pulmonary disease were present. Heart ultrasound was normal. Six months after treatment was started his DLCO was 69 % and it remained stable during follow up.
Three years after starting therapy he is in remission on methylprednisolone 2 mg once per day, mycophenolate mofetil 750 mg BID and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg per day. He is also taking vitamin D3, calcium and pantoprazole. At the last visit his laboratory results were normal including low level of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), heart US was normal and lung function tests stable.
The patient and his parents agree with the publication of the case and publication of liver biopsy pictures. Parents signed informed consent.