A 19-year-old, otherwise healthy male presented to the emergency department (ED) with
worsening chest pain, muffled voice, facial, and neck swelling six days following a right-sided wisdom
tooth extraction.
On presentation, the patient’s vital signs included a blood pressure of
117/77 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), heart rate of 130 beats per minute,
respiration rate of 28 breaths per minute, and an oral temperature of
98.4°F. Physical examination revealed mild respiratory distress and a
muffled voice with diffuse submandibular swelling. The patient demonstrated trismus
but was able to protrude his tongue, albeit painfully. The submandibular space on
the right side was particularly tender, swollen, and fluctuant, without associated
erythema. Crepitus was noted under the right side of the mandible and extended to
the ipsilateral clavicle. Breath sounds were diminished on the right. Cardiac
auscultation demonstrated a distant first and second heart sounds without
appreciable murmur, rub, or gallop. During the examination, the patient reported
orthopnea on several occasions, stating that he would prefer to remain upright in
the stretcher.
A chest radiograph was obtained to evaluate the crepitus noted over the right
clavicle . The radiograph
demonstrated pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema, which was concerning for
esophageal perforation. As a result, a CT chest with contrast and esophagram were
ordered. Initial labs included a white blood cell (WBC) count of 8.65 10^3/cells per
cubic millimeter (reference range 4500 to 11,000 WBCs per microliter) and lactic
acid of 3.3 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range 0.5–2.2
mmol/L).
Computed tomography imaging demonstrated mediastinal air, small bilateral pleural
effusions, and subcutaneous air tracking into the neck, all of which were concerning
for esophageal perforation . Following source identification by CT, the patient received vancomycin,
piperacillin-tazobactam, clindamycin, metronidazole, and fluconazole to treat for
necrotizing soft tissue infection (NSTI), severe sepsis, and esophageal
perforation.
Thoracic surgery and oral and maxillofacial surgery were emergently consulted.
Following the surgeons’ bedside evaluation, the patient was taken to the
operating room (OR). While in the ED, the patient remained normotensive and did not
require a definitive airway. He was intubated in the OR using video-assisted
laryngoscopy. Oral and maxillofacial surgery performed an incision and drainage of
the patient’s facial abscess, and thoracic surgery performed a right-sided,
video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery to drain the mediastinal abscess. Following
surgery, the patient was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) with
septic shock and was placed on norepinephrine and phenylephrine due to persistent
mean arterial pressure less than 60 mm Hg (reference range: normal greater than 65
mm Hg) and a peak lactic acid of 12 mmol/L.
The patient subsequently underwent numerous washouts over the following weeks and was
weaned off vasopressors and mechanical ventilation after 35 days in the SICU. He was
discharged home at 42 days. At his three-week follow-up appointment, he reported
persistent oral pain, left-sided chin numbness, and limited opening of his mouth
secondary to pain.