A 59-year-old woman with a previous history of coronary artery disease with posterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) in 2015 requiring percutaneous intervention to the right coronary artery (RCA) and proximal circumflex via right femoral arterial access presents with chest pain. Her other comorbidities include hypertension, non-insulin dependent diabetes, and active smoking. She presented to the emergency room 7 h after the onset of acute chest pain and shortness of breath. An initial electrocardiogram in the emergency department demonstrated ST elevations in leads V1–V4, consistent with an anterior STEMI. Emergent coronary angiography through right femoral artery access demonstrated a thrombotic occlusion of the mid left anterior descending artery (LAD). She was also noted to have a 90% stenosis in the mid RCA. A Resolute Onyx (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) 2.5 × 15 mm drug-eluting stent was placed successfully in the LAD with restoration of thrombolysis in myocardial infarction 3 flow.
Shortly following intervention to the LAD, the patient developed rapid progressive hypotension and subsequent ventricular fibrillation arrest. Despite ongoing advanced life support protocol, the patient was unable to re-gain a perfusing rhythm. In consideration of Impella placement, right femoral angiography was performed and revealed diffuse vasospasm with lack of flow distal to the 6-Fr sheath in the right common femoral artery. Right subclavian artery access was attempted, but unsuccessful. Given ongoing cardiac arrest and lack of peripheral access options, the decision was made to proceed with emergent transcaval access for Impella CP® placement.
In addition to the 6-Fr sheath in the right common femoral artery, a 7-Fr sheath was placed in the right femoral vein. Abdominal aortic angiogram showed normal caliber aorta with minimal disease. Through the 7-Fr venous sheath, a 6-Fr renal length IMA guide catheter was advanced in the inferior vena cava at the L3 vertebral level. A 6-Fr JR4 guide catheter was then advanced into the descending aorta, and a 20 mm Gooseneck snare was advanced into the descending aorta at the L3 vertebral level. The IMA guide catheter was then directed towards the Gooseneck snare, with positioning confirmed on both AP and lateral views . A mother–daughter system was utilized with an Astato XS 20 wire inside a piggyback wire inside a Navicross catheter. The mother–daughter system was then delivered to the tip of the IMA catheter. The back end of the Astato XS 20 wire was then activated with 50 W via an electrosurgical pencil on cut mode, with successful penetration across the IVC into the descending aorta. The Astato wire was then captured with the Gooseneck snare and advanced up the descending aorta. The piggyback wire and Navicross easily followed and the wires removed and Lunderquist wire delivered to the ascending aorta via the Navicross. The Navicross, IMA catheter and 7-Fr sheath were then removed from the right femoral vein, and a 16-Fr Cook sheath was then advanced through the R femoral vein and across the IVC into the descending aorta. A 5-Fr pigtail catheter was then delivered via the transcaval access and used to cross the aortic valve and deliver an 0.18″ wire into the left ventricle. The Impella CP® was then advanced over the wire to proper positioning within the left ventricle.
Shortly after placement and activation of the Impella CP®, the patient’s haemodynamics improved and return of spontaneous circulation was achieved. Repeat coronary angiography showed acute in-stent thrombosis of the mid LAD stent. Following aspiration thrombectomy, a second Resolute Onyx 2.5 × 12 mm drug-eluting stent was successfully placed in the mid LAD with return of flow achieved. Upon transfer from the cath lab to the cardiac intensive care unit (ICU), the patient remained haemodynamically stable and demonstrated purposeful movements following prolonged cardiopulmonary resuscitation. She underwent successful transcaval closure with Amplatz 10/8 ADO (Abbott, Santa Clara, CA, USA) 48 h after Impella CP® insertion . Unfortunately, she developed unexpected recurrent cardiogenic shock and died days later.
A 67-year-old man with history of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, active smoking, with known coronary artery, and peripheral arterial disease presents with acute chest pain. He has a history of plain old balloon angioplasty to left circumflex artery and RPLB with four Xience drug-eluting stents to his RCA in 2017 via right radial artery access. On his last heart catheterization, RCA vasospasm was seen in the setting of a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction with access again through his right radial artery. Initial EKG in the field demonstrated ST elevation in leads V1, V2, and V3 which resolved on admission to the emergency room.
An hour later, patient’s chest pain returned with intermittent complete heart block and new inferior ST elevation seen on electrocardiogram. He was taken to the catheterization lab where he developed cardiac arrest. CPR was initiated and patient was defibrillated for ventricular fibrillation. While anaesthesia was intubating the patient, right femoral artery access was attempted. Given the difficulty in advancing the wire, angiogram was done which showed complete occlusion of the right iliac artery . The left iliac artery was similarly occluded and right radial and brachial access was unsuccessful with no pulsation seen on ultrasound.
After 45 min of CPR with persistent ventricular fibrillation and tachycardia arrest, left axillary artery access was attempted. An 18 gauge needle was inserted under ultrasound with guidewire with angiogram demonstrating patency of the axillary and subclavian arteries . Subsequent Impella CP® sheath placement was successful . Impella CP® was delivered to the left ventricle over a 0.018″ wire. The mean arterial pressure increased to 80 mmHg with pulse regained minutes afterwards.
After return of spontaneous circulation, the right axillary artery was accessed under ultrasound guidance with insertion of a 6-Fr sheath for a left heart catheterization. Coronary angiogram showed patent right coronary arteries. There was spasm noted in the distal RCA that improved with intracoronary nitroglycerine similar to his last heart catheterization. Patient was transferred successfully to the ICU haemodynamically stable. He survived to discharge with no access site complications.
A 55-year-old man with diabetes, hyperlipidaemia, and no prior cardiac history presented with shortness of breath, syncope, and exertional chest pressure. He underwent urgent heart catheterization for unstable angina. Angiography demonstrated chronic total occlusion (CTO) of his mid RCA. His culprit lesion was suspected to be an 85% stenosis of the obtuse marginal branch of his left circumflex artery. Patient underwent successful PCI with two overlapping Promus (2.5 × 20 mm and 2.5 × 16 mm) drug-eluting stents.
The next day, intervention was attempted on the CTO of the RCA. The Asahi Fielder XT 190 cm guidewire was advanced across the lesion. However, there was failure to cross the CTO with a micro catheter and balloon. Patient developed cardiac arrest during the procedure requiring 5 min of CPR with initial ventricular rhythm. Post arrest, he returned to his baseline and did not require intubation.
The following morning, patient became unresponsive when he walked to the restroom. Cardiac arrest protocol was initiated when nursing staff could not palpate a pulse. Initial code was PEA arrest for 5 min until return of circulation. Patient was transferred to the ICU where he developed refractory PEA arrest. An automated chest compression device was placed with decision by cardiothoracic surgery and cardiology to proceed with emergency ECMO.
Given challenges from morbid obesity and haematoma from recent catheterizations, femoral arterial access was unsuccessful. Left axillary artery became an option given the severity of disease and lack of other viable access sites. Under ultrasound, arterial access was gained with a guidewire placed down the left axillary artery. The vessel was dilated and a 15-Fr Bio-Medicus cannula was placed with venous cannulation from the femoral vein. Flow increased to 4 L/min and pressures increased to a mean arterial pressure of 53 mmHg allowing discontinuation of the CPR machine.
Subsequent pulmonary angiography demonstrated massive bilateral pulmonary embolism as the cause of his cardiac arrest. Patient underwent catheter directed lytic therapy while on ECMO by interventional radiology. While haemodynamic stability was achieved, he never recovered neurological function leading to palliative withdrawal of care.