This patient is a 72-year-old never-smoker female in good general condition with no chief complaints. She has no significant past medical history of neoplastic disease or any risk factor associated with lung disease, except for bilateral carotid plaques. From a lung cancer screening in December 2019, the initial chest CT scan incidentally detected a mixed GGO at the left lower lung . The total size of the nodule was 0.8 cm × 0.6 cm, while the maximum diameter of the solid component was 0.3 cm. A second chest CT scan was performed to confirm the nodule’s persistence in September 2020 . Although the dimension of the nodule remained essentially unchanged, the attenuation of the mixed GGO increased remarkably during this 9-month follow-up interval. No surgical intervention was performed at this time since there was no direct evidence regarding cancer probability in such a small nodule with low clinical risk. Due to the small size of the lesion, no experimental treatment with antibiotics was implemented for this patient. However, a more intense follow-up schedule was recommended.
In April 2021, a third chest CT scan conducted seven months after the second showed that the mixed GGO had already progressed to a 3.1 cm × 2.9 cm solid tumor with an obvious lobulation sign . VDTs calculated by the Modified Schwartz Equation were 400 and 36 days respectively throughout the two follow-up periods. The Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan exhibited a high maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax: 5.1) lesion at the left lower lobe. This patient detected no distant metastasis by PET/CT or contrast-enhanced brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Serum tumor biomarker levels, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA: 6.19ng/ml) and progastrin-releasing peptide (ProGRP: 81.8pg/ml), were elevated in this case.
The patient underwent thoracoscopic left lower lobectomy with mediastinal lymph node dissection and was diagnosed with stage IB (pT2aN0M0, the 8th AJCC edition) LCNEC. Surgical specimens were examined both grossly and microscopically after Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E, Fig. A and B) and immunohistochemistry staining (IHC, Fig. C, F). A 654-gene broad-panel NGS spanning 1.60 megabases (Mb) of the human genome was then performed (Berry Oncology, Beijing, China). Five single nucleotide variations (SNVs: TP53, RB1, MUC16, LATS2, STAG2), three copy number amplifications (CNVs: CSF3R, MPL, TERT), and one gene fusion (EML4-ALK) were identified in this sample. The patient’s postoperative course was unremarkable. She was discharged on postoperative day 8. Platinum-based adjuvant chemotherapy was recommended for the patient. The patient showed no signs of postoperative complications or recurrence 16 months after surgery.