A 51-year-old man presented with dysphagia. Barium swallow showed an irregular stricture in the middle to lower thoracic esophagus. Endoscopy showed a mucosal nodularity that was located 28 cm from the incisors and a tumor stricture that encompassed the area between 32 and 42 cm from the incisors. Computed tomography (CT) revealed lower thoracic paraesophageal lymph node metastasis.
The patient underwent minimally invasive esophagectomy using two 5-mm ports and three 12-mm ports. We placed the 5-mm ports on the third intercostal anterior axillary line and the eight intercostal posterior axillary line. The 12-mm ports were placed on the fifth and seventh intercostal anterior axillary line and the ninth intercostal middle axillary line. The patient was kept in the left semi-prone position, and we used 8–10 mmHg carbon dioxide gas to create pneumothorax during the procedure. The postoperative course was uneventful, except for abdominal wall scar hernia that was repaired on the 15th postoperative day. The tumor was 12 cm in size, and the resected specimen was margin-negative. Pathologic examination confirmed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma infiltrating the adventitial layer of the esophagus and lower thoracic paraesophageal lymph node metastasis [pT3(AD)N3M0, p Stage III AJCC/UICC 8th Ed.].
One year after surgery, he presented with a rapidly growing tumor on the right thoracic wall. On physical examination, the tumor had the size of a thumb tip and was erythematous and mobile; it was located between the sixth and seventh ribs just above the scar of the 5-mm surgical port site . Contrast CT demonstrated an enhancing tumor that was separated from the ribs . Positron emission tomography-CT showed uptake in the tumor site . No other signs of metastasis or recurrence were found by imaging.
We performed resection of the thoracic wall, including the skin and subcutis. Macroscopically, the 22-mm tumor was solid and contained a scirrhous area . Histologic examination of the specimen showed restiform proliferation of atypical cells with intracellular mucus . There was necrotic change in the core of the tumor. The diagnosis was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, consistent with metastasis of esophageal origin.
Based on the absence of imaging evidence of recurrence in other sites and the negative margin on pathologic examination after esophagectomy, we considered this case as local recurrence, which was completely removed by thoracic wall resection. He was simply followed up without adjuvant chemotherapy and is under regular surveillance.