A 6-month-old male infant (weight, 4.4 kg; height, 60 cm) was born at 37 0/7 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 2144 g. The patient’s Apgar scores were 3 and 5 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Endotracheal intubation was performed immediately after birth by the attending neonatologist because of generalized hypotonia and insufficient respiratory function. Since he was diagnosed with neonatal asphyxia, therapeutic hypothermia was also started. Once his respiratory status stabilized, extubation was successfully performed. However, 5 days later, respiratory muscle weakness led to copious secretions resulting in pulmonary aspiration and airway obstruction, which required endotracheal reintubation. Successful extubation was finally achieved 14 days after birth. He required nocturnal continuous positive airway pressure therapy due to respiratory muscle weakness. His physical findings, such as severe hypotonia, mild arthrogryposis, and absent deep tendon reflexes informed a suspected diagnosis of NMD. To confirm this diagnosis, the attending neonatologist performed a nerve conduction velocity test, magnetic resonance imaging, and electroencephalogram, and scheduled the patient for a muscle biopsy 193 days after birth. Fortunately, the patient did not have complications such as cardiovascular disease. We decided to combine SA with dexmedetomidine because of the potential airway risk and possible anesthetic drug-related complications faced.
An intravenous catheter was inserted into the back of his hand before entering the operating room. His blood pressure was noninvasively monitored, along with electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, and continual skin temperature monitoring in the operating room. Dexmedetomidine was administered at 0.5 μg/kg for 10 min (3 μg/kg/h), followed by 0.7 μg/kg/h throughout surgery. During bolus administration, we also administered fentanyl 5 μg for analgesia and atropine 0.05 mg. Lumbar puncture was performed using a midline approach at the L4–L5 intervertebral space with a 25-gage cutting needle (25 mm) in the left lateral decubitus position because the biopsy was to be collected from the left quadriceps muscle. We slowly administered 0.18 mL/kg (0.9 mg/kg) of 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine.
Approximately 2 min after spinal injection, the patient was unable to move his leg and hip. Three minutes later, the sympathetic nerve block was recorded at the T11 level by loss of the pilomotor reflex. Then, the table was tilted to a reverse Trendelenburg position to avoid further cephalad spread. Anesthesia was maintained using only dexmedetomidine. For postoperative analgesia, we asked the surgeons to infiltrate the wound with 3 mL of 0.2% ropivacaine at the time of closure. He was comfortable and breathed spontaneously without additional oxygen and had stable blood pressure, pulse, and oxygen saturation throughout the 38-min surgery. Sensory and motor function gradually recovered and returned to the preoperative level at 3 h after surgery. About 2 weeks later, he was histopathologically diagnosed with myotubular myopathy.