A 30-year-old female presented with fever and painful genital lesions, beginning three weeks prior to her admission. At that time, she suffered from abscesses located on the fingers of her left hand, which were attributed to trauma. She began a course of antibiotic therapy with a first-generation cephalosporin and then switched to amoxicillin and clavulanate due to gastrointestinal adverse effects. Afterward, she reported painful gingivitis that was attributed to periodontitis. One infected tooth was extracted, and a prophylactic course of amoxicillin was prescribed. She consumed over-the-counter analgesics as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and dipyrone.
Her medical history included bipolar disorder, iron deficiency anemia, and an anal fissure treated conservatively. She also underwent bariatric surgery and a cholecystectomy ten years prior.
Physical examination was notable for several genital, labial and perineal, pus-secreting ulcers, fever of up to 38°C, and normal vital signs. Laboratory workup was remarkable for severe neutropenia of 0.13 K/microL neutrophils (range: 1.8-7.7 K/microL) with other than that unremarkable blood smear; acute kidney injury with creatinine 1.27 mg/dl (range: 0.51-0.95 mg/dl) and normal urinalysis. Markedly elevated inflammatory markers with C-reactive protein of 367 mg/l (range: 0-5 mg/l), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were 84 mm/hour.
She was primarily treated with intravascular hydration with fast recovery of kidney function, paracetamol, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic. Further testing included cultures from genital ulcers swabs that were positive for Escherichia coli resistant to fluoroquinolones and Enterococcus faecium, leading to designated antibiotic treatment with vancomycin and aztreonam. A total body computed tomography scan did not demonstrate any source of infection and a positron emission tomography (PET) demonstrated high Fludeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the sternum and clavicles, mainly due to G-CSF therapy, but no evidence of other pathologies. A bone marrow biopsy demonstrated hypocellular bone marrow with agranulocytosis and evidence of stromal damage . This was followed by specific serologic analysis for autoantibodies against neutrophils, which included neutrophils of 8 different donors with known genotype. Our patient was found to have reactivity against neutrophils from all 8 different donors.
Daily treatment with G-CSF was not efficacious, and a trial of hydrocortisone therapy induced a flare of mania that required treatment discontinuation. The patient received a pre-treatment psychiatric consultation, treatment with olanzapine for two days and then treatments with 125 mg methylprednisolone for two consecutive days followed by oral glucocorticoids. After two days of methylprednisolone therapy, she was afebrile, and neutrophil count began to recover.
An additional workup reveled prolonged partial thromboplastin time (PTT), positive test for lupus anticoagulant and low complement of C3 and C4. A wide laboratory autoimmune panel including other anti-phospholipids antibodies was unremarkable. Avast rheumatological and immunological panel, including ANA, c-ANCA, p-ANCA, anti-dsDNA, anti-CCP, rheumatoid-factor, anti-RO, ani-LA and thyroid function was unremarkable. She underwent an extensive infectious workup that resulted in sterile blood and urine cultures. A test for HLA-B5 was negative excluding Behcet’s disease, although except the genital lesions, she had no other clinical signs or demographic background towards the disease. Viral serology and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for cytomegalovirus (CMV), Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex (HSV), and varicella-zoster virus (VZV), were negative. Whereas a positive PCR with numerous copies of human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) was demonstrated in the patient’s blood, followed by positive serology for HHV-6 that was compatible with a very high IgG and IgM antibodies against the virus.
Eventually, a diagnosis of autoimmune neutropenia associated with HHV-6 infection was suggested and the patient was discharged with a very slow taper down regimen of glucocorticoids, and additional low dose aspirin. Her white blood cell count continued to recover until full normalization with no glucocorticoid therapy, and her genital ulcers gradually healed .