A 23-year-old Caucasian female patient was admitted to the Department of Neurology at the end of September due to hands tremor and paresthesia extending to forearms, without the complaint of upper limb weakness. Another major symptom was severe pain in the mid-cervical region. Moreover, the patient suffered from episodes of nausea, vertigo in the period from May to September. During that period the patient also experienced transient episodes of diplopia on distance fixation. Most of the listed symptoms disappeared or decreased their intensity in September except for the limb tremor, episodes of pain in the cervical region, and diplopia.
The medical interview revealed a 2-day episode of fever in May. At that time, the patient could have been exposed to a tick bite in the forest endemic region. However, the tick bite was not remembered. The patient family history was negative for neurological or other chronic familial diseases. She was not taking any medications permanently and did not smoke cigarettes nor consume alcohol or drugs. There was no history of trauma, infections, intoxication and the patient was otherwise in good health. Apart from that, the review of the patient’s systems was negative.
On neurological examination, the muscle strength in the upper right limb was slightly reduced (grade 4 in Lovett scale) in comparison to the left limb. The muscle tone of the lower and upper extremities was at a normal range. Symmetrical intention tremor was observed in her hands, extending periodically to forearms and arms. Normal deep tendon reflexes occurred symmetrically in both upper and lower limbs. The patient’s movements were coherent. The sensory examination did not reveal skin hyperaesthesia in the upper nor lower extremities or spinal tenderness. The sensation was normal in the upper and lower extremities. There were no signs of cranial nerve impairment. The patient was conscious without signs of any psychological or mood disorders.
The patient underwent a comprehensive ophthalmological examination during hospitalization. Her best-corrected visual acuity was measured at 20/20 in both eyes. Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light. Intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg in both eyes. No aberrations were observed in the anterior segments of the eyes. Besides the fact that the patient complained of transient episodes of diplopia on distance fixation, during the examination the extraocular muscle movements were normal. The fundoscopic examination showed bilateral papilloedema. Blurred optic margins and several flame-like peripapillary hemorrhages were observed in both eyes. The foveal reflex was normal. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) testing showed bilateral diffuse thickening of the retinal fiber nerve layer (RNFL) in all quadrants. The average RFNL was 297 μm in the right eye and 291 μm in the left eye . The retinal architecture was normal. Automated perimetry visual field test demonstrated no defects.
Nerve conduction study (NCS) was performed for a better evaluation of the cause of the limb numbness and tremor. A Median nerve motor NCS revealed an abnormal reduction of compound muscle action potential (CMAP) in the right median nerve compared to the left median nerve. Reduced amplitude of CMAP was also detected in both peroneal nerves. The reduction of CMAP was more severe in the right peroneal nerve. After supramaximal stimulation F - waves were recorded from median nerves. Decreased F - wave persistence(45%) was observed in the right median nerve. In both peroneal nerves, the absence of F - waves were found. During the orthodromic sensory study, a decreased conduction velocity was observed in the right median nerve and both sural nerves. Based on evidence from an NCS, radiculopathy of nerve roots of both peroneal nerves and the right median nerve was diagnosed. Furthermore, sensory neuropathy of both sural nerves and the right median nerve was also detected.
Routine blood tests were in the normal range. CRP, ESR, and TSH were within physiological limits. VDRL, HIV, EBV, HCV/HBV, HSV, CMV were negative. The patient was AQP − 4 - IgG negative. The ANA test was negative. Vitamin B12 level was in the normal range. High titers of Bd IgM and IgG antibodies were detected in serum using ELISA method. The results were confirmed by Anti Borellial IgG and IgM antibodies detection by western blot method .
MRI of the cervical spine was obtained to determine the nature of the patient’s tremor and pain in the cervical region. MRI images showed longitudinally extensive (> 3 segments) enlargement of the spinal cord mostly visible from C3 to C6/C7 level. T2 and STIR-weighted images demonstrated a hyperintense, spindle-like lesion in the central part of the spinal cord extending from C1 to C6/C7 without enhancement in the post-contrast image. CSF reservoirs were constructed. Contrast-enhanced T1 images revealed signal amplification in the meninges . The MRI of the optic nerve disclosed bilateral protrusion of the optic nerve heads, slight vertical tortuosity of both optic nerves, and bilateral hyperintense perioptic nerve sheath in T2 images . Brain MRI showed an empty sella turcica sign. Together these signs could indicate elevated intracranial pressure.
After the analysis of MRI images, the patient had a lumbar puncture performed. CSF findings included lymphocytic pleocytosis, increased level of protein, and albumin. Anti - Bb IgM and IgG antibodies were detected in CSF using Western Blotting. The titers of anti -Bb IgM and IgG antibodies were significantly increased. Bb - specific antibody (AI) index was elevated indicating the intrathecal production of antibodies .
The patient met the EFNS criteria for definite LNB and the diagnosis was SaTM due to Bb infection. She received a 28-day course of ceftriaxone (2 g/day intravenously). After the period of antibiotic administration, the symptoms subsided and the patient was discharged from the hospital. The patient’s CSF findings, including pleocytosis, the levels of albumin and protein normalized. Bilateral swelling of optic discs decreased. Post-treatment MRI images showed no abnormalities in the spinal cord and meninges . All other symptoms had subsided except for minor tremors in the left hand, which vanished one month later. The patient was monitored during regular follow - up visits for one year. Six months after the antibiotic treatment the patient’s anti C6 antibody titer decreased by 11 - fold indicating the effectiveness of antibiotic treatment . During follow -up visits no additional aberrations were found in MRI scans. In one year follow up a gradual decrease in swelling of RLNS was observed leading to optic atrophy in superior and nasal quadrants of the right eye and in the superior quadrant of the left eye .