A 4-day-old female Caucasian infant was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit of our hospital because of inspiratory stridor and desaturations while feeding. The girl had been delivered spontaneously at another hospital at 40 weeks 5 days’ gestation to a 32-year-old primigravid mother after an uneventful pregnancy with normal routine prenatal ultrasounds. Rupture of membranes occurred one hour prior to delivery. The infant weighed 3300 g (31st percentile) at birth, and the Apgar scores were nine at 1 min and 10 at both 5 and 10 min. Umbilical cord arterial pH was 7.32; umbilical cord base excess was −3.0 mmol/l.
After birth, the infant was admitted to the newborn nursery, where she was given the first dose of oral vitamin K and received routine care. The first 3 days of life were uneventful. On the fourth day of life, the patient presented with cyanosis while feeding. Upon examination, an inspiratory stridor was noted. Visualization of the oropharynx was attempted, but during examination an episode of deep cyanosis requiring mask/bag ventilation for approximately 30 s occurred. After stabilization, the patient was transferred to our hospital by helicopter and admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit.
On admission, the infant’s temperature was 36.7 °C, heart rate and oxygen saturation levels were stable while the patient was breathing room air (21 % oxygen). The blood pressure was 79/55 mmHg; the weight was 3180 g (23rd percentile), the length was 50 cm (32nd percentile), the head circumference 34 cm (22nd percentile).
On physical examination, the infant appeared well and comfortable. The heart rate was regular, heart sounds were normal. At rest, there were no signs of respiratory distress; the respiratory rate was 55 breaths per minute, and both lungs were equally ventilated without any noticeable rales or rhonchi. When agitated, the patient showed signs of respiratory distress with intercostal, suprasternal and supraclavicular retractions; inspiratory stridor was noticeable. The remainder of the examination was normal.
A nasogastric tube was inserted for enteral feedings and the patient was given nil by mouth until further diagnostic evaluation. Upon admission, a chest X-ray revealed very discrete bilateral opacification of both lungs (right > left) consistent with systemic infection. However, routine laboratory test results were repeatedly within normal range and did not indicate inflammation. Echocardiography showed no abnormal findings. A routine ultrasound of the brain revealed no pathologies; an amplitude-integrated electroencephalogram was appropriate for age without signs of seizure activity.
On the sixth day of life, flexible endoscopy was performed and revealed a mucous protrusion of the dorsal oropharynx . A mediastinal ultrasound and an X-ray swallow examination with a contrast agent were consistent with a space-occupying cystic lesion in the lower pharynx/upper esophagus. No associated anomalies could be detected by an abdominal ultrasound examination. On the seventh day of life, the patient was electively intubated and underwent magnetic resonance imaging, which showed a pediculated soft-tissue-isointense lesion of approximately 6.6 × 17.4 × 10 mm located at the dorsal oropharynx . The following day, this lesion was removed transorally by potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) laser resection and processed for histological evaluation . Macropathology was consistent with a mature teratoma . This diagnosis was subsequently confirmed by histopathology . Signs of malignancy were absent.
The patient was extubated postoperatively without any complications, was subsequently hemodynamically stable and showed an uneventful further hospital course. Oral feedings could be re-initiated on the first postoperative day and were well tolerated. Parenteral nutrition was discontinued on the eleventh day of life. The patient was discharged after 15 days in hospital. Routine follow-up examinations after 3, 6 and 9 months showed no recurrence of the tumor, no abnormal physical findings and an age-appropriate development.