Following an acute anterior MI treated with angioplasty on proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) in mid-February, a 70-year-old male patient with no past relevant medical history kept in contact with our cardiology department through regular phone calls. Pre-discharge echocardiography showed normal LV dimensions, severely depressed LV function (ejection fraction 35%) due to apical and anterior hypokinesis, normal right ventricular dimensions, and function. Medication consisted of metoprolol, torasemide, ramipril, spironolactone, acetylsalicylic acid, clopidogrel, and transdermic nitroglycerine.
Over the course of approximately 6 weeks post-discharge, the patients’ general conditions progressively worsened, and he complained of dyspnoea, fatigue, and ongoing hypotension. For fear of contracting COVID-19 pneumonia, the patient repeatedly refused to attend the Emergency Room, despite medical advice to do so. Conditions did not improve despite medical therapy adjustments (increase in oral diuretics and start on ranolazine), and the patient was finally admitted to hospital following a syncope. Physical examination revealed hypotension, mild apical systolic murmur, bilateral lung crackles, and ankle oedema. Blood exams showed elevated BNP (1500 pg/mL) and creatinin (2.39 ml/dL), and high-sensitivity Troponin I within normal limits. Due to a computed tomography scan which revealed bilateral pleural effusion and possible bilateral pneumonia , he was placed in a general ‘grey’ ward while waiting for nose-swab results, as he could not be placed in the ‘red’ intensive care unit (ICU), dedicated to COVID patients for his own safety, but could not also be considered COVID-free and thus admitted to the ‘white’ (clean) ICU.
Overnight, a rapid escalation of treatment was necessary as conditions did not improve with low-dose inotropes (Dobutamine and Dopamine), and he required intubation and admittance to the white ICU once the nose-swab came back clean (after ∼12 h). Emergency coronary angiography was performed, which confirmed absence of restenosis, and Intra-Aortic Ballon Pump was placed as emergency circulatory support. High-dose inotropic support (Adrenalin and Noradrenalin) was necessary to maintain sufficient haemodynamics. Bedside echocardiography was performed, and confirmed a severely dilated [end-diastolic volume (EDV) = 198 ml, indicized end-diastolic volume (iEDV) = 94 ml/m2], hypokinetic left ventricle with apical aneurysm (distal part of the cavity, inferior to papillary muscle implant, ), ejection fraction of 30%, no LV thrombus, moderate mitral regurgitation due to multiple, central jets and annular dilatation and increased LV filling pressures. Right ventricular dimensions and function were within normal range, with severely increased pulmonary artery pressures (60 + 15 mmHg).
Chest X-ray revealed severe pulmonary congestion. Furthermore, the patient developed sustained ventricular arrhythmias.
An emergency Heart Team was arranged, where it appeared clear that surgical correction of the apical aneurysm and mitral regurgitation were mandatory to allow clinical stabilization and patient discharge. However, pulmonary congestion and consequent hypertension, associated to the high inotropic dosages required to maintain haemodynamic stability, posed a severe threat to postoperative management. It was thus decided to support the patient with a short-term mechanical circulatory support, to allow optimal bridging to cardiac surgery.
An Impella 5.0 (via surgical cut-down of the subclavian artery) was implanted, with the aim of reducing pulmonary congestion and treating the ventricular arrhythmias prior to scheduled ventriculoplasty and mitral valve repair. Intraprocedural trans-oesophageal echocardiography confirmed correct positioning of the device and no interference with the aortic valve function.
Following Impella 5.0 implantation, we immediately observed : resolution of sustained ventricular arrhythmias; reduction of pulmonary congestion; reduction of pulmonary artery pressure by about 20 mmHg, although PCWP (Pulmonary Capillary Wedge Pressure) remained high, around 20 mmHg. Right ventricular dimensions and function remained within normal limits.
Amelioration of general haemodynamic status which allowed a down-titration of inotropes to minimal levels; anticoagulation was maintained through continuous heparin infusion with a target activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 50–70 s.
After 48 h of support, the patient’s conditions appeared optimal to undergo surgical correction of the LV apical aneurysm and mitral regurgitation. The Impella 5.0 was maintained during the procedure , after being advanced forward to allow aortic cross-clamping despite the 9F catheter in the aortic lumen. The aneurysmatic segment was excluded with a Dacron Velour patch (with reduction of the LV cavity from 198 to 110 mL), mitral valve was repaired with annuloplasty and cryoablation of both the aneurysmatic neck and pulmonary veins was performed .
Surgery was successful and the patient was weaned off the Impella 5.0 with the aid of intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) on postoperative Day 5. The intermediate step of IABP positioning was felt necessary due to the development of non-negligible aortic regurgitation and the significant and constant increase in PCWP that threatened haemodynamic stability at Impella flow lower than 2.1 L/min. The patient was weaned off the ventilator on postoperative Day 10 and discharged from the ICU in the cardiac rehabilitation ward on postoperative Day 21. He was discharged home after a 1-month rehabilitation programme and is currently being regularly followed in the cardiological outpatient clinic: his condition appears stable.