A 2-year-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat was presented for nasal discharge, sneezing, coughing, and redness and swelling of the conjunctiva. Residing in Washington, the cat was originally rescued from central California as a kitten and had previously tested negative for circulating feline leukemia virus (FeLV) antigen and feline immunodeficiency virus antibodies (SNAP FeLV/FIV; IDEXX). The cat had received initial vaccinations against feline herpesvirus, feline calicivirus, Chlamydia felis, feline panleukopenia virus, FeLV and rabies. Upper respiratory viral infection with secondary bacterial infection was diagnosed and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (31.2 mg/kg PO q12h for 7 days [Clavamox; Zoetis]) was prescribed. Clinical signs improved but failed to resolve completely.
Two weeks after the initial hospital visit, the cat was again presented for continued sneezing, and ocular and nasal discharge. Physical examination was unremarkable and booster vaccinations were administered. Three months after the initial hospital visit, the cat was re-examined for persistent ocular and nasal discharge. Examination revealed a mild fever (103.1ºF [39.5°C]), bilateral chemosis and a (0.5 cm diameter) cutaneous nodule near the lateral canthus of the right eye. In-house fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytopathology of the cutaneous nodule showed suppurative inflammation. Neither bacterial nor fungal organisms were seen. Cytopathology was not submitted for clinical pathologist review. The sample was not submitted to microbial culture. Based on the clinical findings, a presumptive diagnosis of viral upper respiratory infection was made and topical ophthalmic gentamicin sulfate drops (1 drop in both eyes [OU] q12h for 7 days; Pacific Pharma), orbifloxacin (7.5 mg/kg PO q24h for 7 days [Orbax; Bayer]) and lysine supplementation (250 mg PO q12h indefinite duration [Enisyl-F Lysine Bites; Vetoquinol]) were prescribed.
Two weeks later (3.5 months after the initial hospital visit), the cat was presented for decreased appetite, decreased activity, audible upper respiratory noise, worsening periocular signs, ocular and nasal discharge, and a swollen nose. Physical examination revealed stertor, worsening bilateral chemosis, conjunctivitis, blepharospasm, mucopurulent ocular and nasal discharge, and facial deformity caused by soft tissue swelling over the bridge of the nose ( and ). Based on these findings, fungal rhinitis was considered, with Cryptococcus species being most likely, followed by aspergillosis. Owing to the facial deformity and young age of the cat, nasal foreign body and neoplasia, respectively, were considered unlikely. In-house FNA cytopathology of the soft tissue swelling showed granulomatous inflammation, but no bacteria or fungi were seen. The sample was not submitted for review by a clinical pathologist or for microbial culture. A serum latex agglutination test for cryptococcal antigen (Infectious Diseases Lab, University of Georgia) was negative. Owing to the high pretest probability of cryptococcosis, the test was repeated once, on the same sample, and was again negative. While the cryptococcal antigen test was pending, owing to the high suspicion of fungal rhinitis, fluconazole (10 mg/kg PO q12h administered for 5 days [Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved generic; manufacturer unknown]) was prescribed. In response to the negative cryptococcal antigen test, the cat was placed under general anesthesia and the nasal cavity was flushed with 1 ml of 0.9% NaCl, with most of that volume being recovered. Nasal flush infusate was submitted for cytopathology, which revealed pyogranulomatous inflammation with intracellular yeast organisms most consistent with H capsulatum . In addition, H capsulatum was grown in fungal culture of nasal infusate. Fluconazole was discontinued and itraconazole (5 mg/kg PO q12h until disease resolution [Itrafungol; Elanco]) was prescribed. Voriconazole 1% ophthalmic drops (compounded, 1 drop OU q12h for 5 weeks) was prescribed; 0.75 mg dexamethasone (final concentration of 0.05 mg/ml) was subsequently added to the drops for anti-inflammatory effects. Robenacoxib (1.4 mg/kg q24h for 3 days, then every other day × three doses [Onsior; Elanco]) was also prescribed.
Over the following month (3.5–4.5 months after the initial hospital visit) the ocular and nasal discharge, periocular signs, activity level and appetite improved. The swelling over the nose persisted and terbinafine (compounded, 30 mg/kg PO q12h administered for 11 days) was added to the treatment regimen. Within 2 weeks (5 months after the initial hospital visit) the cat developed anorexia, vomiting and diarrhea. Serum biochemistry showed increased alanine transaminase (ALT; 243 U/l; reference interval [RI] 12–130 U/l) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity (135 U/l; RI 14–111 U/l). The remainder of the biochemistry analysis and complete blood count were within the RIs. Owing to suspicion of adverse effects related to terbinafine, terbinafine was discontinued and metronidazole (compounded, 16 mg/kg PO q12h for 21 days), capromelin (3 mg/kg PO q24h unknown duration [Entyce; Aratana Therapeutics]) and an injection of maropitant (1 mg/kg SC once [Cerenia; Zoetis]) were prescribed. Itraconazole was continued as previously prescribed. Soon after, the cat’s appetite quickly improved and vomiting resolved. Two weeks later (5.5 months after the initial hospital visit), ALT was 387 U/l (RI 29–111 U/l) and the ALP activity was 103 U/l (RI 12–63 U/l), which was attributed to itraconazole since the terbinafine had been discontinued. No additional serum chemistries were run.
Over the following 2.5 months (5.5–8 months after the initial hospital visit), nasal and ocular discharge and periocular signs slowly resolved, while the swelling over the nose persisted. For treatment monitoring, approximately 5 months after the initiation of itraconazole, serum and urine were tested for Histoplasma antigen with an enzyme immunoassay (MVista Histoplasma Antigen Quantitative EIA; MiraVista Diagnostics). Antigen was not detected in serum but was detected in urine (0.4 ng/ml; no RI). Itraconazole was continued and the swelling over the nose slowly improved over the following 2.5 months (8–10.5 months after the initial hospital visit). At that time, a repeat Histoplasma urine antigen test was negative, and an itraconazole blood level was elevated (>20 µg/ml; RI 2–7 µg/ml [MVista Itraconazole Bioassay; MiraVista Diagnostics]). Owing to the resolution of clinical signs and a negative urine antigen test, itraconazole was administered for an additional 30 days then discontinued, and 3 months later (14.5 months after the initial hospital visit) a Histoplasma urine antigen test remained negative. The negative urine antigen test, absence of clinical signs and continued bony remodeling of the nasal cavity suggested that the cat remained in clinical remission ( and ).