A 52-year-old male with a history of neurofibromatosis type 1 presented to our institution in 2020 for a second opinion regarding a cervical intramedullary lesion causing severe pain and myelopathy. He initially developed cervical myelopathy with ambulatory dysfunction and loss of fine motor hand dexterity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine demonstrated a cervical intradural, extramedullary lesion at the level of C2. In March 2017, he underwent an intradural resection of the extramedullary lesion and instrumented fusion with pathology consistent with neurofibroma. Postoperative MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated decompression of the spinal cord without evidence of intramedullary lesion . He received adjuvant radiation therapy for the residual cervical tumor.
In December 2020, he developed rapidly progressive myelopathy with the inability to walk and frequent falls. MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated the progression of known neurofibromas with spinal cord compression and edema bilaterally from C3 to C6 . Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography scan demonstrated a small focal uptake of FDG within the spinal cord at the level of C5–C6. In February 2021, he underwent resection of the C5–C6 intradural, extramedullary tumor with internal stabilization. Pathology confirmed neurofibroma. His symptoms improved following surgery.
In November 2021, he developed left-sided neck and upper extremity pain, which was associated with bilateral shoulder abduction and left elbow flexion weakness. MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated increased size of the intradural nerve sheath tumor in the dorsal aspect of the canal at C6–C7 with persistent intramedullary enhancement at C6 . Differential diagnosis included spinal cord demyelination, ependymoma, meningioma, and infection. Computed tomography (CT) myelogram demonstrated lucency at his left C3 and C6 screws with anterior spondylolisthesis of C3 on C4. He was recommended to have a staged anterior and posterior instrumented fusion. He underwent C3–C7 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion in May 2022. Initially, after surgery, he improved but developed acute, severe intra-scapular pain with radiation into the bilateral lower extremities and left hemi-body weakness after six weeks. MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated an increase in size of an enhancing intramedullary lesion at the level of C6–C7 with worsening edema.
In July 2022, the patient underwent an exploration of the intramedullary lesion at C6–C7. On the sharp opening of the dura, the spinal cord surface showed scarring but no other abnormality. Using intraoperative ultrasound, a midline myelotomy was made directly over the location of the suspected intramedullary lesion. The creamy exudate was appreciated on dissection. Intramedullary cultures were positive for Serratia marcescens. MRI of the cervical spine postoperatively demonstrated evacuation of the intramedullary lesion . Postoperatively, the patient recovered full strength in his extremities. He was discharged to home with a plan for life-long suppressive antibiotics. The patient provided written consent for personal images to be included in this report.