A 48 year-old female presented with 8 weeks of lower back pain, neurogenic claudication, and right lower extremity radiculopathy. On examination, she was neurologically intact.
The MRI of her lumbar spine with and without contrast showed an enhancing extradural mass at the L2-L3 level extending into the right neural foramen, contributing to severe central and right L2-L3 foraminal stenosis . MRI studies of the cervical and thoracic spine were negative, as was the CT of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
The patient underwent central and right neural foraminal decompression at the L2-L3 level. The tumor capsule was clearly defined. Tumor originated from the right lateral recess-L2-L3 neural foramen. An excisional biopsy provided the histopathological diagnosis on frozen section of a lymphoproliferative tumor. According to the intra-operative frozen section, the tumor was debulked allowing for decompression of the thecal sac. Additional samples were subsequently sent for a lymphoma panel evaluation.
Postoperatively, she was started on 4 mg of intravenous dexamethasone every 6 h. The postoperative lumbar MRI showed the thecal sac, and neural elements at the L2-L3 level was adequately decompressed . However, there was a small amount of residual tumor ventral to the thecal sac extending laterally into the right L2-L3 neural foramen. A PET CT scan later confirmed her known residual spinal disease, but without evidence of hypermetabolism/disease elsewhere. After 5 days of intravenous dexamethasone, she was discharged home with a 2-week oral steroid taper.
The patient's lymphoma panel was negative. Rather, the final pathology report showed dense mixed lymphoplasmacytic and histiocytic inflammatory infiltrate with marked stromal fibrosis and a large number of IgG4+ plasma cells with an IgG4/IgG ratio of 27% . Her serum IgG4 level was normal. Furthermore, a bone marrow biopsy obtained as an outpatient was negative for lymphoproliferative disorder or plasma cell dyscrasias with absent IgG4+ plasma cells.
The patient continued to improve clinically. At her 1-year follow-up, she remained clinically asymptomatic without evidence of recurrent disease. Her treatment plan is for continued conservative management. Should her symptoms recur, she would be a candidate for the re-initiation of steroids.