A 28-year-old Caucasian woman, virgo intacta, was referred to us, presenting with a four-month history of a left vulva swelling, which was becoming increasingly uncomfortable. There was no other gynaecological history to note, and our patient did not report masses elsewhere.
Clinical examination revealed a healthy woman with a well-defined deep mobile mass in her left labium majus. She underwent excision of the swelling under general anesthetic and the lump, which did not appear to be attached to adjoining structures, was dissected free from the underlying tissue.
Histology demonstrated a large biphasic tumor (measuring 2.2 × 1.5 × 1.0 cm) consisting of epithelial cells and fibroblast-like spindle cells, with the presence of glandular structures and mitoses. There was also a hemangiopericytomatous pattern in some areas, with spindled and rounded cells adjacent to numerous vessels without muscular walls, and myxoid areas together with zones of definite formation of epithelial structures with large lining cells surrounded by a spindle cell matrix. Bone formation was seen focally and there was a retiform component to the tumor . The immunohistochemical stains LCA, CD68, NSE, CD34, CAM 5.2, SMA, desmin, and S100 were negative. The keratin marker AE1/3 and CD 117 showed focal positivity and the vimentin marker was also positive. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction performed on the RNA extracted from the tumor tissue revealed the presence of a SYT-SSX translocation. A second opinion was sought, which was in agreement with the diagnosis.
A decision to re-excise the vulval scar was taken, as there was doubt about the completeness of the first excision. A pre-operative computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed no evidence of metastatic disease. Re-excision by a consultant gynecological oncologist showed no residual tumor on histology. After discussion at our sarcoma multidisciplinary team meeting, it was felt that further adjuvant therapy was not necessary in view of the completeness of excision. We have followed up our patient with clinical examinations and a chest X-ray every three months for the last three years, and there is still no evidence of recurrence.