A 1 year and 4 month-old-girl with Javanese ethnicity was referred to our hospital due experiencing myoclonic seizure followed by 20 minute GTCS at 3 months, after fever following DPT immunization. She then continued to experience generalized tonic–clonic seizures one to two times per day for 10–15 seconds. At 9 months of age, the patient received a second DPT immunization, and on the same day, she had another generalized tonic–clonic seizure that lasted > 30 minutes, resulting in her admission to the pediatric intensive care unit. Before the first seizure, the patient could lift her head, grasp a toy and make eye contact, but after that, she could neither lift her head nor grasp an object. The patient has no previous history of trauma.
She had a normal head circumference increased physiological reflexes in all extremities. Other systemic examinations revealed no abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) scan examination of the head showed a subdural hygroma in the right and left frontoparietal region, without any other abnormalities . Electroencephalography (EEG) at the beginning of the seizure did not show any abnormalities, but the EEG follow-up 7 months after the onset of the seizure showed an abnormal epileptiform (spike wave) with a normal background . Thus, she was suspected of having DS and was recommended to undergo genetic examination.
Whole exome sequencing (WES) showed a likely pathogenic variant identified as a heterozygous mutation of the SCN1A gene with genomic position 2-166859265-T-C (GRCh37), [NM_001165963.4:C.4003-2A > G [NP_001159435.1:p.?]. The variant is located in the canonical splice site upstream of exon 24 of SCN1A gene (NM_001165963.4 transcript). Since this variant is an essential splicing variant, the protein consequence is uncertain and therefore represented as (p.?). In this patient’s genetic mutation, the canonical junction site occurs which is expected to alter the junction and result in loss or disruption of normal protein function. However, using an in silico predictor, spliceAI , the variant is predicted to result in a loss of 22 base pairs at end of exon 24. This loss is expected to create a frameshift at the Gly1342 position. Sanger sequencing confirmed the patient’s genotype , but the mother’s Sanger analysis was negative . Due to familial issues, Sanger sequencing was not performed on the father, leaving the inheritance pattern unresolved.
The parents were counseled about their child’s condition and agreed to undergo multipronged therapy. Before patient was diagnosed with DS, she received clonazepam (0.01 mg/kg per day), valproic acid (29 mg/kg per day), and phenytoin (5 mg/kg per day), but seizure persisted. When phenytoin was stopped, with valproic acid (30 mg/kg per day) and clonazepam (0.04 mg/kg per day) adjusted, seizures were greatly decreased. Later, patient only experienced one seizure per year. The patient routinely received physio, speech, and occupational therapy.
When comparing the clinical features and outcomes of the two patients , we found that our first patient, who had three medications, was still having a generalized seizure induced by fever with duration less than 5 minutes after they had been seizure-free for 3 months (at the age 11 years and 8 months. Our second patient, however, only experienced one seizure annually after receiving two medications (at the age 1 year and 10 months). This difference implies that the clinical state of the first patient was worse than that of the second.