A 21-year-old Caucasian woman with CF, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and a TIVAD presented with deterioration in her oxygen saturation, from a baseline of 95%, to 88% in room air. This was attributed to an infective exacerbation as her forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1) had decreased from 70 to 50% predicted. Arterial blood gas assessment revealed a pO2 of 5.8 kPa and a pCO2 of 4.1 kPa in room air. The diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide corrected for loss of alveolar volume (KCO) was 60% predicted. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan (including high resolution cuts and pulmonary angiography) revealed moderate bronchiectasis, small airways disease and mucus plugging with no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Her routine medications included nebulised preservative-free tobramycin (TOBI; Novartis, Basel, Switzerland), oral flucloxacillin, azithromycin, prednisolone (variable dose), multivitamins, vitamin E, calcium tablets, zoledronic acid, budesonide/formoterol inhaler, terbutaline inhaler, pancreatic enzymes, insulin glargine/lispro and naproxen. She was relatively immobile due to her RA and so did not complain of significant breathlessness. Intensive treatment with intravenous antibiotics and physiotherapy improved her FEV1 to baseline but her oxygen saturation only partially corrected (90% in room air).
One month later, she presented with transient expressive dysphasia and a right-sided hemiparesis. Oxygen saturation was 85% in room air and blood tests revealed the presence of lupus anticoagulants but anticardiolipin antibodies were negative . Brain CT, lumbar puncture and carotid dopplers were all normal. The neurology resolved within 24 hours and a transient ischaemic attack (TIA) was diagnosed. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a right atrial mass (there was no evidence of intracardiac shunting or abnormal right heart pressures). Further evaluation with a contrast echocardiogram and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging , confirmed the presence of a right atrial thrombus close to the distal end of her TIVAD and also a PFO with right-to-left shunting. A physiological shunt study was also performed, confirming a shunt fraction of 24%. The patient was anticoagulated (international normalized ratio (INR) 2-3).
One year later, the patient was significantly better (oxygen saturation 95% in room air). Repeat echocardiography revealed resolution of the thrombus . Transcatheter closure of the PFO was performed but she remains anticoagulated due to the persistence of lupus anticoagulants and the TIVAD.