A 49-year-old female with prior medical history of gastroesophageal reflux disease and 20-pack-year smoking presented to the emergency room with complaints of vague abdominal pain for approximately one month prior. She described the pain as dull to sharp, concentrated in the epigastrium with radiation to the back. The patient had no other complaints. She denied nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, and changes in bowel function. She also had a history of three episodes of acute pancreatitis. The first was 21 years prior to presenting at the ER and was due to gallstones. A cholecystectomy was performed shortly thereafter. She had two more episodes of acute pancreatitis thereafter, the most recent 13 years prior to presenting to the ER. She denied past or present alcohol use. Imaging from these past admissions was unavailable.
A CT at the time of presentation to the emergency room revealed a hypodense pancreatic body mass . An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was performed, revealing distal gastritis as well as a 3.4 × 2.6 cm pancreatic body mass. There were multiple subcentimeter lymph nodes in the porta hepatis and the gastrohepatic ligament, but no celiac lymphadenopathy. Biopsy of the mass revealed a low-grade spindle cell neoplasm consistent with low-grade fibroid myxoid sarcoma. The patient was discharged with plans for elective surgery in 10 days. She presented to the ER one day before her scheduled surgery complaining of worsening abdominal pain. On presentation, the patient’s labs—including WBC, Hgb, lipase, bilirubin, LFTs, and tumor markers were all within normal limits.
She was admitted and an open distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed without complications. Due to the rarity of the tumor and malignant potential of pancreatic sarcomas generally, a spleen-preserving procedure was decided against. Six peripancreatic lymph nodes were taken with the specimen, with no further lymph node dissection. Frozen section revealed negative margins. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was discharged home on postoperative day 5. The patient received post-splenectomy vaccines before discharge, which included haemophilus b conjugate, pneumococcal 23 polyvalent, and meningococcus ACWY.
On final pathology, the pancreatic mass was measured to be 2.7 × 3.4 × 3.2 cm and identified as a low-grade spindle cell lesion with a sclerotic background, consistent with fibromyxoid sarcoma . The specimen was sent to a ertiary center, where the diagnosis of fibromyxoid sarcoma with sclerotic and myxoid components was confirmed. The presence of MUC4 marker was identified while the specimen was negative for CD34, STAT6, and S100 protein. This further confirmed presence of a low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma. The specimen showed negative margins and six benign lymph nodes. The spleen was unremarkable. A portion of omentum sent with the specimen was also negative for metastases.
The patient returned to the office for a two-week follow-up visit and was doing well with no complaints. It was determined that chemotherapy and radiation were not indicated. She was seen at a 4-week follow-up visit complaining of abdominal pain. A CT was done and showed expected postoperative changes, negative for any acute process. At two months post-op, the patient was seen and was doing well. No further follow-up was arranged.