A 64-year-old man with no previous illness visited a local physician because of progressive headache, decreased motivation, and aphasia over 2 weeks. Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed a 3-cm mass in the left frontal region with well-defined borders, irregular margins, and extensive surrounding edema. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the head strongly suggested a primary brain tumor . The patient developed right-sided insufficiency paralysis, which we decided to immediately treat by craniotomy. Pathological diagnosis of the brain tumor showed adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical analysis detected CK20 and CDX2 but not CK7, suggesting the primary tumor was in the colon .
Thus, we performed a colonoscopy 1 week after brain surgery, which revealed a type 2 advanced carcinoma with a circumference of approximately 80% of that of the lower rectum . Blood tests were not obviously abnormal, and the carcinoembryonic antigen level did not significantly change before vs after treatment (7.6 ng/ml vs 7.5 ng/ml, respectively). Abdominal CT showed rectal wall thickness and regional lymph node metastases . However, there was no other obvious distant metastatic site . We, therefore, decided to perform curative resection of the lower rectal cancer, staged as cT3N2M1 (TNM classification, 8th edition). After whole-brain irradiation (35 Gy/5 Fr), Twenty-four days after whole brain irradiation (35 Gy/5 fr), we performed robotic low anterior resection using the da Vinci Surgical System. Pathological findings showed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma similar to brain tumor tissue (pT3N1aM1 stage IV). The tumor was an invasive growth of moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma that invaded through the muscularis propria into perirectal tissue. The tumor showed vascular invasion (v1b) and lymphatic invasion (Ly1a). The tumor budding had a high score (BD3). Resection margins were negative (R0). High-grade extramural cancer deposits without lymph-node structure (Ex) existed around the primary tumor.
The patient was discharged from the hospital in good condition, and he received capecitabine monotherapy as adjuvant treatment for rectal cancer. The chemotherapy regimen was determined by the patient's preference. Twenty month follow-up after rectal surgery showed no evidence of recurrence.