A 65-year-old Caucasian male, with a history of paroxysmal AF (pAF), hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and chronic obstructive lung disease (CHA2DS2-VASc score 2), was referred for percutaneous pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) in 2013. Timeline illustrates the interventions and thromboembolic events in this patient. Upon admission, there were no other significant findings during cardiovascular physical examination except for aforementioned cardiovascular history. After the initially successful PVI, the patient was treated with acenocoumarol (target INR: 2.0–2.5) for anticoagulation. Due to the recurrence of pAF and a transient ischaemic attack (TIA) despite adequate anticoagulation therapy (INR = 2.1), the patient was opted for re-do PVI and LAAO with a Watchman device (21 mm). Three months after the initial PVI, patient was admitted again for this procedure. One day prior to the procedure, acenocoumarol was stopped and low-molecular-weight heparin (100 mg/day) was started (INR = 1.4). Pre-procedurally, we assessed whether LAA anatomy was suitable for LAAO by taking a CT scan of the heart and performing TEE (made during the previous PVI) . Peri-procedurally, we ensured optimal occlusion of the LAA with TEE and angiography. Post-procedurally, the patient was maintained on (initially) heparin (target range APTT: 50–70 s) (until INR > 2.0), aspirin (80 mg/day), and acenocoumarol (target INR: 2.0–3.0). At three months of follow-up, transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed less than 3 mm peri-device leakage , which was considered as successful LAAO. Subsequently, the patient was maintained on clopidogrel (75 mg/day) and aspirin (80 mg/day). According to the guideline recommendations, the patient used after three months only aspirin (80 mg/day).
In the following years, the patient had two more ischaemic strokes and multiple AF recurrences. The first stroke occurred two years after LAAO. Consequently, the patient switched from aspirin to clopidogrel (75 mg/day). One year later, the patient experienced a second stroke, and was maintained on dabigatran (300 mg/day) afterwards. We performed a TEE one week after this stroke and it showed a significant increase in peri-device leakage of more than 7 mm . In addition, other reasons for stroke, such as significant atherosclerosis in intra and/or extra cranial artery, were ruled out on CT. We also investigated if the patient had any coagulation defects, which he did not have. Consequently, there were three options for management of the leakage: 1) lifetime direct OAC (DOAC), 2) additional percutaneous closure with a second device, or 3) surgical clipping or amputation of LAA. Because the patient experienced many side-effects, including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea, from DOAC use (dabigatran, apixaban, and rivaroxaban), he underwent percutaneous closure with a second device (Amplatzer vascular plug 2) (12 mm). One day prior to the procedure, DOAC (rivaroxaban) was stopped and aspirin (80 mg/day) was started. Peri-procedurally, the peri-device leakage seemed to be successfully treated with additional plugging.
On the first post-procedural day, the patient had another ischaemic stroke, while using clopidogrel (75 mg/day) and rivaroxaban (20 mg/day). At one month follow-up, persisting peri-device leakage (4 mm) was observed on TEE . In addition, the patient developed an amiodarone-induced hyperthyroidism. The patient also experienced persisting side-effects from DOAC use and preferred to discontinue it. Due to progressive symptoms of AF after discontinuation of amiodarone and patient’s preference to discontinue DOAC, the patient underwent a Cox MAZE IV procedure, including amputation of the LAA with both devices. Three days prior to surgery, the patient stopped with rivaroxaban and continued with aspirin (80 mg/day). Intraoperatively, examination of the LAA showed no signs of clots, complete endothelialization of the Watchman device and a device-LAA ostium mismatch of approximately 4 mm. Post-operatively, the patient was maintained on (initially) heparin (0.3 mL/day), acenocoumarol (target INR: 2.5–3.5), and aspirin (80 mg/day). On the first post-operative day, the patient developed right-sided paresis which was attributed to recurrent ischaemia of the left hemisphere, which recovered within the next month. In the following weeks, heparin was stopped, and the patient remained on clopidogrel (75 mg/day) and acenocoumarol (target INR: 2.5–3.5). After three months, only acenocoumarol was continued. Six months after the surgery, the patient had again a TIA. In the following two years, the patient remained free of any cerebrovascular accidents or recurrence of AF.