A 69-year-old Caucasian woman was hospitalized after two episodes with syncope. She had a history of mild COPD and paroxysmal AFib treated with a beta-blocker. Two months prior to admission she had experienced a mild episode of COVID-19 without fever or respiratory impairment, documented by a PCR test. For weeks, she had experienced increasing dyspnea, frequent bouts of palpitations, dizziness, and near-syncope. Upon admittance, she complained of pain from the left thoracic wall after a fall at home. Clinically, she was affected by pain due to rib-fracture. She had no fewer and was hemodynamically stable despite a wide QRS complex tachycardia with a ventricular rate of 199 bpm. . The blood tests showed hemoglobin 6.1 mmol/L, leucocytes 12.9 109/L, CRP 75 mg/L. S-potassium, s-magnesium, and troponin I were all within normal ranges. A Chest X-ray were inconspicuous and a throat swab for SARS-CoV-2 was negative. An echocardiogram demonstrated slightly reduced left ventricular function (LVEF 45%) and a mild mitral insufficiency. The tachycardia was initially treated with amiodarone.
An acute thoraco-abdominal CT-scan revealed not only several non-dislocated rib-fractures, but also a markedly thickened aortic wall (1 cm) at the level of the aortic arch. The wall thickening extended up along the left subclavian artery to the left carotid artery, and down into the aortic root. These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of aortitis . The CT-scan also ruled out aortic dilatation, dissection, aneurysms or stenotic segments. The consultant rheumatologist did not find any subjective signs of systemic involvement and thus suggested a whole-body PET scan, which revealed extensive areas of increased activity throughout the aortic root, ascending aorta, the pulmonary trunk as well as in the surrounding mediastinum . As systemic vasculitis as well as Giant cell arteritis were ruled out, a suspicion of SARS CoV-2-triggered vasculitis/perivasculitis involving the ascending aorta and arch lead to a reevaluation of the patient’s medical history. Antibody testing confirmed previous SARS-CoV-2 infection, whereas tests for HIV, tuberculosis and syphilis were negative.
The basic rhythm was AFib and the intermittent tachycardia was interpreted as being a high-septum-triggered bundle branch reentry ventricular tachycardia (BBRVT) unaffected by adenosine administration. The patient underwent an EP-study. The measured AV conduction proved to be poor despite isoprenaline infusion, but no arrhythmia was triggered, nor any accessory pathways. As the patient also started developing intermittent third-degree AV block, a temporary pacemaker was implanted. Antibiotics given empirically did not cause any reduction in CRP levels and blood cultures were all negative.
In the following days, the episodes of BBRVT increased both in frequency and duration and progressed to ventricular storm, alternating between a RBBB and LBBB configuration . Lidocaine in addition to amiodarone had no effect on the tachycardia. Following a normal coronary arteriography, a repeated EP-study now revealed induction of two types of BBRVT, with LBBB and RBBB configurations corresponding to the 2 clinical VT’s. Voltage-mapping of both the right and left ventricles did not show signs of “myocardial scars”. VT-1 had local reentry-exit at the right sided basal part of the interventricular septum close to the RBB of the Hiss-Purkinje system. VT-2 had local VT-exit on the opposite part of the septum close to the LBB. Ablation was therefore performed to both sides of the basal ventricular septum after which the VT was non-inducible . The heart rhythm now alternated between AFib and sinus rhythm with a markedly prolonged AV conduction time and a permanent RBBB pattern. An ICD was implanted during hospitalization.
Following supplemental prednisolone treatment, the patient then quickly recovered without shortness of breath, arrhythmia and with a normalization of both hemoglobin and CRP. Due to recurrence of symptoms and an episode af nonsustained ventricular tachycardia after prednisolone tapering, long-term treatment with prednisolone and mycophenolate mofetil were initiated without any relapse in the following 14 months. A control-CT-scan showed a marked reduction in aortic inflammation.