A 56-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the out-patient clinic of our department with osteoarthritis of the left hip about six years ago. As conservative treatment had failed, she requested hip replacement arthroplasty. Due to her comparatively younger age and activity level, HRA (CormetTM, Corin Group, Cirencester, UK) was performed. Her post-operative course was unremarkable and the final radiological assessment showed an implant position with a cup inclination of 50° and a stem-shaft angle of 132°. Our patient fully recovered, and the follow-up investigation revealed a stable implant and our patient did not report any pain or problems related to the implant.
Three years later, our patient presented outside the normal follow-up with severe pain in the replaced hip joint. She reported about a falling incident that had occurred two months earlier, followed by an increasing pain over the subsequent weeks. Clinical and radiological evaluation revealed a failure of the acetabular component, which was already dislocated, and additionally showed a narrowing of the femoral neck . For those reasons, our patient underwent revision surgery. Intra-operatively, a massive metallosis of the peri-prosthetic tissue was found and the femoral and acetabular components were already damaged. Therefore removal of the whole implant became necessary. As the femoral bone was found to be intact, osteotomy could be performed directly below the femoral component. By doing this, preservation of the femoral neck was possible, which allowed a revision with a metaphyseal-anchored short-stem hip implant (Metha®, B. Braun AesculapOrthopedics, Tuttlingen, Germany) .
Post-operatively, our patient recovered well and was subsequently referred to a rehabilitation facility. Mobilization was performed by default with half body weight until soft tissue healing was accomplished (two weeks), followed by a rapid and pain-adapted increase to full weight bearing. The follow-up sessions at one, three, six, 12 and 24 months post-operatively were regular. The radiographs at the two-year follow-up showed a stable implant position . Clinical function two years after revision was good, with a Harris Hip Score of 86, a University of California, Los Angeles(UCLA) score of six and a Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index (WOMAC) score of 12.6, with 3.8 in the category ‘pain’, 1.7 in the category ‘stiffness’ and 7.1 in the category ‘function’.