A 54-year-old man was admitted to our department for progressive abdominal distension over the preceding 2 mo.
The patient started to feel abdominal distension and noted his abdomen’s volume increasing 2 mo before presentation. He denied diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or constipation. He also denied any changes in bowel habits. He lost approximately 5 kg in the previous 2 mo.
The patient was previously healthy.
The patient had smoked for approximately 30 years, and his family history was unremarkable.
The patient was afebrile with stable vital signs. He was 163 cm in height and 56 kg in weight. Abdominal physical examination revealed a fixed abdominal mass with ill-defined margins occupying the entire abdomen. No other abnormal signs were found.
Laboratory tests showed a normal white count and hemoglobin level of 103.0 g/L (reference range, 120-160 g/L for man). His 8 AM cortisol level was 2.06 μg/dL (reference range, 8.7-22.4 μg /dL) and adrenocorticotrophic hormone level was 6.14 pg/mL (reference range, 0-46 pg/mL). The albumin level decreased slightly (30.9 g/L; reference range, 35.0-54.0 g/L), with no other liver function and kidney function abnormalities.
Abdominal CT angiography revealed a 32 cm × 21 cm × 12 cm lipoma-like mass extending from the sub-hepatic space to the pelvic cavity. There were no enlarged lymph nodes. Radiocontrast agent confirmed the displacement of the right kidney to the left lower quadrant . Because of the complex relationship between the mass and nearby tissue, we performed a hyper-accuracy three-dimensional reconstruction . This study revealed that the mass received blood vessels from a branch of the right renal artery. The celiac trunk, the superior mesenteric, the inferior vena cava, and the pancreas were displaced and compressed.
Pathological examination revealed well-differentiated liposarcoma (WDLPS). Macroscopically, the mass appeared oval but was separated into irregular lobulations. Its size was 37 cm × 26 cm × 10 cm and it weighed approximately 11 kg. The surface of the mass was covered with a smooth and grayish capsule. The mass wrapped the adrenal gland. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of well-differentiated adipocytes and spindle-shaped cells. Areas of necrosis were rare. Nuclear degeneration was found in some areas (1/10 high-powered fields). Immunohistochemically, the tumor was partly positive for MDM2, S100, CK34, and CKD4, with a low grade of dedifferentiation (Ki-67: 20%) .