We report the case of an 8-year-old girl of Colombian origin and mixed race ancestry (Mestizo) who is the product of the first pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents; her mother was 32-years old and her father was 31-years old at the time of her gestation. Her mother’s prenatal history shows no evidence of teratogen exposure or any other relevant exposures or pathologies. Ultrasound reports during weeks 14 and 25 of gestation showed no morphological alterations.
Delivery care was performed at 38 weeks of gestation by spontaneous vaginal delivery, after which bilateral clubfoot and heart murmur were identified. An echocardiogram showed the presence of an atrial septal defect of 7.4 mm with a left to right shunt, dilated coronary sinus, subaortic interventricular communication of 4.8 mm and 6.8 mm with a left to right shunt. She underwent surgery for her congenital heart disease at 51-days old due to the presence of dyspnea, fatigue, anorexia, and diaphoresis. Currently she has a unicameral pacemaker.
She is currently 8 years of age, and has the following clinical findings: delayed psychomotor and language development, cognitive deficits, anthropometric measurements within normal percentiles, upward slanting palpebral fissures, divergent strabismus, rotated and low-set ears, tall and broad nasal bridge, flat philtrum, bifid uvula, posterior cleft palate, increased anteroposterior diameter of the thorax, scoliosis, and umbilical hernia. Her extremities evidenced clinodactyly of her fifth bilateral fingertips, bilateral ulnar deviation, right thumb with the presence of two interphalangeal grooves, thenar hypoplasia, gait abnormality, bilateral clubfoot (corrected), bilateral sandal gap, nail split of the second toe of her right foot, and a social personality (see Figs. and ).
Complementary studies were conducted: magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain evidenced brain stem and corpus callosum hypoplasia, and cortico-subcortical atrophy; thoracic spine MRI showed a left middle thoracic scoliotic curve (see Fig. ). Electroencephalogram had an abnormal vigil tracing with frequent repetitive discharge points, isolated biphasic spike, associated with right frontotemporal high voltage slow waves. Hip radiography confirmed bilateral coxa valga and hip subluxation; foot and ankle radiography documented a varus foot, her first metatarsal talus mechanical axis was altered by lateralization of the astragal axis, and the presence of ankle valgus.
G-banding karyotyping was performed in 20 metaphases, which reported a 46,XX female; subsequently, chromosomal analysis was performed by CGH array that showed a loss of approximately 3.608 Mb on chromosome 21q22.3, and a copy number gain of 12.326 Mb on chromosome 7q35q36.3 (see Fig. ); these alterations affect approximately 112 and 186 genes, respectively (see Table ). Both copy number changes are terminal, which suggests an unbalanced translocation between chromosomes 7 and 21, resulting in a derivative chromosome 21.
Complementary studies were performed with both parents using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The results showed our patient’s mother has a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 7 and 21 ish t(7;21)(q35;q22.3) (RP11-10L20-, RP11-75J5 +; RP11-75J5-, RP11-10L20 +).