We present the case of a 24-year-old Caucasian non-smoking male patient training for mid and long-distance triathlon competitions. While road cycling, he had an accidental fall and suffered a fracture in his left lateral clavicle . Based on the Neer classification, the fracture can be categorized as a Type IIa fracture, which is located medial to the coracoclavicular ligament. There is noticeable displacement of the medial fragment, but the conoid and trapezoid ligaments remained intact. The patient underwent surgery the following day, during which the dislocated bone fragments were stabilized using a clavicle plate system (VariAx, Fig. b).
One day after surgery, he was discharged. Since the patient's goal was to participate in the upcoming Half-Ironman (consisting of a 1.2 mile/1.9 km swim, a 56 mile/90 km bike ride, and a 13.1 mile/21.1 km run) in three weeks, we immediately initiated EMTT stimulation on the same day . We opted for a relatively intense treatment protocol using the Magnetolith device (STORZ Medical), stimulating for 30 min at a frequency of 8 Hz and magnetic field strength of approximately 80 mT (14,400 impulses per session). The patient does not experience any additional pain or discomfort during the application of EMTT. For the first two weeks, we repeated this protocol every other day .
Additionally, we started with physiotherapeutic measures one day after the surgery . In the first week, the patient's active and passive movements were limited to 90 degrees in flexion and abduction. Moreover, he resumed his training plan and began cycling on a home cycle trainer and running , both while wearing a sling. The sling immobilization was maintained during the second week but omitted during the training sessions. Throughout the second week, the range of motion improved, allowing an elevation and abduction above 90° (Flexion: < 110°, Abduction: < 100°) under the guidance of the physiotherapist. Consequently, the athlete could perform bike training sessions on a TT-Bike (time trial) in conjunction with the TT-position .
At the end of the second week, the athlete could run 20 km without experiencing any pain. Given the patient's report of being almost pain-free during daily activities , we advanced to a more competition-oriented protocol, incorporating strength training using resistance bands. Furthermore, the athlete included brief high-intensity sessions into his exercise regimen. To test his ability to swim in the upcoming Half-Ironman, he swam the crawl for 500 m while wearing a wetsuit. To avoid causing pain, he refrained from pulling and pushing forcefully during the arm crawl phases. The Half-Ironman was completed three weeks after surgery, even achieving a personal best time. A cautious approach was taken in the swimming discipline, resulting in a more restrained swim performance. A clinical assessment after the competition did not reveal any deterioration in terms of painless range of motion. However, to ensure the correct positioning of the screws and plate, an X-ray evaluation was conducted six weeks after surgery . The fixation plate and all screws were intact and not loosened. The fracture gap already exhibited slight bony consolidation, indicating ongoing fracture healing. The treatment can be successfully completed (clinically) at this stage. To confirm complete bone healing radiologically too, the patient received one final follow-up X-ray image ten weeks post-surgery .First week:Elbow, wrist, hand exercises Pendulum, Circular (Codman's Exercises) Isometric exercises All movements were restricted to 90° (Flexion, Abduction) Second week:Exercises from the first week Arm lifting (Flexion) with support of the good arm (< 90°, end of the week: < 100°) Walk Up Exercise against the wall (Active) Passive movements supported by physiotherapist: Flexion: < 110°, Abduction: < 100° Third week:Exercises from first and second week Strengthening exercises with resistance band (pain adopted) Passive movements supported by physiotherapist: Full range of motion (if painless)