A 68-year-old man who was otherwise well, presented with mild shortness of breath with 6 months duration and a recent onset of chest pain. Physical examination showed dullness on percussion and decreased breath sounds in the lower zone of the left lung. Laboratory data, respiratory function tests and arterial blood gas analyses were within the normal limits. Chest x-ray showed a large, well defined soft tissue mass in the anterior mediastinum . On computed tomography (CT), an inhomogeneous fatty mass in the left hemithorax showing invasive features to the heart and left hemidiaphragm was defined . Detection for distant metastases including bone scan, cranial and abdominal CTs showed no abnormal findings. Esophagoscopy and bronchoscopy revealed extrinsic compression effects, but no evidence of intraluminal tumor. Therefore surgical intervention was proposed. On the beginning the patient underwent a left anterolateral thoracotomy but due to diaphragmatic invasion, an abdominal extension of the incision was needed. A large, well-demarcated and slightly lobulated mass located in the left hemithorax showing invasive features to the heart and left hemidiaphragm was explored. The tumor was attached to the inferior pericardial wall causing significant compression to the heart. A pericardial incision was necessary to check possible myocardial infiltration. This manipulation revealed that the tumor was in close association with the left atrium and ventricle anteriorly but showed no invasion to these vital structures.
En bloc resection of the tumor with part of pericardium and the left hemidiaphragm was performed. The diaphragmatic defect was covered with bovine pericardium. The patient tolerated operation well and had an uneventful postoperative recovery. Nine months later he is free of disease and in a very good condition.
The entire tumor measured 9 × 7 × 5 cm in diameter and weighed 430 g in total. The mass was soft and pale yellow in color on cut section. The final pathologic diagnosis was well differentiated low grade liposarcoma (atypical lipomatous tumor, Figure ).