A 32-year-old Caucasian female presented to the emergency department in 2015 complaining of abdominal pain, with acute onset 8 h prior. The pain was constant, localized in the right lower quadrant and intensity was rated as 8–9 on the visual analogue scale. Routine biochemistry including leukocyte count and C-reactive protein was normal.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed fluid in the peritoneum and possible cysts on the right ovary. A gynecological examination was normal, aside from tenderness behind the uterus. A transvaginal ultrasound showed free fluid in the Pouch of Douglass and a 5x4x6 cm large mass between the right ovary and the uterus. At this point the pain had improved considerably on pain medication and the patient was scheduled for an explorative laparoscopy 4 days later.
The laparoscopy found a dilated, necrotic and torqued right salpinx, congealed blood in the Pouch of Douglass and several 1–2 mm, white, round elements on both the salpinx and on all peritoneal surfaces. The right salpinx and several of the peritoneal elements were sent for histological examination alone. Due to the macroscopic appearance, peritoneal carcinomatosis was suspected, although CT scan and laparoscopy had not exposed any underlying malignancies.
However, histological examination revealed no signs of malignancy, but a dilated salpinx with fungal structures, widespread necrosis and severe inflammation with numerous eosinophilic granulocytes and vasculitis like changes in the sub serosal vessels. The peritoneal biopsies showed small thrombotic vessels with fungal structures, within the thrombotic material . The pathologist suspected blastomycosis or another dimorphic fungus. The final histopathological diagnosis of CM was made by identification of the typical large (10–100 μm) endospore-containing spherulae after consulting Danish (Statens Serum Institut) and American microbiologists (Indiana Health Pathology, Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA) . No unfixed tissue samples were available for culture or molecular identification methods.
The patient was referred to the department of infectious diseases where further history taking revealed that the patient had lived in Las Vegas, Nevada from 2006 to 2008 and revisited in 2009 and 2011. In the last 5 years she has also visited Argentina, Guatemala, Nigeria, Zambia and South Africa. She could not recall any episodes of illness while traveling. The diagnosis was confirmed by serology [, ] (immunodiffusion (Meridian Bioscence, OH, USA)) demonstrating IgG antibodies against Coccidioides, with an antibody titer of 1:8. Further workup with a CT-scan of the thorax showed a 16 mm large calcified process in the apex of the right lung. There were no signs of immune deficiency with a negative HIV-test, normal levels of immunoglobulins and a normal CD4 cell count of 1020 cells/μL. Her medical history was inconspicuous; the only prior hospital contact was for fertility treatment that did not result in pregnancy. One to 3 years prior to admittance she underwent four separate in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatments. For the last two rounds of IVF she was also treated with a low dose of prednisolone, 10 mg daily. In 2012, three days after the first insemination, the patient was admitted to the ED for abdominal pain, was observed for 24 h and discharged without further workup.
The patient was started on treatment with oral fluconazole 400 mg twice daily for 1 week, followed by 400 mg once daily. Treatment was scheduled for at least 6 months and possibly longer guided by serological response. Three months and 6 months after initiation of treatment the patient’s antibody titer had fallen to 1:2 and 1:1 respectively. The patient completed 8 months of fluconazole treatment, with a reduced dose of 200 mg daily for the last month. Two months after completion of therapy the antibody titer was still 1:1. To ensure that the pelvic and peritoneal CM had resolved a laparoscopy was done three and a half month after completion of therapy. The laparoscopy found a dilated, chronic inflamed left salpinx and persistence of the small 1–2 mm, white, round elements on the peritoneal surfaces. The histological examination confirmed granulomatous infection with numerous coccidioidal spherules. The patient was immediately restarted on treatment with oral fluconazole 400 mg twice daily. At the moment, length of treatment has not been decided and other treatment options, such as liposomal amphotericin-B or voriconazole, are being considered. The timeline for the case is summerized in .