A 59-year-old Han Chinese male was diagnosed with systemic MCL in February 2014. He received three cycles of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone (CHOP) and rituximab chemotherapy, one cycle of rituximab mega-CHOP chemotherapy, and two cycles of dexamethasone, cytarabine, cisplatin (DHAP) and rituximab chemotherapy, followed by BCNU, etoposide, cytarabine and melphalan (BEAM) chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) in August 2015, which result in complete disease remission with negative restaging positron emission tomography (PET) scan obtained in November 2015.
In March 2016, the patient complained of redness, pain and blurred vision in the left eye. Ocular examination revealed elevated intraocular pressure (IOP, 24 mmHg), diffuse conjunctival injection and anterior chamber reaction (flare 1+, cell 1+) in the left eye, and cortical cataracts in both eyes. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/50 and 20/60 in his right and left eye respectively. He was diagnosed as “anterior uveitis” and was given 1% prednisone acetate eye drops 8 times daily with tapering, along with topical tropicamide and 2% cartelol eye drops. However, the condition of his left eye continued to deteriorate which presented as “pseudohypopyon” and anterior protrusion of the peripheral iris 2 months later , and his left BCVA dropped to hand motion. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) revealed confluent ciliary body masses with almost 360°involvement in both eyes , while ultrasound B-scan demonstrated a clear vitreous cavity and the absence of retino-choroidal anomalies. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no significant findings in the orbit.
Diagnostic paracentesis of the left anterior chamber was performed on April 29th 2016. Liquid-based cytology revealed small malignant cells in the aqueous humor , which were then confirmed to be B-cell in origin by gene rearrangement studies. Given his past medical history, intraocular MCL was diagnosed. A PET examination was re-performed in May 2016 and no signs of systemic recurrence was identified.
Then he was scheduled for 40 Gy external beam irradiation delivered evenly in twenty fractions over a period of 1 month. The pseudohypopyon disappeared 2 weeks after the commencement of irradiation and the symptoms resolved completely after the patient received full irradiation dosage . UBM re-examination disclosed complete regression of ciliary tumor in the right eye and reduction of tumor size in the left eye . Additionally, his left eye received a series of 400μg/0.1 ml methotrexate (MTX) intravitreal injections, weekly for the first month, every 2 weeks for the second month, and monthly for 10 months , which resulted in complete regression of ciliary tumor . In January 2017, he underwent cataract surgery in the left eye with insertion of an AcrySof IQ intraocular lens, and the BCVA improved to 20/200.
Unfortunately, the patient suffered peripheral lymph node MCL recurrence in October 2018, which followed by rapid deterioration. In November 2018, he died of the side effects of intensive chemotherapy.