The case is a 14-year-old Iranian boy with no past medical history presenting with multiple trauma from a motorcycle accident who was transferred to the Poursina hospital emergency room (ER) in Rasht on 9 June 2020. In addition, he had an extensive laceration on his right knee and a star-shaped laceration on his parietal region. O2 saturation was 93%, temperature was 38.5 °C, and the other vital signs were stable. In the ER, his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 3/15 (E1V1M1). No free fluid in the abdomen and pelvic cavity in focused assessment with sonography for trauma was reported. A right bundle branch block was observed in his electrocardiogram (ECG). Echocardiography was performed and reported as normal. He was then referred to the neurosurgery ward and was hospitalized for almost 40 days.
He had no signs and symptoms related to COVID-19. However, during hospitalization, spiral high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of his lung without contrast revealed patchy ground-glass opacity in both lungs (mostly in the right lung) . These findings suggested that the patient was infected by COVID-19. Finally, the COVID-19 infection was confirmed by consecutive positive reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test.
Following a brain CT scan, a deep intracranial hemorrhage in the thalamus was found . The contusion of the right parietal lobe without hydrocephalus and midline shifts were reported . Furthermore, no spinal fractures and displacements were reported in his cervical spine CT scan. Abdominal and pelvic CT scan were also normal.
His laceration of the parietal region was repaired by surgery. In addition, the repair and debridement of the right knee laceration were carried out. Afterward, he was intubated and a collar fixed his cervical spine. He was treated with lasix and mannitol because of raised intracranial pressure. After supportive therapy for almost 40 days, he was discharged after educating his parents about his care at home, while his GCS was 6/15 (E2V1M3).