A 72 years old woman proceeded to the Emergency Department complaining of acute lower right abdominal pain, mild fever, mild weight loss and constipation. The past medical history of the patient was free.
The patient was presented with severe lower right abdominal pain, with signs of local peritonitis and a palpable mass in the same region. The body temperature was 37.2–37.4°C, while arterial blood pressure and cardiac rate 150/90 mmHg and 90/min respectively. The signs of local peritonitis combined with the palpable mass of the lower right abdominal area suggested perforation of the appendix and abscess formation. The laboratory examinations of the patient showed leucocytosis with white blood cell count (WBC) 19000 (with macrophage prevalence: 89%). Colonoscopy revealed obstruction of the right colon. Biopsies were not acquired because the colon lumen was obstructed and the endoscope could not approach the lesion. Computerized tomography (CT) scans of the abdomen revealed a soft lobular mass, measuring 5 × 5 cm, attached to the ascending colon and cecum, compatible with a tumor. The most possible diagnosis was that of a perforated colonic tumor. The patient underwent explorative laparotomy and right hemicolectomy with an end-to-end ileocolonic anastomosis. Thorough exploration of the abdominal cavity revealed no other pathologic findings.
The surgical specimen consisted of a 10 cm length of the terminal ileum and the whole of the right colon. The serosa was very heavily covered by suppurative exudates and fibrotic tissue.
Microscopic examination of the surgical specimen revealed thickening of the ascending colon wall with neutrophilic infiltration. Numerous polymorphonuclear leukocytes within the muscularis and a fibro-purulent reaction over the serosa with actinomycotic "sulfur granules" in it, were found in high power magnification .
Upon receiving the pathology report, systemic intravenous penicillin treatment was initiated. Therapy continued for 10 days and then followed by oral penicillin for 6 months. No postoperative complications were observed and the patient was discharged the 14th day.