The patient was a 72-year-old man who complained of dyspnoea. He had had this symptom since April 2020, but because this symptom worsened, he visited a nearby hospital. Cardiac hypertrophy with high serum IgM concentrations and mild anaemia were found, and AL amyloidosis was suspected. Therefore, the patient was referred to the Haematological Department of our hospital. He had no history of regular visits to medical institutions, and his previous doctor noted atrial fibrillation, a positive faecal occult blood result, and iron deficiency anaemia. He had been prescribed torasemide, vonoprazan-fumarate, apixaban, ferrous sodium citrate, and vitamin C and calcium pantothenate tablets by his previous doctor. These findings suggested cardiac amyloidosis and Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia. His family had no remarkable medical history. An initial examination showed the following: height, 163 cm; weight, 58.3 kg; body mass index, 21.94 kg/m2; blood pressure, 135/88 mmHg; pulse pressure, 141 beats/min (irregular), and percutaneous oxygen saturation, 96%. He had mild oedema, but there were no abnormalities in the chest or neurological findings. An electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with a QRS waveform width of 96 ms, and a chest X-ray showed mild congestion and cardiac enlargement (see , and ). His bloodwork showed a WBC count of 7.5 × 109/l, Platelet count of 25.3 × 1010/l, a RBC count of 365 × 1010/l, and Hematocrit (HCT) of 36.8%. Other measurements were as follows: Hemoglobin, 123 g/l; HCT, 36.8 L/L; Total Protein, 80 g/L; Albumin, 41 g/L; Total bilirubin, 18.8 umol/L; LDH, 104 IU/L; Blood urea nitrogen, 5.36 mmol/L; Creatinine, 103 umol/L; Calcium, 2.3 mmol/L; C-reactive protein, 7000 ug/L; Glucose, 5.8 mmol/L; HbA1c, 5.4%; N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, 2636 pg/ml; High sensitivity cardiac troponin T, 0.032 ng/mL; immunoglobulin (Ig) G, 1394 mg/dL; IgA, 112 mg/dL; and IgM, 1514 mg/dL. Additionally, serum immunoelectrophoresis was positive for Ig type M-protein, and a monoclonal increase in the κ chain was found. The Bence–Jones urinary protein test was also positive, and the involved protein was the κ chain (see , ). The patient underwent a duodenal mucosal biopsy and abdominal skin biopsy as a less invasive histological approach, but no amyloid deposits were found (see , ). A left iliac bone marrow biopsy was performed, which also showed no amyloid deposition, but it showed an increase in plasma cell-like lymphocytes of more than 10%, leading to the diagnosis of Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia (see , ). He also had heart failure, and we needed to pathologically detect amyloid deposition to make a definitive diagnosis of systemic amyloidosis. Therefore, he was referred to the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine. Echocardiography showed concentric hypertrophy with a ventricular septal thickness of 11 mm, a left ventricular posterior wall thickness of 11 mm, a left ventricular end-diastolic diameter of 40 mm, a left ventricular mass index of 103 g/m2, and a relative wall thickness of 0.55. Coronary angiography was performed to rule out coronary artery disease, but no clinically significant stenosis was observed. In addition, hypertensive heart disease, valvular disease, myocarditis, and congenital heart disease were not present in the patient’s history, clinical course, or echocardiography. We considered that the acute exacerbation of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction was due to the underlying cardiomyopathy, which caused concentric hypertrophy and tachycardiac atrial fibrillation acting as an exacerbating factor. The Kumamoto criteria were 1 point based on the assumption of cardiomyopathy resulting from cardiac amyloidosis. At the time of presentation, neither cardiac magnetic resonance imaging nor 99mTc pyrophosphate scintigraphy (99mTc-PYP) was available in our hospital. Because amyloidosis could not be detected by the above-mentioned minimally invasive histological examination, examining the histology of cardiomyopathy including amyloidosis was necessary. Additionally, a myocardial biopsy was performed at the same time as coronary angiography. Biopsies from the right ventricular septum were positive for Congo red stain and showed apple-green birefringence on polarized light microscopy. TTR immunostaining was also performed at Kumamoto University. On the basis of positive results, he was diagnosed with ATTR (see , ). A genetic analysis of TTR was also requested by Kumamoto University. The DNA sequence of TTR exons 1–4 was analysed, but no genetic change was found. Accordingly, the condition was diagnosed as ATTRwt. The patient had a CHADs2 score of 2, and administration of apixaban 10 mg/day was started. He also started torasemide sodium ferrous citrate and bisoprolol fumarate administration, and his atrial fibrillation immediately returned to a sinus rhythm. Although his heart failure could be controlled by medication, early introduction of tafamidis was considered because he met the requirements for that treatment.