The male infant was born to a 23 year-old primi-gravida mother. Pregnancy was uneventful, fetal urinary tract appeared normal on ultrasound, the mother’s medical history was negative for any medication as was family history for renal or cardiovascular disease. While amniotic fluid volume seemed normal on routine ultrasound examinations, anhydramnios of unknown origin was observed at 32 weeks of gestation. No signs of tear or leak in the amniotic membrane were detected. Anhydramnios and pathological umbilical blood flow led to Caesarean section at 34 + 0 weeks of gestation. Birthweight was 2515 g (66th percentile), head circumference 31 cm (24th percentile), APGAR scores 9 at 5′ and 10 at 10 min, umbilical cord artery pH 7.35. The anterior fontanelle was wide and the infant showed features of Potter-sequence with contractures of wrist and ankle joints as well as epicanthus. He also presented with distinct general edema.
After good postnatal adaptation, the infant needed mechanical ventilation due to respiratory distress caused by a spontaneous right-sided pneumothorax at the age of 1 h. He quickly stabilized after nasotracheal intubation and placement of a chest tube. Neither signs of pulmonary hypoplasia nor pulmonary hypertension were evident from chest x-ray or echocardiography (see Fig. a and b). Pre- and postductal oxygen saturation monitoring did not show any significant difference, ventilatory support was minimal (SIMV-mode, PIP 13 mbar, FiO2 0,25) and the patient had no signs of surfactant deficiency.
During the first day of life, he developed severe arterial hypotension (mean arterial blood pressure around 30 mmHg, below 10th percentile ) and consecutive renal failure and anuria (no urinary output for 36 h, serum creatinine 1,98 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 120 mg/dl) which poorly responded to fluid boluses, catecholamine therapy (dobutamine, noradrenaline and epinephrine), furosemide and hydrocortisone therapy. Sepsis, cystic kidney disease and connatal nephrotic syndrome were ruled out. The cortisol level was normal. Echocardiography revealed good biventricular function without signs of pulmonary hypertension.
After 36 h, vasopressin therapy was initiated with excellent response at doses of 0,001 IE/kg/min; blood pressure stabilized with consecutive onset of diuresis almost immediately after starting of vasopressin (see Fig. ). Initially elevated creatinine and blood urea nitrogen normalized with the onset of diuresis. Weaning of vasopressin, however, was difficult due to rapid deterioration of blood pressure and urinary output and could not be discontinued for the next three weeks. Oligohydramnios, refractory arterial hypotension, renal failure with normal renal ultrasound was highly suggestive of renal tubular dysgenesis. On the fourth day of life, the patient suffered from a spontaneous gastric perforation, which was surgically treated without complications (see Fig. ). On the 21st day of life, hyperkalemia needed to be treated with repetitive doses of furosemide. As renal tubular dysgenesis was suspected, endocrinological assessment was performed on day 12. It revealed an excessively high active renin concentration > 330 ng/l (normal 6.3 to 149 ng/l), a low concentration of ACE < 8 U/l (normal 8.3 to 21.4 U/l) and hypoaldosteronism (aldosterone < 37 ng/l, normal 73–425 ng/l). As this is a common finding in RTD, we established a fludrocortisone therapy resulting in stable electrolytes and bicarbonate. The infant required a gastric tube due to poor feeding until the 6th week of life. He was discharged at the age of 7 weeks.
Mutational analysis of the ACE gene showed a novel compound hyterozygous mutation. C.5303 + 1G > A has been described before and impairs splicing of pre-mRNA of ACE . The other mutation was c.1487G > A and has not been reported before in RTD. Therefore, we present a patient with a novel compound hyterozygous constellation of RTD.
The patient is now 17 months of age and has been re-admitted several times for dehydration due to poor feeding in times of respiratory infection. Whenever fludrocortisone therapy was discontinued due to non-compliance, the patient developed hyperkalemia and rise of creatine levels. Currently he is suffering from stage 2 chronic renal disease with a GFR of 60 ml/min/1,73m2 (normal > 90 ml/min/1,73m2). Renal ultrasound shows increased echogenicity but no enlargement of the kidneys. With reestablished fludrocortisone therapy and sodium bicarbonate substitution electrolytes and blood urea nitrogen are normal, serum creatinine and cystatine C only slightly elevated (Creatinine 0,45 mg/dl, cystatine C 1,43 mg/l). Blood pressure is on the 50th percentile. Cognitive and psychomotor development are age-appropriate.