A 38-year-old man arrived at our emergency department with acutely altered mental status.
The patient suffered from alcoholism and had a known history of recurrent episodes of hepatic encephalopathy; the most recent episode had happened 5 mo earlier. He had stopped drinking alcohol for 5 mo and had started drinking again 1 wk prior to this presentation. On the morning of admission, the family had incidentally found him lying in bed, confused and lethargic, and immediately called an ambulance.
The patient did not have any history of disease and did not have a history of seizures or brain trauma, and he had not recently undergone surgery.
The patient has been drinking alcohol everyday for 16 years. Family history was not contributory.
Upon arrival, the patient had a blood pressure of 96/56 mm Hg, pulse rate of 132 beats per minute, body temperature of 37.5 °C, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per min, and oxygen saturation of 96% in room air. Physical examination revealed no acute distress and a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 5 (eyes, 1; verbal, 3; and motor, 1). No signs of trauma were observed on his body. His pupils were equal in size, round, and nonreactive to light. Cardiopulmonary and abdominal examination findings were unremarkable. Bilateral Babinski signs were absent, but the neurological examination otherwise was limited because the patient could not follow commands.
Laboratory studies showed a white blood cell count of 9900/μL with 75.8% of neutrophils, hemoglobin level of 17.6 g/dL, hematocrit of 50.6%, and platelet count of 117000/μL. Electrolyte, liver function, and blood chemistry results were as follows: Sodium, 132 mmol/L; potassium, 3.5 mmol/L; calcium, 8.2 mg/dL; magnesium, 2.4 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 34 mg/dL; creatinine, 2.72 mg/dL; total bilirubin, 6.7 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 3.8 mg/dL; alanine aminotransferase, 496 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 163 IU/L; albumin, 3.9 g/dL; lipase, 73 IU/L; prothrombin time (international normalized ratio), 1.17; and ammonia, 277.7 μmol/L (reference range, 6-47 μmol/L). The fasting blood glucose level was 168 mg/dL; the lactate level was 71.5 mg/dL. The arterial blood gas pH was 7.29 (partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 56 mm Hg; partial pressure of oxygen, 71 mm Hg; and actual bicarbonate level, 26.9 mmol/L).
Electrocardiograms and chest radiographs revealed no acute pathological finding. Brain computed tomography without contrast enhancement revealed no hemorrhage or acute ischemic stroke. Abdominal computed tomography showed atelectasis in both lower lung zones, fatty liver, and ileus.
In the emergency department, one episode of generalized seizure with frothing at the mouth and both eyes deviated to the left side lasting for several minutes was noted. An intravenous injection of lorazepam (1 ampoule of 2 mg) was immediately administered for seizure control; at that time, the patient’s Glasgow Coma Scale score was 3 (eyes, 1; verbal, 1; and motor, 1). The patient was intubated and admitted to an ICU for monitoring with a diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy. Lorazepam and vitamin B infusion were administered to prevent alcohol withdrawal syndrome; lactulose (30 mL) via a nasogastric tube was administered three times per day for management of hepatic encephalopathy, and broad-spectrum empirical antibiotics were administered for control of any infection. On the second day of his hospitalization, several episodes of involuntary bilateral feet dorsiflexion were noted. His ammonia level decreased to 88.1 μmol/L by the third day of hospitalization, but intermittent involuntary movement in the lower face was still noted.