A nine-month-old Chinese girl presented with one-week history of pallor at a referral hospital where she received a red blood cell transfusion for severe anemia (Hb 3.4 g/dL) and started to treat for iron-deficiency anemia (IDA) after microcytosis (mean corpuscular volume 74.6 fl), hypochromia (mean cell Hb 21.5 pg), and low serum iron concentration (1.28umol/L) were confirmed. On discharge after 1 week of treatment, anemia was corrected (Hb 12.4 g/dL). However, recurrent anemia was observed over a six-month period, even another red blood cell transfusion was given in this period. Positive fecal occult blood test results were intermittent. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed the increase of patch density in the left lower lobe and right upper lobe of the lung. Although she had no history of repetitive haemoptysis, chronic cough and dyspnoea, idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis (IPH) was entertained and the IDA therapy was discontinued.
Patient was referred to our hospital for further management. Flexible bronchoscopy was performed, but bronchoalveolar lavage examination of blood-stained fluid and hemosiderin-laden macrophages from involved areas was negative. Review of the chest CT scan showed no extensive ground glass opacities and reticular shadows. Therefore, diffuse alveolar haemorrhage was ruled out. Review of the patient’s history found an episode of intermittent melena 1 month after the IDA treatment, and that was considered to be the side effect of the drug by the outpatient doctor. No related family genetic history. Physical exam demonstrated a girl of normal appearance consistent with her ethnicity except pallor. The diagnostic approach for gastrointestinal bleeding was started. However, the patient underwent both upper and lower endoscopy with negative findings in all of the endoscopic examinations. Plain and enhanced CT of abdomen and the technetium-99 m–labeled red blood cell scans were performed. Again, they were all negative. Her symptoms persisted and one red blood cell transfusion was needed each week.
The department of general surgery was involved in the management and a decision to do surgical exploration with laparoscopy was taken. A 3 cm lesion with dense blistered protrusions on the surface was found within the wall of jejunum , acting as a lead point, so a jejunal segment was resected and an end to end jejunojejunostomy was performed. Pathological examination indicated a vascular malformations (VM) . Postoperative period was uneventful and she was discharged home with no complications. There was no recurrence during follow-ups.