A 40-year-old previously healthy man with a past medical history only notable for a body mass index of 27 presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with several days of fever and cough. He tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) nasopharyngeal swab. His vital signs on examination were notable for a heart rate of 110 beats per minute and a temperature of 38.2°C. His chest X-ray was unremarkable. Given his clinical stability, further labwork was deferred and the patient was discharged from the ED to self-quarantine at home. Over the subsequent 3 weeks, the patient’s symptoms completely resolved. He had repeat COVID-19 testing prior to returning to work, which was negative.
Two months after his negative COVID-19 testing, the patient developed progressive dyspnoea with minimal exertion. He had an episode of syncope which prompted him to return to the ED for further evaluation. On presentation, his blood pressure was 126/99 mmHg, heart rate 122 beats per minute, temperature 37.5°C, and oxygen saturation 97% on room air. Physical examination was notable for tachycardia with regular rhythm, 3/6 holosystolic murmur at the lower left sternal border, positive jugular venous distention to 10 cm, lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally, and no evidence of lower extremity oedema.
Labwork was significant for a troponin of 0.12 ng/mL (normal < 0.02 ng/mL), brain natriuretic peptide of 1321 pg/mL (normal < 100 pg/mL), lactate 2.5 mm/l (normal 0.9–1.7 mm/l), and a D-dimer of 19 014 ng/mL fibrinogen equivalent units (FEU) (normal < 100 ng/mL FEU). Electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia with an S1Q3T3 pattern (see ). Given the significantly elevated D-dimer and history of SARS-CoV-2 infection, a computed tomography angiogram with PE protocol was obtained that demonstrated acute bilateral PE described as a central obstructive clot with acute thrombus and a high obstructive score as defined by a modified Miller score of 15 (see ). Bedside echocardiography revealed severe right ventricular (RV) enlargement (6.5 cm) , positive McConnell’s sign, moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation , right ventricular outflow tract velocity time integral (RVOT VTI) of 6.69 cm (normal > 10 cm) , tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 10 mm (normal > 18 mm) , and an right ventricular:left ventricular ratio of 2.4 (normal < 1) . Repeat SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing returned positive, and the patient was admitted to the coronary care unit on a heparin infusion.
After a multidisciplinary pulmonary embolism response team discussion, it was recommended that the patient be escalated to catheter-directed thrombolysis given the multiple high-risk features for acute decompensation. Unfortunately, prior to the procedure the patient had an episode of bradycardia and hypoxia followed immediately by cardiopulmonary arrest with pulseless electrical activity (PEA). Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was immediately initiated and full-dose systemic alteplase was administered. Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted for consideration of veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Unfortunately, return of spontaneous circulation was unable to be achieved due to persistent PEA and asystole.