The patient was a 75-year-old male. The patient presented to the Department of Respiratory Medicine with fever and chest pain. Imaging examination revealed a tumor outside the right lung; because malignant disease could not be ruled out, the patient was referred to our department for surgical resection of the lesion.
No relevant family history was observed. He had smoked 20 cigarettes per day for 45 years and had a Brinkman index score of 900. The patient had comorbidities, such as hypertension, dyslipidemia, and chronic kidney disease. The patient characteristics on admission were as follows: height, 164 cm; weight, 68 kg; body mass index, 25.3 kg/m2. Physical examination revealed no abnormal chest respiratory or cardiac sounds. No enlarged cervical lymph nodes were observed. On admission, there were no abnormal findings in blood counts, such as white blood cell counts or hemoglobin levels. Biochemical analysis revealed mildly elevated aspartate aminotransferase (54 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (68 U/L), blood urea nitrogen (20.4 mg/dL), and creatinine levels (1.09 mg/dL). Coagulation showed a mildly elevated D-dimer level of 2.20 μg/mL, but no other abnormal findings were observed. The tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (2.5 mg/mL), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (9 U/mL), cytokeratin fragment antigen (1.60 ng/mL), and squamous cell carcinoma (1.4 ng/mL) were within the reference range, while the neuron-specific enolase (14.90 ng/mL) and serum soluble interleukin 2 receptor (580 U/mL) levels were slightly elevated. Respiratory function tests and electrocardiography revealed no abnormalities.
Chest radiography revealed mass shadows in the middle and lower lobes of the right lung . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and abdomen showed a mass lesion of 53 × 48 mm in size with mixed fat density spanning the middle and lower lobes of the right lung . Radiologic reading revealed a mass with mixed fat and soft density in the major fissure area between the middle and lower lobes of the right lung, and the possibility of mediastinal origin was considered. No inflammation or necrosis was noted. The mass appeared to be mediastinal in origin, and liposarcoma or malignant tumors were suggested as differential diagnoses. Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction showed a normal bronchial branch and a mass spanning the middle and lower lobes of the right lung . No significant enlargement of mediastinal lymph nodes was observed. No obvious neoplastic lesions were observed in the other organs. Thoracic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a mixed fatty and soft mass in the major fissure area between the middle and lower lobes of the right lung . Radiologic reading showed a mass with mixed fat and soft tissue density in the major fissure area between the middle and lower lobes of the right lung, and the lesion appeared to be continuous with the pericardial fatty tissue. However, the internal characteristics were accompanied by diffusion restriction, and the possibility of a malignant lesion could not be ruled out. Contrast-enhanced MRI was not performed. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography showed a 53 × 47-mm mass near the right pulmonary hilum with mild accumulation of maximum standardized uptake value of 2.4 . Although malignant lesions could not be ruled out, benign lesions, such as teratomas and paraneoplastic tumors, were identified as differential lesions. No bronchoscopy was performed. Based on the above findings, the possibility of malignant lesions, including lung cancer, could not be ruled out, and the subjective symptoms of fever and chest pain did not improve; therefore, surgical resection was performed. Preoperative diagnosis of this case was difficult, and the patient understood the possibility of performing a middle or lower lobectomy with invasion in mind as malignant disease if intraoperative rapid diagnosis was difficult. Since the patient was relatively old and most refused to undergo reoperation due to leftover tumor, he requested a wide resection if the possibility of malignancy could not be completely ruled out intraoperatively.
At 2 months after the initial consultation, the patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia. The patient was placed in the left lateral recumbent position and a small incision was made in the right fifth intercostal space under thoracoscopic guidance. Thoracoscopy revealed no adhesions or pleural effusions. The lesion was a mediastinal pericardial fatty mass located between the middle and lower lobes . There were no findings suggestive of axial torsion or ischemia of the adipose tissue. In addition, intraoperative thoracoscopic-assisted visualization did not reveal any continuity of the adipose tissue with the pericardial area or any other organ of origin that could have been inferred. Intraoperative findings did not appear that the mass was firmly adherent to the lung with inflammation. A rapid needle biopsy was performed intraoperatively for definitive diagnosis, and the result was a specimen with a high degree of histologic degenerative necrosis. Fat necrosis was also observed, as well as partial proliferation of short spindle-shaped cells. The high degree of degenerative necrosis made it difficult to estimate benign or malignant histology. The surgeon initially attempted to resect the mass alone, but because invasion into the middle lobe of the right lung and into the lower lobe of the right lung could not be ruled out, and because it was difficult to determine benign or malignant by intraoperative rapid needle biopsy, partial resection of the right lower lobe was performed in addition to tumor resection and resection of the right middle lobe. Right middle lobectomy was easily performed by preoperative 3D reconstruction to identify the vessels, the middle lobar bronchus was cut and removed after V4 + 5 was dissected, and A4 + 5 was dissected from the middle pulmonary artery trunk. Partial resection of the combined lower lobes of the right lung was performed using an automatic suturing machine. The thoracic cavity was cleaned and a leak test was performed. The operative time was 1 h 30 min, and the blood loss was 10 mL.
The gross appearance of the removed right lung intermediolateral lung tumor was 8 × 5.5 × 3.5 cm in size . The margins were yellowish-white. Histopathological examination revealed fatty tissue covered with a fibrous capsule. The interior of the capsule was extensively degenerated and necrotic and a small amount of viable material remained immediately below the fibrous capsule. Relatively large blood vessels were observed in the necrotic areas, whereas fat necrosis, numerous foamy histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells, lymphocytes, and neutrophils, as well as atypical mature adipose tissue and blood vessels, were observed in the viable areas. At the site of contact between the capsule and the lung tissue, Masson’s body formation and peribronchiolar metaplasia were observed in the lung tissue, which were considered to be caused by inflammation. No morphologically discernible liposarcoma or malignant findings were observed; MDM-2 were positive in macrophages but generally negative for cyclin-dependent kinase 4 . The most likely diagnosis was epicardial fat necrosis. Based on the symptoms of fever and chest pain, imaging findings, and histopathological examination, the diagnosis of EFN was made. The patient was followed up every 3 months without adjuvant therapy.