A 16-year-old Indian girl presented to our hospital with swelling on the scalp. She was born with a black-pigmented triangular patch over the scalp covered with hair as well as multiple black hairy patches on her extremities, back, and most of her anterior trunk. The patch on the scalp had increased in size over a period of eight years after birth. Within the past three months, swelling had progressed from the hairline to just above the left brow, leading to unilateral mechanical ptosis. Upon applying pressure, there was a scanty, yellowish, non-foul-smelling discharge that was occasionally blood-stained and was associated with intense itching without any pain. Her sleep, appetite, bowel, and bladder were unaltered. Her menarche had begun at the age of 15 years, and her menstrual cycle was normal and regular. Her birth and developmental history were normal. The family history was negative for congenital nevi or melanoma.
The patient's clinical examination revealed her to be afebrile, with a pulse rate of 64 beats/minute, a respiratory rate of 16 breaths/minute, and blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg. The examination of her cardiovascular system was normal. Her cranial nerve functions were normal, and no neurological deficit was found in the limbs. The plantar response in both the limbs was flexor. There was no evidence of meningeal irritation.
A local examination revealed a single swelling of 10 cm × 8 cm on the left side of the scalp. The swelling extended anteroposteriorly from 3 cm in front of the left parietal eminence to just above the lateral part of the left supraorbital ridge. The transverse extension was from the line passing through the left parietal eminence to the right of the midline . Her local temperature was not raised, and tenderness was absent. The surface was irregular, rough with multiple pits, and the margins were irregular with rounded edges. The swelling was firm in consistency and mobile. The anterior part of the swelling overlying the forehead could be lifted. The underlying skin appeared normal. It was non-pulsatile with no evidence of impulse on coughing. The regional lymph nodes were not palpable. Numerous hairy nevi were present over the scalp, trunk, and limbs.
The patient was referred to the Department of Neuro-ophthalmology and Otolaryngology for further assessment. Her fundoscopy and visual evoked potentials were normal. Her otorhinolaryngological evaluations were normal.
Routine blood investigations showed that her hemoglobin level was 11.6% and her total leukocyte count was 4200/mm3 with relative neutrophilia (80%). Her serum urea and electrolyte levels were normal. A lumbar puncture revealed clear cerebrospinal fluid with a normal cell count and biochemistry and no growth on culture. Her liver and kidney function tests were within normal limits. Her electrocardiogram did not show any abnormal features.
An X-ray of her skull (posteroanterior view) revealed a soft tissue swelling in the left temporofrontoparietal region. Ultrasonography of the swelling showed a large, homogeneous, hypoechoic, solid 9.4 cm × 6.8 cm × 1 cm lesion in her scalp in the left frontal region and partially extending into the parietal region on the left side. The underlying outer table of the skull and diploic spaces were normal with few hyper-reflective areas scattered throughout the lesion and distal shadowing raising clinical suspicions of tiny calcified foci. The interface between the lesion and the scalp was obscured. No significant color flow was noted on a color Doppler ultrasonogram. These findings were highly suggestive of a possible angiofibroma. Power Doppler ultrasonography showed a highly vascularized lesion.
MRI of her brain (both plain and contrast images) was done by using a multi-echo, multi-planar technique, which showed the presence of a 8.99 cm × 2.26 cm abnormal signal intensity involving the scalp (subcutaneous plane within fat) in the left frontoparietal region. The signal intensity appeared isointense to hyperintense on T1-weighted MRI scans with few small tubers with cortical dysplasia in the left frontoparietal region and asymmetric dilatation of the left ventricle that were hypointense on T2-weighted MRI and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images. Few foci were seen within the lesion, which appeared hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI and FLAIR images. The MRI impression revealed multiple intra-cranial lesions, which included a benign, homogeneously enhancing, subcutaneous scalp lesion in left frontoparietal region suggestive of angiofibroma; a few calcified subependymal nodules within the body of the lateral ventricles on the right side; a few small tubers with cortical dysplasia in the left frontoparietal region; and left maxillary sinusitis . These radiological findings were highly suggestive of tuberous sclerosis. Magnetic resonance angiography revealed the absence of involvement of any underlying blood vessels.
Microscopic examination of the patient's scalp swelling revealed the presence of lining keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium and underlying dermis. The epidermis was thinned out with loss of rete pegs. Her dermis showed lobules and nests of nevi cells, hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands. There was diffuse deposition of melanin pigment and the presence of melanocytes around and within the hair follicles and sebaceous glands extending up to deep subcutis and infiltrating the fat . All of these findings were suggestive of congenital melanocytic nevi.
On correlating these imaging findings with the patient's clinical symptoms, surgery was considered. Excision with primary skin grafting was done . The graft was taken from the medial aspect of her right thigh.