We obtained written informed consent from the patient’s parents. The case is compliant to the SCARE guidelines . A 10-month-old girl was taken to our hospital by her parents due to recurrent maxillofacial infections accompanied by swelling or abscess of the left cheek and purulent discharge from the preauricular pit for 4 months. On physical examination, a swollen erythematous maxillofacial lesion was observed in the left cheek . A pit with white purulent secretions in the intertragic notch and another small cutaneous dimple in the left parotid gland region were observed . EAC contained no fistula track. All other head and neck examinations were unremarkable. Ultrasound performed for the maxillofacial area demonstrated a lesion with inflammatory changes. The other auxiliary examinations, including otoscopy, pure tone audiometry and renal ultrasound, were without abnormalities. There was no history of previous incision or drainage procedures. No particular family history was recorded. A 3D-computed tomography (CT) fistulogram and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed to delineate the course of the tract and the extent of the lesion. The results revealed two conjunctive tracts: one tract arose from the skin surface anteroinferior to the EAC, beneath the facial nerve, and passed into the deep lobe of the parotid gland and projected to the masseter; the other tract extended from the superficial lobe of the left parotid to the intertragic notch .
Originally, the infection could be controlled by intravenous antibiotic administration, which resulted in maxillofacial infection improvement . However, recurrent inflammation had been persisting for one year. Finally, after obtaining parental consent, the patient underwent surgical management under general anaesthesia at 2 years old. The surgery was performed under facial nerve monitoring. First, a methylene blue staining agent was injected into the cutaneous pit of the intertragic notch. Then, a modified Blair incision encompassing the pit was made. The facial nerve was identified first, which allowed the cyst to be incised easily. During superficial parotidectomy, one cyst lying in the superficial lobe of the parotid and cartilage of the intertragic notch were removed. Blunt dissection was then used to follow the other larger fistula tract, which was located deep inside the facial nerve and projected medially to the posterior aspect of the masseter . Using a microscope, the tract was carefully separated from the facial nerve, which formed a blind pouch alongside the masseter . Finally, a suction drain was placed and kept until 48 h postoperatively . The patient recovered well, and no complications occurred in the following days. The final pathology of the excised tissue was consistent with that of type II FBCA . At follow-up over one year postoperatively, the surgical site was well healed, and the patient had no facial palsy or recurrence by coronal and axial MRI imaging .