A 21-month-old boy with thorax drainage was admitted to our medical center for massive pleural effusion lasting for 1 month approximately for an unknown reason. One month ago, the boy experienced a car accident, and his chest hit against the airbag. Then, he was sent to the local emergent rescue. An instant CT scan showed a hydrops area in the abdominal and chest. Then, an exploratory laparotomy was performed, and spleen rupture and retroperitoneal hematoma were found during the surgery. The boy experienced a splenectomy, and drainage was placed for pleural in the thorax. Subsequently, he experienced persistent pleural effusion. The chest tube drained 400–600 ml every day, and the fluid was clear. The child kept a good mental state and did not complain about anything. He had been fasting for a few days in the previous hospital for the consideration of chylothorax diagnosis, but the pleural effusion did not reduce obviously. In our medical center, chylothorax, pleural-subarachnoid fistula, and urine leakage were taken into differential diagnoses according to the history of trauma and surgery.
The biochemical analyses of the thorax fluid are as follows: Rivalta test (−); WBC, 64 × 106/L; mononuclear cells counts, 14; multinucleated cell counts, 50; total protein, 1.5 g/L; lactic dehydrogenase, 61 U/L; adenosine deaminase, 0.1 U/L; glucose, 4.64 mmol/L; and creatinine, 33.3 umol/L.
The chest radiography showed massive pleural effusion in the right thorax. B ultrasound of the urinary system did not show any abnormity. The heavily T2 MR of the spine suspected a fistula at the T11 level. Brain CT did not present any positive findings .
To distinguish it from chylothorax, the child was allowed to eat some food. However, we did not see any changes to the drainage. Combined with the negative Rivalta test and clear color of drainage, the chylothorax was excluded. Furthermore, the creatinine was not at a similarly high level as the urine. Due to a positive finding from heavily T2 spine MR, the most likely diagnosis would be PSF. A thorax endoscopy exploratory surgery was performed to demonstrate the diagnosis and expecting to find the fistula and repair it. However, we failed to repair the fistula due to the desperate difficulty to find the lesion. To further confirm the diagnosis of PSF, myelography was performed and reassured the pleural-subarachnoid fistula at T11 level . Meanwhile, we performed lumbar cisternal drainage to relieve the pressure of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which could benefit the natural repairment of PSF theoretically. The drainage of the thorax and lumbar cisternal were about 200 ml and 460 every day. The total volume always went around 400–600 ml. Three weeks later, the drainage of the thorax decreased to nearly zero suddenly, but the drainage of the lumbar cisternal was around 400–600 ml. Two more weeks later, we removed the chest tube and elevated the level of the lumbar cisternal drainage gradually, and there was no pleural effusion ever . The drainage volume decreased as the height elevated. We removed the lumbar cisternal drainage 5 days later. During this period, the antibiotic was used to prevent infection, so the child did not catch any infection.
One day after the removal of the lumbar cisternal drainage, the boy became agitated and fell into lethargy. Acute intracranial hypertension was considered due to the lumbar puncture showing more than 300 mm H2O of pressure, and the test of CFS did not show the features of infection. So mannitol was given 10 ml/kg Q8h. An MR scan of the head did not show dilation of the ventricle and paraventricular edema . The boy got back to normal state quickly, and his mental status got worse when we stopped the mannitol treatment at the early stage. This meant that he was involved in stubborn intracranial hypertension and mannitol had become a necessity for him. A ventriculoperitoneal shunt once was considered as a treatment to the secondary acute intracranial hypertension. However, his parents refused to carry the movement. Then, we tried the down step of mannitol treatment, and we stopped the mannitol 2 weeks later. The boy did not complain about any headache. And the re-chest X-ray was normal. After 1 year following, he has not shown pleural effusion again and intracranial hypertension.
A total of 56 cases were initially retrieved through the database search. All the papers were fully read, and we collected and summarized all the etiology, manifestations, detection measures, and treatment methods. The most common cause of PSF was medical operation (51.8%), especially in spinal operation. The following causes were injury (26.8, especially refer gunshot), car accident (17.9%), and other rare events (3.6%, such as massage, tumor infiltration). As for clinical manifestation , continuous or massive pleural effusion was the most common one (74.1%). About 10.3% of patients show pneumocephalus, and 8.6% of patients present with hemopneumothorax. Only a few patients featured by posture headache or upper mediastinum. There were some techniques used by doctors to make a diagnosis of PSF. Radioisotope myelography is the most effective means. Heavy T2-weighted myelography MR is a new non-invasive method to detect the fistula with a positive rate at 88.9%. The other techniques are β2 transferrin (85.7%), CT myelography (83.3%), and myelography (66.7%). For all the 56 patients, 57.1% of the patients received surgical treatment , including through the thorax route (40.8%) and through the laminar route (14.3%). The other patients were cured by different kinds of conservative treatments, and the most popular one was drainage.