A 63-year-old Japanese man with an altered mental state was brought to our emergency department. He had no major previous illness and was not taking any medication. His family history was unremarkable. His social history included chronic alcohol abuse, but he had no history of smoking. Two weeks prior to admission, he started developing anorexia and drank only alcohol. Although he could go out of the house until then, he gradually developed weakness. On the day of admission, his common-law wife found him unconscious, and he was not responsive; hence, he was brought to the hospital via ambulance. He had no apparent history of abdominal pain, shoulder pain, or dyspnea. His initial examination in the emergency department revealed an altered level of consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale score, 8). His vital signs were the following: body temperature, 33.1 °C; blood pressure, 51/21 mmHg; and heart rate, 86 beats/minute. His pulse oximetry waveform was initially undetectable. His physical examination revealed the following: pale face; round and isocoric pupils (both 4 mm) that were responsive to light reflex prompt; cold extremities; and dirty appearance, especially in the intraoral cavity. His abdomen was tensely distended and tympanic. Bedside ultrasonography showed a poor image because of the large volume of abdominal air, and thus we were unable to obtain remarkable findings. Laboratory tests revealed the following: white blood cell count, 22,100/μl; hemoglobin, 15.8 g/dl; and C-reactive protein, 32.9 mg/dl (normal range, 0.00–0.50 mg/dl). Arterial blood gas analysis showed respiratory and metabolic acidosis (pH, 7.040; partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood, 64.3 mmHg; lactate, 8.7 mmol/L [normal range, 0.5–1.6 mmol/L]; bicarbonate, 12.7 mmol/L). Immediate resuscitation was provided using intravenous fluids, endotracheal intubation, a high dose of noradrenaline, and empiric antibiotics (meropenem and vancomycin). Chest and abdominal radiographs showed intraperitoneal gas , and septic shock caused by gastrointestinal tract perforation was suspected. Fluid resuscitation was continued, and the noradrenaline dose was subsequently increased to 0.5 μg/kg/minute; however, his condition did not improve. Computed tomography (CT), performed during preparation for surgery, revealed a massive pneumoperitoneum that had collapsed the inferior vena cava and stretched up to the round ligament of the liver . His condition deteriorated, and his abdomen was markedly distended. High airway pressures were noted, and ventilation became difficult. We initially considered sepsis, but at this point, we suspected TP as the cause of shock. Immediate needle decompression was performed using an 18-gauge cannula through the left abdominal wall. The release of gas was audible, and significant improvement in hemodynamic and respiratory status was noted. He was transferred to the operating room approximately 1 hour after needle decompression. The timeline from admission to surgery is shown in Fig. .
Emergent laparotomy revealed an approximately 10-cm tumor in the colon with perforation. Colectomy and ileostomy were performed. The pathology of the tumor was adenocarcinoma of the descending colon (pT3, pN0, pM0, pStage IIA). The patient underwent intensive care postoperatively and was extubated on day 4. He was discharged from the intensive care unit on day 10. He developed an intra-abdominal abscess, surgical site infection, and drug-induced acute kidney injury, which were treated for several weeks. Finally, he was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on day 41. He was able to walk and eat independently after rehabilitation; however, he subsequently developed peritoneal metastasis. He declined additional cancer treatment, and thus only palliative care was performed.