A 35-year-old male patient, without past medical history, presented to the emergency department with an acute epigastric pain without radiation and vomiting. He denied any allergies neither drug history. He reported having a high fat meal the preceding evening. He complained of abdominal distention and that he don't passing stools or gas for 24 hours.
On admission, He had stable vital signs and abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the epigastrium. The admission workup noted for an amylase level of 4727, a lactate level of 2.2 and white blood cell count of 19.
The computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis showed an evidence of severe AP with extensive inflammatory stranding around the pancreas, free fluid in the left paracolic gutters (grade E of Balthazar classification), and a gallbladder stone with no evidence of biliary dilatation or free air .
The diagnosis of biliary severe acute pancreatitis was retained. Our management was to keep the patient on NPO for 48 hours with an infusion, analgesics, omeprazole and monitoring of hemodynamic and biological constants.
The evolution was favorable, clinically the patient tolerated oral feeding and the results of the biological assessment were normal.
A CT scan planned but the patient refused the examination and left the hospital against medical advice.
Two months later, he was readmitted through the emergency department for abdominal pain.
On clinical examination, he was afebrile; the abdomen was flexible and depressible with tenderness of the left flank. In biology there was no hyperleukocytosis and amylasemia was normal.
An abdominal CT scan concluded that the necrosis flows had extended up to the pelvis with the presence of air bubbles testifying to the infection. The CT also showed the existence of a fistula of the descending colon in the left retroperitoneal space (A and B).
As we did not have the possibility of performing a CT scan drainage, our plan was to do surgical drainage under general anesthesia.
The first step was to perform a laparoscopic exploration of the abdominal cavity to exclude intraperioneal communication of the colonic fistula and to verify the presence of a collection secondary to the infection of the necrosis flows.
The second step was to explore the left retro peritoneal cavity, the descending colon was of good vitality and the colonic fistula was clogged. A washing of the cavity and installation of a gauge drain were done.
The follow up was favorable and the drain was removed on day 9 postoperatively. The patient reported being satisfied with the intervention, and the postoperative course was uneventful. The patient remains asymptomatic.