The first patient is a 55-year-old Lebanese man admitted for right carpal tunnel release. A pre-operative routine ECG showed sinus rhythm with a 1 mm ST-segment elevation, biphasic T-wave in V2-V3 precordial leads, and T-wave inversion in V4-V5-V6 leads as well as leads II and aVF . The second patient is a 62-year-old Lebanese female admitted for a urinary tract infection. Her baseline ECG showed sinus rhythm with a 2 mm ST-segment elevation and a biphasic T-wave in V2-V3-V4-V5 precordial leads . Both patients reported a history of chest pain on exertion during the weeks prior to their current presentation. No cardiovascular risk factors or family history of CAD were noted except for heavy smoking in both patients. Both patients were vaccinated against COVID-19, more than six months prior to the current presentation, with two doses of Pfizer-BioNTech and 1 dose of Johnson & Johnson's Janssen, respectively.
They both suffered from a severe COVID-19 infection requiring oxygen supplementation via a non-rebreather facemask. They had high inflammatory markers: C-Reactive Protein (CRP) > 150 mg/L, Ferritin > 1000 mcg/L, and D-dimers reaching 3560 ng/mL and 4200 ng/mL, respectively. They had normal baseline ECG and troponin levels. An adequate evaluation revealed no pulmonary embolism or deep venous thrombosis. High doses of intravenous corticosteroids were administered for ten days. After cessation of oxygen supplementation and a total hospital stay of 19 and 14 days, respectively, both patients were discharged on Rivaroxaban 10 mg for 6 weeks.
The patients presented at 8 and 9 weeks, respectively, after discharge. They both were hemodynamically stable during the current evaluation and pain-free with an unremarkable systemic examination. Cardiac biomarkers (creatine kinase myocardial band-CPK-MB and troponin T) and basic blood parameters were normal. In both patients, further cardiac evaluation with transthoracic echocardiography revealed wall motion abnormalities in the LAD territory with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 45–49% in the first patient and 35–39% in the second one. At last, we found in both of them on coronary angiograms a severe calcified triple-vessel disease that is not amenable to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) . Patients were started on Aspirin, unfractionated Heparin and adequate heart failure pharmacotherapy. They were then referred for surgical revascularization via coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). The operations were successfully performed on the third and fifth day of admission, respectively. Repeated ECGs one month following the surgery showed complete resolution of the abovementioned pathological changes .