A 70-year-old female patient presented to us with complaints of being non-ambulatory since the past 10 days. She gave a history of difficulty in walking for the past 10–15 years associated with pain in the right hip which did not respond to analgesics and physiotherapy. She also complained of mild pain in the left hip and both the knees. She did not have any history of trauma or fall. There was no other medical or surgical illness. Family history was insignificant. On examination, the right hip had a 2 cm shortening with the joint movements being painful and restricted. A flexion deformity of 10° was noted in the same hip. In addition, the right hip had a restricted abduction and adduction compared to the left hip. There was also a bilateral knee flexion and varus deformity of 10 degrees each. Clinically, we provisionally diagnosed the case as arthritis of the hip joint under evaluation.
The radiological assessment revealed severe joint destruction of the right hip with a fracture at the neck of femur. Femur head demonstrated irregularity and significantly narrowed hip joint space .
The left hip joint also showed narrowing of joint space. Both the knees revealed severe tricompartmental osteoarthritis (OA) . The X-ray of the spine demonstrated fusion of vertebral bodies resembling a bamboo spine appearance .
On magnetic resonance imaging, significant bony destruction of the right femoral head-and-neck regions with superior subluxation of the right greater trochanter and femur was seen . Inflammatory marrow changes in the residual upper femur raised the possibility of an associated osteomyelitis. Inflammatory or hemorrhagic fluid collections were seen in the acetabular fossa. The sacroiliac joint appeared normal.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein were within normal limits. Rheumatoid factor and HLA-B27 were negative as well.
Under local anesthesia and aseptic precautions, aspiration of the involved hip was done in the operating room and joint fluid sent for culture sensitivity and GeneXpert. The aspirate did not show any growth on culture. The results of the GeneXpert turned out to be negative as well.
A total hip arthroplasty was planned. Intraoperatively, on lifting the short external ro­tators, we found the joint capsule to be black. The capsule had lost its natural consistency and had turned hard and contracted. Moreover, the joint surfaces, ligaments, and tendons were blackish too with pieces of black cartilage. The capsule was excised posteriorly and the femur head was removed. Reaming of the acetabulum revealed poor bone quality. An uncemented acetabular cup was used (44 mm) with a ceramic liner (, ).
After the reaming and broaching of the femoral canal, an uncemented femur stem (Smith and Nephew, cone 12/14, size 1) was inserted and the hip joint was reduced. There were no intraoperative or post-operative complications. The bone and soft-tissue specimens were sent for histopathological evaluation. The pa­tient was mobilized full weight-bearing on the 1st post-operative day and was discharged on the 3rd day.
Postoperatively, reexamination of the patient revealed brownish-black pigmentation of the ear pinna as well as the sclera . The urine of the patient was also tested and it turned dark on standing for 24 h .
On histopathological examination, the articular cartilage showed brownish-black pigmentation throughout, sparing only the part adjacent to the underlying bone. Soft-tissue demonstrated brownish-black fragments of pigmentation which were sharply defined and irregularly shaped. The surrounding tissue revealed fragments of non-viable bone, inflamed synovial tissue, foreign body type gi­ant cells, and fibroblastic proliferation with few hyalinized areas. The synovial lining was denuded. All of the features mentioned above are consistent with the diagnostic findings of ochronosis .
The follow-up of the patient at 1 year revealed that her right hip pain had completely subsided along with a full range of motion. The Harris Hip Score of the patient had shown significant improvement from 32 preoperatively to 81 at 1 year follow-up. The patient was also counseled for a bilateral total knee replacement.