A 74-year-old Chinese man presented to the Oncology Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine of our hospital with abdominal distension and poor appetite for more than 1 mo.
One month earlier, the patient developed abdominal distension and poor appetite.
Eleven months ago, the patient was referred to our hospital regarding a low-density space-occupying lesion in the left epigastrium, discovered during a physical examination at another hospital. Physical examination revealed no abnormal findings in the serum tumor marker. Abdominal enhanced computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed a 7.2 cm × 9.7 cm cystic density shadow with clear margins in the left upper abdominal cavity . Simultaneously, the solid component of the lesion demonstrated marked enhancement on enhanced CT images, and a nodular slightly high-density shadow appeared to be seen. The imaging findings confirmed an abdominal tumor before the operation. On January 11, 2021, the patient underwent a procedure involving the distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy in addition to the tension-free repair of the right inguinal mixed hernia. An exploratory laparotomy revealed a tumor (approximately 8 cm × 6 cm) situated at the tail of the pancreas, with a firm texture and local cystic changes. The bottom of the tumor was connected to the pancreatic body through a 2 cm diameter pedicle, showing an infiltration at the pancreatic body and the mesentery of the inferior margin of the pancreas, but not at the fundus of the stomach and the spleen. Firstly, tumor excision from the tumor pedicle followed by rapid intraoperative pathological revealed a myxoma whose malignancy cannot be ruled out definitively. Therefore, a distal pancreatectomy combined with splenectomy with negative margins was performed. After surgery, a solid mass of pancreatic tissue measuring about 5.0 cm × 5.0 cm × 4.8 cm was obtained and used as the surgical specimen. The microscopy showed the obvious proliferation of spindle-shaped and short spindle-shaped cells, which were arranged in interwoven and fascicles with moderate cell density . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) indicated that tumor cells were Vimentin, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), cluster of differentiation 99 (CD99), b cell lymphoma-2 (BCL-2), β-catenin fraction positive, but were negative for creatine kinase (CK), Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), S-100, neurofilament protein (NF), Desmin, P53, Calponin, and Signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6). The Ki-67 index was approximately 65%. Based on these pathological findings, a diagnosis of pancreatic LGMS was made. A month ago, the abdominal enhanced CT showed changes in the tail of the pancreas, with the characteristics of low-density lesions in the surgical field, and multiple metastases in the abdominal cavity, peritoneum, and abdominal wall . This suggests that the patient developed recurrence and metastasis postoperatively.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Clear mind, spiritual well-being, pupils bilaterally large and round, sensitive to light reflection, and no signs of jaundice on the skin, mucosa, or scleral. There was no enlargement of superficial lymph nodes, and the neck was supple with a centered trachea. Jugular veins were not distended. Chest examination revealed no deformities with decreased breath sounds in both lower lungs and no obvious dry or wet rales. The heart rate was 65 beats/min, with a regular rhythm and no pathological murmurs of the valves. Abdominal examination indicated a soft abdomen with a visible 15 cm surgical scar in the left upper abdomen. Palpation revealed a 4 cm × 4 cm mass in the left upper abdomen with poor mobility, tenderness (+), and no rebound pain. The liver and spleen were not palpable beneath the subcostal area. Shifting dullness was observed (+).
Levels of serum tumour markers were normal (alpha-fetoprotein 1.6 ng/mL, carcinoembryonic antigen 1.7 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 16.02 U/mL, carbohydrate antigen 12-5 20.7 U/mL.)
Postoperative pathology: the microscopy showed the obvious proliferation of spindle-shaped and short spindle-shaped cells, which were arranged in interwoven fascicles with moderate cell density IHC indicated that tumor cells were Vimentin, SMA, CD99, BCL-2, β-catenin fraction positive, but were negative for CK, EMA, S-100, NF, Desmin, P53, Calponin, and STAT6. The Ki-67 index was approximately 65%. Based on these pathological findings, a diagnosis of pancreatic LGMS was made.
2020.12.29 the abdominal enhanced CT scan revealed a 7.2 cm × 9.7 cm cystic density shadow with clear margins in the left upper abdominal cavity . Simultaneously, the solid component of the lesion demonstrated marked enhancement on enhanced CT images, and a nodular slightly high-density shadow appeared to be seen. 2021.10.27 the abdominal enhanced CT showed changes in the tail of the pancreas, with the characteristics of low-density lesions in the surgical field, and multiple metastases in the abdominal cavity, peritoneum, and abdominal wall .