This 88-year-old man had several serious medical conditions: angina pectoris, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder, type II diabetes, infected venous leg ulcers and a previous history of transurethral resection of the prostate, percutaneous coronary artery intervention and bilateral hip replacements. After a hip replacement 9 years ago the patient suffered from pulmonary embolization. Furthermore, there was a history of a conservatively treated bleeding gastric ulcer five years earlier.
Shortly after having had supper the patient was suddenly struck by severe epigastric pain and an intense nausea with a few vomits and frequent belching. The patient arrived at the emergency department in pre-chock. His abdomen was soft and non-distended but with severe tenderness to palpation in the epigastrium. A CT scan of thorax and abdomen showed a paraesophageal herniation into the right thorax containing a part of the transverse colon and a part of the distal stomach and proximal duodenum. A pronounced gastric distension was noted. No free fluid or gas was found in the abdominal cavity. Besides the herniation and an abundance of faecal content in the entire colon, the CT scan was normal .
The patient received a naso-gastric tube with an instantaneous drainage of 1000 ml of gastric content. A plain X-ray was performed to control the position of the naso-gastric tube which was adjusted to the gastric fundus. A naso-jejunal tube was placed by a guide-wire, passing the herniated and thereby intrathoracically positioned proximal duodenum .
The patient was taken to surgery the following day. Through a mid-line incision, the cardia was located in normal anatomic position and laterally a severely distended gastric fundus was noted. On the right side of the esophagus, half of the transverse colon was found in a paraesophageal hernia, with a diameter of the crural defect of 5 cm. Behind the colon, the distal stomach and proximal duodenum was found to have been pulled up into the hernia. A phrenotomy was performed and the undamaged and viable colon was pulled out of the hernia. The gastro-duodenal transition was tapered to the colon. On the ventral part of the proximal duodenum there was a punched-out benign perforated peptic ulcer with a diameter of 6 mm . By interrupted 3-0 Prolene® sutures, the peptic ulcer perforation was closed and covered by a viable part of the omentum. A large portion of the omentum was found devitalized and was therefore resected. Due to bleeding, a splenectomy was performed. The devitalized hernial sac containing several septa was excised and an opening to the right pleura was made to allow drainage of the mediastinal cavity above the diaphragm by a chest tube. The right and left crura were mobilized and the diaphragmatic defect was closed by interrupted 2-0 Prolene® sutures. To enforce the phrenoplasty and to minimize the risk of recurrence, a 360° Nissen fundoplication was performed. The patient received a jejunostomy tube for nutrition with the tip located 30 cm from the ligament of Treitz.
The patient was observed over-night in the ICU. To prevent infectious complications the patient received imipenem 500 mg × 3 i.v. for five days and as ulcer prophylaxis omeprazol 8 mg/h i.v. was given continuously. The chest-tube was removed on the fourth post-operative day. Eleven days after surgery the patient developed breathing problems with low saturation and tachycardia and a severe aspiration pneumonia was diagnosed and treated. The patient was discharged one month after surgery.
One month after discharge, the patient was followed-up at the out patient clinic and found to be in good shape and without nutritional problems. The jejunostomy tube was removed and the patient was put on life-long proton pump inhibition (T. Nexium® 40 mg × 1).