An 18-year-old male was cutting down trees with a high school friend when a tree rolled back onto his right leg. His past medical history was unremarkable except for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. He was on no medication. Family medical history was significant for parents with arthritis and knee complaints. The patient was a nonsmoker. He reported that he was pinned by the tree and felt an immediate crunch when he was smacked in the leg before falling to the wet, soft ground where he was imbedded. Fortunately, his friend was able to cut the tree back into smaller pieces and then was able to use tree branches as levers to roll the tree off the patient’s lower leg. The patient was taken to the emergency department where he was evaluated with radiographs which revealed a displaced, oblique distal tibia shaft fracture. He was splinted with fiberglass and had follow-up arrangements with the orthopedic surgeon on call. Instead, the patient’s father had previous surgical treatment with the corresponding author and scheduled followup 5 days after the initial injury.
The patient reported pain quality as a dull ache. He stated the pain was 2–3 on a scale of 10. When describing the pain, he stated it was intermittent. He did not have pain wake him at night. On physical examination, the patient was a 6’0”, 172-lb male with healthy appearance. The right leg was noted to have contusion with ecchymosis of the skin at the point of contact on the pretibial skin overlying the distal one third of the tibia. The skin was intact. The right lower leg was more swollen than the non-affected left leg. The patient’s pain to palpation was localized to the site of the 23 fracture and tibiotalar joint. Patient had no pain with passive extension of the toes or foot. The patient had no pain over the tarsal-metatarsal joints. All lower extremity compartments were soft. Patient had intact pulses and neurovascular function. Radiographs revealed a displaced, oblique, valgus angulated distal tibia shaft fracture in a skeletally mature patient. Computerized tomography scan of the ankle revealed no fracture extension to the joint. The patient and family were recommended to undergo IM nailing for this fracture; however, due to the patient’s concern over knee pain and scar, he requested open reduction and internal fixation with surgery at a rural hospital near his home. In the meantime, the patient was placed in a well-padded, long leg fiberglass splint with stirrup and instructed to ice and elevate before surgery.
The patient was taken to surgery 7 days after initial injury once surgical preparation was complete. Preoperatively, the patient received Ancef 2 g intravenous (IV) and tranexamic acid 10 mg/kg IV. He had general laryngeal mask anesthesia in the supine position. Thromboembolic stockings and compression pumps were placed on the non-operative side. The patient had a tourniquet applied to the right thigh inflated to 300 mmHg at the time of the procedure. Initially, C-arm fluoroscopic images taken intraoperatively were utilized to localize the fracture site and images saved . Manual traction maneuvers to accomplish MIPO were attempted but unsuccessful.
A curvilinear incision starting lateral to the tibial crest at the fracture site and curving medially, distally overlying the medial malleolus was made. 3.5-mm loupe magnification was used and meticulous protection of skin edges with minimally invasive dissection limited to the fracture site with visualization and protection of the saphenous vein and nerve was performed. The periosteum was preserved except at the fracture site where it was noted to be stripped. The fracture was noted to be impacted with multiple spikes of bony interdigitation malalignment and interposed soft tissue preventing reduction and requiring removal before open reduction. Two Smith and Nephew serrated reduction clamps were used on the proximal and distal fracture fragments to provide distraction and a counter-rotation maneuver to dis-impact the fracture spikes resulting in visual reduction. Another Smith and Nephew serrated reduction clamp was placed on the fracture while C-arm fluoroscopic images confirmed anatomic alignment . A 3.5-mm lag screw was then placed percutaneously resulting in limited fixation. A synthes 7-hole narrow 4.5 mm limited contact dynamic compression plate (LC-DCP) was contoured utilizing plate bender press and slid under the saphenous vein and nerve distally. Once the plate was contoured, there was no clamp available in the facility large enough to hold the plate stable to the distal tibia yet small enough to access a limited open fracture site. The serrated reduction clamp was barely large enough to get around the bone to stabilize the fracture without the plate but was not large enough to accommodate the 4.5 mm LC-DCP and the bone diameter. To overcome this in a facility where there were no other clamps available, a second clamp, Smith and Nephew 205-mm pointed reduction clamp, was then placed through the thumbholes of the serrated reduction clamp and then gently squeezed to hold the serrated reduction clamp firmly in place stabilizing the plate against the bone to allow for screw placement . The patient then had compression screws placed proximally and distally to the fracture site followed by locking screws through soft tissue windows and percutaneously with fluoroscopic guidance ( and ). The patient had release of the tourniquet, irrigation, and closure of wounds with short leg fiberglass splint application. He was transferred to the recovery room in stable condition. Due to the lateness of the case being an add on surgery, the patient was observed overnight without problems, received IV firstgeneration cephalosporin antibiotics 24 h postoperatively, and was discharged home the next day. In follow-up, the patient had an uneventful recovery and was elated to not have any knee pain.