A 22-year-old male amateur basketball player with no relevant medical history was admitted to our hospital due to continuous severe lower back pain with radiating nerve pain and numbness from the hip to the posterior part of the left leg. Physical examination revealed paravertebral muscle spasm, diminished sensation at the lateral aspect of the sole of the left foot, diminished strength in plantar flexion on the left side, a weakened Achilles tendon reflex on the left side, and a positive straight-leg raise test (30 degrees) on the left side. Magnetic resonance imaging of the lower spine showed a herniated nucleus pulposus at the left L5-S1 level, and so the patient was diagnosed with left lumbar disc herniation at L5-S1.
Preoperative evaluation was normal. The patient opted to undergo surgical treatment with PEID after failure of conservative treatment. Tracheal intubation was facilitated via the administration of atracurium and penehyclidine. General anesthesia was induced with propofol and fentanyl, and was maintained with sevoflurane, fentanyl, and atracurium. The PEID was successfully completed within 40 min, with complete removal of the herniated disc, annuloplasty of the annulus fibrosus, and thorough decompression of the S1 nerve root. Intraoperatively, the patient was infused with 1,100 mL of Ringer’s lactate solution. Throughout the entire procedure, the urine volume was 400 mL, and the blood loss was less than 20 mL.
Extubation was performed when the patient was conscious, spontaneously breathing, and performing purposeful movements. The patient then suddenly began to respire forcefully. The heart rate was 130 beats/min, blood pressure was 155/90 mmHg, respiratory rate was 35 breaths/min, and SpO2 had decreased from 98 to 65%, followed by the production of 5 ml of pink frothy sputum. Chest auscultation performed by the anesthetist revealed tachycardia and dispersed moist rales bilaterally. Arterial blood gas analysis showed that the pH was 7.34, PaO2 was 71 mmHg, and PaCO2 was 40 mmHg. Electrocardiography indicated sinus tachycardia. NPPE was diagnosed. The airway was kept unobstructed, and oxygen was delivered at 5 L/min via mask ventilation. The infusion volume was limited. Dexamethasone was administered to relieve spasm, and 20 mg of furosemide was administered intravenously to treat pulmonary edema. The SpO2 improved and was maintained above 93%.
After stabilization with supportive treatment for about 60 min in the operating room, the patient was transferred to the orthopedic ward. Subsequent laboratory testing indicated an increased white cell count of 12.5 × 109/L, an elevated neutrophil percentage of 84%, and a hematocrit decrease from 45.3 to 40.7%. The D-dimer level was 1.0 ng/mL, while the other main laboratory parameters were within normal limits. Repeat arterial blood gas analysis indicated that the pH was 7.37, PaO2 was 95 mmHg, and PaCO2 was 48 mmHg with oxygenation via nasal catheterization. Compared with the normal chest radiograph preoperatively , the emergency chest radiograph showed bilateral infiltrates with opacities and nodules . Two hours later, chest computed tomography (CT) of a pulmonary window showed increased vascular diameter, a mosaic pattern of attenuation, and bilateral pleural effusion .
The patient was afebrile, and cefazolin was administered prophylactically. The oxygen requirement gradually decreased to room air, with the hematocrit remaining stable, and the vital signs remaining stable for the following 24 h. A chest radiograph obtained in the morning on postoperative day 1 still showed bilateral infiltrates with opacities and nodules; however, the severity of these was obviously decreased compared with the radiograph taken the previous evening . A chest radiograph taken in the afternoon on postoperative day 1 showed that the infiltrates had further decreased. In the evening on postoperative day 1, CT showed a marked decrease in bilateral pleural effusion . The vital signs were stable, without tachycardia, tachypnea, and/or hemoptysis. At 3 days postoperatively, radiography showed nearly complete resolution of the lung infiltrate and CT . The patient was discharged 3 days after spinal surgery, at which time he reported that he was satisfied with the whole therapeutic process, and had marked improvement of the symptoms in the back and left leg.
At 6 weeks postoperatively, the patient was examined in the outpatient department. The pulse oxygenation was 100% on room air, and there were no abnormal findings on chest auscultation, radiography , and CT .