A 28-year-old male Jehovah’s Witness laborer, affected by iron-deficiency anemia, was evaluated in orthopedic office for restricted mobility and pain (during daily activities) in both shoulders from about 12 weeks. He did not report any trauma in past. There was no history of neurological disease, no drug use or alcohol intake. His family medical history was negative for connective tissue disease or musculoskeletal disorder. He reported that previously these inabilities were interpreted as paraspinal cervical muscle contracture and treated only with muscle relaxant drugs. At the time of evaluation, patient showed mild pain and inabilities in shoulders external rotation and abduction. Physical examination revealed: Bilateral normal internal rotation; bilateral 10° external rotation, abduction and flexion about 60° and axillary nerve numbness. Anteriorposterior X-ray images evidenced bilateral anterior shoulder dislocation and computer tomography-scan showed bilateral Hill-Sachs lesion (<25%) . The surgeon suggested a step-by-step surgical treatment conscious about patient’s medical history and refusal of whatever blood transfusion for religious reasons. The first step was surgical treatment of dominant limb and then right side after 1 month. Surgical procedures were both performed under general anesthesia, beach chair position and fluoroscan aid. The deltopectoral approach was used and for both cases were evidenced a glenoid fossa deficiency with hypoplasia of scapular neck and glenoid. Bristow-Latarjet coracoid transfer procedure was performed to repair the anterior glenoid defect. Any posterior capsular release was performed. During surgeries, bleeding was controlled and intraoperative blood salvage was used to accommodate wishes of the patient to refuse homologous and autologous transfusions, as required his confession of faith. Through post-operatively management, shoulders were supported by a sling with 15° of abduction and maintained for 3 weeks. Passive and active movements of hand and elbow were early started. A 4 weeks later, clinical and radiographic evaluation were performed, and the patient was introduced to passive shoulder motion, while 2 weeks later he started an active controlled shoulder motion. He was followed for next 6 months by upper extremities therapist team. The 1 year after last operations, the patient was clinical and radiographical evaluated and he was able to perform left flexion up to 180° and 160 in right, bilateral abduction was 180 . The constant score was 89 left and 83 right, disabilities of the arm, shoulder and hand (DASH) score was 17 left and 13 right and visual analogue scales were 0.