A 9-year-old Indian boy without any prior trauma presented with a 1.5-year history of pain and swelling in his right ankle, which had emerged subtly and gradually progressed. His gait had also changed. There were no significant medical or family history factors. Notably, the pain and swelling had intensified in the past 6 months. On physical examination, antalgic gait with restricted dorsiflexion of the affected ankle was noted. Local examination revealed a firm and non-tender swelling located in the anterior aspect of the ankle. In addition, there was a 20-degree equinus deformity. Examination of other systems was unremarkable. Routine blood investigations, immune and infection markers, were all within the normal range. Plain X-ray showed osseous masses over the anterior talus with loose bodies . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-defined osseous projection arising from the anterior aspect of the talar neck with MRI reporting suggestive of osteochondroma . No evidence of significant thickened cartilage was seen. Two well-defined osseous fragments seen adjacent to the above lesion in the tibiotalar joint suggestive of loose bodies were also seen.
Based on clinical and imaging findings, a provisional clinical diagnosis of ankle synovial chondramatosis was made and surgical excision was planned.
Surgical excision of the lesion: An anteromedial approach to the talus was done which exposed two hard, whitish, irregular masses (loose bodies) on the anterosuperior aspect of the talus of sizes 3 × 2 × 1 cm and 2 × 2 × 1 cm . They were removed and excision of mass over the anterosuperior aspect of the talus was done with osteotome and mallet with curettage . Excised masses were sent for histopathological examination. Intraoperative dorsiflexion of ankle was restored to 10 degrees. Post-operative radiographs showed normal contour of the talus with complete resection of the talar bump with no loose bodies. Histopathological examination revealed hyaline cartilage enveloped by fibrocollagenous (periosteal) tissue forming reactive bone with a single pyknotic nucleus, confirming periosteal chondroma.
Postoperatively, course was uneventful. On 6-month follow-up, the patient was pain-free, had improved ankle range of motion and normal gait. Active and passive ankle dorsiflexion was possible up to 10 degrees and 20 degrees, respectively, with 30 degrees of plantarflexion . No residual deformity was observed. No clinical as well as radiological signs of recurrence were noted.