A 3-year-old girl was referred to the Clinic for Maxillofacial Surgery with inability to open her mouth, restricted jaw movement and limited mastication. Convex profile, severely retrognathic mandible and absence of chin button were present. Intraoral examination revealed mouth opening of only 1-2 mm .
Preoperative assessment included anamnesis, radiographic and physical investigation. Parents could not recollect the time of onset of mouth opening restriction. Child’s photos from the first months of life showed no restrictions of the mouth opening, indicating that the condition was not caused by any trauma during delivery.
Panoramic radiographs and 3-dimensional computed tomographic reconstruction confirmed bilateral elongation of the coronoid processes associated with deformation of the mandibular condyle with no involvement of articular space . It appears from the CT scan that the coronoid hyperplasia is secondary to the TMJ ankylosis that is present in the left TMJ.
Using Bard-Parker blade, intraoral incisions (first right, than left) were made bilaterally along the buccal mucosa (anterior border - margo anterior of mandible) at the level of occlusal plane and extended posteriorly up to the anterior faucial pillars.
The coronoid processes were approached through the incision along with stripping of the temporalis attachment on the anterior border of ramus of mandible and cutting of tendon attachments .
The first step of osteotomy was made to the right coronoid process of mandible . After unilateral (right side) coronoidectomy, the second step was followed by ipsilateral (left side) osteotomy and coronoidectomy through the same exposure to remove the coronoid and recording of maximum mouth opening of 30mm .
Coronoidectomy was done through an intraoral approach followed with mouth opening of 30 mm (satisfactory distance between upper and lower lip of the mouth). Surgical procedure was performed under general anesthesia with nasotracheal intubation, guided by a nasofiber endoscope.
Alginate impressions were taken intra-operatively to fabricate a splint. Postoperatively the parents were advised for intensive daily mandibular physiotherapy with device TheraBite.
One week after surgery, rehabilitation was begun using a TheraBite 3-5 times a day for 5-10 minutes. Two and six weeks postoperatively, muscular stretching and forced mouth opening under general anesthesia were performed.
As a final result, a mouth opening of 25 mm was achieved, enabling the patient to consume a normal diet and take care of her teeth .
The patient was follow-up postoperatively for at regular intervals after three months, six months, nine months and one year and we found no reduction of mouth opening established with previous treatment.
Ethical approval: All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.