The patient is a 53-year-old woman diagnosed with Propionic Acidemia (result of genetic mutation not available) at the age of 3 in the context of an acute metabolic episode revealing by a right-sided hemiplegia. She had a second acute episode revealed by a left-sided hemiparesis at 9 years old. Then she was well-controlled by a low-protein regimen.
She was followed by a neurologist for functional neurologic disorder appeared around the age of 50 years old, such as dystonia, dysphonia or abrupt loss of muscular tonus in legs. All those disorders improved during the follow-up: she had no dysphonia or dystonia anymore, but still presented rare episodes of muscular weakness. A psychiatric assessment was needed to complete the neurological evaluation.
She had multiple follow-ups by child-psychiatrist for behavior disorders such as clastic crisis and multiple scarifications. She was hospitalized once around 25 years old for a suicidal attempt (self-phlebotomy). She also reported that psychiatrists suspected a bipolar disorder given cyclothymic signs and was treated by Aripiprazole. After 2 to 3 years, it was replaced by Venlafaxine.
She also reported traumatic events in her life: sexual abuse by a first husband, emotional and physical abuse by a second husband. We noted possible emotional neglect in childhood (communication issues with her parents).
She had been passionate by Asian culture (Korea and Japan) since this age of 5 years old and had correspondents with whom she shared her interest. She has had lots of pets and a reborn baby to bring herself some affection and to cope with a feeling of loneliness.
She stopped her psychiatric follow-up for at least 6 years but kept taking her antidepressant, Venlafaxine 225 mg/day and anxiolytic, Alprazolam when needed (medications were reconducted by her general practitioner).
On examination, she was mildly desinhibited and logorrheic, but her mood was globally stable. There was no argument for a hypomaniac, maniac neither depressed syndrome. She reported lots of bodily preoccupations during childhood and teenage with panic attacks (focused on nudity) that have progressively disappeared. Currently, she has been presenting an anxious apprehension of potential muscular weakness: she systematically went out with her wheelchair, although she has never needed it. She also has suffered from obsessive-compulsive disorders for several years. For medical appointments, she systematically established a very-detailed tables describing her symptoms (neurologic, psychiatric…) day per day for the last 6 months…The time dedicated to this tables had consequences on her sleep, her housekeeping and her personal hygiene.
She presented an emotional dysregulation with impulsivity, affective fluctuations and self-induced mutilations. The reborn baby seemed to satisfy an affective emptiness. She also had an alexithymia and dissociative symptoms with depersonalization and multiple episodes of dissociative amnesia in concordance with her traumatic history. During the current follow-up, she was once more victim of a sexual assault that has triggered a sudden episode of dissociative amnesia. She lost memory of the 4 past years and did not recognize her house, her doctor neither her dogs. She was completely detached when she told about the aggression. This dissociative episode has spontaneously recovered after 1 week.
Autistic symptoms were not clinically marked: we only found difficulties for understand implicit sense and some sensorial intolerance. She had no psychotic sign: no hallucination, no delusion or disorganized thoughts. We did not find symptoms of eating-behavior disorder.
Table .
The patient presented a mild global intellectual disability. On memory functions she had deficiencies in short-term memory and working memory, but episodic memory was intact. Executive functions were globally preserved. She also had difficulty in planification and a longer processing speed .
In front of the presence of motor dysfunction and cognitive deficiency, a brain MRI was performed. Furthermore, given the obsessive-compulsive syndrome, we looked for possible attempts of basal ganglia due to propionic acidemia. Indeed in less than 10% of cases, obsessive-compulsive disorders are secondary to basal ganglia pathology [, ]. Here, MRI did not highlight significant abnormality .