A 39-year-old male, Caucasian, smoker who was usually fit and well presented with a 4-month history of progressive headache and new onset vomiting leading to attendance at the emergency department. Headaches were suggestive of raised intracranial pressure, worse on lying flat and bending forward. The patient reported blurriness of his vision when the headaches were severe, but there were no lower cranial nerve signs. Blood pressure on arrival was 241/151 mmHg. Fundoscopy demonstrated Grade III papilledema in the right eye. The rest of the neurological examination was normal. An urgent computed tomography head scan demonstrated mild hydrocephalus and possible diffuse cerebellar edema, but no mass lesion or hemorrhage . The patient was commenced on antihypertensive medications (amlodipine and bisoprolol) before a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed. MRI demonstrated T2 hyperintensity involving the cerebellum, midbrain, pons, and medulla . Cerebellar edema was once again demonstrated. Resultant effacement of the fourth ventricle was seen with hydrocephalus and evidence of periventricular hyperintensity. There were also multiple small T2 hyperintensities in the supratentorial white matter, suggestive of microvascular changes. Microhemorrhages were evident within the left cerebellar hemisphere, brainstem, putamen, and temporal lobe; deemed to be due to profound hypertension. There was no restricted diffusion or abnormal enhancement in relation to the abnormalities described above. The patient was admitted under neurosurgery and underwent frequent neurological examinations in case of any deterioration requiring surgical intervention. As the patient remained Glasgow coma scale 15; the hydrocephalus was managed conservatively and aggressive control of blood pressure was undertaken. Investigations for secondary causes of hypertension were negative. Following optimization of blood pressure with oral calcium channel blockers, the patient was subsequently discharged as clinical symptoms had improved. Repeat MRI imaging 6 weeks post presentation (and before discharge) demonstrated resolution of the posterior fossa edema and hydrocephalus . The patient remained well with complete resolution of headaches at outpatient review 6 months later.