Our patient was a 66-year-old man of Mongolian race who had previously exhibited coronary arteriosclerosis, spinal canal stenosis, transverse colon cancer, and alcoholic encephalopathy. He was presented to our institute for the removal of wires used for the closure of his chest during a coronary artery bypass graft. However, on admission, severe abdominal distention and emaciation were observed. Emaciation caused the wires to be conspicuous along the incision line. Blood tests revealed an inflammatory response, malnutrition, anemia, and coagulation disorder. Staff at the referral institute informed us that the patient had recently been exhibiting a tortured expression. An abdominal computed tomographic scan revealed rectal cancer with stenosis and invasion to the adjacent tissues . At the same time, multiple distant metastases in the lung, liver, and bone were detected. Palliative care was therefore offered. Based on an interview with the patient’s family, informed consent for best supportive care (BSC) was obtained. In regard to palliative support, placement of a metallic stent at the stenotic portion in the rectum was performed . The patient’s abdominal distention was relieved by this procedure. The patient’s waist size decreased from 100 cm to 80 cm. Although this led to improvement of tachycardia, latent torture was still suspected. Staff at the referral institute informed us that his expression was not as calm as observed previously. Therefore, we felt the need to assess cancer pain. We applied the Abbey Pain Scale, a useful tool for the assessment of pain in patients with communication difficulties. In the present case, the patient’s pain score was 5, indicating that his pain was mild. Initially, acetaminophen (200 mg three times per day) and an internal liquid of morphine (5 mg twice per day) were tentatively administered. This not only calmed the patient’s voice tone and wrinkles between his eyebrows but also stabilized his heart rate. Following this, his medication was switched to fentanyl patches, a barbiturate suppository, and a Voltaren suppository (Novartis, Basel, Switzerland), among other medications, to prevent misswallowing. Gradually, the patient’s Abbey Pain Scale score, in addition to his vital signs, showed stabilization. Fortunately, rescue agents were not required. After 2 weeks of medication, the patient was returned to the referral institute. He died 1 month later, following calm days.