A 76 year-old woman presented after falling in the bathroom. She had become dizzy and her face struck the edge of the sink as she fell. She landed on bilateral outstretched arms. She complained of severe pain in her shoulders and was taken to the emergency department. She received intravenous fentanyl. She became nauseated and vomited. Soon after that she complained of shortness of breath. On arrival at the emergency room, her room air oxygen saturation was 98% but later, during the episode of respiratory distress, it dropped to 85%. BP on presentation was 134/71, pulse rate was 74.
Two weeks prior to the fall, a CT scan of the chest had been performed to evaluate persistent cough. The CT scan at that time did not reveal any masses or aneurysms. Past medical history was significant with a history of hepatitis C diagnosed in 2004, confirmed by serologic testing and biopsy. She also had acid reflux, coronary artery disease, requiring a stent to the left anterior descending artery in 2004, severe degenerative joint disease, and lumbar spine surgery in 1991.
She was being treated with aspirin 81 mg (for coronary artery disease), spironolactone (for early cirrhosis), furosemide (for early cirrhosis), omeprazole (for acid reflux), and gabapentin (for chronic neck and back pain).
Social history was noteworthy for lack of alcohol use and smoking. She lived with her husband of 56 years.
On initial examination, she was in pain, but the rest of the examination was within normal limits, including auscultation of heart and lungs. After the episode of respiratory distress, she was intubated, and bruising was noted over the left eyelid and neck. Her pupils were equal and round to light and accommodation. Examination of the neck did not reveal any jugular venous distention or carotid bruit. Auscultation of the lungs revealed inspiratory stridor, heart sounds were heard well with no murmurs, rubs or gallops. Her chest wall was without any obvious hematoma or deformity. Her abdomen was not distended and no hepatosplenomegaly was detected.
EKG showed normal axis, poor R wave progression. X-rays did not reveal any fractures, dislocations of the shoulder joint or vertebral fractures. Chest X-ray showed a widened mediastinum. CT scan of the chest was performed to better assess the widened mediastinum and revealed a large posterior mediastinal hematoma. . There was no active bleeding noted from any of the major vessels.
In the emergency room, platelet count was 95,000/cu mm, INR was 1.3, and hemoglobin was 10.6/cu mm. Sodium was 118 mmol/L and the rest of her renal panel was normal. Her prior sodium levels were between 120 and 125 mmol/L, felt to be secondary to diuretic therapy. Potassium was 5.2 mmol/L, chloride was 87 mmol/L, liver chemistries revealed albumin of 2.42 g/dl, alkaline phosphatase of 185 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 110 U/L, alanine aminotranferase of 62 U/L, calcium was 8.3 mg/dl, and magnesium was 1.5 mg/dl. She had been negative for cryoglobulins and anti nuclear antibodies. On comparing the platelet count, INR and liver chemistries with recent blood work no changes were found, and the findings were felt to be the result of the cirrhosis.
CT scan of the chest revealed findings as above. 2-D Echocardiogram revealed normal ventricular size with hyperdynamic function, moderate mitral regurgitation, and moderate tricuspid regurgitation.
Follow-up CT scans on days 2 and 4 revealed no progression of the hematoma. She continued not to require vasopressor support while in the ICU. On the fourth day she extubated herself, and did not develop respiratory distress. She was transferred to a general ward, observed for several days and later transferred to a rehabilitation center.