A 46-year-old man from North China was diagnosed clinically with PJS at the age of 36 years old. The characteristic pigmentation on his lips and fingertips appeared at the age of 6. Diagnosis of PJS was determined after his partial ileal resection because of intestinal obstruction, and multiple hamartomatous polyps were confirmed in his postoperative pathological specimens. However, the patient had no relations to be affected, and his parents, two elder brothers and a 20-year-old only son had no PJS-related complaints . The definitive diagnosis was made because this patient fulfilled two of the three clinical diagnosis criteria of PJS, which included the presence of characteristic mucocutaneous pigmentation, the presence of hamartomatous polyps in the GI tract, and a family history of PJS .
The patient came to our department at the age of 46, and complained abdominal distension and aggravating after meals. Multiple duodenal and colonic polyps with diameters as long as 2 cm were found by gastroscopy and colonoscopy. Sadly, pathologic findings of several resected colonic polyps revealed adenocarcinoma infiltration within hamartomas , and CT scan discovered small amount of ascites. After 2 month rest, the patient came back for further treatment, but the surgeons denied the feasibility of radical surgical treatment because of mass ascites, which indicated extensive abdominal metastasis. Another 2 months later, the patient passed away because of advanced colon cancer.
Genomic DNA of peripheral blood leucocytes was extracted routinely by Isolation Kit (DP318, Tiangen Biotech, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All nine coding exons of the STK11 gene were amplified by the use of primers listed in Table . PCRs of STK11 exons were performed in a 50-ul reaction which contained 0.4 uM of each primer, 50 ng genomic DNA, and 25ul 2 × premix Ex Taq DNA polymerase (RR030A, Takara Bio Inc., Dalian, China). The PCRs were performed under the following conditions: denaturation at 95 °C for 4 min, followed by 35 thermal cycles, each composed of 95 °C for 30 s, 58 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 45 s.
The index patient and available family members (relatives I:1, I:2, II:1, II:2, II:4 and III:1) underwent STK11 germline mutation testing to confirm cosegregation of the mutation with the disease. For frameshift mutation, T vector assay (CV15, Aidlab Inc., Beijing, China) was used to identify each haplotype by constructing monoclonal cells. In order to rule out polymorphisms and to confirm the pathogenic effects of variations, 100 chromosomes from 50 unrelated ethnicity-matched healthy individuals were also screened for the presence of the mutation. They were screenees from our department, and the age range was from 18 to 91 with an average age of 50.7.
The PCR products were gel- and column-purified and directly sequenced. The purified PCR fragments were then sequenced using BigDye Terminator (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) on an ABI Prism 3100 genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) by Majorbio Co. Ltd.(Shanghai, China). The results were used to performance sequence alignment according to STK11 gene sequence (NP_000446.1 and NM_000455.4 in GRCh38.p7).
Sanger sequencing revealed a heterozygous germline frameshift mutation in exon 8. Further, we performed T vector assay and identified the exact haplotype, which is a two-nucleotide deletion (c.962_963delCC) and has not been reported in literatures or recorded in mutation databases .
The mutation was only found in the index patient, but not in his healthy relatives and 50 unrelated healthy individuals. Since the mutation clearly co-segregates with the disease phenotype in the family, and the mutation is predicted to affect the key structure of STK11 protein, we conclude that this mutation is disease-specific and not a polymorphic variant of the STK11 gene.
The homology modeling programs, Swiss-Model , was used to develop an appropriate model to mimic the effects of the mutated region . Evolutionary conservation of amino acid residues altered was analyzed by comparing across different species .
Through sequence alignment, we found this mutation resulted in a translational frameshift, and the premature stop codon appeared in codon 358 (c.962_963delCC, p.P321HfsX38), which caused a 37-amino-acid-residue change and partial loss of C-terminal regulatory domain . Structure prediction demonstrated that the truncated protein lacks part of the C-terminal end . What’s more, evolutionary conservation analysis of amino acid residues showed that these impaired amino acid residues were most evolutionary conserved, indicating the mutation was likely pathological .