A 63-year-old woman presented with a 3-mo history of aggravation of recurrent symmetrical joint swelling and pain, which she had experienced episodically over 10 years. She first presented to our hospital in April 2018 for these symptoms.
The patient had a history of painful metacarpophalangeal joints in both hands with no obvious cause, with symmetrical and persistent attacks, starting from the interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints of both hands and gradually involving both wrist joints, elbow joints, shoulder joints, and knee joints. Her symptoms were accompanied by morning stiffness lasting more than 1 h, which could be relieved by routine daily activities.
The patient was diagnosed with depression more than four years prior and was treated with antidepressant medication (medication type, dose, and duration were unknown). She denied any other disease history, including heart or lung diseases.
Aside from the depression noted above, the patient’s medical history was uneventful. There was no history of a similar illness in the family.
On initial evaluation, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.0 °C; pulse, 93 beats/min; respiration, 20 times/min; and blood pressure, 108/72 mmHg. The patient also exhibited anxiety, slightly coarse breath sounds in both lungs, inspiratory dry rales in both lower lung fields, swan neck-like deformity in both hands, localized swelling, elevated skin temperature, abduction deformity of both thumbs, and slightly restricted movement of both knees. No significant abnormalities were observed during cardiac and abdominal examinations. No edema in the lower extremities was observed, and no pathological signs were found.
Initial laboratory examinations were as follows: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 74 mm/h; hypersensitivity C-reactive protein, 17.7 mg/L; creatine kinase, 1002.1 U/L; antinuclear antibody cytoplasmic granular positive (1:100); J0-1 +++; and Ro-52 +++. She was negative for anti-CCP and RF. Arterial blood gas analysis under oxygen absorption (nasal cannula 2 L/min) revealed a partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) of 29.7 mmHg and a partial oxygen pressure (PaO2) of 70.6 mmHg. Liver and kidney function, coagulation and D-dimer levels, and white blood cell and neutrophil ratios were normal.
Plain radiographs of both hands suggested degeneration, marked osteoporosis of the wrists, partial interphalangeal joint dislocation, and subluxation consistent with RA. Ultrasound of both knees suggested a luminal effusion and synovitis. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed emphysema and interstitial degeneration in both lungs and interstitial pneumonia in both lower lung fields . Pulmonary function tests suggested moderate restrictive ventilation dysfunction (forced vital capacity < 80%) and moderate diffuse function (diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide < 80%).