We present the case of a 34-year-old male with no relevant medical history who presented with jaundice of 20 days of evolution. His examination revealed scleral and whole-body skin icterus. There was no abdominal tenderness, rebound tenderness, and the Murphy test was negative, with no palpable mass. There was no evidence of any other organomegaly or lymphadenopathy. His test results on admission were as follows: total bilirubin, 5.17mg/dl; direct bilirubin, 2.49 mg/dl; alkaline phosphatase, 152 U/L; and CA199, 58.5 U/ml. Viral serological tests for hepatitis A, B and C and HIV were negative. Computed tomography (CT) revealed the following: soft tissue nodules in the CBD with clear borders, inhomogeneous morphology, heterogeneous density, equal or slightly low-density changes and nodules bulging into the lumen of the CBD. In the venous phase, there was significant heterogeneous enhancement, which was more obvious than that in the arterial phase and showed gradual strengthening changes . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed a localized filling defect in the lower part of the CBD with luminal narrowing . The patient was evaluated by a multidisciplinary committee. The clinical diagnosis was obstructive jaundice with the possibility of bile duct cancer. Laparoscopic pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed. Intraoperatively, adhesions of the omentum and abdominal wall were observed, no ascites were observed in the abdominal cavity and severe cholestasis was observed in the liver. A mass approximately 1.5 × 1.5 cm in size was detected in the lower segment of the CBD. The gallbladder, duodenum, part of the stomach, CBD and head of the pancreas were removed. The bile duct and jejunum were anastomosed, the jejunum and pancreas were anastomosed and a silicone stent and drainage tube were placed. No biopsy was taken during the operation, and there was no biliary leakage.
Pathological examination revealed a large 2 cm × 2 cm solid nodule at the CBD with a grey–yellow colour and an unclear surrounding border. Microscope showed that the myofibroblast spindle cells were tightly packed, with extensive infiltration of chronic inflammatory cells, slightly heterogeneous tumour cells and most regional nucleuses < 5/10 high-power fields (HPF) . No tumour involvement was observed in the duodenal ends, gastric segments, CBD ends or pancreatic margins. Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for vimentin , ALK and SMA . However, results for desmin, cytokeratin 7 (CK7), S-100, Dog-1 , cluster of differentiation 117 (CD117), cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and cytokeratin (CK) expression were negative. The Ki-67 proliferative index was approximately < 20%, and the IgG4/IgG ratio was < 30%. Immunofluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) indicated that ALK was represented by a mainly orange-green signal or only an orange signal, indicating positive results . The postoperative pathological diagnosis was IMT. The patient was followed up for 3 years, and he is currently asymptomatic and without recurrence.