44 year old Indian male was diagnosed as having chronic kidney disease in 2015, basic disease unknown, not evaluated in detail although he had family history of renal disease. He reached end stage renal disease status in December 2016 and was initiated on hemodialysis via a tunneled catheter and maintained on thrice/week dialysis. He underwent live donor renal allograft transplantation with wife as the donor in March 2017 at a private hospital, Delhi. He received Basiliximab as induction and was maintained on tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and steroids. His immediate post transplant period was uneventful apart from one episode of urinary tract infection which was managed with antibiotics. His serum creatinine was around 1.0–1.1 mg/dl. Two months post transplantion he presented to our hospital with asymptomatic rise in serum creatinine to 2.0 mg/dl. Patient denied any history of non compliance. Physical examination was essentially normal. Routine investigations showed hemoglobin 10.5 g/dl, total leucocyte count 5*10 /cumm and platelet count were 2.95*10 /cumm, urine routine showed protein 1+, few RBC’s and no pus cells. Urine protein creatinine ratio was 0.48 and tacrolimus level was 9.6 ng/ml. Graft kidney doppler was normal. In view of unexplained acute graft dysfunction, graft biopsy was done which showed normal glomeruli with presence of multiple light brown annular intratubular crystals with surrounding giant cell reaction on light microscopy. These crystals were refractile under polarizing microscope. Immunofluorescence microscopy was negative. . Patient had no past history of nephrolithiasis but had a strong family history of nephrolithiasis. His maternal cousin and elder brother had died of kidney disease. He was worked up for primary hyperoxaluria in view of suspicion on kidney biopsy but normal plasma oxalate (3.34 g/1.73m2/day) and 24 h urinary oxalate levels (55.56 mg) ruled out the possibility. To ascertain the cause genetic analysis was done which revealed a novel non sense varation in the exon 3 of the APRT gene that resulted in stop codon and premature truncation of the protein at codon 87 s/o APRT deficiency. The patient was advised good hydration and low purine diet and started on allopurinol 200 mg daily. He attained a baseline serum creatinine within 1 month of therapy. His Uric acid level before initiation of therapy was 7 mg/dl and maintained between 5 and 6 mg/dl on therapy.