A 54-year-old Caucasian man with known HIV infection for approximately 30 years had been treated with lamivudine, stavudine and indinavir since 1997. Under this therapy he was stable with an undetectable viral load. He also had dyslipidaemia which was treated with simvastatin 40 mg for many years. He presented to his primary care physician (PCP) with a 10-day history of asthenia, myalgia and jaundice. The initial laboratory revealed elevated liver enzymes (Alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) and Aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT) > 1000 U/l) and preserved kidney function (serum creatinine level of 79 μmol/l and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 90 ml/min/1.73 m2). He was diagnosed with acute hepatitis A and active hepatitis C genotype 1a, which was a new diagnosis. A second visit to his PCP 6 days later showed improvement of the liver enzymes. As stavudine had been withdrawn from the Swiss market, his HIV therapy was switched to Genvoya® at that time. The patient had declined referral to an HIV-specialist for confidentiality reasons.
Ten days after this medication switch, the patient presented to the emergency department (ED) with worsening myalgia and asthenia and could barely walk. He reported a reduced urine output during the prior days. There was no history of trauma, prolonged immobilization, convulsions or consumption of alcohol or illicit substances. On evaluation in the ED, the patient was slightly hypertensive at 144/84 mmHg. He presented with mucocutaneous jaundice. The cardiopulmonary status was unremarkable and the patient had no edema of the extremities. Abdominal examination revealed hepatomegaly 2 cm below the costal margin. Muscle strength was severely diminished, mostly in the axial muscles.
Initial laboratory evaluation on admission revealed elevated creatinine kinase (CK): 185190 U/I, creatinine: 553 μmol/l, phosphate: 3.03 mmol/l, potassium: 7.2 mmol/l, ASAT: 7017 U/I, ALAT: 2881 U/I, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 198 U/I, and total bilirubin: 130 μmol/l (for more details, refer to Table ). Arterial blood gas showed a primary metabolic acidosis with a positive anion gap of 19 and appropriate respiratory compensation . HIV-viral load was low (< 80 copies/ml) with a CD4 count > 550 cells/μl. Thyroid stimulating hormone titre was normal. Abdominal ultrasound did not show evidence of urinary or biliary tract obstruction, but it did show a homogeneous hepatosplenomegaly. No urine could be collected because of anuria.
A diagnosis of severe rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI was made. The patient was initially treated with intravenous (IV) fluids and medical treatment for life-threatening hyperkalaemia with electrocardiographic changes. Because of refractory hyperkalaemia and metabolic acidosis, he was initiated on haemodialysis in a tertiary care setting. His antiretroviral and lipid lowering therapies were discontinued.
Intermittent haemodialysis was continued for over 5 weeks followed by progressive improvement of renal function and diuresis, serum electrolytes, liver enzymes and CK. His viral load remained low. Five months later, his creatinine had normalised to 77 μmol/l and antiretroviral therapy was restarted by an HIV-specialist with emtricitabine, tenofovir alafenamide, etravirine, ritonavir and duranavir. These were well tolerated both clinically and metabolically after several weeks. His lipid panel at the time did not warrant further treatment with a statin and he has yet to be started on treatment for hepatitis C.