A 76-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a history of ovariectomy for an ovarian tumor that was performed 30 years prior. Additional details related to the tumor were unavailable. When she was 68 years old (22 years after the ovariectomy), a local doctor noted a gallbladder polyp and a 3-cm liver mass when performing an abdominal ultrasound. The tumor was considered to be a hepatic hemangioma showing slow growth; however, her outpatient follow-up was discontinued for the next 5 years. A repeat imaging examination revealed that the liver tumor had increased to 17 cm in size. Consequently, she was referred to our hospital for detailed examination and surgical resection.
Almost all blood tests showed normal results, except for the detection of mild anemia, elevated biliary enzyme levels, and an inflammatory response. The abnormal values were as follows: hemoglobin, 10.3 g/dl; albumin, 3.0 g/dl; alkaline phosphatase, 557 U/l; lactate dehydrogenase, 250 U/l; and C-reactive protein, 1.21 mg/dl. The tumor markers, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, α-fetoprotein (AFP), protein induced by the absence of vitamin K or antagonist II, and AFP-L3, were all negative. Further blood tests showed no evidence of viral hepatitis, testing negative for hepatitis B surface antigens, hepatitis B surface antibodies, and hepatitis C virus antibodies.
Abdominal ultrasonography performed previously revealed that the tumor was spreading around the right lobe of the liver and appeared to be a combination of two masses. High and low echoes and blood flow signals were detected inside the tumor.
The abdominal contrast-enhanced dynamic computed tomography (CT) image revealed a maximum tumor diameter of ~ 18 cm in the right lobe and medial section of the liver . The tumor had an uneven and prolonged contrast effect during the early and equilibrium phases of imaging, respectively.
Gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a tumor with mixed high- and low-signal intensities on T2-weighted imaging . The tumor had a mosaic-like internal environment, suggesting bleeding and necrosis. Diffusion-weighted images revealed a high-signal intensity . The dynamic 15-min hepatobiliary phase image showed prolongation of the internal contrast effect . Positron emission tomography findings did not reveal any significant fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation in the hepatic tumor or other parts of the body. Thus, the tumor was suspected to be a liver hemangiosarcoma. Malignancy was possible since the tumor had grown over time, so we decided to perform a surgical resection, and right trisectionectomy was planned as the tumor occupied the right lobe and medial section of the liver.
The preoperative evaluation of the liver function showed an indocyanine green 15-min retention rate (ICG-R15) of 13%, and a Child-Pugh score of 5 points. Since our estimation of the remnant liver function using 99mTc-GSA scintigraphy was insufficient, percutaneous transhepatic portal vein embolization (PTPE) was performed to improve the function of the remnant liver. After PTPE, the future liver remnant volume increased from 501 to 636 mL, and the ICG-R15 did not change. According to the 99mTc-GSA scintigraphy, the LU15 value—which should be more than 13 to prevent post-hepatectomy liver failure—improved from 12.5 to 13.2. Two months after the PTPE, it was decided that surgery would be performed.
The surgical findings indicated that part of the tumor had invaded the diaphragm and thoracic cavity. Hence, a thoracolaparotomy was performed to remove the tumor by opening the chest through the sixth intercostal space and resecting the tumor that had invaded the diaphragm. We then performed a right hepatic trisectionectomy. The operative time was 306 min, and the estimated blood loss was 1475 ml. The size of the resected specimen was 22 × 17 × 8 cm , and we observed a 10 × 9 cm nodule of black-brown and yellowish-white composition with septum formation . The hematoxylin and eosin (HE)-stained specimens showed tumor cells growing in sheets (diffuse pattern) or cords (trabecular pattern), while rosettes (microfollicular pattern; Fig. a) were also visible. The nuclei of the tumor cells were relatively uniform and showed “coffee bean-like” nuclear grooves—characteristic of GCTs . Additionally, an acidophilic non-structural substance (Call-Exner body) was present in the center of the rosette-like structure , which is another hallmark characteristic of ~ 30–50% of GCT cases. Pathological findings were suggestive of a GCT; therefore, we performed additional immunostaining (results are in Table ). The following markers were identified in the specimen: inhibin-α , CD99 , and CD56 , which were similar to that noted in sex cord-stromal cells [, ]. These findings helped to rule out germ cell tumors, which indicate the presence of other markers that were not detected in our evaluation, including the Sal-like protein, AFP, and β-human chorionic gonadotropin. Based on these findings, we diagnosed the tumor as a GCT. This tumor may have been a liver metastasis of the ovarian tumor recognized 22 years after the ovariectomy, and the liver metastasis was resected 8 years after its discovery. There was no recurrence for > 15 months after the hepatectomy.