The patient was a 62-year-old female who was admitted to our hospital mainly due to pain in the right hip for 4 mo and worsening pain in the right thigh for 1 mo. At 4 mo before admission, the patient had no history of trauma. Initially, the pain in the right hip and groin slightly improved after rest but worsened after exercise. The symptoms recurred. In the month prior to admission, the patient felt pain in the right thigh, which had prompted her to visit our clinic.
The patient had undergone an open reduction and internal fixation for a fracture of the left proximal femur 1 year prior , to address the injury sustained in a traffic accident. Due to the delayed union of the left femoral fracture, the patient supported the right limb with crutches on the ground to perform functional exercises.
The patient had no history of osteoporosis or other trauma, no metabolic diseases (e.g., diabetes or kidney disease), no immune diseases (e.g., rheumatism), did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol, and had no history of hormone and bisphosphonate usage.
The patient weighed 60 kg and had a height of 165 cm. Her body mass index was 22 kg/m2. She reported having no bad personal habits nor customs, as well as no family history of cardiovascular, respiratory or gastrointestinal diseases.
No obvious deformity of the left hip, local redness, pigmentation, nor swollen blood vessels were observed. Tenderness at the midpoint of the left groin, tenderness on the lateral side of the femur, missing inguinal lymph nodes, positive percussion test, good passive movement of the right hip joint, and good distal blood supply were found.
Blood biochemistry was normal. Urinalysis was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, arterial blood gas, and levels of bone turnover markers and vitamin D were normal. Specific findings from laboratory tests were serum calcium level of 2.26 mmol/L (range: 2.02–2.7 mmol/L), parathyroid hormone level of 42 pg/mL (range: 15–65 pg/mL) and 25-hidroxyvitamin D level of 13.83 μg/L (range: 11.1–42.9 μg/L).
X-ray of the right hip in the anterior-posterior and lateral views showed right femoral neck and proximal femur cortical discontinuity, and varus deformity of the right hip joint . Computed tomography (CT) of the right hip showed that the upper cortex of the left femoral neck was discontinuous, and the fractured end was displaced . Bone mineral density (lumbar spine and proximal femur) was normal (T value: 0.36).