A 71-year-old male visited our hospital for upper abdominal fullness. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed advanced primary duodenal cancer located in the second portion of the duodenum. Duodenal cavity was closely obstructed due to the tumor, and endoscopic observation could not be performed through the tumor . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a 45-mm primary duodenal tumor and enlarged regional lymph nodes. Enlarged para-aortic and paravertebral lymph nodes were also detected . Elongated, soft tissue mass judged paravertebral lymph node was identified by MRI in T2 and DWI, but there is no evidence to show that this is metastatic . A clinical diagnosis was primary unresectable advanced duodenal cancer with distant lymph node metastases (cT3, cN2, cM1 cStage IV in UICC7th). The patient underwent laparoscopic gastro-jejunostomy to receive bowel obstruction to allow dietary intake before chemotherapy. The patient received the combined chemotherapy using S-1 (80 mg/m2 per oral from day 1 to 21) and cisplatin (CDDP; 60 mg/m2 intravenously on day 8). This regimen was repeated at 35-day intervals. The patient had adverse events of grade 1 anorexia and diarrhea, but improved conservatively. After three courses of chemotherapy, enhanced CT revealed a decrease in the sizes of the duodenal tumor, para-aortic and paravertebral and regional lymph nodes. We judged that tumor response was stable disease (RECISTver1.1), because the size of primary duodenal tumor was slightly decreased . A 2-[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) positron emission CT (FDG-PETCT) revealed the FDG accumulation only at the site of primary duodenal tumor .
Since such a condition satisfied the criteria for resectability of duodenal cancer, the patient underwent laparotomy. Intraoperative frozen section was negative for microscopic para-aortic lymph node, and paravertebral lymph node could not be identified. The patient underwent subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy and lymph node dissection (No.6, 8a, 8p, 12a, 12p, 12b, 14p, 14d, 15, 16). In the resected specimen, duodenal cavity was completely obstructed by type 2 tumor located in the second portion of the duodenum (55 × 45 × 10 mm) .
The pathological diagnosis showed adenocarcinoma infiltrating to the muscularis propria. Distended changes and hydropic degeneration of nucleus were observed, and cancer cells were not detected in the No.14 and 16 lymph nodes. These pathological changes were considered to be induced by chemotherapy, and the pathological grade was determined to be grade 2a . Final stage was IIIA in UICC7th (fT3N1M0). The patient suffered from postoperative pancreatic fistula grade B by the international study group of pancreatic fistula , but made a satisfactory recovery and was discharged on the 29th postoperative day. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy using S-1 for 1 year and remains well for 1 year without recurrence after operation.