A 22-year-old female with a distant history of alcohol and cocaine use presented to the emergency room with a one week history of significant nausea, vomiting, subjective fevers, myalgias, and fatigue. She denied chest pain, dyspnea, or cough. There was no recent illicit substance use. Her initial vital signs showed sinus tachycardia of 130 beats/min, a temperature of 36.9 degrees Celsius, a blood pressure of 75/40 mmHg and oxygen saturations of 90% on room air. Physical examination demonstrated an elevated jugular venous pressure of 9 cm. Heart sounds were difficult to hear on auscultation. The remainder of her examination was unremarkable. Initial blood work showed an elevated white blood cell count of 14.4 × 109/L with a neutrophil count of 13.0 × 109/L. Cardiac troponin I, creatinine, electrolytes, and beta-HCG were normal. Urine toxicology was negative for illicit drugs. Her initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with small voltages in the limb leads . Chest X-ray showed a generous sized cardiac silhouette and clear lung fields. She was admitted into the intensive care unit and was given fluids and ionotropic support with norepherine. Pipericillin-tazobactam and vancomycin were started empirically after blood cultures were drawn. A nasopharyngeal swab (NPS) was conducted and returned positive for Influenza A H1N1. Oseltamivir was initiated following the positive result. However, she remained hypotensive despite starting these aggressive therapies for presumed sepsis. Subsequently, an echocardiogram was performed which demonstrated a moderate sized pericardial effusion with maximal diameter of 1.5 cm in maximal width . There were echocardiographic features of cardiac tamponade including right ventricular diastolic collapse with significant respiratory variation seen on mitral valve annular doppler velocity. An urgent pericardiocentesis was conducted and resulted in an immediate improvement of her hemodynamic status and withdrawl of all ionotropic support. A pericardial drain was inserted and a repeat echocardiogram conducted two days later demonstrated a resolution of the pericardial effusion and absence of echocardiographic findings of tamponade. The pericardial effusion was negative for bacterial cultures, acid fast bacilli, and malignancy. Serologic testing for HIV, Hepatitis B, and C were negative. High dose ibuprofen (800 mg po tid) and colchcine (0.6 mg po bid) were initiated. The pericardial drain was removed and a repeat echocardiogram was conducted within two weeks which did not show any return of the pericardial effusion. The patient was eventually discharged from the hospital in stable condition.