In February 2009, a 75-year-old man with a history of alcoholic liver disease was referred to our hospital for evaluation of multiple liver masses on abdominal ultrasound sonography. The patient had no history of hepatitis of B or C infection. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed 13-cm hypovascular liver tumors , with marked tumor thrombosis growing to the right portal vein and inferior vena cava , and bilateral intrahepatic liver metastases . Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II), also known as des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin, level were 3565 ng/ml and 49,000 mAU/ml, respectively. Chest CT scan, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, and colonoscopy showed no other tumors. His carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels were in the normal range.
Under the diagnosis of unresectable advanced HCC, an indwelling port was inserted, and HAIC with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU, 170 mg/m2) and cisplatin (7 mg/m2) continuously on days 1–5 via an implanted catheter system was administered. One cycle of HAIC consisted of 5 days of treatment and 2 days rest per week for 4 consecutive weeks. Despite significant decrease in tumor markers and remarkable regression of intrahepatic lesions, PVTT, and IVCTT on enhanced CT after one HAIC cycle , we abandoned this treatment due to leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. Eight months later, when his AFP elevated to 202 ng/ml, the patient refused our recommendation of sorafenib, which had become available in Japan at that year. After 18 months, during which the tumor remained silent and he was followed closely without treatment , his AFP and PIVKA-II levels rapidly elevated to 21,490 ng/ml and 1444 mAU/ml (respectively), and enhanced CT showed tumor progression . Therefore, we resumed the HAIC at the same dose for one cycle, but switched to 5-FU alone (1000 mg biweekly) due to renal dysfunction. Twenty-one months after resuming HAIC, we stopped this treatment because the indwelling port became occluded. At that time, the patient’s serum AFP and PIVKA-II were within normal ranges, and enhanced CT and magnetic resonance images indicated that the tumor was still shrunken with necrotic areas, and showed no PVTT, IVCTT, or intrahepatic metastases . He had good hepatic function (Child–Pugh classification A5 and liver damage A) with atrophy of the right hepatic lobe (131 ml, corresponding to 15.1% of liver volume), despite indocyanine green retention rate being 15.0%. We therefore performed a right hepatic lobectomy to remove the residual lesion, at 54 months after his initial treatment. He was discharged on postoperative day 14 without postoperative complications.
The resected specimen showed the solid tumor with significant hemorrhage and necrosis . Microscopic examination revealed a nodule with a central necrotic core, surrounded by a thick hyalinized fibrotic capsule . No residual viable tumor cells were observed . Bilirubin pigments surrounded by necrotic tissue in the central necrotic compartment indicated that the tumor was HCC . No adjuvant therapy was performed. CT imaging has shown no signs of recurrence, and his tumor markers have also been within the normal limits for the past 126 and 72 months after the initial HAIC and after the operation, respectively. His clinical course is summarized in Fig. .