A 56-year-old female patient with NSTEMI (peak high-sensitive troponin 33 ng/L) was referred to our hospital for coronary angiography (CA). Her medical history consisted of hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia, and she had a spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) of the distal descending left artery (LAD) 6 years before presentation. At that time, balloon angioplasty was used to treat the SCAD with good results, and there was already a slight ectasia of the left main visible . Electrocardiogram during the current presentation showed dynamic inverted T waves in the septal leads and flattened T waves in the anterolateral leads which normalized during hospitalization. Echocardiography was without regional wall motion abnormalities. A CA was performed and unveiled, besides a complete recovery of the previous dissected distal LAD, a giant saccular aneurysm of the LMCA shaft not extending beyond the distal bifurcation. No coronary artery stenoses or dissection were present. The aneurysm and embolism accompanied by it were the presumed cause of the NSTEMI. An additional CT coronary angiography was performed to better define the anatomy prior to intervention . The length of the aneurysm was 15 mm, and the maximal diameter was 8.5 mm. Based on these findings, the revascularization strategy was discussed within the multidisciplinary team. Given the rapid growth of the aneurysm over 6 years, the risk of thrombosis and the rupture of the CAA were deemed too large to remain conservative. Because of the acceptable proximal and distal landing zone, a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was considered safer than a surgical approach. Preceding the PCI intravascular ultrasound was performed which confirmed no involvement of the aneurysm beyond the bifurcation of LAD and LCx. IVUS detected no (residual) thrombus. The administration of dual antiplatelet therapy and 3 weeks interval between the diagnostic CA- and IVUS-guided PCI might explain the absence of residual thrombus on IVUS. Subsequently, after placing a safety balloon in the LCX, a 5 × 15 mm Papyrus-covered stent was deployed from the ostial LMCA to just proximal of the LMCA bifurcation thereby covering the giant aneurysm while not compromising flow to the LCX. The implantation of the stent occurred in the caudal right oblique view with 16 atmospheres. After post-dilatation with a 5.5 mm NC balloon, angiography and IVUS demonstrated incomplete coverage of the distal part aneurysm at the level of the bifurcation, with limited retrograde filling of the aneurysm by a small gap distal from the stent close to the bifurcation . Besides secondary prevention, dual antiplatelet therapy was prescribed for the duration of 1 year. No anticoagulation was added as antiplatelet agents were presumed of more importance to prevent stent thrombosis and anticoagulants might delay the sealing of the aneurysm. At 3- and 12-month post-procedure, CA showed an excellent result of the PCI without a residual neck or retrograde filling of the aneurysm and without obvious restenosis . Consequently, additional coiling was not necessary. The history of SCAD and CAA suggested a common underlying cause. MRI of the renal and brain arteries confirmed the diagnosis of fibromuscular dysplasia.