A fifty-six-year-old Sri Lankan male patient presented with acute onset nausea, vomiting and sweating associated with abdominal discomfort and fullness. He did not complain of colicky abdominal pain. Even though he was passing flatus, he had not opened his bowels for 2 days. He did not have any chest pain, palpitations or shortness of breath. There was no loss of consciousness or any other focal neurological symptoms. He had three similar episodes in the past, latest of which was 20 years prior. All of them had resolved spontaneously and no records were available. Barring that, his past medical details and family history were unremarkable. He did not have any history of altered bowel habits, per rectal bleeding or family history of colorectal carcinoma. He was a nonsmoker and a teetotaler.
On examination he was pale with a pulse rate of 50 beats per minute and his blood pressure was 110/50 mmHg. Abdomen was distended and the liver dullness was absent. There was no tenderness, guarding or rigidity. Bowel sounds were reduced and sluggish. There were no focal neurological signs.
ECG done soon after the admission (3 h after the onset of symptoms) showed dynamic ST segment elevation with T inversion in leads V1 to V3, J point elevation in leads L 11, L 111, aVF and T inversion in leads L 1 and aVL . The changes were progressive in serial ECGs. 2D Echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular function with normal ejection fraction without any regional wall motion abnormalities or pericardial effusion. Three troponin I titers done at 4, 12 and 24 h from the onset of symptoms were < 0.10 ng/ml (less than 0.5 ng/ml) with CK-MB = 3.34 ng/ml, 3.88 ng/ml, 3.45 ng/ml (<5) and the myoglobin levels were = 29.94 ng/ml, 31.45 ng/ml, 18.65 ng/ml (<80) respectively. Abdominal X-ray in erect position and Chest x-ray PA done 6 h after the onset of symptoms showed distended stomach, dilated ascending and descending colon with absent rectal air . There was no volvulus or air under the diaphragm. Ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed no hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, abdominal masses or free fluid. There was no ultrasonographic evidence of acute cholecystitis or acute pancreatitis. NCCT brain was normal. Full blood count, serum electrolytes, renal function tests and liver function tests were normal . Serum amylase was 179 U/L (22–80) and CRP was 10 mg/dL (<6) TSH was 1.4 mIU/L (0.55–4.78) and Free T4 1.12 ng/dL (0.89–1.76) Fasting blood sugar was 5.5 mmol/L and Lipid profile was normal.
The patient was managed as acute partial intestinal obstruction with monitoring and supporting care. Naso gastric tube was inserted and the patient was kept nil by mouth. Vomiting and abdominal pain settled in 12 h and vital parameters normalized. Oral feeding was gradually introduced. ECG changes reverted back to normal without any residual ischemic changes within this period. Repeat abdominal x-ray was also normal. He was discharged on the fifth day, with colonoscopy planned for a later date.