A 65-year-old Melanau (native Malaysian) lady was diagnosed with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) secondary to diabetes in March 2020 during a routine follow-up, but was asymptomatic. She was a widower, lost her husband 3 years before the ESKD diagnosis, and had three supportive daughters who were always there during her illness. She never smoked or consumed alcohol. There was no surgical history, and she was compliant with her insulin, low-dose antihypertensive medications, phosphate binders, and vitamins all along. She opted for PD treatment, mainly APD, due to her lifestyle choices. However, before the elective PD catheter insertion, she presented with uremic symptoms in July 2020. We inserted a Tenckhoff catheter for her via peritoneoscopy, and a home-based APD training was started 2 weeks after the insertion. She was given lactulose 15 mL three times per day and bisacodyl 10 mg at night after the procedure to ensure bowel movement. She was well up to the time of the APD training. She reported having two to three bowel movements in a day, which she attributed to laxatives to prevent constipation and the dialysate fill in the abdomen. She had good ultrafiltration (UF), resulting in an asymptomatic episode of hypotension during the training. Her effluent was clear, and she had no abdominal pain during the bouts of diarrhea. Subsequently, with reasonable reassurance, she was advised to withhold her antihypertensive medications and stop the laxative usage. Her diarrhea improved, and her blood pressure returned to normal.
She managed to complete the APD training successfully. Her regime was 10 L of 1.5% dextrose dialysate every day, and her UF was to 500 mL/day with residual urine output of 300 mL/day. She reported having a bowel movement only once a day; thus, she was subsequently advised to retake the osmotic laxative (lactulose 15 mL three times daily) to maintain bowel output at least once to twice per day. She complied with all the prescriptions and was scheduled for a clinic follow-up about a month later.
Upon review at follow-up, she complained of diarrhea containing excessive liquid for 4 weeks. The frequency was 2–3 times per day initially but increased to more than 10 times per day a week before the follow-up. There was no cloudy effluent, vomiting, or fever, but she complained of colicky abdominal pain, nausea, and appetite loss associated with diarrhea. In the past month, she had lost 10 kg, but she thought it was a standard expectation for a new dialysis patient. Upon further questioning, she revealed a family history of endometrial carcinoma but no family history or contact with tuberculosis patients. On examination, she appeared dehydrated; however, she was alert and not in distress. Her blood pressure on admission was 108/52 mmHg and pulse rate was 85 beats per minute, regular rhythm. She was afebrile and not in respiratory distress. Abdominal examination revealed a soft, non-tender abdomen, and there was no organomegaly. Respiratory, neurological, and other examinations were unremarkable. Greenish fluffy pieces with ragged edges and mushy stool (Bristol stool 6) were seen in stool inspection. PD fluid was clear, with zero cell counts and negative culture. No pathogen was isolated in the stool in blood culture and sensitivity tests. Unfortunately, no stool osmolality or stool osmolar gap test was done for this patient, as it was not available in our center. Her full blood counts and electrolytes (mainly potassium and sodium) were surprisingly normal despite frequent diarrhea and dehydration. Only her C-reactive protein was mildly elevated to 34 mg/L (0–5 mg/L), indicating ongoing inflammation. However, her tumor markers were all negative, and thyroid function test was normal. Table summarizes her initial blood investigations on admission.
We resuscitated her with saline and withheld all her laxatives immediately. An abdominal radiograph and abdominal ultrasound did not reveal any abnormality. We proceeded to a colonoscopy examination that revealed brown to black discoloration over the cecum, ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid colon and rectum, clinically suggestive of melanosis coli. Unfortunately, no pictures of the colon were taken during the procedure. Histopathological analyses of the tissues further confirmed the diagnosis, as numerous macrophages containing granular, coarse, brown lipofuscin-like pigments (Perls stain negative) were found within the lamina propria . Her stool culture came back as no growth, excluding any infective origin of her diarrhea.
The laxative prescription was stopped completely, and the dietitian gave her partially hydrolyzed guar gum (PHGG; precursor for probiotics), two scoops a day (about 15 g/day) orally, which improved her symptoms significantly. The PHGG was prescribed for 7 days as her diarrhea resolved substantially. She was discharged well after the restoration of volume and resumed her usual dialysis. On her follow-up 6 months later, she had been relatively well and had no more diarrhea complaints. She felt better, and her recorded blood pressures were normal. Nevertheless, she still continues her APD.