A 35-year-old white woman (weight 75 kg, height 160 cm), gravida 3 para 2, presented to our hospital at 21 weeks of gestation with paraplegia. She had no significant medical or anesthetic history; in particular, she had no history of trauma, and she had not been taking aspirin or anticoagulants. She had been receiving regular care from an obstetrician during pregnancy, which had progressed normally. Twenty-four hours before her admission, the patient had developed a sudden onset of severe interscapular pain radiating to her neck with sudden weakness and paresthesia in both the upper and lower limbs. The patient was confined to bed, and she did not experience any improvement, so she decided to consult in our hospital.
Her physical examination revealed flaccid paralysis in both legs. Her lower limb power bilaterally was grade 0/5. In her right and left higher limbs, power was grades 2/5 and 3/5, respectively. Her upper level with sensitivity was C7–T1. All her deep tendon reflexes were absent. Her plantar response was bilaterally mute. She also had urinary sphincter disturbances. The rest of her physical examination was unremarkable.
The results of hematological investigations were within normal ranges: serum potassium 4 mEq/L, hemoglobin 14 g/dl, platelets 180,000/mm3, international normalized ratio 1.2, and prothrombin time 11 seconds. Obstetrical ultrasound revealed a normal pregnancy at 21 weeks of gestation and a fetal heart rate (HR) of 140 beats per minute. Magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical and dorsal spine revealed a cervical spine epidural hematoma extending from levels C3 to C6 with severe spinal cord compression .
An anesthesiologist, a neurosurgeon, and an obstetrician urgently reviewed the case. After discussion with the patient, it was decided to perform spinal cord decompression with the patient under general anesthesia. After explanation of the anesthesia plan, the patient verbalized understanding and consented to undergo awake fiberoptic intubation. Her American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status classification was I, her Mallampati classification was I, and she had a good mouth opening. On arrival in our operating room (3 hours from admission), noninvasive blood pressure (BP) monitoring with three-lead electrocardiography and pulse oximetry was established. The patient’s basal values were BP 120/60 mmHg, HR 75 beats per minute and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation of 100% while breathing room air. Intravenous access was secured with two 18-gauge intravenous cannulae, and the patient was given 10 ml/kg of isotonic saline solution. Cefazolin 2 g was also administered intravenously. After 5 minutes of preoxygenation with 100% oxygen and nebulization of lidocaine 2%, we carried out a superior laryngeal block, which was followed by nasal fiberoptic intubation. Tracheal intubation was easily performed with a 7.0-mm armored tube. Once the patient’s end-tidal carbon dioxide level confirmed placement, general anesthesia was induced with propofol 2.5 mg/kg, fentanyl 4 μg/kg, and rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg. Immediately after intubation, the patient’s BP was 130/70 mmHg, and her HR was 85 beat per minute. She was ventilated with a target tidal volume of 450 ml and a respiratory rate of 13 breaths per minute. Sevoflurane (1–1.5%) in a mixture of oxygen and air (1:2) was used for maintenance of anesthesia. A radial arterial line was placed for continuous monitoring of arterial BP and collection of arterial blood for blood gas analysis during surgery. We also inserted a urinary catheter.
The patient was turned to the prone position to allow a posterior cervical approach to the hematoma with appropriate padding and careful checking for pressure points. The endotracheal tube was rechecked for correct position by chest auscultation. The patient’s airway pressure was 22 cmH2O. Intraoperative fetal monitoring was not possible with the patient in this position. The patient’s mean BP was maintained between 85 and 95 mmHg. Perioperatively, blood gas analysis showed pH 7.4, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 36 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen 135 mmHg, and bicarbonate 22.3 mmol/L. A laminectomy with evacuation of the epidural hematoma and decompression of the thecal sac was performed, followed by surgical hemostasis . The operative findings did not reveal any arteriovenous malformation. The patient’s hemodynamic parameters remained stable during the procedure, and no vasopressors were required. Estimated blood loss was 350 ml, and the patient received a total of 1000 ml of isotonic crystalloid with adequate urine output.
At the end of the surgery, anesthetic gases were discontinued, and the patient was awakened. Immediately following surgery, a neurological examination of the patient was performed to evaluate her motor and sensory functions, which were identical to the preoperative findings. Postoperative analgesia consisted of intravenous paracetamol 1 g every 8 hours and intravenous nefopam 100 mg per 24 hours. Fetal ultrasound revealed a HR of 150 beats per minute. After discussion with the obstetrician, there was no indication for using tocolysis. The patient was continuously monitored for another 24 hours in the intensive care unit, and the postoperative period remained uneventful. She was transferred to the rehabilitation department where she underwent physical therapy. On postoperative day 2, she had slight sensation in both legs, and her muscle power showed a gradual improvement in the upper limbs (3/5 and 4/5, respectively, in the right and left upper limbs). After 1 month, power had improved to grade 4 in her left leg and to grade 3 in her right leg, and she was able to move her arms freely.