A 32-year old man with a pre-morbid modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score of 0 was referred to primary medical center due to psychosis, behavioral disorders and consecutively movement disorder, decrease in consciousness and hypoventilation. Emergency cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a normal scan. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed mild pleocytosis with lymphocytes (white blood cell [WBC] count 38/μl) and CSF-restricted oligoclonal bands (OCB; Pattern II) . Additionally, Computed Tomography (CT) scan and consecutive bacteriological examination of tracheal aspirate identified an atypical pneumonia due to pseudomonas aeruginosa.
The patient was referred to the Medical University of Innsbruck, where a thorough diagnostic work-up was done. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed continuous bilateral slowing without epileptic discharges. Laboratory examination by a commercially available cell based assay (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany) revealed positive NMDAR IgG in serum and CSF (serum titer 1:2560). Presence of IgG directed to MOG (serum titer 1:40; considered negative) and aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) were excluded by an in-house test as previously described [, ]. Ri, Yo, Hu, Ma2, Amphiphysin, CV2 IgG were negative (determined by a commercially available immunoblot [Euroimmun]). A whole-body 18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed no sign of neoplastic disorder, especially no thymoma. Eventually, diagnosis of NMDAR encephalitis was made, according to the diagnostic criteria of Graus et al. .
The patient was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP, 1000 mg on eight consecutive days) and plasmapheresis (PLEX, on four consecutive days), which led to a clinical improvement (sequelae: postencephalitic syndrome, short-term memory disturbances, apathy). Seizure occurred one month after disease onset requiring antiepileptic treatment with levetiracetam. Anti-NMDAR IgG titers declined with a nadir at month 15 after disease onset (titer 1:80). The patient further clinically improved showing a mRS score of 1 at month 15.
After approximately three years of clinical remission, a slow worsening of psychiatric symptoms occurred. The patient developed new behavioral disorders, and cognitive functions declined (deterioration of short term memory, problems with word finding). CSF analysis was repeated with a WBC count of 5/μl; OCB were not detected (Pattern I) . Cerebral MRI showed T2 hyperintense, T1 hypointense, Gadolinium (Gd) enhancing lesion of the white matter within the left frontal gyrus . This lesion showed hypermetabolism in O-(2[18F]fluoroethyl)-L-tyrosine (FET) PET and reduced metabolism in 18F-FDG PET. Another whole-body 18F-FDG PET/CT revealed no sign of neoplastic disorders, especially no thymoma. EEG again showed unspecific slowing, with bilateral delta and theta activity. The laboratory work-up revealed an increase of NMDAR-IgG (serum titer 1:320). Furthermore, MOG-IgG (titer 1:320), and contactin-associated protein-like 2 (Caspr2)-IgG (as determined by a commercially available cell based assay [Euroimmun]) were found in serum (titer of 1:100), but not in CSF. Treatment with IVMP (1000 mg three days, 500 mg two days and oral tapering) initially led to a slight clinically improvement and afterwards a short stable period, however, was followed by further worsening of psychiatric symptoms after two months. Therefore, treatment with rituximab (375 mg/m2 body surface) was initiated at month 46, which was then followed by clinical improvement of neuropsychiatric symptoms. MRI findings and antibody titers displayed also slow regression .
Until the last follow-up at month 66 the patient had received five cycles of rituximab and showed a substantial clinical and radiological improvement . mRS score was 1. NMDAR-IgG (at month 66) and Caspr2-IgG (at month 58) remained detectable by means of immunofluorescence until last follow-up in serum specimens, while serum MOG-IgG (at month 66) were below the cut-off titer (titer 1:80). Clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic key points are detailed in Fig. .