A 46-year-old male presented to the otolaryngology clinic complaining of vertigo, right-sided hearing loss, and ear discharge for 5 months. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography brain showed a parieto-occipital lesion with a well-demarcated enhanced capsule consisting of mixed solid and cystic parts . The patient was planned for further investigations. However, 3 weeks later, he presented to the emergency department with blurred vision for a few hours. His medical history is remarkable for lower limb paraplegia due to a road traffic accident 20 years before presentation and a mild, dull, on-and-off headache for years. His examination was remarkable for the right-sided sensorineural hearing loss and bilateral blurred vision. The patient was admitted for further investigation.
Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain showed a large, complex solid, and cystic intra-axial mass centered in the right parietal and occipital lobes. Diffusion restriction was noted in the solid component and the walls of the cystic part. A large solid enhancing component was seen in the inferior and posterior margins of the mass. The cystic component had multiple loculations with a thick and irregular wall enhancement. The mass exerted a local mass effect with effacement of the cortical sulci and surrounding vasogenic edema, as well as compression on the posterior horn of the right lateral ventricle with a subtle midline shift to the left side . These findings were suggestive of high-grade glioma. The differential diagnosis included glioblastoma multiforme, anaplastic oligodendroglioma, and gliosarcoma. Hence, the patient was planned for a craniotomy and resection of the tumor.
A right parietal-occipital craniotomy was performed, exposing the dura overlying the tumor, which appeared unremarkable. The lesion started to bulge out upon opening of the dura. Multiple specimens were taken for permanent histopathology. Internal debulking of the lesion started using suction and bipolar. The lesion was soft and greyish and highly vascular. However, there was a decent plane between the lesion and the surrounding parenchyma with some areas of invasion. There was no attachment to the adjacent falx cerebri, and no dural blood vessels supplying the tumor were identified intraoperatively. The lesion was then dissected circumferentially in the brain tissue following the plane, and a gross total resection was achieved.
Microscopic examination of hematoxylin and eosin stained sections shows a proliferation of neoplastic cells, arranged in whorls and fascicles, with prominent vascular spaces and microcystic pattern. Psammoma bodies were identified, and no atypical features were seen. Fragments of brain parenchyma were identified without evidence of invasion by tumor cells; however, infiltration of the dura was seen. In immunohistochemistry, epithelial membrane antigen and progesterone receptor were positive. Glial fibrillary acidic protein was negative with Ki67 <2% proliferative index . Thus, the diagnosis of the WHO Grade I transitional meningioma with no invasion of the surrounding brain structures was made.
The patient’s symptoms started to improve by the 2nd day after the surgery and his headache fully resolved. Aside from the above-mentioned right-sided sensorineural hearing loss, his postoperative examination was only remarkable. MRI brain with and without contrast showed no evidence of residual tumor. On discharge, the patient had a modified Rankin scale score of one. Brain MRI with and without contrast was repeated 2–3 months later and showed no evidence of residual disease or tumor recurrence . On his most recent visit 2 years after surgery, the patient remains well and has no progression of his symptoms, unremarkable neurological examination, with no signs of recurrence or complications.