A 22-year-old male presented at the hospital because of a rash, joint pain for four months, and breathlessness for one month. Five months before admission, he had tattooed a butterfly on his right chest with blue and red ink . Then, four months before admission, erythema appeared on multiple parts of the skin, including the face, the extensor surface of the bilateral elbow, the metacarpophalangeal joints (MCP2–4), the neck, the chest, and the right side of the back . However, there was no muscle weakness. Gradually, he began to develop shortness of breath after physical activity. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest indicated ILD . Physical examination showed typical Gottron rash. C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), rheumatoid factor (RF), electrolytes, glucose, hepatic/renal function, and hepatitis (A, B, and C) were all normal. Laboratory findings of antinuclear antibodies (ANA), extractable nuclear antigens (ENA), anti-centromere antibodies (ACA), complement (C3, C4, and CH50), immunoglobulin (IgM AG), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), antinucleosome, cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody, and glycoprotein I (GPI) were all within the normal range. He had normal creatine kinase levels (CK 32 U/L) and significantly increased levels of ferritin (1016.9 ng/ml). The above findings represent the diagnosis of CADM and ILD. He was treated with glucocorticoid and cyclosporin A (CsA). According to his history, we deduced that the CADM was caused by a tattoo in his right chest. So, the tattoo was surgically resected, and dermatopathologic analysis of the blue and red tattoo was performed with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain. There was no hyperplasia of the epidermis. Pigmentation associated with a small number of inflammatory cells and hyalinization of collagen fibers was detected in the superficial dermis. But no significant difference of lymphocytic infiltration was detected between the blue and the red part of the tattoo . After treatment, the rash and the ILD gradually improved , and the patient was discharged from the hospital.
During the follow-up, he was admitted to our hospital again for shortness of breath after even minor activities a week after he was discharged. A CT scan indicated advanced ILD . His blood routine test, electrolyte, CRP, ESR, liver function, and serum creatinine levels were within the normal range. T-SPOT and (1,3)-β-D glucan tests were also normal. The ferritin level was 888.6 ng/ml. He was treated with CsA and methylprednisolone. Amphotericin B, norvancomycin, cefoperazone-sulbactam, and SMZ were used to treat potential infections. Cyclophosphamide (CTX 0.4 g) and gamma globulin (10 g) were also intravenously injected. However, both the cytomegalovirus (CMV) and antibodies (IgG/IgM) were positive. So, ganciclovir was used to replace the amphotericin B and cefoperazone-sulbactam. Ten days later, the patient had a fever and felt breathless. Chest X-rays indicated diffused lesions in the bilateral lung. He was given BiPAP to assist ventilation. Imipenem-cilastatin, teicoplanin, and levofloxacin were used to control infection. Intubation was also conducted, as the oxygen saturation was continually lower than 80%. A lab test showed that white blood cell (WBC: 20.0 × 109/L), ESR (53 mm/h), and CRP (52.9 mg/l) levels were obviously elevated. Blood gas indicated a low level of oxygen pressure (58.9 mmHg). Although the patient had a definite inducement, his respiratory failure gradually aggravated. Finally, he was dead of respiratory failure.