A 9-month-old female infant (11.7 kg) was admitted to our hospital for a previously undiagnosed growing pulsatile mass at the lower chest that was present since birth and, according to family, had been gradually growing (Video ). She was otherwise asymptomatic, with no history of embolic events, syncope, arrhythmia, or heart failure. Physical examination revealed aplasia of the xiphoid process and lower sternum (Video ). The preoperative electrocardiogram was normal. Transthoracic echocardiography showed dextrocardia with the apex pointing to the right side, and a large contractile pouch arising from the apex, contracting in synchrony with the left ventricle (Video ). No other heart defects were identified. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) confirmed a protrusion extending beyond the apex and showing a wide connection with the left ventricular cavity . The infant was diagnosed with LVD and treated immediately by surgery, without a period of prior observation or conservative management, because it was growing.
The patient underwent surgical resection using cardiopulmonary bypass. Under direct visualization, the ratio of the diameter of the diverticulum “neck” (4 cm) to the maximum diameter of the diverticulum body (3 cm) was 1.3 . In addition, the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) was close to the ventricular connection . Given the vicinity of the LAD to the LVD and the wide ventricular connection, partial resection was undertaken by excising the distal half of the diverticulum, and the remnant was oversewn using an interrupted pledgeted 5–0 polypropylene suture (Prolene, Ethicon, USA) . The right pericardium was resected carefully to avoid damaging the phrenic nerve, and the left ventricular apex was successfully repositioned to the right thoracic cavity.
The postoperative course was unremarkable. Histopathology of surgical specimens showed the presence of all three layers of the heart (endocardium, myocardium, and epicardium), and no fibrotic tissue was identified anywhere in the lesion . During 8-month follow-up, the infant remained asymptomatic with good heart function. The last follow-up echocardiography showed normal left ventricular geometry without obvious evidence of apical outpouching. No thrombosis was identified (Video 3).