Our patient was a 57-year-old right-handed gentleman with a remote history of colon cancer who presented with increasing headache frequency and severity with new onset complex partial seizures. MRI identified a left posterior frontotemporal tumor suggestive of a high-grade glioma . Given the lesion's proximity to both speech and motor cortex the patient was offered an awake craniotomy integrated with intraoperative stereotactic navigation including tractography as well as electrophysiology and evoked potentials for speech and motor mapping to facilitate maximal safe surgical resection which he elected to proceed with.
The patient was placed in the three-quarter lateral position exposing the left side for craniotomy. He was mildly sedated with remifentanil and midazolam by the anesthesia team for surgical exposure. Supraorbital and posterior occipital nerve blocks were performed prior to fixing his head in an MRI compatible Mayfield cranial fixation device (Integra Life Sciences, Plainsboro NJ, USA). A circumferential field block was then performed, and the patient's head was coregistered with the intraoperative stereotactic navigation system (StealthStation, Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). Following coregistration, the surgical team was notified by anesthesia that the patient was vomiting and had aspirated, and they would need to place an endotracheal tube to protect the patient's airway moving forward. At this juncture, the following options were considered: Aborting the procedure, proceeding with biopsy alone or proceeding with surgical resection based on previously integrated preoperative resting state functional connectivity MRI.
The patient's preoperative resting state functional connectivity MRI suggested that there was a corridor through the parietal lobe that would allow for surgical resection without damage to adjacent eloquent cortex [Figures and ]. This option would provide the survival benefit of maximal surgical resection in addition to obtain tissue for a pathologic diagnosis. The decision was made to proceed with surgical resection based on preoperative resting state functional imaging, the methods, and validity of which have been previously published. Following surgical exposure, stereotactic navigation was again used to confirm the optimal gyrus from which to access the tumor . A corticectomy was made in the selected gyrus, and the tumor margin was encountered deeply using a combination of sharp and blunt dissection. Upon arrival at the presumed tumor, stereotactic navigation was again used for confirmation. A peripheral margin was defined circumferentially around the tumor until the deep aspect of the tumor was reached. This portion appeared to involve the posterior aspect of the insular pia. Tumor resection proceeded uneventfully with periodic use of stereotactic confirmation of our resection margins as they related to eloquent pathways including cortical activations by resting state fMRI and en passage white matter fiber tracts by tractography. An intraoperative MRI was obtained demonstrating a small area of residual enhancement within the anterior resection cavity. Following the merger of this intraoperatively obtained imaging, it was recognized that this represented the portion of the tumor immediately abutting language cortex as identified on preoperative functional imaging . Given this proximity to the eloquent cortex and our inability to obtain interactive language mapping with our patient, the risk of further resection was believed to outweigh its benefits and surgery concluded. The patient awoke without difficulty and demonstrated no language or motor deficits postoperatively.