A 74-year-old male presented with a bilateral facial asymmetry for 2 years.
The patient was a 74-year-old male who was discovered to have bilateral facial asymmetry inadvertently two years ago. The right earlobe was slightly swollen and without pain or numbness.
He used to be healthy, denied diabetes, heart disease, hypertension for 15 years, and denied trauma surgery.
He denied any history of exposure to special chemicals and radiation. He had a smoking history of 50 years and had quit smoking for 7 years. He denied drinking alcohol. There were no infectious diseases, metabolic diseases, diabetes, hemophilia, hereditary diseases, tumors and similar diseases in the family.
The patient’s vitals were stable upon examination. The following conditions were noted: asymmetric left and right sides of his face, swollen posterior inferior pole of the bilateral parotid glands, intact surface skin without ulceration, low local skin temperature, the left tumor measuring approximately 5.0 cm × 4.0 cm, right tumor with a size of around 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm, smooth surface, clear boundary with the surrounding tissues, good mobility, no evident spontaneous pain or tenderness, and the facial nerve showing no sign of involvement. In addition, the patient showed normal mouth opening degree, good oral hygiene condition, minimal swelling of the corresponding parotid duct opening, and normal saliva secretion.
Parotid puncture biopsy: Considering lung adenocarcinoma metastasis. Pulmonary biopsy was performed: (right upper lung nodule tissue) adenocarcinoma; Gene detection of lung biopsy specimens showed EGFR gene 21 exon L858R mutation.
Computed tomography (CT) examination revealed bilateral lung space-occupying lesions. Pulmonary biopsy was performed and revealed adenocarcinoma in the right-upper-lung nodule tissue. Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT examination showed the following: (1) Two hypermetabolic nodules in the right upper lobe of the lung, enlarged hypermetabolic lymph nodes in the right hilar and mediastinum; malignant space-occupying lesion in the right upper lobe of the lung and possible metastasis to the right hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes; and (2) multiple hypermetabolic nodules in bilateral parotid glands.
The patient’s was assessed further. Color ultrasound examination indicated multiple heterogeneous hypoechoic nodules in bilateral parotid glands. The patient had smoked for 50 years and had no crucial medical history. CT of the chest revealed density shadows of solid nodules at the posterior and anterior ends of the right upper lobe (2.5 and 1.3 cm in diameter, respectively), with burrs at the edges and pulling adjacent to the pleura. Given the possibility of metastatic lymphatic lesions in the neck, systemic PET/CT showed 18F fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in hilum and mediastinum [maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax): 12.1], bilateral cervical lymph nodes (SUVmax: 10.2), and bilateral parotid glands (SUVmax: 27.3), which indicate the possibility of LC metastasis . The disseminated tumor was characterized by multifocal FDG accumulation, and thus, we decided to conduct further study of the parotid gland mass. The left upper pulmonary nodule was subjected to transthoracic puncture biopsy. The histopathology of the puncture biopsy revealed LC (primary adenocarcinoma of the lung). Subsequently, fine-needle aspiration cytology of the left mandibular angle lymph node confirmed the parotid mass as metastatic lung adenocarcinoma and ruled it out as a LC co-existing tumor. After consultation with the patient’s family, chemotherapy was refused, and the targeted drug Ectinib was administered to the patient.