A 70-year-old man presenting with abdominal pain was referred to our hospital for further examination. He had no past history without appendicitis operated during his childhood. He claimed no family history of cancer or any genetic disorders. Laboratory data revealed no significant abnormalities. Serum levels of tumor markers such as carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (25.7 U/ml, normal range < 37 U/ml) and neuron-specific enolase (9.4 ng/ml, normal range < 16.3 ng/ml) were within the normal ranges, while the carcinoembryonic antigen level was slightly increased (5.6 ng/ml, normal range < 5.0 ng/ml). The patient underwent upper endoscopy, which revealed BE and a type 0-IIa + IIc elevated lesion adjacent to the BE lesion . The tumor biopsy specimen confirmed well to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation. Esophagography showed a type 0-IIa + IIc elevated lesion in the left wall of the lower esophagus, with a size of 15 mm and an estimated depth invading into the submucosa . Thoracic and abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed no evidence of an esophageal mass, lymphatic metastasis, or distant metastasis.
The patient was clinically diagnosed with adenocarcinoma developing in BE. He subsequently underwent laparoscopic distal esophagectomy, proximal gastrectomy, regional lymph node dissection, and double-tract reconstruction with curative intent. Intraoperative findings revealed no tumor invasion into the esophageal adventitia.
In the resected specimen, a type 0-IIa + IIc lesion measuring 25 × 10 mm was macroscopically observed in the esophagogastric junction. Histological examination revealed that the neoplastic lesion was composed of well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the submucosa and an area of proliferation of round-shaped carcinoma cells in a nested or sheeted pattern . The round-shaped carcinoma cells contained hyperchromatic small nuclei with scant cytoplasm indicating small cell NEC . Histological examination also revealed some islands of squamous epithelium, esophageal glands beneath the columnar epithelium, and double-layered muscularis mucosae, indicating BE near the neoplastic lesion . Immunohistochemically, the adenocarcinoma cells were negative for chromogranin A and synaptophysin, whereas the round-shaped carcinoma cells were diffusely positive for synaptophysin but negative for chromogranin A and p40. The Ki67 labeling index was 50% . Based on these findings, a diagnosis of MANEC arising in BE was made. No metastasis of the carcinoma cells into resected regional lymph nodes was detected. The final pathological stage was T1 N0 M0 stage I according to the seventh edition of the Union for International Cancer Control classification.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 19 and has been followed carefully without any adjuvant chemotherapy and no evidence of tumor recurrence 4 months after surgical resection.