A 26-year-old Tamil woman from India presented with an alleged history of generalized seizures. The emergency-room physician administered 600 mg of phenytoin-sodium dissolved in 500 ml of normal saline through a 20G cannula sited into a vein on the dorsum of her right hand. Four hours later, the patient complained of pain at the site of injection, which progressively became severe. The fingers, hand and forearm were swollen and had a purplish-black discolouration . The radial artery was palpable, albeit feeble, under the oedema. The capillary refill under the nail bed was sluggish. The ultrasonic Doppler study of the arm showed normal flow through the radial and the ulnar arteries but the veins appeared collapsed.
The working diagnosis was that the patient had an ischemic hand, with the likelihood of progression to gangrene. This was possibly due to the extravasation of phenytoin leading to PGS. Although a differential diagnosis of compartment syndrome and need for fasciotomy to relieve the pressure was considered, it was decided to manage conservatively.
The intravenous cannula was removed and the arm was wrapped in a dry cotton-gauze dressing and kept elevated to reduce the oedema. Since the pain was intense and not relieved with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the stellate ganglion was blocked using 7 ml of 0.5% bupivacaine. This sympathetic blockade improved the capillary refill and the mottled discolouration, and significantly reduced the pain. However, it lasted for only three hours.
Therefore, it was planned to provide a continuous brachial plexus block. A 20G intravenous cannula was inserted into the interscalene grove 2.5 cm above the clavicle and was directed distally to lie within the sheath of the brachial plexus . A solution of 0.1% bupivacaine with fentanyl (2 μg ml-1) was infused at a rate of 1-2 ml.hr-1 using a Terumo TE-311 infusion pump. The patient had adequate pain relief without any motor weakness. The swelling and the discolouration continued to improve with limb elevation, physiotherapy and oral antibiotics. As there was sufficient improvement, the cannula was left in-situ for seven days to provide analgesia and aid in physiotherapy. The patient was discharged from the hospital after ten days with advice to continue physiotherapy. By the end of a month, the blackish discolouration had disappeared and the range of movement of the hand was nearly back to normal .