A 47-year-old man presented with severe heart failure with NYHA III. He had MELAS syndrome due to a point mutation in mitochondrial DNA (3243A → G). His physical features included short stature (155 cm), deafness, renal glomerular lesions, neurological disorders (lower limb muscle weakness, weakness of tendon reflex, and bilateral pathological reflex positive). The manual muscle testing of his lower limbs was three-fifths. He spent his daily life in a wheelchair. Atrophy of both the cerebrum and cerebellum, and small old cerebral infarction were observed on magnetic resonance imaging. His mother and sisters had the same symptoms but were not definitively diagnosed.
Preoperative laboratory test revealed a normal serum creatine kinase level (207 U/L), anemia (hemoglobin 12.0 g/dL), increased serum creatinine (8.6 mg/dL), and lactic acid (3.68 mmol/L) levels. He underwent hemodialysis 3 times a week because of renal failure. Electrocardiography revealed Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, and cardiac ultrasonography demonstrated moderate mitral valve regurgitation (MR), low left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF 0.3), and left ventricular hypertrophy (left ventricular posterior wall dimensions 13 mm). His coronary arteries were intact. Oxygen therapy, diuretics, and the administration of 3 µg/kg/min of dobutamine were started after admission. However, as these treatments were ineffective, transcatheter mitral valve repair using MitraClip (Abbott Vascular, Chicago, IL, USA) under general anesthesia was scheduled.
On the day of surgery, no premedication was administered, and dobutamine infusion was continued at 3 µg/kg/min until extubation after surgery. In the operating room just before the induction of anesthesia, his blood pressure was 100/68 mmHg and heart rate was 88 bpm. In addition to routine monitoring, a radial artery catheter was placed to monitor BP. His body was warmed using a warm air heating device (Bear Hugger®, 3 M Company, Saint Paul, MN, USA) and maintained at 36.0–36.4 °C to prevent hypothermia. Anesthesia was induced with remimazolam and remifentanil (0.3 µg/kg/min). Remimazolam was administered at 12 mg/kg/h until loss of consciousness for approximately 1 min. The trachea was intubated with the aid of rocuronium (0.6 mg/kg). Anesthesia was maintained with 1.1–1.2 mg/kg/h of remimazolam and 0.1 µg/kg/min of remifentanil. The doses of remimazolam were adjusted to bispectral indices ranging from 40 to 60. Dobutamine at 3 µg/kg/min was continuously infused intravenously until he was transferred to the postoperative intensive care unit (ICU). Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), Flo Trac ™ sensor (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA), and Edwards oximetry CV catheter were used during transcatheter mitral valve repair. TEE findings after induction of general anesthesia were following: LVEF was 0.3, mitral valve annulus long diameter was 50 mm, short diameter was 45 mm. MR was central jet from A2/P2, and vena contracta width of MR: 6 mm. The results of arterial blood gas examinations are shown in Table . Bicarbonate Ringer’s solution with 1% glucose added was administered intravenously. During surgery, 100 mL of 7% sodium bicarbonate was administered when metabolic acidosis progressed. The anesthetic chart is shown in Fig. .
MitraClip (1 clip via the right femoral approach) implantation was performed without complications. When manual pressure hemostasis at a catheter insertion site was started, remimazolam infusion was stopped. Approximately 10 min after the discontinuation of remimazolam, all surgical procedures were completed. Then, 0.5 mg of flumazenil and 4 mg/kg of sugammadex were administered. One minute after flumazenil administration, the patient regained consciousness and spontaneous breathing, and was extubated. The patient exhibited good arousal and had no pain or shivering. Dobutamine was discontinued in the operating room due to stable hemodynamics. The anesthesia time was 264 min and the operation time was 187 min. The amount of infusion during anesthesia was 920 mL. There was no transfusion. During anesthesia, there was no arrhythmia event. After anesthesia, there were no adverse events such as re-sedation and desaturation. The day after the operation, he left the ICU and started rehabilitation. Five days after the operation, he was discharged.