A 13-year-old boy, previously assisted by an external team, presented with a hemorrhagic stroke secondary to an AVM rupture in 2013. A 2013 angiography revealed a left occipital lobe AVM, fed by the calcarine and the posterior inferior temporal artery branches, with superficial venous drainage through the medial occipital vein into the posterior third of the superior sagittal sinus, and deep drainage through the occipital vein into the vein of Galen, thus classifying it as a Spetzler–Martin grade III AVM .
The patient underwent partial resection of the malformation in 2014. We complemented the treatment with embolization in August 2017, with the intraluminal permanence of the endovenous catheter evolving as a complication after gluing to the vein. We performed cervicotomy to remove the catheter but could not remove the intracranial part. The patient was subsequently diagnosed with a brain abscess (2018) after a physical examination revealed purulent exudate through the cervical surgical wound. He presented neurologically with contralateral homonymous hemianopsia, without any other symptoms.
The patient was admitted to our hospital in February 2019. He was reinvestigated using cerebral angiography, which demonstrated residual AVM with the embolization material and the presence of an endovenous catheter in the posterior third of the superior sagittal sinus up to the right jugular vein . He also underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in May 2019 (T1-weighted with gadolinium and T2). We observed the presence of an intra-axial, rounded lesion, with well-defined edges, heterogeneous at the expense of a hyperintense halo with a hypointense center in T2, located in the convexity of the left pre-cuneus, surrounded by significant perilesional edema. The lesion showed significant ring enhancement with the passage of the contrast medium .
Thereafter, he underwent microsurgery, with reopening of planes, complete resection of the AVM transulcal route, removal of residual granuloma.
The catheter remained in the posterior third of the superior sagittal sinus extending up to the cervical region of the right jugular vein. Antibiotics were administered (linezolid and ceftriaxone) in the postoperative period and the patient started to show a good response, without new febrile episodes.
In February 2020, the patient presented with thrombosis of the right jugular vein and purulent exudate through the cervical wound. We started anticoagulation therapy with warfarin and performed a right cervicotomy. We opened the jugular vein to remove the catheter and subsequently ligated the vein .
The patient is currently asymptomatic, without neurological deficits or new febrile episodes. Postoperative MRI scans of the brain showed expected changes without the presence of residual lesions, including edema in the surgical location. Cerebral angiography revealed the absence of residual AVMs . lists the main variables that were analysed. There were seven cases of abscesses resulting from endovascular procedures for AVM . The symptoms for AVM diagnosis mainly were: headache, nausea, hemiparesis, and seizures. All the patients underwent embolization, most often with N-butyl-cyanoacrylate. The most frequently detected microorganism in culture was Escherichia coli.