A 53-year-old male was extensively burnt after falling into a boiling water tank. The patient was pulled out from the tank and transferred to a private medical facility where his wound was
immediately dressed with a traditional herbal product. Two h after the accident, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of the National Hospital of Burns,
Hanoi, Vietnam on 18th June 2020 with severe shock.
Physical examination revealed extensive injuries involving 95% (with a deep injury proportion of 56%) of the total body surface, including his face, chest, abdomen, back,
and all extremities. Moreover, a yellow-brown layer of the herbal medications adhered to the surface of the blisters. The patient was managed according to standard care
for severely burned patients, such as aggressive resuscitation, surgical excision, and empirical antibiotic therapy.
His wound was cleaned and dressed with covering materials and topical antimicrobial agents, including chlorhexidine, povidon-iod, and nanosilver ointment.
On day five, some white patches suspected of fungal colonies appeared on burn lesions where the herbal medicine was placed and intravenous voriconazole
(400 mg daily) was added to the treatment.
Despite the active treatment, the general condition of the patient deteriorated with septic shock and multiple organ failures. Wound swab culture grew Acinetobacter baumannii,
Staphylococcus aureus (on Blood agar, Merck, Germany), and Fusarium (on Sabouraud Dextrose Agar, Bio-Rad, France). On day six, a biopsy was taken from the lesion
covered by the white patches and transferred to the laboratory. Histological examination (Periodic acid Schiff) showed abundant varicosities hyphae and yeast-like
structures suggesting Fusarium infection in the tissue and on the base of the ulcer .
The culture of biopsy material performed on Sabouraud dextrose agar grew a white colony with many crescent-shaped macroconidia characteristic of Fusarium under the microscope .
The DNA from the pure culture was extracted by Fungi/Yeast Genomic DNA Isolation Kit (Norgen BiotekCorp., Canada). The internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
and D1/D2 region of the large subunit of the 28S rDNA was amplified and sequenced by using a pair of primers (forward ITS5 and reverse NL4). The polymerase chain
reaction was run by 40 cycles at 95°C for 30 sec, at 55°C for 30 sec, at 72°C for 60 sec, and finally at 72°C for 10 min. The fungus was identified as Fusarium equiseti
by GenBank BLAST and phylogenetic analysis using Bioedit software (version 7.0) and MEGA software (version 7) . The obtained sequence was submitted to GenBank [MW131978]).
Antifungal susceptibility testing by the agar disk diffusion procedure was performed according to Espinel-Ingroff et al.
. Briefly, the entire surfaces of the Mueller Hinton Agar (Hardy Diagnostics, Santa Maria, CA) plates
(150mm) were inoculated with a suspension of the tested mold and then applied with disks containing antifungals. Inhibition zone diameters (ID) were measured
at the point where there was a notable reduction of growth 72 h after incubating these plates in ambient air at 35°C. The isolation was resistant to fluconazole (ID, 13mm),
itraconazole (ID, 12mm), caspofungin (no inhibition zone), and amphotericin B (ID, 11mm); however, it was susceptible to voriconazole (ID, 50mm). Due to the severe
condition of the patient, his family asked for his discharge on day 10 and he died later.
Written informed consent was obtained from the legal guardian for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.