A 69-year-old female patient initially presented to her gynecologist with pelvic pain and known ovarian cysts identified on prior imaging. She was counseled on management options and underwent a laparoscopic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. The patient was taken to the operating room where anesthesia was administered without difficulty. Surgical skin preparation and sterile draping was performed. A Foley catheter was placed prior to the beginning of the case. A Veress needle at Palmer’s point was chosen for establishing pneumoperitoneum. On first attempt, abdominal placement could not be confirmed and the Veress needle was removed. On a second attempt, aspiration and a hanging drop test confirmed correct positioning of the Veress needle in the abdomen. The abdomen was then insufflated with CO2 gas.
During insufflation, the patient developed hypotension with blood pressure in the 70’s systolic and 30’s diastolic. Concurrently, the patient began to have hematuria into her Foley catheter. A second laparoscopic port was placed in the right midabdomen during this time; however, there was inadequate visualization of the intra-abdominal anatomy due to significant pelvic adhesions from prior surgery. With ongoing hematuria and hemodynamic instability, it was decided intraoperatively to perform a laparotomy for assessment of possible bleeding from a major vessel injury. Meanwhile, an intraoperative urology consult was obtained. Due to the acute nature of the hemodynamic changes and with concern for active hemorrhage, a transfusion of 500 mL packed red blood cells was initiated and the patient received a total of 3 L of crystalloid resuscitation throughout the operation. Immediate evaluation by the anesthesia team did not report any derangements of respiratory parameters or mill-wheel murmur concerning for gas embolism.
Shortly after conversion to laparotomy, the hypotension resolved and hematuria decreased. Immediate evaluation of the abdomen did not identify any obvious source of bleeding from the bladder, colon, major pelvic vasculature, or adnexal structures. Upon further investigation, an area of hematoma was seen along the left ureter at the level of the renal hilum. The urologists performed a cystoscopy which revealed no bladder injury but did appreciate bleeding from the left ureteral orifice. The urologists suspected a subcapsular hematoma and a ureteral stent was placed as a precaution. Blood-tinged urine was seen draining from the stent after placement. As the hematoma was not expanding, the decision was made to observe without further intervention. Throughout the remainder of the surgery the patient’s vital signs remained within normal limits and hematuria resolved. The case was completed via open laparotomy. The estimated blood loss was 500 cc, with 375 cc of gross hematuria. Pre-operative and immediate postoperative hemoglobin values were 13.0 and 11.2 g/dL, respectively.
A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen/pelvis on postoperative day one demonstrated a small amount of fluid around the left kidney, renal edema, as well as a 4.0 × 00.6 × 6.8 cm area of high attenuation in the anterior renal space compatible with a hematoma and needle injury of the renal hilum (