A 74-year-old male visited a local doctor in May 2018 due to a 20-day history of progressive dysphagia. He had no other symptoms suggestive of esophageal cancer. Electronic gastroscopy showed an elevated tumour in the lower segment of his esophagus, which revealed an esophageal adenocarcinoma on biopsy. The complete blood count revealed a total leucocyte count of 24,870/mm3 and the peripheral blood smear showed differential counts of 89, 5, and 4% for neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes 4%, respectively. Since he had no fever, the treating physician did not suspect an inflammatory reaction or abscess, but considered this to be a manifestation of a secondary haematologica disorder. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed thickening of the wall of the esophagus, pulmonary inflammation, and mild bronchiectasis. Aspirates and a biopsy from the bone marrow revealed granulocytosis that had proliferated actively, abundant droplet bodies in the cytoplasm, and an increased number of megakaryocytes. The positivity rate of alkaline phosphatase expression was also increased. These results confirmed a diagnosis of LR and excluded chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML). The patient was referred to our hospital in Jun 2018 for further evaluation and treatment. The patient had an unremarkable family history. On examination, there were no palpable supraclavicular and bilateral cervical lymph nodes, and his body temperature was normal. His vitals were stable with a normal blood pressure, regular heart rate, and normal pulse rate. However, his weight had decreased by 4.5 kg since he had begun to experienc dysphagia. Laboratory investigations included a routine blood test (total WBC: 29,960/mm3, neutrophils: 89.5%, lymphocytes: 7.5%, monocytes: 2.3%, and haemoglobin: 138 g/l) and analysis of tumour markers (alpha-fetoprotein: 1.41 ng/ml, squamous cell carcinoma: 0.1 ng/ml, and carcinoembryonic antigen: 1.01 ng/ml). C-reactive protein was elevated (14.36 mg/dl). Yhe uric acid levels and liver and kidney function tests were within normal limits.Hyperleukocytosis, elevated C-reactive protein, and the neurologic features on the day of admission were indicative of an infectious pathology. Initially, the hyperleukocytosis was considered to be related to an infection. Subsequently, the patient was treated with biapenem (0.3 g twice dailyfor days 1–6) and voriconazole (200 mg twice daily for days 1–6). His WBC counts were 25,290/mm3 and 28,730/mm3 on the 4th and 6th days of treatment, respectively. All the blood cultures taken were negative. Persistent leucocytosis after 6 days of antibiotic treatment indicated that this could not be caused solely by infection. We therefore concluded that the LR was most probably caused by esophageal adenocarcinoma. A radiographic examination of the upper gastrointestinal tract revealed a mass in the lower esophagus. A chest CT showed thickening of the wall of the esophagus, corresponding regions of luminal stenosis, and several enlarged lymph nodes around the lesser curvature of the esophagus. No primary or metastatic tumours were observed. An abdominal ultrasound was performed, which identified no metastases in the liver. A radical esophagectomy was then performed. The resected specimen showed an elevated tumour measuring 6.5 × 6.0 × 1 cm in the lower segment of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction . Microscopically, the tumour was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the serous layer . A prominent intravascular proliferation of tumour cells was observed, which occasionally formed tumour thrombi. Clearance of lymph nodes during the radical esophagectomy revealed no grossly enlarged nodes. The tumour was diagnosed to be of stage IIB (T3N0M0), according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer guidelines.
Postoperatively, the WBC counts successively decreased to 10,450/mm3 within 1 week and 8670/mm3 at 1 month. The patient received 4 cycles of nedaplatin (200 mg on day 1), fluorouracil (1.0 g on days 1--5), and calcium folinate (0.3 g on days 1--5), and has been free of recurrence for 6 months.