A 19-month old female is in follow up at our hospital with a history of renal cysts. She was delivered at 38 weeks gestation and her parents had no related kidney dysfunction or consanguinity to each other. Results from maternal laboratory testing for toxoplasma, rubella, cytomegalovirus and herpes were negative—simply showing a normal karyotype in the amniotic fluid, and a fetal echocardiogram indicated no structural abnormalities. An ultrasound at 20 weeks of gestation detected oligohydramnios, right renal agenesis, and possible left renal dysplasia; therefore we suspected Potter sequence.
The patient’s birth weight was 2.859 g, height was 49 cm, and the score for appearance, pulse, grimace, activity, and respiration was 9-9. At one day old, a renal ultrasound revealed increased renal echogenicity with cortical peripheral millimeter cysts, a right kidney size of 34 × 13 × 18 mm and a left kidney size of 37 × 13 × 18 mm, so a possible diagnosis of ARPKD was done . Laboratory tests at 2 days of age showed a serum creatinine level of 1.31 mg/dL with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 16.16 mL/min/1.73 m2. While in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), she had hypertension that was adequately managed with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, and electrolytic disorder (hyperkalemia) that was controlled without compromising urinary output. Upon discharge from the NICU, her serum creatinine level progressively rose to 2.7 mg/dL (TFG 10 mL/min/1.73 m2).
The patient was followed up by the pediatric nephrology department, requiring treatment with vitamin D, ferrous sulfate, folic acid, and oral bicarbonate due to metabolic problems. At 6 months of age, whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in triplicate, which identified a de novo c.94C > T variation in PAX2 (p.Pro32Ser). This variant was not found in either of the parents. Sanger sequencing confirmed that this variant has not been reported previously in population databases or current medical literature. Bioinformatic analysis of the variant was performed; SIFT and FATHMM classified the variant as “damaging,” while MutationTaster classified it as “causing disease” and Polyphen as “possibly damaging” (score 1.0). Currently, it is classified as “probably pathogenic” according to the guidelines by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (PM1, PM2, PP2, PP3).
Additional examinations were performed. Results from vision and hearing tests were normal; psychomotor development was adequate. An olichocephaly, prominent forehead, micrognathia, and hands with a bilateral fifth finger clinodactyly were recorded. Anthropometric measurements at 1 year of age were a weight of 8 kg, height of 69 cm, and head circumference of 44.5 cm (W/A <1 and <2 SD, L/W <3 SD, HC/A <1 and 0 SD). The last laboratory test at 19 months showed a serum creatinine level of 1.44 mg/dL (GFR 21 mL/min/1.73 m2). No anomalies in other organs were found.