The subject is a 43-year-old woman, diagnosed with TM 11 years ago. The first symptoms were right upper pain and legs weakness, more intense while standing, and overall tiredness. At week 3, the patient showed loss of motor reflexes, ataxia and photosensitivity, reaching the maximum intensity by the 2nd month when a spinal cord lesion was detected by a non-contrasting MRI. At month 3, TM diagnosis was confirmed by CSF immunology, neurological symptoms and gadolinium-MRI showing a multisegmented demyelinating lesion. After clinical and laboratory general tests, comorbidities were diagnosed, i.e., von Willebrand disease, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, autonomic dysfunction, sulcus vocalis, and a thyroid nodule. Currently, 11 years after the initial diagnosis of TM, the patient reports diffuse mid to severe multiarea body pain (VAS = 6 to 9), and paresis 2/5 (MRC) on the body right side. The patient requires a wheelchair for mobility and long-term care. Daily medication includes oral morphine and pregabalin, and topical lidocaine .
NVR was triggered by non-invasive electrical stimulation of the left median nerve, using a bipolar transcutaneous electrical stimulator (square, 10 mA, 5 ms, cathode proximal and 3 cm from anode) applied to the skin using electroconductive gel, over the nerve at the wrist medial midline. An array of 4 light sources and 4 photodetectors totaling 8 NIRS channels with a source-detector optodes distance of 4.5 cm were used to record the concentration changes of oxyhemoglobin (Δ [HbO2]) and deoxyhemoglobin (Δ [Hb]). The peri-spinal vascular response was measured from the upper (C7 and T1) and lower (T10 and L2) spinal cord, which were selected due to the cervical and lumbar sensory enlargement of the spinal cord [, ].
A commercially available fNIRS device (Oxymon, ArtinisTM, The Netherlands) designed for brain fNIRS and based on a continuous wave technology was modified to record spinal NVRs. The system uses time multiplexed method to combine sources and detectors without interference, with dual wavelengths of 760 nm and 850 nm i.e., under and above hemoglobin spectral isosbestic point within < 1 pW sensitivity.
In a quiet experimental room, i.e., < 30 db sound level, 5 × 4 square meter space and dimmed lighting, the patient was informed about the test, then instructed to lie down in prone position on a therapeutic/massage bed with the face inside the window of the bed. The wrist and back skin were cleaned with alcohol skin swabs. The optode holders were fixed tightly on to the skin at cervical and thoracic vertebral level with clinical skin adhesives using the vertebral spinous processes as anatomical landmarks.
The recording protocol consisted of applying 3 electrical stimuli, each of 10 mA every 4 minutes . The rise time, amplitude and duration of the NVR (raw optical density values) induced by each stimulus were measured and off-line processed i.e., filtering, displaying and saved for non-parametrical statics as described in detail elsewhere . Patient recordings were made at least 3 hours after the last routine medication.
Median Nerve Conduction Velocity (NCV) was relatively normal , left spinal N11 wave latency was 100% delayed, whereas the right one was not tested due patient condition. Median values of patient NVR data were compared to those obtained from a healthy control group (N = 37) . The peri-spinal NVR of the patient was absent at C7 and T1 on both sides and for both sides of T8 as well as the left side of T10. An abnormally small delay of NVR was detected for the T10 right side . These findings agree with the notion of a diffuse and severe functional impairment of the neuron-vascular coupling process of the spinal cord correlated to the spinal inflammatory damage. The fNIRS record is consistent with almost complete paresis of the left and right sides of the body.