The patient is a 70-year-old Asian-Japanese woman. No special note in her medical history. In October 2018, she visited a house clinic at her local hospital for frequent urination and dysuria, and left hydronephrosis was noted by ultrasound. She then underwent intravenous urography, which revealed left lower ureteral stenosis, and was referred to our department for further examination. Blood and urinary analysis showed no remarkable findings and urinary cytology showed class II.
Contrast-enhanced CT showed thickening of the lower ureteral wall with contrast effect , and retrograde pyelography showed that the guidewire could not pass through the left ureter due to stenosis of the left lower ureter .
Based on the above, a left lower ureteral tumor was suspected, and a left ureteroscopic biopsy was performed in November 2018. Intraoperative findings showed a papillary tumor in the left lower ureter, and four biopsies were performed. Pathological examination showed no malignant findings as regenerative atypia with inflammatory cells. Intraoperative urine cytology showed class III left renal pelvis urine and class I left ureteral urine. Because of the ureteroscopic findings of papillary tumor and insufficient sample volume, ureteral carcinoma could not be ruled out, and a total resection of the left renal pelvis and ureter was performed in January 2019.
Pathological gross findings revealed a 15 × 12 mm papillary tumor in the left lower ureter . Histopathologically, HE staining showed no evidence of malignancy in the urothelial cells without chromatin hyperplasia or nuclear fission . On the other hand, the interstitium was covered with mildly acidic nonstructural material , and since amyloid deposition was suspected, DFS staining and polarized light microscopy were performed, both of which were positive, leading to the diagnosis of ureteral amyloidosis . No amyloid deposits were found in the excised renal specimen.
Postoperatively, a systemic search was performed for amyloid deposits. Blood and urine tests showed no abnormal findings and negative urinary Bence-Jones protein. Cardio ultrasound revealed no wall thickening suspicious of amyloid deposition, and upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no findings suggestive of amyloidosis. The patient's postoperative course is good with no recurrence for 9 months after surgery by cystoscopy, ultrasonography, and CT .