A 58-year-old Caucasian-Greek woman presented with a dull pain located in the right flank for 4 years. Other symptoms, including hematuria, were not present. The patient had a medical history of spondylolisthesis, osteoporosis, hypertension and hyperlipidemia. The gradual deterioration of pain in the last month before her admission caused her to seek medical attention. The pain initially was attributed to spondylolisthesis and she was prescribed a relative medication. Due to the persistence of pain despite the administration of the specific medication she was submitted to sonography. The ultrasonography revealed a right upper pole renal mass and bilateral adrenal masses. Because of these findings she was admitted for further evaluation. A physical examination revealed a mild tenderness in her right flank. No lymphadenopathy was found. The patient’s blood pressure and the pulse rate were normal. A contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of a 6 cm × 5 cm × 4 cm solid mass at the upper and mid pole of the right kidney with heterogeneous and enhanced areas and bilateral involvement of the adrenal glands . A chest x-ray, chest CT scan, and bone scan were all negative for metastases. Laboratory tests revealed no abnormalities. Endocrinological evaluation demonstrated normal serum and urinary levels of aldosterone, cortisol and 17-hydroxysteroids. The diagnosis of right renal cell carcinoma with bilateral adrenal metastases was established.
Right radical nephrectomy was performed through a bilateral subcostal incision (Chevron). The contents of Gerota’s fascia were removed en bloc, followed by a total left adrenalectomy. Thorough exploration of the abdominal cavity did not disclose any other metastatic focus.
Histological examination of the resected specimens revealed a solid tumor with golden-yellow appearance, relatively well circumscribed and measuring 5.6 × 4.8 × 3.5 cm in the upper half of the right kidney. Almost the entire left adrenal gland, measuring 6.2 × 3.1 × 2.7 cm, was occupied by a brownish compact tumor while only a thin rim of adrenal tissue was preserved. A same mass, with a maximum diameter of 1.9 cm, was also observed in the right adrenal gland. Microscopic examination of the renal and both adrenal gland tumors revealed the diagnosis of clear cell renal carcinoma, Grade3 and pT3 according to the TNM classification system . The carcinoma invaded and focally disrupted the renal pelvis. Invasion of the perinephric fat to a limit extend as well as of various vessels by neoplastic cells was also observed.
Convalescence was uneventful. The dosage of cortisone was gradually tapered to 12.5 mg per day orally. Serum cortisol and electrolytes were normal during the follow-up period. She was discharged 10 days after the operation.
The patient is alive with no evidence of disease recurrence or metastatic disease after six months postoperatively treated with adjuvant chemotherapy.