A 46-year-old Chinese man was admitted with the initial presentations of bilateral tumor-like nodules over the neck during the past 6 months and leg edema for 15 days. The neck nodules enlarged during 6 months and were painless without pruritus or dermatitis. He also had a body weight loss of 10 kg during the past 6 months, without symptoms such as fever, cough, diarrhea, or oliguria. On examination, multiple 1 × 1 cm hard and movable masses were found over bilateral post-auricular and submandibular areas, with intact overlying skin and a sharp boundary. His blood pressure was 145/90 mmHg. Trace edema was found in his lower extremities, but other physical examination results were normal.
Complete blood count showed an increased eosinophilia count at 3.66 × 109/L (50% total leukocytes). His serum creatinine was normal, with a 24-h urine total protein of 8 g and a serum albumin of 19 g/L (normal, 40–55 g/L). Serum IgE was elevated, at 2930 IU/ml (<100 IU/ml), while IgG (3.61 g/L; normal, 7.0–16.0 g/L) and C3 (0.75 g/L; normal, 0.9–1.8 g/L) were decreased. IgG4 was within normal range. His anti-nuclear antibody and anti-neutrophil cellular antibody were normal, and hepatitis B virus surface antigen, hepatitis C virus, and human immunodeficiency virus serology were all negative. An ultrasound examination of tumor-like nodules revealed swelling lymph nodes located over bilateral neck and supraclavicular areas, while renal ultrasound, chest X-ray, and electrocardiogram were all normal.
The patient then underwent renal biopsy. Renal biopsy revealed MPGN with eosinophilic infiltration of the interstitium. Light microscopy of 15 examined glomeruli showed mesangial proliferation involving all glomeruli; mesangial matrix inserting into capillary loops; endothelial cells showing segmental swelling with hyperplasia; thickening glomerular basement membrane with diffuse dual-track sign; protein deposition under endothelial cells; and platinum loop sign . Some of the glomeruli were infiltrated by inflammatory cells. Renal tubular epithelia showed vacuolar degeneration, with eosinophilic infiltrations noted over the interstitium, an unusual finding. Small artery did not show any abnormality. Immunofluorescent staining of 4 glomeruli showed IgA 2+, IgG 3+, IgM 4+, C3 3+, C4 3+, C1q 3+, and fibrinogen 3+ deposition along glomerular capillaries and mesangial areas. Electron microscope showed mesangial matrix hyperplasia with insertion, basement membrane thickening, with electron dense deposit in subepithelial, endodermic and mesangial region, accompanied by epithelial foot process fusion diffusely . Tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were also found, suggesting the diagnosis of MPGN, but the prominent infiltration of eosinophils was unusual, arousing the suspicion of secondary MPGN.
Meanwhile, this patient underwent lymph node biopsy, which showed eosinophilic lymphoid follicular granuloma . Immunohistochemical staining showed positive S-100 and CD1a, but negative CD68, lysozyme, CD15, CD20, CD3, CD138, CD30, CD117, and EB virus-encoded small RNA, BCR - ABL fusion gene test was negative. A biopsy of bone marrow showed no abnormality. He was finally diagnosed as Kimura’s disease based on compatible clinical features and typical histopathological findings.
We prescribed valsartan for blood pressure control initially, with fair results (post-treatment blood pressure between 120–130/75–85 mmHg). After he received the diagnosis of Kimura’s disease, we started him on prednisone 60 mg/day (1 mg/Kg), with tapering to 55 mg/day after 2 months, followed by further reduction of 2.5 mg every 2 weeks. His bilateral post-auricular and submandibular lymphadenopathy shrank and became impalpable after the initiation of prednisone for 2 weeks. Peripheral eosinophilia subsided during the day of prednisone initiation and did not recur. 24 h urine total protein decreased gradually, accompanied by an increase in serum albumin . Serum IgE also decreased after treatment . The patient reached complete remission 3 months after prednisone treatment, a phenomenon that differs significantly from a typical case of idiopathic MPGN. 31 months later, he remained relapse-free and no adverse effect was observed.