The patient was a 26-year-old woman who presented to the emergency department with palpitations and breathlessness for 3–4 weeks and worsening for 8 h. She had a history of VSD repair which was performed 14 years earlier after she was diagnosed with CCTGA. Seven years after the operation one healthy child was born after uneventful pregnancy. She also reported a ‘syncopal event’ 10 years after VSD repair although no further detail regarding the event could be elucidated. Holter’s study at that time only demonstrated no significant tachy- or bradyarrhythmias. Her transoesophageal atrial and ventricular pacing study demonstrated normal sinus node function and AV conduction without inducible ventricular tachycardia (VT). Multiple follow-up electrocardiograms (ECGs) 11 and 13 years after open-heart surgery only showed mild first-degree AV block and intraventricular conduction delay, with one ECG illustrated in . On this admission, her ECG showed high degree AV block with a ventricular rate of 44 b.p.m. A fusion beat be could be seen (the 3rd QRS). Her blood pressure was 102/57 mmHg. Respiratory rate was 25/min and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. Her B-type natriuretic peptide was mildly elevated at 1623 pg/mL (normal 0–450 pg/mL). Other relevant biochemical and haematologic parameters were within normal limits. Her weakness and shortness of breath further worsened shortly after admission and she ‘passed out’ twice, both required electric defibrillation. Her ECG rhythm strip at one such event was shown in . After a bedside Echo study confirming CCTGA [right ventricle (RV) is the systolic ventricle] and preserved right ventricular systolic function [ejection fraction (EF) 55–60%] the patient was taken to the EP lab with implantation of a temporary pacemaker. She was ventricularly paced at 90 b.p.m. and remained completely haemodynamically stable overnight. She received a dual-chamber pacemaker (XL DR 5826, St. Jude Medical, USA), the next day after a thorough discussion with patient and her family members regarding various treatment options including single-chamber, dual-chamber, and resynchronization pacemaker or defibrillator. The atrial and ventricular leads were fixed in the right atrium and high interventricular septum, respectively. Her paced ECG was shown in , with QRS morphology being consistent with high septal pacing. The Echo study with four-chamber views, the chest X-rays before and after pacemaker implantation were shown in , respectively. The ventricular lead was intentionally implanted in the mid- to high septum so that the paced QRS duration was similar to the native QRS prior to pacemaker implantation. This was achieved with careful mapping. The high resolution computed tomography (CT) reconstruct of three-dimensional imaging for the patient’s CCTGA anatomy after pacemaker implantation was shown in . The CT study also confirmed the high septal ventricular lead location. Patient was discharged home in clinically stable condition. She has been physically active at 3, 6, and 9-month follow-ups. Repeat Echo study at a 6-month follow-up showed systolic ventricular function at 57%. Her pacemaker interrogation demonstrated atrial sensing and ventricular pacing rhythm without ventricular tachyarrhythmia. Atrial sensing was 4.4 mV, threshold was 0.5 V at 0.5 ms, and impedance was 538 ohms. Ventricular sensing was 6.8 mV, threshold was 0.5 V at 0.5 ms, and impedance was 326 ohms. Atrial pacing was 19% and ventricular pacing was >99% being in complete AV block. Those parameters were essentially unchanged from previous interrogation at hospital discharge.