A 21-month-old boy presented to our center to receive an open orchidopexy surgery for a bilateral undescended testicle on March 18th, 2022. He was diagnosed with Koolen-de Vries syndrome when he was 6 months old. The child presented swallowing difficulty from birth, which showed that drank milk less and slowly. This symptom gradually eased after adding supplementary food at the age of 6 months old. He was diagnosed KdVS by gene test while the parents’ gene tests were negative. The involved gene KANSL1 is a protein-coding gene located at 17q. The mutation c.1183G> T(encoding p.Glu395*) revealed a heterozygous, pathogenic mutation. He was prone to have respiratory tract infections in winter and required oral medication or hospitalization. When he had bronchitis, he would have symptoms of stridor, which could be improved by putting a pillow under the shoulder. He had characteristic facial dysmorphism of KdVS, like tubular or pear-shaped nose, bulbous nasal tip, epicanthal folds, up-slanting palpebral fissures and telecanthus. He not only had the typical clinical features of KdVS including intellectual disability, and characteristic facial dysmorphism, but also tracheo/laryngomalacia, patent foramen ovale (PFO), and cryptorchidism related to KdVS. In addition, he also had hypothyroidism, indirect inguinal hernia, and syndactyly, which haven’t been reported associated with KdVS.
Prior to anesthesia induction, we re-checked his history, performed a physical examination, and monitored the ECG, SpO2, NIBP, and respiratory rate. He was 85 cm in height and 11 kg in weight. The vital signs were normal. He breathed calmly without symptoms of breathing difficulties, such as nasal flaring, or stridor. Due to the presence of tracheo/laryngomalacia, we planned to keep the spontaneous breath during induction to evaluate his tolerance to anesthetics. Atropine 0.25 mg was administered intravenously for reduction of the secretion. Then we administered midazolam 0.75 mg, fentanyl 20 µg, and etomidate 6 mg as well as dexamethasone 2 mg infused in 2 min intravenously. Then, the patient inhaled sevoflurane from 1 to 3%. The tidal volume of spontaneous breath was adequate initially, but gradually decreased with the deepening of anesthesia. The patient showed breathing difficulty with the suprasternal fossa retraction significantly in the inspiration period and bulging at expiration. Immediately we started manual ventilation by CPAP maintaining Peep at 5cmH2O. The obstruction was soon solved and the tidal volume improved. After inhaling 3% sevoflurane for about 10 min, we tried to establish an artificial airway. We inserted a glidescope which showed that the epiglottis was long, curved, and swinging with the breath . Then we inserted a gel-laryngeal mask guided by a glidescope to make sure it was in the right position. But the inspiratory pressure was high up to 22 cmH2O with the tidal volume only about 30 ml during mechanical ventilation. So we changed the laryngeal mask to a 4.0# endotracheal tube. Then the ventilation parameters improved significantly with ideal airway pressure and tidal volume. Anesthesia was maintained by inhaling 3% sevoflurane and intravenous infusion of remifentanil 0.1-0.15ug/kg/min. A caudal block with 12 ml 0.5% ropivacaine was performed for intraoperative and postoperative analgesia. The open orchidopexy operation lasted for about 80 min. Since muscle relaxant was not used, spontaneous breath quickly returned after sevoflurane inhalation and remifentanil infusion terminated. When the child showed signs of body movements indicating he was awake, we removed the endotracheal tube. The child was very irritable and seemed difficult to breathe with obvious suprasternal fossa retraction, and the color of his mouth turned blue rapidly. We began mask ventilation immediately, but the situation didn’t improve, and SpO2 went down to 84%. So we turned the child to the right lateral position and intravenously injected 2 mg etomidate. The patient gradually calmed down, the color of his mouth became red, and SpO2 went up to 100% within 90 s. But stridor still existed. After 10 min monitored observations, the child was transported to post anesthesia care unit (PACU). The child preferred to lie prone in the PACU. During 48 h after the anesthesia, the suprasternal fossa retraction and stridor existed continuously and optimized on the 3rd day after the operation. The parents reported that the child recovered well in the follow-up a month later.