A 35-year-old Caucasian man, with the previous diagnosis of CAH, was admitted to the Emergency department of a central hospital in Lisbon, Portugal, with anorexia, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. He reported feeling ill for four weeks, since he had an upper respiratory tract infection. In the previous three days he was feeling extremely tired, had persistently vomited and had epigastric pain. At admission he was dehydrated and hypotensive (blood pressure 95/48mmHg). He weighed 73kg (height 173cm; body mass index 24.4kg/m2). Abdominal palpation elicited moderate pain in the epigastrium, but no masses were detected. There was cutaneous hyperpigmentation, not only in sun-exposed areas but also in the axillary and genital areas and gingiva. His genitals were stage 5 of the Tanner scale. He had no facial or body acne. The distribution of body hair and muscular development was normal for his age and sex. On palpation, both testicles presented a petrous, irregularly defined mass (approximately 3x3cm) on the upper pole.
Blood tests showed mild anemia (hemoglobin 11.0g/dL) and sodium (132mmol/L) and serum osmolality (270mOsm/kg) were slightly below the normal range. Serum glucose and potassium levels were normal and there was no evidence of infection. The electrocardiogram record and chest roentgenogram were normal.
CAH had been diagnosed in the neonatal period, in Dusseldorf, Germany, after a seizure and transient coma. Daily treatment with glucocorticoids (prednisone) and mineralocorticoids (fludrocortisone) was started (no record of the dosage could be obtained). The patient was instructed to follow a hypersaline diet. Despite alleged compliance to therapy, he had multiple hospital admissions during childhood. Puberty occurred at the age of 12, with normal development of the external genitalia and secondary sex characteristics and his final height at adulthood was within the normal range for gender and genetic potential, as calculated from his parents’ adult height (mother 161cm, father 178cm; target height 176±8cm). During adulthood he was prescribed hydrocortisone at 20mg a day in a single dosage. He was instructed to double the hydrocortisone daily dosage in situations of acute stress. For the past 10 years there was no regular outpatient follow-up and compliance with therapy was irregular, but there were no hospital admissions due to acute adrenal insufficiency until the reported episode.
His past medical history was irrelevant except for the diagnosis of epilepsy at the age of three. He was treated since then with sodium valproate and carbamazepine. No CAH or other endocrine abnormalities had been diagnosed in his siblings or other family relatives. There was no record of consanguinity in his first degree relatives.
Venous blood was drawn for a complete endocrine panel before starting corticoid replacement therapy . Measurements of carcinogenic embryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-fetoprotein (α-FP), and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) were negative (data not shown). The cosyntropin test was performed on the third day of hospital admission, more than eight hours after the last administration of intravenous hydrocortisone. Blood was drawn at baseline, and at 30 and 60 minutes after intravenous injection of 250μg cosyntropin .
An abdominal computed tomography scan identified a voluminous mass (diameter >12cm) with relatively well-defined limits but the composition was heterogeneous with a predominance of lipid attenuation and multiple areas of calcification, corresponding to the patient’s left adrenal gland. His right adrenal gland was also enlarged (diameter 6cm) and was also heterogeneous .
The scrotal sonogram showed slightly enlarged testicles with hyperechogenic and heterogenous nodules (diameter 4.5cm). Microscopic analysis of three surgical biopsy specimens (1cm each) revealed nodular hyperplasia of ectopic adrenal cells. The testicular tissue adjacent to the nodules showed reduced tubular diameter, hyalinization and peritubular fibrosis. Immunohistochemistry was positive for vimentin, inhibin, and actin and negative for cytokeratins AE1-AE3, placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), CD30, chromogranin and synaptophysin.
Based on the evidence of ineffective steroidogenesis and because malignancy could not be ruled out, bilateral adrenalectomy was chosen. No complications occurred during the surgery or the immediate post-operative period. Together, the excised masses weighed nearly 0.5kg (left, 382g; and right, 44g). The pathological examination revealed cortical nodular hyperplasia with bilateral myelolipomas. We repeated the cosyntropin stimulation test six months after surgery , at 16 hours after the previous administration of oral hydrocortisone.
After informed consent was obtained from the patient, a genetic study was performed with deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extraction from whole blood followed by polymerase chain reaction and direct genetic sequencing techniques. Two distinct mutations affecting the CYP21A2 gene were detected: heterozygous R124H (moderate defect); and homozygous R356W (severe defect). The last could be a true homozygous mutation or result from amplification of one of the alleles.
Before discharge from the Endocrine and Metabolic Department, the patient was prescribed hydrocortisone (20mg in the morning and 10mg in the afternoon) and fludrocortisone (100μg a day in the morning). Two months after surgery the cutaneous hyperpigmentation had almost disappeared and testicular nodules were significantly smaller. Since discharge he has not necessitated an emergency room visit.