A 51-year-old middle-aged woman was hospitalized due to hypertension for 5 years. Blood pressure fluctuated between 150-160/100-110mmHg and could be controlled by medication. There were no accompanying symptoms of headache, dizziness, palpitation, and hyperhidrosis. The general condition was good.
The patient was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus nine years ago. fasting blood glucose (FBG) and postprandial blood glucose (PBG) fluctuated between 6-7mmol/L and 7-10mmol/L, respectively. She also had hyperlipidaemia for two years. The patient had a history of tonsillectomy. The patient had no special personal or family history.
Physical examination showed no obvious positive signs. Laboratory examination showed normal blood levels of meta-norepinephrine (0.53 nmo1/L, normal range <0.9 nmol/L) and metanephrine (0.06 nmo1/L, normal range < 0.5nmol/L), and 24-hour urine catecholamine levels were as follows: Dopamine 310.6 μg/24 h (normal range <459.9 μg/24 h), norepinephrine 2.2 μg/24 h (normal range <11.0 μg/24 h), and epinephrine 31.9 μg/24 h (normal range <76.9 μg/24 h). The hemoglobin level declined (90g/L). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis showed the following findings : There was a solid cystic mass in the right retroperitoneal space. The mass size was 50×45×62cm, and there was an obvious enhancement in the solid part. The mass was located between IVC and the phrenic foot. The IVC, right renal vein, and right and caudate lobes of the liver were significantly crushed. Somatostatin receptor imaging and iodine-131-labeled metaiiodo-benzylguanidine (131I-MIBG) imaging were also performed, and the solid-cystic mass showed increased radioactive uptake in the solid portion. To reproduce the tumor morphology more intuitively, our hospital carried out three dimensional (3D) printing based on imaging data .
Although the patient had no typical features or elevated catecholamines, the results of somatostatin receptor imaging and 131I-MIBG imaging supported the clinical diagnosis of PGL. The patient did not undergo germline mutational testing. The patient was treated for anemia, and the hemoglobin level was raised to 118g/L before surgery. The patient was also given medication (phenoxybenzamine) for 3 months prior to surgery. After consultation with liver surgery, vascular surgery, thoracic surgery, anesthesiology, and intensive care unit departments, our department and liver surgeons developed a special surgical plan for this case: Laparoscopic resection of the PGL.
The patient was placed in the supine position. The intraperitoneal route was adopted, and laparoscopic puncture holes were chosen as: 1) parumbilical, 2) 5cm above umbilicus, 3) 2cm inside the right anterior superior spine, 4) below the xiphoid, 5) subcostal boundary of the right midclavicular line. The right lateral peritoneum was opened, and the ascending colon was isolated to expose the tumor area. The tumor was completely covered by IVC . Vessel loops were used for direction and traction of important large vessels, including IVC, left renal vein and portal vein, and the tumor was gradually exposed (, ). Then the tumor was carefully separated from them. The retrohepatic segment of IVC was isolated from the tumor surface by ligation of several short hepatic veins. The tumor’s regurgitant veins were severed . For dense adhesion of the right adrenal gland with the tumor, the adrenal gland was also excised . The tumor was then carefully separated from surrounding tissues. The arterial vessel from the aorta, which supplied blood directly to the tumor, was also cut off . Finally, the tumor with a complete envelope was removed (, ). The operation lasted 340 min, and the blood loss was about 200 ml. The patient recovered well after the operation without any serious complications. Oral intake and ambulation were resumed on postoperative day 1, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 8.
The pathological diagnosis of the tumor was paraganglioma without adrenal involvement. Immunohistochemical analyses were as follows: soluble protein-100 (+), synaptophysin (+), chromogranin A (+), cytokeratin [CK (AE1/AE3)] (-), Ki-67 (index 2%), melanoma antigen (-), α-inhibin (-), succinate dehydrogenase B (+), O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (-) . The patient was followed for 3 month after the operation, and there were no complications.