This is a 77-year-old female, who initially underwent vaginal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, anterior and posterior colporrhaphy, and SSLF at age 55 in 2001. For apical vaginal suspension, two nonabsorbable sutures were placed in the right sacrospinous ligament. There were no initial reported complications.
Subsequent follow-up visits from an outside hospital documented patient complaints of irregular vaginal spotting and discharge for several years. She presented with purulent discharge from her right buttock in late 2020. After initial failure of a course of oral antibiotic therapy, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging showed a complex abscess and sinus tract extending from the skin into the deep pelvis and surrounding the right gluteus maximus muscle. The patient was treated with oral and intravenous antibiotics, wide incision and drainage, and excisional debridement of the right gluteal area at an outside hospital; however, she remained symptomatic. Patient was referred to colorectal surgery for evaluation for a possible rectovaginal cause of her symptoms; however, the patient's prior colonoscopy was negative for colorectal fistula. The patient was then referred to our service for evaluation.
On initial evaluation, the patient complained of continuous right lower buttock discharge and intermittent vaginal serosanguinous spotting. Physical examination revealed yellow drainage from a < 00.5 cm opening above the right buttock. Vaginal examination revealed atrophic vaginal mucosa with evidence of small granulomatous lesions at the right upper vaginal apex in the area of the sacrospinous ligament. Given the history of SSLF and deep chronic abscess and fistula, the source was thought to be the nonabsorbable suture material used for SSLF. The specific suture material was not included in the initial operative report. Removal of the sutures and deep drainage of the abscess using a multidisciplinary approach, including interventional radiology (IR), urogynecology, and minimally invasive gynecologic surgery (MIGS), was planned.
Five days before surgery, IR performed computed tomography and fluoroscopic-guided percutaneous abscess drainage and fistulogram. A 10-degree locking loop drain was placed into the gluteal abscess for drainage. One day before surgery, a 6-degree locking loop drain was crossed percutaneously into the fistula and into the vagina for localization of vaginal end of the fistula .
The patient was then brought to the operating room for a combined vaginal and laparoscopic exploratory surgery and removal of nonabsorbable suture. The patient was placed under general anesthesia and positioned in dorsal lithotomy position. Cystoscopy was performed and the bladder was observed to be intact with normal functioning ureters. Bilateral ureteral catheters were placed. Laparoscopic surgery for evaluation of the right deep pelvis was then performed. Right pelvic wall dissection was performed to the level of the levator ani muscle. The obturator nerve, ureter, and blood vessels in the area of the right lateral pelvic wall were identified and protected. No intrapelvic abscess was noted.
Subsequently, a vaginal incision was created around the vaginal tract of the fistula guided by the percutaneous vaginal catheter . Sharp dissection was carried to the level of the right sacrospinous ligament. Two sutures covered in purulent discharge became evident at the vaginal apex, and these sutures were completely and sharply excised from the right sacrospinous ligament and vaginal apical area. The sutures were white in color and appeared similar to Mersilene material . The site was copiously irrigated. Laparoscopic evaluation was performed concomitantly to ensure that there were no injuries to the right pelvic wall structures, the bladder, the right ureter, or the bowel. The guiding cutaneous vaginal catheter was removed while the cutaneous gluteal abscess drain was kept in place. The vagina was repaired with 2-0 delayed absorbable sutures, and adequate support of the vaginal apex and no pelvic organ prolapse was noted.
Final laparoscopic evaluation was performed. Complete hemostasis with no damage to surrounding structures was visualized. Cystoscopy was performed to confirm the lower urinary tract, bladder, and ureters were intact. The total procedure time was 4.5 hours, with an estimated blood loss of 50 mL.
The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged home on the same day with oral antibiotics. The postoperative course was uneventful. The cutaneous gluteal abscess drain was removed outpatient on postoperative day 12 when there was no more drainage. At six-week follow-up, the cutaneous fistula was well-healed with no drainage noted . The vaginal apex was well supported. At six-month follow-up, the patient reported no recurrence of vaginal or cutaneous discharge.