A 68-year-old male presents to a rural clinic with a two-week history of claudication and a one-day history of rest pain and fever. His past medical history was relevant for lower extremity arterial insufficiency and claudication in his right leg for which he underwent a right femoral-popliteal above the knee bypass using a 6mm expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) graft in May 2007. The graft was revised a month later in July 2007 when surveillance ultrasound revealed an occlusion. Intra-operative findings at that presentation included extensive calcific atherosclerotic disease and aggressive intimal hyperplasia in the popliteal artery. A small seroma around the distal anastomosis was discovered and evacuated at that time. There was no evidence of graft infection after thrombectomy and revision. Our patient was started on coumadin to maintain graft patency. His initial recovery was unremarkable.
Four months later, our patient began to experience claudication for two weeks and then developed rest pain and fever. He did not display any tissue loss or sensory changes. On physical exam, our patient's distal incision was warm and slightly indurated. His temperature was 38.5°C. Pedal pulses were 2+ in the left extremity and could not be palpated on the right.
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of our patient revealed a peri-graft fluid collection in the popliteal fossa of the right lower extremity and an occluded femoral-popliteal graft. Our patient's white blood cell count was 9000 cells with a 73% neutrophilia and his sedimentation rate was 64 Westergren units (mm/h). A CT-guided aspiration of the peri-graft fluid was cultured and revealed E. cloacae with sensitivity to extended-spectrum cephalosporins, including cefepime, cefpirome, and cefclidine. At that time, our patient was started on a third generation cephalosporin, 1g intravenous ceftazidime every eight hours.
Six hours later, the patient underwent removal of the graft. Endarterectomy with saphenous vein patch angioplasty was performed on the common femoral artery for severe atherosclerotic stenosis. Collaterals from the deep femoral artery were relied upon to perfuse the limb. Our patient completed a six-week course of ceftazidime, currently uses the limb without discomfort, and is without signs of infection.