A 72-year-old male patient presented with “a 10-year history of tearing and purulent discharge from the right eye, with subsequent redness and pain in the medial.
canthus for 3 days.” Ten years previously, the patient had had no obvious cause for tearing and purulent discharge from the right eye, and it was not taken seriously. Three years ago, a right lacrimal duct placement was performed in another hospital (specifics unknown) but the patient still had tearing and purulent discharge after withdrawal of the tube. Four months previously, a localized bulge in the medial canthus of the right eye appeared, which the patient had ignored. Three days previously, the patient had suddenly developed swelling and pain in the inner canthus. He was diagnosed, in hospital, with acute dacryocystitis of the right eye. An intravenous infusion of drugs was started, but there was no obvious improvement. The details of this infusion are unknown. The redness and swelling gradually spread to the upper and lower sections of the orbit, with purulent secretions from the right eye.
Three days later, the patient was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of acute dacryocystitis of the right eye. On admission, the patient was experiencing difficulty opening the right eye, and there was obvious swelling of the lacrimal sac area and surrounding tissue, with unclear boundaries. The patient was also experiencing tenderness in this area. The patient did not have pyrexia and was not experiencing general weakness.
A coronavirus test was negative; blood test results revealed a white blood cell count of 10.72 × 109 /L (normal range 3.5–9.5 × 109 /L), neutrophils of 9.46 × 109 /L (normal range 1.8–6.3 × 109 /L), lymphocytes of 0.53 × 109 /L (normal range 1.1–3.2 × 109 /L), and C-reactive protein in whole blood of 33.07 mg/L (normal range 0–8 mg/L). There were no obvious abnormalities in the remaining indicators. The results of a CT scan of the sinuses were as follows: swelling of the soft tissue of the orbit, face, and the lacrimal sac area of the right eye and soft tissue opacity in the lacrimal sac area of the right side, the nature of which needed to be determined by further clinical examination; the nasal septum was shifted to the healthy side . Upon completion of the auxiliary examinations, a systemic intravenous infusion of the anti-inflammatory supportive therapy cefuroxime sodium (cefuroxime sodium for injection, 1.5 g, Medochemie Ltd., production batch number C505B0) was started as follows: 0.9% NaCl/100 ml + cefuroxime sodium 1.5 g 30 gtt/min q12h.
This therapy was continued for 2 days (intravenous infusion of cefuroxime sodium 1.5 g + 0.9% NaCl injection 100 ml, once every 12 h) but failed to control the redness and inflammation; the area of swelling expanded.
After 2 days of treatment, blood tests were conducted once again. The results indicated a white blood cell count of 7.23 × 109 /L (within the normal range), neutrophils of 6.11 × 109 /L (within the normal range), lymphocytes of 0.5 × 109 /L (a further decrease from the previous blood test), and C-reactive protein in whole blood of 58.43 mg/L (a further increase from the previous blood test). There were no obvious abnormalities in the remaining indicators.
Subsequently, an endoscopic dacryocystorhinostomy with the placement of a drainage tube for the right eye was performed under general anesthesia. On dissection of the lacrimal sac in the nasal cavity, a large amount of yellow and white purulent discharge was visible inside the sac; redness and swelling of the eye were significantly relieved. The pus was extracted via a puncture for bacterial culture and identification. The results showed that one pathogen was isolated, i.e., Staphylococcus aureus. The wall of the lacrimal sac was taken for a routine biopsy and the results revealed an exophytic nasal papilloma . Owing to the high likelihood of postoperative recurrence and hyperplasia, the patient was informed that the papilloma should be treated with dacryocystectomy, the removal of the orbital mass, and the removal of the neoplasm through an incision in the nasal cavity, once the inflammation was controlled.
Two days after surgery, blood tests were conducted once more and the results indicated a white blood cell count of 5.84 × 109 /L (within the normal range), neutrophils of 4.5 × 109 /L (within the normal range), lymphocytes of 0.82 × 109 /L (an increase from the previous blood test), and C-reactive protein in whole blood of 38.95 mg/L (a decrease from the previous blood test). There were no obvious abnormalities in the remaining indicators. At the follow-up visit, 1 week after surgery, a new papillary neoplasm was visible growing from the nasal incision . Again, a biopsy was performed, and the result revealed an exophytic nasal papilloma. It was recommended that once the inflammation had subsided, the patient should undergo dacryocystectomy, the removal of the orbital mass, and the removal of the neoplasm from the nasal cavity incision. However, the patient was reluctant to consent to the surgery and remains under clinical observation.