A 37-year-old White male with CF identified at 3½ months, mutations F508del and R560T, was readmitted to Intermountain Medical Center for a pulmonary exacerbation. One week following discharge from his previous hospitalization 3 months earlier, he coughed hard and developed immediate focal pain in his right chest, mid to anterior axillary line at the 6th and 7th thoracic levels. He was seen in the emergency department and chest x-rays showed no abnormalities. He was treated symptomatically with oral analgesics; the pain waxed and waned but never resolved. A month later he had a particularly vigorous cough, and he felt a pop in the same area with even more pain. The pain worsened further just prior to readmission when his chest “popped” again while tying his shoe. A chest computerized tomography scan at admission demonstrated an acute 5th rib fracture and chronic non-united 6th and 7th right rib fractures. He was taking chronic Vitamin D and calcium supplements and had a 25 hydroxyvitamin D2 and D3 level in the normal range (33 nanograms per milliliter). Forced expiratory volume in 1 second on admission was 0.66 liter (19% of predicted), and forced vital capacity 2.59 liters (61% of predicted), decreased from 0.80 (23% of predicted) and 2.73 (64% of predicted) at the end of his prior admission. His lungs are chronically infected with mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa. His body mass index at admission was 23; he had taken only a few short courses of corticosteroids over his lifetime.
Because of three contiguous fractures and the need for aggressive sputum clearance to treat his exacerbation, operative repair was recommended. An epidural catheter was placed both for analgesia and to make secretion clearance possible in preparation for the surgery performed 2 days later.
Under general anesthesia, he had open reduction and internal fixation of the right 5th, 6th and 7th rib fractures with a Synthes Matrix rib set . The fracture sites were buttressed with iliac crest bone grafts. No chest tube placed, because the lung was attached to the parietal pleura likely from a prior, iatrogenic pneumothorax 13 years earlier that had required a chest tube. He was extubated in the recovery room and returned to a ward bed. After several days of increased oxygen requirements, fever, fluid retention, and borderline vital signs, he stabilized. Numerical pain rating scores are illustrated in Table . The fixated ribs were less painful to him post-operatively than the iliac crest bone harvest site. Bioavailable testosterone was low at 45.9 milligrams per deciliter (normal range 131–682), and replacement therapy was initiated. At discharge, lung function had plateaued with forced expiratory volume in 1 second 0.71 liter (21% of predicted) and forced vital capacity 2.26 liters (53% of predicted), but he was subjectively improved.
He gradually recovered from the surgery as an outpatient and resumed full time employment. He was readmitted 3 times over the subsequent year for acute pulmonary exacerbations, similar to his prior disease pattern. At the time of discharge one year post surgery, forced expiratory volume in 1 second was 0.89 liter (26% of predicted), and forced vital capacity 2.97 liters (79% of predicted), improved even compared with measurements over the year prior to the rib fractures. He has no pain or deformity in his right chest.