A 20-year-old female was admitted at the Firoozgar hospital in Tehran, Iran, on November 2021, with the complaint of abdominal pain and swelling in the last 2 weeks. Upon admission, an abdominal mass was palpated on the right side. A solid heterogeneous, hypo-echoic mass measuring 280 × 100 mm was visualized by ultrasonography originating from the pelvic region extending to the upper abdomen. Computed Tomography (CT) revealed a solid mass, measuring up to 223 mm in the pelvic cavity and rectouterine pouch, which was extended into the right abdominal cavity, root of the mesentery and mesenteric vessels . Correspondingly, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed a large T2 intense mass in the pelvic cavity, measuring up to 216 × 134 mm with extensions to the right upper quadrant of the abdomen with adhesions to the uterus fundus . Cancer Antigen 125(CA-125) and Human Epididymis Protein 4 (HE4) levels were 134 IU/mL and 34.6 Pmol/L respectively, and the Risk Of Malignancy Algorithm score was 3.55%.
With suspicion of ovarian germ cell tumor probably dysgerminoma, the patient underwent a staging laparotomy. Intraoperatively, we found a large hemorrhagic mass originating from the rectouterine pouch, which was supplied by mesenteric vessels, associated with 200cc hemorrhagic ascites in the peritoneal cavity. We resected the mass and performed right salpingo-oophorectomy due to tumoral involvement. Two expert pathologists reviewed the specimens, and the mass was diagnosed to be EIMS. involving the right ovary, uterus and peritoneum . Immunohistochemistry study (IHC) revealed positive staining for ALK . Ki-67 proliferatin index was 30%, while no expression of Cluster of Differentiation (CD)34, Caldesmon, Desmin, Myogenic Differentiation 1 (MyoD1), CD117, cytokeratin, and smooth muscle actin (SMA) was detected .
A multidisciplinary team reviewed the case at the hospital’s tumor board. After recovering from surgery, she was started on 200 mg of Crizotinib orally once a day. Four months after surgery, patient presented again with abdominal distension and loss of appetite and tumoral recurrence was confirmed on imaging studies. Crizotinib was discontinued and chemotherapy was initiated with Docetaxel 125 mg on day 8 and Gemcitabine 1000 mg on days 1 and 8 every 3 weeks. She had received 4 doses of this regimen and was a candidate for a repeat possible surgery after 2 more chemotherapy sessions. However, no response was attained after this strict management and she passed away after 8 months.