A 63-year-old lady was referred from ER to the ENT department, complaining of recurrent epistaxis episodes for the past 4 years. She also has history of left sided nasal obstruction, facial pressure, yellowish nasal discharge, protrusion of left eye and anosmia. She gave history of weight loss of around 7 kg in the past 3 months associated with decrease of appetite.
Bilateral nasal endoscopic examination showed a mass that easily bleeds on touch, filling the left nasal cavity and pushing the nasal septum to the other side.
Computed tomography scan (CT) revealed a destructive mass in the left ethmoid/posterior maxillary and sphenoid sinus extending to the nasal cavity. It measured 4 × 4.5 × 6 cm, with extension posteriorly to involve the anterior superior border of the clivus, invading towards the pterygoid bone and reaching the carotid canal . MRI showed dural thickening lateral to the optic nerve on the left side but no clear intracranial neither periorbital extension. CT scan of chest, abdomen and pelvis were unremarkable for primary or metastatic tumour.
The tumour was treated with surgical excision; however, complete removal was not possible due to attachment to the optic nerve and carotid sheath. Post-operative radiotherapy was administrated.
Multiple soft/tan and bone fragments were received for histological examination. Frozen section was performed for diagnosis and evaluation of margin status. The frozen section diagnosis was reported as “Malignant epithelial neoplasm with prominent clear cell change”. The tumour was extending to the resection margins.
Resected tissues were then fixed in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Permanent hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) sections revealed an infiltrative tumour with extensive bone destruction. The tumour consisted of polygonal to round cells arranged in nests and separated by fibrocellular and hyalinized fibrous septa. Most of the cells had a clear cytoplasm while few cells exhibited eosinophilic cytoplasm especially at the periphery of the tumour. The nuclei were round, uniform and centrally located with inconspicuous nucleoli. Mitotic figures and necrosis were not present. Perineural and lymph-vascular invasion were noted .
The differential diagnosis based on the H&E included squamous cell carcinoma with clear cell changes, mucoepidermoid carcinoma with prominent clear cell change, metastatic renal cell carcinoma and HCCC.
Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells stained positive for EMA, CK5/6 , CEA and p63 and were negative for PAX-8, RCC, CK7, SMA and S-100 protein.
FISH analysis of EWSR1 breakapart probe on paraffin-embedded tumour tissue showed evidence of a 22q12 rearrangement in 164 out of 200 (82%) of interphase nuclei scored .
The histological, immunohistochemical and molecular findings were consistent with primary hyalinizing clear cell carcinoma of the paranasal sinuses.
On follow-up, the patient showed no evidence of disease 4 months after the surgery.