A 74-year-old male patient with underlying hypertension and chronic renal disease presented to the emergency room (ER) with bilateral lower limb paralysis after falling on his back in the bathroom an hour prior. He was a non-smoker, and was not taking his medication regularly. He had no past surgical history. The patient denied any impact to the head or neck, or loss of consciousness. He reported experiencing numbness and weakness of both lower limbs, which was gradually worsening, for more than a week. Physical examination showed cyanotic mottling of the entire skin of the lower limbs with paralysis and loss of sensation below the fifth lumbar dermatome . In addition, severe blue toe syndrome was suspected due to scattered areas of petechiae and cyanosis of the plantar and dorsal aspects of the feet. However, the pulses of the dorsalis pedis and distal posterior tibial arteries, detected by bedside Doppler ultrasonography, were intact. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed a 7.3 cm AAA containing a highly irregular mural thrombus . Diffuse atherosclerotic changes were present along the entire aortic wall, from the aortic arch to the bifurcation of the abdominal aorta, with multiple aneurysmal outpouchings at the arch. In addition, we detected the contrast medium in the arteries below the bifurcation during the delayed phase of CTA . In the lower extremities CTA series , the entire arterial route was patent, without embolic occlusion, from the common femoral artery to the below knee triple vessels. A neurosurgeon was consulted to ascertain whether traumatic spinal injury could have caused this acute-onset paraplegia. However, spinal CT confirmed the absence of lumbar spinal injury. A provisional diagnosis of AAA with a non-occlusive mural thrombus causing acute bilateral lower limb ischaemia was made, and emergent endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) was performed for immediate revascularization.
After the EVAR procedure, the patient was conscious and could obey commands, but still could not move his lower limbs. Muscle power was not restored after the procedure. However, pulsation of the bilateral dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries was detected, even though the limbs were still cold, and the skin was pale and cyanotic. Although the patient was hemodynamically stable after surgery and did not require any inotropic support, he received critical care to combat reperfusion injury. A continuous intravenous infusion of sodium bicarbonate was administered to correct metabolic acidosis. With intravenous hydration, using crystalloid fluids administered at the rate of 100 mL/h, urine output of more than 1 mL/kg/min was expected. However, no urine output was recorded after the surgery, even after massive fluid infusion, and the patient developed hyperkalaemia. Acute renal injury was suspected, and continuous venovenous hemofiltration was immediately performed. Lab data obtained at post-operative hour (POH) 6 painted a grim picture with the following results: potassium 7.7 mEq/L, lactate 110 mg/dL, white blood cells 23,700/uL, and myoglobin 46,590 ng/mL. Due to persistent metabolic acidosis and a high lactate level combined with an increase in abdominal circumference, abdominal CT was performed at POH 9 to rule out ischaemic bowel injury. After acute thrombus-related bowel ischaemia was excluded, critical care was continued due to the patient’s worsening medical condition. For a time, the potassium level declined to 5.5 mEq/L at POH 12 with improvement in metabolic acidosis. However, his general condition rapidly worsened during POHs 15–18. The patient developed severe hypotension despite receiving high-dose inotropic support. An endotracheal tube was inserted because of sudden loss of consciousness and respiratory failure. The potassium level also rose rapidly to 9.0 mEq/L resulting in ventricular tachycardia. Unfortunately, the patient died even after several rounds of cardiopulmonary resuscitation with cardioversion.