An 82-year old woman with a pre-morbid modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score of 1 was referred to the emergency department due to confusion for two days. Besides breast cancer 41 years ago and herpes zoster skin infection three years ago, the patient suffered from pre-existing hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hypothyroidism treated with doxazosin, statin, and levothyroxine. The initial clinical examination revealed apart from global aphasia no further neurological deficits. The patient was afebrile (with a body temperature of 36.6 °C).
Emergency cerebral MRI showed a T2-hyperintense swelling in the left temporo-mesial lobe, including cortical and subcortical areas, hippocampus and amygdala. Within these regions partially a diffusion-restriction of the cortex was found; in addition there was a thin contrast-enhancing rim subcortically at the lateral border of the T2-hyperintense swelling . Electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed continuous bilateral slowing with periodic lateralized discharges. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis at admission yielded a mild pleocytosis comprising mononuclear cells (white blood cell [WBC] count of 8/μl), a slightly disrupted blood-CSF-barrier (as indicated by elevated CSF total protein of 0.73 g/L and Qalb of 11.3) and an intrathecal IgM synthesis (13%). HSV DNA was detected in CSF by means of polymerase chain reaction and diagnosis of HSV encephalitis was established. Acyclovir treatment (10 mg per kilogram bodyweight every 8 h) was started and the patient was transferred to the neurological intensive care unit. Antiepileptic treatment with Levetiracetam (2000 mg per day) was administered. An appropriate neuropsychological testing at this time was not feasible due to the global aphasia (Mini-Mental State Examination Score [MMSE]: 3).
As HSV encephalitis might be associated with secondary autoimmunity [, ], we performed further autoimmunity work-up that revealed Caspr2 antibodies in serum but not in CSF using a commercially available cell-based assay (Euroimmun, Cat. Nr. FA1439–1005–1; Lübeck, Germany). Antibodies against NMDAR, LGI1, AMPAR type 1/2, GABABR, immunoglobulin-like cell adhesion molecule 5 (IgLON5), dipeptidyl-peptidase–like protein 6 (DPPX) using a cell-based assay (Euroimmun), Yo, Hu, Ri, CV2, Ma2, Amphiphysin using an immunoblot (Euroimmun), aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) using a cell-based assay as previously described were not detected in both CSF and serum. A whole-body 18F-FDG PET/CT revealed no hypermetabolic active lesions, i.e. no evidence of tumor, especially no thymoma and no lung cancer were detected.
Acyclovir treatment was maintained for 14 days and corticosteroids were administered additionally for three days. While the clinical course of the patient initially was mainly determined by complications (nasopharyngeal bleeding and subsequent mechanical ventilation, pneumonia), the patient started to improve thereafter. MRI was repeated after twenty-two days revealing a minor regression of the T2 hyperintense lesion in the left temporal lobe and a reduction of the left hippocampal volume. Neuropsychological testing showed a significant impairment with leading deficits in verbal fluency and memory performance (Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD) battery—semantic verbal fluency: 7; phonemic verbal fluency: 0; Boston Naming Test: 8; MMSE: 14). Epileptic discharges were no more detected by spot EEG. CSF analysis was repeated at day 11 and day 29. While WBC count first increased to 65/μl and eventually decreased to 36/μl, an intrathecal IgG synthesis (oligoclonal bands pattern II) occurred. HSV-PCR in CSF was negative at day 11 and 29. Presence of serum Caspr2-antibodies were repeatedly confirmed on day 11 and day 29. An overview on the main diagnostic procedures and treatments over time are shown in Fig. .
After approximately one month the patient was transferred for neuro-rehabilitation. At this time, she had a mRS score of 4. After neuro-rehabilitation, i.e. after another month, neuropsychological testing revealed further improvement, with ameliorated but still present deficits in memory performance and verbal fluency; the MMSE was 21. A clinical follow-up after 7 months revealed a mRS of 3, and no neurological deterioration occurred.