A 9-year-old intact female Maltese dog weighing 1.9 kg was presented with a kyphotic posture and decreased appetite for 3 days. Neurological examination revealed no abnormalities other than mild neck pain. A nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug was administered for pain control. However, 2 days later, the patient was returned to the hospital with deteriorating neurological symptoms and left hemiparesis. The dog was ambulatory with mild-to-moderate neck pain and decreased proprioceptive reactions in the left limbs, along with intact deep pain perception. Physical examination revealed a grade II heart murmur with no other abnormalities. Laboratory findings were mostly normal, except for mildly elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase (405 U/L; reference range, 47–254 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (95 U/L; reference range, 17–78 U/L). Radiography revealed marked ventral spondylosis deformans with intervertebral disc space narrowing in the 6th–7th cervical vertebrae, with no other abnormalities. Echocardiography and abdominal ultrasonography showed myxomatous mitral valve disease stage B1 and small bilateral renal calculi. Based on clinical and neurological signs, the main differential diagnoses were cervical intervertebral disc disease, degenerative myelopathy, neoplasia or inflammatory diseases, and vascular disorders of the brain or cervical spine. Therefore, an MRI of the brain and cervical spinal cord was planned. Two days before the MRI examination, the patient’s clinical signs progressively deteriorated, presenting as non-ambulatory tetraparesis with normal deep pain responses in all four limbs.
MR images of the brain and cervical spine were acquired using a 1.5-Tesla scanner (MAGNETOM AVANTO, Siemens, Germany) with head and neck knee coils, respectively. The MRI sequences of the brain and cervical spine used in the present case are shown in . On T2-weighted images, ill-defined, heterogeneously hyperintense areas in the spinal cord were identified eccentrically in the central-to-left dorsal aspect of the second cervical (C2) spinal cord, leading to focal spinal cord swelling showing a loss of normal parenchymal architecture and circumferential attenuation of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) line on T2-weighted half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin-echo sequence (,,). The lesion appeared iso-to-hypointense on T1-weighted images and iso-to-hyperintense on T2-weighted multi-echo data image combination sequence images (,,). Post-contrast T1-weighted images revealed an ovoid, well-defined mass with homogeneously marked contrast enhancement (size: 10.9 × 7.2 × 8.3 mm, length/height/width; –). The mass contained multiple small cavitary lesions suggestive of cystic or necrotic areas, causing severe left-sided compression of the spinal cord . In the dorsal subarachnoid space just caudal to the C2 mass, although not typical, a structure resembling the “golf-tee” sign, a characteristic sign of an intradural extramedullary lesion (, , , ), and syringomyelia were noted . Additionally, an appearance mimicking the “dural tail sign” in the meninges adjacent to the thickened C2 left nerve root with contrast enhancement, mild atrophy with contrast enhancement of the paraspinal muscle adjacent to the lesion, and ventral meningeal enhancement were identified (,). However, broad-based dural attachment of the mass was not evident in any sequence. Other MRI findings included multiple cervical intervertebral disc degeneration with protrusion, bilateral ventriculomegaly, and Chiari-like malformations. Based on MRI findings, we concluded that the C2 spinal mass was the cause of the patient’s symptoms. Considering the MRI characteristics of the mass (single, well-defined, marked contrast enhancement, and mass effect), a spinal tumor concurrent with gliosis, left-sided neuritis, and myositis was strongly suspected rather than inflammatory or vascular diseases. However, the origin of the C2 mass could not be determined because of its extensive distribution throughout the spinal parenchyma in all images. An intradural extramedullary tumor (e.g., meningioma, nerve sheath tumor, or nephroblastoma) was considered a primary differential diagnosis, and other possibilities were an intramedullary tumor or intramedullary invasion by an extramedullary tumor. Given its clear margins, location, size, and the progression of clinical signs, surgical removal of the mass was planned via dorsal laminectomy of C2 combined with durotomy. A high-speed burr and bone-cutting forceps were used to create a hinged osteotomy of the C2 dorsal arch involving the cranial 75% of the C2 spinous process . The bone flap was rotated dorsally and cranially on the preserved attachment of the cranial aspect of the C2 spinous process to the dorsal arch of C1 to visualize the dorsal dura. A midline durotomy revealed a capsulated mass. Most tumor parts were easily separated and removed from the adjacent spinal cord parenchyma; however, the ventral part adhered locally to the spinal cord meninges adjacent to the left nerve root with fibrotic tissues . After careful removal of these ventral tumor tissues, mild hemorrhage occurred but was promptly controlled. No abnormalities were observed in the spinal cord. A biological, absorbable dura substitute (Lyoplant Onlay; B Braun Co., Germany) was used to cover the dural defect and sutured to the adjacent dura before the spinous process was returned to its normal position. Subsequently, the dorsal arch of the axis was rotated back over the exposed vertebral canal, and the spinous process was stabilized with 2–0 non-absorbable sutures (PROLENE Polypropylene Suture; ETHICON Co., United States) through one predrilled hole. The excised mass, characterized by a red, well-circumscribed, and elastic appearance , was histopathologically examined (hematoxylin and eosin staining). Spindle round-to-polygonal cells containing small-to-moderate amounts of pale, eosinophilic, wispy-to-granular cytoplasm were observed. The nuclei were heterochromatic, with one or two variably distinct nucleoli, along with moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis . These findings were most consistent with glioma, in which oligodendroglioma may be the most consistent. The histopathological identification of an intramedullary tumor did not match the MRI or surgical findings. Thus, a genomic tumor test was performed using the same tissue sample as the histopathology; immunohistochemical staining for glial cell tumor markers could not be performed because of the owner’s financial constraints. This genomic tumor test is a tumor-only, next-generation sequencing, hybrid-capture test involving canine gene panel covering 482,000 base pairs of 120 genes associated with canine or human cancer. Genetic data revealed copy number loss of CDKN2N and gain of MYC, supporting the diagnosis of a canine glioma. Three days postoperatively, the dog was able to stand up and walk in the cage, and its appetite returned to normal. Approximately 2 weeks postoperatively, all neurological signs returned to normal. Although postoperative MRI and computed tomography (CT) examinations were recommended to confirm the residual tissue of the glioma and assess metastasis, including “CSF drop metastasis” from the glioma , only a 16-channel multi-detector CT (Emotion 16, Siemens Healthcare, Forchheim, Germany) scan was performed due to the owner’s financial constraints. On postoperative CT images, regional bone defects in the C2 lamina due to surgery were identified. However, no significant CT findings were identified in the whole body, including tumor metastasis, lymph node enlargement, or contrast-enhanced lesions around the surgical site. Although chemotherapy was recommended based on the genetic data and considering possible recurrence and local adhesion or invasion of the tumor, the owner rejected this suggestion. Ten months after discharge, no recurrence of neurological signs had been reported.
The authors declare that no Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee or other approval was needed. Written informed consent was obtained from the owner prior to any procedures being performed.