A 12-year-old boy with anorexia nervosa presented with subacute multifocal digital swelling. He had been diagnosed with an eating disorder about 4 months prior to symptom onset, requiring admission to the Adolescent Medicine service for malnutrition, orthostasis and bradycardia, which resolved with monitored feeding. Despite ongoing behavioral therapy following discharge, however, adequate intake with continued weight gain remained a challenge. Over the course of 6 weeks, he developed additive and persistent swelling of the right hand first and fourth digits, followed by the left fifth digit . The swelling was painful and unresponsive to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, there was no fever, and he identified no preceding trauma or illness. Physical exam was notable for fusiform swelling limited to the phalanges, as the joints themselves did not exhibit any discrete effusions. Furthermore, the overlying skin was normal in appearance and texture, without petechiae or ecchymoses, and no other mucocutaneous changes were present elsewhere. Complete musculoskeletal exam was otherwise normal, without other areas of swelling or pain. The patient appeared generally cachectic and review of the growth curve revealed significant weight loss with concomitant stunted vertical growth over the previous 2 years, with a sustained body mass index below the first percentile for age. He had previously exhibited a normal fecal calprotectin and at the time of this presentation did not report any gastrointestinal abnormalities concerning for enterocolonic inflammation or malabsorption. He denied practicing restrictive eating behaviors, but his diet included few fruits and vegetables. He was then admitted for a comprehensive medical work up of this constellation of symptoms.
Hand radiographs showed marrow and cortical erosive change with periosteal reaction and overlying soft tissue swelling of the involved phalanges . MRI of the right hand revealed signal abnormalities with surrounding soft tissue edema, but without arthritis, in these areas . These findings prompted concern for chronic noninfectious osteomyelitis (CNO) or an alternate noninfectious inflammatory entity, such as Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis (LCH). Subsequent whole body imaging did not identify any other areas of involvement. The isolation of the lesions to the hands was felt to be atypical for CNO and LCH, particularly without evidence of systemic inflammation to further suggest such diagnoses. Therefore, further evaluations for other etiologies of finger swelling with bony changes were pursued.
Laboratory data were significant for normal complete blood count, iron studies, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and urinalysis. Immunologic serologies were similarly negative, including antinuclear antibody, Rheumatoid Factor, Human Leukocyte Antigen-B27, Celiac antibodies, and Lyme antibodies. Thyroid stimulating hormone and free thyroxine were only very slightly increased and decreased, respectively, but primary hypothyroidism was not thought to be causative of the marked failure to thrive. Hepatic function was intact, with normal albumin level and coagulation studies, but low prealbumin of 18.6 mg/dL (reference range 20–26 mg/dL) was suggestive of a nutritional deficit. Further investigation of vitamin and mineral status showed normal zinc, folate, and vitamin B6 levels. However, vitamin C was strikingly low at 5 μmol/L (reference range 23–114 μmol/L), as was vitamin D 25-OH at 12.2 ng/mL (normal > 30 ng/mL).
The diagnosis of scurvy was made on the basis of a severely low vitamin C level. Although scurvy bone lesions are typically described in the lower extremities, since the analogous lesions were present in the hands this was thought to be consistent with vitamin C deficiency. These vitamin deficiencies were attributed to restricted intake due to anorexia nervosa, and treatment was initiated with ascorbic acid, cholecalciferol, and liquid meal supplements. The ascorbic acid regimen consisted of 100 mg 3 times per day orally for 7 days, followed by 100 mg daily as maintenance; cholecalciferol dosing was 2000 U orally daily. Within 3 weeks of starting therapy, vitamin levels normalized and the digital pain and swelling resolved.