A 30-year-old Colombian woman, G3,P1,A1, who was in her 11th week of an uneventful pregnancy, complained of one week of severe breast pain and had noted a small breast lump. She reported no signs of infection. She had breast fed her last baby eight months earlier. Her medical and surgical history was unremarkable, with no history of tuberculosis exposure and she had received tuberculosis vaccination (BCG) as a child. She had not taken contraceptives. Her family history was negative for breast cancer.
On physical examination a 3 cm. tender mass was palpated over the superior-external quadrant of her left breast with mild erythema. Her temperature was normal. A breast ultrasound was ordered.
Five days later her mass had grown to 9 cm. and was extremely tender to palpation; She was febrile (37.7°C). She was started on cephalexin and acetaminophen. On the 10th day, the ultrasound reported mastitis, with a macrolobulated focus and an area of possible fat necrosis around it. Her mass was now 12 cm. and a second 5 cm. mass had appeared.
She was urgently referred for drainage, which was attempted transcutaneously and was unsuccessful. Her pain became intolerable and during the following one and a half months she required two hospital admissions. Consultation and management were provided by physicians in internal medicine, emergency medicine, general surgery, gynecology, infectious diseases (including tuberculosis specialists), pathology, radiology and initial diagnoses made by these consultants included mastitis, breast abscess, breast carcinoma and tuberculous mastitis.
Cultures of breast tissue initially reported scant Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus viridians, and the patient was treated sequentially with clindamycin, cefazolin, vancomycin, piperacillin-tazobactam combination, ceftriaxone and metronidazole with no improvement, and narcotics were required to control her pain. After the first dose of vancomycin the patient developed drowsiness, shortness of breath, a generalized rash and fever of 40.8 C degrees. She was diagnosed of having an atypical “red man” syndrome, from which she recovered uneventfully. She also had an allergic reaction to clindamycin. Chest radiographs demonstrated a calcified left upper lobe pulmonary granuloma. At the end of that month, incision and drainage was performed twice, with multiple biopsy samples obtained. Further bacterial cultures, fungal cultures and tuberculosis cultures and stains were negative. While undergoing these treatments the breast lesions progressed to involve most of the left breast, skin fistulae formed, thick material exuded from the surgical drains (Figure ) and the patient remained febrile. The pathology reports noted granulomatous inflammation with plasma cells, giant cells, macrophages, lymphocytes and a single granuloma with central necrosis, and ruled out breast carcinoma (Figures and
). At the end of her hospitalization period the final diagnosis was IGM, the patient was started on prednisone 20 mg. four times daily, and some improvement of symptoms occurred. This medication dose varied from 60 mg. four times daily to 15 mg. daily based on her evolution.
She continued her pregnancy, the symptoms were more tolerable, and she had a normal vaginal delivery at 40 weeks. She breast-fed her baby with her right breast for two months. She continued prednisone treatment on the same variable doses. Her left breast continued to have scattered areas of drainage and new areas of tenderness developed.
One month after her delivery treatment options were re-considered by a multidisciplinary team and due to the deterioration in her symptoms a mastectomy was recommended. The patient disagreed with the decision, and returned to Colombia to obtain further opinions.
In Colombia she was treated with minocycline for six months and two 10 day cycles of IV amikacin. Deflazacort was given to control local inflammatory relapses. Triamcinolone and amikacin injections were given to the inflammatory nodules. The discharge from her lesions stopped six months after starting this treatment and the induration and redness disappeared one month later. She returned to Canada and continued taking only deflazacort, varying its dose depending on the presence of side effects. One year later, her symptoms and lesions had been controlled but, decreasing her deflazacort dose led to reappearance of discomfort and redness. The patient maintained her 6 mg. dose for four months remaining asymptomatic, at which time, she decided to stop her medication completely. Her lesions never returned and she has been asymptomatic until now.