The patient is a 64-year-old Asian woman who was brought to the emergency department (ED) with uncontrollable, spontaneous right upper limb and right lower limb movements that started 3 days prior to admission and a history of poorly managed type 2 diabetes mellitus. Initially she had involvement of the right hand; these movements eventually included the complete right arm and the right foot as well. The patient’s right upper limb had pain, but other symptoms were absent. She denied any prior instances of such uncontrollable motions, as well as any viral infections or wounds that had recently occurred. In addition, she denied any other symptoms including headaches, chills, fever, or chest pain. Her vital signs were also normal.
Upon examination, writhing movements were seen across the entire right upper limb. Muscle tension by patient allowed the her to voluntarily stop these motions although it was extremely painful and spread from the shoulder to the hand. From the feet to the knees, both lower limbs showed decreased sensitivity to mild touch (video 1). The patient had symmetrical limb strength and no cranial nerve impairments or abnormal gait patterns. The rest of the examination was uneventful. Initial lab results showed elevated levels of blood urea nitrogen (30 mg/dL), creatinine (1.52 mg/dL), and serum glucose (423 mg/dL). Due to persistent neuromuscular complaints, a noncontrast head CT and head MRI were done. These exams showed a faint hyperintensity in the left putamen and globus pallidus on T1-weighted MRI sequence and a hyperintensity on a T2-weighted scan in the left lentiform nucleus . The neurology team was consulted consulted and nonketotic hyperglycemia hemichorea-hemiballismus syndrome was determined to be the patient’s diagnosis from symptoms and imaging findings as there was no diffusion restriction on MRI after receiving insulin as per basal bolus regimen in the emergency room. The patient’s insulin regimen was changed during her hospital stay, and tetrabenazine (50 mg/day) was also used to address her symptoms. Throughout admission, serum glucose level stayed high and fluctuated between 200 mg/dL and 400 mg/dL. The HbA1C level was 15.3%. On the fourth day of hospitalization, the patient was discharged with a suitable insulin regimen and tetrabenazine to treat choreiform symptoms. When she was discharged, both the frequency and the force of the uncontrollable arm motion had decreased but were still present. Observational notes from a subsequent follow-up visit 1 month later noted that the symptoms were still present, despite the fact that they were getting less severe and frequent. Repeat MRI was planned but not carried out due to financial constraints.