A five-year-old, fully vaccinated, American Indian female presented to a rural community hospital in Minnesota with a 4-day history of vomiting and diarrhea, followed by the development of fevers and progressive lethargy. A clinical diagnosis of sepsis was made. Blood cultures were obtained in the local emergency department, and she was commenced on empiric ceftriaxone (75 mg/kg dose) and vancomycin (15 mg/kg dose) therapy prior to her urgent transfer to the University of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospital. The main symptoms of the patient and the important clinical findings are described below. Upon arrival, she was febrile to 38.1 °C with a heart rate of 180, respiratory rate of 48, and blood pressure of 81/46. Physical exam was notable for lethargy, dry mucous membranes, and diffuse abdominal tenderness. Laboratory evaluation demonstrated a serum lactic acid of 8.8 mmol/L, creatinine of 1.05 mg/dL, leukocyte count of 10,200 cells per μL, hemoglobin 11.2 g/dL, and platelet count of 15,000 cells per μL. Inflammatory markers were elevated, with a C-reactive protein of 286 mg/L and a serum procalcitonin of > 200 ng/mL. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis demonstrated a leukocyte count of 3 cells per μL, glucose of 58 mg/dL, and protein level of 35 mg/dL. No organisms were noted on gram-stain. A peripheral smear was examined and demonstrated the presence of Howell-Jolly bodies. An abdominal ultrasound obtained to evaluate for intra-abdominal infection revealed complete anatomic asplenia. An echocardiogram demonstrated no cardiac anomalies. Within 24 h of admission, a blood culture drawn on initial presentation at the community hospital grew a gram-negative coccobacillary organism that was subsequently identified as H. influenzae. Antibiotic therapy was modified to ceftriaxone monotherapy, and ongoing clinical improvement was observed. The bacterial culture was subsequently identified by the Minnesota Department of Health as H. influenzae, serotype a, by use of a serotype-specific polymerase chain reaction assay, employing appropriate controls.
On hospital day 3, the patient was noted to have left knee and elbow pain. The main diagnoses, interventions and outcomes are described below. First, a knee radiograph demonstrated a large joint effusion. Analysis of aspirated knee synovial fluid was remarkable for a leukocyte count of 16,750 cells per μL (96% neutrophils), but no organisms were noted on gram-stain. Left hip pain developed and a technetium 99m bone scan demonstrated asymmetric signal increase in the left proximal femur, while an MRI revealed joint effusion and myositis without evidence of osteomyelitis . Irrigation and debridement of the left hip was performed, but cultures from synovial fluid were also negative, possibly due to the previous antibiotic therapy.
Next, in light of the newly diagnosed isolated congenital asplenia, further investigation of medical and family history was pursued. This more detailed history confirmed that the patient was previously healthy, with no history of severe or frequent infections. The family was not aware of any other relatives with asplenia. Next generation sequencing for the ribosomal protein SA (RPSA) gene associated with isolated anatomic asplenia was obtained , but did not demonstrate any mutations. An immunological evaluation revealed protective antibody level to Hib (14.7 μg/mL; >1.0 μg/mL = protective level) and most serotypes of a 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine. The patient was discharged home with a peripherally-inserted central catheter and intravenous ceftriaxone was extended to a total 6 weeks course of therapy, due to her slow clinical recovery that included persistent limping and limited range-of-motion of her left knee, noted at the 3-week follow up visit. After completion of intravenous antibiotics, she was doing well with restored function of her left elbow, knee and hip and she had undetectable C-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels. She was later transitioned to daily amoxicillin prophylaxis for her asplenia.