A 57-year-old male, with an 18-month history of urinary incontinence and 15 months of progressive lower extremity numbness, presented with a 10 days of increased lower extremity weakness. The patient had no history of trauma. The neurological examination documented a bilateral paraparesis (manual muscle testing 2/5) accompanied by mild hyporeflexia and dysesthesia relative T9 sensory level. The spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study revealed spinal cord edema T3 to the conus medullaris and enlarged perimedullary thoracic veins; these findings were consistent with a SDAVF . Spinal angiography was performed using a 4 Fr catheter (Michaelson, Cook, Bloomington, IN, USA). Selective injection of the left sixth intercostal artery revealed a SDAVF that was supplied by a radiculomeningeal artery and drained through the perimedullary veins . The orifice of the left sixth intercostal artery was narrow and the vessel was tortuous.
Five days after admission, we performed a super selective embolization. Under general anesthesia, a 6 Fr introducer sheath was inserted into the right femoral artery. Following arterial access, 4000 U of heparin was injected and an activated clotting time of 275 s was achieved. Our attempts to catheterize the left sixth intercostal artery orifice using a 5 Fr guiding catheter (CX catheter-A II Michaelson type, Gadelius Medical, Tokyo, Japan) over a 0.035-inch outer diameter guidewire (Radifocus, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) were unsuccessful; we could not advance both a guidewire and guiding catheter. However, we were able to navigate a 0.0165-inch inner diameter microcatheter (Excelsior SL-10, Stryker, Fremont, CA, USA) into the distal left sixth intercostal artery over a 0.014-inch outer diameter, 200 cm microguidewire (CHIKAI, Asahi Intecc, Nagoya, Japan). We exchanged the microguidewire for a 0.014-inch outer diameter, 300 cm microguidewire (Aguru, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA), and the guiding catheter and microcatheter for a 5 Fr multipurpose guiding catheter (Envoy, Codman and Shurtleff, Raynham, MA, USA). Insertion of the microguidewire into the distal left sixth intercostal artery as a buddy wire stabilized the guiding catheter in the artery orifice . A 0.0165-inch inner diameter dual-lumen microballoon catheter (Scepter XC 4 × 11 mm, Microvention/Terumo, Tustin, CA, USA) was inserted into the dorsal spinal artery over a 0.014-inch outer diameter microguidewire (CHIKAI, Asahi Intecc, Nagoya, Japan) and the balloon was inflated. Onyx 18 was injected through the dual-lumen microballoon catheter. A total of 0.35 cc of Onyx was injected over a period of 6 min and 55 s, after which the SDAVF was completely occluded. The syringe suction easily deflated the balloon and the subsequent removal of the microballoon catheter was completed without any observable adherence to the Onyx cast. A postprocedure selective injection of the left sixth intercostal artery revealed the Onyx cast and occlusion of the SDAVF . Postprocedure multiplanar reconstructed dyna-computed tomography imaging showed the dense deposition of Onyx from the radiculomeningeal artery to the proximal perimedullary veins . No complications associated with the procedure were evident.
Lower extremity weakness markedly improved within three postprocedure weeks, and his urinary and sensory symptoms partially resolved at 6 months. The thoracic MRI 3 months postprocedure revealed the spinal cord edema had resolved, and the enlarged perimedullary veins were no longer visible . The MRI at 12 months postprocedure showed no evidence of SDAVF recurrence.