A 25-year-old gentleman presented to the emergency department with a history of bumper injury to the front of his left knee 5 days back. He did not give any history of knee dislocation. He recalled knee angulating backwards with a posterior jerk followed by buckling of the knee before he lost his balance. He was unable to bear weight and walk on his left leg. On local examination, he had a Grade 3 effusion with positive patellar tap. The valgus stress test was Grade 3 and had a Grade 3 posterior drawer test with considerable pain. The sag sign was positive with loss of tibial step off. Joint line tenderness was present on medial and posterior aspect. A firm localized swelling was palpable on the medial joint line in the region of superficial MCL (sMCL). Plain radiographs showed increased patellofemoral space due to effusion and posterior translation of the tibia. MRI scan revealed a complete mid-substance PCL tear, ACL sprain, PRMM tear, and tibial side rupture of sMCL with proximally migrated wavy MCL fibers lying below the medial meniscus displaced into the medial compartment of the joint (, , ).
A structured pre-habilitation was started for muscle strengthening, reeducation, and range of motion. Surgery was planned 3 weeks post-injury after the acute signs subsided and knee flexion was around 100°. The patient was explained the need of surgery and informed consent was taken. Diagnostic round of arthroscopy confirmed complete tear of PCL with positive floppy ACL sign. It revealed a PRMM tear . Medial drive through sign was positive. Moreover, as the MRI scan revealed, the distal fibers of sMCL were seen incarcerated into the medial compartment passing between the body of medial meniscus and the tibial plateau .
We decided to go ahead with medial meniscus root repair and PCL reconstruction using separate anatomic tibial tunnels followed by open MCL repair with augmentation. Medial meniscus root repair was performed by passing one no. 2 fiber wire and one fiber tape by pull through technique using ACL drill guide set at 45°. The root was not fixed at this point. The peroneus longus graft was harvested from the same leg. PCL tibial tunnel was drilled with the drill guide at 60° entering more anteromedially as compared to the root repair tunnel to avoid convergence. A 3-strand graft was passed and fixed using adjustable loop and bioabsorbable screw. The early scar tissue formed between the MCL stump and undersurface of medial meniscus was freed arthroscopically. Using a medial approach, the MCL was freed from the undersurface of medial meniscus and the capsule .
The deep MCL was repaired primarily to its tibial attachment with 2-0 Ethibond. The sMCL was advanced back to its tibial attachment site and repaired with titanium 3.0 mm suture anchor. Considering the time from injury and the amount of MCL stump that was left behind to suture back, it was decided to augment the sMCL. Using Stannard’s modification of Kim’s technique, sMCL was augmented with semitendinosus graft and fixed over the femoral attachment with 5.0 titanium suture anchor [, ] . Finally, the medial meniscus root was fixed over a titanium suture disc after checking the reduction and tension . The medial meniscus was found to be sitting well over the tibial condyle post repairs . Postoperatively, the knee was placed in a straight knee brace for 4 weeks followed by a hinged knee brace. He was kept non-weight-bearing with crutch support for 4 weeks. Range of motion exercises were started gradually from 0 to 90° over the period of 4 weeks. Static quadriceps, gluteus exercises, and straight leg raises along with calf pumps were started immediately according to the pain tolerance. After 4 weeks, partial weight-bearing was begun gradually progressing to full weight-bearing without support by 8–10 weeks. At 1-year follow-up, the patient had attained full range of knee motion with good quadriceps strength. There was no joint line tenderness. Tibial step off was maintained with negative posterior drawer test and valgus stress test. He had returned to pre-injury sporting and routine activities without symptoms.