Patient: a 55-year-old Japanese female.
None of the factors contributing to lateral compartment knee disease, such as obesity, complications, or psychiatric disorders, were present in the patient. During hyaluronic acid (HA) treatment, although we prescribed strength training to the patient, she did not perform it frequently enough because of severe pain. As the knee pain was caused by tripping while playing tennis, the possibility of trauma cannot be ruled out.
In 2013, due to pain in both knees, she visited our hospital and was diagnosed with OA of the knee.
In December 2017, while playing tennis, the right knee developed a knee collapse. She was examined at the hospital, and an MRI of the right knee was performed. Horizontal dissection of the lateral meniscus and cartilage defect on the lateral condyle of the femur were observed.
Since 2018, injections of hyaluronic acid have been administered every 2 weeks, but joint edema and pain recurrence have been remitted.
The patient had already undergone HA treatment and received multiple steroid joint injections; however, these interventions were not very effective. Moreover, the patient was unwilling to undergo these treatments. The patient was aware that our hospital would start providing regenerative medicine treatments and had been waiting for a year before the start of the treatment. During that period, the patient received HA treatment, which proved ineffective. Therefore, the patient requested ASC treatment in April 2018.
In April 2018, MRI of the right knee was performed. A cartilage defect was found in the external condyle of the femur, and the patient desired ASC transplantation. The range of motion of the right knee is 0–145. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiograph of the right knee are shown in Fig. .
On 28 April 2018, 20 mL ASCs were collected from the abdomen.
On 11 June 2018, the first ASC transplantation was performed on the right knee.
On 2 July 2018, although the effect was experienced after 1 week of treatment, the pain recurred when the subject moved violently.
On 6 August 2018, the patient was in a good condition. When the Timed Up and Go Test was conducted, it showed improvement from 10 seconds to 7 seconds.
On 10 September 2018, the patient was in a good condition. She resumed playing tennis and was living almost without pain.
On 10 December 2018, an MRI was performed. There was no pain even when the subject jumped on one leg and a repaired cartilage defect was observed.
On 22 April 2019, the second ASC transplant was performed on the right knee and the first ASC transplant was performed on the left knee.
On 22 June 2019, there was a slight fever on the day of the procedure.
On 5 August 2019, the patient was in a good condition. It became possible to assume a sitting position.