An 18-year-old male was evaluated in the outpatient clinic of our hospital complaining of unejaculation during masturbation for the last several years. From his medical history, it was noted that he was born with a low anorectal malformation, which was surgically treated on the second postnatal day with anorectal reconstruction. Pregnancy was full term with normal delivery and uncomplicated otherwise. The recovery period was uneventful. The patient was subjected to multiple anal sphincter dilatations using Hegar dilators (size 12) for the first 6 months after the operation. For the next 17 years, he suffered from severe constipation, which was treated conservatively, and occasional episodes of soiling. He never developed any acute or chronic urinary tract infections (UTI) until the age of 17 and remained sexually inactive. At the age of 17, he started complaining of recurrent episodes of UTIs from E. coli that were treated with oral ampicillin. These episodes were followed by urine and semen leak from the rectum after masturbation and patient thought these symptoms to be related to incontinence. In addition, after masturbation the patient failed to ejaculate.
The patient was initially elsewhere investigated with a flexible cystourethroscopy, a retrograde cystourethrography, MRI of the pelvis, and rectosigmoidoscopy without any abnormal findings. A digital rectal examination did not reveal any perineal fistula or any other abnormal findings. However, because of his persisting symptoms the patient underwent additional imaging with anorectal endoscopic ultrasound scan, which revealed the presence of a suprasphincteric fistula 3 cm above the anal verge and at the 12th hour of the rectum, leading to the diagnosis of a rectourethral fistula . Semirigid cystourethroscopy revealed a small diverticulum on the left ureteral orifice and a fistula orifice at the 6th hour of the urethra right distal to the verumontanum and proximal to the striated sphincter . The opening was catheterized with a nitinol zip wire (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) and a connection was identified with the rectum as the wire exited through the rectum and anus.
Following the diagnosis of urethrorectal fistula, the patient was subjected to transanal rectal advancement flap repair under general anesthesia. The transanal Latzko technique was chosen, using the nitinol zip wire for identification of the fistula orifice on the rectum, because it is effective, simple to perform, and has minimal morbidity. The Latzko technique does not involve the section of the anal sphincter in contrast with the transrectal trans-sphincteric approach (York-Mason technique). The patient was placed in the lithotomy position. Cystourethroscopy was performed and the urethral fistula orifice was reidentified and catheterized until the entire course of the tract was followed and the guidewire protruded through the anus. The rectal opening of the fistula was exposed and identified under direct vision at the 12 O'clock position. After injection of adrenaline solution to the submucosa surrounding the fistula, a flap of mucosa, submucosa, and part of the muscular layer was created and covered the rectal side of the fistulous tract after excising the fistula orifice to the rectum. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on the first postoperative day with a 16F all-silicone indwelling urinary catheter.
Follow up was arranged in the 20th postoperative day with voiding cystourethrography that revealed no leakage from the urinary bladder or urethra and finally the catheter was removed. Despite the uneventful postoperative period and the normal imaging, the patient presented recurrence of the fistula 1 month after removal of the urinary catheter with the same clinical manifestations. He was further managed with scrotal flap reconstruction. The patient was placed again in the lithotomy position. Cystourethroscopy was performed and the urethral fistula orifice was reidentified and catheterized with a nitinol guidewire that protruded through the anus. A midline “inverted Y” perineal incision was performed. The fistula was well prepared circumferentially in its whole length and excised with urethral and rectal orifices included. Urethral and rectal defects were closed separately with running absorbable 5/0 sutures. A ventral scrotal skin flap was prepared and de-epithelialized with scissors so as to avoid damage of its vasculature and finally interposed between the urethra and rectum. The perineal skin was reapproximated with nonabsorbable 3/0 sutures. Again the patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on the second postoperative day with a 16F all-silicone indwelling urinary catheter and a suprapubic catheter. The postoperative follow-up consisted of urine cultures at the first and third month after catheter removal of the final procedure as well as voiding cystourethrogram at the third postoperative month. He does not have a recurrence 2 years after the final procedure.