A 32-year-old homosexual male patient with a chief complaint of high fever having lasted for one week was admitted to Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University. The fever persisted at 39–41 °C and could be remitted with anon-steroidal antipyretic analgesics, but the temperature rose again after 6-8 h. The fever was not accompanied by chills, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or frequent urination. The patient had received antibiotic treatment for five days in another hospital, but the fever did not resolve and was accompanied by anorexia and weight loss. The positive result of the initial screening for anti-HIV 1 antibodies via enzyme linked immunosorbent assay was positive, which prompted the patient to be transferred to our hospital. There was no history of blood transfusion or intravenous drug abuse. Physical examination showed a body temperature of 38.7 °C, a pulse of 120/min, breathing of 26/min, blood pressure of 96/56 mmHg, anemia and emaciation. The neck was supple, with no superficial lymph node enlargement. No obvious abnormalities were found upon oral cavity and cardiopulmonary examination. The liver and spleen were palpated just under the ribs and found to be soft. There were no visible abnormalities in the chest or abdominal CT scan. Laboratory studies on admission showed white blood cell count of 1.69 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 98 g/L, platelet count of 99 × 109/L, procalcitonin of 1.8 ng/μl and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 51 mm/L. Liver and renal function were normal except the patient showed low albumin (19 g/L). HIV infection was confirmed by Western blot analysis. The CD4 count was 2 cells/μl and the baseline HIV viral load was 5.0 × 105 copies/ml. Serological detection of (1, 3) β-D-glucan, galactomannan (GM) and interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) were negative. Blood screening for cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, syphilis, hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus were negative.
Diagnosis and treatment: the patient continued to have a fever after admission. Anti-infection treatment started with linezolid (300 mg, Bid), imipenem/cystatin (1.0 g, Q8 h), fluconazole (400 mg, Qd), compound sulfamethoxazole tablets (0.96 g, Qd) and supportive treatment to correct hypotension and hypoproteinemia. On the seventh day after admission, the daily peak body temperature was still at 39–40 °C. He also had poor mental and dietary status. A dark purple linear mucosal lesion approximately 1.5 cm long was found on the left palate with no mass or ulceration. Reexamination of the chest and abdominal CT scan showed bilateral lung infection and splenomegaly. Three sets of blood culture and one set of bone marrow culture were negative. GeneXpert MTB/RIF and GM test in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were both negative. Diagnostic therapy for mycobacteria (rifampicin, isoniazid, moxifloxacin, ethambutol, clarithromycin) were administered for one week. The patient remained hyperthermic, with limited daily function of self-care. On the 17th day after admission, the patient was in a state of shock and his consciousness deteriorated (Glasgow Coma Scale score was 11). He exhibited persistent high fever and dyspnea. An oxygen supply at 10 L/min was administrated in both channels to maintain oxygen saturation at 90% or more. The dark purple mucous membrane lesions on the left palate grew larger, and new dark purple lesions were found on the right palate and bilateral palm surfaces. The spleen was 2 cm below the ribs. Routine blood analysis showed white blood cell count of 0.82 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 57.5 g/L, platelet count of 27 × 109/L. Hemophagocytosis was observed in the second bone marrow aspiration smear. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) showed enlargement of multiple lymph nodes and splenomegaly . Supportive treatment was strengthened (subcutaneous injection of the granulate colony-stimulating factors to boost leukocytes, infusion of red blood cells and platelets, administration of dopamine to maintain blood pressure, albumin and plasma to maintain colloid osmotic pressure). Ibuprofen sustained release tablets (300 mg bid) were used to keep the patient’s body temperature below 38.5 °C. On the 19th day after admission, the oral and bilateral palmar lesions had expanded , and four dark purple nodules appeared on his back. Combination antiretroviral therapy (cART, lamivudine /tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/dolutegravir) was started as soon as biopsy of the oral mucosal lesions was performed. On the 23rd day after admission, the nodules on the palate mucosal membrane were further enlarged, and there were multiple purple-black nodules on both palms and lower limbs . The nodules on the back and chest enlarged in size and increased in number. The spleen reached 3 cm below the ribs. The pathological results suggested Kaposi’s sarcoma , and 40 mg of intravenous doxorubicin liposome was administered immediately. The body temperature returned to normal 3 h after the completion of the first chemotherapy treatment without administering ibuprofen. The next day, WBC, Hb, and PLT values increased, the rash on the palate, back, and limbs did not progress, and the patient’s mental and dietary status improved. This patient was finally diagnosed with AIDS-related KS (T1I1S1 stage) and HPS.
Follow-up: The patient underwent eight cycles of chemotherapy (doxorubicin liposome, 40 mg for 1 day) every 2 weeks, as well as lamivudine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/dolutegravir and compound sulfamethoxazole tablets (0.96 g, Qd) every day. The patient’s mental status, diet, sleep and physical strength improved significantly. He gained weight and the rashes on the palate, back, and limbs subsided . The chest and abdominal CT scans showed significantly less enlarged lymph nodes in both number and size, as well as a reduction of the size of the spleen . Routine blood analysis was normal, and the liver and kidney function, blood sugar, and blood lipids were at normal levels.