A 42-year-old, non-smoking female with highly active relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) and no concomitant diseases was first diagnosed in 2008. Interferon beta (IFNB)-1a intramuscularly, injected 03/2008, was stopped due to a suspected allergic reaction, intradermal testing for IFNB-1a and -1b could not exclude an allergic reaction. Glatiramer acetate had to be withdrawn after 4 months (07/2008–11/2008) for elevated liver enzymes. Due to high disease activity natalizumab was initiated in 2009 and stopped in 2012 because of JC-virus antibody positivity, hereafter the patient refused further immunotherapies. After a severe relapse resolving only after plasma exchange (PLEX), treatment with fingolimod was initiated, but stopped after 4 months due to another severe relapse requiring treatment with glucocorticosteroids and again PLEX. After 2 further relapses and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) activity in 2013, treatment with alemtuzumab was decided.
In January 2014 alemtuzumab (12 mg daily) was applied over 5 days, methylprednisolone 1 g, dimetindene, ranitidine, acyclovir and ibuprofen were given as concomitant medication. Except of fatigue and a mild bradycardia, infusions were well-tolerated. After 2 months, progressive non-productive cough, exertional dyspnea and general exhaustion developed. C-reactive protein and leucocytes were normal. Computed tomography- (CT-) scan of the lung showed atelectasis in both lower lobes without evidence of atypical pneumonia. Lung function tests showed a high-grade restriction in diffusion capacity (diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) 45% of normal) as well as a respiratory alkalosis (pH 7.46, pCO2 34.3 mmHg), a respiratory partial insufficiency in ergospirometry (decrease of pO2 from 89 mmHg to 78 mmHg and increase of lactate from 1.0 to 5.5 mmol/l during exercise with 150 watt) and a low-grade restrictive lung disease (vital capacity (VC): 2.75 l, reference: ≥ 3.70 l) without obstructive impairment (FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s)/VC: 88.7%, reference: ≥ 80.9%). Bronchoalveolar lavage revealed a moderately active inflammation and a reduced CD4/CD8-ratio (0,67; reference ≈ 2) consistent with an extrinsic allergic alveolitis or a damage of pneumocytes due to drug toxicity. However, an extrinsic allergic alveolitis seemed unlikely because of negative specific IgG antibodies. The Prick test and Methacholin provocation test, suggesting an allergic reaction or a hyperreagibility of the bronchial system, were negative. Histopathologically, hyperplasia of alveolar pneumocytes and remnants of hyaline membranes consistent with a diffuse alveolar damage were found in a transbronchial lung biopsy . There was no evidence for an infectious agent. Renal function, urine test and anti-GBM antibodies indicating an alemtuzumab-associated Goodpasture syndrome, were unremarkable. Platelets and thyroid function were normal, thyroid antibodies were not determined.
Based on these results, a diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) related to alemtuzumab drug toxicity was diagnosed. Respiratory symptoms regressed over few months, no corticosteroids were given. Diffusion capacity in December 2014 and December 2015 had constantly improved (single-breath-methode, DLCO 71,5 and 81% respectively of normal). Blood gas analysis and lung function tests were normal lately.
Due to the increased risk for recurrent toxicity, alemtuzumab was not continued and treatment switched to rituximab (off-label) in January 2015. MS clinical course and MRI controls have been stable since 2014. The disease course and treatments are shown in Fig. . Written informed consent for patient information and images to be published was provided by the patient.