A 38 year old male married patient, medically free, referred to our center from a another hospital complaining from lower abdominal pain of few months duration, intermittent, vague, gripping in nature, associated with abdominal distention.
He didn't undergo any type of surgery previously. Past history of the patient was negative for any fever, sweating, vomiting, constipation, or weight changes. He also didn't suffer from obstructive urinary symptoms. Family history was negative too.
On examination, he actually was found to have large left, hypochondrial mass. It was painless & hard in consistency.
On investigation, his hemoglobin level and leukocytic count were within normal range. Markers for colon, liver and prostate cancers were negative. On computerized tomographic (CT) scan; there was a large heterogeneous mass measuring about 16 × 12 × 10 cm occupying the left hypochondrial region with multiple small metastatic right lung lesions . CT guided fine needle aspiration was performed and was positive for malignancy. At that time, patient was offered surgical intervention for the abdominal mass but he refused any further treatment. Upon follow up of the patient, CT scan was repeated 7 months later, there were multiple bilateral lung deposits the largest measuring about 1 cm in diameter. Also there was a large tumor in left atrium extending to inferior left pulmonary vein measuring about 2 cm. the mass in the abdomen was still there as before. Then patient was sent home for tender care upon his request. Five months spent at home and the man came back again. He just reported a better feeling than before upon using some herbs (Teucrium polium, Cat Thyme) prescribed for him. On examination; there was no masses felt in the abdomen, so that CT scan was repeated. Unexpectedly; there was more than 60% reduction in the tumor size as well as disappearance of lungs & heart lesions as illustrated by figures &. During this interval, he was not given any type of radiation or chemicals as a therapy for his illness. Surgery was offered again and the mass removed by laparoscopic approach. Histopathologic analysis described a rounded hemorrhagic, necrotic and partially hyalized tumor that is markedly vascular and has a very prominent alveolar pattern. Immunohistochemical staining including cytokeratin, desmin, actin, S-100, synaptophysin, HMB45, chromogranin, vimentin, myoglobin and PAS was performed. All stains were negative apart from PAS and myoglobin which were positive . The overall picture was consistent with alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) infiltrating the omentum. Similarly, endoscopic assessment of upper gastrointestinal tract (due to epigastric pain) demonstrated multiple sessile polyps in stomach & duodenum; biopsies were taken, and the diagnosis was alveolar soft part sarcoma. Few months' later, patient developed headaches, brain CT scan was done and unfortunately he was found to have metastatic brain lesions. He was referred to a specialized center for radiotherapy and died within 6 months.