A 13-year-old boy was referred in April 2021 to our Allergology section due to a self-resolving episode of vomiting and palpebral oedema after dinner. The same meal was taken in other subsequent occasions without him developing any symptoms, therefore we excluded food allergy. The boy had a history of chronic rhinitis, absolute IgA deficiency and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis since the age of 10 years and was on levothyroxine treatment. In 2018, hypereosinophilia had been reported for the first time (eosinophil count = 1600/µl), reaching the peak in July 2020 (blood cell count 9100/µl, eosinophil count = 3140/µl) but was considered secondary to suspected allergic rhinitis. In the previous year, the boy had also complained of dry cough with physical exertion and during the night. On evaluation the boy looked healthy, and we only detected palpable thyroid and hypertrophic nasal turbinates. Skin prick tests for aeroallergens were performed, demonstrating sensitization to house dust mites (HDM) and cat epithelium, while spirometry showed a marked obstructive pattern with positive bronchodilation test (FEV1 + 32%). FeNO was 32 ppb (normal values < 25). Therefore, we prescribed long-term treatment with inhaled fluticasone + salmeterol together with nasal mometasone. We also performed further blood tests to investigate hypereosinophilia, which confirmed such evidence (white blood cells = 10,600/µl, eosinophil count = 2010/µl; 19%) and demonstrated a marked increase in serum total IgE levels (4968 U/mL), undosable IgA, and normal serum protein levels, except for that of β1 globulin. A reduced number of CD8 + lymphocytes (17.1%, normal range = 20–28%) and a slight increase in the numbers of CD19 + lymphocytes (16.5%, normal range = 5–14%) with normal percentages of other lymphocyte subpopulations were also observed.
Positivity for specific IgG anti-Echinococcus spp. and Strongyloides stercoralis by ELISA commercial kits and positive IgE for Ascaris were also detected (64.2 KUA/L, normal values up to 0.1), while the search for antibodies against Taenia solium, Toxocara spp. and Trichinella spp. as well as the search for PR3-ANCA and MPO-ANCA were negative. Tropical causes of eosinophilia such as Wuchereria bancrofti infection, were not investigated considering their rarity in our country and the fact that the patient had never travelled abroad. Then, we performed chest x-rays and abdominal ultrasound, which were normal, while in the third sample, stool examination showed positivity for pinworms, which was confirmed by the adhesive-tape test. The boy later revealed that he had suffered for at least 2 years of perianal pruritus. We administered two doses of pyrantel pamoate, separated by 2 weeks, to all household members and, three months later, the adhesive-tape test was repeated and turned out negative. Spirometry showed an improvement of all ventilatory parameters with negative bronchodilator test and FeNO was normal (12 ppb). Blood testing showed a normal eosinophil count and persisting positive serology for Strongyloides, while Western blot (Wb) for Echinococcus was negative and IgE levels dropped to 2230 U/mL. Component-resolved diagnostics related to HDM allergy demonstrated sensitization to tropomyosin (Der p 10 IgE > 100 KUA/L). The patient and his parents were relieved by the efficacy of the treatment. Unfortunately, a couple of months later, the boy was admitted due to onset of type 1 diabetes mellitus; blood testing continued to show normal eosinophil count 6 and 12 months later. Notably, symptoms of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis as well as thyroid function tests were controlled since the start of levothyroxine treatment and during the entire period of follow up.