A 19-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) following a motor vehicle accident. He was conscious upon admission with no abnormal symptoms in his airways. The results of his lung examination were also normal. His blood pressure was measured as 130/85 mmHg, his pulse rate as 130 beats per minute. No free fluid were detected in focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) scan. His body mass index (BMI) as 36.3, suggesting morbid obesity. No tenderness to palpation on his spinal column, no symptoms of laceration in his chest and abdomen and no abdominal guarding and tenderness were detected. The results of his perineal and pelvic examinations were also normal. Although his distal pulses were normal, a deformity was observed in the distal third of his left forearm. He had a left lower extremity crash injury. His left leg was nearly amputated below the knee, with severe muscle and skin damage, and the nerves and vessels were all cut. He reported a history of committing suicide, although he had no history of diseases except for psychological disorders treated with valproate.A nasogastric tube (NGT) and a foley catheter were inserted. His chest x-ray , pelvic radiographand brain computed tomography (CT) scan were normal.
Limb amputation was planned in his left lower extremity, and below knee amputation and aggressive soft-tissue debridement were performed due to the severe crash injury. Serial examinations and hydration were also performed to prevent kidney damage.The patient did not tolerate the NGT and pulled it out. After this event, tachypnea, a sinus tachycardia with aheart rate of 150 beats per minute were observed in his serial examinations. He was complaining of upper abdominal pain. After NGT reinsertion, the patient reported pain alleviation, and his situation considerably improved. Thereafter, the patient had a tendency to eating despite his previous lack of appetite. The patient was transferred to the operating room with a suspicion of gastrointestinal bleeding, ischemia and necrosisafter detecting coffee ground secretions in the drained fluid.A midline laparotomy was performed. shows the detected dilation and discoloration of the stomach. Gastric decompression was performed with a NGT with the help of external compression of the stomach. All the discoloration then disappeared except for that of certain suspicious areas, which necessitated. On the following day, given the lack of improvement in the patient`s condition, he was transferred to the operating room for a second laparotomy as shown in . After performing a total gastrectomy with a Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy, the patient was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU).
His condition improved during the following three days. Despite performing surgical debridement three times, the infection of the amputation stump was not controlled, which ultimately led to above-knee amputation due to severe infection. On the 5th post-operative day, the patient suffered from tachypnea with a re-elevated heart rate and anuria. Leukocytosis, elevated creatinine levels and metabolic acidosis were also detectedin his lab reports. Blood culture and urine culture were performed, and chest radiographs showed bilateral patchy pulmonary infiltrations. Infectious disease consultation was performed, and imipenem, ciprofloxacin and vancomycin were administered to treat sever sepsis adjusting with the creatinine level. The patient underwent hemodialysisdue to his creatinine elevation, anuria and lack of response to crystalloid administration.
To rule out the high suspicionof anastomosis leakage, a contrast study was performed using gastrografin; nevertheless, the contrast could not be detected even in the intestinal lumen owing to the patient’s obesity. Given the failure to rule out anastomosis leakage using imaging modalities, the patient was transferred to the operating room once again, and anastomoses were found to be normal with no leakage. Unfortunately, the patient died three days later owing to multi-organ failure.