A 72-year-old male with diabetic polyneuropathy presented to the ED with a chief complaint of chest pain two days after sustaining a flame burn while cooking. His vital signs were stable and his physical exam revealed a deep partial-thickness burn over the majority of his right pectoralis extending across midline to the left sternal border . The patient reported severe thoracic pain (10/10) unrelieved with oral therapy consisting of NSAIDs and acetaminophen at home.
After obtaining informed consent, bilateral SABPs were performed in the manner described by Blanco et al. The anesthetic dose was calculated based on the patient’s weight of 66 kilograms (kg) and recommended maximum dose of 3 milligrams (mg)/kg ropivacaine. This yielded a maximum of 20 milliliters (mL) of 1% ropivacaine (10mg/mL) total for both SABPs, or 10 mL per side. An additional 5 mL of 1% lidocaine with epinephrine was added to each SABP to prolong the effect of the block and reduce the systemic absorption of ropivacaine.
The patient was positioned in the left lateral decubitus position with right arm overhead for the right-sided block. A high-frequency 10-5 megahertz linear transducer was used to locate the third rib in cross section in the mid-axillary line. Superficial to the rib lies the SA, which is deep to the latissimus dorsi (LD) . The targeted lateral cutaneous branches of the intercostal nerves at thoracic vertebral levels three to nine (T3–T9), are located in the fascial plane separating the SA and LD muscles. Anesthetic spreads in the fascial plane above and below the level of injection to the lateral cutaneous branches of the thoracic intercostal nerves. Although anesthetic will affect dermatomes above and below the site of injection, it is necessary to adjust the injection site based on the dermatome level. We recommend injecting just above the superior level of injury, targeting the level above the dermatome in case of miscounting the ribs. In this patient, whose burns were located in the T2-T5 dermatomes, we injected at the T2 dermatome above the third rib at the mid-axillary line.
After sterilizing and anesthetizing the skin, an in-plane technique was used to inject the 15-mL mixture of ropivacaine and lidocaine with epinephrine between SA and LD muscles following hydrodissection with 10 mL of normal saline. The same process was repeated on the patient’s left side. The injected ropivacaine and lidocaine spreads along the fascial plane above and below the site of injection, a process facilitated by hydrodissection with 10mL of normal saline before and after anesthetic administration. Thus, it is not necessary repeat injections at each thoracic vertebral level to achieve analgesia across the chest wall.
Five minutes after the initial injection, the patient reported significant analgesia over his right chest, and 20 minutes after the termination of the procedure he was able to sleep comfortably. The patient reported no discomfort during the injection process and experienced no side effects. A local burn center recommended admission for treatment with silver sulfadiazine and fluid resuscitation; when the patient was interviewed on hospital day two, he reported the SABP took approximately 20–30 minutes to take full effect and lasted for an estimated 15–18 hours. He ultimately required two doses of 2 mg intravenous morphine at approximately 30 hours and 35 hours after his SABP. His only other medications were acetaminophen 500 mg orally every six hours, ibuprofen 600 mg orally every six hours, and home medications gabapentin and trazodone. The patient was discharged in stable condition on hospital day two.