A 42-year-old patient, gravida 3, para 3, with an obstetrical history of two vaginal births and a personal history of congenital deaf-mute, with no surgical history or blood transfusions, was admitted to our clinic for painful uterine contractions with an onset of approximately 24 h. The patient had no previous antenatal obstetrical care.
The ultrasound examination showed 31 weeks and 4 days of fetal biometry with a marked discordance between the abdominal circumference measurements and the rest of the biometrics due to massive fetal ascites. Therefore, we only used head circumference, biparietal diameter, and long bones measurements for gestational age evaluation. Hyperechoic fetal bowels and polyhydramnios were noted, with an AFI (amniotic fluid index) of 28 cm. The fetal breathing was present but very limited due to the severe ascites. The Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA) and Umbilical Artery (UA) Doppler assessments were normal. There were no signs of other fetal structural abnormalities .
Further tests were planned to detect the cause of fetal ascites. The blood count, and liver and kidney function were found normal. The patient’s fasting blood sugar level was monitored daily. The values varied in a normal range (78–106 mg/dL) with 5.89% HbA1c.
The genetic counseling recommended invasive testing.
The extended TORCH complex revealed high titers of IgG antibodies for Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Herpes Simplex type 1 and 2, Toxoplasmosis, Epstein Barr, Parvovirus B19, and Rubella, with negative IgM antibodies for all the above.
The patient was also tested for HBV, H½ HIV 1/2 infections, and Syphilis. The anti-HCV antibodies were positive in the mother’s blood (44.55 cut-off-index (COI)).
The HCV infection of the mother associated with fetal ascites, hyperechoic bowels, and polyhydramnios guided the investigations for potential transplacental transmission of HCV, but we could not dismiss other causes.
A therapeutic paracentesis was planned to improve the fetal prognosis by abdominal decompression and to help investigate the etiology of fetal ascites.
At the beginning of the procedure, cordocentesis was performed under ultrasound guidance for fetal anesthesia and to retain fetal blood samples for further assay. The umbilical cord was punctured at the placental insertion site, and 8 mL of fetal blood was collected from the umbilical vein. Then, to reduce fetal movements during paracentesis, anesthetics were injected according to recent guidelines . The fetal blood was tested for blood count, albumin, bilirubin levels, blood sugar level, the direct Coombs test, HCV RNA, CMV IgM, Toxoplasmosis IgM, Rubella IgM, and Herpes Simplex type 1 and 2 IgM.
Under ultrasound guidance, an 18 G needle was inserted in the fetal peritoneal cavity for paracentesis, and 160 mL of clear fluid was extracted until ascites became minimal . Cytological and biochemical analyses were performed (leukocytes, red blood cells, glucose, albumin, creatinine, urea, proteins, Rivalta reaction, cytological examination, and blood smear).
Following paracentesis, an amniocentesis was also performed, and 40 mL of clear amniotic fluid was collected for further tests (viral DNA for herpes simplex, Epstein Barr, and parvovirus).
After the maneuvers, both the mother and the fetus were stable, with an optimal fetal biophysical profile score (BPS). In addition, fetal breathing movements were visibly improved.
Fetal blood investigation revealed normal blood count and a negative Direct Coombs test. The fetus tested negative for CMV, Toxoplasmosis, Rubeola, Herpes simpl½type 1/2, Epstein Barr, and Parvovirus B19. The anti-HCV antibodies were absent, but the HCV RNA was detectable (251 UI/mL). The mother HCV RNA was determined on the same day by PCR (polymerase chain reaction) with a 2,365,000 UI/mL result.
Fetal ascites assay: The cytological exam had no clinical significance. The Serum Ascites Albumin Gradient (SAAG) was >1.1 g/dL, so the ascites was considered transudate. The rest of the biological tests from ascites fluid were within normal ranges.
Two days after paracentesis, the ultrasound exam showed normal amniotic fluid levels, fetal ascites remission, and mild hepato-splenomegaly .
During the hospitalization, the pregnancy was carefully monitored. The fetus maintained normal AFI and BPS.
No signs of fetal structural abnormalities were detected. Thus, we considered that intrauterine transmission of HCV was the cause of fetal ascites, hyperechogenic bowels, and polyhydramnios.
We could not establish the mother infection moment or transmission pattern. In the literature, the primary risk factor for HCV transmission was considered to be transfusion of blood and blood products, but for our patient, we can only consider a blood product transfusion before HCV testing was introduced as a screening method in general transfusion practice. We could not gather this kind of information from her or from family. Injection, drug use, or sexual contact may be more probable, as a lack of prenatal care reflects an underlying high-risk social situation. None of these conditions can be highlighted as infection factors for this case. We do not know the infection status of the sexual partner, and from the declared history or clinical examination, there were no signs of drug use.
The positive fetal blood HCV-RNA and the ultrasonographic aspect suggested a decompensated hepatitis C of the fetus.
Patient parenteral/oral hepatoprotective treatment was administered, as there was no possibility of antiviral treatment at that moment. The patient was discharged from the hospital and examined weekly. The ascites remained absent, AFI was noted within normal ranges until birth, and the bowels echogenicity appeared normal.
Five weeks later, the patient was admitted in advanced labor and delivered vaginally a male fetus weighing 2880 g, with an Apgar Score of 7 and no signs of respiratory distress. Fetal ascites was absent, and a slight abdominal skin excess was noted . After the delivery, the mother and the newborn had a good evolution and were discharged after three days. A pediatric exam was recommended to establish a proper postnatal monitoring and therapeutic plan.
The newborn liver function and blood cell count were normal, with present anti-HCV antibodies. The infant continued the follow-up exams. At the age of 3 months, the anti-HCV antibodies were present, and HCV RNA was detected. At 9 months, the anti-HCV antibodies persisted, and the HCV RNA was still measurable