A 15-year-old competitive female wrestler with persistent shoulder pain presented after unsuccessful management of her shoulder pain with conventional physical therapy. The injury occurred during a wrestling practice when another wrestler fell (full bodyweight) on the anterior shoulder in a position of end range abduction/external rotation. No immediate diagnosis was made on the field. The athlete was able to continue with wrestling but with significant limitations in her performance, persistent resting pain and disturbed sleep. Following the wrestling season, she underwent three months of physical therapy including glenohumeral joint mobilizations, range of motion and traditional rotator cuff exercises. This rehabilitation approach resulted in minimal improvement in symptoms or sport specific function. The athlete had no prior injuries to the shoulder, cervical, or thoracic spines.
The subject subsequently presented to the physical therapist and physician for a co-evaluation, The physician was a dual-board certified anesthesiologist and pain management physician with a specialty in regenerative medicine. The physical therapist was board certified, and fellowship trained in orthopaedics. Informed consent was obtained from the subject/parents prior to the history and physical examination. The subject’s pain on the numeric pain rating scale (NPRS) was 5/10 at rest and 8/10 during athletic activity . She described the pain as widespread with poor localization, and her initial Quick-DASH score was 18% . The subject was unable to perform wrestling off-season practice or run due to a feeling of instability and pain in the shoulder. Pull-up motions and bench press motions were notably limited due to pain and feelings of instability during supervised team weight training. Further. skills position of a wrestling “under-hook” position could not be performed due to instability. Importantly, prior to injury, her spring sport participation was unrestricted and included four days per week of wrestling practice with three days per week of strength training. Pre-injury, one-repetition maximum testing was reported to be 65lb bench press, 50lb pound dumbbell row, and 145lb deadlift.