A 30-year-old primigravida, without relevant medical history, was referred at 9 weeks gestation with a monochorionic–monoamniotic twin pregnancy complicated by TRAP sequence. The first ultrasound revealed a structurally normal fetus accompanied by an amorphous fetus of similar size . Color Doppler imaging of the arcadiac’s umbilical cord showed a single umbilical artery with blood flow towards the acardiac twin.
At 11 weeks gestation, three possible options were presented to the patient and her partner: conservative management, elective fetoscopy with coagulation and transection of the acardiac’s twin ‘s umbilical cord at around 16 weeks, or intrauterine treatment only in the event of threatening congestive heart failure. The advantages and risks of these types of intervention were discussed in the Institutional Review Board (Ethical Committee), and approval was granted. We counseled the parents about the holmium laser’s first use in this case, with its anticipated advantages for transection. The patient opted for elective fetoscopy with cord occlusion and transection. From then on, we performed ultrasound weekly to define the optimal timing for intervention. Subsequent ultrasound examinations showed cord entanglement . No hydrops or congestive heart failure was seen.
At 16 weeks, fetoscopy was performed under peridural anesthesia. Amniocentesis was performed using an 18-gauge needle, and warm Ringer’s lactate was infused to create relative polyhydramnios and thereby an enlarged working environment. Using the Seldinger technique, a 2-mm-diameter 86Teflon cannula was inserted to guide a shaft containing a 1-mm fetoscope and a 0.365-mm laser fiber.
Under fetoscopic sight and ultrasound guidance, the Wharton’s jelly and umbilical cord vessels of the acardiac twin were coagulated using an Nd:YAG laser beam (50 W). Color and pulsed-wave Doppler ultrasonography was used to confirm the arrest of blood flow. After that, the Ho:YAG beam (0.5 J, 15 Hz) was used to transect the umbilical cord . The same laser fiber was used, only changing the setting from Nd:YAG to Ho:YAG.
The Ho:YAG laser acts in direct contact with the umbilical cord and strictly cuts through the tissue without moving the cord. Due to its shallow penetration depth, there was no risk of unintendedly hitting other structures in the uterus (placenta, umbilical cord, etc.). Finally, extra fluid was drained. Postoperative ultrasound examination was regular, and the patient was discharged the same day. Six weeks later, she left the Netherlands and returned to her country of residence. At 38 weeks, the patient underwent cesarean section in her country and delivered a healthy male baby and the remains of a small acardiac twin. We had repeated email contact with the parents. They reported that the child was healthy and had completely normal development at the age of 4 years.