A 28-year-old male presented to the Emergency Room with complaints of right lower abdominal pain for 12 hours, which was insidious in onset, continuous, non-radiating, dull aching type with no exacerbating and relieving factors. It was associated with nausea and anorexia as well. His past surgical history included open appendectomy for acute appendicitis one year back with an uneventful postoperative period. No current medication use, family history was insignificant and the patient is a non-smoker. The patient was afebrile and the vitals were within normal limits. Abdominal examination showed scar of previous gridiron incision. There was tenderness and rebound tenderness in the right iliac fossa. Mild guarding was present with no other peritoneal signs.
The routine laboratory tests were unremarkable except for leukocytosis of 14,500 cells per cubic mm with neutrophilic predominance (90%). Transabdominal ultrasonography showed evidence of fluid collection in the right paracolic gutter with no other abnormalities. However, Contrast Enhanced Computerized Tomography (CECT) of abdomen and pelvis revealed a small structure at the base of caecum with enhancing walls along with stranded surrounding fat, suggestive of inflamed appendiceal stump. This confirmed the diagnosis of stump appendicitis .
The patient was immediately shifted to the operation room. A consultant general surgeon with prior experience performed the surgery. Abdomen was opened via gridiron incision. The paracolic gutter was packed with purulent fluid. The caecum and ascending colon were mobilized, and taenia coli were traced up to the base of the appendiceal stump. There was evidence of perforated abscess at the site of the stump. The purulent fluid (.) was drained and the residual appendiceal tissue was resected.
The peritoneal cavity was thoroughly washed with normal saline. The tissue sample was sent for histopathological examination which confirmed the diagnosis of appendicitis, making the final diagnosis as perforated stump appendicitis. .
Following surgery, the patient was transferred to post-operative room. He was put on parenteral antibiotics and analgesics. He did well during the postoperative period, and was discharged on day five. On follow up after two weeks, the patient was stable and healthy.