A 37-year-old Asian man who complained of a two-month history of dizziness visited our clinic. Neurological examinations using the manual muscle test revealed a left leg motor weakness of 5-/5 on the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale [,]. MRI demonstrated high-signal lesions in bilateral occipital forceps majors, the left caudate head, and the left semicentral ovale on both fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2-weighted (T2W) imaging . These lesions were enhanced by gadolinium-dimeglumin with expansion along the corpus callosum . But these enhancements were not as strong as those recognized in malignant brain tumors. Definite uptake of thallium was identified by 201Tl scintigraphy in both early and delay phases. However, the retention index (ratio of thallium uptake between delay and early phases) was 0.88, which was too low for malignant brain tumors to be suspected . tMS was suspected on the basis of the observations of MRI and scintigraphy. However, oligoclonal bands were not detected by CSF examinations. For further investigation, MRS and PET were planned for our patient.
A few days later, he was admitted to our hospital because of progression of his left leg motor weakness (4+/5 on the MRC scale). The day after admission, he exhibited mental confusion and left hemiparesis (2/5 on the MRC scale), and three-day consecutive steroid pulse therapy (1000 mg of methylprednisolone sodium succinate and 8 mg of dexamethasone per day) was applied. Despite the treatment, his symptoms did not improve, and MRI showed further enlargement of the lesions . Therefore, without MRS and PET studies, an emergent open biopsy under a navigation system was performed for definite diagnosis.
Histological investigation showed perivascular proliferation of lymphocytes without atypical features, and Kluver-Barrera staining displayed sporadic absence of the myelin sheath, suggesting demyelinating disease . The majority of the proliferating lymphocytes were T-cell type , and the existence of lymphocytes positive for both cluster of differentiation (CD) 4 and CD8 ruled out monoclonal increase of the lymphocytes. Furthermore, the presence of macrophages (CD68) strongly implied inflammatory changes in the lesion . After one month of prednisolone treatment, MRI revealed remarkable shrinking of the lesions , but mild disorientation and left hemiparesis (4+/5 on the MRC scale) remained as sequelae.