A 52-year-old Caucasian woman had a medical history of hypertension, smoking and alcoholism. She presented with binocular diplopia. A computed tomography scan showed an intrasellar lesion with invasion of her right cavernous sinus that was further confirmed by brain magnetic resonance imaging. An endoscopic endonasal biopsy was performed and histopathology showed a nonspecific inflammation and subacute hemorrhagic alteration of her nasal mucosa. An antibiotic prophylaxis with cefazolin 2gr was given. A transnasal surgical excision was performed, and no leak of CSF was observed after the surgery. Histopathology confirmed a single prolactin pituitary adenoma. Five days after the surgery, she presented a fever (38.6°C) and a meningeal syndrome with consciousness disorder, neck stiffness and a Glasgow Coma Scale evaluated at 13 (E4V4M5) but without focal neurological deficits. The CSF collected by lumbar puncture showed hypoglycorrhachia (1.33mmol/L; CSF/serum glucose ratio=0.20), an elevated protein level (5.88g/L) and 4500 leukocytes/mL including 98% polymorphonuclear leukocytes. There was no detectable organism on direct microscopic examination after Gram staining. Treatment combining intravenous vancomycin 1gr twice a day and intravenous meropenem 2gr three times a day was started for presumptive postsurgical meningitis. Her clinical condition rapidly improved, with apyrexia and a net regression of the meningeal syndrome within 2 days. Five days after the onset of symptoms, vancomycin was stopped and meropenem 6gr per day was continued for a total of 14 days. At 90-day follow-up she was afebrile, healthy and without any sign of meningitis.
The CSF was inoculated on Polyvitex (bioMérieux, La Balme-les-Grottes, France) and Columbia agar with 5% sheep blood and incubated at 37°C under a 5% carbon dioxide atmosphere. After 48-hour incubation, small whitish round shiny domed colonies were observed on both culture media. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) performed as previously described [,] yielded P. calida with identification score of 2.26, 2.17 and 2.17 for the three spots deposited on the MALDI-TOF-MS plate. Furthermore partial rpoB gene sequencing performed as previously reported confirmed the identification of P. calida with 99.88% sequence similarity with the reference sequence (GenBank GQ892191). Antimicrobial susceptibility was performed by diffusion method in agar and incubated aerobically for 24 hours at 37°C. The isolate was resistant to ampicillin (minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) >8mg/L), amoxicillin-clavulanate (MIC, 1mg/L), and cephalothin (MIC, 1mg/L). It was susceptible to ceftriaxone (MIC, 0.5mg/L), imipenem (MIC, 0.5mg/L), ciprofloxacin (MIC, 0.25mg/L), gentamicin (MIC<1mg/L) and co-trimoxazole (MIC<1mg/L).