A 67-year-old Japanese man underwent abdominal computed tomography (CT) in our institution for follow up after gastrectomy; the CT revealed abnormal thickness of his sigmoid colon wall and further studies were planned. Two years previously, he had undergone a distal gastrectomy due to gastric cancer (moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma), and received S-1 (tegafur-gimeracil, 100mg) orally for 14 days followed by a seven-day rest period as adjuvant therapy for two years. He also had inactive hepatitis C. There were no abnormalities on physical examination except for an upper abdominal midline scar due to previous surgery, and his performance status was grade 0. There were no abnormalities found on laboratory tests.
A double contrast radiological examination with barium enema showed a protruding lesion with a smooth surface at the distal end of the sigmoid colon, and the lumen was narrowed for approximately 2cm. An endoscopy demonstrated a 20mm Bormann 2 lesion with central ulceration located 20cm from the anal verge . No metastatic sites in other internal organs were confirmed by CT.
Multiple biopsies from the main site showed group V malignant cells that were positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56, and proved to be a NEC.
Under a diagnosis of NEC, a sigmoidectomy was performed. During the operation, three small hard white nodes were found at the mesenteric and pelvic cavity. The main tumor was located at 20cm on the oral side of the peritoneal reflection, and dissected by three enlarged paracolic lymph nodes.
Macroscopically, a 15×20mm sub-mucosal tumor with the appearance of a small central ulceration was observed in the sigmoid colon .
Microscopically, the tumor deeply invaded the tissue and extended beyond the serosa. On hematoxylin and eosin staining, the tumor had high cellularity with appearance of hyperchromatic nuclei with irregular sheets, rosette arrangements, and alveolar structures . Immunohistochemical staining for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 were also positive, which indicates an endocrine function . Several ductal structures were occupied by mucinous fluid and positivity for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), PAS-diastase (d-PAS), and Alcian blue was observed on the mucosal surface, suggesting the adenocarcinoma was included within the tumor. The nodules in the mesenteric and paracolic lymph nodes were also pathologically diagnosed as metastases. Finally, the tumor was diagnosed as a NEC (small-cell carcinoma).
Adjuvant chemotherapy was planned based on a regimen for small-cell lung carcinoma. Cisplatin plus irinotecan (cisplatin plus irinotecan therapy, cisplatin 60mg/m2 day 1 and irinotecan 60mg/m2 days 1, 8, and 15) were administered. Only a grade 2 side effect of transaminitis was observed during chemotherapy, and the patient recovered conservatively from this side effect. After finishing five cycles of chemotherapy, an evaluation CT showed no findings of recurrence. After cisplatin plus irinotecan therapy was finished, tegafur-uracil (UFT; 400mg) and leucovorin (UZEL, 75mg) were administered orally for 28 days followed by a seven-day rest period. Nine months after surgery, follow-up CT showed an enlarged lymph node behind the inferior vena cava and a 15×8mm nodule located at the ventral side of the cecum, which raised a suspicion of mesenteric dissemination. Under consideration of progressive disease, cisplatin plus irinotecan therapy was performed again using the same regimen. After nine cycles of cisplatin plus irinotecan therapy, a follow-up gastric endoscopy demonstrated external tumor invasion to the anterior duodenum wall due to growing peritoneal dissemination. It seemed that the tumor had acquired a resistance to cisplatin plus irinotecan therapy, and therefore carboplatin plus etoposide therapy, carboplatin plus etoposide therapy carboplatin 390mg day 1 + etoposide 96mg, 80% dose, days 1, 2, 3 were selected as a third-line regimen. After six cycles of carboplatin plus etoposide therapy, the peritoneal dissemination sites had not expanded on CT findings, and the tumor invasion on the anterior duodenum wall had partially receded on endoscopic findings. At the present moment, the survival time has reached approximately 30 months after the initial surgery.