A 59-year-old female was referred to our hospital with a chief complaint of right lower quadrant abdominal pain. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a multilobed retroperitoneal tumor with a maximum diameter of 11 cm . The tumor involved retroperitoneal major vasculatures, such as the right common iliac vein and artery, as well as the right psoas muscle and femoral nerve. The right ureter was also involved and obstructed by the tumor, and a ureteral stent was placed in another hospital for urinary drainage. A biopsy was performed through the retroperitoneal route for the histologic diagnosis . Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the biopsy specimens revealed pleomorphic tumor cells with scattered mitoses . Immunohistochemistry of the biopsy specimen was performed for the representative markers of liposarcoma (p16, MDM2, and CDK4), leiomyosarcoma (α-SMA), and neurogenic tumor (S-100). The results of immunohistochemistry revealed positive staining for p16, MDM2, and α-SMA and negative staining for CDK4 and S-100 . The Ki-67 index was approximately 40%. Although the tumor partially had a character of leiomyosarcoma, the lesion was ultimately diagnosed as dedifferentiated liposarcoma with the Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer (FNCLCC) grade 3. Because the tumor was highly invasive and complete resection was not feasible, we decided to administer neoadjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin and ifosfamide (AI). The patient received six courses of doxorubicin (20 mg/m2 per day on days 1–3) and ifosfamide (1.6 g/m2 per day on days 1–5). The treatment was repeated every 3 weeks until the fifth course. In the sixth course, the treatment was delayed 1 week because of thrombocytopenia. After completing 6 courses of AI, the tumor size was considerably reduced , and we decided to perform surgery with curative intent. The surgery was performed 6 months after the first diagnosis.
Before laparotomy, femoro-femoral arterial bypass was performed to prepare for the right common iliac artery resection . Thereafter, the patient underwent laparotomy and tumor resection combined with right nephrectomy, resection of the right common iliac artery and vein, and resection of the right psoas muscle and femoral nerve . The right common iliac vein was not reconstructed. The postoperative course was uneventful, although the patient needed a walking brace to support her gait.
Macroscopically, the resected specimen revealed a whitish solid tumor surrounded by fibrosis . The pathological examination indicated a 99% disappearance of tumor cells , and only a small number of atypical cells were partially observed . Although the Ki-67 index was much lower (< 1%) in these cells, other immunohistochemical characteristics were similar to those of the biopsy specimen. The surgical margin was negative for tumor cells. The patient was healthy without any complaints after 1 year of surgery, and a follow-up CT scan revealed no tumor recurrence.