A 19-year-old male with Wilson ‘s disease (WD) for 7 years was referred to our hospital with complaints of a 1-year history of foam urine. He was found to have proteinuria in a checkup 1 month ago. He was diagnosed with WD 7 years ago due to the appearance of corneal K-F ring and the reduction of blood ceruloplasmin. After that, the patient was regularly treated with DMSA for copper excretion. He denied a family history of genetic disease and D-penicillamine medication history. Physical examination revealed no significant abnormalities. Blood examinations showed normal blood cells. normal levels of serum creatinine (93.28µmol/L), blood glucose (5.23 µmol/L), triglyceride(2.29mmol/L), and total cholesterol (5.71 mmol/L), low levels of total protein (6.2 g/dl) and serum albumin (2.7 g/dl). Urinalysis showed that urine protein (2+), and 24-hour urinary protein was 4599.98 mg/24 h. Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), and Anti phospholipase A2 receptor antibody(PLA2R) were negative. Tumor and infection indicators are normal. Doppler sonography showed no abnormality.
A renal biopsy was performed. Light microscopy showed thickened glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and discrete “spike” formation. The capillary loops were open. And mesangial expansion with mesangial hypercellularity were observed . Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed granular deposits of IgG(2+), IgM(+), C1q(2+), and C3(2+) along the glomerular capillary wall. Protein absorption droplets can be seen in renal tubular epithelial cells . Furthermore, the test of copper staining was negative . Electron microscopy revealed glomerular basement membrane irregularly thickened and podocyte foot process effacement. Electron-dense deposits were noted in the subepithelial, basement membrane and mesangial regions . He was finally diagnosed with secondary MN caused by DMSA. Glucocorticoid (triamcinolone 32 mg/d) was initiated. The change of 24-hour urinary protein was recorded, and 24-hour urinary protein was significantly reduced after the treatment initiated on the 28th day following admission to our hospital .