It was a 34-year-old black African woman, gravida 1. She had no medical or surgical history of comorbidity. She had also no family history of comorbidity. She consulted our department for intense abdominal pain in the right iliac fossa lasting 10 days, which then spread to the entire abdomen. According to the patient, she had been in amenorrhoea for more than 4 months. She also complained of an intermittent fever. During questioning, the patient stated that two months ago there was a sensation of movement in the right iliac fossa, accompanied by intermittent abdominal pain. The patient had no bleeding. She reports an unprotected sexual intercourse preceding amenorrhoea. On examination, her general condition is altered, conjunctiva and mucous membranes were normally coloured, blood pressure was 90/50 mmHg, the heart rate was 123 bpm, temperature at 39,5°. On abdominal examination, generalised abdominal pain and guarding were noted. There was also a mass in the right iliac fossa, which was difficult to assess due to pain. On vaginal examination, the cervix was long posterior and closed. We note a painful serif of Douglas’ membrane. The abdominal ultrasound noted the following : an abscess in the right iliac fossa with agglutination of the intestinal loops and fistulization of the abscess into the peritoneal cavity. Appearance of peritonitis secondary to an abscess of the appendix. The biological assessment showed: hyperleukocytosis with white blood cells at 27 100 / ul, haemoglobin level at 11.8 g/dl, platelets at 226 000 /ul. Blood sugar, kidney, and liver tests were normal. The serum β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) level was less than 5 UI/l. The diagnosis of acute generalised peritonitis was made and we performed an exploratory and therapeutic laparotomy. Intraoperatively, 200 ml of pus was aspirated. Upon exploration we discover numerous false membranes ; there was also a mass in the right iliac fossa that contained the right ovary, appendix, and pus with fistulization into the abdominal cavity. An adhesiolysis and ablation of the mass was conducted, removing the right adnexa. Additionally, an appendectomy was performed. Following the confirmation of good haemostasis, the abdominal cavity was washed with isotonic saline and the abdominal wall was closed layer by layer on two drainage tubes. After dissecting the sample, we identified a macerated foetus with a gestational age of 14 weeks. The appendix presented itself as normal . Due to cultural customs, the parents chose to bury the operating specimen, which resulted in the inability to conduct a pathological examination. The surgical procedure was performed by a senior surgeon and two residents in general surgery. The patient’s postoperative course was favourable, and they were discharged from the hospital in good health on the seventh day after the operation. She was satisfied with the treatment received. On discharge the patient received the following recommendations : Consult very early in a maternity unit with ultrasound equipment for the next pregnancy, be regular in prenatal visits, and do at least four ultrasounds, including two in the first trimester of pregnancy. One month later, the patient attended a consultation with no reported complications or complaints. The patient is currently being followed by our team.