A 78-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, aneurysm of the ascending aorta, and chronic inflammatory pleurisy presented headaches and visual disturbances (left homonymous hemianopia). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an occipital extra-axial lesion with surrounding edema . Three weeks later, the patient underwent a total resection, which revealed a malignant meningioma with Ki-67 proliferative index of 40% . Next-generation sequencing (NGS) detected no specific mutation. Immunohistochemical analysis found high expression of pankeratin AE1/AE3, vimentin, INI-1 (clone MRQ-27), and focal expression of epithelial membrane antigen. P53, cytokeratin 7, and cytokeratin 20 were negative. All melanocytic makers (HBM45, SOX10, Melan A) were negative. Moreover, there was no expression of STAT-6 , bcl-2 , and a nonspecific granular cytoplasmic staining of CD99 . Postoperative brain MRI showed hemorrhagic remodeling without any evidence of a residual tumor . According to the actual data of the literature, postoperative surgical bed irradiation with total dose of 68 Gy (34 daily fractions of 2 Gy) was performed. At the end of RT, the patient was in a good health condition without neurologic symptoms. One week after the end of RT, he underwent a total resection of a right shoulder cutaneous lesion. Histopathological analysis revealed a superficial spreading melanoma. Four months after the end of RT, the patient presented dizziness and left arm weakness. A brain MRI revealed a local recurrence and six new brain lesions . In order to distinguish melanoma brain metastases between meningioma brain metastases, the occipital lesion was biopsied. Pathological analysis confirmed WHO grade III meningioma with Ki-67 proliferative index (MIB-1) of 80%. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a focal expression of progesterone receptor without any expression of melanocytic markers (SOX10, HMB45, Melan A). Thus, a hypothesis of melanoma brain metastases was excluded. Positron emission tomography with radiolabeled [18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose coupled to a CT-scan (18FDG PET/CT) showed six hypermetabolic cerebral and cerebellar lesions , a focal intense uptake lesion of the fundus , and a sigmoidal nodule. The results of the brain MRI, 18FDG PET/CT, and the pathological examination of the brain lesion suggested that the patients developed several distant brain metastases of a malignant meningioma. No specific treatment was initiated. Five weeks after the cerebral biopsy, the patient presented a digestive hemorrhage. Gastroscopy showed many duodenal micro-ulcerations; no biopsy was made. He had a second digestive hemorrhage 5 days later, which required hemostatic surgery. Pathological examination of a gastro-intestinal tract specimen revealed a malignant lesion, which had the same morphological and immunohistochemical features of the right occipital lesion . Again, there was also no specific mutation on NGS. Radiation therapy of the whole brain was performed (30 Gy in 10 fractions of 3 Gy). One month after the end of RT, despite the lack of guidelines, a systemic treatment with bevacizumab (10 mg/kg intravenous every 2 weeks) was administrated. Only one injection was made. The patient died suddenly on the 15th of June. The main hypothesis of the cause of death was a cardiac arrest secondary to a pulmonary embolism. An autopsy was not proposed to the family to understand the cause of death that is why the post-mortem examination was not performed to determine the real cause of death.