An 81-year-old Japanese female presented with a 3-month history of dysphagia. She was medicated for hypertension and sarcoidosis. She underwent the treatment with an antihypertensive drug. There was no family or medical history of other-site melanomas. Esophagoscopy showed a 30-mm white ulcerating tumor in the lower esophagus, at a site 30 cm from the incisors . Pathological examination showed an atypical short spindle to polygonal cells, which was positive for human melanoma black (HMB)-45, and melan-A, but negative for anticytokeratins (CK7 and CK20) on immunohistochemical analysis. Enhanced computed tomography revealed wall thickening measuring 30 mm in size in the lower intrathoracic esophagus, with no significant lymph node or distant metastasis . On the basis of these findings, we diagnosed PMME, and the patient underwent subtotal esophagectomy with two-field lymph node dissection with gastric construction. Macroscopically, the tumor was an irregular elevated white and black mass 60 × 35 mm in size in the lower esophagus . A microscopic examination demonstrated that the tumor was located in the submucosal lesion and that there was solid proliferation of eosinophilic tumor cells without tubular or papillary structures . The tumor cells had large round nuclei, and melanin pigments were found in the cytoplasm of tumor cells. Positive immunohistochemical staining for HMB45 and melan-A was observed in tumor cells as with the biopsy specimen . Based on these morphological features and the immunohistochemical findings, the tumor was diagnosed as PMME with T3 invasion, lymph node negative (0/27), and the final disease stage was classified as pT3N0M0 stage III (UICC, eighth edition). The patient refused postoperative adjuvant treatment, and 4 months after surgery, whole-body lymph node and bone metastases appeared. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)–diffusion-weighted imaging with background body signal suppression (DWIBS) showed whole-body lymph node swelling and bone metastases . As the patient had a nonmutated BRAF gene, she was started on intravenous administration of nivolumab (240 mg, every 2 weeks) according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) malignant melanoma treatment guideline . After eight cycles, the lymph node and bone metastases were dramatically reduced. Following eight courses of nivolumab, MRI-DWIBS revealed that the multiple lymph node and bone metastases were markedly reduced . Blood tests showed transient elevation of serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) to 4000 IU/L before the initiation of nivolumab treatment. However, the serum LDH levels returned to a normal range 3 months after the treatment. The patient received 30 courses of nivolumab for 15 months after recurrence. During the treatment, Grade 1 fatigue was the only adverse event observed, and she had maintained the partial response for 15 months. However, bilateral adrenal metastases occurred. Nivolumab therapy and all other treatment were then stopped on the patient’s request. She died about 27 months after recurrence. No severe immunotherapy-related adverse events (irAE) were recorded.