The case we present here is about a 69-year-old male patient who presented to our hospital with substernal chest pain associated with shortness of breath of 10 days duration and one episode of loss of consciousness one day back. The patient denied chest trauma, fever, or chills. He was a past smoker and taking medicines for systemic hypertension, type-2 diabetes mellitus, and long-standing atrial fibrillation. He was on aspirin, atorvastatin, atenolol, amlodipine, and metformin. In the emergency room, his systolic blood pressure was found to be of 170/90 mmHg with heart rate of 45 beats/min. Family history was unremarkable for any cardiovascular illness. Patient was conscious with no focal neurological deficit. Physical examination was within normal limits except for a soft systolic murmur at the apex. Complete blood count and serum biochemistry were within normal limits. Electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation with slow ventricular response and ST segment depression of 3 mm in leads V2 and V6 with T-wave inversion. Laboratory studies did not show any elevation in cardiac enzymes. A computed tomography scan of the head showed normal findings. He was taken to the cardiac catheterization laboratory for the placement of a temporary pacemaker and coronary angiography (CAG).
Temporary pacemaker was inserted via right femoral vein and kept in the right ventricle. CAG was performed via right femoral artery approach. Selective cannulation of the left coronary artery revealed a normal left main coronary artery bifurcating into the left anterior descending (LAD) and the left circumflex artery (LCX). There were non-obstructive lesions in the mid-LAD as well as at the first diagonal branch. LCX had minor atherosclerotic plaques. RCA was hooked with Judkins right catheter 3.5 × 6 French (Cordis). Selective cannulation of the RCA revealed a dissection within the proximal segment of an uplifted tortuous (Shepherd’s Crook morphology) RCA with the normal flow down the distal vessel ( and ).
The dissection was treated by direct stenting (3.5 mm × 24 mm, Partner Sirolimus Eluting Stent, Lepu Medical), after which the dissection disappeared . Three days later, his heart rate was in a range of 60-70 beats/min and temporary pacemaker was removed. His subsequent stay in the hospital was uneventful and discharged free of symptoms on the 5th day. At 6 month follow-up, patient remained chest pain free.