A 46-year-old Yemeni man presented to our cardiology clinic complaining of occasional episodes of palpitations of 2 weeks’ duration. He had an aortic mechanical valve replacement in Hungary, 33 years ago, at the age of 13, due to aortic regurgitation grade III–IV, with an enlarged left ventricle and impaired systolic function.
After the operation, he was sustained on digoxin, amidopyrine, potassium tablets, and one-quarter of a 10 mg coumarin tablet, and was advised to have continuous anticoagulation therapy (as prescribed in his discharge report). When he arrived in Yemen, 4 months after the operation, he was clinically stable, with no complications, but for unknown reasons, his treatment had been changed by his specialist. Aspirin 75 mg and digoxin were the only drugs used for his therapy for a period of approximately 33 years, until he presented to us with palpitations.
A clinical examination revealed a healthy adult man with a New York Heart Association functional classification of I, a pulse rate of 88 regular beats per minute and blood pressure of 110/80 mmHg. Auscultation of his heart revealed a normal first heart sound and loud mechanical component of the second heart sound and grade II/VI systolic murmur at the base. The rest of the clinical examination was normal.
A chest X-ray revealed a normal-sized heart with cardiothoracic ratio of less than 50 %. Electrocardiography showed a sinus rhythm with no other abnormal changes.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal heart chamber size with normal left ventricular systolic and diastolic function. A metallic aortic valve was visualized with peak velocity of 2.54 m/sec and a mean transaortic pressure gradient of 12.58 mmHg . The aortic valve area was 1.44 cm2, and there was normal pulmonary pressure. Due to limitations in the clinical investigation, because of the current war in Yemen, transesophageal echo was not done and fluoroscopy was not available.
Blood tests revealed an international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.0, activated partial thromboplastin time of 30 seconds, hemoglobin level of 124 g/L, and platelet count of 249 × 109/L. His liver, thyroid, and kidney function tests were all normal.