A 22-year-old Caucasian female in her 24th week of pregnancy was evaluated for a mild headache after being in a motor vehicle accident as a restrained passenger. A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and revealed a hypodense lesion with hyperdense margins in the right frontal lobe . It had a predominantly cystic appearance. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without gadolinium contrast showed a mass measuring 4.2 cm in greatest anterior-posterior × 3.2 cm in greatest transverse × 3.1 cm in cephalocaudal dimension, located in the right frontal lobe.(MRI with contrast was performed only after the delivery of the baby, see ). No significant surrounding vasogenic edema was observed using T2-weighted and diffusion weighted imaging [Figure and ]. MRS showed significant N-acetylaspartate (NAA) peak in the lesion along with a choline peak (Ch) at 1804 of amplitude and creatine (Cr) peaking at 1122 . The Ch/NAA ratio was 0.752. There was no marked elevation of lipid lactate peak, suggesting the lesion to be a low-grade neoplasm. Gadolinium enhanced MRI study was avoided during pregnancy due to risks to the fetus.
The patient's medical history was significant for two episodes of seizure at 4 and 15 years of age. No tumor was detected at that time as demonstrated by CT imaging used during the second episode. A discussion with the patient's obstetrician ensued. Given the fact that the patient's MRS suggested a benign nature of the brain lesions, and considering that she had no prior symptoms, and the T2 weighted images showed no edema, it was determined that there was no need for acute intervention. Stereotactic biopsy was considered as an option, but it was thought that the risk of intracranial hemorrhage outweighed the benefit of the invasive procedure in the otherwise asymptomatic patient. The patient, her obstetrician, and her primary care doctor were instructed to be aware of neurological symptoms, such as headache, dizziness, nausea, weakness, and numbness. Neurosurgical follow-up was offered to the patient, but she wished to continue the rest of her monitoring with her obstetrician and primary care doctor.
The baby was carried to full term and delivered via Cesarean section under spinal anesthesia. Epidural anesthesia was an optimal choice because it allowed the maintenance of stable blood pressure and neurological assessment of the patient during the section. The choice of Cesarean Section was partly due to her previous history of having had the same procedure. Also, since brain surgery may induce labor, Cesarean section could be performed at any time with low morbidity/mortality and low blood loss in the case of worsening neurological status indicating progressing of the intracranial mass. General endotracheal anesthesia was readily available. The patient was admitted prepartum on the morning of her Cesarean section. A lower transverse Cesarean section was performed under special instructions to the anesthesia service for careful monitoring of her blood pressure during the procedure. The patient was given adequate fluids to ensure that she was euvolemic. Otherwise, the Cesarean section was uncomplicated. If the patient were to deteriorate neurologically, the plan would be to place the patient on dexamethasone to reduce the underlying edema, perform emergent CT or MRI, and bring the patient to the operating room for tumor resection. Postpartum management of the patient involved regular checks with her obstetrician and primary care physician, who were educated on signs and symptoms of tumor progression in this case.
Two months after the patient delivered her baby and recovered from the Cesarean section, she underwent a right frontal craniotomy with the use of Neuronavigation to remove the tumor. The patient was placed in a supine position with her head rotated to the left. She was typed and crossed with blood available on call. The patient was given 50 g of mannitol and 10 mg of dexamethasone. The anesthesia service was instructed to maintain the patient's pCo2 at approximately 30 mmHg. The gross tumor was dissected from the falx. Parts of the falx that were adherent to the tumor were resected. The dura overlying the tumor was also resected. Immediately following the surgery, the patient was kept on dexamethasone and was assessed neurologically every hour.
The intra-op fresh frozen sample of the brain lesion demonstrated cartilaginous tissue, which was later determined to be a parafalcine chondroma . No immunohistochemistry was performed as the cartilaginous nature of the tumor provided the definite pathological diagnosis. Post-surgical MRI with gadolinium was performed every 6 months and there was no evidence of any recurrence or residual of the neoplasm up until 1.5 years after surgical resection of the tumor. The patient had no neurological deficits post-resection.