The patient is a ten-year-old female who presented to the emergency room for severe left lower quadrant abdominal pain. She reported pain that started ten hours prior to associated nausea. The pain was sudden in onset, constant, and 10/10 in severity without any alleviating factors. Menarche was approximately five months prior. Menstrual cycles occurred monthly, lasting five days. Her surgical history was significant for an appendectomy. She denied any fevers, diarrhea, constipation, vaginal bleeding, dysuria, or trauma. The rest of her history and labs were unremarkable. On presentation, the patient was hemodynamically stable but appeared to be in significant pain. A transabdominal ultrasound showed a large predominantly anechoic structure, i.e., simple cyst, in the midline pelvis measuring up to 5.6 cm superior to the bladder and anterior to the uterus . In cases of a large cystic mass, it could easily be inadvertently identified as the urinary bladder or even a bladder diverticulum. Thus, images which clearly demonstrate a cyst to be independent of the bladder are critical. The left ovary was not definitively visualized, but careful assessment of the large simple cyst demonstrated a hyperechoic rim of tissue representing a displaced left ovary . Doppler assessment of the large simple cyst and displaced left ovary demonstrated no discernible vascularity concerning ovarian torsion. Normal vascular flow was noted in the right ovary .
Given the patient's acute abdomen and ultrasound findings, ovarian torsion could not be ruled out without intraoperative evaluation. Gynecology was consulted where emergent operative evaluation was discussed to preserve ovarian function. The patient's mother gave consent, and the patient underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy, left ovarian detorsion, and aspiration of the left ovarian cyst. Operative findings included a 10 cm left ovarian simple-appearing cyst with a bluish hue. Torsion was noted at the infundibulopelvic ligament and utero-ovarian ligament which were successfully detorsed . Given concerns for the inability to safely dissect the cyst wall from the ovarian cortex due to significant edema, the cyst fluid was aspirated. The patient tolerated the procedure well with an estimated blood loss of 25 ml and was transferred to recovery in stable condition. She was stable for discharge several hours postoperatively. Pathology results were negative for malignant cells and consistent with benign cystic contents of the left ovary.