A 10-year-old girl presented with a 3-month history of pain in her left lower leg after bruising. She had no medical conditions and was physically active. On physical examination, she had a bony lump in the middle third of the left tibia with some tenderness. An X-ray of the left leg showed a 6-cm mass with multiple osteolytic and sclerotic lesions in the thickened anterior diaphysis of the left tibia . No periosteal reaction was observed. Computed tomography revealed that the 6-cm mass was confined to the cortex of the tibia . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), it was heterogeneously hypointense and isointense on a T1-weighted sagittal image and heterogeneously hyperintense on a T2 sagittal image; it measured 63 mm in the tibia with incomplete involvement of the marrow cavity . The mass was highly suspected to be an OFD, and open biopsy was performed.
Histologic examination of the biopsy specimen revealed that immature bone trabeculae were surrounded partly by prominent osteoblastic rimming . Cytokeratin (AE1/AE3)-positive epithelial cells were sparsely distributed throughout the specimen, but clusters of epithelial tissues were absent. Based on the combined results of imaging and histologic analysis, OFD was diagnosed.
The patient was followed via observation only regardless of pain. However, she had difficulty walking owing to increasing pain 4 months after diagnosis. MRI revealed a slight increase in tumor size but no pathological fracture . Because the diagnosis was OFD, her pain was first treated with painkillers but was not sufficiently controlled. We therefore decided to surgically remove the tibial tumor after thorough discussion with her parents. Nine months after OFD diagnosis, intercalary 10-cm segmental resection with 1.5-cm wide partial cortex posteromedial preservation using a PVFG and a locking plate for reconstruction was performed. Resection was preceded by osteosynthesis using a locking plate to mechanically stabilize the lower leg. A 14-cm section was removed from the patient’s fibula; after reducing its size to 12 cm, it was inlaid into medullary cavity of the tibia .
The tumor was composed of spindle cells with bony trabeculae rimmed by osteoblasts . Small clusters of epithelial cells were sparsely distributed throughout the tumor and were positive for AE1/AE3 immunostaining . Therefore, the diagnosis was upgraded to OFD-like AD. Bone union was observed 9 weeks after surgery , at which time the patient was allowed to partially bear weight. Full weight-bearing was allowed 12 weeks postoperatively. No complications were observed. Eight months after surgery , the patient walks without a cane. Nineteen months after surgery, the plate was removed . Twenty-two months after the definitive surgery, no recurrence was observed.