A 61-year-old white male with no past medical history underwent a laparoscopic cholecystectomy after an episode of cholecystitis and radiologically proven gallstones. The gallbladder was removed through the epigastric port using an endobag and there were no complications. However, the pathology report revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (T2).
Subsequently, the patient was referred to a hepatobiliary center and, 3 months after the initial cholecystectomy, a radical cholecystectomy was performed. The initial port sites of the previous cholecystectomy were not resected because an endobag was used during the initial procedure. The pathology report showed no tumor in the secondary resection, and the lymph nodes tested negative for metastases. Follow-up was continued with periodical checkups and standard blood work (with carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19.9).
Three years later, the patient reported symptoms of discomfort and pain around the epigastric port site scar. CA 19.9 level was normal (reference value < 37U/ml). An epigastric port site recurrence was subsequently discovered, partially fixed to the xiphoid process. A wide abdominal wall resection was performed, including part of the xiphoid process, with the reconstruction completed using a mesh according to the Ramirez technique . Follow-up was continued with periodical imaging and standard blood work.
Almost six years after the initial cholecystectomy, the patient presented with an occasionally painful mass in the left axilla. CA19.9 level was 15U/ml, within normal range. An ultrasound showed that the axillary lymph nodes were pathologically enlarged, and a large-needle biopsy was performed. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK19, mucin (Muc) 5ac, and to varying degrees positive for Muc1 (epithelial membrane antigen; EMA). Staining was negative for CDX2, CK20, thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1, and prostate specific antigen (PSA).
This immunohistochemical profile showed the presence of an adenocarcinoma, most likely arising from the prior gallbladder carcinoma.
Subsequently, a positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) scan was performed and showed the metastasis in the left axilla , and also revealed an elevated subpectoral uptake on the left side , with two additional suspicious parasternal masses on the left and right , and raised activity in the epigastric port site scar . There were no signs of intra-abdominal tumor activity.
Given the extensive dissemination and limited symptoms in the axillary node, we decided against an axillary lymph node dissection and palliative chemotherapy, instead of adopting a wait-and-see policy. Three months later, a new PET-CT scan showed growth of one of the parasternal masses. The patient experienced no progression of symptoms. After multidisciplinary discussion, palliative radiotherapy (5 times 4 gray (Gy)) was performed on the parasternal mass. One month after completion, the patient showed growth of the axillary mass on physical examination. A new CT-scan confirmed growth of the axillary lymph nodes. Subsequently, a new series of radiation was performed (10 times 3 Gy) on the left axilla. Another six months later, palliative chemotherapy was initiated because of disease progression.
The patient died of metastatic disease at the age of 68, approximately 6.5 years after the initial cholecystectomy.