An 85-year-old Japanese man underwent EVAR for an AAA at another hospital in June 2014. Graft limbs were placed in both the right and left common iliac arteries (CIAs). During post-dilatation, the Equalizer® balloon catheter (Boston Scientific) ruptured and was trapped in the left CIA due to severe calcification, and a part of this catheter remained in the left CIA. A SMART® stent (10 × 40 mm; Cordis Endovascular) was also implanted in the left CIA to cover the remaining balloon. Thereafter, post-dilatation was performed again with a percutaneous transluminal angioplasty balloon (10 mm), and final angiography showed good left limb blood flow. Computed tomography after EVAR showed no limb stenosis or kinking .
The patient developed left intermittent claudication in late January 2015. His symptom developed gradually, not suddenly. Subsequently, he experienced rest pain and developed ulcers on his left leg; he visited our hospital at the beginning of February 2015 . He had a history of smoking with a Brinkman index score of 200. His medical history included an old myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, cerebral infarction, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. The patient was taking appropriate anticoagulant therapy with warfarin (3 mg/day) and antiplatelet therapy with aspirin (100 mg/day). The prothrombin time and international normalized ratio were well controlled. The laboratory findings were as follows: a white blood cell count of 6670/μL; hemoglobin, 12.2 g/dL; platelets, 193,000/μL; total bilirubin, 1.0 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 20 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 7 IU/L; lactic dehydrogenase, 263 IU/L; blood urea nitrogen, 27 mg/dL; creatinine, 1.75 mg/dL; prothrombin time/international normalized ratio, 2.65; activated partial thromboplastin time, 54.1 s. The ankle-brachial index (ABI) of the left leg could not be measured. The skin perfusion pressure was approximately 40 mmHg in both the dorsalis pedis and plantar arteries. Magnetic resonance angiography and ultrasonography showed a left graft limb occlusion and left superficial femoral artery (SFA) occlusion. The deep femoral artery was patent, and it supplied collateral blood flow to the popliteal artery; however, arteries below the knee were totally occluded . The lower limb blood flow had not been evaluated before EVAR; however, the rich collateral vessels from the deep femoral to the popliteal artery indicated that the SFA occlusion was a chronic lesion. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with ischemic ulcers, i.e., critical limb ischemia (Rutherford 5), due to left limb occlusion and SFA chronic total occlusion (CTO). Embolization due to atrial fibrillation was less likely to be the cause in this case, because the ischemic symptoms had developed chronically, not acutely; in addition, the patient had been receiving appropriate anticoagulant therapy, and he had no recent episode of atrial fibrillation. We discussed a treatment strategy, including thrombolysis, surgical thrombectomy, and femoral–femoral or axillo-femoral bypass grafts. For thrombolysis, anticoagulant therapy was concomitantly used, and the patient was considered to have a higher risk of hemorrhagic complications. Furthermore, as the patient was unwilling to undergo surgical treatment, open surgery was not considered. Moreover, taking into account the patient’s condition (i.e., low left ventricular function and critical limb ischemia), we initially administered EVT to treat the left limb occlusion without thrombolysis.
Initial angiography showed that the left graft limb was totally occluded with a large amount of thrombi and there was severe calcification in the external iliac artery (EIA). A 9-French (Fr) Optimo® occlusion catheter (Tokai Medical Products) was inserted via the left femoral artery to prevent peripheral embolization, and we attempted to pass wires through the lesion. We changed the wires several times because the EIA had stenosis and calcification, and finally, the wires were passed through the lesion into the aorta. Thereafter, thrombus aspiration was performed by using a 6-Fr guiding catheter, and a large amount of red thrombus was aspirated. Pre-dilatation was performed with 6- and 8-mm balloons. A major portion of the thrombi present were removed; however, antegrade blood flow was poor. Furthermore, the entry of the left limb still seemed narrowed . Unfortunately, retrograde angiography performed a few minutes later showed thrombotic re-occlusion of the left limb. Thrombus aspiration and balloon angioplasty were performed repeatedly, but a large amount of thrombi was uncontrolled. Therefore, we placed a SMART® stent (8 × 100 mm; Cordis Endovascular) in the left EIA to cover the remaining thrombi, and the thrombi were consequently controlled. We examined the narrow entry of the left limb by using intravascular ultrasound (IVUS), and we found that the lumen was deformed into a crescent-moon shape . The balloon expansion was also poor. Based on the IVUS image and balloon expansion, we found a kink in the limb at the entry of the left limb. Therefore, we placed an additional SMART® stent (10 × 60 mm; Cordis Endovascular) to correct the limb kinking. After stenting, IVUS showed reduction of the deformation . A small amount of thrombi remained in the left common femoral artery; however, final angiography showed good antegrade flow, and we completed the procedure . The patient continued anticoagulant therapy with warfarin (3 mg/day) and antiplatelet therapy with aspirin (100 mg) for life. After the first EVT, the ABI improved to 0.65. Two weeks later, the second EVT for the left SFA CTO was performed . The ABI finally improved from 0.65 to 0.83. Ulcers on the left leg had completely healed after debridement and skin grafting.
Seven months after the first EVT, the ABI of the left leg improved to 0.96, and computed tomography angiography showed good expansion of the two implanted stents and no kinks or stenosis in either limb . We continue to follow-up this patient regularly at our hospital, and he has had no signs of recurrence for 12 months.