A 58-year-old male was admitted on February 19, 2022, for a 3-week history of progressive upper and lower extremities weakness. Five months earlier, the patient described increasing pain in the neck. His medical history is unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed a neurological deficit rated ASIA B. He had no dyspnea, and no bowel or bladder dysfunction. The patient had a Karnofsky Performance Score (KPS) estimated at 30%.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine showed a hypointense signal on the T1- and T2-weighted image, corresponding to a C1–C2 lesion process with lysis and dislocation exerting a mass effect on the medullary cord . There are no intramedullary signal abnormalities. Computer tomography of the cervical spine demonstrated multiple lytic lesions extending from C1 to C7 vertebral bodies, but especially in the C1 and C2 vertebral bodies, leading to a deformation of the atlantoaxial junction . The Spinal Instability Neoplastic Score (SINS) was evaluated at 15 . Additional biological tests were required to rule out malignant hemopathy. The serum monoclonal gamma-globulin spike was 20.8 g/L, with IgG Kappa at immunofixation and 11% of plasmocyte cells at the myelogram, confirming the diagnosis of MM. The viral serologies were negative.
After a multidisciplinary consultation meeting between neurosurgeons, anesthesiologists, and clinical hematologists, the patient was managed with a rigid adjustable cervical collar for a planned 6-month period and chemotherapy. With a 30% of KPS, this patient is less likely to support surgery.
From the February 15, to the July 17, 2022, five courses of VTD chemotherapy induction were performed. The dosage and duration were Velcade 1.8 mg per os discontinuous, Myrin 100 mg per os continuous, and dexamethasone 40 mg per os discontinuous and then repeated every 3 weeks. This medication was supplemented with antimicrobial prophylaxis such as cotrimoxazole, levofloxacin and valacyclovir, Low-molecular-weight heparin, and folic acid.
The patient was followed with regular clinical and biological assessments. After five courses of VTD chemotherapy, the Very Good Partial Response rate obtained was 98%. The size of the osteolytic process on C1 and C2 was decreased by 64% on a control MRI of the cervical spine .
The indication of an autograft was decided in the presence of an excellent response to chemotherapy induction courses. The patient underwent the autograft on August 2, 2022. He was discharged with complete resolution of neurologic deficit ASIA E. The rigid adjustable collar has been replaced by the foam cervical collar. The maintenance treatment with Velcade was continued every 2 weeks.
The patient was seen in outpatient consultation 3 months later. Physical examination found a patient in apparent good health with no neurological deficit and was pain-free .