A 25-year-old male presented with one months of intermittent fever, productive cough, and nine days of black stool. After admission, the patient received active fluid replenishment, blood transfusion, and other supportive treatments. Ulcerative nodules can be seen on the patient’s roof of the mouth, and black nodules can be seen in the eyes and corners of the mouth , which gradually increased in the past six months. The patient’s physical exam was notable for a temperature of 39.5 °C, heart rate of 115 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 87/44 mmHg. Neck lymph nodes, axillary lymph nodes, and inguinal lymph nodes were enlargement; low breath sounded in both lungs, no wet and dry rales; unison heartbeat, no pathological murmur; soft abdomen, no tenderness and rebound tenderness. Laboratory findings showed a significant elevation of anti-HIV antibody positive, and the patient’s CD4 T count was 2 cells/ml, HIV-RNA was 6.81 × 10^5IU/ml. Computed Tomography (CT) of the lungs showed many small patches, nodules, and patchy high-density shadows, with blurred boundaries and uneven density . One week after admission to the hospital, the patient’s orbital skin biopsy immunohistochemical showed CD34(+) CDX2(-) D2-40(+) HHV8(+) Ki-67(50%+), which was taken to suggest Kaposi’s sarcoma. According to guidelines, the patient received Liposomal Doxorubicin (20 mg/m2 IV every three weeks) for Kaposi’s sarcoma.
However, the patient was still running a high fever, and sputum was sent for microscopy and culture, the Xpert MTB/RIF assay was negative, but acid-fast staining of blood was positive after 24 days since admission. The interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) of tuberculosis (TB) in blood was positive. Four days after those positive results, Pathogen-targeted next-generation sequencing (ptNGS, a multiple PCR-based targeted NGS technique) of cervical lymph node tissue reported Mycobacterium thermoresistibile (M. thermoresistibile). Results of ptNGS reported 1 × 106 unique reads of Mycobacterium thermoresistibile, and there were no resistance mutations at the loci. After reviewing the drug-sensitivity panel of the organism, the decision was made to start the patient on Isoniazid (0.3 g q.d.), ethambutol (0.75 g q.d.), rifabutin (0.3 g q.d.), azithromycin (0.5 g q.d.) and Levofloxacin (0.5 g q.d.). The duration of treatment is expected to be at least one year, determined by the CD4 + T count.
After six months of treatment, the patient’s symptoms were alleviated, enlarged lymph nodes shrank, the temperature returned to normal, lung condition improved slowly , the count of CD4 + T cells increased gradually, and the HIV load dropped greatly.