A 65-year-old Chinese man was hospitalized in November 2012 for epistaxis since the previous month. Indirect nasopharyngoscopy revealed a scarlet mass with a rough surface in his left nasopharyngeal cavity. A clinical examination revealed no lymph node enlargement. He underwent surgery. A pathological examination indicated a mucosal melanoma in his left nasopharyngeal cavity. The results of computed tomography (CT) and MRI examinations showed that there was no metastasis to other organs.
This patient was hospitalized again in March 2013 to undergo adjuvant treatment, including IFN-α2b treatment, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. A high dose of IFN-α2b (20 MIU/m2 per day) was administered for 5 days, then radiotherapy was performed 14 times (total 28 Gy), followed by a low dose of temozolomide (75 mg/m2 per day) for 3 weeks.
On the third day of IFN-α2b treatment, our patient began to develop simple episcleritis in his left eye. He experienced symptoms of severe eye pain, hyperemia, and edema on the lateral sclera and conjunctiva of his left eye. The redness was diffuse, and it covered a pie-shaped area confined to the outer quadrant . We performed the phenylephrine blanching test to diagnose episcleritis. Episcleritis may be differentiated from scleritis by using phenylephrine eye drops, which cause blanching of the blood vessels in episcleritis, but not in scleritis. The percentage of CD3+ T cells in lymphocytes from blood was increased after IFN-α2b treatment . After approximately 6 days, the symptoms of eye pain, hyperemia, and edema disappeared gradually. The treatment of IFN-α2b had been stopped when the symptoms disappeared. After radiotherapy was performed three times, our patient again developed episcleritis in his left eye, but it was limited to the inner quadrant. The same symptoms of hyperemia and edema occurred again ; CD3+ T cell frequency was also at a higher level . After approximately a week, all the symptoms disappeared completely, and the treatment with radiology was still on-going. Simple treatment involving topical ofloxacin and phenylephrine was administered during the two periods of episcleritis. Whether the occurrence of these two episodes of episcleritis is associated with treatment of IFN-α2b and radiotherapy is of interest and worth studying.
This patient was followed up to detect late metastasis or recurrence for the first 2 years after surgery and the adjuvant therapy, and no metastasis or recurrence was found.