A 10-year-old girl visited our clinic. Her parents complained that their surrogate daughter appeared abnormal, with a marked difference in the height of the bilateral palpebral fissure when smiling after she was born . The left upper eyelid seemed to have ptosis. The patient did not complain about pain, diplopia, muscle weakness, etc. She also denied a history of birth injury and hereditary ocular diseases. She could close her eyes fully while sleeping and blinking.
Her parents recalled that the patient was born with her left eye open and right eye closed and that her father used his hand to open the upper and lower eyelids of the right eye. The patient was delivered at 36+ 20 weeks, and her birth weight was 3.5 kg. The girl had an older brother with no ocular or systemic diseases other than low myopia.
During the initial examination, the cycloplegic refraction was–0.50DS – 0.75DC × 175-OD and plano lens-OS. The bilateral corrected visual acuity was 20/20, with normal intraocular pressure, extraocular movement, alignment, and pupil profile. Anterior and posterior segment examination under slit-lamp revealed no abnormal findings. Her visual function was normal, with 60arc sec in the random dot stereo test. Notable ptosis was observed in the right upper eyelid , with the margin to reflex distance 1 of 1.0 mm on the right and 3.0 mm on the left. The retraction of the right upper eyelid when smiling was approximately 5 mm; thus, it indicates medium retraction. The right and left levator palpebrae superioris muscle measured 7.0 and 12.0 mm, respectively; a 1.0 mm lid lag on downward gaze was noted on the right eye . Her right upper eyelid crease was normally formed and symmetrical with that of her left upper eyelid. Her fundi were normal, and her eyelid movements were full, but poor right levator function was noted in upgaze and insufficient upper eyelid descent in downgaze. The ice pack test and laboratory test for thyroid function showed normal results. Here, daily photographs show that she could close her eyes fully while sleeping . The patient was then asked to wear glasses and undergo further examinations.
After 1 month, she underwent complete magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbital and ocular motor nerves. The findings showed normal morphology of the nerves. Facial electromyography showed normal motor nerve conduction; however, the conduction latency of the levator superior muscle in the right eye was longer than that in the left eye. Negative results were noted for the test of repetitive nerve stimulation(RNS) and blink reflex. She also underwent a neurological examination, and the results revealed no abnormalities in the areas innervated by the facial nerve and trigeminal nerve; however, the levator palpebrae superior muscle innervated by the oculomotor nerve was probably considered to have developmental problems.
At 6-month follow-up, her right upper eyelid retraction during smiling seemed to be milder. The retraction of the right upper eyelid during smiling was approximately 3 mm, not 5 mm (measured 6 months ago). Moreover, a smaller difference was noted in palpebral fissure height than that at the initial presentation. The patient and her parents reported an improvement in appearance . Ptosis did not seem to change during this period; the margin to reflex distance 1 was approximately 1.3 mm on the right eye and 3.0 mm on the left eye. Lid lag was 1 mm and showed no improvement. The cycloplegic refraction reading was − 1.00DS − 1.00DC × 170-OD and + 0.50DC × 90-OS, the bilateral corrected visual acuity was 20/20. We asked the patient to use new glasses and wear them continuously. Her parents believed that their daughter’s appearance had improved and chose to continue the follow-up rather than surgery.Our patient and her parents agreed that her photos and information can be used for publication purposes.