A 36 year-old white woman with an 11-year history of psoriasis who after having maintained relatively good control with class I topical steroids and calcipotriene ointment flared to 30% total body surface area involvement. She was unresponsive to a 9 month course of efalizumab (Raptiva®) 1 mg/kg/wk including a 5 month overlap with methotrexate at 5 mg/wk. She was then transitioned to etanercept (Enbrel®), 50 mg subcutaneously biweekly: efalizumab was overlapped 4 weeks to avoid psoriasis worsening. Psoriasis worsening has been reported when patients discontinue efalizumab, in particular patients that that are partial or nonresponders. Over the course of these overlap weeks she developed non-tender, bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy. She denied other symptoms. A complete blood count performed at this time revealed a white blood cell count of 11.9 k/mcl, hemoglobin 14.6 g/dL, and platelet count of 218.0 k/mcl., and a differential count included 30.8% neutrophils, 62.2% lymphocytes, and 7.0% monocytes. Circulating lymphocytes were small and mature-appearing. A lymph node biopsy was performed. Microscopic examination of the enlarged lymph node revealed diffuse effacement of the normal nodal architecture by an infiltrate composed of small lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells. The capsule was intact and thin and the nodal sinuses were obliterated. The lymphocytes were a mix of CD4 positive T-helper and CD8 positive T-suppressor cells. Although follicles were not apparent in sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin, immunohistochemistry revealed small clusters of CD10 and BCL6 positive small lymphocytes, corresponding to residual germinal centers. CD23 immunohistochemistry showed the dendritic cell network to be essentially obliterated . Plasma cells were present individually and in variably sized clusters located throughout the node. By immunohistochemistry, they were composed of a polyclonal mixture of kappa and lambda light chain positive cells. Flow cytometric analysis of the peripheral blood revealed a lymphocytosis composed of a mixture of CD4+ T-helper and CD8+ T-suppressor cells. The patient was instructed to stop all biologic agents. The lymphadenopathy resolved over the following 2 months, and the patient remained without adenopathy for 2 months. At that time etanercept was restarted at 50 mg subcutaneously weekly with good control of her psoriasis and no recurrence of her adenopathy for 23 months.