An 11-year-old female patient proceeded in the Emergencies Department of our hospital complaining for a painful abdominal bulking mass that has been presented seven days ago. The clinical examination revealed a large painful bulking mass in the left lower abdomen, which was disappearing in supine position . We did not manage to palpate a deficit or split in the abdominal wall.
The parents characterized their child as a neurotic child suffering from dyspeptic symptoms for more than two years that had been defined and treated as gastritis by per os administration of ranitidine and magnesium hydroxide. Even the medical treatment was still vomiting, while she had breakfast with milk and during traveling. Furthermore she avoided eating large amounts of food, because of gastric pain and hooves. All blood tests that were performed were normal (Glucose 95 mg/dl, Urine 30 mg/dl, Creatinine 0,6 mg/dl, k 3,9 mEq/l, Na 142 mEq/l, Cl 105 mEq/l, T3 1,4 ng/ml, T4 8 mg/dl, TSH 0,6 UI/ml).
We performed abdominal ultrasonography and barium studies that revealed a dilated stomach, in which the contrast medium was identified lower than the iliac crest in the left iliac fossa. The abdominal MRI didn't reveal any parietal or aponeurotic deficit. Upper GI endoscopy showed an elongated gastric utricle and evidence of reduced clearance of gastric contents (semi-solid meal and bile staining liquids) as well as a mild gastritis of the andrum. The histological examination of multiple biopsies received was negative for H. Pylori infection or any other mucosal pathology.
Radio isotopic study of gastric evacuation with solid meal revealed a significant distention of the stomach along with prolonged halftime in the evacuation time of a solid meal.
The above-mentioned data suggest the diagnosis of gastroparesis with simultaneous gastroptosis. The patient was treated medically with per os administration of domperidon. The initial dose of Domperidon was 10 ml, four times per days for three months, followed by a dose of 10 ml three times per day. Six months after the initial diagnosis and treatment the bulking mass has been disappeared and the patient does not complain for pain, dyspepsia or discomfort.