We present a case of a 36-year-old Asian female who initially noticed a right breast lump. She was reviewed by the breast surgeons and biopsy confirmed triple negative (estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2) breast cancer. Ultrasound-guided biopsy of the right axillary node was negative. Neoadjuvant FEC-D chemotherapy was commenced together with monthly goserelin as ovarian protection with eight cycles given in total. She also received granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) to prevent neutropenia.
She tolerated the FEC-D chemotherapy well apart from an episode of grade 1 thrush and migraine. This was treated with nystatin, fluconazole, and co-codamol. She also attended the accident and emergency department for urinary tract infection and was prescribed trimethoprim. She was not on other medications at that time. She received adjuvant two-field radiotherapy and a boost to increase the amount of radiation delivered to the area at highest risk of breast cancer recurrence. She underwent wide local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy 5 months after initiation of chemotherapy.
The patient noticed dark pigmentation of her left thumb nail a few days after the second cycle of chemotherapy. Over the next few months, the linear pigmentation on her thumb nail became darker. She denied pain, bleeding, or preceding history of trauma. There was no toenail involvement. She did not have any previous skin disease including psoriasis or lichen planus.
On presentation to the dermatology department, the left thumb nail pigmentation was linear, uniform, and well demarcated extending from proximal nail fold to free margin . Hutchinson’s sign was negative. No other nails were involved, and no rash noted elsewhere. There was no pigmentation of the oral mucosa. Patient was otherwise clinically well. Blood tests including full blood count, renal profile, liver function test, HbA1c, thyroid function test, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, lipid profile, coagulation profile, B12, folate, iron studies, phosphate, and magnesium were all in the normal range.
At 12-month follow-up after initial review, the appearance was stable and was suggestive of striate melanonychia. At 24 months follow-up, the changes remained stable. Despite the reassuring clinical features, the patient was understandably anxious whether this might be a presentation of acral melanoma given her history and was referred to the plastic surgeons for a nail matrix biopsy. Biopsy reassuringly was reported as melanosis . Figures and show evidence of central pigmentation which was confirmed as melanin with positive staining with Masson Fontana . There is no evidence of significant atypia noted.
Striate melanonychia in this lady was felt most likely due to the synergistic effect of chemotherapy drugs compounded with racial predisposition. Chemotherapy agents most likely to have contributed include cyclophosphamide, docetaxel, epirubicin and 5-fluorouracil [, ].