A 19-year-old male was brought to the emergency room after being found unconscious at home. His father found him unresponsive with irregular noisy breathing and frothy salivation. An empty pack of Alprazolam (Xanax) was noted beside his bed. His father did not notice any jerky movements or classic seizure manifestation. The family denied any history of trauma, headache or seizures. Apart from easy irritability, tendency to spend most the time alone and sleep difficulties, the patient did not have major psychiatric disorder. He was a cigarette smoker and might have used illicit drugs. His past medical history was unremarkable apart from bronchial asthma exacerbations that necessitated admissions during his early childhood with no recurrence in adulthood.
Upon arrival, he was in deep coma (Glasgow Coma Scale score of 3 out of 15) with bilateral pinpoint unreactive pupils. There was no spontaneous voluntary or involuntary movement noted. He was hypotensive (systolic blood pressure of 70–80 mmHg), tachycardiac (heart rate of 132 beats/minute) and tachypniec (respiratory rate of 23 breaths/minute). His core body temperature was 38.8°C and oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry was 71%. Exam showed generalized hypotonia, diminished reflexes, absent plantar response with no meningeal signs. He had one episode of coffee-ground vomiting.
He was intubated, mechanically ventilated and resuscitated with intravenous fluids, vasopressors and inotropes (norepinephrine and dopamine). Arterial blood gases showed a picture of respiratory and metabolic acidosis (pH: 7.1, pCO2: 64.2 mmHg, PO2 57.8 mmHg and HCO3 20.9 mEq/L). His complete blood count showed leukocytosis (white blood cells count of 27.5 × 10e9/L, (80% neutrophils), a hemoglobin of 14.8 mg/dl, and platelet count of 214 × 10e9/L. He had acute kidney injury (creatinine 206 umol/L) with hyperkalemia (5.7 mmol/L). His liver function test showed highly elevated transaminases (aspartate aminotransferase of 326 U/L, alanine aminotransferase of 326 U/L) with normal alkaline phosphatase (ALP), gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), bilirubin and albumin. Coagulation profile showed INR of 2 with prolongation of PT and APTT. His serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK) level was 4858 U/L.
A chest X-ray done in the day of presentation showed an evidence of bilateral lung infiltrates more in the left side. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain without contrast done in the same day did not reveal any hemorrhage, space occupying lesion or territorial infarction. The brain parenchyma looked normal with preserved grey-white matter differentiation .
His urine tested highly positive for benzodiazepines (>1000 ng/mL) and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC >100 ng/mL) while it did not show any traces of opioids, ethanol, amphetamines or cocaine. His plasma benzodiazepine level was 56.5 ng/mL. The patient was transferred to the ICU with the diagnoses of drug overdose, acute kidney injury, acute liver injury (toxic versus ischemic), aspiration pneumonia with respiratory failure and septic shock. Supportive measures were continued and antibiotics, intravenous proton pump inhibitors, vitamin K, fresh frozen plasma were given.
The next day, the patient improved in terms of hemodynamics and respiratory condition. His level of consciousness slightly improved as he started to open his eyes spontaneously, blinked to visual threat, extended his arms to painful stimulus but was not following commands and there was no verbal output. His blood leucocyte count started to subside gradually, and his liver function tests, urea and creatinine returned to near-baseline within days. All of his blood and sputum cultures did not grow any organisms. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies were negative by Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the screening for hepatitis B and C was also negative. He had an episode of generalized tonic-clonic convulsion and levetiracetam was started via nasogastric tube.
Electroencephalography (EEG) was done at the same day of the seizure which revealed a diffuse severe slowing of background at 2–3 Hz of low voltage. However, there was no focality, asymmetry or epileptic abnormalities. Transthoracic echocardiography was done which showed an evidence of biventricular moderate to severe global systolic dysfunction.
Clinically, there was no further improvement noted in the following three days.
In the fifth day of admission, he was found to have fixed dilated left pupil and normal reactive right one. His level of consciousness was the same. Physical examination showed generalized hypotonia with bilateral extensor plantar responses. Intravenous mannitol was given and urgent CT scan of the brain showed a clear generalized diffuse hypodensity involving the subcortical white matter . MRI brain done in the 7th day of admission which showed diffuse white matter changes with sparing of the brain stem and cerebellum .
The patient spent 3 weeks intubated in the intensive care unit with full supportive care while his level of consciousness stayed at Glasgow come scale of 7 (opening eyes spontaneously and extending limbs to pain).
In the 23rd day of admission, the patient had bilaterally dilated unreactive pupils with absence of brainstem reflexes. CT scan of the brain showed increasing in the white matter hypodensity with evidence of tonsillar herniation and subsequent new left occipital infarction in the posterior cerebral artery territory. The patient was declared brain dead after fulfilling the brain death criteria.