A six-week-old female presented to our ED via ambulance from her pediatrician’s office for respiratory distress. She had no known past medical history and was born at 38 weeks via induced vaginal delivery with routine prenatal care. Her mother described a history of increased work of breathing, wheezing, and grunting respirations since birth, which had noticeably worsened in the prior week. The patient had mild associated congestion and rhinorrhea, but her mother denied other infectious symptoms. At the pediatrician’s office, the patient was found to have an oxygen saturation of 70% and was placed on a non-rebreather with minimal improvement.
Her initial vital signs on arrival to the ED showed hypothermia with a temperature of 35.2° Celsius, a tachycardic heart rate of 169 beats per minute, tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 50 breaths per minute, and persistent hypoxia at 68% despite oxygenation by non-rebreather. Obtaining an accurate blood pressure was challenging, but the highest measurement was 38/23 millimeters of mercury. Physical examination was notable for an ill-appearing, mottled, neonatal female. Her heart and lung sounds were diminished on auscultation, with diffuse rales that were more prominent in the right lung. She was noted to have absent femoral pulses.
Given the patient’s poor oxygen saturation and increased work of breathing, she was transitioned to high-flow nasal cannula. A chest radiograph was obtained and demonstrated cardiomegaly with pulmonary interstitial edema .
Focused point-of-care echocardiography was performed, which showed poor left ventricular contractility with an ejection fraction visually estimated to be less than 15%, restricted motion of the mitral valve leaflets with abnormal valve morphology, and a mitral regurgitation jet ( and ). These findings raised the concern for cardiogenic shock secondary to a previously undiagnosed congenital heart defect. An epinephrine infusion was started to provide inotropic support with improvement in the patient’s blood pressure.
Ultimately her oxygenation and work of breathing failed to improve on high-flow nasal cannula, and she was intubated. Fentanyl was given for induction and sedation, but paralytics were avoided to ensure preservation of her respiratory drive.
Cardiology was consulted and a complete echocardiogram was performed, which confirmed the diagnosis of congenital heart disease, more specifically an incomplete Shone complex. We considered initiation of alprostadil in case of a ductal-dependent lesion, and this was eventually administered after transfer to the pediatric intensive care unit. Her clinical course was complicated by significant end-organ damage including acute renal failure requiring continuous renal replacement therapy and seizures. She underwent coarctation repair several days later, which she tolerated well. Her ejection fraction, renal failure, and seizures improved, and she was discharged home one month after admission.