The patient is a seven year old Sri-Lankan girl. In January 2012 she contracted an upper airways infection with fever and after one week she presented yellow discoloration of eyes and acholic stools. Blood investigations showed an increase of total bilirubin (19.5 mg/dl, direct 9.4 mg/dl, and indirect 10.1 mg/dl), transaminases (AST 1216 U/L, ALT 1022 U/L) and alkaline phosphatase (524 U/L). An abdominal scan showed irregular liver surface with inhomogeneous structure, compatible with chronic liver disease. In March, the child was admitted at our unit: general conditions were good, weight was 12.7 kg (25th pc), height 92.2 cm (25th pc); she showed yellow eyes discoloration and hepatomegaly. Laboratory tests showed elevated ESR (51 mm/h), LDH (1567 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (713 U/L), transaminases (AST 1391 U/L, ALT 1405 U/L), γ-GT (294 U/L) and IgG (2110 mg/dl). Liver kidney antibodies (LKM) were strongly positive (1:640). Other test, including Anti-native DNA antibodies, ASMA, AMA, EMA and tTG, were normal. A liver biopsy showed enlargement of portal spaces correlated to a lymphocytic infiltrate with plasma-cells, neutrophiles and eosinophiles. This process exceeded the limiting membrane with piecemeal necrosis interesting the epithelium of the bile ducts. Periportal and portal fibrosis (onion-like), vacuolar degeneration of hepatocytes with formation of binucleate cells and pseudorosettes and signs of lobular inflammation with formation of apoptotic bodies were also present, together with a reduction of the number of biliary ducts. A magnetic resonance cholangiography was then performed, showing normal duct anatomy and no signs of large duct sclerosing cholangitis. For this reason a diagnosis of overlap syndrome of type 2 AIH and small duct cholangitis was performed.
Treatment with prednisone at a dose of 15 mg twice daily (2 mg/kg/day) was followed by a general improvement. After two months the patient presented a mild but persistent increase of transaminases and alcaline phosphatase. There were also signs of hypercortisolism and hypertension, and for this reason a gradual reduction of prednisone to 10 mg/day was performed and azathioprine at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg/day was introduced. Two weeks later the liver enzyme levels returned to the normal range.