A 31-year-old African American male previously diagnosed with Huntington’s disease presented to a large public safety net hospital medical center after a family member found him immobilized on the ground at home. The patient was unable to determine how long he was down. In the emergency department, the patient was found to have an AKI with an elevated creatinine of 2.8 mg/dL and an extremely elevated CK level of 114,400 U/L. Medical records of the patient from three years prior showed a baseline glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of > 90 mL/min/1.73 m2 and a creatinine of 1.0 mg/dL. He also met criteria for systemic inflammatory response syndrome, with tachycardia, fever, and leukocytosis, and was therefore admitted to the hospital. A summary of the initial laboratory report is provided in Table .
The patient presented with advanced Huntington’s disease characterized by dysarthria and choreiform movements of his hands. His family member who he lives with was able to provide additional history, reporting that the patient ambulates independently at home, though his gait is unsteady, and he had another fall 1 week prior. The patient performs his activities of daily living independently, but requires assistance with his instrumental activities of daily living, which family members provide for him. She further stated that several family members had passed away from Huntington’s disease and she had an understanding of the progressive degenerative nature of the disease.
Neurological exam showed an alert patient with equal and reactive pupils who was able to understand questions and responded with one word “yes” or “no” answers due to prominent dysarthria. Cranial nerves II–XII were intact. Muscle bulk was normal and muscle strength was 4/5 in the bilateral upper and lower extremities. Palpation of the muscles in the extremities did not elicit pain. On review of systems, the patient denied any muscle pain, joint aches, chest pain, or shortness of breath but reported head pain. A computed tomography scan of the head and cervical spine showed no signs of traumatic injury. A renal ultrasound showed bilateral renal parenchymal disease in the absence of stones, hydronephrosis, and obstruction. The results from blood cultures and urine toxicology were negative for abnormalities, though his urine was notably dark red-brown in color. Fractional excretion of sodium was 2%, consistent with an intrinsic renal injury.
Rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI was presumed, and the patient was treated initially with a 1 L bolus of normal saline followed by 200 mL/hour of lactated ringers for maintenance fluids. On day 4, the fluids were switched to 75 meq of sodium bicarbonate in 0.45% normal saline at 125 mL/hour due to metabolic acidosis. Electrolytes were repleted as needed. Over the next few days, the patient demonstrated progressive oliguria and showed signs of volume overload, noted by edema of the lower legs. Laboratory analyses of blood samples revealed progressive increases in the levels of creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate. CK levels continued to decrease from the peak level measured at admission. Due to worsening kidney function, with a creatinine of 13.9 mg/dL, the patient was dialyzed on day 7, day 9, and day 11 of his hospital stay. Over several days, gradual signs of renal recovery were observed, indicated by a down trending creatinine and BUN and an increasing GFR. A summary of the patient’s laboratory values over this time period are provided in Table .
On the 12th day of hospitalization, the patient became lethargic, hypoxic, and unresponsive. Because of the concern for a possible seizure, he was intubated for acute hypoxic respiratory failure and was transferred to the medical intensive care unit (ICU). Initial computed tomography (CT) imaging without contrast revealed ischemia, but follow-up magnetic resonance imaging without contrast revealed bilateral infarcts within a watershed distribution involving the frontal, parietal, and left occipital lobes of the brain, consistent with posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). Given that the patient had concurrent hypertension, oliguria, copious secretions present from his endotracheal tube, in addition to prior aggressive fluid treatment, volume overload was a likely cause of the PRES. On day 14, the patient was placed on continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) in place of hemodialysis due to his acute condition and worsening renal function with anuria. CRRT was initiated at a blood flow rate of 200 mL/minute and a dialysate rate of 1.5 L/hour. Over the subsequent days of treatment, these parameters ranged between blood flow rates of 200–300 mL/minute and dialysate rates of 1.5-3L/hour based on his electrolyte, BUN, and creatinine levels, as well as urine output. His ICU course was complicated by pneumonia and thrombosis of his central venous catheter, which interrupted CRRT from days 15–17 and required removal and replacement. On day 23, CRRT was stopped and hemodialysis was resumed 3 days per week, starting on day 24. On day 26, the patient was transferred back to the regular hospital floor. There was evidence of renal recovery indicated by a declining serum creatinine and a urine output of 800 mL on day 35.
Notably, the patient experienced marked dysphagia and episodes of vomiting even with a full liquid diet, requiring a nasogastric tube placement for nutrition on day 37. Subsequently, the patient underwent several food trials with the speech-language pathologist and was able to successfully complete them without concern for aspiration and the nasogastric tube was removed on day 44. He was evaluated by a physical therapist who arranged for an ambulation-assist device to be used at home. He was discharged home on day 46 with 24-hour care from his family. Labs upon discharge included a GFR of 63 mL/min/1.73 m2, creatinine of 1.5 mg/dL, and a BUN of 27 mg/dL.
The patient followed up as an outpatient with his primary care doctor two days after discharge. Neurologic exam showed intact cranial nerves II–XII, equal and reactive pupils, and continued dysphagia and unsteady gait. No new neurological deficits were documented. Unfortunately, medical records from the patient’s neurology clinic were inaccessible for review. Notably, the patient was readmitted to the same hospital for pneumonia in March of 2023 and was found to have return of baseline renal function with a GFR of 117 mL/min/1.73 m2, creatinine of 0.9 mg/dL, and a BUN of 6 mg/dL. Interestingly, his CK level was mildly elevated at 297 U/L, and in the absence of any other identifiable cause, supports him having an elevated level at baseline.