A 62-year-old female had a low-energy fall at home, with trauma to the left hip region followed by inability to stand or walk. She was taken to a nursing home at her native place and X-rays done there, revealed an intertrochanteric fracture of neck of the left femur. There were no other skeletal injuries. The patient was a known case of hypertension, on medication for the past 7 years. She did not have any other medical comorbidity. She was not receiving any blood thinners. The patient was investigated and operated the next day by an orthopedic surgeon. The patient underwent fracture fixation using a DHS, on fracture table under spinal anesthesia. As per the information mentioned in the discharge card, intraoperative period was uneventful. The patient was transfused two units of packed red cells in post-operative period. On the 3rd post-operative day, the patient started developing discoloration of the toes and foot of the operated lower limb. Color Doppler done the following day revealed the absence of flow in popliteal, anterior tibial, and posterior tibial vessels. As there was no facility of vascular intervention where the patient was operated, it being a small nursing home at a remote place, the patient was referred to our tertiary care center. The patient came to our hospital on the 7th post-operative day. On examination, the patient had discoloration of skin over the left lower limb up to the mid-thigh with evidence of dry gangrene up to middle third leg . Peripheral pulses were not palpable on the affected lower limb and the patient had absence of sensation over the foot and leg. Vascular surgeon was consulted; he advised a computed tomography (CT) angiography which revealed abrupt cutoff of flow in SFA . The level of cutoff was corresponding to the level of the third cortical screw of the DHS plate. There was no significant collateral circulation. As the patient presented late with changes of gangrene already set in, the limb could not be salvaged and the patient landed up having to undergo an amputation.