A 43 year old male patient came to the department of Oral medicine and Radiology with the chief complaint of pain in the upper lip for the past 15 days. The patient experienced a mild, intermittent, dull aching type in the same region. His Past medical history was non-contributory and in the past dental history the patient revealed the history of trauma from road traffic accident 15 years ago, during which the patient had suffered from lip laceration and fracture of anterior teeth. Laceration in the lip was sutured immediately and later root canal treatment and crown placement was done. He further added that, 2 years after the trauma, he had developed pain and swelling in the upper lip in relation to 11, 12. A minor surgical procedure was done and a tooth spicule was removed. Constitutional signs and review of all systems appears to be normal on general examination. On local examination, inspection revealed no abnormality in the upper lip, labial mucosa and the entire oral cavity. On palpation a painful tiny hard mass measuring about 5 mm approx was palpable in the upper lip 0.5 cm lateral to the midline in relation to 11 and 12. On hard tissue examination prosthetic crown was present in relation to 11, 12. Considering the chief complaint, history and correlating with the clinical findings the mass in the upper lip was provisionally diagnosed as a foreign body in the upper lip.
An intra oral Periapical radiograph of the upper lip revealed a single radiopaque mass measuring about 3 X 2 mm in size .
Blood investigation was performed which revealed to be within normal limits. Then an excisional biopsy was done by placing a single incision under local anesthesia .
All procedures were performed under aseptic condition .
A review was done after 7thday, first month, third month and after 6 month. All necessary check radiographs were taken. The wound healing was satisfactory.
Histopathological examination shows the connective tissue mass with interspersing trabeculae of mature bone and osteocytes in lacunae surrounded by loose to densely arranged collagen fibers ). Hence the final diagnosis was suggestive of osseous Choristoma.