A 2-year-and-8-month-old girl was referred to the previous hospital because of altered consciousness. A head computed tomography (CT) indicated the urgent neurosurgical intervention for the intracranial hemorrhage with a midline shift. On arrival to our hospital, spontaneous breathing was absent, and Glasgow Coma Scale was evaluated to be E1V1M1. The contrast-enhanced CT in our hospital confirmed the hemorrhage extending to the subarachnoid space and disclosed an aneurysm of 21 × 13 × 12 mm at the right MCA . We applied quantitative measurements of the sGWR and mASPECTS (range 0–24) for her neuroimaging data . The modified sGWR scored 1.13, while mASPECTS gained only 2 points, both suggestive of poor prognosis . Although decompressive surgery was immediately performed, her systemic conditions became unstable with uncontrollable pulmonary edema. She died on the 15th day after admission. The panel sequencing for COL3A1, FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, and RNF213 excluded the diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, and Moyamoya disease. Blood culture was negative throughout the treatment course. Systemic imaging studies excluded malformation of great arteries, renal cysts, and tumors.
Through the literature search from 2021 to April 2022 in PUBMED , we found 103 publication records with search terms, “intracranial”, “aneurysms” and “pediatric”. Among them, 21 patients were reportedly under 3 years of age (12 females; 1 months to 2 years) at onsets [, , –]. Although variable degrees of neurological deficits were left, none of them died or failed to receive neurosurgical operations for their critical conditions. Thus, no clinical or neuro-imaging parameters were identified to predict the unfavorable outcome (death). Based on the neuroimaging data (n = 10), however, we estimated mASPECTS scores. We classified them into the three groups: L (low, mASPECTS 0–8), M (moderate, 9–16) and H (high, 17–24) . Two (67%) of the three patients who belonged to the L group showed profound complications of developmental delay and/or epilepsy as neurological sequelae. On the other hand, two (29%) of seven patients with M and H scores showed hemiplegia. These data suggested that mASPECTS scores were useful for predicting postsurgical outcomes of ICA.