A 58-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a chronic cough and progressive dyspnea since 3 months. Her medical history included urolithiasis and a multinodular goiter, treated with a left hemithyroidectomy and thyroid hormone substitution. She had no antecedents of pulmonary disease, and there was no active or passive tobacco exposition. Her sister was treated for breast cancer, but no other family history of cancer was mentioned. Her World Health Organization (WHO) performance score was 1. Clinical examination revealed decreased breath sounds at the base of the right lung. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a necrotic mass in the apical segment of the right lower lobe, extending to the right hilum and encasing the right main and lower lobe bronchus. There were several enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes and right-sided pleural fluid. Positron emission tomography (PET) visualized a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid liver lesion in segment 4b . Pathologic diagnosis of an adenocarcinoma [thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) positive] was confirmed by endobronchial ultrasound and CT-guided liver biopsy. The malign process was staged as a cT2aN3M1b or stage IVb adenocarcinoma (TNM 8th edition). The programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) tumor proportion score was 30% using the Roche SP 263 antibody assay. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)- and reactive oxygen species 1 (ROS1)- immunohistochemistry was negative. Molecular analysis, performed by next-generation sequencing (NGS, SeqCap) revealed an EGFR mutation in exon 18, E709_T710delinsD. Since the result of the NGS was not yet available, the patient was included in a phase III randomized controlled trial with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and experimental immunotherapy with a combined transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) and PD-L1 inhibitor. After two cycles, a partial response (PR) was observed with a stable situation after four cycles. Maintenance study immunotherapy was continued, but after two cycles there was disease progression of the primary tumor and the liver metastasis. Furthermore, the patient was hospitalized with grade 3 acute kidney injury, caused by an immune-mediated interstitial nephritis. The treatment was ceased, and renal function was restored after corticosteroid administration during 3 months. Two months later, afatinib 40 mg was initiated because of progressive disease (PD). This treatment was moderately tolerated with grade 2 paronychia and a grade 2 acneiform skin eruption, treated with tetracycline and topical therapy. After 6 months, a PR with ongoing decrease of the liver metastasis was retained . Because of persistent grade 2 skin toxicity, the dose of afatinib was reduced to 30 mg.