A 68-year-old woman was diagnosed with poorly differentiated, human papillomavirus positive, basaloid SCC (T2N2, stage IIIB) and treated with CRT (Standard Nigro Protocol including infusional 5-fluorouracil, Mitomycin-C©, and 30 Gy of radiation) in 2014 at another healthcare institution. The tumor was located at the proximal anal canal, without extension to the external anal sphincter or intersphincteric fat, and it did not reach the peritoneal reflection . The response to initial treatment was complete, and the course of disease after treatment was unremarkable.
In August 2018, she was referred to our institution for evaluation of a possible AC recurrence. At her initial visit, she reported constipation, transient anal bleeding, dysuria, and pollakiuria. The physical examination was unremarkable, and anoscopy was also normal. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan done 4 months earlier at the referring institution revealed multiple hypermetabolic pelvic peritoneal nodules. The largest and most intense nodule was anterior to the left common iliac artery measuring 1.8 cm. An abdominal-pelvic computed tomography (CT) also described these prominent pelvic implants, the first and largest at the left common iliac chain measuring 2.6 × 2 cm, with a smaller second satellite lesion (1 cm) located inferiorly. The third implant lay anterior to the mid-sigmoid colon and posterior to the uterus (2.5 × 1.6 cm). The fourth implant was located lateral to the uterus and medial to the sigmoid colon (0.8 cm).
In light of these results, a full diagnostic work-up was undertaken to investigate the probable recurrence of her AC. At this point, the patient had not received any local or systemic treatment before being referred to our group, and no tissue biopsy had been obtained. A new PET scan study done in our institution reported a mild progression of the nodules, with a dominant implant still along the left common iliac chain . There was no sign of local recurrence nor any signs of hepatic, adrenal, or bone metastasis. As seen in Fig. , the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study supported the PET scan findings and revealed at least three distinctive sites of metastatic implants with no evidence of anal or pelvic lymph node recurrence. One was located in front of the left iliac bifurcation (2.5 × 2 cm), another implant was noted at the root of the lower mesentery (1.3 × 1 cm), and there was also an implant between the caecum and the right psoas muscle (1 × 1 cm).
A diagnostic laparoscopy, colonoscopy, and complete anal and gynecological examination were performed under general anesthesia as part of the work-up. The anal canal and the inferior portion of the rectum were normal. A formal vaginal examination was impossible because of a stenosis secondary to prior radiation therapy, but the accessible vaginal mucosa was soft and normal. During the colonoscopy, biopsies were taken in the anal canal and were all found to be negative. Biopsies of peritoneal implants (parasigmoid and left pelvic) confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic epidermoid AC with basaloid traits. Moreover, immunochemistry studies were positive for CK5/6 and P40 markers, hence reinforcing the proposed diagnosis of recurrence of her initial 2014 epidermoid AC.
The patient’s chart was subsequently discussed at the institution’s tumor board and among international experts. The patient hesitated for several months to undergo surgery or to have systemic treatment. A PET scan in early November 2018 demonstrated a slight progression of peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC) with no other lesions reported. Management options were discussed with the patient and her family. After declining systemic chemotherapy, she agreed to undergo CRS with HIPEC to address her recurrent AC.
The patient underwent surgery 1 week later. A midline laparotomy was performed, and the peritoneal cavity was thoroughly inspected for all sites of metastatic disease. The peritoneal carcinomatosis index (PCI) was evaluated at 10. The patient underwent complete CRS including an omentectomy, ileocecal resection, anterior resection of the recto-sigmoid colon to address nodules on the mesentery, and on the wall of the sigmoid colon, as well as a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. The remaining nodular implants were also removed at the angle of Treitz, on the small bowel mesentery, on the right retroperitoneum, and in the pelvis. Intraoperative frozen sections were positive for epidermoid carcinoma, hence compatible with the initial AC. A completeness of cytoreduction score (CC) of 0 was achieved during the CRS (disease completely resected). After completion of intestinal continuity, a closed-technique HIPEC was performed with Mitomycin-C© (fixed 20 mg) at 42 °C for 90 min. The surgery was well tolerated, and the patient was transferred to the post-anesthesia care unit in a stable condition. Her post-operative course was unremarkable, and she was discharged on post-operative day 17. The final pathology report of the peritoneal implants was positive for poorly differentiated basaloid SCC. Since the patient had already refused systemic chemotherapy preoperatively and was now considered disease-free, she was not given adjuvant therapy. She was followed at the outpatient clinic every 4 months with a physical exam and alternating CT scans and PET scans. At 12 months, she remains disease-free, with no sign of recurrence at the last PET scan study.