We present the case of a 56-year-old Chinese man who had been smoking and drinking for decades. He was hospitalized for six months with abdominal pain. In September 2019, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper abdomen identified a pancreatic head mass, multiple retroperitoneal enlarged lymph nodes, and abnormal enhancement near the inferior vena cava in right lobe of the liver. Ultrasound guided biopsy of the pancreas was performed. Pathology diagnosis was pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (stage IV) . Next generation sequencing (NGS) confirmed the tumor was microsatellite stability (MSS), and a total of 6 gene mutations, TSC2, CREBBP, HIST1H3I, MAP2K4, SMAD4, and STK11 were detected. Additionally, frame shift mutation occurred in exon 17 of TSC2 gene (32.13%); missense mutation occurred in exon 9 (7.47%) and nonsense mutation occurred in exon 5 (9.49%) of SMAD4 gene. The NGS confirmed that there were no targeted drug-related gene mutations and the tumor mutational burden (TMB) was 7.1 mut/Mb.
In October 2019, the patient’s primary oncologist started him on AG (gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel). The gemcitabine (1000mg/m² over 30 minutes, weekly for 2 weeks, every 21 days) and nab-paclitaxel (125mg/m², weekly for 2 weeks, every 21 days) were administered intravenously. However, in the first three cycles and the fifth cycle of chemotherapy, for several reasons (such as COVID-19), he only received chemotherapeutic agents (AG) on the first day. In March 2020, the repeated MRI showed progressive disease. In late March 2020, the patient developed back pain and underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and endoscopic metal biliary endoprosthesis (EMBE) due to obstructive jaundice. In April 2020, positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed a 6.0 cm × 6.0 cm mass in pancreatic head, multiple enlarged lymph nodes in different sizes were found in pancreatic head and retroperitoneum, and multiple low-density shadows in the liver .
Based on these findings, the patient was treated with FOLFIRINOX (oxaliplatin, Irinotecan, calcium folinate and 5-Fluorouracil). However, considering that the patient had just undergone surgery, the patient was asked by his doctor to eat S-1 for 14 days (from April 2, 2020 to April 16, 2020) before he received FOLFIRINOX treatment on April 25, 2020. In June 2020, after 4 cycles of chemotherapy, upper-abdomen enhanced CT revealed that the size of pancreatic head lesion was significantly decreased to 2.3 cm × 2.5 cm , more that 50% decrease, and multiple low-density shadows in the liver. The patient was repeated CT about every two months . Until October 2020, the CT only revealed a mass in the pancreatic head, and the lesion was slightly low density with peripheral lymph node metastasis.
In October 2020, the patient underwent one cycle of Olaparib by himself, although he did not have the targeted drug-related gene mutation. On October 16, his abdomen enhanced CT scan revealed multiple liver metastases , and the largest measured 2.3 cm. We changed the chemotherapy regimen to AG again (gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel). In November 2020, the abdomen enhanced CT scan revealed progressive disease , and the size of the pancreatic head lesion was 6.4 cm.
The patient has undergone multi-line chemotherapy, chemotherapy alone could not inhibit the progression of the disease, and there was no standard treatment after two or more lines of systemic chemotherapy. In addition, his Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG-PS) was 2, he suffered from severe cancer pain all over the body (OxyContin 30mg, every 12 hours) and weight loss, the aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase were at normal level, and alkaline phosphatase increased slightly (not higher than 2 times the normal value). Thus, we decided to use chemotherapy (S-1) combined with immunotherapy (sintilimab). Considering the economic status of patient, we decided to choose sintilimab (more economical). The sintilimab is a fully human IgG4 monoclonal antibody; it can bind to PD-1, block the interaction of PD-1 with its ligands, and help recover the anti-tumor response of T-cells, and it has been approved to treat relapsed or refractory classical Hodgkin lymphoma, advanced non-small cell lung cancer and metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma. The anti-tumor effect of sintilimab is similar to that of other anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies . Sintilimab was administered intravenously (200mg, every 3 weeks); and S-1was orally (40mg, twice a day orally for 2 weeks, every 21 days). The patient started to receive S-1 on November 24, 2020, and sintilimab on November 27, 2020.
The patient did not come to our hospital again until June 2021 . He said he was treated at a local hospital during these seven months, and received a total of 10 cycles of sintilimab combined with S-1. The performance status was better than before (his PS improved to ECOG-PS 1); his severe cancer pain was well controlled (OxyContin 10mg, every 12 hours). The abdomen enhanced CT scan showed that the intrahepatic metastases and pancreatic head lesion were significantly reduced (the size of the pancreatic head lesion was 1 cm). By standard Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria, version 1.1, the patient had a partial response (more than 80% decrease) to therapy with this regimen. Moreover, throughout his treatment, the CA 19-9 level was always normal.
At the latest follow-up (August 2021), the patient still had a partial response to this regimen (S-1 combined with sintilimab), and the duration of partial response was 8 months.