A 64-year-old man was referred to our hospital with abnormalities in biliary enzymes. He lived in Hokkaido, Japan’s northernmost island, and had not been treated for chronic diseases, nor was he taking any medications permanently. He had a history of drinking well water. Although serum enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with a hydatid cyst antibody was falsely positive for echinococcal infection, the Western blot examination indicated echinococcal infection . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 19-cm cystic lesion with calcification in the liver. He was diagnosed with AE of the liver based on serological and radiological findings, and elective surgery was scheduled.
He was admitted to our hospital with complaints of breathing difficulty several days before surgery. He had a body temperature of 37.5 °C and oxygen saturation of 94% on 3 L/min oxygen inhalation. There were no other abnormal findings on physical examination. Chest X-ray showed a high cardiothoracic ratio of 63% , but electrocardiography revealed a normal sinus rhythm. The CT scan showed cystic lesions not only in the liver, but also in the pericardium, suggesting the AE of the liver had ruptured into the pericardium . The patient underwent transthoracic echocardiography, which demonstrated pericardial effusion and floating highly echoic material, also suggesting the rupture of the AE into the pericardium. Although we consulted a cardiologist, pericardial drainage was not performed because the patient’s vital signs were stable and there were no significant symptoms suggesting cardiac tamponade. Nine days after admission, the surgery was performed. Because rupture of the AE into the pericardium was expected, cardiac surgeons stood by. Laparotomy with a Mercedes-Benz incision revealed that the cystic lesion in the liver of the left lobe had invaded the diaphragm, pericardium, and inferior vena cava (IVC). First, pericardial drainage was done by cutting down the pericardium . After that, extended left hemi-hepatectomy, partial hepatectomy of segment 6, reconstruction of the IVC, and reconstruction of the pericardium were done . Drains for the pericardium and Winslow’s foramen were inserted. A cystic duct tube was also inserted in case of postoperative bile leakage. The operation time was 7 h and 23 min, the amount of bleeding was 1710 mL, and 560 g of red blood cells and 720 g of fresh frozen plasma were transfused. On pathological findings, the specimen with haematoxylin–eosin staining showed alveolar echinococcosis vesicles with laminar membranes in a pericardial cavity excision. Upon liver resection, the diagnosis of AE of the liver that had ruptured into the pericardium was confirmed. The surgical margin of the hepatic left lobe was positive, suggesting a remaining echinococcal lesion in the liver. The drains for the pericardium and Winslow’s foramen were removed on postoperative days (PODs) 4 and 5, respectively. The complications of bile leakage and abscess on the hepatic resection surface occurred, which required percutaneous drainage treatment on POD 11. The drain for the abscess was removed on POD 36. The cystic duct tube remained in place for 20 months after surgery because of bile leakage. Although the complications extended his hospital stay, he was discharged 7 weeks after the surgery. There were no cardiac complications after surgery. Because the surgical margin was positive, he was put on medical treatment with 400 mg ABZ per day, and no regrowth of the remaining lesion was confirmed at 19 months. As long as the remaining lesion does not grow, he will take ABZ for life. If the lesion does regrow, we will consider re-excision of the lesion if his liver function and operability allow it.