A 49-year-old woman was referred to our cardiology department with progressive dyspnoea on exertion. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable. She was healthy until 2 months prior to her visit, when she developed a persistent cough and experienced faintness, palpitations, and chest discomfort when walking. She appeared uncomfortable and was diaphoretic and orthopnoeic with bradycardia and bilateral lower limb pitting oedema at presentation. No visual disturbances or skin lesions were observed. Notably, initial laboratory evaluation revealed elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I (hs-cTnI) (217 pg/mL) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) concentrations (580.9 pg/mL). Chest radiography revealed pulmonary congestion with bilateral pleural effusion. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a third-degree atrioventricular block with torsade de pointes . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed notable akinesis and wall thinning of the left ventricular basal anteroseptal wall and an impaired left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 43% without hypertrophy . We suspected acute coronary syndrome and performed emergent coronary angiography after temporary cardiac pacing, which revealed smooth, unobstructed coronary arteries. However, left ventriculography illustrated remarkable left ventricular aneurysm formation that was inconsistent with the coronary blood flow . Endomyocardial biopsy was not performed because of haemodynamic instability. Chest computed tomography ruled out mediastinal or hilar lymphadenopathy. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) revealed multifocal and broad areas of transmural late gadolinium enhancement in the apical anterior, mid-septal, inferior, and lateral wall , while 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed notable FDG uptake in the septal and inferior walls of the heart without extracardiac abnormal FDG accumulation ( and ). Serologic tests for viral myocarditis, rheumatologic diseases, and other systemic diseases, including serum angiotensin-converting enzyme, lysozyme, soluble interleukin-2 receptor, and interferon-gamma release assay for tuberculosis, yielded negative findings. Based on the above findings, a diagnosis of isolated cardiac sarcoidosis was finally made on the 22nd day of admission, in accordance with the diagnostic criteria of isolated cardiac sarcoidosis in the updated Japanese Circulation Society guideline. After heart failure management and cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator were commenced, immunosuppressive therapy with oral prednisolone was initiated to reduce inflammation and to prevent further myocardial fibrosis and deterioration of cardiac function. Administration of prednisolone was initiated at 30 mg/day (0.5 mg/kg/day), gradually decreased by 5 mg/day at intervals of 4 weeks, and maintained at 5 mg/day. The hs-cTnI concentration declined sharply below the upper reference limit (<10 pg/mL) after the introduction of glucocorticoid therapy , followed by a subsequent decrease in BNP. 18F-FDG PET/CT examinations performed 2 months after the initiation of prednisolone therapy indicated no cardiac FDG uptake . However, despite the absence of symptoms and elevated BNP, the hs-cTnI concentration gradually increased to 254 pg/mL 2 months after reduction of the prednisolone dose to 5 mg/day. Two months later, dyspnoea on exertion worsened and elevated BNP levels were observed . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a reduction in the LVEF to 25% . The extent of active myocardial inflammation was re-evaluated using 18F-FDG PET/CT, which revealed de novo FDG uptake at the apex of the heart . A cardiac sarcoidosis relapse was confirmed, and the prednisolone dose was increased to 30 mg/day followed by the addition of methotrexate at 6 mg/week, which resulted in a prompt reduction in the hs-cTnI concentration to <10 pg/mL and subsequent success of heart failure management, although the BNP levels were still elevated, revealing a discrepancy between hs-cTnI and BNP . The prednisolone dose was tapered by 5 mg/day at intervals of 4–6 weeks and maintained at 10 mg/day in combination with methotrexate at 6 mg/week. The patient’s general condition has remained stable, and the hs-cTnI concentration has been below the upper reference limit for over 3 years after the relapse.