A 9-year-old Caucasian boy presented with long-standing nasal obstruction. Physical examination revealed a large mass covered with normal mucosa, originating from the right side of nasal septum and located 3 mm far from the vestibule. The lesion was polypoid in shape, soft to palpation but more indurate than inflammatory nasal polyp . CT scans confirmed a large right nasal mass adjacent to the nasal septum . The tumour was 15 × 10 × 10 mm in size and skin-to-pink coloured. It filled nearly all the right nasal meatus. Under general anaesthesia and endoscopic guidance, an incision posterior to the lesion was performed, the mass was separated from the quadrangle cartilage and dissected out with a 2 mm margin of unaffected mucosa . Since then, the patient has been asymptomatic for 12 months with completely healed lining of the nose.
Histopathologically (HE staining), prominent glandular proliferation containing serous as well as mucous components was found in the tumour except for its anterior part where hypertrophied mucosa with prominent fibrous lamina propria without glands was observed. The latter portion of the lesion was lined by parakeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, whereas the glandular area was covered by ciliated respiratory epithelium . In the connective tissue areas, abundant inflammatory cells and numerous blood vessels were present . No identifiable mitotic activity or necrosis could be observed.
Immunohistochemistry revealed pan-cytokeratin (cytokeratins 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 13, 18) immunostaining in both types of surface lining epithelium as well as in glands. Smooth muscle actin was present in myoepithelial cells surrounding glandular acini and in blood vessel walls . Immunostaining for vimentin visualised positive cells located in the connective tissue and, occasionally, in the stratified and airway epithelium . Positive immunostaining for CD8 disclosed T lymphocytes in the stroma, but interestingly, cells of the basal layer of the stratified epithelium also presented CD8 immunoreactivity . Numerous macrophages expressing CD68 were observed in the connective tissue and, occasionally, in the epithelium . There was no S-100 immunoreactivity in the lesion (not shown). Collagen type IV and laminin (not shown) were present in basal laminae of surface lining epithelium, blood vessels and glands.