A 35-year-old male was injured in his right shoulder in a motorcycle accident. After the accident, he was unable to lift his arm so he came to our hospital. As relevant information, seven months earlier, he had undergone a successful Latarjet procedure for the treatment of anterior shoulder instability. By the time he had the accident, he had resumed his normal daily activities and returned to sports at the same level he played prior to the surgical procedure. No complications were reported. Healing of the coracoid graft was confirmed in a CT scan at 4 months follow-up postoperatively.
Physical examination denoted deformity, tenderness, and swelling on his right shoulder. The range of motion was limited, flexion was 80°, and abduction was about 45°, and a constant score was made which amounted to 34 points. Neurovascular examination was normal. Standard radiographs of the shoulder and right clavicle were made as well as a Zanca projection. They revealed a distal clavicle fracture classified as a Neer type IIA fracture pattern. Screws from the Latarjet procedure were in a good position without signs of loosening. They also showed the remnant of the coracoid process, according to surgical history .
Due to this background, a CT scan was performed in order to measure the coracoid process remnant which would affect the decision on the surgical technique chosen. We measured it from the base to the distal end of the previous osteotomy . Total length was 7.5 mm, and it was decided to use a double-button fixation system, since the drilling for the placement of the device has a width of 4 mm, leaving enough bone available for the stabilization of the button.
Surgery was performed with an interscalene nerve block and the patient placed in the beach-chair position without traction. Standard antibiotic prophylaxis was used (cefazoline, 2 grams intravenously). The ipsilateral arm and shoulder were prepared and draped in a sterile fashion. First, a posterior portal and a diagnostic arthroscopy were performed. The coracoid bone graft of the Latarjet procedure previously performed was found in the correct position and healed. No associated injuries were found. An anterior working portal was then created through direct vision through the rotator interval. The rotator interval was opened and the subscapularis bursa and scar tissue were resected until the remnant of the base of the coracoid process was visualized and carefully cleaned using a radiofrequency ablator. An anterolateral accessory portal was created and the arthroscope was changed using a switch stick to have a lateral vision. The coracoid remnant was measured arthroscopically confirming the length of 7.5 mm previously analyzed in the CT scan.
A drill guide was then introduced in the anterior portal and centered on the under face of the remnant of the base of the coracoid process. Good positioning and support of the guide in the coracoid remnant were observed. Then, a 3 cm incision was made over the clavicle, and the guide was placed down and positioned 15 mm medial to the fracture in its center. A 2 mm Kirschner wire was inserted and a 4 mm hole was created with a cannulated drill through the clavicle and the remnant of the coracoid process. A guidewire was passed through the drill and retrieved through the anterior portal. The FLOOP system (South American Implants) was then inserted through the tunnels using the wire, and the button was flipped under the surface of the coracoid process. After the flipping of the button, the clavicle button was placed and the system was tightened through its blocking capacity when adjusting, until anatomic clavicle alignment was achieved. The button was then secured with 5 knots. This allowed reduction of the proximal part of the fracture. Fluoroscopy was performed to confirm an accurate reduction in the fracture and position of the buttons. The patient was discharged the same day after surgery with our usual standard of antibiotic prophylaxis (500 milligrams of cephalexin every 6 hours for two days), without antithrombotic prophylaxis .
Postoperative, the arm was supported with a sling for 4 weeks. The patient was not permitted to elevate the arm above 90° in any plane during the first 3 weeks. The patient was allowed to bear weight on his arm from the sixth week onwards. After week 8, full shoulder active range of motion in all planes was allowed, with an increase in the intensity of strength and functional training for a gradual return to activities and sports. The patient was allowed to return to sports when radiographic and clinical fracture union had occurred (10 weeks after procedure), full shoulder range of motion had been achieved, and shoulder strength was near 100%. . Clinical follow-up was conducted weekly during the first month and then monthly until fracture healing was achieved. The radiological evaluation consisted of a frontal clavicle radiograph and Zanca projection. One year after surgery, the patient indicated no pain on a visual analogue scale and the constant score was 95 points (the preoperative score was 34 points). The patient had no symptoms or signs referable to the acromioclavicular joint on specific testing.