A 43-year-old woman first presented to a medical centre after an abnormal heart silhouette was detected on a chest X-ray during a health screening, which had not been present three years earlier . Her significant past history included undergoing a right adrenalectomy for primary aldosteronism, with good post-operative results. She was not on any regular medications.
Upon presentation for the chest X-ray findings, the patient was asymptomatic, and the results of physical examination were within normal limits. The blood tests that included d-dimer and immunological assessments were within normal limits. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated an aneurysmal formation on the epicardial aspect at the base of the anterior wall of the left ventricle (LV) . Tortuous vessels were seen near the aneurysm, along with blood flowing from the fistula and draining to the upper pulmonary valve. These vessels displayed a mosaic signal and a systolic-dominant continuity waveform on Doppler echocardiography . Three-dimensional reconstructed contrast-enhanced computed tomography (3D-CT) images depicted a 43 × 42 × 33 mm aneurysm, located at the level of the aortic valve on the anterior aspect of the heart ( and ). A whole-body CT scan was negative for other aneurysms in other regions of the body. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)-CT was negative for abnormal uptake in the aneurysm or other organs.
After admission, coronary angiography (CAG) confirmed the presence of two CPAFs via the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery (, , ) and conus branch (CB) of the right coronary artery (, , ), and one giant aneurysm. Selective injection of contrast agent via the LAD revealed inflow of contrast into the aneurysm and outflow into the pulmonary artery (PA). Additionally, experimental balloon occlusion of the feeding vessel abolished inflow of contrast into the aneurysm .
Selective angiography of the CB did not clearly show an inflow into the aneurysm. Right heart catheterization showed a mild increase in oxygen saturation from the right ventricle to the PA (72% and 76%, respectively), with a normal mean PA pressure and PA wedge pressure. The pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio was 1.00.
An instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) measurement was performed in the LAD to confirm the steal due to the CPAF. Marked myocardial ischaemia was not detected (iFR = 0.96: below 0.89 indicate ischaemia). Altogether, the findings were diagnosed as congenital CPAFs with a giant aneurysm.
Because of the risk of rupture of the aneurysm, which had expanded over a few years, we recommended surgical resection. However, the patient refused this option and opted for endovascular therapy. The patient was prescribed beta-blockers and readmitted for treatment two months later. Her condition was stable, but CAG revealed that the feeding vessel via the LAD was occluded midway, and the aneurysm no longer showed much contrast agent (, , ). TTE showed an isoechoic-to-hyperechoic solid echo inside the aneurysm, with absence of an internal-blood flow signal, indicating spontaneous thrombosis of the aneurysm .
Since we were concerned about recanalization of the aneurysm, we performed coil embolizations of the feeding vessel in the LAD artery (, , ) and the CB (, , ), using four 0.018″ straight type coils and nine 0.014″ deatchable coils. Periprocedural complications were not observed. Contrast-enhanced CT conducted on the second day after the procedure showed that the feeding artery was completely embolized by coils and that the aneurysm was almost completely thrombosed ( and ). There was minor residual flow from the draining vessels into the aneurysm. Additionally, there was slight evidence of a fistula connecting the bronchial artery to the CPAF, which had not been discernible on pre-procedural studies. As these findings had no bearing on the patient’s haemodynamic status, we did not perform an additional intervention.
The patient was discharged on the third post-procedural day, free of any complications and without the need for supplementary medication. At a one-year follow-up after the procedure, the patient remained asymptomatic, and a follow-up contrast-enhanced CT was negative for changes. The thrombus inside the aneurysm remained intact .