The patient presented as an 82-year-old woman who noticed hematochezia and change in stool caliber over a period of 3 months. At initial presentation, there were no constitutional symptoms including weight changes, fevers, chills, myalgias, or anorexia. Her social history was remarkable for 40-pack year smoking habit. Her past medical history was significant for depression, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (emphysema), coronary artery disease complicated by hypercholesterolemia, and essential hypertension. Her family history was significant for breast, ovarian, lung, and bladder cancers; there was no personal or family history of colorectal cancer.
On initial examination, she had a 5 cm palpable rectal mass 8 cm from the anal verge, which was also visible as a 5.5 cm heterogenous soft tissue mass on contrasted abdominopelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The patient had normal appearance of genitourinary organs and the remainder of the examination was unremarkable. Contrasted CT imaging of the chest and liver were negative for metastatic lesions; pararectal lymphadenopathy was confirmed on contrasted MRI of the pelvis. She had a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 8.2 ng mL−1. Given her initial diagnostic imaging, a recommendation was made for diagnostic colonoscopy and core needle biopsy for pathologic tissue evaluation and mismatch repair genotyping. Histopathology revealed a moderate-grade adenocarcinoma microsatellite stable with a clinical stage of stage IIIB, cT4a, cN1b, cM0.
Because of her untreated nonmetastatic disease, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0, and adequate organ function, she was recruited to the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Experimental Therapeutics Clinical Trial Network (ETCTN) protocol #10,410, an accelerated-titration phase I study testing the addition of radiosensitizing oral ropidoxuridine (IPdR) to the usual concurrent capecitabine–radiotherapy combination for rectal cancer (NCT04406857). The accelerated titration design was based on prior phase I trial ropidoxuridine–radiotherapy experience . NCI Central Institutional Review Board (CIRB, Bethesda, Maryland) granted approval for conduct of the trial; the patient provided written informed consent. Her first pretrial treatment step in the TNT schema was eight cycles of leucovorin calcium (folinic acid, 400 mg m−2 day 1), fluorouracil (400 mg m−2 day 1 and then continuously 2400 mg m−2 day−1 on days 1 and 2), plus oxaliplatin (85 mg m−2 day 1) chemotherapy (mFOLFOX6) repeated every 2 weeks starting in November 2020. Her second on trial step of TNT involved daily intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for 5 days per week to a dose of 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions of 1.8 Gy using 6 megavolt photons beginning in March 2021. Concurrent oral twice-daily ropidoxuridine 75 mg m−2 for 7 days per week and oral twice-daily capecitabine 875 mg m−2 for 5 days per week began on day 1 of radiotherapy. The investigational ropidoxuridine–capecitabine combination was to finish on day 28 of radiotherapy. Plasma ropidoxuridine (IPdR) pharmacokinetic assay and percent iododeoxyuridine (IUdR, a short-lived metabolite of IPdR) incorporation into granulocyte DNA pharmacodynamic assay were collected on day 8.
She achieved a partial response to mFOLFOX6 without any unresolved grade 2 or higher adverse event before starting her ropidoxuridine–capecitabine–radiotherapy. After 14 days of ropidoxuridine–capecitabine–radiotherapy, the patient complained of a 3-day history of 6–10 stools per day. Laboratory investigation disclosed grade 2 neutropenia and grade 3 thrombocytopenia. All trial therapies were stopped. Three days later, she was evaluated for grade 3 abdominal pain, grade 4 neutropenia, and grade 4 diarrhea. She was hospitalized for grade 4 sigmoid typhlitis when discovered on same-day abdominopelvic CT. Intravenous hydration and antibiotics were started. At 10 days after hospital admission, she progressed to pneumoperitoneum and bacterial sepsis (Streptococcus bovis) despite aggressive supportive care and intravenous antibiotics. She died from typhlitis-related bacteremia and multiple organ failure 27 days after the start of ropidoxuridine–capecitabine–radiotherapy. This grade 5 adverse event was listed as a definite attribution to the ropidoxuridine–capecitabine treatment. This event suspended the phase I accelerated titration portion of the trial; the trial closed to all accrual in December 2022.
A sensitive high-pressure liquid chromatography assay for percent IUdR incorporation into granulocyte DNA found no incorporation of this metabolite into her granulocytes on day 8. Pharmacokinetic analyses detected no IPdR plasma levels over 4 h of sampling; IUdR plasma levels peaked at 0.070 micromolar 30 min following the morning 75 mg ropidoxuridine dose and fell to less than 0.020 micromolar 4 h after the dose. Her pharmacokinetic analyses for capecitabine and its metabolites revealed a peak fluorouracil concentration of 1.2 micromolar at 2 h of the morning 825 mg m−2 dose, which is 10 times higher than reported in a prior capecitabine pharmacokinetic study .