A 75-year-old male was referred for unexplained symptoms of nocturia, polyuria, and unintentional weight loss in October 2018. Relevant medical history reported abdominal trauma with hepatic and splenic lacerations, requiring two laparotomies and splenectomy. Upon outpatient assessment, the patient reported occasional pain in the lower abdomen before flatulency. Abdominal examination revealed a small, palpable mass superficially located in the laparotomy scar site and a second, soft, non-tender mass in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen.
Upon diagnostic workup, blood test results showed a c-reactive protein (CRP) level of 26.4 mg/L and elevated gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) of 95 U/L. No other biochemical deviations were observed in complete blood counts, renal-, or liver function tests. A thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed ascites, multiple intraperitoneal tumour depositions and tumour involvement of the small bowel mesentery . Tumour obstruction of the distal ureters caused bilateral hydronephrosis. No signs of distant metastases were detected. An indistinct mass in the caecum was presumed to be the primary tumour . Subsequent colonoscopy did not identify any (mucosal) abnormalities in the cecum, appendix or elsewhere in the colon.
Ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsy of an abdominal wall lesion was executed and histopathological examination identified localization of pseudomyxoma peritonei, with immunohistochemical staining being positive for cytokeratin 20 (CK-20) and CDX-2 and negative for cytokeratin 7 (CK-7). Hereafter, the patient was referred to our hospital, a tertiary centre, for further treatment. Tumour markers were assessed (CA 19.9 of 470 U/mL, CEA of 25 μg/L), and PMP originating from an appendiceal mucinous neoplasm was suspected. Eligibility for cytoreductive surgery (CRS) was determined during a multidisciplinary tumour board discussion.
After general anaesthesia, bilateral ureteric stents were placed by the urologist. Upon explorative median laparotomy, bulky tumour was encountered in the abdominal midline. As high-grade disease was suspected, the tumorous tissue was resected and sent for frozen section procedure. The pathological assessment confirmed a low-grade mucinous neoplasm. The extent of peritoneal involvement was assessed by using the Peritoneal Cancer Index (PCI) and scored as 30 . Given the low-grade aspect of frozen section biopsies and the inevitable risk of bowel obstruction due to multiple colonic tumour depositions, it was decided to continue with maximal tumour debulking and subsequent HIPEC. During debulking, a greater omentectomy, peritonectomy of peritoneum overlying the bladder and subtotal colectomy were performed. Mucus located on small bowel serosa and mesentery was removed manually and no serosal injuries occurred. The achieved completeness of cytoreduction (CCR) was defined as CCR2, indicating residual tumor nodules between 0.25 and 2.5 cm . Following cytoreduction, hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy was applied using the open Coliseum technique with Mitomycin C for 90 min at 42°C, according to the standardized Dutch CRS-HIPEC protocol . After perfusion, an end ileostomy was created and a pelvic drain was placed.
The postoperative course was complicated by a delirium requiring medical treatment (grade 1 complication according to the Clavien-Dindo [CD] classification) and urinary retention, requiring replacement of a long-term catheter (CD grade 2) [, ]. The patient was discharged on the ninth postoperative day. Shortly after, the patient was readmitted with clinical symptoms of pyelonephritis, confirmed by positive urinalysis and abdominal CT scan, requiring treatment with oral antibiotics (CD grade 2 complication). Six weeks postoperatively, ureteric stents were removed.
Postoperative histopathological examination demonstrated extensive localization of extracellular mucin in all resected specimens with the presence of mucinous epithelium with mainly mild to moderate cytological atypia , and focal areas with high-grade cytological atypia and architectural features . The appendix was identified after cross-sectioning of the cecum. A high-grade appendicular mucinous neoplasm (HAMN) was encountered according to the PSOGI 2016 consensus classification [, ]. In addition, one tubular adenoma with low-grade dysplasia was found in the descending colon and 16 lymph nodes, all without metastases. Based on the clinical and histopathological findings, the final diagnosis was high-grade PMP originating from a HAMN .
In our centre, a thoracoabdominal CT is performed routinely 3, 6, and 12 months after the CRS-HIPEC procedure and every 6 months thereafter, up to 5 years after the initial surgery. The first postoperative CT scan identified multiple peritoneal depositions located cranial-ventral in the hepatic region, with suspicion of surface implants in segment III. Furthermore, extensive peritoneal involvement was seen in the upper left abdominal region. Left-sided pleural effusion was present, without signs of pulmonary metastases. Tumour markers were elevated (CA 19.9 of 160 U/mL, CEA of 10 μg/L). Upon multidisciplinary tumour board discussion, the patient was not considered eligible for re-CRS-HIPEC due to prior comorbidity and progressive disease. Active surveillance and watchful waiting were discussed, to further monitor the patient’s condition.
Seven months after initial surgery, the patient was admitted to the hospital with severe anaemia (haemoglobin of 3.4 mmol/L, MCV of 69fL, ferritin of 7μg/L), without signs of hematemesis or objectified melena. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy excluded gastro-intestinal bleedings. Tumour markers were increased (CA 19.9 of 760 U/mL, CEA of 28 μg/L) and a thoracoabdominal CT scan showed progression of known mucinous depositions in the hepatic and epigastric region.
Interestingly, multiple new intraluminal lesions of the small bowel with contrast enhancement were seen, not corresponding to the intraperitoneal mucinous lesions . Enteroscopy via end ileostomy revealed a 5-cm sessile polypoid mass at approximately 60 cm with bleeding tendency, impeding further passage and intubation . With no options for endoscopic resection due to the large size, multiple biopsies were taken and the procedure was terminated.
Histopathological assessment of the polypoid intraluminal lesion revealed intestinal-type neoplastic tissue with hyperchromatic nuclei showing pseudostratification directly adjacent to the mesenchymal stroma. No infiltrative features were present. Additional next-generation sequencing demonstrated an activating mutation for KRAS and a mutation for SMAD4 . Both mutations were also present in the intraperitoneal localizations of high-grade PMP. No mutations were found in GNAS, BRAF, HRAS and NRAS. Based on the clinical, histopathological and molecular findings, the patient was diagnosed with an intraluminal recurrence of PMP located in the ileum.
With no remaining surgical treatment options for the progression of PMP, nor treatment possibilities for anaemia caused by the bleeding intraluminal lesions, the patient was referred back to the initial teaching hospital and received blood transfusions as part of palliative care. During the eighth transfusion, the patient collapsed and sudden cardiac arrest occurred. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was unsuccessful and the patient deceased shortly hereafter. Post-mortem diagnosis of haemolytic transfusion reaction was excluded by laboratory investigations. The cause of death was determined as a severe gastrointestinal haemorrhage caused by the underlying disease.