An 88-year-old woman who presented with upper and lower limb purpura visited the hematology department . Enhanced fibrinolytic-type DIC was diagnosed by a blood test. The significant laboratory findings were as follows: platelet count, 77,000 cells/mL; a decreased fibrinogen level (128 mg/dL); and an increased fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products level (47.5 μg/mL). The diagnosis of DIC was made according to the diagnostic criteria for DIC established by the Japanese Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis (4 points).
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a 60 mm pararenal AAA, a 42 mm right CIAA, and 19 mm right internal iliac artery dilation . In the absence of other obvious reasons for DIC, we hypothesized that DIC was associated with an AAA and a right CIAA. The angle of the infrarenal neck was severe (89.1°) . Although the patient’s anatomical status fell outside the recommended indications for endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) and after considering the patient’s advanced age and tendency for bleeding, it was thought that open repair would be excessively invasive; therefore, we chose the endovascular approach. Percutaneous coil embolization of the right internal iliac artery using peripheral HydroCoils (Azur; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was carried out prior to EVAR. EVAR was then performed under general anesthesia. An introducer sheath was inserted after the bilateral femoral artery and bilateral brachial artery were cut open. Bilateral renal artery stent placement was attempted to preserve the flow. However, although wiring to the renal artery was successfully performed using a bilateral brachial artery approach, a catheter was not used because of the angle of renal arterial bifurcation. Renal artery stent placement was abandoned. An Endurant II main body stent graft (Medtronic, Santa Rosa, CA, USA) was advanced to the infrarenal artery and inserted into the appropriate location. In the end, a main body stent graft was placed directly below both renal arteries. For the contralateral leg, a stent graft was inserted into the left common iliac artery, and for the ipsilateral leg, a stent graft was inserted into the right external iliac artery. Final digital subtraction angiography demonstrated that the AAA and right CIAA were excluded by the stent graft without visible endoleak, with patency of bilateral renal arteries . The intraoperative blood loss was 1456 mL. The patient received 6 units of red blood cells and 10 units of platelet concentrates during the procedure. To prevent thrombus formation associated with sheath implantation, heparin was administered during EVAR, and its effect was reversed with protamine after the procedure.
On postoperative day 1, the DIC score worsened to 6 with a drop in platelet count. Nafamostat mesylate was administered intravenously at 200 mg/day. On postoperative day 3, the patient was weaned off DIC with a score of 2, and Nafamostat mesylate was discontinued. The platelet count quickly increased , and the purpura on the extremities quickly disappeared. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital 9 days after surgery. Postoperative CT revealed aneurysm exclusion, no endoleak and patency of the bilateral renal arteries . The patient is undergoing outpatient follow-up and is progressing without any bleeding tendency.