A 30-year-old African woman [para 1, gravida 2, 167 cm, 69 kg, with a body mass index (BMI) of 24.7 kg/m2] from a low-income family presented to the emergency department with a chief complaint of abdominal pain and vomiting lasting 8 hours. The abdominal pain was colicky, and she had a history of vomiting for four episodes on admission to the emergency department; associated with this, she had a history of blurred vision, lightheadedness, loss of appetite, low-grade fever, and low-grade fever and constipation. An ultrasound revealed that she had a dilated, thickened wall and fluid filled with hyperechoic spots on the colon, and she was scheduled for an emergency laparotomy. Subsequently, she was transferred to the operating room for an emergency laparotomy. A bilateral 18 gauge intravenous cannula was secured, and 0.9% normal saline was infused rapidly. Her vital signs at the time of admission were as follows: blood pressure 110/65 mmHg, pulse rate 115 beats per minute, SpO2 95%, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, urine output 150 ml. Otherwise, she has no history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or previous medication use. On physical examination, her conjunctivas were slightly pale with a delayed capillary refill, her buccal mucosa was dry, and she was moderately dehydrated; she had a 29-week-sized protuberant abdomen, which was tender and distended during an examination. Other systems were standard, there were no relevant findings on systemic examination, and she had no history of previous surgical and anesthesia exposure. On preoperative airway evaluation, a comprehensive airway evaluation was done and revealed Mallampati class II, jaw slide class A, with a sternomental distance (SMD) of 13 cm and thyromental distance (TMD) of 7 cm.
Preoperatively, the pros and cons of performing and postponing the operation were briefly discussed among the patient, surgeon, and consultant anesthetist on duty, and the closing decision was made to continue the surgery. Considering pregnancy, all other findings, and the risk of GA, the team members decided to proceed with thoracic epidural anesthesia with an adjuvant (opioid) as the sole anesthesia. After briefing the patient about the risks and benefits of doing and not doing the procedure, informed consent was taken from both departments (surgery and anesthesia) as per the hospital protocol.
The woman was premedicated with ondansetron (4 mg, intravenous) and dexamethasone (8 mg, intravenous). All available American Society of Anesthesia (ASA) standard monitoring [non-invasive blood pressure (NIBP), capnography, pulse-oximetry, and electrocardiography] are attached, and the vital signs were recorded [blood pressure (BP) 110/65 mmHg, pulse rate (PR) 114 beats per minute, respiratory rate (RR) 22 breaths per minute, peripheral arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) 94%, and urine output (UOP) 180 ml]. After the patient and equipment were prepared, the woman was placed in a sitting position, and the tip of the scapula (T7) was marked; then, the spinous process was counted down up to the T10 level. The area was washed with antiseptic solutions (iodine and alcohol). Afterward, the needle insertion site was infiltrated with 3 ml of 2% lidocaine (60 mg).
The Touhy needle used was introduced, and after the 2 cm insertion of this needle, the loss resistance syringe with saline was connected, and the loss of resistance was felt at 4.5 cm. The catheter guide was connected to the needle, and a catheter was introduced through the guide up to 15 cm; then, the needle was slightly removed. The catheter was fixed at 10 cm; after that, 3 ml of 2% lidocaine was administered as the test dose, and HR and BP were recorded. There was no change in vital signs. Then, after 10 ml of half-percent (0.5%) (50 mg) bupivacaine and 0.25 ml (25 µg) fentanyl were given, vital signs were recorded as BP of 105/65 mmHg, PR of 84 beats per minute, SpO2 of 97% RR of 19 breaths per minute, and needle pinprick and an alcohol-soaked swab were used to check the sensory block.
A Bromage score was applied to check the motor blockage, and the block was complete. After checking the differential blockage, the surgery was started and the abdomen was opened. The large bowel was obstructed, which was preoperatively diagnosed; the small bowel was also obstructed, and there was adhesion to the intestine and uterus.
There was dense, thick, and edematous adhesion with trapped and obstructed terminal ileum and sigmoid colon on the surface of the uterus. There were multiple hard mesenteric lymphadenopathies and granulomatous swelling in the bowel surface adhesion areas. There was also a thin non-offensive pus in the cul-de-sac.
The adhesion was gently released with blunt and sharp dissection from the uterine surface and lateral abdominal wall. Retrograde milking down to the rectum was done, and the patency was checked. Later, the pus was investigated, and laboratory results revealed the patient had intestinal tuberculosis. Intraoperatively, all vital sign parameters were stable (BP 102/60 mmHg, PR 78 beats per minute, RR 18 breaths per minute, SpO2 98%). The surgery took 1 hour and 50 minutes, and anesthesia took 2 hours. The estimated blood loss was 300 ml; a total of 2000 ml of 0.9% normal saline was given. Then the patient was transferred to the Post-Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU), and she was cooperative. An obstetrician checked the fetal status, and it was well; no change in fetal movement was observed. The mother’s vital signs in the recovery room were BP of 102/60 mmHg, PR of 78 beats per minute, SpO2 of 98%, RR of 18 breaths per minute, and urine output of 350 ml per minute; no apparent complication happened, and after 30 minutes of recovery the patient was transferred to a surgical ward. Ten milliliters of 0.125% bupivacaine top-up dose was given every 8-hour difference, and the severity of pain was assessed with a numerical rating scale; no pain to mild pain was recorded during follow-up, and after 2 days, the catheter was removed, the tip was checked, and multimodal analgesia was continued until her discharge. She started pyridoxine 50 mg per oral (PO) daily, and continued anti-TB (RHZE) four tablets per day. She was discharged safely after 5 days of hospital stay with her preserved pregnancy without any apparent complications. Then the patient was followed for 6 months and had no complications.