A 34-year-old Albanian, Kosovan male was sent to our centre to undergo echocardiography, in order to clarify the unexplained chest pain that had started two days earlier. Patient explained that his chest pain started after physical exertion, which consisted of carrying wood. This pain radiated to the back and was of strong intensity. He was visited by an internal medicine doctor and was then referred to the cardiologist.
Patient reported that this was the first time to experience such pain. He had been suffering from bronchial asthma since childhood. Patient was not aware of suffering from other diseases, nor was he aware of serious diseases or sudden deaths among his family members. His parents did not show features of the Marfan syndrome and the patient did not have other siblings.
He was 176 cm tall and weighed 61 kg, had elongated arms, arachnodactyly and moderate joint laxity. Patient had serious chest wall deformities, which included thoracic scoliosis of the vertebral column and pectus excavatum . On auscultation of the heart, a diastolic murmur 1-2/6 over the aortic area was heard. Auscultation of the lungs demonstrated prolonged expiration and mild wheezing. Blood pressure was 150/90 mmHg. ECG displayed sinus rhythm, heart rate of 80/minute, without any abnormalities.
Chest X-ray revealed osseous deformities previously mentioned and a heart size that encompassed almost entire left hemi-thorax.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed enormous size of the aortic bulb, measuring 80 mm on short axis parasternal view at the level of aortic cusps . Despite the very large size of the aortic root, aortic regurgitation was mild. Mitral valve prolaps of the anterior leaflet with mild mitral regurgitation was also noted .
Transesophageal echocardiography confirmed the massive size of the aortic root and normal size of the aortic arch and descending thoracic aorta . We were unable to detect signs of aortic dissection, thus computed tomography (CT) of the chest was recommended.
Contrast CT of the chest demonstrated severe enlargement of aortic root measuring 78.7 mm, and intramural hematoma that reached the aortic arch .
An ophthalmologic examination discovered the presence of myopia, of -3 diopters. No signs of ectopia lentis or retinal ablation were found. Ocular pressure was 12 mmHg.
In accordance with Ghent criteria, patient was diagnosed as having Marfan syndrome, complicated by severe aortic root aneurysm and type A intramural hematoma with no intraluminal tear or flap being detected. As a result, patient was put on Beta blocker therapy and was referred immediately for surgical intervention, replacement of the affected aorta with composite aortic valve- ascending aortic conduit, in a specialized cardio-surgery centre abroad. Unfortunately, patient ended up fatally during the open heart surgery.