A 68-year-old man with a history of transverse colon cancer (tub2, ly1, v0, pT1N0M0 stage I) and sigmoid colon cancer (pap, ly0, v0, pT3N0M0 stage IIA) was admitted to our hospital. Curative laparoscopic surgery was performed for synchronous double colon cancer 10 years ago. Conventional surveillance was performed 5 years after the primary colon cancer. The CEA level in the fifth year was 12.6 ng/mL. His CEA level remained slightly elevated due to heavy smoking. Oral floor cancer was detected seven years after surgery. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed no space-occupying lesions in the liver. The squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen was examined; however, CEA levels were not measured. Marginal mandibulectomy was performed at the Department of Otolaryngology of our hospital. The final diagnosis was SCC (pT1N0M0 stage I). After another 3 years, a liver tumor was detected during annual surveillance for oral floor cancer. Positron emission tomography–CT showed that the tumor was located on segment 7/8 (S7/8) of the liver, with an abnormal accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose . Dynamic CT showed that the tumor was 23 mm in size, with ring enhancement in the early phase . In the delayed phase, the tumor had a low-density area . Gadolinium–ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a hyperintense lesion without central filling in T2-weighted image sequences and a hypointense lesion in the hepatobiliary phase . In addition to a solitary liver tumor, no extrahepatic metastases were detected. Laboratory data showed a highly elevated CEA level (29.9 ng/mL). The levels of other tumor markers, including CA19-9, α-fetoprotein, and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II, were within normal limits. Tumor biopsy provided a diagnosis of moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. The preoperative differential diagnoses included delayed-onset CRLM, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, and liver metastasis from oral floor cancer.
A laparoscopic S7/8 partial resection was performed. The operative time was 324 min, and the intraoperative bleeding volume was 35 mL. The histopathological diagnosis was moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor was positive for caudal-type homeobox protein 2 and negative for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and CK20 . Therefore, a pathological diagnosis of CRLM was made. The patient has survived for 1 year without any recurrence.