We report a case of a 39-year old male, with no previous medical history, presenting with Salmonella typhimurium myopericarditis.
The patient initially presented to our emergency department (ED) with acute chest discomfort, on the background of a four-day history of persistent, watery diarrhoea, occurring three to four times per day. On Day 0 (four days prior to admission), he noticed diffused abdominal cramps, bloating, nausea without vomiting, and fever. There was no history of recent travel, however he had a seven-year-old daughter, who had a one-week history of the same symptoms which had resolved prior to the patient’s presentation. There was no report of blood in the diarrhoea, which was beginning to decrease and form solid motions by Day 4.
However, it was during this stage (Day 4) that the patient noted central chest discomfort, described as a burning sensation, radiating to the axilla and neck, associated with diaphoresis and self-resolving shortness of breath. This was not exacerbated by exercise, however there was some relief with leaning forwards. He initially presented to his General Practitioner (GP), who organised for faecal cultures, before referring onto ED.
At presentation to ED, his observations were within normal limits, with no documented fevers or tachycardia. Physical exam was unremarkable. Serial electrocardiogram (ECG, Figure ) revealed prominent ST elevation (> 2 mm in leads V2-V6, > 1 mm in II/aVF), as well as ST depression in aVR. Investigations revealed a white cell count (WCC) of 7.3 × 109/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) of 84 mg/L, as well as a Troponin I (Abbott Architect) of 14,757 ng/L and a creatinine kinase of 594 units/L. Other blood tests such as electrolytes, creatinine and liver function tests were unremarkable.
Chest X-ray showed mild cardiac enlargement, without signs of pulmonary oedema or pneumonia. Faeces microscopy and culture, along with blood cultures were taken, and the patient was admitted without specific antimicrobial treatment. An echocardiogram conducted the next day showed a trivial amount of pericardial fluid. The was no clinical or echocardiographic evidence of tamponade, ventricular dysfunction, or thrombus formation.
During Day 5, we were notified of a Salmonella species from the faecal culture organised by the GP. Treatment was commenced with 1 g of ceftriaxone daily. Later that night there was an associated, asymptomatic rise in the Troponin I from the previous nadir of 8,915 to 15,114 ng/L. Ceftriaxone was increased to 2 g daily, and the Infectious Diseases Unit were consulted. At this stage the repeat faecal culture also identified Salmonella species, with negative blood cultures at 48 h. Joint decision at this stage was made to change to azithromycin 500 mg daily for 5 d and to not initiate non-steroidal therapy, given that the initial presenting symptoms had fully resolved. There had been no clinical events of arterial or venous thrombus, combined with no significant echocardiography changes, therefore no anticoagulation was prescribed. After a further period of observation over 24 h, during which the troponin decreased to 11,327 ng/L, the patient was discharged home.
Post discharge, at Day 7, the initial presenting blood culture was positive for gram negative bacilli in one aerobic bottle, out of two sets, also identified as Salmonella typhimurium, however by this stage the patient was convalescing well at home.