A 43-year-old Hispanic woman with no past medical or family history of importance, presented to our emergency room (ER) with progressive lumbar pain for the past 4 months, 10/10 in intensity, which irradiated to her left lower limb limiting her functionality. She also referred weakness of her left leg, associated with loss of sensitivity, and had experienced night fevers, chills, and a 23 kg (50 pound) weight loss. A physical examination revealed monoparesis of her left leg, associated with hyperreflexia, and hypoesthesia.
A contrasted pelvis and lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a solid infiltrative mass in her left sacral and iliac bones, compromising the left sacroiliac joint, the ipsilateral sacral nerve roots, and the pyramidalis and gluteus medius muscles. Other bone lesions compromised the left femoral neck and the right femoral diaphysis .
The hypothesis was that these lesions were metastatic, so further studies were ordered. Breast ultrasonography revealed a mass of 2 cm by 3 cm in her left breast, but a subsequent fine-needle biopsy showed benign histopathology. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed masses in both her liver and lung . A bronchoalveolar wash was negative for malignancy, and so was a transbronchial biopsy. A decision was made to do a CT-guided percutaneous biopsy of the sacral lesion; the results revealed a metastasized lung adenocarcinoma , negative for ALK mutation but with a complex mutation of the EGFR gene: a 19-Del associated with a T790M (exon 20) mutation. The genetic assay used was cobas® EGFR Mutation Test v2 (Roche®). The target deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was amplified and detected on the cobas® 480 system which measures the fluorescence generated by specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products, using the amplification and detection reagents provided in the cobas® EGFR mutation test kit (lightmix®).
Stage IV lung adenocarcinoma was diagnosed. In the absence of third-generation EGFR-TKIs (not approved by the local drug and food administration at the time) and taking into account the performance status of our patient, which was Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 2, platinum-based chemotherapy of gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 day 1 and 8) with carboplatin (AUC 6) was initiated. Only grade 1 toxicities were observed.
Our patient suffered from a severe headache 25 days after admission, with no response to analgesia, and a CT scan of her brain was done; the CT scan revealed intraparenchymal bleeding on the left cerebellar hemisphere, with fourth ventricle compression and non-communicant acute hydrocephalus. A brain MRI showed a lesion in the cerebellum, thought to be a metastasis . After stabilization of the clinical status, whole brain irradiation with three-dimensional conformational radiotherapy (CRT) was done (3 Gy fractions for a total dose of 30 Gy). Radiation therapy (three-dimensional CRT) was also administered to her left sacral and iliac bones for pain management (4 Gy fractions for a total dose of 20 Gy). She died 4 months after diagnosis.