A 60-year-old woman visited the Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center in South Korea because of progressive abnormal behavior, personality change, and cognitive decline over the past 4 years. At the age of 56, she showed disinhibition, such as hoarding plastic bottles or paper cups and becoming aggressive over trifles. She also showed compulsive behavior, such as closing doors; apathy; and dietary change. The patient showed a progressive cognitive decline and relatively sparing memory and visuospatial function. However, at the age of 58, she started to show memory impairment as she could not remember where she put her money. She also showed visuospatial dysfunction as she got lost in her neighborhood and could not find her car in a parking lot. At the age of 60, disinhibition and apathy worsened along with increased appetite. In addition, she complained of nonspecific dizziness and unstable gait. She had a history of hyperlipidemia and no family history of neurological diseases in her first- or second-degree relatives.
On neuropsychological tests, her Mini-Mental State Examination score was 22, her clinical dementia rating score was 1, and the detailed results revealed global cognitive impairment . On neurological examination, she showed hyperactive deep tendon reflexes in the bilateral biceps, brachioradialis, and knee and positive Chaddock signs on both sides. Although no gross gait abnormalities or ataxia were observed, she showed bilateral sway on tandem gait. Upon physical examination, xanthomas were found in the bilateral dorsum of the hands and the Achilles tendons (, ). A skin biopsy revealed diffuse infiltration of foamy macrophages in the dermis, and a tendon biopsy revealed numerous lipid crystal clefts and a small number of foamy macrophages (, ).
Brain spectroscopy performed at 56 years of age showed hypoperfusion in the bilateral frontal and right temporal lobes . A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed during the same period showed slight periventricular white matter changes on T2 FLAIR images, but no other specific abnormalities were observed . An 18F-flutemetamol PET scan was interpreted as negative for amyloid. Her clinical phenotype and spectroscopy findings corresponded to probable bvFTD based on Rascovsky criteria for bvFTD .
However, follow-up T2 FLAIR images, performed at the age of 60 years, demonstrated progression of periventricular white matter changes and newly developed symmetrical hyperintense lesions in the dentate nucleus of the cerebellum . Although no evidence of peripheral neuropathy was found in the nerve conduction study (NCS), her posterior tibial somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) and visual evoked potential tests (VEP) were abnormal. Bone mineral osteodensitometry revealed the presence of osteoporosis. Ophthalmic examination revealed age-related macular degeneration with no cataracts or retinal invasion.
CTX was suspected based on xanthomas and follow-up brain MRI findings; thus, serum cholestanol and related gene tests were performed. Serum cholestanol (12.4 mg/L; normal value ≤6.0) and 7α,12α-dihydroxycholest-4-en-3-one (0.485 nmol/mL; normal value ≤0.100) levels were elevated. The serum levels of very-long-chain fatty acids for X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy and arylsulfatase A for metachromatic leukodystrophy were within the normal range. In genetic analysis with whole exome sequencing, a likely pathogenic variant (LPV) (NM_00784.4:c.1001T>A, p.Met334Lys) and a pathogenic variant (PV, NM_000784.4: c.1420C>T, p.Arg474Trp) were found in the CYP27A1 gene, which was confirmed to be translocated via genetic testing of her daughter and son, who carried each variant as heterozygous. The c.1001T>A (p.Met334Lys) had not been reported previously and the c.1420C>T (p.Arg474Trp) has been observed in several CTX patients and classified as pathogenic in ClinVar. (ClinVar accession number as VCV000004259.12) (–). The patient was finally diagnosed with CTX and was prescribed with chenodeoxycholic acid (750 mg/day). Eight months after the treatment, her disinhibition symptoms decreased. In neuropsychological tests, she showed improvements in visuospatial function, memory, frontal/executive function, general cognition, and global severity scales .