A 59-year old Afrocaribbean lady was recently referred to our hospital following confirmation of screen detected left breast cancer. As the lesion was only just palpable, the patient had undergone an image guided biopsy of the radiological abnormality at the host screening centre. Histological assessment of the breast biopsy confirmed invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). The patient’s case was discussed at a multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting with review of breast imaging which confirmed the presence of a highly suspicious density in the upper outer quadrant of the left breast , compatible with the site of the known IDC. The agreed plan was for the patient to undergo a wide local excision of the left breast lesion and sentinel lymph node biopsy. Moreover, it was agreed that she would also require a pre-operative ultrasound-guided skin marking on the morning of surgery in order to guide the extent of the breast resection.
She arrived on the morning of her operation and as per hospital protocol was taken to the admissions area for routine checks and observations by the nursing staff as well as to facilitate the consenting process by the surgical team. She was the first patient on the afternoon operating list. The surgical registrar went to see the patient, confirmed the clinical history, imaging findings, histopathological results and MDT recommendations. The patient was informed of the risks and benefits of the proposed procedure as well as the need for image-guided skin marking to assist resectional surgery and it was explained that this would occur prior to her being transferred to the operating theatre. The patient appeared to understand the process, the risks and benefits and duly signed the consent form. The registrar went to the breast imaging department to ensure that the radiologists were expecting the patient for an ultrasound scan. Prior to leaving for the imaging department the registrar explained to the sister in charge of the ‘admissions unit’ that the patient needed to have a pre-operative ultrasound scan and she was not to be transferred to the anaesthetic room until the image guided-skin marking had been conducted. The responsible consultant surgeon, who was otherwise engaged in clinic communicating a new diagnosis of breast cancer to another patient, received a telephone call from the theatre staff informing him that the patient was anaesthetised and enquiring as to his likely arrival time in the operating theatre. No ultrasound skin marking had been conducted. No-one had contacted the surgical team to ask them if it was acceptable to transfer the patient to the anaesthetic room. The patient herself had not queried being transferred to the operating theatre without a pre-operative procedure that only a few minutes beforehand she was informed was an absolute necessity.
The consultant radiologist due to perform the pre-operative ultrasound scan was called to the operating theatre, and thankfully was able to perform the image-guided localisation ‘on-table’ without further insult. The patient subsequently underwent the planned procedure and histopathological assessment confirmed a completely excised 5.2 mm IDC (closest margin 5.5 mm).