The patient was a 43-year-old woman with severe opioid use disorder (OUD), stimulant use disorder, and a history of overdose and infectious complications from injection drug use. The patient had a 6-year history of injecting fentanyl and cocaine. She was experiencing homelessness in Miami, FL.
She presented to a free student-run clinic at the IDEA Miami syringe services program (SSP) for wound care . During that time, she was injecting 0.25 g of fentanyl and cocaine together per day in her hands and arms. At this visit, she reported ulcers on bilateral upper extremities. She stated that she had never had wounds like these before despite injecting drugs for 6 years. She described the wounds starting as closed areas of hypopigmentation, then gradually opening, and producing foul-smelling yellow drainage. She noted that when the wounds began, she had a fever that subsided after one day. She had no night sweats, chills, or lymphadenopathy. On a physical exam, she had multiple ulcerations, with the largest being 4 cm in diameter, diffusely over her bilateral forearms with surrounding erythema and warmth (see Fig. : 1a, 1b). She did not have wounds present on her legs at this time. A diagnosis of xylazine-associated skin ulcers was favored over other infectious or inflammatory skin conditions due to the clinical picture and recent studies reporting similar case presentations in cities with large populations of PWUD. The wounds were cleaned with saline and dressed with petroleum-impregnated gauze. The patient was instructed to clean the wounds with water and soap daily and replace the petroleum- impregnated gauze dressing. She was also prescribed a course of doxycycline for suspected superimposed bacterial infection.
Seven weeks later, she presented to clinic once again for wound care. She had continued to inject drugs and her wounds had progressed (see Fig. : 2a, 2b). The wounds were warm, red, and painful and she had a subjective fever. She also noted that new ulcers had formed on her bilateral lower extremities. On physical exam, she had multiple large ulcerations on her bilateral forearms with surrounding hyperpigmentation and 2 small ulcerations with a necrotic center on the lateral aspect of her bilateral knees. The patient reported that she did not inject in her legs. She stated that she had successfully finished her previous course of antibiotics but was unable to consistently clean and dress her wounds. At this visit, her urine was tested for xylazine using the Rapid Response™ XTS (Liquid / Powder), which is a rapid visual immunoassay for the qualitative, presumptive detection of xylazine in liquids or powders at the cut-off concentration of 1000 ng/mL. This test strip was positive, indicating the presence of xylazine. The wounds were cleaned with saline solution and dressed the same as last time, and she was given the same wound care instructions. She was also prescribed a second course of antibiotics (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) for suspected superinfection of the wounds.