A 43-year-old woman presented for evaluation of infertility on 29 th January 2018 at the Centre for Reproductive and Genetic Health, London. She had secondary infertility for one year and had previously had a first trimester miscarriage, which was managed conservatively. Her medical history was unremarkable. Her ovarian reserve test showed a total antral follicle count of 6, anti-Mullerian hormone 4.7 pmol/l, follicle stimulating hormone 10.10 IU/l and oestradiol <250 pmol/l. Her male partner was 33 years old. His medical history was unremarkable and his semen analysis was normal. The couple was counseled. The patient underwent two consecutive cycles of controled ovarian stimulation to optimize the yield of embryos sent for PGT-A testing. An antagonist protocol was prescribed with Fostimon® 225 IU and Merional® 225 IU (IBSA, Italy). Vaginal egg retrieval was carried out 37 hr post 10,000 IU of Pregnyl (MSD, UK).
On the first cycle, a total of eight oocytes were collected, seven were mature and three exhibited normal fertilization at 16–18 hr post intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). A total of three top-quality embryos were frozen using the vitrification techniques on day 3 of embryo development. Embryo vitrification was performed using Kitazato vitrification kit with the use of high concentrations of cryoprotectants and ultra-rapid cooling to avoid detrimental ice crystal formation . On a subsequent cycle, a total of four eggs were collected all of which were mature and three fertilized following ICSI. On day 3 of embryo development, the frozen embryos from the previous cycle were thawed and all cultured to the blastocyst stage simultaneously. From the frozen thawed cohort of embryos, one embryo reached the blastocyst stage on day 6, while from then fresh cohort one embryo formed a blastocyst on day 5 of development. The blastocyst is an advanced stage of embryo development where the embryo differentiates into two cell lines, the inner cell mass and the trophectoderm, and forms a fluid filled cavity (Blastocoel). It is a prerequisite to culture embryos to the blastocyst stage prior to trophectoderm biopsy.
The unit policy is to only perform blastocentesis on half the embryos reaching the blastocyst stage for quality control. Therefore, the day 5 developing blastocyst was subjected to blastocentesis using a microinjection pipette prior to trophectoderm biopsy . A minimal invasive micro-puncture was performed between two junctions of cells, the fluid was aspirated and then expelled into a 0.2 ml Eppendorf tube. The tube was immediately placed on an ice rack and stored in a −80 °C freezer until analysis. Trophectoderm biopsy was then performed immediately using a non-contact 1.48 μm diode laser (RI, Cornwall, UK) with a total of 5–8 trophectoderm cells removed. Prior to blastocoelic fluid aspiration and trophectoderm biopsy, the blastocyst was removed from the embryoscope slide dish and approximately 15–20 μl of spent culture media was collected using a sterile individually wrapped 20 μl Gilson pipette. The collected media were expelled into a 0.2 ml Eppendorf tube and immediately placed on a cold rack and stored at −80°C until further analysis. The blastocyst was vitrified post biopsy using Cook blastocyst vitrification media (Cook, Sydney).
All three samples containing DNA and a negative control were sent to our genetic provider, Reprogenetics UK, where genetic analysis was performed using next generation sequencing (NGS). The blastocoel fluid sample and 10 μl of the spent media sample were each subjected to a modified version of MDA (Qiagen, UK) using a protocol developed at Reprogenetics specifically for the purpose of amplifying DNA from blastocoel fluid and spent media samples (Babariya and Wells, unpublished). The amplified products were run on a 1% (w/v) agarose gel to check for amplification success. Thereafter, Nextera DNA kit (Illumina, UK) was used to prepare libraries from successfully amplified samples followed by 75 bp paired end sequencing on a MiSeq (Illumina). Unfortunately, the blastocoel fluid sample resulted in suboptimal amplification and was not subjected to NGS. The sequencing data was analyzed using an in-house custom algorithm to determine the chromosomal copy number.
The trophectoderm biopsy results were euploid for both the embryos. Analysis of cell-free DNA in the corresponding embryo culture media yielded concordant results, indicating that both of the embryos were euploid. The patient had a 3D saline infusion sonohysterography on day 12 of the cycle, which revealed a normal uterine cavity. She was advised to take Primolut® (Bayer Schering Pharma, Germany) 5 mg twice daily from day 14 of the cycle until day 25 with Buserelin® (Sanofi-Aventis, Germany) from day 21 as per manufacturer’s instructions. Buserelin was stopped once luteal phase support was commenced. She had a baseline scan on day-1–3 to assess the endometrium and ovaries. Progynova® (Bayer, UK) 2 mg three times daily orally and 2 mg twice daily vaginally was prescribed on day-3 of the withdrawal bleed. She was advised to have a repeat transvaginal scan 12 days later to assess endometrial thickness. Once the endometrium was >7 mm in thickness and had a triple line on ultrasound, luteal support was commenced and embryo transfer was booked 6 days later. Luteal support for cryopreserved embryo transfer cycles included Utrogestan® (Besins, Belgium) 200 mg three times daily orally, intramuscular Lentogest (Institut Biochemique SA, Switzerland) three times per week and Crinone® 8% (Merck Serono, UK) twice a day per vaginam. These were continued until 10 weeks of pregnancy.
The suitable blastocyst was warmed on the day of embryo transfer using Cook Warming Kit (Cook, Sidney). The patient was instructed to perform a urinary pregnancy test 16 days later. As the urinary HCG test was positive, the patient was advised to come to the unit for serum HCG. Her serum hCG was 1312.0 IU/l. Subsequently, scans at 6 weeks and 8 weeks of gestation confirmed a viable intrauterine singleton pregnancy with normal foetal development. At the time of the write up of the case report, the patient was 20 weeks without any reported foetal or obstetric concerns.
This study was approved by the IRAS 214276. This report is based on a finding of the ongoing prospective study.