A 56-year-old male patient with a history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was diagnosed with hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma in June 2011. The disease progressed with pathology-proven metastatic liver tumor, for which he first received RFA in October 2012. In June 2014, abdominal sonography disclosed a mixed echogenic tumor of about 5 × 4 × 4 cm located in the left lobe just below the heart. A computed tomography scan showed a recurrent liver tumor of around 3.6 cm in the S2 segment . He was admitted for repeat RFA on August 5th, 2014. Three Covidien 15 × 3 cm cool-tip needles were inserted under echo guidance, and RFA was smoothly applied for a total of 16 min. No immediate complications were noted during the procedure.
Upper abdominal fullness was noted after the RFA. Abdominal sonography showed no new ascites and his hemogram remained stable. Hemorrhagic complications were therefore unlikely. The abdominal pain and fullness gradually subsided on the next day, however new-onset chest pain and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response developed. Fever and chills were also noted, and a physical examination revealed friction rub. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed diffuse ST elevation except for leads AVR and V1 , and the baseline ECG was normal . A chest X-ray showed a water-drop appearance and left pleural effusion . Inflammatory markers including leukocyte count and the concentration of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) were elevated (Hb 9.6 g/dL, WBC 10300/L, CRP 19.8 mg/dL), however levels of cardiac enzymes were not elevated (CK 202 U/L, CK-MB 0.6 ng/mL, troponin-I 0.013 ng/mL). Echocardiography showed a small amount of pericardial effusion with a maximal depth of about 1.12 cm, without signs of tamponade . Acute pericarditis was the most likely diagnosis, and he was treated with aspirin 100 mg and diclofenac 100 mg per day. Three days later, the ST segment (elevations) had mostly returned to baseline and the size of his heart and left pleural effusion had also decreased . His symptoms improved and the levels of inflammatory markers declined (Hb 9.1 g/dL, WBC 7720/L, CRP 8.357 mg/dL). He was discharged uneventfully five days later. There was no pericardial effusion and the ST segments had totally returned to baseline 1 month later.