We report a case of a 63-year-old man who presented with a 6-month history of a gradually increasing swelling on the right upper back. Although the swelling was painless, the patient experienced some discomfort because of its size. He had also observed a comparatively smaller swelling on the left side of the same region. Furthermore, he recently experienced unintentional weight loss. He reported no history of heavy manual work, trauma, or malignancy during his lifetime, and his past medical history was unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed the presence of a palpable, non-tender, firm mass with limited mobility located beneath the scapular tip of each shoulder. However, it was more prominent on the right side. The masses were more noticeable on forward arm flexion. No palpable lymph nodes were noted, and the back and shoulder exhibited a normal range of motion. Routine laboratory investigations showed no abnormal findings.
The patient underwent contrast-enhanced CT, which showed well-defined, bilateral, solid masses located deep to the serratus anterior muscles in the infrascapular region . The right and left infrascapular lesions measured 9 × 3 × 6 cm and 7 × 2 × 5 cm, respectively. The masses appeared isodense relative to the surrounding skeletal muscles and exhibited a multilayered appearance with internal fatty streaks. No invasion or associated bony lesions were observed. Moreover, two soft tissue masses were bilaterally present between the gluteus maximus and gluteus minimus muscles , measuring 6 × 3 × 5 cm and 7 × 2 × 6 cm on the right and left sides, respectively. They were predominantly located at the level of the greater trochanters. The imaging characteristics were similar to those of the infrascapular lesions.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed using a 1.5-Tesla scanner, and T1- and T2-weighted axial and coronal scans were acquired without contrast administration. The bilateral infrascapular lesions showed muscle-like signal intensity on both sequences . Focal linear hyperintensities were observed within the masses following the signal intensity of fat, with no signs of local infiltration.
On the basis of the clinical and radiological appearances of the infrascapular and gluteal masses, a presumptive diagnosis of elastofibroma was made. However, considering the patient’s anxiety and history of weight loss, biopsy was recommended during a multidisciplinary oncology meeting. A histopathological diagnosis of elastofibroma was established through core-needle biopsy of the right infrascapular mass .
The diagnosis was discussed with the patient, and he decided to undergo surgical resection of the infrascapular masses. However, the gluteal masses were asymptomatic and did not warrant surgical management.
Both infrascapular masses were completely excised. The masses were not encapsulated and exhibited a rubbery consistency. Histopathological analysis revealed the presence of fibrous collagenous tissue, occasional fibroblasts, and a large number of eosinophilic fibers intermixed with islets of mature adipose tissues. The resected lesions had clear surgical margins. At the follow-up visit, the patient was asymptomatic and showed no functional limitation in the movement of the shoulder joint.