A 46-year-old Filipino gentleman presented to the emergency department with a decreased vision for one month. He also reported three months history of tremors and palpitations. There was no history of headache, weakness, numbness, altered level of consciousness, unintentional weight loss, chronic diarrhea, insomnia, shortness of breath, neck swelling or pain. The patient was diagnosed with hypertension five months ago and took atenolol 50 mg once daily for management. There was no family history of thyroid or autoimmune diseases. The patient did not smoke or drink alcohol.
On physical examination, the patient had high blood pressure (176/86) with a normal heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature and oxygen saturation. He had mild bilateral hand tremors. Neurological examination revealed bitemporal hemianopia. He had a firm, diffuse, non-tender thyroid swelling. There was no proptosis, lid retraction, lid lag, muscle weakness, thyroid bruit, or skin changes. The patient had a pale left-sided optic disc on the fundus examination. The cardiac, respiratory and gastrointestinal examination was normal.
Laboratory examination showed a normal complete blood count and renal and liver function tests. Serum TSH was 3.35 (reference range 0.3–4.2) mIU/L, FT3 was 19.7 (3.7–6.4) pmol/L, and FT4 was 68.9 (11-23.3) pmol/L. Repeated thyroid function tests (TFT) showed similar results. The serum TSH receptor antibody was positive (11.5 mIU/L; Cut-off ≥ 1.75 mIU/L). Serum sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) was high (126 nmol/L; reference range: 18.3–54.1 nmol/L). The rest of the pituitary hormonal profile was normal.
A thyroid ultrasound showed enlarged inhomogeneous echogenicity and increased vascularity, indicating diffuse thyroid disease. MRI of the pituitary gland showed a large sellar/suprasellar mass of intermediate T1 signal and a mixture of hypo and hyperintense signal in T2 with moderate enhancement. Optic chiasm was elevated and bowed over the superior border. The anterior carotid artery was displaced superiorly with no encasement, and the tumor was contacting the left cavernous internal carotid artery (ICA) .
The patient was diagnosed with TSHoma with possibly co-existing Grave’s disease (due to the presence of positive TSH receptor antibody and diffuse thyroid enlargement). Octreotide, subcutaneous 100 mcg twice a day, was started. Repeat TFTs showed a decrease in TSH level to 0.45 mIU/L (> 50% reduction) and a decrease in FT4 to 50.9 pmol/L. At this point, carbimazole 20 mg twice daily was added, further decreasing FT4 to 39.9 pmol/L. Due to a lack of availability, the TRH stimulation test was not performed. The patient underwent navigation-assisted trans-nasal, trans-sphenoidal endoscopic resection of pituitary macroadenoma. Repeat MRI pituitary 48 h post-operation showed a solid residual enhancement measuring 28 × 24.5 × 19.5 mm .
The histopathology revealed marked perivascular and interstitial fibrosis. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining was negative for Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), Prolactin, Growth Hormone (GH), Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH), Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) and Luteinizing Hormone (LH), and positive for synaptophysin. .
Given the unexpected histopathological finding, the alpha subunit pituitary tumor marker level was sent and was positive (0.6 ng/ml, cut off for normal is </= 0.5 ng/ml), supporting the diagnosis of TSH secreting pituitary adenoma. An NM Ga68 DOTATATE whole-body PET CT (somatostatin receptor scintigraphy) showed significant uptake in the pituitary macroadenoma . A positiveGa68 DOTATATE is suggestive of functioning pituitary tissue in the adenoma .
The patient had a nuclear scan of the thyroid gland (192 MBq Tc 99 m pertechnetate), demonstrating features suggestive of GD (diffusely increased homogeneous uptake and thyroid uptake was 36%).
On follow-up, the patient had persistent visual field defect but noticed much improvement in right eye vision and mild improvement in left eye vision. A follow-up pituitary MRI showed a stable residual tumor size. The optic chiasma was still compressed and elevated more on the left side. The patient was offered a second surgery, but he refused and opted for medical management. He is now on octreotide intramuscular injection of 20 mg every four weeks and carbimazole 10 mg once daily with the latest TFTs in the normal range. His latest MRI pituitary performed one year after the surgery shows regression in the size of the residual pituitary adenoma measuring 24 × 22 × 19 mm .