A 54-year old athletic male was a helmeted cyclist on a street race bicycle, when he fell over the handlebars and struck his head directly on cemented ground, sustaining a hyperflexion injury to his neck. He was able to get up at the accident scene and pushed his bicycle to the closest meeting point. Due to severe neck pain, he asked a friend to call an ambulance. He was initially brought to a local hospital in the Rocky Mountain region, where a CT of the head and cervical spine was obtained. The patient was placed in a C-collar and transported by ambulance to our level 1 trauma center for definitive management of his cervical spine fracture. Upon arrival, the patient was awake and alert with a GCS of 15. He stated to have felt some tingling sensation in his right hand after the accident, which apparently subsided by the time of his presentation to our hospital. His clinical exam demonstrated full symmetric motor strength (M5/5) in all four extremities, a normal rectal tone and bulbocavernosus reflex, and minimal hypoesthesia in the small finger on the right hand, related to the C8 dermatome. The review of his CT scan from the outside facility revealed a complex multi-level fracture-dislocation of the cervical spine from C6 to T1, with rotational instability (AO/OTA classification 51-C2.1). The injury pattern included a C7/T1 fracture-dislocation with a left-side locked/perched facet at C6/C7 , a right side facet fracture-dislocation at C7/T1 , and a “saving” traumatic laminotomy at C6 and C7 on right side . A CT-angiogram was obtained which demonstrated a grade 1 intimal tear to the left vertebral artery at the C6 level. In light of the highly unstable fracture pattern, we decided to apply a Halo fixator for temporary external fixation. The Halo application was performed under local anesthesia without any closed reduction attempts, in order to mitigate the risk of an iatrogenic compression of the spinal cord. The patient was kept awake throughout and reported no change in symptoms. Thereafter, an MRI of the cervical spine was obtained for advanced imaging and preoperative planning. The MRI demonstrated a complete disruption of the annulus fibrosus of the C7/T1 intervertebral disc, a disruption of the anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL) and posterior longitudinal ligament (PLL) at the same level, and a complete extrusion of the C7/T1 disc into the spinal canal, positioned behind the C7 vertebral body . The interspinous ligament was disrupted at C6/C7, and there was mild spinal canal stenosis at C6/C7 without signs of cord compression or contusion.
A surgical plan was designed based on the following considerations:The posterior perched facet requiring posterior approach and open reduction to restore anatomic sagittal alignment of the spine; The extruded disc at C7/T1 requiring a C7 corpectomy and decompression through an anterior approach; The sequence of surgery being dictated by the intraspinal disc which requires (1) anterior decompression, followed by (2) posterior fracture reduction, and ultimately (3) an anterior completion fusion after posterior reduction and instrumentation.
As part of the preoperative shared decision-making process for surgery, the patient understood the detailed plan and the risks of intra- and postoperative complications. He agreed to proceed with surgery and provided a written informed consent. We took him to the operating room the next day for the 3-stage procedure under continuous neurophysiological monitoring. In supine position, the cervical spine was exposed from C6-T1 through a standard left side anterior Smith-Robinson approach. The dislocation at C7/T1 was visualized and the intervertebral disc at this level was obliterated, as expected from the preoperative MRI findings. A C7 corpectomy was performed which allowed decompression of the spinal canal by removal of the extruded intervertebral disc. The anterior wound was then closed temporarily. Under strict log-roll precautions, using the Halo ring for axial traction, the patient was carefully moved into prone position, for the 2nd stage of the procedure. We then performed a standard posterior approach from C4-T2. A completion laminectomy was performed through the laminar fractures at C6 and C7, for posterior spinal canal decompression. The perched facet at C6/C7 on the left and the facet fracture-dislocation at C7/T1 on the right were anatomically reduced, and a left side C6/C7 facetectomy was performed, which resulted in adequate rotational and sagittal alignment of the cervical spine. Spinal fixation was performed by posterior instrumentation with placement of lateral mass screws at C4, C5, C6, and pedicle screws at T1 and T2. The posterior wound was closed, and the patient was log-rolled back into supine position for the 3rd stage of the procedure. The previous anterior cervical wound was re-opened. The exposed dura was visualized through the preceding C7 corpectomy, and a 2-level anterior fusion from C6-T1 was performed with a PEEK cage filled with autograft bone from the resected C7 vertebra, and placement of a 2-level anterior locking plate . The anterior wound was then closed, the Halo was removed, and the patient was transitioned into a cervical collar. He tolerated the procedure well and was extubated in the operating room. His neurological exam was normal and the hypoesthesia in the right C8 dermatoma resolved postoperatively . The grade 1 vertebral artery intimal injury was managed conservatively with 325 mg acetylsalicylic acid (Aspirin) for three months. The patient was mobilized with physical therapy and discharged home on the 2nd postoperative day. He remained in a cervical collar for 6 weeks and was allowed to remove the collar for showering only during that period of time. The patient resumed full activity at three months. He was back riding his bicycle at 7 months, and by 10 months after surgery he had returned to competitive street bicycle racing in the 100 mile “Elephant Rock Century Ride” in Castle Rock, Colorado . The patient remained asymptomatic and continued his work as a financial consultant as well as unrestricted physical activity and exercises, including regular participation in competitive bicycle races, at follow up 7 years after the accident.