A 36-year-old female with no known comorbidities, with no medical or surgical history presented to our teaching hospital with recurrent symptoms of intermittent abdominal pain and constipation which were managed conservatively over the past two decades. However, her current presentation was marked by acute symptoms, including:Abdominal pain for four days. Multiple episodes of vomiting for two days. Absolute constipation for two days.
The patient has had a history of three normal vaginal deliveries. Upon admission, her vital signs were recorded as follows: a pulse of 110/min, blood pressure of 120/90, afebrile temperature, respiratory rate of 25/min, and maintained normal oxygen saturation on room air. Physical examination revealed a distended abdomen, mild tenderness, and sluggish gut sounds. A digital rectal examination (DRE) revealed a collapsed rectum with no fecal staining. Laboratory data demonstrated normal full blood count, renal functions, and electrolytes.
Initial ultrasound imaging disclosed multiple fluid-filled bowel loops with sluggish peristalsis and a slender streak of inter-bowel fluid. Subsequently, a CT scan was performed, suggesting a dilated small bowel with a potential stricture or band in the terminal ileum due to inflammation (A and B).
There was also mild free fluid in the abdominopelvic cavity, along with a collapsed large bowel .
Diagnosis of acute intestinal obstruction was made and to address the patient's condition, a nasogastric tube (NGT) was inserted for decompression, and she received intravenous (IV) fluids as per the ‘drip and suck’ protocol.
After a thorough explanation of her diagnosis and the necessity for surgery, she provided written and informed consent.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed, during which 350 ml of ascitic fluid was drained. It was discovered that a 5 cm segment of the small bowel, located 1.5 ft proximal to the ileocecal junction (ICJ), had herniated internally through a defect in the (Cilley type-III defect) right-sided broad ligament. A similar defect (Cilley type-III) was found on the left-sided broad ligament however, no bowel herniation was found. Fortunately, the bowel was found to be healthy, the herniated bowel segment was carefully reduced, and the defects were repaired with Vicryl 2.0.
Following the successful surgical intervention, the patient remained vitally stable and was discharged home.