A 38-year old man presented in 1988 with a left testicular mass which was removed and found to be a non-seminomatous GCT. Staging investigations revealed spread to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Six cycles of bleomycin, cisplatin and etoposide (BEP) chemotherapy was initially given , followed by retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND) for residual disease. In 1993, his alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level began to rise. A radiolabelled anti-AFP-antibody scan suggested active disease in the right para-aortic region corresponding to a node near the right renal vein on CT. This was subsequently resected. Post-operatively, the AFP initially fell but then increased and the patient received six cycles of cisplatin, vincristine, methotrexate, bleomycin alternating with actinomycin D, cyclophosphomide and etoposide (POMB/ACE) chemotherapy . In 1995, the patient had a further relapse with an AFP rise, and a CT scan showed recurrence in the abdomen. Following further tumour resection the patient underwent high dose chemotherapy (with carboplatin, cyclophosphomide and etoposide) with autologous stem cell rescue. In 1997, the patient's AFP level increased again. Serial CT and 18-fluoro-deoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (18FDG-PET) did not initially reveal any new suspicious lesions. However, when the AFP rose to 2494 ng/ml in 2001, an 18FDG-PET scan demonstrated a lesion in the left superior mediastinum which matched a 1.4 cm lymph node on CT. This was resected, and histology showed active yolk sac tumour involving the excision margins of the lymph node. Consequently in May 2001 he received four cycles of gemcitabine, carboplatin and paclitaxel followed by a second high dose chemotherapy procedure modified to include paclitaxel (carboplatin, cyclophophamide, etoposide and paclitaxel) .
In January 2004, the AFP level began to rise again. Extensive investigations including a CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis, 18FDG-PET scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, microbubble ultrasound of the liver, and ultrasound of the remaining testis did not reveal any sites of relapse. Eventually, when the AFP measured 1531 ng/ml in Sep 2004, a repeat 18FDG-PET scan showed an area of increased uptake in the posterior aspect of the superior mediastinum just anterior to the vertebral bodies of T1/2 . However, a repeat contrast-enhanced CT scan and MRI again showed no obvious defined lesion could be identified in this area, although there was soft tissue changes related to the previous surgery in the area . The MRI scan, in particular, did not show any abnormal marrow signals. To further delineate the lesion, the patient underwent a PET/CT scan. This indicated that the lesion lay in the anterior part of the vertebral body of T2 . Because of the discrepancy between the PET/CT and the initial PET scan, he then underwent a trans-oesophageal endoscopic ultrasound. This showed a 1.3 cm lesion posterior to the oesophagus and anterior to the vertebrae at approximately T1/2 . At surgery in November 2004, a retro-oesophageal pre-vertebral tumour was found (1.9 × 1.3 × 0.4 cm) which was resected. Histological examination with immunohistochemical staining was consistent with relapsed GCT composed of yolk sac elements . Following surgery, the patient made a good recovery and his AFP normalised in January 2005 . He remains well with normal markers on close follow-up.