A 65-year-old man of Han nationality, 170 cm in height, 85 kg in weight, and 29.4 BMI, suffered from cerebral infarction 13 years ago and left with right limb movement disorder. Coronary angiography performed one year before hospitalization showed three-vessel disease, and no stent was implanted. The patient underwent CAG five days before hospitalization, three stents were planted during the operation, and 80% of the lesions with the preservation of the anterior descending branch were opened later. The patient had a history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, diabetic nephropathy, and cerebral infarction and had no history of food or drug allergy or thrombocytopenia. After hospitalization, the laboratory showed that hypersensitivity troponin was 2.85 ng/ml. The ECG on admission showed ST-T changes in leads I, aVL, V5-V6 , and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction(NSTEMI) was initially considered. Blood tests did not show apparent thrombocytopenia. Cardiac examination reveals no prominent murmurs, friction rubs, or galloping rhythms.
On the 6th day after admission, the patient was admitted to the cardiac catheterization laboratory for PCI. During the operation, 80% stenosis of the proximal section of the anterior descending branch opening was found, the occlusive lesion was opened, one stent was implanted, and the patient returned to the ward after the operation. Because of the severe thrombus burden of the patient, tirofiban (10 ug/kg, 3 minute bolus, followed by 0.1 ug/kg/min [the guidelines recommend the dose] ) instillation was started. Ten minutes after the tirofiban infusion, the patient suddenly shivered, accompanied by a continuous increase in body temperature, up to 39.4°C, with heavy sweating. It was considered that the patient had a high possibility of sudden hypersensitivity reaction, and the allergen was not known, so transient bacteremia and infusion reaction could not be ruled out. Blood routine examinations and blood cultures were taken urgently. Diphenhydramine hydrochloride injection (1 ml; 20 mg) by intramuscular injection for symptomatic anti-allergic treatment. It was found that the platelet count decreased to 1 × 109/L, but the blood was drawn again to exclude the test error, and the reexamination was still 1 × 109/L. The laboratory physician performed a blood-smear examination of the peripheral-blood sample, confirming a profound platelet deficiency with no platelet aggregation. The smear results were reported to the attending physician.
All antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs were discontinued immediately. Given the patient's severe thrombotic burden, clopidogrel antiplatelet therapy was still retained. On the 7th day after hospitalization, the patient gradually developed scattered ecchymosis with subcutaneous bleeding spots, microscopic hematuria, and epistaxis. Other standard laboratory tests include prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), fibrinogen, and D-dimer. Haptoglobin, reticulocyte count, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) are also expected. Methylprednisolone sodium succinate 80 mg for four days and gamma globulin 200 mg/kg/day for two days for symptomatic anti-inflammatory treatment, daily blood routine , and occult blood tests, including urine and stool samples. On the 10th day of hospitalization, the patient's platelets recovered to 18 × 109/L. On the 13th day of hospitalization, the ecchymosis throughout the patient's body gradually subsided, and no visible bleeding points were seen. The re-examination showed that platelets recovered to 84 × 109/L, and the patient was discharged. One month after discharge, the patient's repeated blood routine showed that platelets had returned to normal.