A 52-year-old woman with bilateral DDH underwent left and right THA with subtrochanteric osteotomy at a local hospital in November 2016 and February 2017, respectively. The bilateral stem was a modular hip system (Just company, China, imitation of S-ROM). The patient felt no pain in the hip and performed normal activities after the operation. Postoperative follow-up X-ray examination revealed that the osteotomy area of the left femur had not healed . No further treatment was administered. The patient denied a family genetic history. In October 2017, the patient experienced spontaneous left-sided thigh pain when bearing weight. She was very frightened, and could neither stand on both legs or walk. The movement of the left hip joint was limited, and the patient could not participate in social activities or even care for herself. Therefore, she came to our hospital for treatment. Physical examination revealed tenderness of the left thigh and a limited movement of the left hip joint (0–90° in extension-flexion). A radiographic image showed a fracture in the distal part of the stem and revealed that the subtrochanteric osteotomy site of the left femur had not healed . Laboratory examination was not suggestive of an infection (white blood cell count: 4.52 × 109/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 6 mm/h; C-reactive protein level: 6.26 mg/L; neutrophil percentage: 64.9%). She was diagnosed with a modular prosthesis fracture, and we performed a revision surgery. The acetabular component was not revised, because a preoperative X-ray examination and intraoperative findings revealed a well-fixed acetabular component. The proximal stem and sleeve were removed using an extractor and osteotomes, and the bone growth of the removed sleeve was found to be good. The fractured prosthesis was removed using the window technique . A fully-coated revision stem (200 mm in length, 9 mm in diameter; Chung-Li company, China) was implanted after reduction of the fracture, and the proximal femoral bone defect was reconstructed using a cortical bone plate (Xin-Kang-Chen company, China) . The catheter was removed 24 h after the operation. Antibiotics were injected intravenously for 3 days after the revision surgery, while anticoagulants were administered orally until 35 days after the operation. Following the principle of moving from easy and passive exercises to difficult and active exercises, the patient performed muscle strength and joint mobility exercises for the left limb in the early stages and hip function and gait exercises in the later stages. Partial weight-bearing was allowed 7 days after the operation, and completely weight-bearing was allowed 4 weeks after the operation. The patient was followed up via outpatient examinations. During the follow-up period, the patient’s condition gradually improved. One year postoperatively, the patient felt no pain and could walk normally. The left hip joint movement was not restricted. The patient could take care of herself, and was able to perform all of her activities of daily living. The visual analogue scale score and the Harris Hip score significantly improved from 7 and 48 preoperatively to 2 and 85 1 year postoperatively, respectively. The patient was very satisfied with the therapeutic effect. Plain radiographs showed union in the subtrochanteric osteotomy site of the left femur .