We report a case of epithelioid haemangioendothelioma of left tibia in 7 month old boy. He presented with fever and persistent cry of about 2 weeks duration. Parents noticed a swelling on left upper tibia. On examination there was a diffuse swelling at the anteromedial aspect of the left leg in the junction of upper and middle one third, measuring approximately 8x3x3 cms. Skin was shiny. No dilated veins or visible pulsations were seen on the skin over the swelling. Tenderness was present at the site of swelling. No abnormal movements or deformities, or other bone involvement were noticed. X-ray of left tibia showed an expansile osteolytic and poorly demarcated lesion involving the metaphyseo-diaphyseal region of left upper tibia . There was no periosteal reaction. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of left tibia was done and it showed a relatively well delineated expansile metadiaphyseal intramedullary lesion in the proximal and mid tibia measuring 4.3×1.9×1.7 cms. There was marked cortical thinning in the lateral aspect and suspicious breach. Surrounding periosteal thickening was seen with edematous changes . To rule out other areas of involvement, we did ultrasonography of abdomen, computerised tomography of thorax and abdomen, all of which were normal. Inicisional biopsy of the lesion was done. Grossly, the specimen looked dark brown, firm in consistency, aggregate measuring 1.5×1×1cms. Cut section showed dark brown areas. Microscopic examination of sections from bone showed a vascular neoplasm composed of interanastomosing capillary sized vessels. The cells lining the vessels were of moderate size, polygonal with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and round to oval nuclei with moderate pleomorphism. Mitotic rate was 0-1/10high power field. Formations of lumen within the cytoplasm of cells with RBC’s inside were noted. Focal areas showed myxoid change in the stroma. The tumor was immunoreactive for factor CD34 and vimentin . A diagnosis of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma Grade 1 was made. Meanwhile the patient became asymptomatic. His fever and pain subsided. Since the lesion was of Grade I, the patient being an infant, and since there was symptomatic relief, we thought of conservative management with frequent follow ups. Although the lesion was extensive but conservative management is not documented so far in intermediate grade vascular tumors in infants, we took a decision to follow conservative method. We followed up the case every month for initial 6 months and thereafter at 3 months interval. The lesion showed a dramatic response by spontaneous regression during this period and by the end of 1 ½ years the lesion almost healed . There was no delay in any mile stones and the child started walking at the age of 1 year.