A 19-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 1, was admitted to a secondary hospital at 37 weeks of gestation with breech presentation. Her pregnancy was complicated by multiple hepatic hydatids (the largest cyst: 6.0*4.3 cm) (see Fig. ) and a large pelvic hydatid cyst (10.0*8.2 cm) (see Fig. ). Fetal ultrasound showed that the term of the fetus was approximately 37 weeks [biparietal diameter (BPD): 8.9 cm, abdominal circumference (AC): 31.7 cm, femur length (FL): 67 cm]. Three weeks prior to admission (September 1, 2021), the patient felt distended and presented at the hospital, and at that time, it was also her first antenatal examination during this pregnancy. An obstetric ultrasound was performed, and hepatic and pelvic hydatids were found during the scan (see Fig. ). The size of the pelvic hydatid cyst did not change over these weeks (9.5*8.6 cm). Three years earlier, she delivered her first baby at home. Two years earlier, she was screened for local endemic diseases and found to have hepatic and abdominopelvic hydatid disease and underwent surgical treatment. Since then, due to a lack of conscientiousness for medical care and her living in remote pastoral areas, she did not have regular reexaminations or medication.
Ultrasound revealed that the pelvic hydatid cyst was located posterior to the uterus as a bulge in the posterior fornix (see Fig. ). Vaginal and rectal examinations confirmed the mass to be posterior to the uterus and anterior to the rectum. Other laboratory tests, including routine blood examination, C-reactive protein, and liver and kidney function tests performed after admission, were normal.
The woman declined Caesarean section and truly wanted natural delivery, so we devised a management plan according to her situation. Since a large cyst might lead to labor obstruction and abnormal fetal presentation and be more prone to rupture in late pregnancy, we chose to drain the cyst through the posterior fornix under the guidance of transabdominal ultrasound (see Fig. a and b; Video ) (draining out approximately 400 ml of liquid). After the cyst disappeared, the patient was carefully observed for half of the day, including bleeding, fetal movement and uterine contraction. After confirming that the patient did not have any complications, we successfully performed an external cephalic version. After two days of observation, the woman was discharged because she showed no signs of labor. One week later, the woman delivered a baby boy naturally with head presentation in our hospital and was advised to undertake medical management for HCD follow-up.