A 4.5-year-old female child was brought to pediatric emergency department with complain of recurrent vomiting, dizziness followed by loss of consciousness and tightness of body for last 12 hours. As told by parent, child had ingested 4–5 tablets of disulfiram accidentally 48 hours back. Her father was a chronic alcoholic and was prescribed this medication by a local doctor. On examination, the child was lethargic, pulse rate of 124 beats/minute with low volume and regular, respiratory rate 36/minute with respiratory distress in the form of use of accessory muscle of respiration. Chest auscultatory findings were normal. Per abdomen examination was normal without any organomegaly. The child was responsive to painful stimuli in the form of grimacing with eye opening. Pupil size was normal with pupillary and corneal reflexes preserved. Cranial nerve examination does not show any deficit although we could not perform all because the child was on minimal conscious state. Glasgow Coma Score was 7/15 (E2V2M3). Deep tendon reflexes were brisk and plantar extensor. Blood sugar was 12 mg/dL and was low despite dextrose infusion. Hemoglobin was 11.5 g/dL, total leukocyte count 13,000 with 66% polymorphs and 30% lymphocytes. Platelet count and peripheral smear was normal. Blood urea, creatinine, sodium, potassium, and calcium were normal. Coagulation profile was normal, and hepatic enzymes were elevated (AST 127 U/L and ALT 95 U/L). After initial stabilization in emergency room, the child was shifted to pediatric intensive care unit (ICU) where the child was managed initially with intravenous fluids, routine bed care for ICU, and subsequently intragastric (IG) feeds were started along with medications for prevention of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Blood sugars normalized after 8 hours of admission. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain showed bilateral globus pallidus hyperintensity in T2-weighted (T2W) and diffusion-weighted (DW) images and hypointensity in T1-weighted (T1W) images including diffusion restriction . After 7 days, she was shifted in patient ward where she remained for 3 days and was discharged on request of the attendants on IG feed. Initially, the child came every third day for follow-up for removal of IG feeds for first 2 weeks. Subsequently, when the child did not come for follow-up, a telephonic call to attendants was made, and they informed that the child had died 7 days back at home during sleep at night.