A 72-year-old Japanese man, a chronic recurrent smoker, who was previously diagnosed with Buerger disease, presented to our dermatology clinic in February 2022 with ulcers of the right first and left second toes. There were small ulcers on the toes, and he was treated conservatively with standard wound dressings. In June 2022, his lower limb condition worsened with bilateral lower limb pain and discolouration. The patient complained of poor mobilization due to a worsening of lower limb conditions. Cyanotic lesions and multiple ulcers were found on the toes and distal phalanges . He was previously diagnosed with Buerger disease and he presented to Hiroshima University Hospital with recurrent ulcers since 2011. He was prescribed with sarpogrelate hydrochloride, a selective 5-hydroxytryptamine (2A) antagonist, and clopidogrel tablets.
He was alert, afebrile, and his blood pressure was slightly elevated (130/52 mmHg) with a normal pulse rate (60 b.p.m.). He had adequate cardiac function and no indication of heart disease. The ankle-brachial indexes (ABIs) were 1.14 on the right limb and 0.91 on the left limb, with a visual analogue scale of 85. Hypoperfusion at both below-ankle regions was found using a SensiLase PAD3000 flowmeter skin perfusion pressure assessment device. The other clinical examination was unremarkable. Blood investigation revealed mild anaemia with thrombocytopenia and abnormal serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (e-GFR) levels . A renal impairment with nephropathy was suspected. Rheumatoid factor, lupus anticoagulants, and serological investigations were later assessed to rule out other vasculitis and hypercoagulable states. Renal biopsy was performed to confirm the diagnosis of immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy. In view of Rutherford classification Stage 6 CLTI and localized infections, the patient was advised to undergo amputations. The patient refused surgical intervention and was referred to the Regeneration and Medicine Unit of Hiroshima University Hospital for a treatment option.
The non-invasive investigational treatment option of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS; SX-1001, Nippon Sigmax Co., Ltd, Japan; ) was initiated, and the patient was instructed on how to operate the LIPUS device at home and how to apply transducers for LIPUS irradiation in the gastrocnemius of the ischaemic leg. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient. He was treated regularly with iodine wound dressings, sarpogrelate hydrochloride tablets (300 mg), clopidogrel tablets (75 mg), and 20 min daily LIPUS treatment from July 2022 to July 2023. He also stopped smoking throughout the treatment course. His compliance with LIPUS treatment and conservative therapy, including discontinued smoking, was monitored during the observed time frame.
During the continuous LIPUS treatment and regular wound managements, the patient’s symptoms in the bilateral lower limbs, ulcers, and the blue-coloured toes gradually reduced . The ABIs at the sixth month was 1.10 on the right limb and 1.02 on the left limb, and the ABIs at 1 year was 1.27 on the right limb and 1.05 on the left limb, with an improvement of hypoperfusion at both below-ankle regions.
A non-contrast magnetic resonance angiography examination was performed after 1 year of treatment with LIPUS. The results showed no disruption of blood flow within the imaging range . The signal of both peroneal and popliteal arteries was slightly reduced, but the periphery was visualized. Tortuosity and irregularity of blood vessels were noticeable in both feet . Throughout the period of regular follow-up, the patient reported that he adhered to smoking cessation and complied with the treatment regime, following which his walking performance improved with a reduction of his limb pain. His walking performance was evaluated by measuring maximal walking distance/time and/or pain-free walking distance/time. After 1 year of treatment with LIPUS, he had achieved better walking independence with improved quality of life.