A 46-year-old Japanese man was referred to Kawasaki Medical School Hospital for further examination of liver dysfunction. The patient had been diagnosed with DM at approximately 35 years of age and treated with anti-DM drugs for the last 5 years. He also had continuous mild elevation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of unknown origin during the last 5 years. When the patient met his younger brother several months before his first visit to our department, he found out that his younger brother had been diagnosed with hemochromatosis in another hospital, and was advised to have the etiology of his liver dysfunction examined.
This patient did not have a history of alcohol abuse, blood transfusion, or medication except for anti-DM drugs. His parents had no history of chronic liver diseases, except for his mother, who has DM. The degree of his ALT elevation did not change significantly after the commencement of treatment with anti-DM drugs. His physical examination did not show skin pigmentation, arrhythmia, or hepatosplenomegaly.
Hematological examination revealed no abnormalities. Biochemical examination demonstrated mild elevation of ALT (43 U/l) and moderate elevation of fasting blood glucose (123 mg/dl) and hemoglobin A1c (6.9%). The patient was negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and anti-hepatitis C virus antibody. Importantly, the serum iron level was moderately elevated (284 μg/dl, reference range 40–188 μg/dl), and the serum ferritin (1722 ng/ml, reference range 10–240 ng/ml) and transferrin saturation ratio (91.3%) were remarkably elevated. Serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels were within the normal range. The serum hepcidin-25 level, which was measured using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry, was remarkably increased (139.6 ng/ml, reference range 7.8 ± 7.0 ng/ml).
Ultrasonography demonstrated the mild hepatorenal contrast, suggesting the presence of fatty liver. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a marked reduction in the signal intensity of the liver in T1- and T2-weighted images. Furthermore, an in-phase image of the T1-weighted image showed a greater reduction in the signal intensity than an out-of-phase image , suggesting hepatic iron accumulation, as evidenced in a previous report . Because we suspected that liver dysfunction resulted from hereditary hemochromatosis based on the family history, elevated iron, ferritin and transferrin saturation ratio in serum, and MRI findings, we performed a liver biopsy in this patient after obtaining written consent. The liver histology exhibited mild hepatic steatosis, mild mononuclear cell infiltration , and mild to moderate periportal fibrosis . Notably, we observed a large amount of iron that had accumulated predominantly in hepatocytes in the liver biopsy specimen .
In hereditary hemochromatosis (except for ferroportin disease), loss of any one of the hepcidin regulator genes (HFE, HAMP, HJV, and TFR2) attenuates or abrogates intracellular hepcidin signal transduction and hepcidin secretion [, ]. In contrast, hepcidin is appropriately synthesized and released in response to increased serum iron levels in ferroportin disease. We speculated that this patient might have ferroportin disease, since the serum hepcidin level (139.6 ng/ml) was increased in response to elevated serum iron levels. We scanned all the cording regions and the splicing junctions of SLC40A1, a gene coding ferroportin-1, after obtaining informed consent and having our genetic examination approved by the Kawasaki Medical School Ethics Committee. This patient had a heterozygous A > G transition at c.1520 in exon 8 (p.H507R) in the SLC40A1 gene . Thus, taken together with increased hepcidin-25 level, high transferrin saturation ratio, and iron accumulation predominantly in hepatocytes, we diagnosed this patient with nonclassical ferroportin disease. Unfortunately, we could not examine mutations in SLC40A1 in his family lineage.
We initiated treatment with phlebotomy in January in 2017. Phlebotomy (400 ml at a time) was performed monthly for 3 years . The serum ferritin level rapidly declined in a few months and the serum iron and transferrin saturation ratio started to decline in approximately one year after the commencement of phlebotomy, and then gradually decreased until the last phlebotomy. Serum ALT also returned to the normal range in a few months after the commencement of phlebotomy, and remained normal thereafter. The hemoglobin level did not decrease for the first 2 years after the commencement of phlebotomy and then gradually decreased until the last phlebotomy, but slightly increased after the cessation of phlebotomy . MRI after 3 years of phlebotomy demonstrated a marked restoration in the signal intensity reduction in the liver in T1- and T2-weighted images compared to that before the commencement of phlebotomy , suggesting a marked reduction in hepatic iron accumulation by phlebotomy. Importantly, the serum hepcidin level (1.0 ng/ml) was normal when the serum ferritin level was normal and hepatic iron accumulation was remarkably reduced after 3 years of phlebotomy . Serum ALT and ferritin levels have remained normal to date since cessation of phlebotomy (for 6 months).