A 27-year-old Asian female presented to our institute with a chief complaint of amenorrhoea for 37 days and vaginal spotting for two days. The patient had a regular menstrual cycle and no history of pelvic surgery, received any infertility treatment, any form of contraception or pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
Upon presentation, her vitals were regular, with a regular heart rate of 77 beats/ minutes and blood pressure of 120/84 mmHg. Gynecological examination showed no abnormalities besides a small vaginal hemorrhage and tenderness of the bilateral adnexal area. Laboratory examination revealed that blood beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) of 2974.00 mIU/mL. The pelvic transvaginal ultrasound examination showed a normal uterus (56 mm*43 mm*52 mm) at the anterior position, an endometrium of 10 mm thick with no gestational sac observed, and an ununiformed posterior uterus wall. Fullness in the Douglas Pouch with an anechoic area of 35 mm*13 mm and a right and left ovary size of 33 mm*25 mm and 30 mm*20 mm, respectively, were observed. A provisional diagnosis of “ectopic pregnancy” was made in our outpatient clinic. Considering the patient has fertility requirements, the patient was admitted for observation of dynamic blood β-hCG and further investigations.
Upon admission in the afternoon, serological examinations, including dynamic blood β-hCG, were requested, and the patient was scheduled for surgical intervention the next day. The following day, serological studies showed a blood β-hCG 3091.00 mIU/mL, progesterone 36.5 nmol/L, and no significant increase in blood β-hCG compared to the outpatient clinic result. The combination of the symptoms, blood β-hCG titer, and pelvic transvaginal ultrasound examination results support the standard diagnosis of “ectopic pregnancy.” Furthermore, the patient compliant of dull pain in the lower abdomen, and the re-examination pelvic ultrasound revealed that the intimal thickness of 13 mm, a hypoechoic heterogeneity at a size of 22–24 in the left pelvis with a clear boundary and peripheral blood flow. Fluid in Douglas Pouch(48*23 mm) and posterior fornix puncture revealed 2 mL of unclotted blood. Considering the complications of ectopic pregnancy includes abdominal bleeding and hemorrhagic shock, the laparoscopic operation was performed immediately with the consent of the patient and her family.
Intra-operatively, an enlarged and intact ampulla of the left fallopian tube (4*3*3 cm) with hemorrhage blocks at the umbrella end was observed. The ampulla of the right fallopian tube was enlarged (3*2*2 cm). In contrast, the right ovary was normal in size, but with two corpus luteum, suggesting a double spontaneous unilateral ovulation . No abnormality was found in the left ovary. Bilateral fallopian tube fenestration and embryo extraction were performed following the consent of the family members with signatures. Following the embryo removal inside of bilateral fallopian tubes, hematocele and chorionic villi tissues were observed after dissection. Bilateral fallopian tube mesangium and fallopian tube fenestrated were injected with 50 mg Methotrexate (MTX) to prevent pregnancy. Pathological examination results showed the presence of chorionic villi tissues in the blood clot and the contents of both the left and the right fallopian tubes . Postoperatively, nutritional support treatment was provided to promote recovery. Serological examination showed a blood β-hCG of 768.99 mIU/mL and 254.61 mIU/mL two and four days postoperatively. The patient’s vitals were stable, and she was discharged. The patient was subjected to follow-up for one month on outpatient clinics until blood β-hCG was normal.