A 70-year-old woman noticed a palpable mass in her left breast for three months and came to the hospital in December 2016. Her past medical history included Parkinson’s disease, osteoporosis, and cardiovascular co-morbidities such as mild ischemic heart disease and lacunar infarctions of brain, and she took medications accordingly. She has no family history of BC. On physical examination, she could walk and talk slowly with continuous tremor in left arm and hand and decreased facial expression which was typical as ‘masked face’ of Parkinson’s disease. There was a 2.5cm round hard lump in the left upper outer quadrant of the left breast without nipple discharge and palpated movable lymph nodes (LN) about 1.5cm in size in the left axilla. Ultrasound revealed a left breast solitary mass measuring 3.1×2.7cm2 and abnormal enlarged LN in the left axilla, infra- and supra-clavicular fossa, considering LN metastasis. The mammogram did not find clusters of micro-calcifications. Multi-disciplinary consultation indicated that the risk of general anesthesia for the patient was relatively high. Both the patient and her relatives preferred procedures under local anesthesia to ensure safety. Considering the abnormally enlarged supra-clavicular LN, the surgical procedure might be palliative instead of radical.
The patient underwent left breast extended lumpectomy under local anesthesia (LA) in January 2017. Intraoperative fast frozen biopsy revealed left BC so patient subsequently received sentinel and targeted axillary lymph node biopsy under LA on the same day. Post-operative pathology showed invasive breast carcinoma, not otherwise specified (NOS), measuring 2.3×1.5×1.5cm3, and LN metastasis (6/6). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was ER (++, 95%), PR (++, 40%), HER2 (2+), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (-), and Ki-67 index 30%. The stage was pT2N2M0, IIIa, and molecular subtype was luminal B. With awareness of the risk of insufficient treatment and lack of evidence, the patient and her relatives refused intravenous chemotherapy and chose oral chemotherapy. Therefore she was put on adjuvant capecitabine (1.5g BID, 2 weeks on/1 week off) for 8 cycles. Concurrently, the patient underwent whole breast radiotherapy (WBRT) plus tumor bed boost, with the left axilla included. After the oral chemotherapy was finished, she received tamoxifen as endocrine therapy instead of aromatase inhibitor (AI) due to osteoporosis.
The patient was followed every half-year post-operatively and the results were normal. However, in January 2020, her chest CT showed multiple pulmonary nodules in right lung (the largest measuring 12.2 mm) andmasses in right pleura (the largest measuring 5.0 × 1.4 cm2) . She developed mild cough and dyspnea in July 2020, and followed-up chest CT showed the progression of the pulmonary nodules and masses in the right pleura , suggesting pulmonary and pleural metastases. 18F-FDG PET/CT showed multiple FDG avid pleural masses with maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) 9.4, and multiple pulmonary nodules with mild FDG uptake (SUVmax1.6), demonstrating pulmonary and pleural metastases . The metabolic tumor volume (MTV) of the largest pleural mass was 27.7 cm3. There were no metastases in bone, liver, or brain on 18F-FDG PET/CT. The imaging evaluation of the patient was summarized in . In August 2020, the patient received first-line CDK4/6i palbociclib (125mg QD, 3 weeks on/1 week off) + letrozole (2.5mgQD) and intravenous bisphosphonate (Q6M) with 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 to intensify the treatment of osteoporosis.
She suffered from mild delirium, delusion, progressive tremor of left upper extremity and grade 4 neutropenia after the first cycle of palbociclib, so the dose of palbociclib was reduced to 100mg QD (3 weeks on/1 week off) from the second cycle. All the above-mentioned adverse effects recovered partially yet remained. In December 2020, her discomfort had relieved, and the chest CT showed both the pulmonary nodules and pleural masses were smaller (the largest pulmonary nodule measuring 9.4 mm, and the largest pleural mass measuring 4.3 × 1.3 cm2), achieving partial remission (PR). However, her cough and dyspnea got worse in April 2021, and her chest CT revealed that pulmonary nodules and masses in pleura were larger than before (the largest pulmonary nodule measuring 10.1 mm, and the largest pleural mass measuring 4.4 × 1.2 cm2), and there was increasing pleural effusion, suggesting PD. The progression free survival (PFS) of first-line CDK4/6i was 8 months.
In May 2021, the patient started second-line CDK4/6i abemaciclib (150mg, BID) + fulvestrant (500mg, im, Q2W×3, then Q4W) after palbociclib + letrozole had failed. Two months later, 18F-FDG PET/CT was performed to evaluate the treatment response , which revealed that both the pulmonary nodules and the pleural masses were smaller than that of chest CT in April 2021 (the largest pulmonary nodule measuring 9.6 mm, and the largest pleural mass measuring 4.0 × 1.2 cm2), and pleural effusion was decreased. SUVmax of the lesions as well as MTV of the largest pleural mass (13.9 cm3) were decreased than those of previous FDG PET/CT To evaluate the ER status of metastatic lesions, 18F-FES PET/CT was performed subsequently . The study was approved by the institutional ethics review board of the Peking Union Medical College (PUMC) Hospital (IRB protocol #JS-2959), and written informed consent was obtained. The 18F-FES PET/CT showed multiple ER-positive pleural masses with obvious FES uptake and multiple ER-negative pulmonary nodules, which implied ER heterogeneity of metastases. The ER expression volume (EEV) of the largest pleural mass was 17.2 cm3. The condition of the disease was partial remission (PR). Hence the treatment (abemaciclib + fulvestrant) was continued, and the tolerance was acceptable. She suffered adverse effects including grade 2 neutropenia and grade 1/2 diarrhea, without delirium or delusion, and the tremor was mitigated. Medications including bisphosphonate (iv, Q6M), 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 were also continued.
In August 2022, she felt uncomfortable and the dyspnea recurred. The second 18F-FES PET/CT was performed and there was a new ER-positive pleural mass with SUVmax 2.7 and EEV 5.3 cm3 , and the other pleural metastases decreased both in size and uptake of FES. Multiple pulmonary nodules were still ER-negative, and the pleural effusion increased notably. The imaging evaluation suggested PD, and PFS of second-line CDK4/6i was 15 months.
Since 18F-FES PET/CT revealed that the most of the metastatic lesions were still positive, the patient and her relatives turned down the option of intravenous or oral chemotherapy and were willing to try another line of endocrine-based therapy. In September 2022, the patient was put on dalpiciclib (125mg, QD, 3 weeks on/1 week off) + fulvestrant (500mg, im, Q4W) + exemestane (25mg, QD), and underwent the drainage of pleural effusion. She felt improved appetite, relieved fatigue afterwards, and laboratory test revealed grade 2/3 neutropenia. Currently her disease had been stable for 2 months after the third-line CDK4/6i. The timeline of the patient’s disease progression was summarized in .