Mr. K. F. a 57-year-old man, right-handed, bipolar schizophrenic, was the victim of a mechanical fall from standing height. On admission, neurological examination was normal. A painful strain evoked a broken left wrist. The right shoulder was swollen, painful and nonfunctional. Radiography objectified anterior marginal fracture of the distal radius and fracture of the proximal humerus with suspected posterior dislocation associated . The computed tomography scan confirmed the diagnosis of complex proximal humeral fracture associated with posterior dislocation of the humeral head. This was a fracture in four fragments of Neer associated with posterior dislocation or fracture of the head and metaphysis of the humerus from the anterior notch of posterior dislocation in reference to Duparc classification . An anteroinferior marginal fracture of the glenoid ( and ) was associated.
An osteosynthesis of the wrist bone was carried out in an emergency. Ten days later, the synthesis of the humeral fracture was performed by the extended deltopectoral approach. The minor tubercle held up, the long biceps broken is resected and undergoes tenodesis in its groove. The humeral cap united to the metaphyseal-diaphyseal posteromedial beak is reduced then screwed in compression. We fix again the fragment of the major tubercle fractured by osteosuture and the minor tubercle is screwed into the cephalic notch. The synthesis is carried out by a small fragment locking compression plate. The incision is closed over a suction drain. The limb is held by a derotation device. Analgesic treatment, preventive heparin therapy were prescribed. The immediate postoperative course was uneventful and the control radiography satisfactory ( and ). Healing was obtained in the normal time. Rehabilitation started on the 4th day by assisted passive and active mobilization, joint and muscle maintenance. The derotation system is kept between sessions for 5 weeks.
The discharge from the hospital was carried out 28 days after shoulder surgery. Three weeks later, the radiography showed ossifications with Grade 3 glenoid starting point according to Kjaersgaard-Andersen et al. . Successive checks confirmed ossifications ( and ). Six months later, the shoulder was stiff and painless with active anterior elevation to 70°, active abduction to 45°, external rotation nil and thumb to the right buttock in internal rotation. The hand-mouth was possible, and the hand-head was the limit. Glenoid humeral ossifications were identical .