A previously healthy 5-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital. He was a full-term baby delivered via vaginal sections following a normal 39-week pregnancy with unremarkable events. He did not require support services after birth and had no family history of epilepsy. The child had normal development, including expressive and receptive language, at the appropriate time.
This patient had initial seizures during sleep at the age of 1 year, with the left mouth pouting, left eye blinking and drooling for several seconds, and, sometimes, left upper-limb flexion and head version to the left, lasting for 1–2 min. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed rolandic cortex discharges, with 40% SWI. The regimens of valproate 0.25 bid, lamotrigine 25 mg bid, and clonazepam 0.5 mg bid were administered, and consequently, the frequency of seizures reduced.
However, in August 2016, clinical deterioration with extra manifestations, including continuous drooling, dysarthria, and expressive language impairments, occurred, in accordance with the ESES presentation of EEG (i.e., SWI > 85%). As a result, steroids [methylprednisolone (MPN): 10 mg/(kg · d) for 3 days, followed by 5 mg/(kg · d) for 3 days] and intravenous immunoglobulin [IVIG; 1 g/(kg · d) for 2 days], followed by oral prednisone (starting with the initial dose of 2 mg/kg, lasting for 1 or 3 months, and then tailed off) were provided to the patient in the later serial sessions, with the same antiepileptic drugs regimen as earlier. He was relieved with no seizure and drooling. Improvement in language ability was observed, but the patient had a recurrence after prednisone was tailed off every 4–5 months.
Therefore, since August 2017, the serial real-time TCD-SDvEEG monitoring was carried out. The outcomes of the stable transcranial Doppler ultrasound (TCD) tracings and the corresponding EEGs in the following serial relief-and-relapse sessions are shown in Fig. a–d.
Specifically, in August 2017, the patient experienced similar recurrent types of seizures, drooling, and dysarthria, with involuntary movements of the face for about 10 days . The real-time serial TCD-vEEG monitoring was then applied as previously described . The trends in lack of CBFV variation and obvious range of CBFV fluctuation (more than 35%) were found during all non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep stages , in accordance with the corresponding EEG with 95% SWI . Interestingly, after administering steroids and IVIG, the outcomes of TCD tracing returned to nearly normal levels , consistent with the resolution of clinical symptoms . Moreover, the range of CBFV fluctuation also alleviated with the changes in spikes, despite no changes in SWI (95%) . Unfortunately, 1 week after prednisone withdrawal (October 09, 2017), the symptoms relapsed, in keeping with the deterioration of TCD tracing , although the ESES status still showed no suppression compared with the last session . Because of repeated recurrence, the long-term steroid regimen was provided with methylprednisolone [10 mg/(kg · d) for 3 days, followed by 5 mg/(kg · d) for 3 days], followed by the long-term oral prednisone maintenance.
Specifically, after 1 month of oral administration of prednisone at a dose of 2 mg/kg, the improvements in clinical symptoms , decrease in SWI (40%) , and parallel changes in hemodynamics were observed.