A 35-year-old Thai female presented with a 6-month history of an asymptomatic single, small acne-like lesion on her left cheek (a 1.5 cm red-yellow nodule). She had previously seen a general practitioner and was transferred to the nearby dentist to check her dental condition that might have caused the lesion. Despite taking off her dental caries, the facial lesion rapidly grew in size with a few new small erythematous papules occurring. She reported no fever, no poor appetite, no night sweats, nor weight loss. She had no underlying disease and denied taking herbs, supplements, or other oral medication. None of her family members reported the same clinical entity.
The examination showed a reddish-yellow tumor-like lesion on her left cheek, measuring 5 cm in diameter, with a few 1–1.5 cm erythematous papules scattered on the face . The rest of the general physical examinations were normal, without lymph node enlargement or hepatosplenomegaly.
Tissue histology was obtained by a punch biopsy and revealed a dense dermal infiltration of mixed inflammatory cells, prominently of histiocytes with large vesicular nuclei and pale voluminous cytoplasm, admixed with some small lymphocytes, plasma cells, and scattered neutrophil without eosinophil . Engulfment of intact lymphocytes, or the emperipolesis phenomenon, was observed . Immunohistochemistry showed positive for S100 protein, CD68, and cyclinD1 + indicated histiocytes, and negative for CD1a indicated non-Langerhans cells . Computed tomography scans of the brain, neck, chest, and whole abdomen revealed a non-significant 0.8 cm of the cervical lymph node. The bone marrow study was negative for malignancy. Basic laboratory tests were also normal. However, molecular genetic testing was limited in our hospital.
The patient was treated with oral prednisolone (50 mg/day). At the one-month follow-up, the lesion had decreased in size giving a favorable outcome. However, prednisolone resulted in a partial response at the two-month follow-up, so methotrexate 25 mg/wk was added. As of now she is undergoing treatment, including a taper dose of steroids (15 mg/day) and methotrexate 25 mg/wk, with regular and monthly follow-ups.