A 59-year-old Japanese woman who had been diagnosed with Crohn’s disease at age 24 was undergoing treatment with 6-mercaptopurine, mesalazine, and infliximab (300 mg/month). A subcutaneous central venous (CV) access port was placed in the patient’s anterior chest wall at age 53, and total parenteral nutrition had been continuously administered at home. The patient was a housewife with no notable history of occupation, hobbies, or international travel. Five days before her admission, the patient developed a > 40 ℃ fever and was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation.
A physical examination revealed swelling and redness around the CV port insertion site. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography examination showed a 10-mm hypodense lesion at the tip of the CV catheter in the superior vena cava . The results of blood tests were as follows: white blood cell count, 4.0 × 109 /L; neutrophil percentage, 48.0%; absolute neutrophil count, 1.9 × 109 /L; C-reactive protein, 60.1 mg/L; procalcitonin, 0.43 ng/mL; albumin, 3.6 g/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 9.9 mg/dL; and creatinine, 0.90 mg/dL. Two sets of aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures were submitted, and treatment was initiated with meropenem (1 g, thrice daily). On day 2 of hospitalization, the CV port/catheter was removed, and the catheter tip was submitted for two sets of culture testing. The patient’s fever drastically improved after initial treatment. On day 3, gram-negative rod bacteria were detected from both sets of aerobic blood culture at 31 and 36 h (anaerobic culture was negative). The same bacterium was also detected from the catheter-tip culture, and its morphology was suggestive of glucose non-fermentative bacilli. On day 6, drug susceptibility results revealed carbapenem resistance, therefore meropenem was switched to levofloxacin 500 mg/day by intravenous infusion. After 14 days of treatment with levofloxacin, CV port/catheter was placed, and the patient was discharged on day 18 of hospitalization .
Regarding the identification of bacterial species, the top 3 matches and scores given by Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) were Burkholderia caribensis (score 1.209), Raoultella ornithinolytica (score 1.198), and Arthrobacter globiformis (score 1.187). Because the score was below 1.7, species of the isolate could not be identified by MALDI-TOF MS. Later, the isolate was identified as L. jiangsuensis by 16 S rRNA gene sequencing. The L. jiangsuensis isolate was Gram-negative, aerobic, spore-free, rod-shaped bacteria and produced circular, smooth, grey-colored colonies (2–3 mm) on Sheep Blood Agar (T) and green-colored colonies (3–4 mm) on Drigalski Lactose Agar after 24 h incubation . Biochemical characteristics of the strain isolated from the present patient were similar to those of strain JW-64-1T except for catalase activity, acid production from glucose and lactose, and nitrate reduction . Although strain JW-64-1T can reduce nitrate to nitrite, our strain could not reduce nitrate consistent with other Luteibacter spp. . Antimicrobial susceptibility test of the isolate revealed high minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values for first to third generation cephalosporins and carbapenems .