A 41-year-old woman first noticed anal bleeding in December 2013. She had initially presented to a local hospital, and a colonoscopy was performed. Colonoscopy revealed an elevated tumor of approximately 15 mm in diameter with a central shallow depression in the lower rectum. It appeared similar to mucosal prolapse syndrome, and the histopathology of the biopsy specimen revealed no malignancy . Transanal excision of the elevated tumor was performed. The histopathological diagnosis of the tumor revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. The patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation. Laboratory data investigations revealed normal serum hemoglobin. Tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and serum anti-p53 antibody, were within the normal ranges at 1.2 ng/ml (normal range 0 to 5.0 ng/ml), 11 U/ml (normal range 0 to 37.0 U/ml), and 0.40 U/ml (normal range 0 to 0.40 U/ml), respectively. Although elevated AFP levels take several months to normalize after the resection, the serum levels of 2 months after resection were within normal limits at 2 ng/ml (normal range 0 to 10.0 ng/ml). Abdominal computed tomography did not reveal liver metastasis, enlarged lymph nodes, or peritoneal metastasis, and the resected tumor was re-examined at our hospital. The schematic drawing of intraoperative situation is shown in Figure . Microscopically, the tumor comprised columnar neoplastic cells with clear cytoplasm showing tubular structure and focal solid growth by examination of the hematoxylin-eosin staining . Most of the tumor was clear cell carcinoma, and the conventional adenocarcinoma present very focally . Immunohistochemistry using an anti-AFP antibody demonstrated diffused and strong positive staining of the cytoplasm of the neoplastic cells . These results led to the diagnosis of AFP-producing adenocarcinoma of the rectum. The depth of the submucosal invasion was 5,000 μm, and there was a positive venous invasion . Both these findings were suggestive of possible lymph node metastasis; therefore, we advocated additional surgical resection with lymph node dissection. Furthermore, the patient underwent laparoscopic intersphincteric resection in March 2014. The histopathological report revealed no residual tumor in the surgical specimens and no lymph node metastasis. The patient was discharged 18 days postoperatively, and 12 months later, there are no signs of recurrence.