A 22-year-old Iranian man originally from the northern province of Mazandaran, was admitted to Fajr Laboratory Center (Sari, Iran) for premarital thalassemia screening. All evaluated hematologic indices were in the normal range ; however, both isoelectric focusing and cellulose acetate electrophoresis techniques revealed an unusual slow moving electrophoretic band in the location of Hb Q. A hematological investigation was then performed for the whole family. His father's blood tableau and Hb electrophoretic pattern were completely normal. His mother was a 38-year-old of Iranian ethnicity with normal hematologic indices. Her Hb electrophoretic pattern contained a band suspected to be Hb Q. Further evaluation by automatic capillary zone electrophoresis (Minicap system, Sebia, France) revealed an extra peak in the graphs of our two patients, identified as Hb Q . Previous reports of the quantity of Hb Q-Iran are stated to be 17% to 19% of the total Hb content. In our study, we found the amount of Hb Q-Iran to be 19.2% in these heterozygous individuals.
The family was then referred to the Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center for molecular analysis. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) samples were obtained from all members of the family and analyzed for α-globin mutations. The samples were examined by DNA analysis for the presence of the Hb Q-Iran mutation using the amplification refractory mutation system polymerase chain reaction method. Automated direct nucleotide sequencing (ABII377, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) of the amplified α2- and α1-globin genes was performed to characterize other nondeletional α-thalassemia determinants. Direct conventional sequencing revealed a single guanine to cytosine missense mutation (c.226G > C; GAC >CAC) at codon 75 in the α-globin gene in all samples except from the father . No other α-globin mutation could be detected by direct nucleotide sequencing.
Despite the normal clinical features of our patients, laboratory findings led to the identification of a rare Hb variant, Hb Q-Iran. Hereby, we report a family in the north of Iran whose members are carriers of the Hb Q-Iran gene.