An 85-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our hospital with right flank pain 10 years ago. She had a past medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and essential hypertension. She denied any history of thyroid disease and neck irradiation. She had no family history of any cancer. She was a housewife and had no history of tobacco smoking or consuming alcohol. A physical examination at the time of presentation was not significant except for right costovertebral angle tenderness. Her heart rate was 96 beats per minute and blood pressure was 155/90 mmHg. The findings of laboratory tests, which were complete blood count, liver and renal function tests, and urine analysis, were within normal range and they did not help us find the etiology of her right flank pain. Abdominal screening with computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass on her right kidney, which was considered a primary renal cell carcinoma and she underwent a right nephrectomy. Unexpectedly, PTC metastasis was diagnosed from demonstrative histopathological findings, such as positive immunoperoxidase staining for thyroglobulin (Tg). After further examinations of her thyroid and neck with ultrasonography (USG), a total thyroidectomy was performed. Pathological examination of thyroid tissue revealed a 5 cm tumor with capsular invasion and a strong positive immunoperoxidase staining of cytokeratin-19, HBME-1, and galectin-3. She was diagnosed as having metastatic PTC. Orally administered levothyroxine 75 mcg daily was initiated in addition to the metformin 1000 mg twice daily and amlodipine 10 mg daily treatments she received prior to PTC diagnosis. Postoperative serum Tg was above 300 ng/ml and anti-Tg was negative. Afterward, she was screened with unenhanced thoracic CT and skeletal scintigraphy. They revealed bilateral multiple nodules in her lungs and bone metastasis on T10 vertebra and right sacroiliac joint. Initially, 30 Gy radiotherapy was implemented to her T9–10 vertebrae for 12 days. We also started treating her with L-thyroxine to keep her thyrotropin (TSH) level below 0.1 mIU/L. After 2 months, she was treated with 200 mCi RAI for ablation. A RAI whole body scan (WBS) showed extensive RAI uptake in lungs and bones. A second 200 mCi RAI was applied 8 months after the first treatment. A post-ablative WBS showed progression. Serum Tg was still above 300 ng/ml and 200 mCi RAI administration was applied for the third time. A WBS was still displaying high radioactive activities in multiple areas of her body. Because of the existence of increased uptake, we planned a fourth RAI treatment but our patient was lost to follow-up for 2 years.
When she presented again in 2015, her serum Tg was above 300 ng/ml again and a fourth 200 mCi RAI WBS of our patient was done. Unexpectedly, the WBS revealed diminished RAI uptake compared with the previous ones . However, a neck USG showed two solid thyroid nodules at the previous thyroid area and bilateral lung metastases were identified by thoracic CT. For the next 3 years, she was lost to follow-up, again. Finally, in February 2018, she was referred to our clinic and presented with a huge hemorrhagic draining cervical mass . Of interest, besides this finding, she did not have any other complaints other than a little dyspnea when lying down. Summing up all previous RAI treatments, cumulative 800 mCi RAI was given to her in the past 10 years; however, a physical examination and screening findings were not yet promising at the last follow-up . Eventually, considering her elderly age, harboring multiple metastases, and the absence of severe complaints, we planned radiotherapy to the giant mass on her neck. After applying radiotherapy, she was lost to follow-up again and at the end of the year her sons reported that she was dead.