A 68-year-old woman presented with pain in the left wrist that had started 2 years earlier. The patient reported no traumatic wrist event or other medical conditions such as corticosteroid use, smoking, and alcoholism. Physical examination revealed diffuse tenderness of the left wrist and swelling. Range of motion was limited from extension 40° to flexion 10° and grip strength was measured 19 kg. Sclerotic change and collapse of the lunate and scaphoid were observed on plain radiography . Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed fragmentation of the lunate. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed avascular necrosis of the scaphoid and lunate, suggesting coexisting Kienböck's and Preiser's diseases. Upon MRI analysis, the articular cartilage of the proximal capitate or distal radius lunate fossa seemed to be intact .
To prevent arthritis or the possibility of arthritis not being detected on MRI, proximal row carpectomy (PRC) with a distally based capsular inter-position technique was planned.
During the operation, a dorsal longitudinal skin incision was made on the wrist. The fourth extensor compartment was incised, and a neurectomy was performed on the posterior interosseous nerve terminal branch . A capsular incision was designed for a distally based capsular flap . The PRC procedure was performed as follows . The capsular flap was kept safe from damage. A Homan retractor was inserted in the ulna side of the triquetrum for removing the triquetrum. For this, the dorsal lunotriquetral ligament was divided on direct view. The triquetrum was held with a towel clip, and an elevator was inserted to the volar side for blunt detachment from the ligament. This procedure is safer than sharp dissection. A scalpel can be used only when the ligament structure is observed directly. The lunate is removed in a similar fashion. In general, the scaphoid is the most difficult bone to excise. The radioscaphocapitate (RSC) ligament should be saved, but the scaphoid blocks view of the ligament, and the scaphotrapeziumtrapezoid ligament on the distal pole of the scaphoid is strong. Care and patience are needed for blunt dissection. Bone could be fragmented in pieces and removed little by little with a rongeur and osteotome. A scalpel also can be used, but only when ligament structures are visible. The RSC ligament can be tested with ulnar translocation of the carpal bone. If the RSC ligament is intact, the capitate cannot travel over the lunate fossa of the radius. The pisiform is maintained. Excised bones were requested for pathological examination, and the lunate and scaphoid demonstrated avascular necrosis.
After the PRC procedure, articular cartilage was assessed for arthritic change. This analysis showed changes in the proximal capitate that were not detected on MRI . The proximal portion of the distal based capsular flap was tied to the volar capsule and distal-based dorsal capsular interposition after PRC has been done .
As the present case showed, articular cartilage wear can exist even when MRI shows normal cartilage. For this reason, we suggest preparing a capsular flap for interposition with the PRC procedure.
A cock-up splint was used for 3 weeks. The patient was able to return to work 3 months after surgery, was pain-free, and returned to all activities. At the last follow-up 14 months after surgery, no progression of arthritis was seen in the lunar fossa or proximal capitate. The patient's wrist showed a fair range of motion with 30° of flexion, 60° of extension, and a modified Mayo wrist score of 80 . In comparison contralateral extremity, 80% of grip strength was measured (25/31 kg).