This case study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University.
A 67-year-old female, who complained of intermittent fever lasting for 10 months was admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. The patient developed fever without an apparent reason (e.g. she did not experience chills before fever), which was the highest during afternoon and evening hours. The patient also complained of urinary urgency and frequency, facial edema, shortness of breath and weakness. She reported no cough, sputum, night sweats or joint pain. Her temperature would usually drop to normal after she would take ibuprofen. Furthermore, the patient visited the local clinic, and was diagnosed with urinary tract infection, which was treated with clindamycin for 4 days. During that period (2 to 3 weeks), the body temperature gradually dropped to normal. No blood tests or other examinations were conducted.
The patient again developed a fever (Tmax was 38.3 °C), and after visiting the local clinic she was again treated with clindamycin. Nevertheless, this time, the fever didn’t drop following administration of omidazole and levofloxacin for 4 days. Therefore, the patient was admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Physical examination confirmed the following: high body temperature (38.0 °C), blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, heart rate of 80 Bpm (beats per minute), and respiratory rate of 18 Bpm. Superficial lymph nodes were not palpable.
After admission, the patient’s body temperature fluctuated from 37.3 to 39.0 °C. Blood tests showed white blood cells 5.88*109/L, neutrophil 65.4%, hemoglobin 101 g/L, platelet 293*109/L. Mycoplasma and Chlamydia antibodies, IgM and IgG were both negative. Three sets of blood cultures tested negative. Furthermore, procalcitonin was 0.09 ng/ml, ESR was 110 mm/h, T-SPOT. TB (Oxford Immunotec Global PLC, Abingdon, England) was negative. Blood EB virus and cytomegalovirus antibodies IgG were positive, while IgM were negative. In addition, hepatitis A IgM, hepatitis B antibody, and antigen were all negative. Also, HBV, HCV, HIV and syphilis antibodies all tested negative. Autoantibodies and anti-neutrophil antibodies were negative, as well as tumor markers. Serum biochemistries, including aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, serum creatinine, and lactate dehydrogenase were all within normal limits. Cardiac, abdominal and urinary tract ultrasound showed no signs of damage. Enlarged lymph nodes were not detected by chest high-resolution computed tomography (CT) or total abdominal enhanced CT. Nevertheless, abnormal spleen with SUVmax 10.2 was observed by PET-CT . Bone marrow aspiration revealed that lymphocytes accounted for 19.5%, while abnormal suspicious cells for 7% of the total cell count, while no plasma phagocytes were detected. Consequently, splenectomy was conducted to further investigate the organ pathology. During the operation, a small stomach nodule was found, and was immediately resected and analyzed.
Pathological examination indicated an obvious enlargement of the spleen (14x12x3.8 cm, weight 410 g), with reddish brown cut surface, while there were no obvious nodules. Following microscope examination, the splenic architecture was normal, the white pulps were reduced and dispersedly distributed, the red pulps were extended, and the splenic sinus was enlarged, containing atypical lymphoid cells. At higher magnification, the atypical cells were large, with 2–3 small nucleolus . Also, atypical cells were almost limited to venous sinuses. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry data indicated that atypical cells were positive for CD20, CD79a, CD5, Mum-1 and Bcl-2, while they were negative for CD3, CD10, CD23, Bcl-6, CD138, CD163, CD34 and CyclinD1. Kappa and Lambda were positively scattered, while Ki-67 proliferative index was approximately 80% . Pathological diagnosis was splenic non-Hodgkin B cell lymphoma, i.e. diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Nodule diameter was 0.7 cm, and pathological diagnosis was gastrointestinal stromal tumor . Furthermore, diffuse large B cell lymphoma cells were found within the vessels around the stomach nodule. The immunohistochemistry results indicated that nodule cells were SMA (−), Desmin (−), Vimentin (+), CD34 (+), CD117 (+), S-100(−), Ki-67-LI (< 5%), Dog-1 (+), CD20 (+). To sum up, the above results supported the diagnosis of splenic diffuse large B cell lymphoma concurrently with gastrointestinal stromal tumor in the stomach.
The patient underwent comprehensive physical examination prior to chemotherapy. Twelve days after splenectomy, she received following R-CHOP chemotherapy regimen: rituximab, 600 mg, day 0; cyclophosphamide, 1.4 g, day 1; doxorubicin hydrochloride liposom, 40 mg, day 1; vincristine, 4 mg, day 1; prednisone, 100 mg, days 1–5. The patient was in remission after 3 treatment courses.