A 72-year-old white woman was admitted to our hospital because of newly diagnosed hypercalcemia (albumin-corrected calcium 4.2 mmol/L; normal range 2.19–2.59 mmol/L) and multiple bone lesions visualized by bone scintigraphy. For 6 months, she had experienced progressive weakness, bone pain, nausea, and body weight loss of 4 kg. In addition, she noticed nocturia and polydipsia. According to her husband, she had recently become depressive and forgetful. Seven years before, she had been treated for breast cancer. The tumor stage was pT1c, pN0, M0, G2, R0; her estrogen and progesterone receptor status was positive; and she was herceptin 2 receptor-negative. At that time, a segment resection and a sentinel lymph node biopsy, as well as radio- and chemotherapy, were carried out. No local tumor recurrence had been detected in the last ultrasonographic follow-up of the breast and lymph nodes a few months earlier. Having found hypercalcemia and an elevated alkaline phosphatase (AP) level (233 U/L; normal range 35–104 U/L), her practitioner directly initiated whole-body bone technetium-99m-3,3-diphosphono-1,2-propanodicarboxylic acid (99mTc-DPD) scintigraphy , which showed multiple active hits, with the biggest lesions located in the os ilium and acetabulum on the right-hand side; unspecific, diffuse uptake in the calvarium; and multiple sites of focal uptake at costochondral junctions. In the context of the patient’s history of breast cancer, she was suspected of having multiple bone metastases.
On examination, the patient appeared to be in an afebrile, hemodynamically stable state, and no neurologic deficits were noticed. Her body mass index was 20.5 kg/m2. Laboratory studies showed hypercalcemia (albumin-corrected calcium 3.55 mmol/L), low phosphate (0.56 mmol/L; normal range 0.87–1.45 mmol/L), impaired renal function (creatinine 119 μmol/L, estimated glomerular filtration rate of 39 ml/minute), elevated AP (189 U/L), and a grossly elevated PTH level (1466 ng/L; normal range 15–65 ng/L) . 25-OH-vitamin D was slightly decreased (14.2 μg/L, normal >20 μg/L). Tumor marker CA15-3 was normal (26.7 kU/L, normal <30 kU/L).
On the basis of the laboratory constellation of primary HPT, neck surgery was considered and proposed to the patient. We felt that this patient could benefit from parathyroid surgery and correction of hypercalcemia, regardless of a potential concomitant malignancy. Sonography and scintigraphy of the parathyroid glands were performed, and a parathyroid adenoma (>2 cm in diameter) was detected at the left inferior side. Concerning the possible metastatic bone disease, 18F-FDG-PET/computed tomography (CT) was carried out . This examination provided evidence of multiple metabolically active, predominantly lytic bone lesions in the pelvis and at the sternum as well as a corticalis-disrupting lesion in the glenoid on the left-hand side .
The patient received intravenous continuous hydration (isotonic saline) and oral vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol 2000 U/day), and she consented to the proposed parathyroid surgery, which was carried out 1 week later. Following removal of the enlarged parathyroid gland (suspected to be the single source of excessive PTH; weighing 4.5 g), the patient’s intraoperative PTH level decreased to 22.6 ng/L , indicating removal of the culprit lesion. As expected, the lesion was posterior to the left lower thyroid pole and completely removed. In the postoperative course, no local (neck) complications were noticed.
After surgery, there was a progressive fall in serum calcium (total calcium down to a nadir of 1.96 mmol/L on day 5; albumin-corrected as shown in Fig. ), whereas phosphate remained low (0.52 mmol/L on the fifth postoperative day, returning to within the normal range 7 weeks later), and AP activity further increased up to 395 U/L 2 weeks after PTX . This increase could be attributed to an increase in the bone isoenzyme because bone-specific AP mass (up to 121 μg/L, normal postmenopausal range 6–26 μg/L) peaked at around the same time and came back to within the normal range by week 12 after PTX. PTH increased during the initial postoperative course (with low postoperative calcium) to 300 ng/L, ruling out hypoparathyroidism, and fasting urinary spot calcium excretion decreased to a level below the detection limit and remained low (urinary calcium/creatinine molar ratio <0.1) until 10 weeks after surgery. This constellation suggested hungry bone syndrome (HBS), a common consequence following successful parathyroid surgery in patients with OFC, and we considered this postoperative course compatible with the bone lesions . We started therapy with oral calcium (2 g/day) and calcitriol (0.5 μg/day), we continued treating the patient with vitamin D3 (2000 U/day, long-term). Owing to initial diagnostic uncertainty, signals sent by some physicians to the patient, and her fear of recurring malignancy, the largest lesion in the area of the pelvis was biopsied with CT guidance in an outpatient setting (3 weeks after PTX) . No malignant cells could be found, but the material turned out to be insufficient for pathological diagnosis by histological and immunohistochemical investigations. With the aim of gaining more information in the setting of an elevated AP (reflecting elevated bone turnover), we performed 18F-fluoride-PET 7 weeks after PTX. In this investigation, all the lesions showed increased fluoride uptake and progressive sclerosis of some lesions reflecting bone mineralization. Additional open biopsies were performed 9 weeks after PTX . Tissue samples of the right patella and of the right os ilium (the most reachable lesions) were obtained; again, no malignant cells were found.
We regularly saw the patient in our consultation, and laboratory controls showed that the serum calcium could be kept in the normal range over weeks . The therapy with calcium and calcitriol was adapted continuously. Six months after PTX, the patient presented with a joint effusion of the left knee. The rheumatologists conducted a joint puncture, and aspiration material showed calcium pyrophosphate crystals. Twenty-three weeks after PTX and bone lesions of unknown etiology and significance, we conducted further follow-up imaging by 18F-FDG-PET/magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to prove BTs and again rule out malignancy. The bone lesions were no longer detectable in the PET component of the examination. One year after PTX, the patient no longer had joint pain, remained normocalcemic, was physically active, and found herself, in retrospect, much stronger than in many years before.