A 65-year-old female, who was recently treated with amoxicillin for bacterial sinusitis in outpatient for 7 days, presented to the Mount Sinai St. Luke's Emergency Department with severe abdominal pain, fever, and diarrhea. Her vital signs were notable for temperature 39°C, heart rate 112 beats/min, and blood pressure 99/65 mmHg. Abdominal examination revealed hyperactive bowel sounds and diffuse abdominal tenderness with rebound. There was no abdominal rigidity or guarding. She was non-alcoholic, non-smoker, and drug-free. Initial laboratory evaluation was remarkable for white cell count 17,000/μL (4–11000/μL) and creatinine 1.7 mg/dl. Enzyme immunoassay was positive for toxigenic strain of C. difficile. The patient was resuscitated with intravenous fluids, and oral metronidazole therapy was initiated.
On the night of her admission, she started having retrosternal chest pain of severe intensity with moderate distress in breathing. Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed ST-segment elevation in the chest leads V1–V5, consistent with left main coronary artery or left anterior descending artery occlusion . Aspirin 325 mg was administered. Cardiac biomarkers, troponin-I and b-type natriuretic peptide, were elevated at 2.16 ng/mL and 447 pg/mL, respectively. Serial troponin-I was trended with a peak level of 9.8 ng/mL. Chest radiography and hepatobiliary ultrasound were unremarkable. Initial transthoracic echocardiogram showed apical ballooning and global left ventricular hypokinesis with a left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) of ~ 20–25% .
ST-segment elevation myocardial (STEMI) infarction code was activated. Emergent coronary angiogram demonstrated normal coronary arteries with no coronary disease but consistent with global hypokinesia. Left ventriculogram showed hypokinetic left ventricular apex consistent with TCM . After supportive treatment, the patient's condition improved along with resolution of fever and diarrhea. On day 5 of her admission, EKG showed normalization of ST-segment elevation, and she was discharged from the hospital. A repeat echocardiogram 2 weeks later demonstrated an improved LVEF of ~60% indicating the transient nature of the disease, essential for diagnosis .