A 46-year-old Caucasian woman, with a body mass index (BMI) of 20.7 kg/m2 and absence of risk factors for cardiovascular disease, nulligravida, nulliparous, was admitted to the Emergency Department of the San Camillo Hospital in Rome (Italy), presenting with abdominal swelling associated with exertional dyspnea and recurrent syncopes. On physical examination the patient showed lower-extremity edema, jugular venous distension and grade III/VI tricuspidal holosystolic murmur.
Her past medical history was significant for uterine leiomyomata for which she underwent multiple myomectomies. Because of a progressive, aberrant growth of the myomatous uterus, the patient subsequently received a subtotal hysterectomy with preservation of the cervix and adnexae, approximately 1 year prior to the present scenario. On histopathological examination, ordinary uterine leiomyomas were found, with the peculiar aspect of microscopic, thread-like masses into the lumina of small caliber venous structures confined to the resected uterus.
On admission the patient underwent a two-dimensional Doppler transthoracic echocardiography followed by a cardiac computed tomography which showed the presence of a 5 × 3.5 cm fluctuating solid, thrombus-like mass inside the right atrium and ascending from the IVC .
Successively, a chest-abdomen-pelvis Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance (MR) revealed a voluminous (15 × 22 × 9 cm) pelvic mass that caused compression of the bladder and left ureter, determining severe left hydroureteronephrosis . Moreover, inside the lumen of the left iliac vein and inferior vena cava, finally extending into the right atrium, a solid mass, provided with large vessels within, was noted .
Low molecular weight heparin (12,000 IU per day) was commenced and diuretic therapy set out. Improvement of lower-extremity edema and of dyspnea was observed.
Bilateral uterine artery embolization was performed preoperatively to prevent mass growth and reduce the risk of copious intraoperative bleeding. Arteriography of the hypogastric arteries showed bilateral dilation with marked left-sided prominence and an altered, protuberant vascularity of the neoformed pelvic mass . Additionally, cystoscopy with retrograde bilateral double J stenting was carried out to treat the left hydroureteronephrosis caused by ab estrinseco compression of the left ureter. Furthermore, bilateral stenting was also used for prevention of iatrogenic injury, granting intraoperative guidance to ureteral identification, in consideration of the high complexity of the pelvic pathology.
In view of the extension of both the pelvic and intravascular masses, the patient was scheduled for a two-stage surgical procedure.
The first stage of the procedure involved sterno-laparotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) with cannulation of the ascending aorta, superior vena cava and right atrial appendage, followed by hypothermia (26 °C), circulatory arrest and right atriotomy. Concurrently, a cavotomy of the IVC at infrarenal level was performed in order to divide the intravenous leiomyoma and allow for a safe extraction through the atriotomy. Closure of the atrial opening was then performed and gradual, uncomplicated weaning from CPB was obtained after patient rewarming. Division was made necessary due to extensive adhesions of the intravenous mass to the inner caval wall. A second cavotomy, superiorly to the iliocaval confluence allowed for removal of the residual intracaval leiomyoma .
Second-stage surgery was performed 7 days later and consisted of a relaparotomy, longitudinal cavotomy superiorly to the iliac confluence and extraction of the intravenous leiomyoma occupying the iliocaval bifurcation extending to the left iliac vein . ‘En bloc’ resection of the voluminous pelvic leiomyomatous mass with adnexae and cervix was then performed . Ligation and excision of the left hypogastric vein was also executed in order to radically remove all myomatous intravenous tissue, thus preventing recurrence.
Histopathological examination was consistent with pelvic recurrence of uterine leiomyomatosis with IVL. The intravenous masses were composed of elongated cell bundles with areas of hyalinization and a large amount of collagenous fibers amidst; such cells expressed smooth muscle cell markers on immunohistochemical analysis (i.e. smooth muscle actin, desmin), confirming their leiomyomatous origin.
The patient had an uneventful recovery, length of stay in intensive care unit was 3 days and the patient was then discharged from our department on postoperative day 9.
At 3 month follow-up the patient did not show evidence of disease recurrence. Nonetheless, long-term surgical follow-up and surveillance was advised .
An additional movie file shows the two-stage surgical procedure in detail (Additional file ).