A 74-year-old right-hand dominant male presented after a fall with a closed left transverse midshaft humerus fracture with an associated supracondylar distal humerus fracture with intercondylar extension through a medial column . The patient had no other injuries and was neurovascularly intact on presentation. He was an independent ambulator who lived alone. The patient was treated with a splint in the emergency room, with plans for operative fixation the next day.
After administration of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a lateral position with the arm hanging over a radiolucent paint roller positioner. A posterior incision was made, followed by a triceps split between the long and lateral heads of the triceps. The fracture sites over the articular surface were irrigated and cleaned. The intra-articular medial condyle fragment was reduced using multiple Weber clamps and compression was achieved with a 2.4-mm screw proximally and a 4.0-mm cannulated screw at the level of the joint. With the olecranon fossa of the distal humerus exposed at this stage, attention was turned to the humeral shaft fracture. The dorsal cortex of the humerus was perforated using a drill bit just proximal to the olecranon fossa to create a window for the reamer. Following sequential reaming, a 7 mm × 240 mm nail was inserted into the intramedullary canal, and subsequent interlocking screw fixation was performed. Finally, with the humeral shaft and articular elbow surface stabilized, a four-hole medial distal humerus plate was applied to the medial distal humerus in antiglide mode . Following closure, the patient was placed in a long arm splint with a non-weight-bearing (NWB) status of his left upper extremity (LUE) . The patient had an uneventful post-operative course and was discharged on post-operative day 1.
The patient was in a splint for 2 weeks and then began range-of-motion exercises. He was NWB for 6 weeks after surgery and advanced to progressive weight bearing as tolerated. He was admitted to the hospital for a mechanical fall approximately 1 month after surgery and was evaluated by the orthopedic team. He reported some pain control issues with his LUE, but the incision was well healed and the patient remained neurovascularly intact. The patient was then seen in the office 1 month later and reported significant improvement in pain. Despite his residual swelling of the LUE, his elbow range of motion was 20–135°. At his 4-month post-operative follow-up, the patient reported minimal pain at 2/10 intensity, and radiographs demonstrated appropriate callus formation .