A 14-month-old female with a history of gross motor delay and iron deficiency anemia presented to an urgent care with right hip pain. On evaluation, she had cervical and inguinal lymphadenopathy, an elevated ESR (109), CRP (10.19), anemia (Hgb 7.6) and WBC of 10 with 14% bands. Bilateral hip X-ray showed persistent undertubulation without fracture. After having several similar presentations for fever and inconsolability with significantly elevated inflammatory markers and concerning x-rays, she was admitted to the hospital for further evaluation. Intake exam was notable for hepatosplenomegaly, central hypotonia and erythematous maculopapular rash. The differential diagnosis included storage disorders, metabolic disorders, and infiltrative processes, such as leukemia.
Brain MRI was unrevealing, only noting cervical lymphadenopathy. Echocardiogram was unremarkable. Blood smear did not show leukemic blasts. Her rash was consistent with scabies and treated with permethrin. Her extensive metabolic work-up was normal (including urine mucopolysaccharides, creatine kinase, acylcarnitine profile, and plasma amino acids), except for elevated urine mevalonic acid. Repeat urine organic acids performed during another febrile episode again showed elevation of urine mevalonic acid. Genetic testing revealed two mutations in her mevalonate kinase gene with one allele having deletion of exons 10–11, while the other allele having a variant of p.Asn166Lys of unknown significance. Given mutations on both alleles for her mevalonate kinase enzyme, she was diagnosed with MKD.
Our patient is now 23 months old and thriving. Since her diagnosis of MKD, she was started on Anakinra with an excellent response, but she developed diarrhea and was transitioned to Canakinumab. To date, she has had no recurrence of fevers, rash, hepatosplenomegaly, or arthralgias. She is receiving physical and occupational therapy for her gross motor delay, and her skills have improved significantly. She is now walking without difficulty.