Physical examination of a 30-year-old man revealed hepatic space-occupying lesions, in the absence of chills, fever, nausea, vomiting, jaundice, and other symptoms. He was referred to our hospital for further treatment after a few days.
Informed consent was obtained from the patient prior to the examination. The patient underwent CEUS at our inpatient department with a LOGIC E9 ultrasound scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA). The level of low mechanical index (MI) in CEUS was 0.2. B-mode imaging revealed a hypoechoic zone (4.6 cm × 3.6 cm) in the caudate lobe of the liver, with a clear boundary, uneven internal echo, and hypoechoic zone surrounded by a hyperechoic ring. Color Doppler flow imaging did not find any obvious blood flow signal in the above-mentioned hypoechoic zone. CEUS revealed that the lesion was filled with the contrast agent, its center was moderately enhancing, and the peripheral area was hyperenhancing in the arterial phase. Contrast agent wash-out could be observed as a hypoenhancement at the center of the lesion and the peripheral hyperechoic area remained as a hyperenhancement in the portal venous phase. The central area exhibited further wash-out in the late vascular phase. The lesion showed a defect in the Kupffer phase . Quantitative CEUS parameters reflecting tissue vascularity can be obtained from time-intensity curve (TIC) analysis. The fitted TIC of a region of interest can be obtained on a pixel-by-pixel basis using SonoLiver (TomTec, Germany, and Bracco, Italy). Quantitative analysis of CEUS showed that the contrast arrival time for the lesion was 8 s, the fall time for the lesion was 33 s, the mean transit time for the lesion was 15 s, and the time to peak for the lesion was 24 s. The peak intensity of the lesion was − 56 dB. The intensity of the lesion during the Kupffer phase was − 60 dB. The time to peak for the surrounding liver tissue was 13 s, the peak intensity of the surrounding liver tissue was − 62 dB, and the intensity of the surrounding liver tissue during the Kupffer phase was − 44 dB. The CEUS findings indicated that the liver lesions were benign but failed to clarify their specific nature. The patient underwent enhanced CT on the same day. The enhanced CT images showed a rounded, abnormal enhancement in the caudate lobe of the liver near the second hepatic hilum (4.4 cm × 4.1 cm), with obvious hyper-enhancement in the arterial phase, and wash-out in the portal and delayed phases . The inferior vena cava and hepatic vein were compressed, and no obvious filling defect was observed, considering the possibility of HCC. During hospitalization, the patient underwent complete laboratory examinations within the next three days. He did not have a current or past history of hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infection. The levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen, and sugar chain antigen were 1.72 ng/mL, 0.89 ng/mL, and 19–94.46 U/mL, respectively. The white blood cell count was 4.30 × 109/L. The levels of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and total bilirubin were 19 U/L, 16 U/L, and 9.8 µmol/L, respectively.
We decided to perform laparoscopic hepatic caudate lobe resection for this patient after consultation with the hepatobiliary surgeon. Laparoscopic ultrasound exploration conducted during surgery revealed a soft, gray-brown mass measuring 3 cm × 3 cm located on the Spiegel’s lobe near the inferior vena cava. The Spiegel’s lobe was partially excised during surgery. The results of the histopathological examination showed that the lesion was a liver angiomyolipoma, and some areas were composed mainly of epithelioid and spindle-shaped cells . The findings of immunohistochemical analysis were as follows: HMB45 ( +), smooth muscle actin ( +), cathepsin K ( −), S-100 ( −), SOX10 ( −), hepatocyte ( −), glypican-3 ( −), arginase ( −), AFP (-), GS ( +), cytokeratin (CK)19 ( −), EMA ( −), CK7 ( −), CK20 ( −), CD34 ( −), CD117 (c-kit 9.7) (-), CD117 (positive control) ( +), DOG1 ( −), DES ( −), caldesmon ( −), succinate dehydrogenase B ( +), CC21 ( −), CD23 ( −), CD35 ( −), and Ki-67 (LI approximately 3%). The results of fluorescence in situ hybridization were as follows: Epstein–Barr virus encoded RNA (EBER) chromogenic in-situ hybridization (CISH) ( −) and EBER CISH (positive control) ( −). The patient recovered well and was discharged after the surgery, and no tumor recurrence was observed at the 7-month follow-up.