An 80-year-old italian woman of Caucasian origin presented to the emergency room at the Catholic University of Rome with severe abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea. Her symptoms, which had developed over the last four months, consisted of unrelenting lower abdominal pain that began 30 minutes after eating and lasted for about three hours. It was unrelieved by bowel movements or changes in position. For this reason, the patient reduced her food intake, and her weight decreased by 5 kg. The day before admission, bloody diarrhea developed.
The patient had a history of arterial hypertension, hiatal hernia, bilateral hearing loss due to chronic otomastoiditis, and polyarthritis (cervical, dorsal, and lumbosacral spondylosis; bilateral osteoarthritis of the hip). She had undergone open surgical cholecystectomy for gallstones in 1959. In 1998, she was hospitalized for rectal bleeding caused by acute diverticulitis. In 2004, she was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the papilla of Vater and had a cephalic pancreaticoduodenectomy. The pathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated intestinal-type adenocarcinoma measuring 1.5 cm in diameter that had invaded the muscle layers of the duodenal wall. The margins were tumor-free, and two lymph nodes were negative for malignancy. During that hospitalization, she developed paroxysmal atrial fibrillation that was converted to a normal sinus rhythm with amiodarone. Her medications included zofenopril (7.5 mg/day), manidipine (10 mg/day), esomeprazole 20 mg/day, celecoxib (400-600 mg/day), and acetaminophen plus codeine (500 mg plus 30 mg/day). She had no known drug allergies.
During admission, she was alert and oriented with normal vital signs (blood pressure, 150/70 mm Hg; heart rate, 80 beats per minute; temperature, 36.8°C). The lower abdomen was tender, but there were no signs of peritonitis. Although the bowel sounds were decreased, passage of flatus and feces was normal. There was no palpable organomegaly. The patient's lungs were clear on auscultation and a systolic ejection murmur (2/6) was heard over her aortic area. Admission laboratory tests revealed: hemoglobin 12.1 g/dl; white-cell count 15,290/mm3 (neutrophils 86%); platelet count 317,000/mm3; total protein 5.6 g/dl; albumin 3.2 g/dl. Serum electrolytes, creatinine, glucose, bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase, gamma glutamyl transferase, and amylase levels were within normal limits, as were the prothrombin and partial thromboplastin time. Plain films of the abdomen revealed no free intraperitoneal air or air-fluid levels, and the chest x-ray excluded the presence of pneumonia or nodules. Immediately after admission she was placed on an NPO (nil per os) regimen with total parenteral nutrition, and within eight hours her symptoms completely disappeared.
Abdominal CT revealed a hypodense mass measuring 4 × 4 cm in the space between the vena cava and the aorta, at the level of the origin of the celiac trunk. The mass extended caudally for about 4 cm, enveloping the origin of the superior mesenteric artery, the left renal vein at its confluence into the inferior vena cava, and the origin of the right renal artery, and anteriorly to the confluence of the splenic and mesenteric veins. Enlarged lymph nodes (1 cm) were observed at the hepatic hilum and in the intercavoaortic and left para-aortic spaces. Thickened bowel loops were also seen. This picture was consistent with local recurrence of the neoplastic disease.
A week later, oral feedings were resumed and the patient once again experienced diffuse abdominal pain and diarrhea. The pain responded poorly to conventional analgesics (scopolamine 20 mg IV, acetaminophen 500 mg PO, tramadol 37.5 mg PO t.i.d., fentanyl 25 μg transdermally), but it disappeared promptly when oral feedings were withdrawn.
A duplex ultrasound examination was performed to assess the mesenteric circulation . To the extent that it could be explored, the artery showed no evident stenoses on B-mode or color- and power-Doppler evaluation. The superior mesenteric artery was characterized by a high peak systolic velocity (283 cm/sec) that was consistent with vascular stenosis. Blood flow in the celiac artery was turbulent, and the peak systolic velocity was also high (118 cm/sec). The patient was started on subcutaneous enoxaparin (4000 U/day) and transdermal nitroglycerin (10 mg/day, from 08.00 to 20.00). Since oral feedings could not be resumed, a central venous catheter was inserted for prolonged parenteral nutrition.
In view of the tumor histotype and the age and general condition of the patient, there was no indication for systemic chemotherapy and the patient was transferred to a hospice. She remained pain-free without any form of analgesics and had a relatively good quality of life until her death three months later.