A 47-year-old male patient presented with diarrhea for more than four months.
The patient had diarrhea without obvious incentives for more than 4 mo. The number of times a day was 8-10, and the stool was yellow paste. The amount was approximately 100-200 mL/time. There was no mucus, pus, or blood and intermittent pain around the umbilical cord. The diarrhea was usually accompanied by loss of taste, fatigue, and occasional nausea and vomiting. The vomit included stomach contents, and there was no obvious abdominal distension or hair loss.
He had a previous medical history of hyperthyroidism, Grave’s eye disease, and diabetes mellitus.
The patient smoked about 360 packs per year of cigarettes for more than 20 years and drank an average of 4 double liquors of alcohol per day for more than 10 years while denying any relevant family history.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 36.3 ℃; blood pressure, 111/88 mmHg; heart rate, 110 beats per min; respiratory rate, 22 breaths per min. His height was 170 cm, and his weight was 75 kg. Furthermore, the skin around his lips and hands was pigmented, the anterior edge of the nails of both his hands was significantly thickened and yellow, and his nails were partially atrophied .
Pertinent laboratory findings included an increased platelet count (5.01 × 1011/L) and hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin of 27.3 g/L) with a reduced total protein (50 g/L). The level of the calcium correction amount was (2.164 mM) along with his IgM and C3 levels (0.25 g/L and 0.82 g/L, respectively), but his anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antinuclear antibody, IgG and IgG4 findings were normal.
Gastroscopy imaging identified the esophageal mucosa to be smooth without any abnormalities. The mucosa of the whole stomach, pylorus, and duodenum bore a diffuse polypoid bulge appearance, and the surface mucosa was congested . Pathological examination of the tissue sent for gastric biopsy showed the existence of hyperplastic polyp changes. The colonoscopy performed identified mucosal hyperemia, edema, and granular bulge in the lower segment of the ileum (about 30 cm away from the ileocecal valve), and a diffuse polypoid bulge of the mucosa could be observed from about 15 cm from the end of the ileum to the rectum, some of which was nodular with mucosal hyperemia and erosion on the surface. Rectal lesions were lighter than in other intestinal segments . Pathological examination of the descending colon, transverse colon, ascending colon, terminal ileum, lower segment of the ileum, rectum, and sigmoid colon identified proliferative and juvenile polyps under the microscope .