A 13-year-old girl was admitted to our neurology department because of inflexibility in her left leg and left hand when she was in physical education. The patient had noticed three months previously that her left leg got easily caught up in the rope when she was skipping because of its clumsiness A similar symptom appeared in her left hand one month ago: it took a lot of effort and time for her to do up buttons.
The patient was a middle school student and had performed very well in sports three months earlier. The patient's mother had a normal pregnancy. The girl was born at 39 weeks of gestation with a birthweight of 3100 g; her Apgar score was normal.
The patient has a family history: her mother was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease at the age of 30, nine years ago, with initial symptoms of bradykinesia and rigidity in her left arm, which then progressively affected the left leg, right arm and right leg. Her mother's symptoms improved significantly after taking L-dopa 1 hour.
The patient's neurological examination showed mild bradykinesia and rigidity in her left arm and leg, her muscle strength is normal and Babinski sign is negative. Further physical examination revealed nothing abnormal: the blood pressure was 106/66 mm Hg, and her serum biochemistry, whole blood count, thyroid function were all normal. The patient had a related family history, suggesting that it might be hereditary PD. We applied genetic analysis to the proband (the patient) using targeted multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA)+ next-generation sequencing (NGS) to cover candidate genes known to cause familial forms of PD. We detected genes of interest including Recombinant Parkinson Disease Protein 2 (PARK2), Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), ATPase cation transporting 13A2(ATP13A2), Alpha-Synuclein (SNCA), ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCHL1), PTEN induced kinase 1 (PINK1), Parkinsonism associated deglycase (PARK7), ATPase copper transporting beta (ATP7B), GTP cyclohydrolase 1 (GCH1), GRB10 interacting GYF protein 2 (GIGYF2), HtrA serine peptidase 2 (HTRA2), phospholipase A2 group VI (PLA2G6), F-box only protein 7 (FBXO7), vacuolar protein sorting 35 homolog gene (VPS35), vacuolar protein sorting 13 homolog C (VPS13C), vacuolar protein sorting 13 homolog A (VPS13A), eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4 gamma 1 (EIF4G1), DnaJ heat shock protein family (Hsp40) member C6 (DNAJC6), DnaJ heat shock protein family (Hsp40) member C13 (DNAJC13), synaptojanin 1 (SYNJ1), parkin coregulated (PACRG), interleukin 1 beta (IL1B), ataxin 2 (ATXN2), ataxin 3 (ATXN3), ATPase H+ transporting accessory protein 2 (ATP6AP2), RAB39B, Microtubule-associated protein Tau (MAPT), TATA-binding protein (TBP), prodynorphin (PDYN), transglutaminase 6 (TGM6), nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A member 2 (NR4A2), glutamate dehydrogenase 2 (GLUD2), glucosylceramidase beta (GBA), pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2), phospholipase A2 group VI (PLA2G6), ferritin light chain (FTL), WD repeat domain 45 (WDR45), Coenzyme A synthase (COASY), presenilin 1 (PSEN1), coenzyme Q2(COQ2), syntaxin 1B (STX1B), dynactin subunit 1 (DCTN1), DDRGK domain-containing protein 1 (DDRGK1), TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TARDBP), ceruloplasmin (CP). The same Parkinsonism-related gene panel was applied to her mother. However, no mutation gene was found in the patient and her mother.
In addition, the patient had normal liver function, no corneal KF ring, and no ATP7B gene mutation; therefore, we did not consider this patient as hepatolenticular degeneration (Wilson disease, WD). Moreover, the patient was not using dopamine receptor blockers, so drug-induced Parkinson's syndrome was not considered. The patient also did not have fever, personality changes, cognitive impairment, joint pain or other immune-related symptoms, autoimmune Parkinson's syndrome was not considered. She has not recently been infected or vaccinated, so infection-related Parkinson's syndrome was not considered. Moreover, she denied exposure to toxic substances, so poisoning-related Parkinson's syndrome was not considered.
Then, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was taken for the patient. MRI showed that there was a lesion about 7.3 × 6.2 × 6.8 cm in size in the temporal lobe with long mixed-T1 signal, long mixed-T2 signal, and there was cystic degeneration in periphery regions of the lesions. There was heterogeneous contrast enhancement in the solid part on gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images .
The mass was completely removed via right tumorectomy, then microscopic examination revealed that the resected tumor cells stuck out of elongated cytoplasmic protuberances attached to the dilated radial arrangement around thin-walled blood vessels to form perivascular pseudorosettes . The space around the vessels without cells was wide. Some tumor cells were large, cytoplasm was eosinophilic, and nuclear fission was rare. The pathological diagnosis revealed a typical ependymoma (WHO II). Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that the tumors expressed glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), S-100 protein, vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and p53 protein, which were weakly positive immunoreactivity for GFAP, S-100, positive immunoreactivity for EMA and P53. The Ki-67 was 10%-30%.
The patient recovered well after the operations and her left leg and hand were almost as flexible as before. MRI after surgery showed that 33a cystic lesion with cerebrospinal fluid signal was left, and the cystic lesion was decreased two months later . After surgery, she received radiation therapy and there was no recurrence in the follow-up study.