A 14 year old Chinese boy presented to a district hospital with a 5 day history of non-specific right hypochondriac pain. There was no history of jaundice, fever, anorexia or weight loss. He did not have any other associated symptoms. He had no significant past or family history, and no history of drug intake or allergies. His general physical examination was unremarkable. Yellowish discoloration of skin or sclera, spider naevi and palmar erythema all were absent. Systemic examination revealed massive hepatomegaly. His blood count and liver function tests were normal. Alpha fetoprotein was also normal. Ultrasonography revealed a large mass in the right lobe of the liver. He was referred to our hospital for further management. Contrast enhanced CT Scan revealed a large, hypodense mass of 14 × 15 × 15 cm in the right lobe of the liver. . Exploratory laparotomy was performed and revealed a large mass in the right lobe of the liver and part of the left lobe with ruptured capsule and the ruptured part adhered to pleura. Tumor resection was performed and about 70% of the total liver was resected. Pathologic review of the specimen revealed an 1150 gm right hepatic lobe and part of the left hepatic lobe with a 14 × 15 × 15 cm tumor mass. The histological examination showed malignant sarcomatous tissue with giant neoplastic cells and residual hepatocytes suggestive of Undifferentiated Liver Sarcoma. . Sarcomatous tissue with severe atypia of the neoplastic cells and focal presence of giant cells, partially with myoblastic characteristics, was also present. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxy Kinase (PCK), Vimentin and Alpha 1 Antitrypsin and negative for Epithelial Membrane Antigen (EMA).
Our patient's postoperative recovery was uneventful. He was given 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy, AIM Regimen (Adriamycin, Ifosfamide and Mesna), which was well tolerated. A post-chemotherapy CT scan showed no signs of recurrence and our patient is alive and well 6 months after surgery.