A 27-year-old previously healthy male patient presented with nausea and vomiting and headache after a rain shower. He developed a fever of 39 °C the next day, followed by gradual onset of limb weakness and unsteadiness within 3 days. He was admitted to the local hospital on the fifth day of illness. Cerebral computed tomography (CT) findings were unremarkable, but cranial magnetic resonance imaging suggested inflammatory changes in the meninges and splenium of corpus callosum (A–D). The patient was immediately treated with acyclovir, dexamethasone, and mannitol.
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed elevated intracranial pressure (>300 mmH2O), increased protein level of 2.48 g/L, and a high white blood cell count of 79 × 106/L, with normal glucose and chloride levels. No pathogens were identified in either the CSF or blood, but NGS including DNA and RNA detected Streptococcus pneumoniae (sequence number 12) in the sputum. One week later, the patient became unconsciousness with limb twitching and straightening, eye rolling and staring, teeth clenching, and intermittent apnea episodes, which resolved spontaneously after a few seconds. A repeat brain CT scan still showed no abnormal findings, but he was moved to the intensive care unit for further treatment. He received tracheal intubation with ventilator-assisted ventilation, acyclovir, ceftriaxone, dexamethasone, intracranial pressure reduction, and antiepileptic treatment. His heart rate exhibited frequent episodes of bradycardia, with a minimum rate of 10 beats per minute, often observed during nursing roll-ups and back pats. An electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated the presence of complete right bundle branch block, but bedside cardiac ultrasound showed no significant abnormality. He subsequently received isoprenaline and atropine, and his heart rate recovered to 80 beats/min. However, his level of consciousness gradually worsened to a moderate coma. The CSF pressure increased again (290 mmH2O) and the CSF protein level reached 1.93 g/L. Repeat NGS still found no pathogens in the CSF. He was hospitalized for further treatment in our facility.
Examination revealed that the patient was in a comatose state, with no expression of pain despite pressure on the orbits. His bilateral direct and indirect light reflexes were absent, his left corneal reflex was blunted and right corneal reflex was absent. No limb muscle contraction was observed upon painful stimulation, accompanied by absent tendon reflexes in all four limbs. Additionally, the patient presented with bilateral negative Babinski signs in both lower limbs and positive meningeal stimulation signs. On the day of admission, the patient suffered two cardiac arrests, and arterial blood gas potassium tests showed levels of 5.0 and 4.3 mmol/L, respectively. A bedside ECG suggested complete right bundle branch block. His heart rate recovered to 90 beats/min within 2 min after both cardiopulmonary resuscitation sessions. The following day, the patient's heart rate rose to 160–180 beats/min, and a bedside ECG showed atrial flutter and complete right bundle branch block, and a temporary bedside pacemaker was placed after communication with the family. On the third day, the patient's bilateral pupil dilatation was fixed and bilateral direct and indirect light reflexes, bilateral corneal reflexes, and head-eye reflexes had disappeared. Considering the patient's critical condition and poor prognosis and the family's poor financial situation, they chose to stop active treatment and were willing to donate the patient's organs.
Cranial CT angiography showed diffuse edema of the brain tissue, suggesting an inflammatory response, with no intracranial arterial visualization and poorly visualized veins. GFAP IgG antibodies were found in the CSF at a dilution of 1:32 using a cell-based assay, but were not detected in the serum (A–F). A tissue-based indirect immunofluorescence assay suggested a positive result in the CSF but not in serum, indicating fluorescent signals in cerebellar and hippocampal regions and significant astrocyte signals, indicating positivity for anti-GFAP antibody (A–D). Other IgG autoantibodies were tested in both the CSF and serum, including N-methyl-d-aspartatic acid (NMDA), α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA), gamma-aminobutyric acid subtype A (GABAA), gamma-aminobutyric acid type B (GABAB), aquaporin-4 (AQP4), myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), ganglionic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (ganglionic AChR), myelin basic protein (MBP), glutamic acid decarboxylase 2 (GAD65), dopamine receptor 2 (DRD2), leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 (LGI1), and contactin-associated protein-like2 (CASPR2) were all negative. Oligoclonal bands were found in the CSF but were absent in the serum. No pathogens were detected in the CSF, alveolar lavage fluid, urine, or blood by NGS. Alveolar lavage fluid smears for antacid bacilli and rapid fluorescence staining for deep fungi, and Aspergillus tests were all negative.
Hospital Organ Procurement Organizations use the ABC-HOME assessment to evaluate patients for eligibility as potential organ donors. The patient was judged to be brain dead according to the Chinese Adult Brain Death Determination Criteria and Practice Guidelines, and organ harvesting was carried out according to standard protocols by the hospital surgeons. Two patients successfully received kidney transplants and one patient received a liver transplant.
The two kidney transplant recipients, aged 56 and 50 years respectively, suffered from chronic renal insufficiency in the uremic phase. Their pre-transplant blood creatinine levels peaked at 506 and 1002 μmol/L, respectively, and both had creatinine fluctuating from 118 to 191 μmol/L in the 15 months after transplantation, with regular anti-rejection medication. One recipient had a serum creatinine level of 191 μmol/L at the 13th month after transplantation, with no clinical discomfort; however, this was considered as an immune rejection response and anti-rejection treatment was intensified for 10 days. In this report, his serum creatinine fluctuated between 115 and 133 μmol/L.
A male patient who was 23 years old with hepatocellular carcinoma diagnosed 6 months previously due to anemia detected at a local hospital, received a liver transplant. His maximum alanine aminotransferase levels were 1082 U/L before transplantation and 84 U/L 1 week after transplantation, but increased again to 446 U/L 1 month later. He was readmitted to hospital with suspected acute rejection and was treated with tacrolimus 2.5–3 mg and liver protection. His alanine aminotransferase was maintained at 24–40 U/L over the following 15 months.