The patient was an 88-year-old White male, with history of prostate cancer status post-prostatectomy, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease, who presented with mid-abdominal pain lasting over 2 months. Abdominal ultrasound with contrast revealed an echogenic mass in the pancreas. Subsequent MRI of the abdomen demonstrated a 5.3 × 4.2 cm lesion in the pancreatic body concerning for pancreatic adenocarcinoma . This lesion demonstrated restricted diffusion with associated upstream pancreatic ductal dilation. Additionally, the mass encased the portal confluence (with severe narrowing of the splenic vein), distal celiac axis, proximal common hepatic artery, and splenic artery. No metastatic lesions were identified in the abdomen. At this time, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) was 1671 U/mL (reference range < 35 U/mL), amylase was 87 U/L (reference range 29–103 U/L), and lipase was 29 U/L (reference range 11–82 U/L).
Given the imaging findings, the patient was diagnosed with stage III locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma and started on chemotherapy (Gemzar and Abraxane) and a course of stereotactic body radiation therapy. Over the next 12 months, CT imaging of the abdomen and chest demonstrated a response to therapy with a size reduction of the pancreatic mass to 1.4 × 0.9 cm and no signs of metastases. However, at 12 months post therapy initiation, the patient was not considered to be a candidate for tumor resection because of the continued unchanged soft tissue encasement of the nearby vasculature, presumed to be persistent tumor involvement. Sixteen months after initiation of therapy, PET/CT revealed a metabolically active lesion at the site of the primary pancreatic tumor. The patient was then recommended for IRE treatment for his pancreatic cancer. Leading to the procedure, CA 19-9 was 196 U/mL, amylase was 76 U/L, and lipase was 29 U/L. The lesion is not readily visible on unenhanced CT or ultrasound, only venous phase of contrast-enhanced CT.
Therefore, the patient’s previous PET/CT scan was imported into the 3D image analysis workstation (Xperguide Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands). CBCT imaging alone did not show the lesion, but fusion with PET/CT enabled targeting of the tumor area. Skin entry points and paths were chosen for each of three IRE needles per manufacturer’s recommendation. The needles were placed approximately 1.5 cm from each other, as confirmed by CBCT imaging throughout placement . After placement, the IRE probes were unsheathed by 1.5 cm, and the lesion was treated for two rounds of 90 electrical pulses each. The wattage was increased in between the two rounds.
Postprocedurally, an expected but small amount of pneumoperitoneum was observed on CBCT. On follow-up PET/CT, no new or residual fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity was noted in the ablation zone . Two weeks post-procedure, CA 19-9 was 266 U/mL, amylase was 64 U/L, and lipase was 10 U/L. Six months post-procedure (18 months from initial diagnosis), MRI scans have confirmed the presence of soft tissue surrounding the adjacent vasculature, which is nonspecific and may reflect post-treatment change since the PET was negative.