A 69-year-old man was referred to our institution for the treatment of persistent AT. He had a history of mitral valve plasty for mitral regurgitation due to mitral valve prolapse and coronary artery bypass grafting for angina pectoris 19 years before the ablation and paroxysmal AF was first diagnosed in the following year. The frequency of AT has increased starting at 14 years before the ablation, and cardioversion was performed each time. He was admitted for radiofrequency catheter ablation of AT because of palpitations during exercise and increased brain natriuretic peptide levels. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed an AT with a tachycardia cycle length (TCL) of 304 ms and positive P-waves in leads I, II, III, aVF, V4, V5, and V6 . With informed consent, the patient underwent an electrophysiological study and ablation.
Endocardial mapping of the atrium was performed using a PentaRay catheter (Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA) with the CARTO mapping system (Biosense Webster). Checking the activation map of the left atrium (LA) during AT with a TCL of 304 ms and activation on the CS propagating from distal to proximal, we suspected that the AT was localized re-entrant tachycardia in the LA anterior wall . However, because a small part of the TCL was still not covered by the LA mapping, a second map was acquired in the right atrium (RA). The activation map of the RA showed a focal activation pattern starting from the RA septum. When the maps of both atriums were combined, the propagation of the tachycardia on the activation map exhibited the centrifugal activation from the LA anterior wall, and the conduction from the RA to LA was not well understood (Video 1). While, a coherent map demonstrated that the propagation ran from the RA high septum to the LA anteroseptum via an interatrial connection, and turned to the RA septum from the LA septum via the Bachmann bundle with clockwise rotation. Furthermore, the high-septum interatrial connection appeared to have a conduction delay because conduction velocity vectors near the connection were thicker relative to the surrounding areas . On a voltage map, a wide low-voltage zone (LVZ) extending from the LA anterior wall to the LA and RA septums was documented . Entrainment mapping revealed a short post-pacing interval (PPI) [PPI-TCL <20 ms] in the RA and LA septums, and finally, the AT was diagnosed as BiAT with a re-entrant circuit involving both atrial septums . On the ripple map of both atriums, a propagation reciprocating near the assumed high-septum interatrial connection was visualized (Video 3), and clear double potentials were recorded near the site . The preceding potentials were considered to be far field potentials due to amplitude lower than the following potentials, and the TCL (304 ms) was completely covered by adding the activation time of the preceding potentials (36 ms) to the activation time of the endocardial potentials of both atriums (268 ms). Given these, the preceding potentials were considered to be potentials of an epicardial interatrial connection. Ablation began with 35 W of radiofrequency using an irrigated catheter (ThermoCool SmartTouch™ Surround Flow, Biosense Webster) on the epicardial interatrial connection with a conduction delay from the endocardial side . After 17 s of ablation, BiAT was terminated and sinus rhythm (SR) was restored without pause . Additional burns at the area near the successful site of ablation were applied; subsequently, pulmonary vein isolation and LA roof ablation were also performed using a 28-mm cryoballoon (Arctic Front Advance, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). All procedures were completed without any complications. No AT was induced by atrial burst pacing under isoproterenol infusion. After the ablation, the patient was followed up without any antiarrhythmic drugs, and SR was maintained during 3 months of follow-up.