A 36-year-old man was diagnosed with Ph+ B-ALL. He received ten courses of chemotherapy and relapsed after four lines of therapy. In relation to the evaluation criteria, morphology complete remission (CR) was achieved after one course of vincristine, daunorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and prednisone (VDCP) plus imatinib. Then two courses of cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, and 6-mercaptopurine (CAM) plus imatinib were performed. The patient remained in morphology CR, but BCR-ABL 190 was positive. The patient proceeded with two courses of high-dose methotrexate (HD-MTX) plus dasatinib and one course of VDCP plus dasatinib. Morphology CR persisted, but BCR-ABL 190 did not become negative even with dasatinib. After one course of CAM plus dasatinib, the percentage of lymphoblasts and prolymphocytes in the bone marrow increased to 11%. Moreover, the fusion gene showed that BCR-ABL 190/ABL was 0.4, and flow cytometry (FCM) analysis revealed minimal residual disease (MRD) with 10.5% abnormal lymphocytes. Subsequently, one course of dexamethasone, vincristine, cytarabine, mitoxantrone, and etoposide (DOAME) plus dasatinib was conducted, and molecular CR was achieved. Unfortunately, the patient progressed to molecular relapse within 2 weeks. DOAME plus dasatinib was administered again, but BCR-ABL 190/ABL ascended to 0.29 with 20.2% lymphoblasts in the bone marrow. Subsequently, a T315I mutation was detected, and dasatinib was discontinued. Finally, the patient was administered a course of cytarabine, aclacinomycin, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (CAG) in combination with prednisone and L-asparaginase, whereas the disease continued to progress with 68% lymphoblasts in the bone marrow (the WBC count was 1.92 × 109/L; LDH was 227 U/L; BCR-ABL 190 was not detected). During the above treatment process, the patient received nine intrathecal injections of dexamethasone, cytarabine and methotrexate and did not develop central nervous system invasion.
Owing to the presence of R/R disease, anti-CD19 CAR-T cell therapy was initiated. The anti-CD19 CAR-T cells were cultured for 8 days before infusion. The CAR transduction efficiency was 41%. The conditioning regimen was administered to the patient using a standard lymphodepleting regimen (fludarabine 30 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2) on day –5 to –3. The CAR-T cell infusion was administered as follows: 4 × 106 cells/kg of anti-CD19 CAR-T cells were divided into three infusions on day 0 to day +2 . Following the infusion, the patient experienced grade 4 cytokine release syndrome (CRS) with elevated IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ, and ferritin levels, as well as grade 3 CAR-T cell-related encephalopathy syndrome according to Lee’s grading system . The levels of IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ, and ferritin gradually returned to baseline 3 weeks after treatment with tocilizumab (monoclonal antibody against the IL-6 receptor) (8 mg/kg, qd, +3 and +5 days), dexamethasone (20 mg, qd, +6 to +8 days, +12 to +15 days, +19 to +21 days), and plasma exchange (, ) (2000 mL per time, +10 days, +11 days and +17 days) . One month later, the white blood cell (WBC) and lymphocyte counts remained below 1.0×109/L, except for a brief increase on days 6 and 7 post-CAR-T cell infusion. The dynamic changes of WBC and lymphocyte counts after CAR-T cell therapy were depicted in . Furthermore, lentivirus copies with the polymerase chain reaction test to reflect CAR-T cell infusion increased in relation to the B lymphocyte decline, suggesting that the CAR-T cells reached peak levels after 2 weeks . In addition, the CD4+/CD8+ T cell ratio in the peripheral blood was significantly below normal 2–3 weeks after the CAR-T cell infusion .
After CAR-T cell therapy, bone marrow morphology revealed 0% immature lymphocytes, and severe bone marrow suppression with no hematopoietic recovery, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) was administered to promote granulocyte recovery. Antibiotics and intravenous immunogloblin (IVIG) were administered because the patient developed infections (Escherichia coli) during myelosuppression. There was no evidence of viral infection. To support hematopoietic recovery, allogeneic HSCs were harvested by apheresis from a 6/6 HLA-matched sibling donor. Furthermore, 100 mL of HLA-homologous donor peripheral HSCs (mononuclear cells [MNC] 1.8×108/kg and CD34+ cells 0.95×106/kg) (, ) were infused on day 34 following the CAR-T cell infusion. Before allogeneic HSCs on day 33 after the CAR-T cell infusion, the WBC count was 0.61×109/L, the neutrophil count was 0.53×109/L, lymphocyte count was 0.06×109/L, and the platelet count was 20×109/L. The engraftment time of neutrophils was +36 days, and the engraftment time of platelets was +42 days after CAR-T cells infusion . On day 40, bone marrow morphology revealed 0% immature lymphocytes and negative MRD by FCM. The expression of the fusion gene BCR/ABL 190 was negative. Chimeric analysis showed full donor chimerism. Three months after CAR-T cell therapy, bone marrow morphology, and fusion gene expression level suggested molecular CR. However, decreased liver function with skin pigmentation and a festering skin rash was noted . The level of donor chimerism was 100%. According to the consensus criteria for acute graft versus host disease (aGVHD), grade III aGVHD was highly likely . Unfortunately, we did not expect allogeneic HSCs to engraft successfully for patient and did not realize that aGVHD would occur, therefore, no prophylaxis for aGVHD was administered. Treatment was halted owing to financial reasons, and the patient abandoned the treatment and eventually may be died of aGVHD combined with infection. A brief chronology of this case’s key clinical events is depicted in .