A 43-year-old male patient, a right-handed manual worker, presented to our arthroplasty clinic at Al-Karak hospital, Jordan, with a one-year history of right shoulder pain. The patient has no previous shoulder injuries. NSAIDs only partially alleviated the pain, which was aggravated by activity. His family history for alkaptonuria was positive because his sister had the disease. Physical examination revealed a limited range of motion in the right shoulder with abduction weakness. The patient had signs of alkaptonuria, such as black urine and black pigmentation in the mouth, eyes, and ear pinnae. His urine had been black since he was five years old, he reported.
However, unfortunately, the patient neither tested for nor was informed that he had alkaptonuria previously despite having some suggestive symptoms. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed intraoperatively with the striking features of extensive ochronosis. Laboratory findings were unremarkable except for a mild elevation of the inflammatory markers (ESR and CRP). A summary of the lab values is found in .
As of preoperative assessment, patient underwent radiographic assessment of the affected shoulder. The preoperative image shown in .
Since there were signs of rotator cuff arthropathy, the patient had a right shoulder MRI without contrast , which showed severe osteoarthritic changes of the right glenohumeral joint, including narrowing of the joint space, osteophytes, abnormal signal intensity of visualized bone consistent with bone marrow edema, and multiple subchondral cysts. Also, thickening with altered signal intensity of the supraspinatus tendon is compatible with tendinopathy, a feature of degenerative secondary rotator cuff arthropathy.
Based on the MRI results, which pointed to rotator cuff arthropathy, the patient was selected to undergo a reverse total shoulder arthroplasty.
In addition to the standard surgical procedure for reverse arthroplasty, a remarkable intraoperative finding of soft tissue ochronosis is observed in . A diffuse black discoloration of the proximal humerus, glenoid labrum, and rotator cuff degenerative tendons. There were no intraoperative or postoperative complications during or following the surgery.
A postoperative X-ray showed well-positioned and aligned components in . The patient’s postoperative course was unremarkable with clean dressing and gradual return of shoulder range of motion. The patient was started on physiotherapy on the first postoperative day. The physiotherapy was gentle range-of-motion exercises; the abduction range-of-motion exercises have improved from the preoperative status. Patient was put in arm sling for a period of 2 weeks postoperatively.
Aside from the standard deltopectoral approach steps used in shoulder surgery, there were a few technical difficulties encountered intraoperatively. The intraoperative course was challenging in this case and different from other surgeries done for rotator cuff arthropathy.
Firstly, the soft tissue discoloration (ochronosis) that was affecting the proximal humerus, the labrum, the rotator cuff tendons, and surrounding tissues was obscuring the field and making proper identification of the anatomical structures very difficult. Secondly, the inflammatory process induced by alkaptonuria and evidenced by adhesions added to the technical difficulties with poor demarcation of the soft tissue planes. Thirdly, an increased blood loss was noticed compared to the standard reverse procedure, which is clearly due to poor delineation between anatomical structures, the presence of inflammatory adhesions, and increased vascularity given the underlying inflammatory process.
The author’s recommendations when dealing with such cases include the following tips.
The use of an extensible approach is very advisable for better identification and delineation of the anatomical planes and structures. A good intraoperative hemostasis is crucial in these cases to prevent excessive intraoperative bleeding from the underlying inflammation and adhesions. In anticipation of excessive bleeding, preparation of blood products may be necessary as well. Gentle soft tissue handling is mandatory to avoid injury to previously inflamed and irritated tissues and minimize the risk of infection and adhesions. After thorough irrigation at the end of surgery, meticulous closure is crucial to prevent postoperative wound complications.
Rehabilitation was started as soon as the first week after the surgery. Rehabilitation is done by trained physiotherapists in our hospital. Our postoperative rehabilitation protocol was conducted over two phases. The first phase, which started postoperatively and lasted for 6 weeks, was to have passive and patient-assisted range of motion to encourage shoulder range of motion and avoid stiffness. During phase one, the patient was kept in an arm sling. The second phase was from 6 weeks to a 5–6-month period, which focused on periscapular and deltoid strengthening. At this phase, the arm sling was discontinued.
The first follow-up visit was two weeks after the surgery. During this visit, the wound was healed and cleaned. Periodically, the patient was followed up for one year. After 2 months of surgery, the patient returned to his manual working activity of carpentry, and has painless stable range of motion. At the final follow-up visit, the Oxford shoulder score (OSS), which is a 12-item Patient-Reported Outcome (PRO) measurement specifically designed and developed for assessing outcomes of shoulder surgery, was improved from 47 preoperatively to 12 postoperatively, an indication of remarkable functional improvement.