A 37-year-old, gravida 4 para 3003, Caucasian female in her twenty-fourth week of pregnancy presented to the ED with intermittent bilateral arm pain of two days duration. The pain began suddenly, lasted less than 10 minutes, and resolved spontaneously without exacerbating or alleviating factors. Past medical history included hypothyroidism, anemia, and anxiety but did not include traditional cardiovascular risk factors. Her presenting blood pressure was 100/70 millimeters of mercury with a heart rate of 115 beats per minute. Physical exam was unremarkable, with normal heart sounds, no murmurs, clear lung sounds bilaterally, no peripheral edema, normal pulses, and a gravid abdomen. Initial electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia with T-wave inversions in leads III and aVF, but no ST-segment elevations or depressions. Laboratory analysis showed a hemoglobin of 8.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 12–15 g/dL) consistent with baseline anemia; otherwise, her basic metabolic, coagulation, renal, and hepatic panels were within normal limits.
Differential diagnosis included pericarditis, myocarditis, coronary dissection, coronary vasospasm, and musculoskeletal pain. However, AMI was low on the initial differential, and troponins were not ordered on initial laboratory studies. Approximately one hour later, she experienced another episode of bilateral arm pain with radiation to her upper back. A repeat electrocardiogram was then obtained, which showed ST-segment elevations in leads I, aVL, V1 and V2 with reciprocal depressions in II, III and aVF .
Add-on troponin-I to the initial laboratory studies was 217 nanograms per liter (ng/L) (reference range: less than 19 ng/L). Because the etiology of ST-segment changes in pregnancy can be from entities other than a ruptured atherosclerotic plaque, such as coronary dissection or vasospasm, the cardiologist and emergency physician obtained a STAT formal transthoracic echocardiogram. This showed hypokinesis of the entire anterior, anteroseptal, and anterolateral left ventricular walls and reduced ejection fraction of 40% without pericardial effusion or right ventricular enlargement .
In the presence of significant wall motion abnormalities, AMI was highly likely, and the patient underwent emergent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). A repeat troponin level at two hours was 2447 ng/L. Emergent PCI revealed 90% stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending artery due to plaque rupture and thrombus, and the lesion was repaired using balloon angioplasty and placement of a drug-eluting stent (DES) .
The patient was treated with dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) including aspirin and clopidogrel. She was transferred to a tertiary care hospital for high-risk maternal-fetal medicine and cardiology evaluations. Her post-PCI course was uneventful, and three days later she was discharged home. She delivered two healthy children at 35 weeks via cesarean section (C-section) that was complicated by postpartum hemorrhage. She recovered fully and remained asymptomatic on DAPT without bleeding complications on follow-up six months later.