An 81-year-old woman with pancreatic duct dilatation was referred to our hospital. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed an 11 mm × 15 mm low-density mass in the posterior aspect of the pancreatic head. Approximately less than 180 degrees of the tumor was in contact with the superior mesenteric vein . The tumor had not invaded the common hepatic artery, celiac axis, or superior mesenteric artery (SMA). No metastatic lymph nodes or organs were detected. Abdominal CT without contrast revealed multiple calcifications in the aorta and visceral arteries. Furthermore, the celiac axis showed severe stenosis caused by calcification . Although the arterial pathway between the proper hepatic artery and SMA developed through the GDA, we identified well-developed collateral flow from the SMA to the GDA via the inferior pancreatic duodenal artery . The tumor marker levels (CEA, CA19-9, DUPAN-2, Span-1) were within the normal limit. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration revealed adenocarcinoma. The patient was diagnosed with T1, N0, M0, and stage IA pancreatic head cancer according to the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control TNM classification. In previous papers, vascular reconstruction with PD increases the risk of thromboembolism and postoperative bleeding (caused by pancreatic fistula) [–] and, this patient had no suitable bypass vessels available because of severe arteriosclerosis. Thus, we planned to perform surgery after stent placement and NAC. Prior to PD, we consulted with an interventional cardiologist to perform percutaneous transluminal angioplasty on the celiac axis.
Angiography of the abdominal aorta did not reveal a celiac axis. An antegrade approach directly from the aorta to the celiac axis is difficult because of severe stenosis or occlusion. Hence, our strategy involved retrograde access to the celiac axis through a collateral pathway originating from the SMA.
Percutaneous revascularization of the celiac axis was performed using a right femoral artery approach. A 7-Fr guiding catheter was selectively inserted in the SMA. The celiac axis was retrogradely visualized through the collateral pathway originating from the SMA . Subsequently, a triple coaxial system was used to reach the celiac axis. Severe CAS posed a significant challenge in advancing the micro-guidewire; however, through diligent effort, we were able to successfully navigate the wire through the celiac axis. A 6-Fr guide catheter was positioned at the entrance of the abdominal aorta, and the microguidewire was grasped from the aorta using a snare. Then, a microguidewire was inserted antegradely in the celiac axis from the left femoral artery using the pull-through technique . A balloon catheter was used to dilate the celiac axis. Careful handling was necessary in situations with a high risk of lacerations, because calcification might cause the arterial walls to harden, reducing their flexibility. When intravascular ultrasound was used to visualize the celiac axis, severe calcification was observed throughout its circumference. A balloon-expandable stent was successfully deployed in the celiac axis, and stent dilatation was performed using a balloon dilatation catheter. Contrast imaging of the celiac axis revealed the hepatic and splenic arteries ; however, the GDA was not visualized because of the accordion phenomenon. GDA ligation did not seem to impede the hepatic blood flow from the celiac axis. The stent was placed so as not to cross the left gastric artery (LGA). After stent placement, the arcade of pancreas head became narrower and the proper hepatic artery (PHA) became thicker . This suggested increased blood flow from the CA.
The patient received two cycles of neoadjuvant Gemcitabine (GEM) and S-1. One month after starting chemotherapy, we placed a stent and started 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) (100 mg oral aspirin and 30 mg direct factor Xa inhibitors). Subsequently, DAPT was switched to single antiplatelet therapy (30 mg direct factor Xa inhibitors). The preoperative progress is presented in Fig. .
After two cycles of NAC and stent placement, subtotal stomach-preserving PD was performed. After clamping the GDA, we intraoperatively confirmed that the hepatic artery blood flow was adequately maintained by monitoring the flow velocity and direction of blood flow using a blood flow meter ; then, we dissected the GDA. The surgical procedure was routinely performed without using any special techniques. Grade A chylous ascites developed postoperatively, and the patient was discharged on day 17.