A 54-year-old-female patient, without addictions or comorbidities, was admitted in our emergency department due to assault with a screwdriver in her head and loss of consciousness for 1 h. Her colleagues explained that she suffered the injury hit by shedding electric screwdriver when working in a factory, and the screwdriver penetrated the right zygomatic bone . The injury was associated with an immediate coma and bleeding of the right ear. The patient had no history of vomiting or seizures. Owing to the disorder of vital signs, the patient underwent tracheal intubation in emergency department.
Neurological examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 3/15. A screwdriver was seen partially penetrating the right cheekbone through a lacerated horizontal wound of 10 mm × 10 mm. The injury was accompanied by left pupillary dilatation (5 mm) with disappeared responsive to light, right pupillary dilatation (3 mm) and unresponsive to light, and bleeding of right ear. There was no evidence of any other injury.
A noncontrast axial computed tomographic (CT) scan showed a metallic foreign body passing through the right cheekbone to posterior cranial fossa, and a linear structure extending from right temporal bone, petrous bone, middle cranial fossa, posterior fossa to left occipital bone . Meanwhile, left cerebellar hematoma and subarachnoid hemorrhage were also demonstrated in CT scan . Because of the clinical status of the patient, a digital subtraction angiogram could not be performed.
The patient was emergently taken to the operating room (OR) and immediately given broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage with penicillin (3.75 g, ivgtt). The patient was given a right cheekbone craniectomy and removal of the foreign body at supine position. 6 cm long straight incision was adopted with the entry point as the center. Craniotomy was performed along the skin incision, during which the screwdriver came along and was removed . Afterwards the wound was debrided, cleaned, and closed. Brain CT scan was made again and revealed little hematoma of screwdriver tract, a left cerebellar contusion with about 15 ml hematoma, obvious compression of the fourth ventricle and brain stem, and intraventricular hemorrhage . Then right frontal puncture was immediately performed, followed by drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which was as higher as 20 mmHg, to achieve maximum brain relaxation. The patient was then repositioned, placed in prone position and given evacuation of posterior fossa hematoma. The incision was made along the median line, about 16 cm, then skin and muscle flap were separated and the skull was exposed. A 6 cm × 5 cm flap was removed from occipital bone and about 15 ml of subdural hematoma was evacuated. Contusive cerebellar tissues and sutured dura were removed. The patient was then transferred to the neurosurgery intensive care unit (NICU) for postoperative management.
On post-operative day (POD) 2, brain CT showed smaller posterior fossa hematoma. Meanwhile, external ventricular drainage tube was also placed to replace CSF and prevent obstructive hydrocephalus . However, the patient suffered persistent coma, with GCS of 4/15, complicated with pulmonary infection in the subsequent 3 days. Tracheotomy was performed to open the airway and control infection. Meanwhile, the patient received aggressive broad-spectrum antibiotics which were maintained for 14 days. Intravenous sodium valproate was given for prophylaxis against posttraumatic seizures. No other serious complications were reported after symptomatic supportive measures such as anti-infection treatments and nerve nutrition. The patient’s GCS score was improved to 12 on POD 42. Postoperative brain CT scan revealed favorable findings. The patient was discharged on POD 60. Postoperative 6-month follow-up evaluation showed normal neurological status of the patient, without further seizures.