A 64-year-old man visited a university hospital for motor weakness in both lower extremities. The weakness developed suddenly without any prodromal illness 3 weeks prior to the hospital visit and gradually worsened. For controlling chronic pain in multiple joints due to seronegative rheumatoid arthritis, he had been taking oral prednisolone (4 mg per day, 2 mg bid) for 10 years, which was prescribed by the local pain clinic. The clinician in the local pain clinic used oral prednisolone because the patient’s pain was refractory to commonly used pain medications, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, tramadol, and disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (hydroxychloroquine and methotrexate). On physical examination, symmetrical motor weakness was observed in the bilateral lower extremities. The strengths of the bilateral hip flexor, knee extensor, ankle dorsiflexor, first toe extensor, and ankle plantar flexor were Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 2. He could not stand or walk. Any sensory deficit was not checked, but he had neuropathic pain on the entire right lower extremity (numeric rating scale: 4; 0 indicates no pain, and 10 indicates the most severe pain). Deep tendon reflexes of both the lower extremities were decreased. Ankle clonus and flexor plantar reflex were not present. He also had voiding difficulty. After self-voiding of 100 mL urine, residual urine was approximately 400 mL.
We admitted the patient, and laboratory tests were performed upon admission. White blood cell count (15,170 cells/μL) and C-reactive protein (2.011 mg/dL) were increased. Rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptides, anti Sjiogren’s syndrome (anti-Lo), and anti-rheumatoid arthritis (anti-Ra) antibodies, complement C3, and C4 were negative.
In the nerve conduction tests performed the next day (approximately 3 weeks after onset of symptoms), decreased amplitude was observed in the compound motor action potentials of the bilateral peroneal nerves recorded at extensor digitorum brevis (Rt: 0.3 mV, Lt: 0.4 mV) (Supplementary ). This was also observed in bilateral tibial nerves recorded at abductor hallucis (Rt: 4.7 mV, Lt: 4.7 mV). Decreased sensory nerve action potentials in the bilateral superficial peroneal nerves (Rt: 4 μV, Lt: 9 μV) were also noted. A positive sharp wave (1+) was present at the right tibialis anterior, peroneus longus, and lumbar paraspinal muscles. The F-waves of the peroneal nerves bilaterally and H-reflexes from the tibial nerves bilaterally showed no response. The central motor conduction time to the bicep brachii, abductor pollicis brevis, and tibialis anterior, induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation, were normal. Furthermore, sensory evoked potentials from both median and posterior tibial nerves were within normal limits.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed no abnormalities. The complete spine MRI showed central canal stenosis at C4–5 and C5–6 without significant cord compression and mild central canal stenosis at L5-S1. The gadolinium enhanced MRI revealed the enhancement along the entire lumbosacral nerve root (cauda equina) . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was performed 1 month after the onset of symptoms (7th admission day): elevated white blood cell count (19 cells/μL: polymorphonuclear cell 25%, lymphocyte 75%) and protein level (142.5 mg/dL) were observed. Red blood cell was not present, and glucose level (70 mg/dL) was within the normal range. Bacterial culture, tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, and Varicella-zoster virus IgG and IgM of the CSF were negative. However, CMV detection by PCR was positive. In the blood test, CMV detection by real time PCR showed 6.73 × 102 IU/mL and 740 copies/mL. Human immunodeficiency virus antigen, antibody, and ribonucleic acid tests were negative. Therefore, the diagnosis of lumbosacral polyradiculitis due to CMV was confirmed. Ganciclovir (250 mg twice daily) was administered intravenously.
The nerve conduction test was conducted 2 months after the onset of symptoms. The compound motor action potentials of the bilateral peroneal nerve, recorded at extensor digitorum brevis, (Rt: 0.4 mV, Lt: 0.4 mV) remained similar to those noted in previous studies (Supplementary ). However, those of the tibial nerves, recorded at abductor hallucis (Rt: 4.4 mV, Lt: 2.6 mV), were decreased. Additionally, in the electromyographic test, a positive sharp wave (2 + ~ 3+) was present at all the evaluated muscles of the lower extremities, including the iliopsoas, vastus medialis, tibialis anterior, peroneus longus, tensor fascia latae, gastrocnemius, gluteus maximus, and the lumbar paraspinal muscles. The results of the sensory nerve action potentials were not changed compared to those of the prior test. These findings were indicative of lumbosacral polyradiculopathy.
Three months after the onset of symptoms, in the CSF analysis, CMV detection by PCR was negative and no WBC was found. CMV detection by PCR in blood test was also negative. We stopped the administration of Ganciclovir. Four months after the onset of symptoms, the strength in the lower extremities were examined, and MRC grade 3 on the right side and MRC grade 4 on the left side. The neuropathic pain on the right lower extremity had completely disappeared. Additionally, voiding difficulty recovered completely. The patient provided informed signed consent for participation in the study.