A 35-year-old male presented to us with a history of a stab injury to the right side of his neck with profuse bleeding 2 months before admission. Following the injury, he lost consciousness for 10 min and developed visual disturbance in the form of the left homonymous inferior quadrantanopia. He was neurologically intact and had GCS 15 at the time of presentation. An ill-defined cystic and compressible swelling just below the angle of the mandible was discovered on examination of the neck, which had a well-healed scar mark over it. The swelling had a palpable thrill and bruit that coincided with the apex beat. However, no abnormalities in cardiac status were discovered.
Although the patient had no significant neurological morbidity, a CT scan of the brain revealed a large right parieto-occipital infarction , while a computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a PSA at the bifurcation of the right CCA that communicated with the IJV. On the right side, the external carotid artery (ECA) and its branches were not visible . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a large fistula between the CCA bifurcation site and the IJV, with blood being pulled from the right ICA to the IJV through the fistula tract . The anterior communicating (A-Com) and posterior communicating (P-Com) arteries provided adequate cross circulation [ and ]. Because the fistula was so strong, it drew blood from the opposite posterior circulation .
The surgery was planned to remove the PSA and repair the right ICA and IJV to reconnect the fistula. The PSA, measuring about 5 cm × 3 cm, was discovered just a short distance from the start of the ICA, and the fistula was discovered to be of such a large size that the surgical plan had to be revised intraoperatively. Bypass was also not an option, and because the left ICA fed the right cerebral hemisphere very well through the right MCA, the right ICA was ligated just above and below the connection with the PSA to trap it. Fistula ligation was also attempted, though due to its large caliber, only a ligature was attempted, and full obliteration was not possible. The PSA was discovered to originate at the junction of the CCA and ICA and was inseparable from the IJV, which was severely dilated.
The patient was neurologically intact until the 2nd postoperative day (POD). On the 3rd POD, the patient suddenly deteriorated and became left hemiplegic with MRC Grade 0 in both the upper and lower limbs. GCS also dropped to 11, and the right pupil became dilated and nonresponsive to light. In addition to the previous right parieto-occipital infarct with significant midline shift, a CT scan of the brain revealed a large right-sided MCA territory infarct . CTA revealed a reduction in the size of the PSA while the fistula remained patent and the right MCA was not visible beyond its origin . A right fronto-temporo-parieto-occipital decompressive craniectomy (DC) was performed right away. The brain was found to be swollen, tight, and nonpulsatile postoperatively.
On the 2nd post discharge POD, GCS increased to 15, and the power of the left lower limb improved to MRC Grade 2 while the power of the left upper limb remained at MRC Grade 0. The right pupil was 6 mm in diameter and did not respond to light, whereas the left pupil was 4 mm in diameter and did respond to light. After 4 weeks of DC, cranioplasty was performed using autologous bone. After another 4 weeks of DC, the patient was discharged with MRC grades of 3 and 2, respectively, in the lower and upper limbs.
At 6 months, the patient’s left lower and upper limb power had improved to MRC Grades 4 and 3, respectively, and he could walk with assistance. However, the homonymous quadrantanopia remained unchanged.