A healthy 9-year-old Japanese girl presented to a clinic with left hip joint pain without apparent cause for 1 month. She was diagnosed as having coxitis simplex. Although she had taken anti-inflammatory drugs, her pain did not change for 1 year. She was then sent to another hospital, where OO in her left acetabulum was suspected. As a result, she was referred to our hospital approximately 1 year after her first symptom presentation, where she presented with severe left hip pain and was completely unable to walk. Radiographs of her left hip showed no obvious osseous abnormality . In contrast, CT examinations revealed a well-demarcated 5 mm mass with limited bone sclerosis in her left acetabulum . The mass was characterized by low intensity on T1 and high intensity on T2 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images. MRI also revealed joint effusion . Clinical and radiological findings were consistent with OO of the left acetabulum. She underwent CT-guided resection of the nidus and ablation using a standard electrosurgical generator at a power output of 15 W for 60-seconds duration . This procedure was performed under total anesthesia and in the prone position. We identified the positional relationship between the nidus, triradiate cartilage, and sciatic nerve using a CT marker. After making a small 3-cm long incision while avoiding her sciatic nerve, a guide pin was inserted. A 5.0 mm cannulated drill was inserted over the guide pin to remove the nidus, which was then sent for histological examination. Next, ablation using a standard electrosurgical generator was performed to completely destroy any residual tumors. To preserve her triradiate cartilage, the position of the electrode tip was confirmed on intraoperative images during each step. The technical tips and pearls of CT-guided resection are summarized in Table . A histological examination confirmed the characteristic appearance of OO . Complete pain relief was achieved beginning on the first postoperative day. Our patient could walk without any pain at the final follow-up 1 year post-treatment, and no local recurrence was observed.