This case describes a 29-year-old woman who was first diagnosed with ameloblastoma as a child at 7 years old. The lesion originated in the ascending branch of the left mandible, and the first surgical procedure was performed in March 1997 followed by disease recurrence in April 1999. A second resection was performed in May 1999, and during the next 16 years, the patient underwent several surgical approaches that were consistently followed by disease recurrence. Some of the procedures were conservative surgeries, but others were radical procedures that left her with several deforming scars. She presented to our clinic in January 2015 with a new magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that evidenced a right, triangular aspect, paracellarlesion, extending to the homolateral cavernous sinus (13 × 9 mm), which was suspected to be a residual lesion that would have achieved the cavernous sinus by contiguity growth after several surgeries. Her last surgery had been performed in April 2014 and was followed by local radiotherapy in May 2014. She was asymptomatic and not willing to undergo a new invasive procedure. She decided to be followed without further intervention.
For the next 18 months, she was clinically stable and asymptomatic, but she returned in July 2016 with intense pain on the right side of her face that required multiple hospital visits for intravenous analgesia. MRI revealed an extensive heterogeneous lesion with contrast enhancement centered on the right cavernous sinus anterior to the cavus of Meckel and exhibiting anterior extension towards the upper orbital fissure (measuring approximately 19 × 15 × 16 mm). To identify new treatment possibilities, we decided to perform a new biopsy and conduct molecular testing . A BRAF mutational analysis by the allele-specific protein chain reaction (PCR) certified test revealed the presence of a BRAF c.1799 T > A;p.V600E mutation corresponding to a V600E amino acid substitution. After tumor board discussion and a careful conversation with the patient, she decided to undergo BRAF inhibitor therapy.
A treatment regimen with vemurafenib 960 mg PO twice daily was started on October 4, 2016. Prior to the initiation of therapy, a new MRI performed on September 24 revealed a lesion measuring 24 × 21 × 19 mm. After 2 weeks of therapy, the patient was asymptomatic and was not using any analgesic medication. During the course of therapy, she experienced grade one anorexia, nausea and fatigue, without any severe therapy-related adverse events. MRI performed in April 2017 revealed stable disease (24 × 18 × 15 mm), and her last MRI performed in September 2017 evidenced a reduction of the lesion size (18 × 13 × 14 mm) . The patient currently remains asymptomatic with excellent tolerance to the medication.