A 15-year-old girl was admitted into our spine center in November 2015 with complaint of gradually aggravated hyperlordosis for 4 years and lower extremities weakness for 1 year. She had been wearing the brace for more than 4 years (20 h/day) without controlling the hyperlordosis. She was dependent in the wheelchair and couldn’t stand without any support. Medical history included pectus excavatum at birth, and corrective operation was performed 4 years ago. Physical examination found weakness of facial expression muscles (bilateral inability to completely close the eyes, frown, bulge the cheek, purse the lips, and whistle), winged scapula of both sides and decreased strength in back, proximal upper and lower extremities (grade II-III on the Oxford scale). The Gower sign was positive due to the weakness of abdominal and iliopsoas muscles, while her intelligence, vision and hearing acuity were all normal. Her mother also had weakness of expression muscles without spinal deformity. Anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral standing X-ray of whole spine revealed thoracolumbar hyperlordosis (T9-S1, 116°), scoliosis (T5-L2, 44°), and horizontally positioned sacrum . Computed tomography (CT) showed similar deformities. Wasting and fat infiltration in paraspinal muscles was detected from Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), without any spinal cord or canal abnormality . The electromyography (EMG) showed myogenic changes in proximal upper and lower extremity. The Creatine kinase MB (CKMB) was 5.8 μg/L, slight higher than the normal level (3.6 μg/L), but the Creatine kinase (CK) was normal (116 U/mL) as well as other laboratory tests.
FSHD was diagnosed on the basis of classic clinical presentations . In December 2015, posterior internal fixation and bone graft fusion from T4-ilium was performed and the paraspinal muscle was obtained for biopsy. Postoperatively, the hyperlordosis and scoliosis were corrected to 72°and 35° separately. The appearance of leaning forward was improved obviously. The biopsy showed myogenic change and predominance of type I myofibril. The girl had been followed-up for 12 months with favorable correction for hyperlordosis and sitting posture . The score of SF-36 increased from 124 to 526.5, while the score of ODI decreased from 66.7 to 51.1.