A 70-year-old Japanese woman with a two-week history of fatigue and subsequent appetite loss was admitted to our hospital due to acute kidney injury (AKI). She had a one-year history of chronic thyroiditis and dyslipidemia, for which she was taking levothyroxine sodium and atorvastatin, respectively. One month before admission, she suffered from gastric discomfort, and thus she took cimetidine, methylmethionine sulfonium chloride, and itopride hydrochloride for two weeks prior to admission.
On admission, she had no upper respiratory symptoms or arthralgia. Her body temperature was 36.7 °C, and blood pressure was 123/77 mm Hg. Physical examinations of the heart, lungs, abdomen, and nervous systems were unremarkable. The right costovertebral angle was tender. There was no pitting edema or palpable purpura of the lower extremities. The suspected drugs, including cimetidine, were discontinued.
Laboratory studies revealed white blood cell count of 12,700/µL (neutrophils, 11,600/µL; lymphocytes, 600/µL; monocytes, 500/µL; eosinophils, 200/µL). Her serum creatinine (s-Cr) concentration was high at 5.81 mg/dL as compared to 0.5 mg/dL at one year before the admission. The level of C-reactive protein was also increased (14.89 mg/dL). Her antinuclear antibody and anti-Sjögren antigens A and B were negative. The titers of MPO-ANCA and proteinase 3 ANCA were 192 U/mL and 9.2 U/mL, respectively. The urinalysis showed urinary pH 6.5, mild proteinuria (1+) with mild occult blood (1+), and no urinary glucose. Moreover, the analysis of the sediment showed 1–4 red blood cells and 50–99 white blood cells per high power field (×400). No eosinophils were found in the urine. In addition, the analysis of urinary excretion of N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase and the beta-2 microglobulin revealed their concentrations to be 13.8 IU/L and 546 µg/mL, respectively. Urinary protein excretion was 1.32 g/24 h and 24-hour creatinine clearance was 14 mL/min. Blood and urine cultures were negative. Computed tomography showed enlarged kidneys but no signs of urinary obstruction and no abnormal shadow in the lung field. A drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation test of peripheral blood was positive for cimetidine (602 cpm, stimulation index 289 %).
In further evaluation of the cause of AKI, a renal biopsy was performed five days after admission. Light microscopy (Olympus BX-53 microscope, Olympus Optical Co. Ltd.) revealed 11 glomeruli, all of which were intact . The glomerular basement membrane showed no thickening or irregularity. Approximately 90 % of the renal cortex showed signs of tubulointerstitial injury . The interstitial compartment was severely and diffusely infiltrated by plasma cells, lymphocytes, monocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils, accompanied by mild to moderate fibrosis . Peritubular capillaritis and leukocyte casts with prominent neutrophil infiltration were observed in the interstitium . These photomicrographs were captured using an Olympus DP74 digital camera. Immunofluorescent and electron microscopic examination did not show any deposits of immunoglobulins or complement components. Based on renal biopsy findings, we diagnosed the condition as ATIN due to drugs, acute pyelonephritis, and/or AAV.
We started treatment with intravenous ampicillin-sulbactam for acute pyelonephritis. Due to the urinary tract infection and lack of characteristic AAV, corticosteroid administration was not initiated after the first biopsy and the patient was followed up. The patient’s renal function improved slightly with antimicrobial therapy and cessation of cimetidine, but s-Cr was 1.69 mg/dL and MPO-ANCA titer was 121 U/mL on day 31 after admission.
Suspecting that MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis was the most probable explanation of the prolonged renal impairment, we performed a second renal biopsy on day 31 after admission . Light microscopic assessment of the biopsy specimen showed 30 glomeruli, of which only three were globally sclerotic and no other glomerular lesions were observed. The interstitial compartment was focally infiltrated with inflammatory cells, (mainly plasma cells, lymphocytes, and a slight mixture of neutrophils). Approximately 50 % of the renal cortex showed signs of tubulointerstitial injury . No arteritis or arteriolitis was observed. Immunohistochemical analysis showed no expression of IgG, IgM, IgA, C3, and C1q. There were no subepithelial, subendothelial, mesangial, or tubular electron-dense deposits, as observed by electron microscopy. The second renal biopsy showed that ATIN persisted although it had improved compared with the first renal biopsy findings. We diagnosed ATIN associated with MPO-ANCA because renal injury persisted with the presence of MPO-ANCA despite discontinuation of cimetidine and antibiotic therapy.
At 40 days after admission, our patient was started on 25 mg (0.6 mg/kg) oral prednisolone per day , with gradual tapering to 7.5 mg/day over a year. Improvement in renal function was shown by s-Cr dropping to 1.1 mg/dL and MPO-ANCA seroconversion changing from positive to negative after one year.