A 70-year-old Chinese female presented with deep-seated epigastric pain radiating to the back/flanks without a focal neurological deficit. The esophagogastroduodenoscopy was negative. The patient underwent computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen/pelvis, which documented an enhancing extradural spinal lesion measuring approximately 2.3 × 1.5 cm at the level of the L1 and L2 vertebrae, resulting in severe central canal stenosis . It extended through the left L1/L2 foramen and into the left paravertebral region, abutting the left psoas muscle. Although there was no bony erosion/destruction, the L1 vertebral body showed posterior scalloping abutting the lesion. A supplemental magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan scan confirmed an enhancing “dumbbell shaped” 4.8 × 3.9 × 1.4 cm (CC × TV × AP) intraspinal extradural lesion centred at the L1/L2 level . It was isointense on T1, hyperintense on T2, and homogeneously enhanced with contrast. On MRI, it resulted in severe L1/L2 spinal stenosis, compressing the conus/filum terminale, and extending into the left L1/L2 neural foramen. Based on the CT/MR images, the differential diagnoses included schwannoma, neurofibroma, lymphoma, and metastasis.
The patient underwent T12–L3 laminectomy with L1–L2 left facetectomy for excision of the tumor accompanied by T12–L3 instrumented fusion . Intraoperatively, a completely extradural highly vascular soft-tissue lesion was found at the L1–L3 vertebral levels. Intraoperative frozen sections showed fibroadipose tissue with numerous vascular channels closely associated with arterioles and venules. The findings were suggestive of a vascular malformation. The patient recovered well postoperatively.
Histological examination showed fibroadipose tissue with diffuse proliferation of densely packed vascular channels closely associated with some arterioles and venules without any thrombosis . Immunohistochemical staining found the endothelial cells to be CD31 immune-reactive . The rare lymphatics channels were immune-reactive to D2-40 stain. However, the stains for Melan-A and HMB-45 were negative.
Four months after the surgery, the patient remained neurologically intact. MRI repeated 3 months postoperatively showed complete resection of tumor and no cord compression .