A four-day-old male newborn was transferred to the Seoul National University Hospital on account of progressive necrotic skin lesions. He was delivered via cesarean section due to prolonged labor at a gestational age of 39 weeks + 2 days with a birth weight of 3560 g. The patient was an only child with no remarkable prenatal or perinatal problems, including intrauterine sonography findings. Both parents denied a family history of hematologic or autoimmune diseases . He was initially treated with antibiotics under the impression of neonatal sepsis due to necrotic skin change at an outside hospital; however, his skin lesions worsened. The skin lesions started at the toes and rapidly progressed to the lower legs, buttocks, left hand, and left upper arm. The lesions were initially dark red and then changed to black .
On the sixth postnatal day, he abruptly experienced several episodes of apnea accompanied by desaturation, from which he soon recovered. Although he did not show motor deficits, his right pupil was unresponsive to light, and this was followed by clonic movements in both arms for a few seconds.
Brain sonography and computed tomography images showed multifocal patchy intracranial hemorrhage in the right cerebral hemisphere and left temporo-occipital area, and intraventricular hemorrhage without ventricular dilation. Moreover, an old ischemic lesion, which was thought to have occurred in the uterus, was observed on the left periventricular white matter . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and brain sonography images did not reveal venous thromboembolism . Venous sonography images showed thrombotic occlusion of the left cephalic vein, but not of the internal organs and veins, such as the kidney, liver, spleen, pancreas, and portal vein. Electroencephalography showed intermittent, slightly suppressed background activity and occasional spike discharges, which suggested diffuse cerebral dysfunction and focal seizures.
The complete blood count, liver function test, and renal function test results were unremarkable except for hyperbilirubinemia, which was thought to be due to physiologic jaundice. The levels of inflammatory markers were not elevated, and microorganisms were not isolated in the blood, urine, or cerebrospinal fluid. The prothrombin time international normalized ratio (PT-INR), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), and D-dimer levels were 0.99 s, 33 s, and 23.05 μg/ml, respectively . The protein C activity level was remarkably decreased below 10% (normal range: 74–152%); however, the protein S concentration was within the normal range. A skin biopsy of the left calf skin lesion showed fibrin clots in most capillaries, suggesting DIC or deep vein thrombosis.
Molecular analysis was performed targeting inherited diseases presenting as early-onset vasculitis or coagulopathy. The results revealed a homozygous pathogenic variant c.631C > T (p. Arg211Trp) in the PROC gene, which was inherited from both his unaffected parents . This variant is seldom present in the population database (rs121918143, ExAC 0.02%) and has already been observed to be a compound heterozygous variant in individuals affected by purpura fulminans and severe protein C deficiency . Both parents showed no clinical signs of heterozygous mutation; the father and mother showed protein C activity levels of 69 and 57%, respectively (normal range, 74–152%).
The patient was initially treated with intravenous prostaglandin E1, high-dose steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin with antibiotics, and nitroglycerin ointment to prevent skin necrosis prior to the diagnosis of severe protein C deficiency. Antiepileptic drugs and mannitol were added to prevent further seizures and decrease the intracranial pressure, respectively. Under the diagnosis of protein C deficiency, fresh frozen plasma (FFP) transfusions (10 ml/kg/day) were started.
As new skin lesions were found on the left arm and both buttocks on postnatal day 7, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) treatment was started. Protein C concentrate replacement therapy was initiated on postnatal day 11. The first dose of protein C concentrate was 100 IU/Kg, followed by 50 IU/Kg every 8 h. The doses of protein C concentrate were adjusted according to protein C activity level and clinical symptoms. The target level of protein C activity was 50% and the dose of protein C concentrate was increased if the existing necrotic skin lesions were aggravated or a new lesion was developed. As a result, protein C concentrates were given up to 80 IU/kg every 8 h. The immediate level of protein C activity after 1st loading of protein C concentrate was 47%, and the final trough level was 55% on postnatal days 12 and 17, respectively. The level of D-dimer was decreased to 5.13 μg/mL after protein C concentrate replacement but was not normalized. From postnatal day 17, anticoagulation therapy was changed to warfarin instead of protein C replacement and heparinization therapy. The target PT-INR was 2.0 to 3.0 .
After 2 months of treatment, the patient’s skin lesions healed without any surgical treatment but remained scarred with shortened toes . There were no more clinical seizures, and follow-up brain sonography and brain MRI did not show any new hemorrhagic brain infarctions; however, there was ongoing loss of ischemic tissue . Ophthalmic surgical interventions were performed to treat bilateral retinal traction detachments with retinal folds. Finally, the patient was discharged on postnatal day 87 with warfarin and other medications.