A 54-year-old Caucasian, non-hispanic female complained of a small central scotoma in the left eye equal to the size of a printed character while reading. The patient had been previously diagnosed with lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) for which she was prescribed tamoxifen (20 mg daily), and she continued for a period of 1.5 years (cumulative dose of 10.95 g); after that period, the treatment was discontinued. The patient subsequently underwent a lumpectomy 5 months later but did not have chemotherapy or radiation therapy. No baseline ocular examination results were available before the start of the tamoxifen treatment. It was noted that the patient was not on any other medications during or after the tamoxifen treatment.
The patient had undergone laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) treatment previously, but had no other confounding ocular conditions. Her current prescription was −1.25 + 0.25 × 2 (OD) and +2.75 + 0.25 × 131 (OS), and the best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in each eye. Humphrey visual fields (30-2 and 10-2 SITA-standard threshold tests) were performed. Both tests were normal with good test reliability and hence were not repeated.
A dilated fundus examination revealed a duller foveal light reflex and a yellowish foveal discoloration in the left eye. However, fundus photography (FP), fundus autofluorescence (FAF), and fluorescein angiography (FA) were unremarkable. FP, FAF, and FA for the right eye were also unremarkable . The FAF images for either eye did not show any areas of abnormal hyper- or hypo-autofluorescence. All other findings including optic discs, vessels, and peripheral retina were unremarkable in both eyes.
Figure D shows the spectral spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) image from the left eye showing focal disruption of cone outer segment (OS) layer at the foveal center with a localized hyper-reflective region located in the cone inner segment (IS) layer. The external limiting membrane (ELM) appears intact. The SD-OCT for the right eye shows a normal macula with contiguous outer retinal layers . The inner retinal layers appear to be normal across the retina for both eyes. Both FAF and SD-OCT images were acquired using Spectralis OCT (Heidelberg Engineering Inc., Heidelberg, Germany).
After observing the subtle foveal irregularities in the photoreceptor layer in the left eye from the SD-OCT image, the patient was imaged on a research-grade AO-SLO system. The system hardware and imaging procedure are described in detail in Wells-Gray et al. . Briefly, the AO-SLO acquires 1° × 1° images of the retina at 60 frames per second at an imaging wavelength of 680 nm with a lateral resolution of ~ 2.3 µm. Prior to imaging, a combination of 1% tropicamide and 2.5% phenylephrine was used to dilate the pupil and paralyze accommodation. During imaging, the patient looked at a fixation target displayed on a computer monitor, which corresponded to the area of imaging. Multiple AO-SLO datasets were acquired around the foveal center of both eyes and subsequently postprocessed to remove eye motion. For the AO imaging, the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki were observed, and the protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of The Ohio State University (OSU). Written informed consent was obtained after all procedures were fully explained to the patient and prior to imaging.
The montage of AO-SLO images for the left and right eyes, respectively, are shown . Lesions are more clearly visible in the left eye as compared with the right. Cone densities (using a 50 × 50 µm window) measured at (i) fovea, (ii) 75 µm superior, and (iii) 150 µm superior from the foveal center (just outside of the lesion region) were 26,000, 29,600 and 53,200 cones/mm2, respectively, for the affected left eye. The measured values close to the foveal center are much lower than the > 100,000 cones/mm2 expected from the literature , however the result at 150 µm from the foveal center is in good agreement with the expected value for age-matched healthy subjects . For the right eye, the foveal cone density was 39,200 cones/mm2, greater than that measured in the left eye but still well below the expected value for an age-matched control. Cone densities at 75 µm superior and 150 µm superior from the foveal center were 52,000 and 58,400 cones/mm2, respectively, in good agreement with published results .