We received a referral for evaluation of bilateral chronic anterior uveitis in a six-year-old female. She was subjectively complaining about blurry vision and floaters in both eyes for 1 year. She had been diagnosed with BS when she was 19 months old. Anterior uveitis had been first diagnosed when she was 5 years old. She was on frequent topical cycloplegics and corticosteroids in both eyes for her uveitis. Systemically, she was taking mycophenolate mofetil 250 mg twice a day, tofacitinib 4 mg daily, and prednisone 9 mg daily. Additionally, she was receiving infliximab at a dose of 10 mg/kg monthly. She had already failed naproxen, methotrexate, etanercept, tocilizumab, canakinumab, rilonacept, anakinra, golimumab, and intravenous immunoglobulin because of their ineffectiveness or adverse effects. She had also received cyclophosphamide pulse therapy which had been stopped due to aseptic meningitis. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right (OD) and left (OS) eyes was 20/70 and 20/80, respectively. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 17 and 18 mm Hg OD and OS, respectively. Slit-lamp exam revealed bilateral faint band keratopathy, along with 1+ anterior chamber cells, posterior synechia 360°, fibrous membrane on lens, and cortical and posterior subcapsular cataract in both eyes (OU) (a, b). During dilated fundoscopy, 2+ haze in the media was observed, along with swollen and hyperemic disc OU (c, d). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of macula showed normal structure and contour OU along with vitreous opacities OD and possible choroidal thickening OU (a, c). Optic nerve head OCT retinal nerve fiber layer thickness map demonstrated thickening of retinal nerve fiber layer OU (a, c). Fluorescein angiography (FA) depicted disc and vascular leakage in both eyes (g, h). Indocyanine green angiography showed hypocyanescent lesions OU with indistinct borders, indicating active choroiditis OU (k, l).
Based on the involvement of the retina, retinal vessels, optic nerve, and choroid, we diagnosed her with bilateral panuveitis and retinal vasculitis OU. Given her complicated history, we decided to proceed with intravitreal fluocinolone acetonide 0.19 mg implant implantation OU after discussing the risks and benefits with her parents instead of waiting for a successful systemic remedy by pediatric rheumatologists. During the 1-month follow-up visit, floaters had disappeared. The BCVA OD and OS was 20/50 and 20/40, respectively, and IOP was 20 and 21 mm Hg OD and OS, respectively. e and f illustrate improvement seen in media haziness and disc swelling on dilated fundoscopy, the stability of OCT of macula OU along with no vitreous opacities OD, improved choroidal thickening OU (b, d), improvement in the optic nerve OCT (retinal nerve fiber layer) (b, d), FA (i, j) and indocyanine green angiography with transition from active choroiditis and granuloma into distinct choroidal scars (m, n).
At 6-month follow-up visit after intravitreal fluocinolone acetonide 0.19 mg implant implantation, her BCVA was 20/30 and 20/25 OD and OS, respectively, IOP was 19 mm Hg OU, and no changes were objectively observed, including cataract progression compared to the 1-month follow-up visit. Written informed consent was obtained from the mother of the patient for publishing the details of her medical case and any accompanying images. The CARE Checklist was completed by the authors for this case report, attached as supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).