It's the case of a 41 years-old female patient, with a history of high blood pressure for the last 3 years revealed by vertigo. The patient was initially treated with captopril and subsequently with atenolol. Following a year of antihypertensive therapy, treatment resistance led to the worsening of her high blood pressure, prompting further investigations to determine the cause.
Clinical examination revealed slight overweight (BMI: 25,7 kg/m2), high blood pressure at 20/10 mmHg, and tenderness in the left lumbar region.
An abdominal ultrasound was performed and did not reveal any kidney anomalies but indicated the presence of a heterogeneous process located near in the upper pole of the left kidney, suggesting an adrenal lesion. Computed tomography of the adrenal glands confirmed the presence of a heterogeneous round-shaped left adrenal mass, measuring 5 cm in diameter, with well-defined and regular margins. No signs of local or regional invasion were detected, and no retro-peritoneal adenomegaly was reported. A clear limit with the left kidney was evident. The lesion exhibited an uneven texture with small calcifications and a central area with a liquid density .
The contralateral adrenal gland was of normal size and appearance. The blood and urine adrenal hormonal work-up, did not reveal anomalies indicative of a secretory tumor.
In light of the imaging data, a transperitoneal laparoscopic adrenalectomy was chosen as the appropriate treatment modality using three trocars, with a placement identical to a laparoscopic nephrectomy but slightly displaced upward for better exposure. The dissection of the adrenal gland was straightforward, and the entire adrenal gland with the cyst was removed without aspiration of the cystic content allowing the removal of a 60 g gland, predominantly consisting of a well-contained cyst with chylous fluid content .
The performance of a cystic enucleation was not feasible as the cyst occupied the entire gland without preservable parenchyma.
The postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the first post-operative day.
Histological analysis identified the cyst as an endothelial cyst with no signs of malignancy (, ).
The postoperative recovery proceeded without complications, and the patient was discharged on the first postoperative day, with a three-month follow-up showing moderate hypertension (16/9 cm Hg) effectively controlled with an ACE inhibitor witch was the main indication for the operation.