A 31-year-old man was transported to a peripheral hospital with blunt thoracic trauma caused by a car crash. Tracheal intubation was performed without bronchoscopic guidance for severe hypoxia and subcutaneous emphysema. On whole-body computed tomography, bilateral pulmonary contusions and hemothorax were observed. In addition, the endotracheal tube was penetrated beyond the tracheal bifurcation and into the mediastinal space, thus CT raised suspicion of TBI . There was no extravasation suggestive of active bleeding in other organs. Laboratory data showed a decrease in hemoglobin concentration (12.9 g/dL) and platelet count (10.6 × 104). While the prothrombin time (PT) was within the normal range (13.6 s), the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was prolonged (67.3 s), and there was an elevation in fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (FDP) (35.00 μg/mL) and D-dimer (16.48 μg/mL). In addition, the patient’s rapid COVID-19 antigen test and COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) screening test was positive. Having determined that he required emergency surgery, the patient was transferred to a private negative pressure room in our intensive care unit (ICU). To facilitate the tracheal suture and prevent aerosol exposure, veno-venous ECMO support was implemented. The right femoral vein and right internal jugular vein were each cannulated with a 21-Fr cannula. Once the veno-venous ECMO circuit was flowing at 3.4 L/min (FiO2, 80%; sweep, 4 L/min), the patient was weaned from the ventilator. Heparin was not administered as a bolus injection or continuous intravenous infusion because of prolonged APTT due to trauma-induced coagulopathy, and the patient received 2 units of fresh frozen plasma. Following ECMO was established, bronchoscopy (disposable scope) was performed, and the endotracheal tube was adjusted into the tracheal lumen. The persistent mild bleeding hindered a detailed evaluation, but only laceration in the cartilaginous wall was observed. Left-sided bronchial injury was not seen. With ECMO support, surgical repair was performed without intraoperative mechanical ventilation. In accordance with the surgery manual for COVID-19 patients in our hospital, all medical staff who treated this patient donned personal protective equipment (Additional file : Fig. S1). The perioperative management is summarized in Additional file : Table S1. After a standard posterolateral thoracotomy in the right fifth intercostal space, partial transection of the membranous wall at the tracheal bifurcation and two-thirds circumferential laceration of the right main bronchus were also noted . Trimming of the injured tracheal wall was not necessary as it was fresh tissue, and the lacerations were repaired by continuous running sutures using 4-0 monofilament absorbable sutures (PDS-II, Ethicon, Tokyo, Japan). The cartilage wall was sutured intraluminally, while the membranous wall was done extraluminally. A sixth intercostal muscle flap was buttressed over the tracheobronchial repair site. On the second postoperative day (POD), APTT improved to 40.4, prompting the initiation of systemic heparin anticoagulation. On the 10th POD, the patient was decannulated from ECMO, and left femoral vein thrombosis was detected on follow-up enhanced CT. Systemic heparin anticoagulation was initiated. He came off the ventilator on the 15thPOD. On the 23rd POD, thrombosis regression was observed on the following CT. A Follow-up bronchoscopy performed on the 24th POD showed good healing at the bronchial repair site . The patient was discharged on the 29th POD. All medical staff who treated this patient were not infected with COVID-19.