A 68-year-old woman visited our emergency department (ED) because of a sudden attack of severe back pain. The pain developed so suddenly that the ED physician provided a tentative diagnosis of aortic dissection. Chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) with contrast enhancement revealed no findings related to the pain and both aortic dissection and any aortic involvement were excluded. The ED physician prescribed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The next day, the patient presented to the outpatient department and was admitted for further examination. She had medical histories of asthma and atrial fibrillation, was not receiving any medication, was a current smoker, and was not an alcohol consumer. She owned a corgi dog that lived in her house and she had been bitten and scratched by the dog daily.
Upon admission, her body temperature was 37.5 °C, with blood pressure 127/48 mmHg, heart rate 84 beats per minute and oxygen saturation 95% in ambient air with no accelerated respiration. She looked very ill suffering from the severe back pain. A physical examination did not note spinal knocking pain, neurological abnormality, or any other specific findings. A laboratory test revealed a white blood cell count of 13,360 cells/mm3 (normal value: 3900–9800 cells/mm3), platelet count of 17.0 × 104/μL, serum creatinine level of 0.66 mg/dL, and C-reactive protein level of 18.5 mg/dL (normal value: 0–0.5 mg/dL). Re-performed enhanced CT and plane magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine was not diagnostic.
On the second hospital day, Gram-negative bacilli were detected in her blood cultures. We started intravenous meropenem 1 g every 8 h, based on a provisional diagnosis of spinal epidural abscess or vertebral osteomyelitis/discitis. P. multocida was identified, and drug susceptibility was confirmed by the Vitek2 system with GN and AST-N228 card, bioMérieux . Then, the antimicrobial treatment was switched to intravenous ampicillin 2 g every 6 h.
On the eighth hospital day, MRI was re-performed with gadolinium-contrast to confirm the diagnosis. T2-weighted imaging and T1-weighted imaging with gadolinium enhancement revealed an epidural abscess at the Th5–6 level . We decided to withhold a surgery and continued the conservative treatment because of absence of a neurological deficit. On the twenty-fourth hospital day, the abscess had disappeared on the plane MRI. The antimicrobial treatment was switched to oral levofloxacin 500 mg every 24 h before hospital discharge. In total, 12-week antibiotic treatment was completed. She visits our hospital with another medical condition which is unrelated to this episode, and no recurrence occurred in 5 years after the treatment was completed.