A 34 year-old Korean woman was in her first trimester of pregnancy when she developed proteinuria. She was not edematous and did not have hypertension. Her proteinuria became increasingly severe and by her third trimester of pregnancy her urine protein to creatinine ratio (UPC) was greater than 10 gm/gm. She was induced at 37 weeks gestation and delivered a healthy boy who had no complications. Her proteinuria did not resolve following delivery and percutaneous kidney biopsy was performed. This demonstrated 1 out of 20 globally sclerotic glomeruli with no other abnormalities on light microscopy. Immunofluorescent staining was negative. Electron microscopy revealed moderate podocyte effacement and segmental basement membrane thinning. She has persistently declined treatment, including use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and all forms of immunomodulatory therapy. Despite this, her UPC has been stable for several years at 1.0 gm/gm and her creatinine has consistently measured less than 1.0 gm/dl.
There was suspicion of a genetic component to her disease as her mother had developed end-stage kidney disease in her mid-50s and her brother had proteinuria progressing to chronic kidney disease . The mother presented with shrunken kidneys and had not been able to undergo biopsy; she underwent kidney transplantation at 55 years and has had no proteinuria since that time. The brother’s clinical history has not been confirmed due to lack of consent. Per his sister’s report, proteinuria was initially mild and he opted against kidney biopsy until his proteinuria worsened and he subsequently developed chronic renal insufficiency. His biopsy reportedly demonstrated minimal change disease and he was treated with oral steroids without any improvement.
Genetic testing of TRPC6 was performed due to the apparent autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. She was found to be heterozygous for a novel TRPC6 frameshift mutation resulting from a 4 base pair GATA deletion in exon 12 [c. 2617–2620 del GATA, p. D873fsX878] . The reported mutation is novel, as it has not been seen in over 90 patients with nephrotic syndrome sequenced in our laboratory, is not reported in any dbSNP or exome sequencing databases of normal controls, and has not been previously reported in TRPC6. The resultant frameshift leads to a premature stop codon, and is predicted to result in a truncated TRPC6 protein lacking the C-terminal coiled coil domain. The proband’s mother also tested positive for the same mutation but her brother did not wish to be tested. DNA sequencing for mutations in ACTN4, INF2, and NPHS2 associated with adolescent or adult onset nephrotic syndrome revealed no other mutations in this family (data not shown). Due to segmental basement membrane thinning on the proband’s kidney biopsy and the possibility of X-linked transmission in this family, the collagen 4 alpha 5 (COL4A5) gene was also sequenced in the proband’s mother and was negative for mutations.