A 52-year-old male came to see doctors with a complaint of pain in his right hip for 6 mo.
The patient had developed unexplained right hip pain 6 mo ago, presenting as persistent dull pain accompanied by limited movement of the right hip joint without radiating pain or numbness of the lower limbs. The right hip pain worsened 2 mo prior to this visit, manifested as severe pain when standing or walking, limping, and inability to straighten or move the right lower limb. The patient had developed symptoms of anemia 1 wk ago.
No special circumstances.
The patient had no family history of hereditary diseases.
On admission, the patient suffered normal spinal motion, no pressure or percussion pain in the spinous process, pain in the right hip without radiating, inability to straighten the right lower extremity, limited movement in the angle and range of the right hip, limping, and no erythema found on the skin of the right hip, respectively.
Laboratory tests showed a platelet count of 695 × 109/L (normal range, 125-350 × 109/L); monocyte count of 0.71 × 109/L (normal range, 0.1-0.6 × 109/L); D-dimer of 0.35 mg/L (normal range, 0-0.55 mg/L); C-reactive protein of 176.29 mg/L (normal range, 0-5 mg/L); procalcitonin of 0.25 ng/mL (normal range, 0-0.2 ng/mL); and ESR of 21.00 mm/h (normal range, 0-15 mm/h), respectively.
Pelvic radiography showed multiple cystic hypodense shadows in varying sizes, with well-defined borders in the right iliac bone and right upper femur, suggesting osteolytic bone destruction . CT revealed a soft tissue mass with heterogeneous density in the intermuscular space anterior to the right iliopsoas muscle and the right superior femur, with patchy hypodense necrosis within the mass with indistinct borders, at the size of approximately 5.3 cm × 7.5 cm × 21.2 cm (AP × LR × SI). The plain CT attenuation value of the mass was approximately 49 HU and osteolytic bone destruction could be seen in the adjacent iliac bone and acetabulum. The enhanced CT attenuation value of the mass was approximately 55 HU and 58 HU in the arterial and venous phases respectively, representing heterogeneous mild to moderate enhancement . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed a mixed-signal mass along the right iliopsoas and the anteromedial muscle gap of the right upper femur, with a heterogeneous low signal on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), a heterogeneous slightly high signal on fat-saturated T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), a high signal on diffusion weighted image (DWI), and a low signal on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) imaging . The patient underwent a whole-body 99mTc-methylene diphosphonate bone scan, which demonstrated a high radioactive accumulation around the areas in the right ilium, acetabulum, proximal femur, and knee .