Our patient is a 24 year old male who was involved in a motor vehicle accident. He was an unrestrained occupant in the front seat of a truck when he sustained the injury. Upon arrival to our hospital, he was tachycardic and tachypneic and was managed accordingly with ATLS protocol.
He had severe pain over the pelvis and gross deformity over the the right leg with distal neurovascular structures intact on examination. He had degloving soft tissue injury over the right heel for which debridement was done at the hospital where he was referred from.
Pelvis x-ray and CT scan was taken and showed right side overlapping symphysis pubis associated with ipsilateral transverse acetabular fracture type . The x-ray of the right leg showed a closed tibial shaft fracture.
The patient was unable to maintain his O2 saturation with atmospheric breathing at the emergency room. He was put on intranasal O2 support for a lung contusion injury he had. He had no urinary complaint or blood at the urethral meatus, therefore a Foley catheter was inserted with no need for cystourethrography. He was taken to the operating theater 10 days after the injury. Closed reduction of the locked symphysis was not attempted inorder to avoid further displacment of the ipsilateral acetabular fracture. The patient was positioned supine on the operating table and his pelvis and both legs were prepped and draped free. The symphysis pubis was approached through a Pfannenstiel incision 2 cm above the pubic tubercle with about a 10 cm incision width. The rectus abdominis was found to be partially contused and was further surgically splitted at the midline vertically to retract it laterally. The retropubic space was accessed with blunt dissection to expose the overlapped pubis symphysis and the rami .
Then 3.5 cortical screws were applied on the opposing pubic bone bodies with an anterior to posterior direction, approximately 2 cm lateral from the center using them as a joystick to apply a reduction clamp. Using the Jung Bluth clamp on the inserted screws, rotational and disimpacting force was applied and reduction of the symphysis pubis was achieved. After achieving reduction, 3.5 mm size and 6-hole precontoured reconstruction plate was applied on the superior aspect of the symphysis. The plate was secured with three cortical screws on each side.
For the percutaneous fixation of the acetabulum, an entry point was identified laterally on the supra-acetabular area with the help of a fluoroscopy image aiming to the symphysis and a stab incision was made for a guide wire insertion. The guide wire was directed from the entry point towards the symphysis using the pelvic inlet and obturator oblique outlet views under fluoroscopy. A 4.5 cannulated drill bit was used to create a path for the screw. Then the transverse column acetabular fracture was fixed percutaneously, using a 6.5 mm size and 100 mm length partially threaded cannulated screw. A post-operative x-ray image was taken the day after surgery .
Post-operatively, the patient was stable and followed in the ward with 72 hours of post-operative broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics and adequate analgesics. Prophylactic unfractionated heparin 7,500 IU subcutaneous twice a day was continued according to the hospital’s protocol.
The patient was discharged after 5 days of hospital stay, shifting the UFH to oral rivaroxaban 10 mg per day for 1 month and additional adequate analgesics. He had no access for center-based physiotherapy, hence was advised on home physiotherapy with hip and knee passive range of motion and non-weight bearing status of 6 weeks period due to the associated tibial fracture he had. On the 2nd week of his visit to the OPD, the surgical wound was in good condition and the stitches were removed. He was on bilateral axillary crutch support for bed to chair and home mobilization during the first 6 weeks of his post-operation period. At his 2-month follow-up, the patient had no pelvic pain and was able to partially weight bear with the help of a crutch. He had no urinary symptoms or suprapubic pain. At 6-months follow-up he was back to his normal pre-injury activity. Pelvic radiograph showed the hardware in a good position with fracture and dislocations staying reduced .