A 79-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital complaining of episodes of repeated fever and some uncertain discomfort for 10 days. He had a nonproductive cough, but no chill, pharyngalgia, arthralgia, chest pain, dyspnea or diarrhea. He denied experience of trauma or drug abuse. He previously had been well but had a medical history of hypercholesterolemia and a long duration of two packs/day cigarette smoking. His father died from a sudden heart attack and he also had two brothers suffering from hypertension. On physical examination, he was 69 inches (1.73m) tall and weighed 178lb (81kg). He was febrile with a heart rate of 90 beats per minute, blood pressure 135/85mmHg, and respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute. Head and neck examinations were significant for pale conjunctivae and a left carotid bruit. His chest was clear to auscultation. His heart rhythm was regular with a nondisplaced apical impulse, an S4 gallop, no murmurs or rubs. His abdomen was benign, with no tenderness or masses. He had symmetrical palpable pulses in the femoral, popliteal and pedal arteries bilaterally without changes of skin appearance, temperature or sensations. Laboratory assessments revealed a high level of white blood cell count (20.7×109/L), neutrophils (85%), C-reactive protein (132mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (45mm/hour) and a low level of hemoglobin (94g/L). A lipid level test showed total cholesterol, triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein and low-density lipoprotein were 342, 280, 35 and 263mg/dL respectively. Liver and kidney functions, urine and stool tests were normal. A chest X-ray showed no recent infections. Conventional antibiotics using cefoxitin and levofloxacin were given for 10 days in the out-patient department and 4 days in our hospital for suspected sepsis, but his temperature still fluctuated and mostly remained above 38°C. However, bacteriological cultures of blood, urine, and sputum were negative. Immune markers like complements, interleukins, self-antibodies and globulins showed no abnormalities. Tumor and human immunodeficiency virus biomarkers were also negative. However, a brief scanning of computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were done to search for the focus of the fever and suggested edemas and abnormalities around his left greater psoas and peritoneum, suggesting inflammatory changes. Ceftizoxime and clindamycin were regulated to use on advice from microbiologists and kept for another 2 weeks, but still without any conspicuous relief of symptoms. Based on the ambiguity of the CT and MRI done earlier, a contrast-enhanced computed tomographic angiography ([CTA], Figures a and b) was performed and demonstrated the existence of an 81.9mm×61.6mm PA, which originated from his left iliac arteries and covered the bifurcation of his left common iliac artery and proximal ends of both his internal and external iliac arteries.
The endovascular procedure was performed 1 day after the CTA. Heparin 4000IU was administered intra-arterially once access had been obtained. A 6-F artery sheath punctured his contralateral femoral artery. Then a 5-F Rösch inferior mesenteric catheter (Cordis) and 0.035 3mm “J” standard guide wire (Cook) were used together to enter his left common iliac artery. Hand injections of contrast demonstrated the existence of a huge PA and also identified both the rupture of PA and the proximal end of his left internal iliac artery . Another catheter and guide wire were inserted through an ipsilateral femoral artery puncture. Via the catheter passway, metal coils (Cook: 8mm diameter, Figure c) were released and fixed at the distal end of his left internal iliac artery. Then the left femoral artery was exposed and a 14-F artery catheter (Cordis) was inserted. A 14mm×7cm Bard self-expandable polytetrafluoroethylene-covered Fluency stent (Boston Scientific) was placed after dilating with an 8mm×4cm angioplasty balloon. A selective left iliac arteriography 5 minutes after deployment of the stent graft confirmed complete exclusion of the PA and normal flow to the arteries of his ipsilateral lower extremity.
The postprocedural course went well. The patient received subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin, urokinase and prophylactic cefminox. Furthermore, he was given long-term medications for hypercholesterolemia with atorvastatin, aspirin and omega 3 cod liver oil. Initially there was eradication of fever. His subsequent clinical course was uneventful and he was discharged 7 days after the endovascular treatment. CTA performed after 30 days showed a well-expanded stent with no signs of a new PA and a decreasing and consolidated residual hematoma. He received oral administration of warfarin for 3-month anticoagulation, maintaining an international normalized ratio of 2.0 to 3.0. At 1.5-year clinical follow-up, his recovery was good.