A 43-year-old man presented to the emergency department reporting sudden-onset feeling of palpitations and near syncope after strenuous heavy lifting. He was pale and diaphoretic; blood pressure was measured 90/70 mmHg, oxygen level 99%, heart-rate 210–230 b.p.m., and body temperature 36.6°C. Past medical history was clear for cardiac disease, syncope, or pre-syncope. No history of sudden cardiac death (SCD) or cardiomyopathy into his family was stated. He denied recent flu-like symptoms, smoking, illicit drug use, or excessive alcohol consumption. Physical examination was unremarkable. Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) depicted an irregularly irregular, broad QRS complex tachycardia . No previous ECG recordings were handed. Direct current (DC) cardioversion restored sinus rhythm with manifest ventricular pre-excitation and clear ‘delta’ waves confirming our initial clinical suspicion for underlying WPW syndrome. Shortest pre-excited RR interval (SPERRI) during AF was estimated at 160 ms , indicating an AP with extremely short antegrade effective refractory period (ERP) at risk for mediating SCD. Echocardiography ruled out abnormalities associated with WPW, including Ebstein’s anomaly, valve lesions, cardiac hypertrophy, atrial aneurysms, and septal defects. Cardiac ischaemia was also excluded on the basis of clinical, electrocardiographic, echocardiographic, and laboratory data. The patient was put on enoxaparin 80 mg b.i.d. and propafenone 150 mg t.i.d. and his clinical course remained uneventful. Electrophysiological study (EPS) was performed at a tertiary centre on Day 10 post-diagnosis; programmed atrial stimulation induced pre-excited AF with markedly increased SPERRI = 264 ms and a left anterolateral AP with antegrade only conduction properties was ablated . The patient was scheduled for routine cardiologic follow-up and advised to abstain from intense physical activity for at least 1-month post-discharge. In case of palpitations, ECG and 24-h Holter monitoring were suggested. CHA2DS2-VASc Score was calculated zero, so 1 month of rivaroxaban 20 mg daily was deemed sufficient post-ablation. Family members were also screened for pre-excitation. The patient remained symptom free without pre-excitation on surface ECG on his latest follow-up visit 3 months after the procedure.