A 76-year-old Asian man underwent radical left nephrectomy due to CCRCC in 1995, but detailed medical records of the primary renal tumor were not available as the patient had undergone the procedure at another hospital. In August 2019, the patient suddenly experienced epigastric pain after eating, accompanied by abdominal distension, nausea, and vomiting. Enhanced abdominal CT revealed a space-occupying lesion in the pancreatic body and tail, multiple liver metastases, and lymph node metastases around the pancreas; however, chest CT was negative. CT imaging findings of the space-occupying lesions were similar to those of CCRCC. Whole-body fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT scans showed pancreatic thickening along with increased fluorodeoxyglucose tracer intake, pancreatic duct dilation, and a mild increase in the metabolic activity of lymph nodes in the peripancreatic and mesenteric areas . Thus, as the patient’s symptoms, past history, and imaging results were indicative of malignant tumor metastasis, we did not perform a biopsy but chose to proceed with metastasectomy. The patient underwent combined exploratory laparotomy with pancreatic body and tail resection, splenectomy, and left hepatic lobectomy. In the early stage of surgery, the intraoperative frozen-section examination was performed to identify the tumor property. The dimensions of the excised pancreatic tumor were 15 × 7 × 6 cm, and the cut surface was multicolored. Metastases were visible in 1 of 3 lymph nodes around the pancreas, whereas the two liver metastases measured 2 × 1 × 3 cm and 1.5 × 1 × 2 cm, respectively. The results of histopathological and immunohistochemical analyses are provided in . Histologically, the CCRCC metastases were found in Fuhrman grades II–III. Considering the adverse reactions and financial burden of the systemic therapy, we decided to follow up closely without the application of systemic therapies for the time being.
In June 2020, the high-resolution chest CT re-examination revealed new nodules in the basal segment of the right lower lobe . We believed that systemic therapy was necessary to prevent tumor progression and prolong survival. Then the patient received targeted therapy (Sunitinib). At this time point, the patient had a Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) intermediate-risk feature based on clinical manifestations and laboratory examinations. In September 2020, a reexamination of the abdominal enhanced CT showed that there were multiple new-onset metastatic lesions in the left renal area, the liver, and the lymph nodes in the hilar area . Given the continuous progress of the tumor, we decided to use targeted therapy combined with the PD-1 inhibitor (Toripalimab). In May 2021, a chest CT scan showed no significant changes in pulmonary nodules; while an abdominal CT scan revealed that the number of liver metastases was reduced and the size was decreased. Consequently, we could conclude that the patient had a partial response after receiving targeted therapy combined with PD-1 inhibitors. Since receiving the combinatorial treatment, the patient has not suffered from any serious adverse events. Conversely, the patient’s physical and psychological conditions are gradually improving. We will continue to adopt targeted therapy combined with immunotherapy, and follow up regularly.