A 59-year-old woman visited her primary care physician for discomfort in the lower right abdomen. As no abnormalities were identified from gastroscopy or colonoscopy, her physician scheduled routine follow-up. Three months later, she again visited her physician complaining of hypertension. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was elevated at 23 ng/mL (normal range, 0–5 ng/mL), and computed tomography (CT) showed a 65-mm tumor in the right ovary. She was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
She developed transverse colon cancer at 38 years old and underwent transverse colectomy and lymph node dissection. At 55 years old, intramucosal colorectal cancer was diagnosed and endoscopically removed. The patient’s family pedigree is shown in Fig. . She had five siblings, four of whom (II-1, − 2, − 4, − 6) had a history of colorectal cancer and two of whom (II-1, − 4) had a history of multiple colorectal cancers. EPCAM deletion was identified in an elder sister (II-2) and she underwent prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in the United States.
Pelvic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor with solid components measuring 50 × 78 × 36 mm on the dorsal side of the uterus . The interior of the tumor showed signal hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging. The tumor showed lobular growth but had not infiltrated surrounding areas. Contrast-enhanced CT showed no distant metastases or lymph node metastases. Serum CEA level was elevated at 18 ng/mL. Carbohydrate antigen 19–9 and carbohydrate antigen 125 levels were within normal ranges.
As the above findings suggested, the tumor could be either primary or secondary ovarian cancer. Therefore, we decided to perform surgery to allow for pathological examination. We performed total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and partial omentectomy. There was a fist-sized, lobular, cystic tumor in the right adnexa. The right ovarian tumor measured 8.5 cm in diameter, had a lobular interior, and was primarily mucinous with some solid portions . Ascites was absent, and the uterus and left adnexa appeared normal. During surgery, we found a cherry-sized tumor in the ileum, located on the 20-cm mouth side from the ileocecum. Subsequent ileal resection was performed. The ileum tumor measured 2.5 cm in diameter and showed papillary growth in the lumen .
Histopathological examination revealed mucinous adenocarcinoma of the ileum. Atypical columnar cells growing in irregular/fused duct patterns were present in the ileum. Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor cells was negative for keratin 7 and keratin 20. The tumor had infiltrated to the subserosa and was partially exposed to the serosa . The ovarian tumor showed the same pathological features. Finally, the patient was diagnosed as having ileum cancer with ovarian metastasis (pT4NXM1, stage IV).
Furthermore, we performed immunohistochemical examination of MMR proteins. While MLH1 and PMS2 nuclear staining remained intact, MSH2 and MSH6 staining was decreased in both the ileum and ovarian tumor .
The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged 10 days after surgery. We referred her to the Department of Gastroenterology of our hospital for adjuvant chemotherapy. She received chemotherapy comprising intravenous oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 on day 1 and oral capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 twice daily from days 1 to 14, every 3 weeks (CAPOX regimen). After four courses of CAPOX, the treatment regimen was switched to capecitabine monotherapy because of an oxaliplatin-related adverse event. She received two courses of capecitabine monotherapy, thereby completing initial treatment. Currently, she has remained disease-free for 24 months.
Because her medical and familial histories and immunohistochemical examination of MMR proteins suggested LS, we referred her for genetic counseling in the Department of Medical Genetics of our hospital. Based on genetic information from her older sister, genetic testing was performed with her consent. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay showed deletions of EPCAM exons 8 and 9, upstream of MSH2, confirming LS. Her son (III-6) also underwent genetic testing, but the results were negative.