A 40-year-old woman presented with a chief complaint of a sudden pain on the left side of her neck while driving. She requested an ambulance and was transported to our hospital because of swelling in the left neck area as well as pain.
Her symptoms were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale score, E4V5M6; body temperature, 37.1°C; blood pressure, 237/125 mmHg; pulse rate, 89 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 25 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation in room air, 97%. There was a prominent mass on the outer left side of the neck, approximately 10 cm in diameter. There were café-au-lait spots all over the body and small scattered nodules. While preparing for a contrast computed tomography scan, the patient complained of severe dyspnea, expressed agony, and exhibited a rapid drop in oxygen saturation. She was immediately ventilated with a bag valve mask, but ventilation was impossible because her tongue had protruded from the oral cavity. When a laryngoscope was used to expand the laryngeal area with fentanyl 0.1 mg, 1% propofol 60 mg, and rocuronium 50 mg, the glottis could not be observed because it was compressed by the enlarged mass. Therefore, to manage the surgical airway, a cricothyrotomy was first carried out, which resulted in an immediate increase in oxygen saturation with a gaseous eruption. Subsequently, a gum-elastic bougie was inserted caudally and a 6 mm tracheal tube was inserted using the bougie as a guide.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a massive hematoma in the deep interstitial space from the left buccal region to the left side of the neck, which caused airway stenosis. There was a 1 cm-long aneurysm in the left occipital artery, with extravascular leakage around the aneurysm .
Angiography undertaken on the same day also showed a left occipital artery aneurysm, percutaneous embolization was selected based on café-au-lait spots and multiple nodules throughout the body, which suggested neurofibromatosis and vascular fragility. After embolization, we confirmed that the aneurysm was not contrasted and the procedure was completed . On day 2 of hospitalization, the swelling in the left side of the neck increased, and after an emergency angiogram was performed for suspected rebleeding, another coil embolization was performed. As the occipital artery was contrasted retrogradely from an artery branching from the vertebral artery to the vicinity of the aneurysm, we suspected bleeding around the aneurysm and undertook another embolization procedure. As the microcatheter could not be guided to the peripheral occipital artery, the branch from the vertebral artery was embolized with a coil at the bifurcation . However, due to the continued increase in cervical swelling, a left occipital artery aneurysmectomy was performed on day 5 of admission. From the time of skin incision, there was bleeding everywhere, and the total bleeding volume was 2,000 mL, making hemostasis difficult. When the sternocleidomastoid muscle was released from the mastoid process and rotated downward, a coil-filled aneurysm was exposed, which was dissected and removed together with the surrounding hematoma. The extraction sites were then examined pathologically, and the pathology results showed that it corresponded to a diffuse type of neurofibroma . The patient was discharged without complications on day 31 since visiting the hospital.