A 55-year-old man was admitted to our department with fever for 10 days and gross hematuria for 9 days. The patient had developed fever with a maximum temperature of 39 °C, without chills, abdominal pain or diarrhea 10 days prior. The temperature returned to normal after antipyretic and antibiotic administration under the guidance of community doctors, but it increased again and was accompanied by gross hematuria just a few hours later. The patient gradually developed foamy urine with eye pain, photophobia, tinnitus, rash and other discomforts before this recent admission to our department.
Physical examination revealed increased temperature (37.7 °C), normal blood pressure (Bp, 100/80 mmHg), and bradycardia (HR, 56 bpm). There was hyperemia on his head, neck and chest skin and hyperemia and rash on his back. His physical exam was otherwise unremarkable. Specifically, he had no oral lesions, lymphadenopathy, joint swelling, lower extremity edema, or cardiac murmur or rub.
A history of renal lithiasis for 3 years could be elicited. The diagnosis of renal lithiasis was established at the local hospital, and the patient had received extracorporeal lithotripsy at the same hospital. The patient denied eye trauma and a history of surgery. He was unaware of any familial genetic disease and had not been tested for a genetic disease.
The results of the initial laboratory tests were as follows: white blood cell count 15.0 × 109/L, neutrophil ratio 86.3%, hemoglobin 118 g/L, platelets 215 × 109/L; albumin 24 g/L, blood urea nitrogen 6.4 μmol/L, plasma creatinine 79 μmol/L, uric acid 130 μmol/L. blood sugar 5.8 μmol/L. potassium 4.67 μmol/L, sodium 142 μmol/L, chloride 104 μmol/L, calcium 2.11 μmol/L, and CO2CP 25 μmol/L. Urine erythrocytes (6250.00 μL) and urinalysis showed 3+ blood and 1+ protein with 8–10 white blood cells/high-power field. Twenty-four-hour urine collection revealed 0.673 g of protein. Tests for the presence of rheumatoid factor, ANA and ANCA were negative. Tests for the presence of anti-mitochondrial and anti-smooth-muscle antibodies were negative. Complement levels were normal.
Symptoms gradually worsened after admission, and the body temperature fluctuated at 39–41 °C with more hematuria and more extensive rash. In addition, the patient developed a severe headache, neck stiffness, eye pain, conjunctival congestion, and decreased vision in both eyes, accompanied by tinnitus and hearing loss. The hearing test showed severe neurological deafness in both ears. The slit lamp examination showed that the conjunctiva of both eyes was mixed and congested, and mutton-fat-like KPs were observed, but the cornea was still clear. Bilateral intraocular pressure increased to 30 mmHg in the left and 35 mmHg in the right. Fluorescein angiography revealed multiple leakages from the optic discs as well as the retinal pigment epithelium in the posterior pole of both eyes and the accumulation of cystic fluorescein, typical of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, as shown in Fig. .
A percutaneous renal biopsy was then performed. Sampling consisted of 17 glomeruli with 2 small cellular crescents with fibrinoid necrosis and 2 ischemic sclerosis and fuchsinophilic protein deposition in the mesangial area. Lymphocytes and monocytes showed multifocal and flaky infiltration in the renal interstitium with fibrosis. Immunofluorescent examination revealed strong IgA (3+) deposition along the glomeruli, as well as IgG(+), IgM(−), C3(++), C1q(−), and FRA(++). Based on the findings mentioned above, the diagnosis of IgA nephropathy (M1E0S1T1C1) with VKHS was confirmed, as shown in Fig. .
During hospitalization, the patient was given a bolus of methylprednisolone 500 mg 3 times, followed by treatment with prednisone 60 mg, mannitol and cyclophosphamide. The patient’s symptoms were significantly relieved, intraocular pressure was reduced to normal, urinary protein was reduced to 208 mg/24 h, and red blood cells were reduced to 1.90 μL by contrast microscopy.
The patient is still taking prednisone and intermittent cyclophosphamide treatment, the urine test results have returned to normal and his condition is stable, without complaints of blurred vision or headache.