A previously healthy girl aged 2 years weighing 15 kg was brought to our pediatric emergency department and admitted 5 h after her chest and upper abdomen were squeezed by an e-bike with high traveling speed in her family yard. The e-bike was inadvertently activated by herself, and it suddenly moved forward and pushed her chest and abdomen into a brick wall. On admission, she was conscious but looked pale. There were signs of hemorrhagic shock, blood pressure of 103/49 mmHg, heart rate of 167 beats/min, and respiratory rate of 42 breaths/min. Bruises were observed on her right lateral chest wall. Her abdomen revealed slight tenderness and was distended. The laboratory tests showed a red blood cell (RBC) count of 3.29 × 1012/L, hematocrit of 25%, and a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 90 g/L. Liver function test revealed an elevated liver enzyme, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 2,898 IU/L, and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 2,247 IU/L. Chest and abdominal plain radiograph was unremarkable. Chest and abdominal plain computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral traumatic wet lungs and irregular lacerations in segments VI, IVA, and II, graded as III and IV, respectively, by the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma's Organ Injury Scaling (AAST-OIS) . After admission, the Hb level declined to 71 g/L. Point-by-care ultrasonography demonstrated that the involved area of the left hepatic lobe was 5.5 cm × 4.8 cm × 1.5 cm and that of the right lobe was 4.8 cm × 4.4 cm × 4.9 cm with hemoperitoneum. Initial fluid resuscitation, blood transfusion of two units of concentrated RBCs, and hemostatics were given immediately. The patient received non-invasive ventilation with high volume oxygen inhalation and absolute bed rest. The Hb level was within the normal range. The patient received non-operative management and recovered uneventfully. On the 11th postinjury day, she was transferred to a conventional ward.
On the 16th postinjury day, the patient suddenly presented abdominal discomfort and hematemesis. Then, massive bloody stool occurred with hemorrhagic shock. The Hb level declined to 52 g/L with hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 99.8 mmol/L, direct bilirubin 82.3 mmol/L). Urgent fluid resuscitation, blood transfusion, systemic hemostatics, and oxygen inhalation were given. Emergent gastroscopy revealed no obvious bleeding from the duodenal papilla, and erosive gastroduodenitis was suspected. The source of gastrointestinal bleeding was unclear, but the bleeding ceased spontaneously. The Hb level was 103 g/L following multiple blood transfusions of 6 units of concentrated RBCs. On the 22nd postinjury day, massive bloody stool reoccurred. The Hb level dramatically declined to 51 g/L. Emergent re-gastroscopy showed active bleeding from the duodenal papilla . The diagnosis of traumatic massive hemobilia was confirmed. After receiving fluid resuscitation and blood transfusions of 5 units of concentrated RBCs, the patient underwent an emergency hepatic arteriography. A pseudoaneurysm from a branch of the left hepatic artery was confirmed and contrast extravasation under the diaphragm was also observed. The involved arterial branch was selectively embolized using gelatin sponge particles, spring coil, and free coil. Post-embolization angiography showed a complete occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm and no contrast medium extravasation . The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on the 5th post-embolization day.
After a one-year follow-up, regular ultrasonography and color Doppler ultrasound showed that a heterogeneous echogenicity in the parenchyma of the left hepatic lobe and the inner diameter of the portal vein was normal. Echogenicity of blood clots in the gallbladder lumen gradually disappeared at 2 months post-embolization. A mild dilatation of the left intrahepatic bile duct was found at the 6th week after trauma, and long-term follow-up was needed.
The Pubmed database revealed that there were about 35 pediatric patients who suffered blunt liver injury complicated by hepatic artery pseudoaneurysm and/or delayed life-threatening hemobilia (–). The clinical characteristics of these patients, including those of the present one, are summarized in .