A 50-year-old male presented with a sudden headache and nausea from the past day. He had a history of asthma, hypertension, and sinusitis. His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15 (E4V5M6). There were no neurological deficits, including visual disturbance or hemiparesis. He was started on oral betamethasone 1 week before to treat his sinusitis.
Routine blood tests revealed an elevated white blood cell count. Endocrinological blood tests showed low secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) . Head computed tomography (CT) revealed an enlarged pituitary fossa . MRI showed a large pituitary tumor without enhancement, a high-intensity area with diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) in the pituitary gland, and a low-intensity area with T2*-weighted imaging in a large tumor [-]. There had been no cortical infarction . Magnetic resonance angiography revealed pseudo-occlusion of the left internal carotid artery (ICA); however, the left middle cerebral and anterior cerebral arteries were depicted due to a cross-flow through the anterior communicating artery. To differentiate whether it had been an acute obstruction or not, we checked the ASL on MRI. ASL on MRI showed decreased perfusion of the left hemisphere [-]. We had diagnosed this occasion as PA, with acute left ICO but no ischemic stroke.
As he had no neurological deficit, we treated him conservatively with intravenous hydration and hydrocortisone infusion. Two days after admission, he presented with sudden disorientation, a GCS of 12 (E3V4M5), sensory aphasia, and incomplete right paralysis.
Emergency head CT revealed a low-density area in his left temporal lobe . He was diagnosed with a stroke lacking ischemic tolerance due to ICO due to PA; thus, emergency tumor decompression was attempted to prevent ischemic progression.
Under general anesthesia, we performed endonasal transsphenoidal surgery. After the dura incision, a white tumor erupted, reflecting high intrasellar pressure (ISP).
Pathological findings showed a paucity of FSH-positive cells with immunostaining among many unstained cells. Based on pathological and physical findings, we diagnosed him with a nonfunctional adenoma.
Postoperative MRI showed recanalization of the left ICA and no fresh cerebral infarction except for a known temporal lobe stroke . His incomplete right paralysis improved immediately after surgery. He was transferred to the hospital for rehabilitation for mild sensory aphasia, and his modified ranking scale was 1.