A 22-year-old nulligravida, unmarried Sindhi female presented to the Emergency Room (ER) with a 5-day history of intermittent, severe lower abdominal pain on April 12th, 2023. The patient complained of throbbing, non-radiating pain. Initially, the patient had visited her local practitioner, who had advised an abdominal and pelvic ultrasound. The ultrasound revealed an oval hypoechoic area in the right lower abdomen measuring 15.9 × 8.8 × 5.9 cm and showing no blood flow on color Doppler. The report was suggestive of a right ovarian cyst. The local practitioner had thus referred her to our facility for drainage of the cyst.
At the time of presentation, the patient complained of mild pain in the lower abdomen but was otherwise vitally stable. Her medical, surgical, and menstrual histories were all unremarkable. On GPE, the abdomen was soft and non-tender with a hard mass in the right hypochondrium.
On the day of admission, she was anemic with a hemoglobin count of 9 g/dl. She also had leukocytosis (WBC = 15.2), with predominant neutrophilia, and a normal platelet count. Her Liver Function Tests (LFTs) were deranged with elevated direct bilirubin (0.7), alkaline phosphate (184), and LDH (315). Tests for various tumor markers showed an increased serum CA-125 (351 IU/ml), while serum Beta HCG, serum alpha-fetoprotein, and CEA were in the normal range.
Ultrasound-pelvis at our facility reported a solid cum cystic heterogeneous mass with specks of calcification in the right periumbilical region measuring 155 × 101 × 55 mm . Based on the indefinite ultrasound findings, an MRI of the pelvis was ordered, which showed a 164 × 105 mm obliquely placed comma-shaped mass in the lower abdomen/pelvic region . Twisting and swirling of vessels was noted on the left side that extended into the mass. The ovaries, however, were normal in size. The radiology findings were suggestive of an enlarged wandering spleen with the torsion of its pedicle and infarction.
An exploratory laparotomy with a possible splenectomy was advised and eventually performed. A midline lower abdominal incision was given to reach the peritoneal cavity. An enlarged wandering spleen was found with torsion of the splenic vein and thrombosed arterial supply from omentum wrapped over the mass. A splenectomy was performed, and a tissue cross-section was sent for histopathology that later reported hemorrhagic infarction and congestion of the spleen and separate omental tissue . There were no signs of any malignancy.
Postoperatively the patient was clinically and vitally stable. She had two episodes of vomiting on the second post-op day (April 15th), which were managed with ondansetron. The Hemoglobin and WBC count were in the normal range, but her platelets remained high throughout her post-operative stay. She recovered well and was discharged 2 days later on April 17th, 2023.