A 50-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency room after experiencing headache pain for 10 d.
Headache for 10 d.
The patient did not have a history of hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, surgery, infection, liver or kidney dysfunction, smoking or drinking. He was married.
His grandfather had a history of venous thrombosis in the lower extremities.
The physical examination yielded the following results: body mass index = 21 kg/m2, with stable vital signs, and clear consciousness, The patient's ophthalmoscopy indicated the presence of optic papilledema, normal results for the rest of the cranial nerves and for muscle tension of the extremities, limb muscle strength was rated as grade 5 based on the Medical Research Council scale, normal depth of feeling, normal tendon reflex, and negative Babinski, Chaddock, and meningeal irritation signs. The patient’s Montreal Cognitive Assessment was 29.
The blood test results were as follows: D-dimer: 1430 g/L, prothrombin time: 16.3 s (reference range: 10.6-14.3 s), plasma partial thromboplastin time: 45.4 s (26.0-40.0 s), without obvious abnormalities on routine examinations of blood, urine, and feces, serum homocysteine concentration, anticardiolipin antibodies, rheumatic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, negative antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factors, thyroid function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and creatine kinase level.
To determine the reason for CVST, coagulation tests were performed. The results were as follows: AT activity: 81.8% (reference range: 75%-125%), protein C: 52.8%, protein S: 31.9% (reference range: 70%-140%), and LA1/LA2 for preliminary screening/diagnosis of lupus: 1.16 (reference range: 0.8-1.2) . Because the patient had taken warfarin for one week for anticoagulation the anticoagulant protein test was performed. Warfarin is known to reduce the content and activity of plasma protein C and protein S antigens; hence, the drug was considered to be the reason for the observed decrease in activity of protein C and protein S. As the patient had no acquired risk factors for thrombophilia, such as surgery, immobilization, trauma, or infection, the possibility of hereditary thrombophilia was considered. Coagulation factor II, V, and SERPINC1 gene detection showed that the patient had no gene mutation of coagulation factor II and V, but had heterozygous mutations in the introns around Exon 1 (rs2227589 site) of SERPINC1 that encoded the AT gene: c.41+141G>A .
Considering that the patient’s daughter was of childbearing age, we also conducted blood coagulation tests and SERPINC1 gene test for the patient's daughter, to determine whether thromboprophylaxis needed to be given during perinatal and contraceptive periods when the risk of VTE is increased. The results showed that her AT-III, protein C, and protein S were all normal . SERPINC1 gene detection showed the same heterozygous mutations in the introns around Exon 1 (rs2227589 site) as her father: c.41+141G>A .
The patient had an unexplained acute headache, with nausea, vomiting and intracranial hypertension with fundus optic papilledema. He had a family history of venous thrombosis and was highly vigilant against CVST. Subsequently, a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed. As expected, cranial magnetic resonance venography (MRV) and MRI revealed several abnormal findings: filling defects were observed in the superior sagittal sinus, inferior sagittal sinus, straight sinus, torcular herophili, bilateral sigmoid sinus, and transverse sinus , which enabled a diagnosis of multiple CVST.
MRV and MRI examination 2 wk later showed that the inferior sagittal sinus and straight sinus were significantly clearer than that before treatment, while the superior sagittal sinus, bilateral sigmoid sinus, and transverse sinus were slightly fuller than that before treatment .