A 58-year-old man presented to our hospital with right upper abdominal pain for two months and two hepatic masses that had been detected by liver computed tomography (CT) on the S5 and S8 segments. Three senior radiologists conducted an evaluation of the lesions based on the CT/MRI LI-RADS (Version 2018) criteria. All three doctors concurred that both lesions were classified as LR-4. The patient had a 30-year history of chronic hepatitis B without treatment and regular check-ups. The patient denied a family history of cancer. The serum level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), CA19-9, CA125, and CEA were normal. However, PIVKA-II was slightly elevated (516 mAU/ml). The patient had normal liver enzymes, total serum bilirubin of 15.1 umol/l, and serum albumin of 41.3 umol/l. The preoperative liver function was graded as Child-Pugh A. The preoperative liver computed tomography (CT) shows that there were two masses in the liver and the imaging diagnosis was liver cancer. In the junction of the left and right lobes of the liver and in the lower segment of the right anterior lobe of the liver, patchy and slightly low-density lesions with unclear boundaries were observed, with sizes of about 4.1×3.6cm and 5.7×3.7cm, respectively. The image of tumor in S8 was shown in . In the latter lesions, the enhancement in the arterial phase showed obvious uneven enhancement, and the enhancement in the venous phase and the delayed phase decreased, showing relatively low density . CT of the chest and extrahepatic abdomen showed no other lesions to rule out metastatic tumors. Three-Dimensional Reconstructed CT of liver parenchyma, tumor, and vessels showed that there was no variation in hepatic artery, hepatic vein, and portal vein . The volume of the liver totaled 1513.6ml. We simulated anatomic hepatectomy through 3D reconstruction, requiring removal of the S4, S5, S6, and S8 of the liver, for a total of 991.4ml. The patient has cirrhosis and anatomic hepatectomy may result in insufficient residual liver ratio.
The patient exhibited good liver function preoperatively (Child-Pugh Grade A) and no evidence of lymph node or vascular metastasis was found, making surgical resection feasible. Given the patient’s cirrhosis and the results of the 3D reconstruction, anatomical segmentectomy was deemed risky due to insufficient residual liver function, posing a risk of postoperative liver failure. Therefore, we decided to perform a partial hepatectomy. Laparoscopic examination revealed cirrhosis without ascites. The tumors were located in segments S5 and S8 of the liver, with the S5 tumor being particularly large. After attempting laparoscopic surgery, we switched to open surgery due to difficulties in exposure, potential for significant bleeding, and the challenge of ensuring therapeutic efficacy laparoscopically. The liver parenchyma was excised using an ultrasonic knife approximately 2cm from the tumor margin, ensuring complete tumor removal.
To the naked eye, the tumor in S5 and S8 were solid and yellowish-white in color with some necrotic changes . Postoperative pathology showed that the tumor in S5 was 7×3.5cm, with poor differentiation and large necrosis. Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma was found in most areas (90%) and hepatocellular carcinoma in a small part (10%). Immunohistochemistry shows CgA (-),CD56 (+diffuse), Ki-67 (+80%), Heppar-1 (+) . There was no fibrous tissue separation at the tumor junction. Combined with immunohistochemistry, it was consistent with mixed hepato-neuroendocrine tumor (MiNET). The tumor in S5 was 4.5×4.5cm with Heppar-1(+), Hepatocyte (+), and Ki67 (+8%). Final diagnosis was hepatocellular carcinoma, grade 2.