A 77-year old male was referred to our clinic with ocular pain, conjunctival injection, and severe loss of vision in his left eye. His eye symptoms had started 3 weeks ago spontaneously. He had been treated with topical fortified 5% cefazolin and 2% tobramycin alternately 4 times a day for 4 days, but symptoms had not improved after treatment. He had a history of type II diabetes mellitus for 8 years, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and pneumothorax. He underwent cataract surgeries in both of his eyes. At the first visit, his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in the right eye and hand movements in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 20 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination showed a corneal epithelial defect, stromal infiltration (5 × 4 mm) with feathery margins and hypopyon . Corneal scrapings were taken immediately for smears and culture. Because the lesions progressed in spite of the fortified 5% cefazolin and 2% tobramycin, topical 1% voriconazole was administered every 2 hours, and itraconazole 200 mg orally twice a day was prescribed. Intrastromal and intracameral injection of voriconazole (50 μg/0.1 mL) was performed total 5 times every 4 days.Fungal hyphae were observed in KOH-stained corneal specimen stained on microscopic examination. Fungal culture on Sabouraud dextrose agar identified Trichophyton species after 7 days of incubation. We inspected the patient’s body for other fungal skin infection, and found onychomycosis on the patient’s foot. The patient had suffered from foot onychomycosis for 10 years. Trichophyton, which was the same species causing the fungal keratitis, was identified on culture of nail. The treatment regimen was changed to topical 1% itraconazole every 2 hours and 200 mg of systemic itraconazole intravenously every 12 hours. In spite of the treatment, no clinical improvement was observed for 4 days and the corneal infiltrate worsened . Therefore, therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty and cryotherapy was done. Many fungal hyphae and yeast forms in severe chronic active inflammation was found in the surgical specimens under microscopic examination with methenamine silver nitrate (MSN) staining . Topical natamycin per 2 hours, moxifloxacin per 6 hours, and oral terbinafine (250 mg, once a day) was prescribed for postoperative management.Four days after the penetrating keratoplasty, the corneal graft was clear with moderate cellular inflammatory reaction in the anterior chamber . Patient was discharged and treated with topical natamycin and oral terbinafine for 8 weeks after surgery. The graft was clear with no anterior chamber cellular reaction at postoperative 1 month . His visual acuity was “counting finger” at 50 cm distance in the right eye and there was no evidence of recurrence.