A 4 year old female presented with huge abdominal swelling first noticed by her parents at 2 years of her age (See Figure ). The swelling had increased in size since then to occupy almost whole of the abdomen. Right labia had a swelling which increases in size on standing and decrease on lying down. On examination abdomen was found to be distended, felt tense with flanks full. The swelling over the labia was reducible on manipulation suggesting its continuity with the abdominal swelling.
Ultrasound abdomen showed 30 × 20 × 20 centimeters huge, multiloculated, multiseptate, lesion extending from xiphisternum to pelvis with extension into the right labia majora. Lesion was causing lateral and posterior displacement of bowel loops and compression of liver and both kidneys. A provisional diagnosis of omental, mesenteric or ovarian cyst was made. CT scan was done to throw some more light on the site of origin. Non-contrast film showed the cyst filled with clear fluid possibly arising from the mesentery. Contrast film was suggestive of multiloculated cyst. Pelvic films proved the labial extention of the cyst (See Figure ), but still the exact site of origin remained unclear.
Patient was taken up for exploratory laparotomy and midline vertical incision was kept. After opening the peritoneum a thin walled cyst was seen popping out of the skin incision (See Figure ). On exploration it was found attached to the greater omentum (See Figure ).
Cyst was deflated partially by aspiration and we found the swelling over labia majora got reduced as we deflated the cyst and no adhesions were found between the cyst wall and labia. Complete excision of the cyst wall along with part of omentum was done. Histopathological report of the cyst wall showed endothelial cell lining, foam cells, lymphatic spaces, lymphoid tissue and smooth muscles which are diagnostic of lymphangiomatous cyst (See Figure ). Patient was under follow up for since six months and had no clinical and radiological signs of recurrence.