We report the case of a 22-year-old white man in good physical health (body height of 184 cm; body weight of 76.6 kg) who used ibogaine for the first time; he had no history of acute or chronic illness and no history of any drug dependence. He had no concomitant use of prescribed medications. Prior to admittance he had not taken any somatic medication for approximately 6 months.
According to his own statement, he wanted to achieve a “spiritual cleansing and reboot” by taking ibogaine. He had ordered dried ibogaine root bark via the Internet and took a cumulative dose of 38 g. He took two portions with <5 minute of latency between the two doses, grinding it and dissolving it in water. He reported having visions that occurred approximately 1 hour after he consumed the substance, which is a typical finding in ibogaine use [, ]. These visions, which mainly consisted of visual memories of his life, lasted for 10 minutes. Subsequently, he felt nauseated and had to vomit repeatedly. Over the next 30 minutes, the vomiting continued and he started to develop muscle tension and cramps in his arms and legs. Ten hours after he took the drug, his relatives found him having a generalized (tonic–clonic) seizure (please see also Fig. ). The emergency physician administered midazolam intravenously. The patient was immediately admitted to our intensive care unit, where he had several grand mal seizures. Within the next 3 days, repeated administrations of midazolam were necessary to stop the persistent generalized seizures. Anticonvulsive treatment with levetiracetam (1000 mg) was initiated on day two and immediately stopped the symptoms He was constantly awake and had no further neurologic progression (for example tremor, clonus or hyperreflexia). Cranial computed tomography and magnetic resonance tomography did not show any pathological findings. All laboratory tests showed unspecific alterations which might be related to the multiple previous epileptic seizures. In addition, slightly increased C-reactive protein (CRP) values and white blood cell counts (including lymphocyte count and neutrophil count), mild decreased platelet counts and elevated creatine-kinase values were found temporarily during the first days after admission. No signs of an infection and no inflammatory process were found.
His neurological status on day two revealed mild dysarthria with a subjective feeling of heaviness of the tongue, mild bilateral ptosis and psychomotor slowness. An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed mild diffuse encephalopathic changes but no epileptiform activity. On day five, all symptoms had disappeared completely and the laboratory values had normalized. Only the already declining creatine-kinase remained slightly increased, which was consistent with his several previous tonic–clonic epileptic seizures. He was finally discharged from our hospital. During a 3-month control period after this event that included documented abstinence, he had no further seizures without levetiracetam treatment, which had been tapered off after a few weeks. Detailed information about clinical and laboratory findings is provided in Table .