A 77-year-old Chinese woman presented to the gastroenterology clinic with a complaint of gastrointestinal hemorrhage and abdominal pain for 1 mo.
Symptoms started 1 mo before presentation with gastrointestinal hemorrhage and abdominal pain. The patient felt severe abdominal pain, no radiation-induced pain, and no nausea and vomiting. The patient defecated hemorrhage once a day. The symptoms of abdominal pain were slightly eased about 20 min after defecation.
Nine years ago, this patient underwent the resection of MSRCT in the left shoulder, back, and left supraclavicle. No chemotherapy was taken after operation. Recently, the tumors in the left shoulder, back, and left supraclavicle metastasized to the common bile duct.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumours.
On the physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.6 ℃; blood pressure, 97/59 mmHg; heart rate, 84 beats per min; respiratory rate, 16 breaths per min. The abdomen was flat, without tenderness or rebound pain.
The laboratory examinations showed that the patient's hemoglobin level decreased to 58 g/L. Fecal occult blood test was positive. Levels of serum tumour markers were normal. There were no abnormalities in liver and kidney function.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) and gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no abnormalities. We performed endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography on the patient. The gastroscope showed that the gastroduodenal mucosa was smooth and pale. The main nipple was found to be changed after endoscopic sphincterotomy without blood stains. The nipple was incised with a knife, and dark red liquid was discharged . On duodenoscopy, the scope was successfully passed through the esophagus, stomach and duodenal bulb, and reached the descending part, and the main nipple was found and was intubated successfully. The amount of contrast agent used was 20 mL. X-ray showed that the common bile duct had developed without expansion, and the maximum diameter was approximately 0.8 cm. It was filled with filling defects of different sizes. The intrahepatic bile duct was partially developed without expansion. There were irregular filling defects in the middle and lower segments of the common bile duct, which could be moved. The bright red liquid was discharged. The cystic pancreatic duct was not developed. The biliary tract was cleared through the zebra guide wire airy catheter, and the bleeding clots and necrotic tissues were removed. Then, the storage guide wire was inserted into the biliary full posterior membrane metal stent . After release, the stent was in a good position. Before inserting stent, the spyglass was performed. After insertion of the spyglass and after repeated flushing, new organisms could be seen in the middle of the common bile duct, with a rough surface, necrosis of the surface, active bleeding and local lumen stenosis . Spy-Bite was performed. Subsequently, the pathological result suggested that it was an MSRCT.