Due to frequent episodes of headache, a 30-year-old female underwent neuroradiological investigations that documented the presence of an aqueductal stenosis with triventricular hydrocephalus and transependymal transudation . She underwent an ETV through a right-sided burr hole.
During the procedure, no hemorrhage occurred. Neither symptoms nor signs of infection were identified during the hospitalization and the patient’s symptoms improved. She underwent regular clinical and neuroradiological follow-up. In particular, the MRI demonstrated a decrease in size of the third and the lateral ventricles, with the resolution of the transependymal transudation. The fast spin-echo (FSE) sequences revealed the patency of the stoma and the regular flow void inside it.
Twenty years after the endoscopic procedure, the patient complained again of severe headaches, acute onset of gait imbalance, dizziness, and vomiting. The MRI showed a dilatation of the lateral ventricles with slight deviation of the septum and slit third ventricle, indicating an obstruction of both FM . Because of a mild dilatation of the left lateral ventricle and an apparent enlargement of the Monro foramen aditus, we performed a left-sided approach for homolateral planned foraminoplasty and septostomy. Using a rigid endoscope (OI HandyPro Neuro-Endoscope Karl Storz Endoskope, Tuttlingen, Germany), we observed the left FM to be completely occluded by a fibrous membrane. We performed a foraminoplasty using a laser coagulator (2 μm thulium laser, RevoLix Jr, LISA Laser USA, Pleasanton, CA, USA) to pierce the membrane and a 4 Fr NeuroBalloon catheter (Integra, Plainsboro, NJ, USA) to enlarge the slot. Through the left Monro foramen, we entered into a slit third ventricle and reported the patency of the ventriculostomy that was enlarged during the procedure. We observed, when retracting the endoscope, a clear pulsation of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) through the stoma. We also fenestrated the septum and, through the septostomy, evaluated the contralateral FM, which was also occluded by a fibrous membrane . No complications occurred during the procedure nor the hospitalization. The analysis of the CSF did not reveal any abnormality.
After surgery, the symptoms improved and the early postoperative MRI showed the resolution of the biventricular hydrocephalus and the patency of septostomy, foraminoplasty, and ETV . Trying to objectify the volumetric reduction of the ventricular system, we segmented the data of the preoperative and of the postoperative MRI (Elements, BrainLab, Munich, Germany). We obtained a preoperative ventricular system’s volume of 191.8 cm3, while in the postoperative MRI, the value was reduced to 135.9 cm3 .
A year later, the patient remained asymptomatic and no changes on the cerebral MRI were observed.