A 45-year-old female was admitted to the hospital in August 2022 due to the presence of a right upper abdominal mass and pain.
The patient presented with a mass in the right upper abdomen three months ago, accompanied by recurrent abdominal pain. She underwent various examinations, including a CT scan and ultrasound, at the local hospital. According to the test results, the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma was made. However, the liver biopsy revealed a neuroendocrine tumor of grade 2 (G2), which contradicted the previous findings. Thereafter, immunohistochemical analysis was positive for Syn, CD56, and Vimentin markers in the tumor cells, whereas markers such as CK7, CK9, CK20, Arg-1, CDX-2, and NSE yielded negative results. In order to obtain a more accurate diagnosis and determine the appropriate treatment course, the patient was admitted to our hospital.
No significant past medical history, especially liver disease, such as hepatitis, alcoholic or non-alcoholic liver disease, or cirrhosis.
The patient had no family history or genetic predisposition for the disease.
An abdominal mass was detected 7 cm below the costal line at the right mid-clavicular and 10 cm below the xiphoid process. The mass exhibited a hard, smooth-surfaced, firm texture with unclear boundaries. Lastly, no evidence of jaundice, splenomegaly, or lymph node enlargement was observed.
The routine results, including bloodwork, coagulation, and liver function tests, were within the normal range. It is worthwhile noting that the patient tested negative for hepatitis B or C. Additionally, the patient’s Protein Induced by Vitamin K Absence or Antagonist II (PIVKA-II) level was 50.38 mAU/ml (reference: 0-40 mAU/ml), whereas the levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen (CA)-125, CA-199 and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were normal.
Based on the findings of contrast-enhanced ultrasound, the mass is likely to be malignant. Afterward, the CT scan displayed a low-density hepatic mass . The mass showed uneven enhancement with thickened and tortuous tumor vessels in the arterial phase . In contrast, the enhancement was lower in the portal venous and delayed phases . Patchy filling defects were visible in the right hepatic vein. No abnormality was observed in the remaining liver, bile ducts, gallbladder, pancreas, or lymph nodes. Based on the CT findings, a preliminary diagnosis of right lobe giant hepatocellular carcinoma with a thrombus in the right hepatic vein was considered. Three-dimensional reconstruction based on contrast-enhanced tomography revealed the relationship between the tumor and intrahepatic bile duct, portal vein, hepatic artery, and inferior vena cava . Furthermore, the patient’s indocyanine green retention rate at 15 minutes (ICGR15) is less than 10%. According to the formulae of Urata et al. , the patient’s standard liver volume was calculated to be 1031.53 cm3, and the liver volume after right hemihepatectomy was 649.34 cm3, accounting for 62.94% of the standard liver volume.