A 30-year-old woman was referred to her obstetrician for pregnancy monitoring. The first ultrasonographic examination confirmed a 7-week pregnancy. She had delivered one child after a previous normal pregnancy and had no history of abortion. Routine biochemical tests yielded normal red blood cell count, hemoglobin level, renal and hepatic function, and blood sugar level values for a woman in the first trimester of pregnancy. First-trimester ultrasonographic screening for chromosomal anomalies revealed a large NT of 6.4–7 mm, with thin septae limited to the back of the fetus; the nasal bone was present, and normal blood flow was observed through the ductus venosus and tricuspid valve .
The management of the case and challenges presented are detailed in Table .
The combined risk for trisomies 21, 13, and 18 was 1/560, but considering the known association between these heterogeneous genetic syndromes and cystic hygroma, prenatal screening was recommended.
Karyotype analysis and DNA extraction from chorionic villi were performed. Owing to the normal results of the karyotype and multiple genetic syndromes associated with increased NT, we pursued next-generation sequencing of 1,024 genes that have been associated with several structural abnormalities; this identified the known homozygous pathogenic mutation c.441 + 1G>A of the NPC2 gene (NM_006432.3, OMIM 601015). The mutation has been reported in international databases as pathogenic and responsible for NPD-C2. Genetic testing of the parents and the previous offspring revealed that they were both heterozygous (carriers) for the abovementioned mutation, although their first child was not affected .
Considering the poor prognosis, the parents decided to terminate the pregnancy at 16 weeks, which was uneventful.
Six months later, the patient presented with a new pregnancy at a gestational age of 11 + 3 weeks. Ultrasonographic screening showed normal findings, with an NT of 6 mm. Chorionic villus sampling was performed due to the high recurrence risk of Niemann–Pick disease. The karyotype was found to be normal. However, molecular testing revealed that the fetus was homozygous for the previously identified familial mutation c.441 + 1G>A; hence, the pregnancy was terminated at 14 weeks.