A 78-year-old man underwent vascular graft replacement for an abdominal aortic aneurysm, and then experienced right extremity thromboembolism, resulting in ischemic necrosis of the right forefoot. After the surgery, his general condition was poor, he was bedridden with a tracheotomy and an artificial respirator, and he had total dependence. However, his expression, comprehension, problem-solving. and memory were all sound. His functional independence measure (FIM) score was 20 points. Three months after surgery, the necrosis had spread to the middle part of the right foot, but since the patient’s general condition had improved, a right foot amputation was performed. Chopart amputation was performed because the necrosis extended to the central part of the sole. In the surgery, transfer of the tibialis anterior and peroneus brevis tendons, as well as Achilles tendon lengthening, were performed, taking into consideration the balance of the tendons, to prevent postoperative deformation.
For postoperative rehabilitation, to prevent deformity and protect the wound, the ankle joint was splinted for 3 weeks after surgery. From the day after surgery, the patient was able to move in a wheelchair without bearing weight on the affected limb. Two weeks after surgery, non-weight-bearing walking training was started. Three weeks after surgery, the splint was removed, and ankle joint range of motion training and full-weight walking training were started. Four weeks after surgery, he was able to walk with a walker. Five weeks after surgery, he was able to walk with a T-cane, and no varus or equinus deformity was observed . Active dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the ankle were possible, and the range of motion was 5 degrees dorsiflexion and 10 degrees plantar flexion. The patient was able to stand and walk without a prosthesis with a heel load. However, he was unable to push off the ground and his right foot dragged when he walked forward. Therefore, a foot prosthesis was made (-A and B) and attached 6 weeks after surgery (-A and B). The foot prosthesis features a belt-type rubber tip and a 10 mm-thick sole, which is designed to attach the rubber tip to the foot. Due to the absence of equinus deformity, the posterior heel and anterior part of the amputation edge had the same height. The tip and sole are both made of rubber, the inside of the midfoot is made of sponge, and the surface is made of leather. As a result, the patient was able to push off the ground and was no longer limping while wearing the foot prosthesis. Moreover, he was able to walk 1 km while using a cane, as well as get on and off a bus independently.
Six years after surgery, at the age of 85 years, the patient's walking ability was stable, and he was able to perform his daily activities independently. Given this long-term stability, we conducted a comprehensive assessment of his walking ability. We measured walking speed and plantar pressure using a 10-m walking test, performed twice; once with and once without a prosthesis. During the test, the patient used a T-cane both with and without a prosthesis. The patient’s walking speed increased from 0.6 m/s without the prosthesis to 0.8 m/s with it; an increase of 33%. The stride length increased from 33 cm without the prosthesis to 50 cm with the prosthesis. The number of steps decreased from 30 steps without the prosthesis to 20 steps with the prosthesis.
The plantar pressure while walking was measured using an insole-type pressure distribution sensor (Pedar-X; Novel gmbh, Germany) . This device has 99 segmental sensors placed in the insole. The pressure was measured 6 years after surgery, when the patient was aged 85 years, using a T-cane with and without the prosthesis. A sheet sensor was inserted between the shoe and the foot, and another was inserted between the shoe and the prosthesis. Measurement was conducted three times, each time including five steps. The measurement with the least data variability was used, and the mean maximum pressure was calculated. The pressure at the amputation stump was the average of seven sites in the most distal row (, sixth row counting from the rear, the row indicated by the red arrows) where the values were obtained. The same sites were used to calculate the amputation site pressure with a prosthesis. -A shows a plantar pressure map without the prosthesis and -B shows the same map with the prosthesis. At the amputation stump, the plantar pressure was 129.3 N/cm2 on average without the foot prosthesis but decreased by 59% to 51.6 N/cm2 on average with the foot prosthesis. Regarding the plantar pressure of the non-amputated foot, the pressure in the hindfoot decreased, and that in the forefoot increased with the prosthesis (-B), compared to without the prosthesis (-A).
The final follow-up was 7 years after surgery, and no varus or equinus deformity was observed in the patient’s foot. His FIM score was 124 points. The deducted items were 1 point for using a cane while walking and 1 point for using a handrail while using stairs.