A 40-year-old Chinese Han male presented to the emergency room of Peking Union Medical College Hospital with the chief complaints of nausea, vomiting and anuria. He had been in his usual health until approximately 10 days ago, when he took 500 mg paracetamol to alleviate a headache. Later in the day, nausea and vomiting developed without fever, rash, edema or gross hematuria. During the next week, his blood creatinine level increased gradually from normal to 700 μmol/L, followed by a decrease in urine output. The day before admission his urine volume was only 40 mL/day. His plasma creatine kinase levels were constantly normal.
He had a 12-year history of hypertension, with the highest blood pressure ever observed being 150/110 mmHg. His blood pressure was well controlled with amlodipine (below 140/90 mmHg). He had no significant past or family history of kidney diseases. The patient is a military man and has a comprehensive health checkup every year. A health checkup performed 1 months before the onset of his symptoms showed that his routine urine test and serum creatinine level were normal. He had been taking part in long-distance running almost every day for some years, and running approximately ten kilometers each day. Although he sweated a lot, he insisted on not drinking water during or within one hour after the exercise, aimed at “losing weight”.
Physical examination revealed an anxious appearance. He was hypertensive with a blood pressure of 148/108 mmHg (without taking his anti-hypertensive medicine on that day), respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and heart rate of 70 beats/min. His oxygen saturation was 97% in room air. His body mass index was 24.6 kg/m2. No other findings were remarkable.
His serum creatinine level was 860 μmol/L, and the urea was 12.49 mmol/L. Urinalysis showed that the white blood cell count was 15 cells/mL and red blood cell count was 80 cells/mL (only 30% were dysmorphic). Protein excretion rate was 250 mg/24 h. Ultrasound of the urinary system showed enlarged kidneys (right kidney 13.3 × 6.6 × 7.3 cm; left kidney 14.2 × 6.5 × 6.1 cm).
The patient underwent ultrasound-guided transdermal renal biopsy. Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) was diagnosed, characterized by dilated tubules lined by flattened tubular cells, effacement of the proximal tubule brush border, distal tubule casts, and interstitial edema under the light microscopy. No tubular crystals were identified by polarized light microscopy. The glomerulus and blood vessels were largely normal . Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy supported the diagnosis of ATN.
After 7 weeks of dialysis, his baseline creatinine decreased to 300 μmol/L, and serum electrolytes were normal. His urine volume increased to more than 3 L/day.
The patient’s creatinine declined continuously and stabilized at 45 μmol/L after discharge from hospital. His urinalyses were also normal. He restricted his salt and calorie intake, and started long-distance running once again, without taking enough water. He had lost 10 kg within the next year. His blood pressure kept normal without antihypertensive therapy. One year after the first discharge, a routine health checkup showed that his creatinine had increased to 150 μmol/L, and he was re-admitted to our hospital.
His routine urine test and urine sediment analysis were normal. Protein excretion rate was 420 mg/24 h. Laboratory tests including complete blood count, serum uric acid, serum immunoglobulins, complements, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were all normal. Serum tumor markers and serum immunofixation electrophoresis were also normal. Ultrasound showed that both kidneys had shrunk (right kidney 9.5 × 5.7 × 4.4 cm; left kidney 10.4 × 5.6 × 5.5 cm). Artery ultrasound including renal, carotid, lower extremity and mesenteric arteries showed no evidence of stenosis or thrombosis.
Renal biopsy was performed for the second time. Nine of 25 glomeruli showed global sclerosis, and the basement membrane in non-sclerotic glomeruli had variable thickening and wrinkling. Patchy tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were observed. The arteriolar wall was thickened and the vascular lumen was narrowed , and no tubular crystals were found under polarized light. Immunoglobulins and complements were not observed in the tubulointerstitium, glomeruli, nor blood vessels under immunofluorescence. Electron microscopy showed no abnormalities.
Considering the patient’s history of long-distance running, ischemic changes in renal biopsy, and exclusion of other likely causes of CKD, especially vascular diseases, chronic dehydration-associated kidney disease similar to MeN was suspected. The patient underwent CKD management including regular monitoring, blood pressure control and lipid control. During the follow-up period, the patient’s creatinine fluctuated between 150 and 180 μmol/L.