In July 2022, a 55-year-old woman complained of a 5-month history of a progressively enlarging cervical mass with pain. Physical examination was unremarkable except for the presence of large palpable masses in the neck associated with tenderness. Nasal endoscopy indicated the presence of fleshy masses on the right lateral and posterior walls of the nasopharynx. Biopsies obtained from the nasopharynx confirmed a diagnosis of nonkeratinizing undifferentiated NPC. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the nasopharynx and neck examination revealed the presence of nasopharyngeal lesions and enlarged bilateral cervical lymph nodes (level II,III,IV,V on the right and level II on the left) fused into masses, with the maximum dimension measuring 11.4cm in the coronal plane . Chest and abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) as well as whole-body bone scan showed no signs of tumor metastasis. The patient was then diagnosed with nasopharyngeal nonkeratinizing undifferentiated cell carcinoma, classified as T3N3M0 (stage IVa) according to the 8th edition of the AJCC staging system. The patient received two cycles of the GP chemotherapy regimen (gemcitabine 1000mg/m2, D1,8; cisplatin 75mg/m2, D1; 21 days per cycle). The symptom of swallowing difficulty emerged after 2 cycles of chemotherapy. Subsequent MRI scan indicated a size reduction in the nasopharyngeal lesions but an enlargement in the cervical lymph nodes . What’s more, two cycles of chemotherapy resulted in significant adverse events, including grade 3 anemia, grade 1 leukopenia, grade 1 thrombocytopenia, and grade 2 renal dysfunction (according to the NCI CTCAE v5.0) .
To further elucidate the nature of the enlarged cervical lymph nodes, an additional fine needle aspiration was performed. The histopathological analysis confirmed lymph node metastases of nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and immunohistochemical assessment revealed epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression at 90% intensity with a score of 3+ and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) combined positive score (CPS) of 50.
Considering the intolerability of chemotherapy, the patient underwent toripalimab plus cetuximab combined with volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) from August 2022. One week after the loading dose of toripalimab (240mg every 3 weeks) along with cetuximab (400mg/m2, then weekly administration of 250 mg/m2), the patient reported a significant improvement in neck swelling and swallowing difficulty compared to the previous condition. Subsequent CT scans showed a slight reduction in tumor size . Then the radiotherapy was started in August-25 2022, with the following dose distribution: 69.96Gy/33F to the gross tumor, 66Gy/33F to the cervical lymph nodes, 60Gy/33F to the planning target volume 1, and 50.1Gy/33F to the planning target volume 2, 5 times per week. Target contouring was performed referring to the Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology (CSCO) guideline and international guidelines for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (, ). Intravenous toripalimab and cetuximab were given concurrently. Notably, due to the rapid reduction in cervical lymph node size, adjustments to the radiotherapy plan were made every two weeks . Post-treatment MRI scans suggested partial remission (PR) . After radiotherapy, the patient continued toripalimab (240mg every 3 weeks) along with cetuximab (250 mg/m2 every week) until 2 months later when the MRI of nasopharynx and neck examination indicated CR . The patient experienced grade 1 nausea and grade 2 oral mucositis during RT. Then she was regularly followed up with periodical imagological examinations and remained disease free until the time of writing this report, without further therapies. The timeline depicting interventions and outcomes of the case is illustrated in .