A 65-year-old male was transferred from a regional hospital following resuscitated ventricular fibrillation cardiac arrest and unsuccessful thrombolysis of inferior ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). On arrival to our centre, he had ongoing ST elevation in inferior ECG leads, had mild chest pain, and was haemodynamically stable. His cardiovascular examination was unremarkable. He underwent immediate rescue percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) to right coronary artery. He was later referred for inpatient staged PCI of the left anterior descending artery (LAD).
He did not have any significant past medical history and was not on any regular medications. He was an ex-smoker and consumed two to four standard units of alcohol per day. Initial coronary angiography showed an acute occlusion of the proximal RCA and severe mid RCA stenosis (treated with PCI), anomalous left circumflex coronary artery arising from proximal RCA with no significant disease, and long segment of severe calcific disease the in proximal to mid LAD (; , ). His blood tests showed normal full blood count, renal function, and liver function results with high troponin-I levels. Post-PCI transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed left ventricular ejection (LVEF) of 45% with inferior wall akinesia, and no significant valvular pathologies.
The staged procedure was performed via the right radial artery with a 6-F Ikari-Left 3.5 (Terumo Interventional Systems) guiding catheter and standard angioplasty wires in LAD and diagonal branch. The LAD lesion was predilated and stented with two overlapping stents (Xience Sierra 3.0 × 23mm and 3.5 × 23mm, Abbott Cardiovascular). Despite high pressure (20 atm) post-dilatation with non-compliant balloons, significant focal stent under-expansion remained in mid LAD just distal to the diagonal bifurcation . As the stent under-expansion was due to coronary calcification, IVL with a 3 × 12 mm balloon was performed achieving better stent expansion. Further high-pressure post-dilatation with a 3.0 NC-balloon resulted in an Ellis grade-III coronary perforation (; , ). Prolonged balloon inflation was unsuccessful to stop the extravasation, but it was successfully sealed with a PK-Papyrus (Biotronik) covered stent (3.0 × 20 mm) sacrificing the diagonal branch . At the end of procedure, the patient was stable with minimal pericardial effusion and no clinical or echocardiographic features of cardiac tamponade.
Three hours later, the patient developed cardiac tamponade requiring urgent pericardial drainage. Repeat angiography demonstrated recanalization of the diagonal branch and ongoing contrast extravasation along its course (; , ). Further post-dilatation of the Papyrus covered stent failed to seal the perforation. Considered options were deployment of a second overlying covered stent or attempting to re-wire the diagonal to seal the perforation with coils. OCT was used to clarify the mechanism of bleeding. This demonstrated an interrupted elastic membrane of the Papyrus stent at the diagonal bifurcation, potentially caused by underlying fractured calcium (; , ). A second overlying PK-PAPYRUS stent (3.5 × 15 mm) was deployed and satisfactorily sealed the perforation (; , ).
Following the procedure, he remained stable, and the pericardial drainage was removed after 24 hours. He was discharged on day 3 with no residual pericardial effusion on TTE, mild LV systolic dysfunction (LVEF 45%) with inferior wall akinesia. His 6-month follow up TTE was unchanged, and the patient was clinically well.