A 69-year-old male 9 months removed from an allogeneic mismatched unrelated bone marrow transplant for myelodysplastic syndrome presented to our pulmonary clinic for evaluation of new pulmonary infiltrates . He had been doing well from a transplant standpoint, and sirolimus immunosuppression was discontinued two months prior. Three months prior, the patient presented to the ED, tested positive for COVID, and was discharged home with an unremarkable course. His home antigen test cleared and his repeat viral swab two months later showed no evidence of persistent COVID.
The patient was a non-smoker without a pulmonary history, and other than a cough was not in distress and saturating well on room air. A bronchoscopy was ordered for further investigation. When the patient arrived for the procedure 11 days later, he had an increased cough. His saturations prior to the procedure were normal but dropped during moderate sedation induction with fentanyl and versed on 4 L per minute (lpm) of oxygen. His airways appeared grossly normal by white light bronchoscopy. A BAL was obtained from the inferior segment of the lingula, with 37 of 120 ml lavagate returned. The fluid was white, turbid, and non-purulent. Post procedure, the patient did well and was weaned off oxygen in 30 min. At that point he developed coughing, hypoxia, and a drop in blood pressure.
He was transferred to the acute care evaluation floor of the cancer center, where his temperature rose to 38.40 C and his blood pressure dropped to 80/50 mmHg while on 4–6 lpm of oxygen. He was conversational but mildly altered. Blood cultures were drawn, fluids administered, and antibiotics initiated. On arrival to the emergency department from the cancer center, the patient continued to require oxygen from 8 to 10 lpm, with mean arterial pressures < 65 mmHg after 3 L of intravenous fluids (IVF). Bloodwork was notable for a leukocytosis with neutrophilia and a bedside echocardiogram was normal. A repeat CT showed progression of infiltrates compared to 2 weeks prior . The patient was admitted to the ICU for vasopressor support and observation. Over the next 24 h BAL and blood culture data were sterile and the patient remained on low dose vasopressors and high dose oxygen requirements. The BAL was notable for a cell differential of 23% Macrophages, 4% Neutrophils, 72% Lymphocytes, and 1% Eosinophils. Pathology of BAL showed numerous lymphocytes with reactive features that were primarily cytotoxic T-cells with an increased CD8:CD4 ratio of 7:1 and variable expression of activation markers CD38 and HLA-DR . A BAL COVID PCR antigen test was negative. Following a multi-disciplinary discussion of the most likely diagnosis, methylprednisone 2 mg/kg was initiated. Over the course of the next 48 h the patient improved remarkably with vasopressors and oxygen weaned to off. All cultures from BAL and blood remained negative. He was discharged on 1 mg/kg of prednisone daily and recovered within the ensuing weeks to baseline without disease recrudescence over the next 6 months during prednisone tapering.