An 83-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the Department of Orthopedics with a chief complaint of progressive kyphosis, which had worsened over the previous six months. The patient complained of a progressive dysphagia and had lost approximately 20 kg over the previous six months. Posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs demonstrated a mediastinal homogenous opacity partially filling the left hemithorax and causing tracheal displacement. She was then referred to our department for further investigation.
A physical examination revealed marked prominence of the left hemithorax. This region was dull to percussion and did not move with respiration. The intercostal spaces were bulging, and no breath sounds were heard on the left. The right hemithorax was clear and moved well with respiration. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable. Her general condition was good. Physical examination of the heart as well as an electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed no abnormal findings. Routine laboratory tests were within normal limits. Liver and renal function was very good.
The presence of a giant tumor was confirmed by computed tomography (CT) (size 2 × 20 × 11 cm). The CT scan showed that the tumor caused bilateral lung compression and tracheal and esophageal displacement. No fluid accumulation was seen. A CT-guided fine needle aspiration identified the mediastinal mass lesion as a possible thymoma.
The patient subsequently underwent radical surgical excision of the tumor via median sternotomy.
The total weight of the excised tumor was 2550 g [-]. Histological examination showed a thymoma [B1 according to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification, CD3(+), CD5(+), CD1(+), keratine(+), CD20(-) and CD30(-)]. The tumor was macroscopically and microscopically completely encapsulated (Masaoka stage I).
The patient was extubated in the operating room and then taken to the intensive care unit for two days of postoperative monitoring. The rest of her postoperative recovery was uneventful, and she was discharged on the tenth postoperative day.
Two years after the operation, the patient currently shows significant improvement of her posture, no pulmonary discomfort, and she has regained 20 kg of weight. Follow-up CT scans revealed no evidence of disease . Her trachea and esophagus were returned to their anatomical location, the lungs were fully expanded and the mediastinum had returned to its normal width.