A 70-year-old male was referred to Liverpool Ocular Oncology Centre (LOOC), complaining of floaters in his right eye (RE) over the past 5 months. One month before presentation to LOOC, the patient presented to Oncology Department with abdominal pain, lack of appetite and weight loss. The patient was diagnosed by Medical Oncologists with HCC/CCC with multiple liver metastases. The diagnosis of HCC/CCC was made via endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) with 19G needle of the primary tumour which sent for histology and confirmed the diagnosis. Computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of liver metastases. The staging of the tumour was T3N1M1 and/or stage IV B (liver metastases).
On presentation to LOOC, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/24 in RE and 6/4.8 in left eye. Fundus examination of his RE showed a single whitish elevated lesion 3–4 DD in size at the infero-temporal arcade associated with vitreous infiltration and intra- and sub-retinal fluid. The patient underwent a 25G pars plana vitrectomy with excisional biopsy of the affected tissue, resection of the lesion, peeling of the epiretinal membrane, air tamponade and intravitreal bevacizumab (anti-VEGF) injection. Four surgical specimens were sent for histopathology test which confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic carcinoma to the vitreous and retina . The patient was started on cycles of palliative chemotherapy intravenously with gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 along with cisplatin 70 mg/m2 on day 1, after intraocular metastatic disease was diagnosed.
One month postoperatively, his BCVA has improved to 6/9.5 in his RE and fundoscopy revealed peripheral retinal haemorrhage and subretinal haemorrhage near the resolving metastatic lesion. Two months postoperatively the BCVA had improved to 6/7.5 and there was no sign of active disease in his RE . Four months postoperatively fundoscopy showed telengiectatic vessels on thickened retina with no vitreous infiltration. Six months postoperatively there were pigmentary changes at the site of metastatic lesion, the vitreous was clear and there were no new lesions. Nine months postoperatively his BCVA decreased to 6/9.5 due to developing nuclear sclerotic cataract in his RE, while the vitreous was clear, with no reactivation and no new ophthalmic lesions. Metastatic intraocular lesion had stable regression after treatment with vitrectomy, excisional biopsy and systemic chemotherapy for the duration of ocular follow-up.
The patient underwent in total 8 cycles of palliative chemotherapy with gemcitabine along with cisplatin approximately every 4 weeks but unfortunately succumbed to widespread metastatic disease 5 weeks after completion of last chemo cycle and one year after the initial diagnosis of the primary disease.