A 52-year-old female with a history of hypothyroidism presented with continuous cough and shortness of breath. General examination was normal and local chest examination revealed absent breathing sounds on the right side. Pulmonary function test showed a mixed obstructive and restrictive lung pathology. Chest x-ray revealed complete opacity on the right side and contralateral mediastinal shift. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed infiltrative right hilar soft tissue lesion measures 4 × 5 cm with an endobronchial extension of the lesion obliterating the right main and upper lobe bronchus . Bronchoscopy showed a large mass occluding the right main bronchus and encroaching on the carina . Multiple biopsies were taken but were not diagnostic. After a multidisciplinary meeting between pulmonary, radiology and cardiothoracic surgery teams, a decision was made to proceed for surgical intervention. Although, lobectomy including excision of the bronchial involvement was deemed feasible, intra-operatively, preservation of a healthy and functioning lobe was not possible and pneumonectomy was done. Initial examination of the lung specimen on the operating table showed a large mass at the right main bronchus encroaching on the carina with bronchial wall invasion extending to the extra-nodal tissue. There were multiple lymph nodes enlargement and were biopsied. Gross examination showed the main bronchus filled with mucus plug and serial sectioning revealed variable sized bronchioles filled with thick mucoid secretions. Microscopic examination showed lung parenchymal tissue with marked mucin impaction that plugged the bronchial tree and associated with bronchial dilatation . The adjacent pulmonary tissue showed areas of hemorrhage, lung collapse and chronic inflammation. No evidence of malignancy was seen. However, tissue fragments from the peribronchial mass exhibits an excessive numbers of lymphocytes, plasma cells, some neutrophils and most notably numerous histiocytes with abundant foamy cytoplasm and large vesicular nucleus. Many of these histiocytes engulfed numerous intact lymphocytes and plasma cells within their cytoplasm (emperipolesis or lymphocytophagocytosis) . These large histiocytes were positive for S100 protein and Cluster of Differentiation 68 (CD68) and were negative for Cluster of Differentiation 1a (CD1a) and Langerin. Kappa and lambda stains did not show obvious light chain restriction and Immunoglobulin G 4/ Immunoglobulin G IgG4/ IgG was less than 5%. Special stains for Fungi, Gomori Methenamine-Silver Nitrate Stain (GMS) and Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) were negative. The histopathological and immunohistochemical features were consistent with Rosai-Dorfman disease. After 6 months follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic, and no tumor recurrence or metastasis was detected .