A 22 year old female patient, tailor by occupation came to emergency department with history of road traffic accident and injury sustained to her right elbow and forearm. On examination there was type 3B open fracture having wound over the lateral side of elbow with fractured lateral epicondyle, extensive lacerated wound over the dorsum of proximal 1/3rd forearm with open diaphyseal fracture of both ulna and radius in middle 3rd. On assessment of distal neurovascular deficits, patient found to have low radial nerve palsy with intact vascularity. Standard anteroposterior(AP) and lateral Radiographs were taken which showed lateral epicondylar fracture of humerus with posteromedial dislocation of elbow and diaphyseal fracture of both ulna and radius at middle 3rd level . Tetanus toxoid, antibiotics after test dose along with analgesics were given. After primary wound toilet at emergency, case was posted to emergency operation (2hours since injury) with plan of wound debridement and open reduction and internal fiation/external fixation with minimal possible implants aiming biological fixation and radial nerve exploration. In the operation theatre the elbow was examined under general anaesthesia where no other findings were found except for lateral laxity tested by varus stress test after elbow was reduced. Primary wound debridement with excision of contaminated small lateral epicondylar fragment was done. The radius was fixed with rush pin and ulna was checked, where it was well reduced and in alignment. In view of post traumatic raw area, external fixator pins over the ulna spanning the elbow was planned on table and same was done . Then radial nerve was explored utilising the wound and posterior approach where no obvious findings were found. Post operatively antibiotics and analgesics continued. Limb kept elevated for 2 days. Wound debridement was done every 2nd day and posted to operation theater after a week for wound coverage with split skin graft. Post op 5th day wound inspection showed well taken graft and no infection was found . After 2 weeks, pins of humerus were taken out and elbow physiotherapy started and patient was discharged. After 2 months, pins of ulna taken out when she had 400 to 1200 of flexion and 600-600 of supination-pronation movements. After 4months, check X ray [ and ] was taken which showed union of forearm bones when pin was removed and all activities were encouraged except for lifting heavy weight. Range of motion by 6 months were 300-1400 flexion [ and ], 700-800 supination-pronation. Patient followed for 2 years.