Our 33-year-old male Caucasian patient presented with a 3-month history of general symptoms (weakness, excessive sweating, and episodes of low-grade fever) and was admitted to our pulmonology ward with dyspnea due to pneumonia and severe anemia (hemoglobin of 8.5 g/dl). A physical examination revealed enlargement of his right suprasternal lymph node, later excised for histopathology . This confirmed a diagnosis of CD20-positive T-cell/histiocyte-rich large B-cell lymphoma (THRLBCL), an uncommon morphological variant of DLBCL . The neoplastic cells were CD19-positive, partially positive for CD30, and negative for CD15. At diagnosis, routine computed tomography (CT)-based staging confirmed Ann Arbor stage IVB disease, with generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly (enlarged lymph nodes of the neck [subclavicular on right side], mediastinum [subcarinal, para-aortic, right pulmonary hilum, left pulmonary hilum], right axilla, and abdomen [celiac, para-aortic, para-iliac, spleen]). He also had sclerotic lesions of the ninth, tenth and twelfth thoracic vertebrae. A lumbar puncture with cerebrospinal fluid analysis excluded central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma involvement; in addition, an increased concentration of total protein showed no sign of oligoclonal bands. Our patient was deemed to have an age-adjusted International Prognostic Index (IPI) score of 3 (stage IV, two extra-nodal sites, low lactate dehydrogenase, poor performance status, age <60 years).
Standard R-CHOP immunochemotherapy was administered to our patient as a first-line regimen . As in all high-risk cases, liposomal cytarabine (DepoCyte 50 mg) was administered via the intrathecal route during the first four cycles for prophylaxis of CNS relapse. A good clinical response was confirmed by CT imaging after the third cycle (partial response; PR), followed by a complete response (CR) after eight cycles (treatment schema, Fig. ) that was confirmed by positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT). During this first-line therapy, our patient twice developed neutropenic fever, which necessitated prolonged hospital admission, despite granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) primary prophylaxis.
Early relapse was confirmed 5 months after completion of first-line therapy. PET-CT imaging revealed multiple sites of high standard uptake values (SUVs), including the mediastinum blood pool structure (MBPS) and various sites in his head and neck region (parotid glands, palatine tonsils, submandibular lymph nodes), thorax (supraclavicular lymph nodes on the left, paratracheal chain), and abdomen (para-aortic lymph nodes, stomach, spleen, and liver [Deauville 5]). Elevated SUVs were also detected in his skeletal system, although there was no infection, nor G-CSF used, at that time. Radiological examination also revealed a right-side pleural effusion; in the absence of hypoalbuminemia or heart failure, this was also most likely related to the lymphoma.
As second-line salvage chemotherapy, our patient received three cycles of rituximab, etoposide, methylprednisolone, cisplatin, and cytarabine (R-ESHAP; Table ). A PET-CT assessment demonstrated a PR to this second-line chemotherapy. A fourth cycle of salvage chemotherapy was then administered: dexamethasone, carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, and melphalan (DexaBEAM), followed by ibritumomab tiuxetan, carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, and melphalan (Z-BEAM)-conditioned ASCT . This led to a CR, as confirmed by PET-CT. Our patient’s quality of life during second-line treatment and ASCT was poor, due to prolonged hospital admissions and his great concerns relating to potential severe complications of each of the salvage regimens.
At a 3-month follow-up visit after ASCT, our patient presented in good clinical condition and demonstrated weight gain. He had good hematopoietic reconstitution and elevated liver function tests, despite negative tests for hepatitis B and C. Although there were no clinical symptoms of disease or infection, a PET-CT assessment demonstrated increased metabolic activity consistent with early relapse, with high SUVs in the Waldeyer ring (palatine tonsils, pharyngeal tonsil, submandibular lymph nodes), the cervical lymph nodes on his left side, the axillary lymph nodes bilaterally, and his stomach, spleen (with splenomegaly), MBPS, and liver (Deauville 5).
At this point, our patient was enrolled in the MOR208 clinical study. During the first 12 weeks of treatment, MOR208 was administered intravenously at 12 mg/kg, once a week. Peripheral blood lymphocyte immunophenotyping by flow cytometry revealed prompt clearance of B-lymphocytes from his peripheral blood; in particular, a decrease in CD3−, CD56−, CD16−, and CD45+ B-lymphocytes and a compensatory increase in CD45+ and CD3+ T-lymphocytes was observed . Three months after starting third-line MOR208 therapy, PET-CT assessments demonstrated a PR, with only a small number of metabolically active lymph nodes (palatine, cervical on his left side, axillary on his left side, axillary on his right side, lower part of his esophagus, MBPS, liver). Following the scheduled 12 weeks of treatment, MOR208 was continued as maintenance therapy, with administration every second week. PET-CT confirmed a CR 9 months later .
MOR208 was very well-tolerated, with few adverse events. Our patient developed four upper respiratory tract infections, comprising three instances of pharyngitis that required symptomatic treatment and one incident of bronchitis, which necessitated antibiotic therapy (amoxicillin with clavulanic acid). Our patient did not have any hematological adverse events. During treatment with MOR208, our patient’s quality of life and performance status remained high (World Health Organization grade 0, Karnofsky score 100 %). No hospitalizations were required; all procedures were performed in a day clinic. Our patient engaged in full-time work and physical activities. He continues to be well, with an ongoing duration of response of 24 months.