A 49-year-old Caucasian female with no cardiac risk factors aside from mild hyperlipidemia underwent wide local excision and regional lymphadenectomy to remove a BRAF wild type cutaneous melanoma of the right anterior chest involving a single right axillary sentinel lymph node (Stage IIIA). She received 1 month of adjuvant intravenous interferon and remained clinically disease-free for 8 years before biopsy confirmation of multiple, bilateral pulmonary metastases. As initial therapy for metastatic melanoma, she received ipilimumab at 3 mg/kg and nivolumab at 1 mg/kg. Serum cTnI levels were within the normal range (0.02–0.06 ng/mL) 2 weeks prior to treatment and again on day 1 of ipi/nivo. Two days after initiating treatment, she experienced painless anterior neck swelling representing treatment-related thyroiditis which resolved spontaneously but subsequently required thyroid hormone supplementation.
Two weeks after the first dose of ipi/nivo, she developed nausea unrelieved by ondansetron and proton pump inhibition with normal amylase, lipase and transaminases. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain was normal 5 days before CPB and again 4 months later. Additional workup revealed elevated cTnI to 0.19 ng/mL (3× upper limit of normal [ULN]) which more than doubled over the next 4 days to 0.44 ng/mL (7× ULN) . Creatine kinase–myocardial band (CK-MB), was initially normal but became mildly elevated to 6.3 ng/mL (normal <5 ng/mL). Total creatine kinase was minimally elevated at 335 U/L (normal <190 U/L) indicating no significant myositis. An ECG did not demonstrate conduction delays or ST changes, and echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of ≥ 55% with normal wall motion and no significant valvular abnormalities. Cardiac MRI including T2-weighted spin echo images and late gadolinium enhanced images with an inversion recovery gradient echo sequence was normal with no evidence of focal myocardial fibrosis, scarring or inflammation. She had no active or antecedent symptoms suggestive of viral illness, absolute lymphocyte count was normal, and serology was negative for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and HIV. Cardiology was consulted and felt that the clinical presentation and workup was not suggestive of ischemia. Checkpoint blockade was discontinued, and intravenous methylprednisolone was initiated at 125 mg daily for presumed immune-mediated myocarditis. Following 3 days of high dose intravenous glucocorticoid, her nausea resolved and cTnI declined to 0.26 ng/mL (4× ULN) with a normal CK-MB level. Steroid therapy was converted to oral prednisone at 1 mg/kg daily and tapered over 1 month. cTnI levels nadired at 0.11 ng/mL (1.8× ULN) but climbed again to 0.78 ng/mL (13× ULN) 2 months after therapeutic dose prednisone was discontinued and 4 months following the only dose of ipi/nivo . To exclude heterophilic antibodies as a source of false positive cTnI elevation, serum was assayed with and without polyethylene glycol pre-incubation and no antibodies were detected. The patient was negative for rheumatoid factor and renal function remained normal, excluding other potential causes for cTnI elevation. CK-MB, which had been normal for several months, became elevated again at 7.6 ng/mL (1.5× ULN) and total CK was again minimally elevated. The patient was asymptomatic, and repeated ECG, echocardiogram and cardiac MRI were normal. Serum brain natriuretic peptide levels were normal, indicating absence of excessive left ventricular wall stress . To establish a diagnosis, right heart catheterization with endomyocardial biopsy showed areas of early collagen deposition admixed with inflammatory cells . The inflammation was not seen adjacent to or encroaching on normal cardiac myocytes. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed the great majority of the inflammatory cells were CD3+ T cells and CD68+ macrophages. Furthermore, the majority of the T lymphocytes were CD8+ granzyme B+ cytotoxic cells and a minority CD4+ helper cells. Only rare CD20+ B lymphocytes and CD138+ plasma cells were noted. An exercise SPECT myocardial perfusion study showed no abnormality to explain the clinical or histopathologic findings. Thus, the patient was thought to have CPB-induced smoldering myocarditis persisting for almost 4 months and resulting in myocardial fibrosis with preserved myocardial function.
Computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis performed 7 months after the initiation of CPB demonstrated stable disease with multiple persistent lung metastases up to 40 mm in diameter . Due to reluctance to use more potent immunosuppression in the setting of stable metastases, chronic, low-dose prednisone was started at 10 mg daily following the myocardial biopsy. As depicted in Fig. , cTnI levels steadily declined during the first 8 weeks of low dose prednisone but subsequently plateaued near 0.3 ng/mL (5× ULN) with persistent mild elevation of CK-MB at 8.4 ng/mL (1.68× ULN) and intermittent atypical chest discomfort at the cardiac apex. Initial measurement of serum anti-striated muscle antibodies was mildly elevated at a titer of 1:120 (Mayo Clinic Laboratory). Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) was administered at 400 mg/kg daily for 2 days beginning 227 days following initiation of CPB. Two weeks later the CK-MB level normalized after being persistently elevated on 8 consecutive determinations over the preceding 4 months and has remained normal on 3 consecutive analyses over 1 month. The rate of decline in cTnI levels also accelerated following intravenous immunoglobulin and repeat assay for serum anti-striated muscle antibodies became negative.