A 49-year-old woman was transferred to our emergency department with 5 days of sepsis, drowsy mental status, and quadriplegia below the C5 level. She had undergone hemodialysis for 10 years due to glomerular nephritis-induced end stage renal disease. At the referring hospital, she had been given empirical antibiotic treatment for a fever that had developed one month prior to transfer. During the antibiotic treatment, sepsis, quadriplegia, and deteriorated mental status had developed suddenly. Her septic condition and mental state had worsened rapidly and she was then transferred to our hospital.
On physical examination, she complained of neck pain and dyspnea. She had coarse breathing sounds with rales on the bilateral lower lung fields and tachycardia (142/min) without murmurs. Erythema and tenderness were observed around the arteriovenous (AV) shunt site on her left forearm. The neurologic examination showed quadriplegia below the C5 level. The laboratory findings showed a white blood-cell count of 23,660 cells/mm3 (normal range, 5000 to 10,000 cells/mm3), a platelet count of 225,000/L (normal range, 150,000 to 450,000/L), a prothrombin time of 13.8 s (normal range, 10.0 to 14.0 s), an activated partial thromboplastin time of 31.7 s (normal range, 23 to 35 s), an international normalized ratio of 1.19 (normal range, 0.85 to 1.5), an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 80 mm/hr (normal range, 0 to 20 mm/hr), a C-reactive protein of 114.4 mg/dL (normal range, <3 mg/dL), blood urea nitrogen of 110.2 mg/dL (normal range, 8 to 23 mg/dL), creatinine of 6.99 mg/dL (normal range, 0.5 to 1.2 mg/dL), and potassium of 7.0 mEq/L (normal range, 3.5 to 5.1 mEq/L).
Computed tomography scans of the cervical spine revealed intervertebral disc space narrowing, osteophytes, and erosion and cysts in the adjacent vertebral endplates at the level of C4- C6, suggesting DSA . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium enhancement revealed a signal change in the C3-C5 vertebral bodies, suggesting pyogenic spondylitis. The patient’s cervical cord was severely compressed by an epidural abscess at the same vertebral level . In addition, the typical findings of DSA, such as intervertebral disc space narrowing, minimal osteophyte formation, and endplate erosion and cysts were noted at the level of L2-L4 . Chest radiography showed severe pulmonary edema with focal pneumonic infiltration and marked cardiomegaly. Echocardiogram showed no septic vegetation but severe concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle and mild aortic regurgitation. The patient’s sepsis and epidural abscess secondary to pyogenic spondylitis were thought to initiate from infection of the AV shunt site on her left forearm. The blood culture that had been performed at the referring hospital revealed methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA).
The patient’s problems included the following: 1) MSSA bacteremia with AV shunt site infection, 2) pyogenic spondylitis occurring at C4-C6 where asymptomatic DSA preexisted, 3) quadriplegia caused by cervical cord compression due to an epidural abscess at C3-C5, 4) drowsy mental status, 5) cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema impending acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), 6) pneumonia, and 7) end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis. Physicians from the departments of nephrology, infectious disease, cardiology, neurology, vascular surgery, and spine surgery, met and fully discussed the patient’s health concerns and decided to perform emergent decompressive spinal surgery and debridement of the infected AV shunt site.
In order to reduce severe pulmonary edema, impending ARDS, and hyperkalemia, the patient underwent emergent hemodialysis through the subclavian vein just prior to spinal surgery. We performed an open door laminoplasty from C3 to C6 and the vascular team debrided the infected AV shunt site in 72 min. Because of the severe pulmonary edema, mechanical ventilation was required for two postoperative days, and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was performed for 10 days. CRRT was switched to regular hemodialysis on the 11th postoperative day. The patient was treated with a combination of intravenous nafcillin, amikacin, and metronidazole during the early postoperative period, and her treatment regimen was changed to piperacillin/tazobactam and isepamicin on the 13th day of her hospital stay.
Histology of the tissue excised during the surgery revealed a typical feature of amyloid deposition, indicating DSA . With intensive medical care, her septic condition and mental state gradually improved. On the 25th postoperative day, neurologic functions of the extremities began to recover. The patient underwent vigorous rehabilitation, and she was transferred to the referring hospital on the 34th postoperative day. At the last follow-up 8 months after spinal surgery, she was able to walk with a cane and use a spoon to eat. Although MRI obtained 8 months postoperatively showed kyphosis and signal change in the spinal cord, there was a complete resolution of spondylitis and epidural abscess . The patient and her family refused further anterior reconstructive surgery because they were satisfied with the clinical results.