A 23-year-old nonsmoker male, with a clear medical and family history, presented with the acute onset of hematochezia and melena within the preceding 12 h. On physical examination, he appeared pale, with a pulse rate of 128 per minute, a respiratory rate of 33 per minute, and a blood pressure of 80/55 mmHg. Abdominal examination revealed a soft, nondistended abdomen with no collateral venous circulation, hepatomegaly, or splenomegaly.
The patient was resuscitated by inserting two wide cannulas, received 2 l of fluid (normal saline and Ringer lactate), and a nasogastric tube was inserted to exclude upper GI bleeding. Blood samples were taken for laboratory investigations. Laboratory findings included a hemoglobin level of 6.4 g/dl, platelet count of 440×10^9 /l, and normal renal and liver function tests.
The patient was then prepared for esophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD) and colonoscopy. The OGD was normal, but the colonoscopy could only pass up to the splenic flexure due to a poor view. Therefore, CT angiography was planned, but the patient became unstable; consequently, he received blood and fresh frozen plasma. As a result, surgical intervention was deemed necessary.
The patient was taken to the operating room and underwent laparotomy. Gross examination revealed that both the small and large bowel were loaded with blood, raising suspicion that the bleeding originated from the proximal small bowel. A multiple clamps test was performed on the small bowel after milking the small bowel lumen. After waiting for 10 min, a highly suspicious area was identified 40 cm from the duodenojejunal flexure. Enterotomy of the jejunum was performed, revealing a small mucosal vascular lesion measuring 1.5 cm with an active bleed . Resection and anastomosis were performed, and the patient was transferred to the ICU. He remained fasting for 48 h, stayed in the hospital for 5 days, and was discharged in good condition. A follow-up CT angiography on day 4 postoperation showed normal findings.