A 60-year-old hispanic man was referred for peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) for a progressive metastatic ileal neuroendocrine tumour (NET). The patient was initially diagnosed through routine scanning and treated with several lines of treatments from 2003 to 2018 which included a right hemicolectomy, hepatic arterial embolization, long-lasting octreotide, and the resection of two peritoneal implants. Afterward, the patient received treatment with pegylated interferon, and due to new progression, everolimus and octreotide were added. The patient later presented with new hepatic and peritoneal disease, and 177Lu-Dotatate treatment was started after being discussed in the endocrine tumour board.
Treatment with PRRT was approved after confirming somatostatin receptor-positive lesions in the liver, segments III, IV, and VIII. The administration of the first dose of PRRT was delayed until October 2018, due to intestinal obstruction requiring jejunal loop resection and jejunal-ileal anastomosis; this intervention confirmed the existence of peritoneal carcinomatosis with a Ki-67 of 5%.
Once recovered from surgery, a 68Ga-Dotatoc PET/CT was performed to rule out other possible foci of metastatic disease, which confirmed not only multifocal hepatic tumour infiltration and peritoneal carcinomatosis but also identified a cardiac lesion in the left ventricle that expressed a high density of SSTR, compatible with CM . This cardiac lesion was not visualized in previous Octreoscan® nor a tomographic study (CT). In physical examination, the patient was normotensive (122/84 mmHg), with 67 beats/minute, had prominent jugular veins with a prominent ‘v wave’ alongside the Kussmaul’s sign. A holosystolic murmur was heard at the left mid sternal border, with no palpable thrill, followed by a strong second heart sound.
Given recent findings, a transthoracic echocardiogram was requested to assess cardiac involvement, with an incidental diagnosis of tricuspid valve disease, characterized by a retraction and thickening of the leaflets with decreased mobility, suggesting CV, and severe tricuspid regurgitation (Video 1: transthoracic echocardiogram study, 2D study of four-chamber apical view; Video 2: transthoracic echocardiogram study, 2D view of tricuspid regurgitation in parasternal modified view; Video 3: transthoracic echocardiogram study). Colour Doppler of tricuspid regurgitation in parasternal modified view. Based on these results, the coexistence of two types of cardiac lesions was confirmed in an asymptomatic patient from a cardiovascular point of view. A cardiac magnetic resonance was performed and no late gadolinium enhancement was found in the left ventricle .
The patient received the first dose of PRRT on 30 October 2018, after which he presented with two further episodes of intestinal obstruction; the first at the end of December 2018, treated with a jejunum-colic bypass, and the second in January 2019 treated conservatively. The second dose was administered on 1 January 2019, with a CT study performed on 13 March 2019 demonstrating stable disease.
The patient completed the treatment with the administration of two more doses (26 March 2019 and 28 May 2019) of PRRT without complications; a new 68Ga-Dotatoc PET/CT was carried out, showing a partial hepatic and peritoneal response with the stability of the rest of the lesions.
After the administration of each dose of PRRT, a whole-body scintigraphy was performed , confirming an uptake in the existing lesions, as well as the cardiac metastasis. During follow-up, this patient remained asymptomatic with a progression-free survival of 22.4 months to date.