A 74-year-old woman visited a nearby hospital with a 3-month history of right ocular protrusion and decreased right-eye visual acuity. She had no relevant medical history. Based on computed tomography (CT), an intraorbital tumor was suspected, and the patient was referred to our hospital. The patient was conscious and explicit during the initial examination. Right exophthalmos, conjunctival edema, and papillary edema of the optic nerve were observed. No intraocular hypertension was observed. Her corrected visual acuity was 0.3 on the right and 0.6 on the left. Head CT revealed a mass superior to the medial side of the right orbit [ and ]. CT angiography revealed an ophthalmic artery outside the mass , and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed T1 isointense and T2 isointense lesions. Diffusion-weighted MRI revealed a hyperintense lesion, and T1-weighted Gd-enhanced MRI showed a homogeneously enhanced lesion [ and ]. Constructive interference in steady-state sequencing showed that the internal rectus and superior oblique muscles were externally compressed by the tumor [ and ]. Blood test results were negative for Immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgG4, and beta 2-microglobulin. All tumor markers tested negative. Therefore, malignant lymphoma was suspected. Because the tumor was located on the medial side of the right orbit, an endoscopic transnasal approach was used for a biopsy 2 weeks after admission.
Bosmin (0.1%) was injected into the incision site of the nasal septal mucosa in the right nasal cavity, and the right maxillary sinus was opened by resecting the uncinate process of the ethmoid . The superior wall of the maxillary sinus is the landmark of the inferior wall of the orbit. Ethmoidectomy was performed to expose the medial side of the orbit . The ethmoidal mucosa of the medial orbit was then dissected, and the lamina papiracea was removed to expose the periorbita . Based on the anatomic position of the internal rectus and inferior rectus muscles, the orbital periosteum was incised from the anterior to posterior end in the lower part of the orbit. Due to the increased intraorbital pressure caused by the tumor, a thin incision through the orbital periosteum caused the fat in the orbit to protrude. Therefore, we believed that there was no internal rectus muscle directly below the orbital periosteum incision site and made a deep incision in the orbital periosteum, and subsequently, the tumor was identified. However, distinguishing between the fat, tumor, and medial rectus muscles was difficult. The medial rectus muscle and tumor area were bluntly dissected, and a portion of the tumor was removed . The intraoperative diagnosis was malignant lymphoma; an additional permanent specimen was removed from the same site. To the extent possible, the exposed orbital contents were partially covered with the remaining ethmoidal mucosa , and a silicone sheet was placed in an inverted U-shape to complete the surgery . The postoperative course was uneventful, and eye movement was fully restored. No new visual loss or diplopia was observed postoperatively.
Histopathological examination revealed proliferating lymphocytes with moderate cellular atypia [ and b]. In addition, immunostaining showed positivity for CD5 , CD20 , and CD79a , with a Ki67 index of 70% . The permanent pathological diagnosis was high-grade mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma (Ki67 index: 70%).
First, radiotherapy (40 Gy) was administered to the right intraorbital tumor and neck. We then administered three cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride (hydroxydaunorubicin), vincristine sulfate (Oncovin), and prednisone. Six months after treatment, T1-weighted Gd-enhanced MRI showed that the tumor had shrunk, ocular protrusion had improved, and no evidence of visual acuity or visual field abnormalities was present.