Our 13-year-old patient is a Caucasian girl with an unremarkable medical history, yet her family history is significant for allergies and asthma. She initially presented, to another institute, with multiple pruritic facial skin lesions and a pruritic left intranasal lump. Apart from having two erythematous pruritic plaques in the left suborbital region and a yellowish pruritic lump occupying the left nasal vestibule, her physical examination proved to be insignificant without any lymphadenopathies or salivary gland enlargements. Consequently, a laboratory workup was conducted in addition to an excisional biopsy of one dermatologic lesion and a needle biopsy of the nasal lesion. Both biopsies exhibited nonspecific inflammation with granulation, necrosis, and no signs of malignancy. No specific diagnosis was made. The patient was started on hydrogen peroxide treatment for the skin lesions, which resolved completely with no recurrence. Simultaneously, another lump started growing in the right nasal vestibule. Suspecting an inflammatory etiology, she was started on oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day by mouth twice a day. Despite therapy, these nasal lumps continued growing. Hence, prednisolone was discontinued after 10 days of therapy to start an indomethacin trial of 1.5 mg/kg/day by mouth twice a day for 14 days, which was also discontinued due to its inefficacy. Then a decision to perform surgery was taken, and the presurgical computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral soft tissue masses arising from the right and left nasal vestibules. Although she had undergone many surgical attempts to remove the lumps, none of them succeeded and both lumps flared in size. After a couple of months, our patient presented to our institution with bilateral nasovestibular lumps; they were massive in size, occluding nasal entrance and protruding outside the nose . We did an extensive laboratory workup to exclude any comorbidities . We did an fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy of the lesion, which was diagnostic of ALHE . Our following surgical attempt included complete mass resection. Despite surgery and postsurgical treatment with topical steroid creams, the lesion recurred. Consequently, we started the patient on intralesional prednisolone twice a month and topical 0.1% tacrolimus ointment twice daily. This latter regimen seemed to slightly control the lesion’s growth, causing a limited regression in size after 4 months of treatment . A timeline of the patient's case can be seen in .
Our patient’s parents reported her full adherence to treatment. The patient herself reported decreased quality of life and impaired social interactions due to the disfiguring lesions. She also reported marked fear and distress because of the ineffectiveness of multiple therapeutic regimens and surgeries. The patient’s family reported severe financial burden due to the high costs of the treatments.