The case refers to a 46-year-old woman born in Guinea-Bissau, where she worked as a teacher. Her past medical history was positive for hypertension, treated with losartan 50 mg since 2016, and a cholecystectomy. The patient moved to Portugal in 2018 to investigate complaints of diffuse nonspecific abdominal discomfort and nausea with 2-month duration. She denied alcohol intake or exposure to hepatotoxic drugs. She had no known family history of liver disease, viral infections, or cancer.
Physical examination was unremarkable. The patient’s weight was 45 kg and height was 1.60 m, corresponding to a body mass index of 17.5 kg/m2. Initial blood work-up showed elevated liver enzymes, namely, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 540, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 686, alkaline phosphatase 111, and gamma-glutamyl transferase 198 U/L, with INR 1.2 and normal bilirubin and platelet count. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a normal liver, slight main biliary duct dilatation due to previous cholecystectomy, and no splenomegaly, ascites, or venous thrombosis. She was admitted in the Internal Medicine Department for investigation. Further testing showed positive HBsAg, HBcAb, and HBeAb, with negative HBeAg and HBsAb and undetectable HBV DNA. Total anti-HDV was positive, with negative IgM and undetectable RNA. Other hepatotropic viruses were excluded, with negative anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV), anti-hepatitis E virus IgG and IgM, and anti-human immunodeficiency virus; positive anti-hepatitis A virus IgG with negative IgM; positive anti-CMV (cytomegalovirus) IgG with negative IgM; positive Epstein-Barr virus VCA IgG and IgM and EBNA IgG, with negative DNA. Rickettsia, Coxiella, and Plasmodium falciparum were also excluded. The patient had mild peripheral eosinophilia and a positive IgG antibody for Strongyloides stercoralis (12.59 [<1.00]), which was also identified in stool. Autoimmune panel was positive for antinuclear antibodies (ANA), fine-speckled, and with a titer of 1/320, but negative for anti-smooth muscle, anti-liver kidney microsomal type 1 (anti-LKM1), anti-liver cytosol type 1 (anti-LC1), and anti-soluble liver antigen (anti-SLA) antibodies, as well as anti-mitochondrial antibodies. Serum protein electrophoresis showed a polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) was elevated at 2,570 mg/dL, while immunoglobulin M was normal. Alpha-1 antitrypsin, ceruloplasmin, urinary copper, serum iron, and serum ferritin levels were within normal range.
The patient was treated with ivermectin for Strongyloides stercoralis infection. Following treatment, the eosinophilia resolved in 4 days, and repeat stool testing was negative for parasites. There was a decrease in transaminases (AST 100, ALT 141 U/L), and the patient was discharged.
Around 6 months later, the patient was readmitted due to persistent abdominal discomfort. At this time, she presented AST 323, ALT 331 U/L, and IgG 3,101 mg/dL. After Hepatology consultation, a liver biopsy was performed, showing intense lymphoplasmocytic infiltrates, interface hepatitis, emperipolesis, and no cytopathic viral effect, as shown in a, b. These findings were compatible with autoimmune hepatitis with mild fibrosis (Ishak fibrosis score 1/6).
When applying the revised original AIH diagnostic score, the diagnosis was classified as probable (13 points, pretreatment) . Therefore, the patient was started on prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day while commencing prophylactic tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. Transaminases had spontaneously decreased in the previous 4 weeks (AST 152, ALT 181 U/L) and had a further reduction after 7 days of therapy (AST 59, ALT 108 U/L). Upon azathioprine (AZT) 50 mg introduction 2 weeks later, however, there was again a steep rise in transaminases (AST 544 and ALT 1496 U/L), with IgG reduction to 1,962 mg/dL . AZT was stopped due to presumed toxicity, and PDN was increased to 1 mg/kg/day. A second liver biopsy showed less pronounced inflammatory infiltrates and features suggesting possible viral superinfection (shown in , ). An extensive viral search was again conducted, including negative HBV and HDV viral loads, positive Epstein-Barr virus DNA in serum (556 copies/mL) but negative in liver tissue, and positive herpes simplex IgM. After discussing with the Infectious Diseases team, the patient was treated with acyclovir for 21 days, and steroids were tapered, resulting in a decrease in transaminases.
She was kept on low-dose PDN (7.5 mg) for several months, maintaining a normal IgG and transaminases around 2–3 times the upper limit of normal. However, there was a new disease flare (AST 166, ALT 286 U/L, IgG 2,417 mg/dL), with repeated negative viral screening and histology revealing only features of AIH. Therefore, PDN was increased to 20 mg and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 1.5 g/day was added, with no response in transaminases.
About 6 months later, despite normalization of IgG, transaminases peaked again (AST 490, ALT 1,000 U/L). HBV DNA and HDV IgM remained negative. Serum hepatitis E RNA was also negative. Histology showed active AIH, including moderate lymphoplasmocytic infiltrates, interface hepatitis, and emperipolesis, with no cytopathic viral effect. Surprisingly, HDV viral load, which had been repeatedly undetectable in the past, now came back positive at 103,100 UI/mL. Further testing in an external laboratory classified the virus as genotype 5 (GT5).
Having diagnosed chronic hepatitis delta, MMF was stopped. Therapy with pegylated interferon was contraindicated due to the autoimmune disease. More recently, almost 1 year later, bulevirtide became available in our country. However, the patient refused this treatment for personal reasons because she is currently spending most of her time in her home country, Guinea-Bissau, where she has both her family and her job. She is being kept on steroid monotherapy (prednisolone 20 mg), with persisting hepatitis (AST 127 and ALT 350 U/L). There were concerns about progression of fibrosis, as platelet count has progressively dropped to 78,000 × 109/L. However, her liver stiffness (FibroScan®) value is currently at 9.0 kPa.