A 75-year-old man presented with a 3-week history of progressive vertigo, ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagia and hiccups; on the background of a 3-month history of fatigue, anorexia and 8 kilograms of unintentional weight loss. He had no significant past medical history and there was no history of taking immunosuppressive agents.
On examination, his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15. There was significant truncal ataxia, bulbar dysarthria and direction-changing gaze-evoked horizontal nystagmus. Power was normal in the limbs, but there was severe ataxia and brisk deep tendon reflexes in both upper limbs. Heel–shin coordination was preserved, and lower limb reflexes and plantar responses were normal. He had an Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score of 6.5.
Routine bloods were unremarkable. An infective screen including a tuberculosis interferon gamma release assay, and viral (hepatitis A/B/C, herpes simplex), schistosomal and strongyloides serology were all negative. Testing for human immunodeficiency virus which causes an immunocompromised state returned negative. Vasculitic, autoimmune and antineuronal antibody panels were also negative. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain was normal. A chest, abdomen and pelvis CT scan did not demonstrate any evidence of systemic malignancy. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed elevated protein 0.76 g/L (0.15–0.40 g/L), glucose 4.6 mmol/L (2.5–4.5 mmol/L), 0 polymorphonuclear cells, 11 mononuclear cells, and 0 erythrocytes. Cytopathology revealed increased lymphocytes with no evidence of atypia. Flow cytometry was not possible due to low cell recovery. There were no bacteria seen; CSF culture was negative and Mycobacterium tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative. Matched oligoclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) bands were detected in the CSF and serum. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed diffuse signal change within the pons, cerebellar peduncles and pontomedullary junction with some mass effect, and characteristic punctate and linear enhancement typical for CLIPPERS .
Treatment with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g/day) for five days, followed by a tapered dose of oral prednisolone (down to 20 mg/day) and an introduction of oral mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg BD), resulted in marked clinical improvement including restoration of normal mobility. His EDSS score improved to 1. A follow-up MRI brain revealed corresponding radiological resolution . No atypical imaging features as previously described by Taieb et al. in their series were evident on the baseline presentation and follow-up MRI brain studies. A diagnosis of CLIPPERS was made in view of the clinical presentation, radiological findings and exquisite response to steroid treatment.
Nine months later, our patient presented with a GCS of 10 (E3 V2 M5) and dysphasia after a 1-week history of lethargy. On examination, he had bilateral sixth nerve palsies and hyperreflexia in both upper limbs. His EDSS score worsened to 7. A lumbar puncture revealed elevated protein 0.57 g/L (0.15–0.40 g/L), normal glucose, 6 mononuclear cells, 0 polymorphs and 66 erythrocytes. No blasts or malignant cells were present. Flow cytometry was not performed due to low cell counts. CSF herpes simplex and enterovirus PCR were negative. John Cunningham virus serology was also negative. Notably, EBV PCR was positive in the CSF, with negative plasma EBV PCR. Oligoclonal IgG bands were detected in both CSF and serum; however, there were additional bands detected only in the CSF which were consistent with intrathecal synthesis.
MRI of the brain revealed new peripherally enhancing lesions in the left frontal and parietal lobes . In addition, there were confluent T2 hyperintense changes in the bilateral periventricular white matter. Importantly, no new lesions were demonstrated in the pons or infratentorial compartment. These imaging findings are atypical for the progression of CLIPPERS and thus prompted a brain biopsy.
Biopsy of the left parietal lesion showed an angiocentric infiltrate of epithelioid histiocytes, lymphocytes and large atypical lymphoid cells with large areas of necrosis. The large atypical lymphoid cells were B-cells (CD20+, PAX5+, Epstein-Barr Encoding Region In Situ Hybridisation +) and the lymphocytes were predominantly small T-cells (CD3+) . The features were those of lymphomatoid granulomatosis grade III.
There was no evidence of any skin or pulmonary involvement of LYG. Our patient was enrolled in a treatment trial for lymphoma, and has since commenced treatment with ibrutinib, rituximab and EBV-specific cytotoxic T-cells (EBV-CTLs). He is tolerating his treatment well and has made significant clinical improvement. His GCS improved to 15 and he had an EDSS score of 2. His dysphasia has resolved and is fully independent with mobility. Similarly, his repeat MRI Brain six months post treatment also demonstrated a decrease in vasogenic oedema and reduced enhancement in the left parietal lobe compatible with treatment response .