We observed a 54-year-old man, a former chronic smoker, with no risk factors for sexually transmitted infections (STIs). His mother and wife have no history of STI, specifically syphilis and HIV. The patient has no risky behaviours either. No significant medical history and no previous episodes of recurrent angina in childhood, chancres, or skin rashes were found. He had been experiencing exertional dyspnoea without chest pain for 1 year, along with a decline in his overall health, which prompted him to seek emergency care due to acute respiratory distress. The cardiovascular examination revealed no abnormalities, except for a more pronounced diastolic murmur at the aortic focus. Peripheral pulses were present and symmetrical, and the neurological examination yielded normal results. An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with lateral ST depression and T-wave inversion. Coronary angiography revealed a severe stenosis in the left main stem assessed by visual angiography, while the rest of the coronary network appeared completely smooth without any signs of atherosclerosis. The patient underwent angioplasty, resulting in a satisfactory outcome , and subsequently received optimal treatment with dual antiplatelet therapy, statin, beta-blocker, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors, and sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors.
During follow-up, the patient remained symptomatic, presenting with New York Heart Association (NYHA) Stage 3 dyspnoea but without angina or fever. An echocardiogram revealed a dysfunctional, globularly dilated left ventricle (LV) with an LV ejection fraction of 40%, a severe AI (aortic regurgitation area of 0.41 cm2; ), a dilated ascending aorta measuring 41 mm, and a 50 mm abdominal aortic aneurysm .
Further evaluation using computed tomography angiography of the aorta disclosed fusiform dilation of the ascending thoracic aorta and cylindrical dilation of the suprarenal abdominal aorta, measuring 51 × 46 mm. This dilation was partially thrombosed over a 10 cm length with multiple parietal ulcerations .
In response to these findings, a biochemical assessment was conducted, revealing impaired renal function, estimated glomerular filtration rate at 40 mL/min/1.73 m2 (>90 mL/min/1.73 m2), an erythrocyte sedimentation rate four times the normal range for the first hour (<20 mm/h), negative C-reactive protein results (<8 mg/L), and positive syphilitic serology with treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay at a titre of 1/2560 and with venereal disease research laboratory test at a titre of 1/64, along with IgG and IgM antibodies measured at 39.
The syphilitic origin was confirmed through positive serological tests, consistent with a presentation of tertiary syphilis, and the absence of evidence supporting an alternative aetiology. Following a consultation with a cardiovascular surgeon and vascular team, it was decided to proceed with aortic valve replacement and aorto-coronary bypass surgery, with a mechanical aortic prosthesis On-X N 23 and double bypass of proximal interventriculaire antérieure and first marginal via the left internal mammary artery, but vascular surgery of the ascending aortic aneurysm was not possible at once, and conservative treatment with close monitoring was decided upon. The patient underwent the surgery within the week.
The patient was seen at the follow-up consultation 1 month after the operation. Residual NYHA Grade 2 dyspnoea was found. The local condition of the sternotomy scar was satisfactory, and no significant ultrasound gradient was found on the aortic valve. Two months after the operation, there was a complete improvement in the patient’s overall condition.