A 4-year-old Iranian girl was referred to our center for genetic analysis presented with a history of mild hepatomegaly and short stature. She is the second child of a non-consanguineous family. She was delivered following a normal vaginal delivery after term pregnancy with a birth weight of 2.50 kg, and height of 46 cm. No hypoglycemia was noted in the perinatal period and the postnatal transition.
At the age of one, she was admitted because of hepatomegaly, diarrhea, and developmental delay. Biochemical tests revealed alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 13 IU/L, and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 63 IU/L. Triglyceride was normal (66 mg/dl) with a normal cholesterol level (136 mg/dl), but a high level of LDH (1024 U/L). Peripheral blood smear showed hypochromic microcytic anemia (hemoglobin of 10.8 g/dl and a hematocrit of 34.6%, the mean corpuscular volume of 60.40 fl, and low mean corpuscular hemoglobin 18.81 pg) and normal platelet count (221,000/µL). Hence, blood gas analysis and electrolyte levels were normal, but a low level of CPK (18 U/L), was documented as shown in Table .
Urine amino acid analysis by chromatography presented a weak band in cysteine and moderate bond in arginine. Lung fluid showed inflammatory cells mostly PMNs admixed with respiratory columnar cells and squamous cells in the proteinaceous background. No fungal elements were identified. Histology of the liver tissue revealed cirrhosis. According to clinical presentation and liver biopsy, storage disease was suggested by the local pediatrician without genetic analysis, so treatment with frequent feeds and cornstarch was initiated.
At the age of 3, Targeted gene sequencing (TGS) with a custom-targeted Ion AmpliSeq™ panel was performed. The panel included 7219 amplicons covering 450 genes associated with Inborn Metabolic Diseases consisting of glycogen storage disorders genes with hepatic involvement. Sanger sequencing validated identified the variants, using an ABI Prism 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Analyses were done using an Ion Torrent 540 chip (Life Technologies, Guilford, CT, South San Francisco, CA). The human GRCh37/hg 19 was used as the reference. Polyphen2, SIFT, and Mutation Taster were used for in silico analysis, GERP and Phastcons scores were used to evaluate the conservation of the variants. The population frequency of each variation was evaluated, using data from the gnomAD database. ACMG guidelines were used for variant interpretation . The sequence variants were described according to the Human Genome Variation Society Nomenclature . The sequence variant RefSeq NM_001040633.1 was used. Interestingly, a novel heterozygous variant c.592A > T (p.Met198Leu) was detected, in the exon 1 of the PRKAG2 gene, by TGS and suggested PRKAG2 syndrome. Further functional tests are needed.
On admission, the patient’s echocardiogram revealed normal heart function with very mild MR, and TR. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis using urine revealed normal results for Glc4.
Past medical family history of the patient revealed that proband had a sibling (boy) who expired at the age of 15 years old with pulmonary and liver symptoms. Figure presents the pedigree of the family with 2 affected children. The proband's brother had a heterozygous variant c.1897C > A (p.Leu633Ile) which was detected in the exon 14 of the CFTR gene by WES. Their parents were also examined for this mutation. The father of the family carried a heterozygous mutation too, but he was always healthy with no pulmonary symptoms. The proband's brother also had a liver biopsy, which revealed cirrhosis with no known underlying cause. He had undergone liver transplantation at the age of 6. At the age of 14, his echocardiogram showed mild MR, TR, and severe pulmonary hypertension. Finally, the proband's brother died at age 15 before mutation analysis for the PRKAG2 gene. Proband was normal for mutation on the CFTR gene by WES .