A 38-years-old woman came to primary health care with a complaint of a swollen right cheek for four days. The patient claimed to have no history of dental problems. Three days before her cheek was swollen, she admitted having her molar teeth manipulated with a toothpick due to food waste stuck in her right molar teeth. The patient showed swelling in her right cheek, high fever, pain in the swollen area, and difficulty opening her mouth or trismus. In the primary healthcare centre, the patient was diagnosed with abscess and diabetes mellitus (blood glucose was 350mg/dl at presentation) and treated with intravenous antibiotics and oral antidiabetic drugs for three days. However, the condition progressively worsened on the third day. The patient had intake difficulty and developed shortness of breath. Thus, she was immediately referred.
The patient was fully awake in the emergency room with normal blood pressure and heart rate. She presented with an increased respiratory rate (22 times/minute), dyspnea, and fever (38.8oC). There was no abnormality in the heart and lung examination. The right buccal to the neck area was swollen and hyperemic . There was a positive sign of pain and tenderness in the affected area. Abdomen and extremities were within normal limits. Complete blood count (CBC) results showed elevated leukocyte counts (20950/µ) with a higher proportion of neutrophils (88.2%) and a low proportion of lymphocytes (10.3%). Random blood glucose was 300 mg/dl with elevated creatinine level (1, 4 mg/dl) and normal blood urea nitrogen (15mg/dl). CT-scan imaging supported the diagnosis of submandibular abscess with expansion to right parotid space, bilateral parapharyngeal space, epiglottis, retropharyngeal space, and upper-right neck area with prominent lymph nodes . The patient was then diagnosed with right submandibular-parapharyngeal-right parotid-retropharyngeal abscess due to infection in molar 46, 47 with comorbidities type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and pre-renal acute kidney injury (AKI).
Initial therapy included incision and drainage surgery for submandibular abscess and odontectomy for molars 46, 47 due to teeth decay . Intravenous fluid and per-enteral dietary intake were given post-operative. A broad-spectrum antibiotic, ceftriaxone (2x1g), was given with metronidazole (3x500mg) to eradicate the infection. Blood glucose was regulated through intravenous injection of insulin aspart 4 IU twice every hour until target blood glucose of 140-180mg/dl was achieved. Paracetamol injection was also administered (3x1gram) intravenously. The patient still experienced fever and trismus the next day; however, the creatinine and blood glucose decreased to 1mg/dl and 244 mg/dl, respectively. HbA1c result was 11.6% showing chronically uncontrolled blood glucose level. On the third day, the fever subsided (37.3oC), and bacterial culture returned positive for Klebsiella pneumonia sensitive to ceftriaxone. Therefore, antibiotic administration was continued. After eight days, the blood glucose returned to normal, although there was still active pus production from the parotid. The patient started per-oral dietary, and the insulin regimen was changed to the subcutaneous bolus of detemir 14 IU at night and Aspart 3x8 IU before the meal. On the 12th day, there was no active pus production, blood glucose was normal, and the patient underwent abscess evaluation surgery and canal root removal for both molars . After 15 days of care, the patient's blood glucose was well regulated, and there was no active pus production. Therefore, she was later discharged.