We report the case of a four-year-old female patient who was presented at the pediatrics clinic at the University Clinical Centre of Kosovo with recurrent seizures and developmental delay. The patient was born on July 2018 at the gynecology and obstetrics clinic at the University Clinical Centre of Kosovo with an Apgar Score of 9/10. She was born at term, by vaginal delivery, and after a normal and uneventful pregnancy. The body weight at birth was 3,250 grams, the body height was 53 centimeters, and the head circumference was 34 centimeters. The patient was the first child from the first pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents. She had no history of perinatal asphyxiation, encephalitis, head injury, or febrile seizures. The parents denied the use of any medications. Her family history was negative for any neurological or genetic illnesses. An echocardiography was performed six days after the birth, and aberrantly inserted chorda tendineae in the left ventricle were observed.
In the third month of life, the patient experienced clusters of seizures of combined focal and generalized onset, which predominately occurred during the day. Seizures were generally brief, lasting from several seconds to a minute. They included tonic-clonic activity with motor activity being confined to one part of the body, migrating to another part of the body, and commonly becoming generalized seizures. In the beginning, the patient experienced one to two cluster of seizures weekly, which persisted in the following days at a higher frequency. The patient was admitted to the pediatric clinic in the University Clinical Centre of Kosovo. In a physical examination a relative microcephaly and a bilateral decreased muscle tone were evident.
At the age of fifteen months, she was admitted to the neurology department of pediatrics clinic in the University Clinical Centre of Kosovo. In physical examination, a relative microcephaly, facial dimorphism , including micrognathia and slopping forehead, a weakness of the limbs, intellectual disability, speech delay, inability to stay seated, and inability to keep the head straight and up were observed. Moreover, the neurological exam revealed a bilateral decreased muscle tone and decreased reflex response of the limbs. At the age of 28 months the head circumference measurement was under the third percentile.