A 41-year-old woman had a history of an acute rheumatic fever (ARF) treated with penicillin in childhood. She presented with a two-day history of redness and pain in her left eye. Symptoms occurred few days after an acute pharyngitis. She reported a history of a similar episode in her right eye a year ago. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Slit lamp examination revealed a nodule in the superior sclera with hyperemia and chemosis around it [Figure 1]. Ocular examination and funduscopy excluded all forms of uveitis or suppurative infections. B-scan ultrasonography showed no abnormalities in the posterior segment of the left eye. Spectral Domain OCT (3D OCT-1Maestero; Topocon, Japan) of the sclera showed enlarged vessels, inflammatory infiltrates (hyporeflective spaces), separated fibers, and a serous detachment between them [Figure 1]. The scleral thickness at the level of visible layers was 659 µm on the nodular area and 555 µm around it. A surgical punch biopsy of conjunctiva and Tenon's tissue was performed at admission. Histopathologic exam revealed mild and nonspecific inflammation and excluded bacterial or parasitological infections. Investigations showed negative results for tuberculosis, syphilis, and rheumatoid arthritis (chest X-ray, throat culture, tuberculin skin testing, syphilis serology, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor). Laboratory tests showed high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (35 mm in the first hour), raised anti-streptolysin O (ASO) titer of 545 units/ml, the presence of group A Streptococcus in the throat culture, C-reactive protein of 1 mg/l, a white blood count of 5600/mm (lymphocytes: 51%), and normal levels of blood electrolytes, glycemia, and azotemia. The patient received benzathine benzylpenicillin (extencilline: 1.2 million units intramuscularly twice monthly for three months). Examination showed rapid improvement within six days and remarkable resolution of signs after two weeks [Figure 1]. OCT demonstrated accumulation of the liquid in the sub-Tenon's space after 6 days and improvement of the fibrous structure of the sclera after 15 days. Recurrence of signs was observed in the right eye after 22 days [Figure 1]. The patient declared that she had not received the second dose of extencilline. OCT revealed hyporeflective areas due to an inflammatory fluid in the right sclera [Figure 2] and normal findings in the left eye. Extencilline treatment was administrated with the same doses in addition to oral corticosteroids. Complete recovery of signs was noticed after one week [Figure 2]. Normal level of ASO titers was reached after two months.