A 67-year-old woman with no relevant past medical or family history was admitted to our emergency department due to progressive staggering vertigo. Ten days prior to admission, the patient had noted unsteadiness of gait and inadequate coordination of her extremities along with truncal instability. In the neurological examination on admission, the patient presented with bilateral dysmetria but especially severe truncal ataxia disabling her to walk. Examination of vertical eye movements revealed upbeat nystagmus, whereas pupillary function, horizontal smooth pursuit, and the vestibulo-ocular reflex were unremarkable. Further neurologic examination was normal, as were the initial laboratory results.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head, including contrast enhanced scans, revealed no pathological findings beyond minor nonspecific vascular white matter hyperintensities on fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences. Especially no abnormalities in the brainstem or the cerebellum were present. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed a pleocytosis (97/mm3) with positive oligoclonal bands. Consecutive serum and CSF analyses were negative for active infectious or systemic autoimmune causes. An immunoblot for intraneuronal antibodies revealed Zic4 antibodies in serum and CSF (coverage: Table and Fig. ). A combined positron-emission tomography and computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed substantial 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the right upper pulmonary lobe consistent with lung cancer . Subsequent immunohistochemistry after lobectomy confirmed small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC, Fig. .B-E), insofar as that TTF-1 (thyroid transcription factor-1) evidenced a pulmonary origin and Synaptophysin-staining demonstrated neuroendocrine differentiation . Moreover, a fraction of about 70% of Ki67-positive cells were indicative of high proliferation rates in this tumor . The patient had previously admitted history of long-term cigarette smoking.
Under the diagnosis of a paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (PCD), intravenous methylprednisolone 1000 mg q.d. was administered over five days, followed by five sessions of plasma exchange. In consequence of increasing respiratory distress and incapacitating opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome, we had come to an agreement with the patient before to initiate sedation and mechanical ventilation not least because of the pending lobectomy.
After tumor resection, clinical presentation remained unchanged, so that intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) were administered for five additional days and cyclophosphamide therapy was started. The patient was discharged to rehabilitation in a cardiopulmonary stable but reduced overall state requiring mechanical ventilation. Regrettably, she deceased six weeks later due to cardiac arrest.