A 24-year-old man was brought in to the emergency room with a chief complaint of seizure. Prior to seizure, the patients vomited abruptly several times. The most recent seizure occurred 30 min prior to admission and lasted around 7 min. Since the seizure had ended, the patient had been rendered unconscious. Upon thorough history taking, it was revealed that the patient had no family with similar condition and was not on regular medications. Prior to this, the patient had complained of frequent headaches that seemed to be worsening and had gotten worse over the previous month. The patient has given his consent in written form for further examination.
Physical examination was notable for decreased consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 11) and a dilated left pupil with intact light reflex. A contrasted Brain CT Scan revealed extra-axial mass on the left sphenoid with extensive tentacle edema, which pushed midline structures 2 cm toward the contralateral side . The patient was then diagnosed with left sphenoid meningioma. No diagnostic challenge was found during examination in this case report.
Lowering the ICP was attempted using simple measures such as head elevation, corticosteroid, and mannitol. The patient's GCS deteriorated during observation and another seizure occurred. Emergency tumor resection was initially planned. However, the ICU confirmed that there were no available beds as the remaining ventilators were used for COVID-19 patients.
It was decided to perform intraparenchymal fiberoptic ICP monitor insertion and DC instead of tumor resection because tumor resection was considered too risky without the availability of ICU and given that patient's neurological status had deteriorated. The procedure was conducted immediately upon information of ICU by a senior trauma neurosurgeon in our institution. The ICP monitor was inserted through the Kocher point on the right side . The initial pressure on the ICP monitor was 51 mmHg.
The DC was performed in a trauma case fashion: a question mark incision with a wide bone flap . The ICP gradually decreased to around 35 mmHg after the bone flap was removed. Duramater was found to be tense. It was decided not to perform duraplasty because we thought it would cause the brain to bulge and lengthen the surgery time. After the surgery, we observed the ICP in the operating room before transferring the patient. The patient successfully regained spontaneous breathing and thus was extubated.
The patient slowly regained consciousness in the recovery room after the procedure. The best observed GCS was 12. The skin overlying the decompressed site was bulged and the ICP remained around 30 mmHg. The patient's overall condition improved during our care and the ICP gradually returned to normal with the administration of ICP-directed mannitol and routine dexamethasone. Best observed GCS on fifth post-operative day was 15. The average ICP on the last post-operative day was 15.04 ± 2.7 mmHg. Two weeks afterwards, the patient came back to our outpatient clinic neurologically intact. The patient was then planned for elective tumor resection.