A 1-day-old Iranian girl was transferred to our tertiary referral center due to severe cyanosis and refractory metabolic acidosis. She was born in a private hospital in Shiraz, Iran, at a gestational age of 39 + 5 weeks by cesarean section with Apgar scores of 8 and 9 in the 1st and 5th minutes, respectively, from a primigravid, 27-year-old mother with a history of consanguineous marriage. The results of prenatal screening including ultrasound were not significant, and fetal echocardiography was not performed for her. She had a birth weight of 2390 g (< 3rd percentile), length of 50 cm (50th percentile), and head circumference of 34 cm (50th percentile) at birth. She had normal vital signs, including blood pressure of 70/45 mmHg, respiratory rate of 50 breaths per minute, pulse rate of 128 beats per minute, and temperature of 37 °C. She had normal posture, muscle tone, activity, and reflexes such as moro, sucking, rooting, and grasping. Umbilical cord artery blood gas (ABG) revealed pH 7.30, pCO2 47.2 mmHg, pO2 18 mmHg, HCO3 22.7 mmol/l, and base excess (BE) −3.7 mmol/l. She was in a good condition, and breastfeeding started for her immediately after birth. She had normal blood sugar, hemoglobin (15.6 g/dL), and hematocrit (47.7%) on the first postnatal day. Unfortunately, she developed respiratory distress about 10 hours after birth. Hence, she was visited by a pediatrician; she had tachypnea (respiratory rate 85 breaths per minute), cyanosis, retraction (intercostal, subcostal, and supraclavicular), systolic murmur (grade 2 at the apex), and hypotonia on physical examination. Her oxygen saturation was 85%, which increased to 91% with 10-liter oxygen by hood. Therefore, she was transferred to neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for further evaluation and better management. Chest X-ray was normal, and ABG showed pH 7.25, pCO2 20.4 mmHg, pO2 101.6 mmHg, HCO3 8.8 mmol/l, and BE −18.3 mmol/l. Oxygen saturation decreased to 81% despite oxygen intake after 2 hours, and retraction and tachypnea were intensified. Consequently, the patient was intubated and needed high setup ventilation to maintain acceptable oxygen saturation (more than 90%). Although the patient received appropriate assisted ventilation, her conditions deteriorated and developed severe metabolic acidosis (pH 6.88, pCO2 24 mmHg, pO2 58.6 mmHg, HCO3 4.3 mmol/l, BE −28.8 mmol/l) which was not corrected with hydration and intravenous bicarbonate. Moreover, she developed abnormal movements in her upper extremities. Her blood sugar and calcium were 438 mg/dL and 8.5 mg/dL, respectively, so she was started on phenobarbital. Brain ultrasound was normal. Ammonia, lactate, blood, and urine biochemical tests were requested due to persistent metabolic acidosis. She was transferred to our hospital 36 hours after birth. On arrival, the patient was connected to a ventilator (mode SIMV (Synchronized Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation), PIP (Peak Inspiratory Pressure) 30, PEEP (Positive End-Expiratory Pressure) 7, RR (Respiratory Rate) 60, FiO2 (Fraction of inspired oxygen) 100%). Oxygenation index was 29.4. She was hypotensive (blood pressure 42/25 mmHg), and her pulse rate was 145 beats per minute. In our center, the patient had refractory hypoxemia, severe persistent metabolic acidosis, hypotension, and hypotonia. Complete blood count (CBC) showed hemoglobin 12 g/dL with MCV (Mean Corpuscular Volume) 134.1 fl, and normal leukocyte and platelet counts. Results of sepsis workup were negative. Liver function test was normal except mild increase in liver enzymes (SGOT (Serum Glutamic Oxaloacetic Transaminase) 94 and SGPT (Serum Glutamic Pyruvic Transaminase) 71). Her prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and international normalized ratio (INR) were 39.4 s, 48.7 s, and 2.86, respectively. Serum BUN (Blood Urea Nitrogen), creatinine, and electrolytes were normal. Blood ammonia, lactate, and urine creatinine were 228 μg/dL, 137 mg/dL, and 93 mg/dL, respectively. Echocardiography at the time of admission revealed severe pulmonary hypertension with right-to-left shunt through PDA and foramen ovale, right-side heart failure, and dilated right atrium and ventricle. Bed-side brain sonography showed bilateral ventriculomegaly (ventricular diameter of 23 mm) and intraventricular hemorrhage grade 3 on the 5th day of life. Acylcarnitine profile in the plasma was determined by tandem mass spectroscopy (MS/MS) that showed increased propionylcarnitine (C3), succinyl and methylmalonyl carnitine (C4DC), and low free carnitine (C0) levels. Therefore, the C3/C0 and C4DC/C0 ratios were increased. Amino acid profile in the plasma that was checked by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectroscopy (LC–MS/MS) showed normal levels of glycine, homocysteine, and other amino acids. Urine organic acid and acylglycine profile was checked by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and liquid chromatography (LC–MS/MS). The results showed that lactic acid (824 mmol/molcrt (mmol/ mol creatinine in urine), normal < 90 mmol/molcrt); 3-hydroxybutyric acid (66.1 mmol/molcrt, normal < 5 mmol/molcrt); methylmalonic acid (1052 mmol/molcrt, normal < 18 mmol/molcrt); propionylglycine (8.3 mmol/molcrt, normal < 0.5 mmol/molcrt); 3-hydroxypropionic acid (79.5 mmol/molcrt, normal < 12 mmol/molcrt); methylcitric acid (48.4 mmol/molcrt, normal < 5 mmol/molcrt) were increased. These results, as well as findings of plasma acylcarnitines, were compatible with MMA cobalamin disorders or methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deficiency. The results of these tests were reported on her last day of life.
During the hospital course, the patient received empirical antibiotics with suspicion of sepsis from the first day of admission, bicarbonate to correct metabolic acidosis, milrinone and sildenafil for PPHN, dopamine, dobutamine, and epinephrine due to hypotension, and assisted ventilation due to hypoxemia. Nitric oxide was not available in our center. Metabolic acidosis persisted, so peritoneal dialysis was started for the patient on her 4th day of life. Due to unstable hemodynamic, feeding was not started for the patient. Unfortunately, her oxygen saturation reduced precipitously and did not respond to respiratory and medical support, and she died on her fifth day of life.