A 27-year-old non-HIV-infected female was admitted to our hospital because of a headache and the worsening of pre-existing visual disturbance. Her medical history comprised tuberculous meningitis treated with anti-TB drugs (2-month treatment with isoniazid, 300 mg/day; rifampin, 450 mg/day; ethambutol, 1000 mg/day; and pyrazinamide, 1500 mg/day, followed by a 10-month treatment with isoniazid and rifampin) with adjunctive corticosteroid 10 years ago. The Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture was susceptible to all anti-TB drugs, and the patient attained bacteriological remission with a sequela of visual impairment (bilateral counting finger) because of hydrocephalus that was treated with the placement of a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt. Although asymptomatic remnant tuberculomas were reported primarily in the bilateral ambient cistern after the completion of the anti-TB treatment , her symptoms remained stable, and she visited a neurosurgical clinic regularly to check the patency of the VP shunt.
Upon admission, the patient was alert and afebrile, and the neurological examination revealed only the worsening of pre-existing visual disturbance from counting finger to light perception without meningeal irritation. The blood analysis revealed a slight elevation in CRP levels (0.37 mg/dL), and the interferon-γ release assay (T-SPOT) was positive. A chest X-ray revealed no abnormal lesions suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis. In addition, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) testing revealed elevated protein levels (570 mg/dL), no pleocytosis (6/μL), and normal glucose levels (60 mg/dL), with a standard opening pressure (130 mmH2O). Notably, antigens of Cryptococcus, Toxoplasma, and Aspergillus in the CSF and the serum antibody against Taenia solium were all negative, and no elevation of soluble interleukin-2 receptor and the angiotensin-converting enzyme was observed in the CSF. Furthermore, a head CT revealed new emerging tuberculomas in the left sylvian fissure, which was accompanied by a low-density area in the left temporal lobe . While a contrast-enhanced axial T1-weighted brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed tuberculomas with a diffuse hypointense area around the left sylvian fissure, brain fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging indicated a hyperintense area around the tuberculomas in the left sylvian fissure, suggesting edematous changes . Repeated mycobacterial culture and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the CSF did not indicate the existence of the reactivation of CNS tuberculosis. During these 2 weeks of examination, the symptoms did not worsen without specific treatment. Based on these findings, we diagnosed these lesions as late-onset post-treatment PRs. Accordingly, we prescribed the oral administration of corticosteroids (prednisolone, 30 mg/day, 0.6 mg/kg/day), which were gradually tapered off. After 3 months of the corticosteroid treatment, the tuberculomas disappeared, including those previously present in the bilateral ambient cistern, and brain edematous changes around the left sylvian fissure vanished . Four months after the onset of PRs, we reduced the dosage of prednisolone to 5 mg/day; however, because a tuberculoma reappeared in the same place of the left sylvian fissure, we increased the dosage of oral prednisolone to 20 mg/day. This time, we carefully tapered off prednisolone over 1 year, and the corticosteroid treatment erased the residual tuberculoma again with no recurrence of tuberculous meningitis. The patient’s symptoms remained stable during 1 year of follow-up without additional anti-TB drugs.