A 27-year-old female was referred with cytology showing high-grade changes (moderate dyskaryosis). She was a nonsmoker with no significant past medical history, nulliparous, and currently under the treatment of a fertility centre for male factor infertility, awaiting intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
During the consultation, different management options were discussed. Pending colposcopic assessment, possibly the traditional approach would be “see and treat”, that is, a large loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ) of the cervix at the time of colposcopy, assuming colposcopy was considered to show high-grade changes. In view of her nulliparous status, age, and the wish to preserve fertility and reduce any potential risk factors for future pregnancies, the patient was alternatively offered a colposcopy with directed biopsies. Should the histology show high-grade cervical precancerous changes (CIN2+), an excision with a view to remove these changes could be performed at a second visit (select and treat).
The colposcopy was performed by an experienced colposcopist, consultant gynaecological oncologist, using the DSI colposcope.
The colposcopic impression was of low-grade changes , whilst the DSI mapping suggested that the acetowhitening changes potentially corresponded to high-grade CIN .
In view of clinical and standard colposcopic appearances consistent with bacterial vaginosis and low-grade changes only, treatment was not offered on the day. Three directed punch biopsies were taken, a high vaginal swab was obtained, and a course of topical Clindamycin cream as empiric treatment of bacterial vaginosis was prescribed.
One of the biopsy sites was selected based on clinical judgement prior to reviewing the DSI map, and two further were directed by the DSI map . The biopsy which was based on colposcopic impression showed koilocytic changes and CIN1 only, whereas the two biopsies based on the DSI evaluation showed CIN1 and CIN2 . There was no evidence of CIN3, cervical glandular intraepithelial neoplasia, or invasive malignancy.
Following these results, a further clinic appointment was arranged and the patient was reexamined with the DSI colposcope. The colposcopic images and DSI map from the first visit were reviewed prior to examination to provide a reference standard. This time, neither the colposcopic impression nor the DSI map suggested any areas suspicious of high-grade disease . Notably, none of the sites biopsied at the first visit demonstrated any features in keeping with high-grade lesion neither did the DSI map, suggesting that punch biopsies likely removed all high-grade disease initially present. Therefore, the patient was offered the option of conservative management by cytology and colposcopy at 6 months versus the standard LLETZ treatment and was fully counselled, in the presence of her partner, regarding available evidence and potential risks. Pending the infertility treatment, risks such as cervical stenosis and the possibility of requiring a test run prior to embryo implantation were stressed out in particular. However, in order not to delay commencement of fertility treatment, immediate cervical excision was opted for.
A LLETZ was performed with written consent, using the DSI colposcope, under local anaesthetic. Haemostasis was achieved by ball diathermy on the cervical crater as per standard practice. The specimen measured 20 × 18 × 11 mm and weighed 1.9 grams. Final histology showed HPV-related features and CIN1 clear from all margins (endocervical, ectocervical, and deep lateral). There was no evidence of high-grade CIN or invasive cancer.
The patient was discharged back to her family doctor, with a plan for cytology and high-risk HPV cotesting in six months as a test of cure, according to the National Health Service Cervical Screening Programme guidelines.