A 58-year-old man with intermittent abdominal discomfort lasting several months came to our clinic.
At a local hospital, abdominal ultrasound (US) revealed a huge liver cyst.
The patient had no previous medical history.
He was healthy without a personal or family history of tumors.
During a physical examination, he was found to have a distended abdomen and no palpable masses.
Laboratory tests revealed mild leukocytosis (11 × 109/L), with normal hematocrit and platelet count. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were within normal limits except for a slight elevation of hepatic enzyme; his carbohydrate antigen-199 level was within the normal range.
Multiple hypo-attenuating shadows in the liver were observed on abdominal computed tomography (CT) images, the largest of which measured 18.9 cm × 14.1 cm in size and occupied the left lateral lobe of the liver , with a CT value about 0 HU and no enhancement . Cystic masses of varying sizes with thin septa and nodular calcification were observed in the left lobe of the liver . No nodular components or septum-like structures were identified in the cystic lesions of the right lobe of the liver . The internal septa were mildly enhanced after intravenous administration of contrast medium . It was diagnosed as polycystic liver based on CT features.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large cystic lesion measuring approximately 18.3 cm × 13.5 cm × 19.3 cm, originating from the left lobe of the liver. The signal of the cystic fluid was hypointense on T1-weighted images (T1WI) and hyperintense on T2-weighted images (T2WI) . A circular lesion in the left inner lobe measuring 3.2 cm × 2.0 cm showed hyper-intensity on both T1WI and T2WI . Multiple cystic lesions in the right lobe of the liver showed low signals on T1WI and apparent high intensity signals on T2WI delineated from the surrounding liver without enhancement . Diffusion weighted imaging and apparent diffusion coefficient map showed no abnormal signal in the liver. On contrast-enhanced TIWI, there were internal separations in the capsule wall and significantly enhanced vascular shadow between the lesions . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed diffuse dilatation of the biliary tree . According to MRI manifestations, cystadenoma was diagnosed.