A 63-year-old Greek man, active smoker, was admitted to the emergency department with a 2-month history of dyspnea and presented with acute abdominal pain. One month ago, he was diagnosed with GPA by lung biopsy and laboratory testing and was receiving low-dose dexamethasone (15 mg/day). His other medical and family history was unremarkable. He was not using anticoagulant agents.
On physical examination, his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, pulse rate 80 beats/minute, and respiration rate 20 breaths/minute, and he was afebrile. His height was 170 cm and weight 70 kg. His heart sounds were regular without any murmur, and his respiratory sounds were clear. He had abdominal dilatation with diffuse sensitivity to palpation and dullness on percussion. There were no inflamed joints, nasopharyngeal abnormalities, or dermatologic manifestations. On admission, there was no need for intubation and mechanical ventilation, and the patient was hemodynamically stable and with normal neurological examination.
Complete laboratory testing and blood gases were obtained, and urgent computed tomography (CT) scan of the lungs, brain, and upper and lower abdomen was performed. Chest X-ray (CXR) showed an infiltrative shadow in the upper left lobe , while CT scan showed multiple intraparenchymal cavitated nodules in the left lung and a large retroperitoneal hematoma and multiple aneurysms of the renal, hepatic, and pancreaticoduodenal arteries . There were no other brain or chest aneurysms, as confirmed by whole-body CT angiography.
Laboratory tests showed: leukocyte count: 16 × 103/μL (80% neutrophils, 10% lymphocytes, 5% monocytes, and 2% eosinophils); hemoglobin 7.2 g/dL; hematocrit 21.1%; platelet count 235 × 103/μL; C-reactive protein 46 mg/dL; urea 236 mg/dL; serum creatinine (SCr) 7.6 mg/dL (2 months prior to admission, his SCr level was 0.7 mg/dL); and albumin: 2.3 g/dL. His liver enzyme levels and electrolytes were normal. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 122 mm/hour. Urinalysis showed protein of 2+ and blood of 2+, but without red blood cell casts or dysmorphic red blood cells. Proteinase-3 antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (PR3-ANCA), c-ANCA, and antinuclear antibody were positive, while antiglomerular basement antibody (GBM) and myeloperoxidase antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO) were negative. The serum total complement and complement 3 and 4 levels and serum protein electrophoresis were within normal limits. Viral serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus was normal.
Automatic rupture of these aneurysms with concomitant retroperitoneal hematoma was suspected, and urgent angiography of the celiac artery and renal arteries was performed. Angiography showed multiple aneurysms of the hepatic, renal, and pancreaticoduodenal arteries and embolization of the pancreaticoduodenal arteries was performed, as these arteries were the suspected cause of the hematoma .
The following day of embolization, the patient deteriorated and was intubated because of acute respiratory failure and was transferred to the ICU. His respiratory failure was attributed to alveolar hemorrhage, as confirmed by bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage. He did not develop pancreatitis after the embolization. In the ICU, the patient was hemodynamically stable, on mechanical ventilation, and sedated. His blood gases improved immediately after intubation. Due to acute renal failure, he was placed in continuous veno-venous hemofiltration (CVVHDF) and received pulse therapy with methylprednisolone 1 g/day for 3 days followed by maintenance therapy with prednisolone 50 mg/day and 700 mg cyclophosphamide pulses, after proper hydration, two times on a 2-week basis. The daily dose of prednisone was tapered gradually.
The patient deteriorated gradually, despite the initial improvement and the early and combined immunosuppression and supportive therapy. He was subjected to tracheostomy on the 15th day of admission, but developed severe thrombocytopenia and neutropenia, attributed to cyclophosphamide. Blood cultures on the 20th day revealed Acinetobacter baumannii, for which he received combined antibiotic therapy. His clinical and hemodynamic condition and results of laboratory and blood gas testing deteriorated gradually and finally died on the 30th day of admission from severe septic shock and multiple organ failure.