A 38-year-old woman who presented with a swelling over the anterior midline of the neck for the last 7 years. The swelling progressively increased in size. Throughout these 7 years the patient presented a weight gain, cold intolerance, and constipation, while as pressure symptoms she does not present hoarseness of the voice or dysphagia. The patient is low socioeconomic status, lives in a small town, with no previous pathological history, suffers from cancerophobia, and the size of the goiter is aesthetically disturbing to her. Although the patient complained of night sweats without fever, chest pain or haemoptysis, it should be noted that the patient did not have any past history of tuberculosis.
On physical examination, she had diffuse, mildly tender thyromegaly. The swelling was soft to firm in consistency, moved with swallowing, with an irregular surface and edges that were not well defined. The overlying skin was indurated. The cervical or axillary lymph nodes were not palpable, other systemic and regional examinations revealed no abnormalities.
Routine hematological and biochemical investigations like blood sugar, urine examination and serum electrolytes of the patient were normal, the thyroid-stimulating hormone was elevated and free T4 were lower, the antithyroid peroxidase antibodies were normal. No tracheal shift was detected in the chest radiograph and electrocardiogram was normal. Nasal Endoscopy showed both the vocal cords to be freely mobile.
Ultrasound (USG) of the thyroid gland revealed an enlarged thyroid gland (3.3 × 5.7 × 7.9 cm) with multiple echogenic nodules of varying size, without features of malignancy. Color Doppler showed increased vascularity of the gland, USG also showed absence of lymph nodes.
Two fine FNAC were performed, the first one was non-diagnostic and the second one was showed colloidal cells with follicular cells without any evidence of malignancy. Based on the clinical and biological findings, USG and FNAC, a diagnosis of multinodular colloid goiter was made. In view of these data the patient underwent a total thyroidectomy after normalization of thyroid hormones by substituting hypothyroidism with Levothyroxine (75 μg per day).
Intraoperatively, the thyroid gland was found to be enlarged with multiple nodules involving both lobes. With absence of adhesions between the surface of the thyroid gland and the surrounding muscles, the recurrent and laryngeal nerve were identified preserved on both sides. Macro and normovesicular multinodular thyroid goiter, reworked with hemorrhagic foci .
Epithelioid and giganto-cellular granulomatous thyroiditis with caseous necrosis, no histological evidence of malignancy. Hence, a final diagnosis of tuberculosis of thyroid was made . The patient has not received anti-tuberculosis treatment because she has no other tuberculous focus and has undergone total thyroidectomy. At the last visit the patient is asymptomatic and euhyroid under substitution by Levothyroxine (100 μg/day). Our study has been reported following the SCARE 2020 Checklist criteria .