A 56-year-old male patient was admitted to the cathlab for an anterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) after presenting ventricular fibrillation treated by external defibrillation during ambulance transport. His medical history was limited to moderate hyperlipidaemia without medication. On admission, the patient was afebrile with a heart rate of 65 b.p.m. and blood pressure of 135/60 mmHg. Physical examination revealed a Killip Class II with bilateral basal lung crackles without further abnormalities. The electrocardiogram recorded a significant ST-segment elevation in antero-lateral leads and a ST-segment depression in inferior leads. An emergency coronary angiography showed a severe stenosis of the distal left main coronary artery and an occlusion of the mid-LAD (, , Video S1). A PCI was initially performed in the left main and ostial LAD (, , Video S2). Then, a distal balloon inflation induced a contrast extravasation (, , Video S3), treated with the bailout implantation of two covered stents and a drug-eluting stent (DES). The final angiographic control showed a potential coronary cameral fistula (, , Video S4). The patient was haemodynamically stable, with no pericardial effusion or arrhythmia. He was thus referred to a high-volume centre with on-site cardiac surgery facilities.
At admission, the patient remained asymptomatic. The electrocardiogram showed no Q waves, and displayed negative T waves in the lateral leads (, ). A control coronary angiography revealed a luminal narrowing of the ostial segment of the left main coronary artery, a patent stent extending from the left main to the proximal LAD, multiple stents in a septal branch with an iatrogenic LAD–LV fistula and an occluded mid-LAD supplied by collaterals arising from the right coronary artery (RCA) (, , Videos S5–S7). This confirmed that balloon inflation and bailout PCI performed during the first procedure were carried out erroneously in the main septal branch. The Heart Team strategy was thus to attempt a percutaneous myocardial revascularization of the LAD, and a fistula closure.
First, a bilateral radial approach was performed with 6 Fr guiding catheters, allowing a retrograde crossing through a septal collateral with a Caravel™ (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) microcatheter and a Gaïa second™ (Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) guidewire . Then, an antegrade rotational atherectomy was performed with the Rotablator™ system (Boston SC, Natick, MA, USA) and a 1.25 mm burr in order to ablate the stent struts and to perform a balloon inflation, followed by a DES implantation in the mid-LAD .
Angiographic views showed a successful opening of the LAD but a persistent competitive flow through the iatrogenic septal LAD–LV fistula, which could induce a coronary steal and a stent thrombosis in the LAD . The decision was thus made to attempt a closure of the fistula. The initial attempt at vascular plug delivery in the fistula failed, and the significant competitive flow was successfully occluded by the insertion of a PK Papyrus™ (Biotronik, Berlin, Germany) covered stent . Final angiographic views showed an excellent management of the LAD lesion and a thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) III flow .
The patient was still asymptomatic, with normalization of T-waves inversion on the electrocardiogram (, ) and normal renal function. T Troponin reached a peak of 3140 ng/L (N < 14). Transthoracic echocardiography showed a preserved LV ejection fraction at 55%, with an anterolateral hypokinesis (, Video S8). The patient was discharged three days later, on dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and ticagrelor as well as statin, beta-blockers, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors.
At 1-month follow-up, he remained asymptomatic. A control angiography showed patent stents on the left main and LAD coronary artery, with a totally occluded coronary cameral fistula (, , Video S9).