A 63-year-old man without familial history of MG was diagnosed with secondary acute myeloid leukemia that originated from myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms, unclassifiable 2 years prior to the current presentation. He was then treated with intensive chemotherapy, and underwent allogeneic HSCT from a human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched unrelated donor in the following year. Prophylaxis against GVHD consisted of tacrolimus and short-term methotrexate. He achieved remission of acute GVHD, and tacrolimus was discontinued on day 86. He then developed mild chronic GVHD of the skin and liver at 7 and 12 months after the transplantation, respectively. Fourteen months after the transplantation, he was admitted to our hospital due to progressive bilateral pleural effusion, which was attributed to pleuritis related to chronic GVHD, and was successfully treated with intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy (mPSL) (1 g during the course of 3 days) followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day). During the process of tapering oral prednisolone to 7.5 mg/day (20 months after the transplantation), the patient began to complain of bilateral ptosis, dropped head, and dyspnea on exertion, which continued to worsen, and he was admitted to our hospital.
On examination, his general condition was normal, except for the presence of sinus tachycardia (106/min). He had a moon face appearance as well as increased pigmentation and sclerotic changes on the skin. He was alert and had normal cognitive function. The patient had ptosis, dropped head, and mild bilateral weakness involving the craniocervical muscles and deltoid muscles (grade 4 as measured by the Manual Muscle Strength Testing) with fatigability. However, no bulbar symptoms were noted.
Blood sample tests showed an elevated anti-acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibody (14.0 nmol/L), but negative anti-muscle specific kinase (anti-MuSK) antibody. His HLA genotype consisted of A*24:02-B*52:01-C*12:02-DRB1*12:01 and A*24:02-B*52:01-C*12:02-DRB1*15:02. Although the arterial blood carbon dioxide concentration was within the normal range, a pulmonary function test revealed a substantial reduction of vital capacity (VC) at 1.69 L (45.4% predicted). Polymerase chain reaction analysis of short tandem repeat sequences for peripheral blood showed 100% donor chimerism. Chest computed tomography suggested mild emphysematous changes in the lung field, but thymoma was not found. Intravenous injection of edrophonium remarkably improved the patient’s ptosis and dropped head. An electrophysiological study showed 20.0% area decrement of compound muscle action potentials (CMAP) from the right deltoid muscle by 3-Hz repetitive axillary nerve stimulation. These findings confirmed a diagnosis of generalized MG with Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America clinical classification IIb, quantitative MG score 14 out of 36, and MG-ADL score 8 out of 24.
Flow cytometric analyses were performed by using the patient’s peripheral blood because depletion of Tregs after HSCT has been reported to be valuable in predicting chronic GVHD severity [–]. The Treg population in the peripheral blood, defined as CD4+CD25highFOXP3+ cells, was 0.24% of the total lymphocytes . This proportion was lower than that of our post-HSCT patients (mean ± SD 0.51 ± 0.15%) and of healthy subjects (0.94 ± 0.19%) .
Considering progression to myasthenic crisis, intravenous immunoglobulin was initially administered (0.4 g/kg for 5 days) and the patient showed mild responses for his ptosis and dropped head, but his fatigability and dyspnea on exertion remained unchanged. Subsequent mPSL pulse treatment (1 g for 2 days) exacerbated MG symptoms. We started pyridostigmine 180 mg/day with tacrolimus 3 mg/day, and consequently, his fatigability gradually improved and VC increased to 2.35 L (63.1% predicted) on the 28th hospital day. Follow-up electrophysiological study showed disappearance of significant CMAP decrement (4.5% area decrease). However, these improvements were insufficient for his daily activity. Follow-up anti-AChR antibody was still elevated to 18.0 nmol/L on the 22nd hospital day. The patient was treated with an increased oral prednisolone dose of 50 mg/day and intravenous mPSL pulse (1 g for 3 days), and anti-AChR antibody was decreased to 9.7 nmol/L on the 55th hospital day. Finally, he was administered four courses of weekly rituximab 375 mg/m2, and his fatigability and weakness continued to improve steadily without pyridostigmine. He was discharged on the 92nd hospital day, receiving tacrolimus 3 mg/day and prednisolone 20 mg/day . Five months after discharge, minimal manifestations remained, with a VC of 2.95 L (79.2% predicted), and he continued to take oral prednisolone at a dose of 10 mg/day and tacrolimus at 3 mg/day. Titers of anti-AChR antibody were steadily reduced (4.6, 3.7, and 3.2 nmol/L on 3, 6, and 9 months after discharge).