A 64-year-old lady presented to the emergency department following a fall and sustained isolated capitellar fracture . On CT scan, this was found to be Type III capitellar fracture according to Bryan and Morrey’s classification . She was taken to theater on a routine trauma list and an attempt was made to fix the fracture fragment but in view of severe communition and osteoporosis, it was not possible to fix the fracture and hence the fragment was excised . She was found to have mild valgus instability on table. The elbow was immobilized for few weeks in back slab and then the patient was referred to physiotherapy. She achieved range of motion of 30–90 degrees in elbow joint with full supination and pronation.
Her repeat radiograph at 4 months showed slight subluxation of the elbow toward radial side with some incongruency in humeroulnar joint. She continued to have pain in her elbow, especially on loading and also features of lateral instability. Radiocapitellar resurfacing option was thought of, but in view of very poor bone stock and subluxation, it was felt that this would not be suitable option for her. Other treatment options were discussed in the form of tendon interposition arthroplasty, total elbow replacement, and allograft reconstruction. All options were discussed with her and having understood the pros and cons of each procedure, she opted for capitellar reconstruction using allograft. The configuration of defect was replicated with the help of 3D printing prepared from her latest CT scans.
The freeze-dried humerus allograft was used for surgery. After GA, the patient was positioned supine on table and sterile tourniquet was used. Kocher incision was used and common extensor origin was identified and soft tissue was freed anteriorly and posteriorly to expose the lateral condyle and the size of defect was assessed. Soft tissue and synovium were removed with curette. Defect was measured with the help of ruler and guide wire and was found to be 24 mm (medial lateral) × 20 mm (height) × 16 mm depth. Similar size of capitellum and part of lateral trochlea was taken and cut precisely from allograft and care was taken not to oversize or under size it. This part of bone was placed over defect and fine-tuned with the help of burr. This was fixed with two Acutrak headless compression screws of 3.5 mm diameter and care was taken to bury the screws head under the articular surface (, ). Wound was closed and the patient was immobilized in above elbow back slab for 4 weeks followed by mobilization in hinge brace for a period of 6 weeks.