A 63-year-old female was noted to have an adrenal mass during her medical check-up 7 years ago. She has underlying hypertension with one anti-hypertensive drug. Otherwise, she does not have endocrine disorders or associated comorbidities in the patient and relatives. During the initial finding, it was 4.5 cm in size. Since it was asymptomatic, she was decided for routine imaging follow up. She underwent a two-yearly computed tomography (CT) scan to monitor the growth of the tumour. It remained stable initially until recently it started to grow to a size of 7 cm. The CT features were in favour of right benign adrenal tumour but in view of the risk of compressive symptoms, she was decided for surgical resection of the tumour via laparoscopic retroperitoneal approach. The surgery went well without any intraoperative and postoperative complications. She was discharged after day 2. There was no further treatment or follow up required.
Grossly the tumour was firm with a lobulated surface measuring 95 mm × 85 mm × 40 mm and weighing 140 g . It was partly covered by fatty tissue with an intact fibrous capsule. Serial sections showed a well-circumscribed tumour with heterogeneous yellowish to a greyish cut surface. Few foci of small haemorrhagic spots were seen. No necrosis identified. There is a remnant of adrenal gland attached to the lesion measuring 70 mm × 10 mm × 6 mm. Cut section of the adrenal gland is unremarkable.
Histologically, it is a well-circumscribed tumour composed of lobules of mature univacuolated adipocytes separated by fibrous septae and rimmed by a thin capsule (A). There were intervening blood vessels and bone marrow elements containing trilineage hematopoietic cells with an increase in the number of megakaryocytes (A and B). Foci of haemorrhages were seen within the adipose component. No lipoblast or atypical stromal cell seen. No necrosis or calcification identified. There was an attenuated adrenal cortical tissue seen at the periphery (C and D). No evidence of malignancy seen. The features are in keeping with myelolipoma.