In February 2021, a 17-year-old female patient presented with a lump on the right breast about 1.5 × 1.5 cm in size in the lower inner quadrant . The lesion gradually increased in size over a period of 1 month without any pain or bleeding. She did not consult any doctor until the right breast underwent rapid enlargement after accidentally falling, reaching 20 × 20 cm. She had skin ulceration, pink-blueish discoloration, and bleeding from the breast lump for 3 days, without heat, pain, or discharge. On physical examination, the lesion appeared firm with a non-mobile, irregular margin. Axillary lymphadenopathy was negative, and there were no palpable supraclavicular nodes. The left breast was normal.
There was no other remarkable feature in the patient's medical history. She had no history of chronic illness or radiotherapy and was without a significant medical family history, including breast cancer. During hospitalization, the results of the laboratory tests were as follows: WBCs, 7,760/mm3 (normal: 3,500–9,500/mm3), Hb, 5.1 g/dL (11.5–15.0 g/dL), hematocrit, 18.0% (35.0%–45.0%), platelet, 80,000/mm3 (125,000–350,000/mm3), PT, 17.9 s (9.0–14.0 s), APTT, 39.8 s (20.0–40.0 s), INR, 1.57 (0.8–1.5), fibrinogen, 60 (200–400) mg/dl, D-dimer, 85.27 mg/L (0–0.55 mg/L). An ultrasound examination was performed, demonstrating that the right breast had heterogeneously mixed echogenicity of approximately 254 × 280 × 96 mm with an indistinct margin.
Considering the inconclusive findings on ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) scans of the head and chest were performed and revealed that the right breast had heterogeneously increased in density, with focal skin thickening, and an enhancement of the nipple. There was no obvious axillary lymphadenopathy in both axillae. In addition, the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a heterogeneous mixed signal intensity area predominantly of isointense signal intensity on T1-weighted images, and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images, containing multifocal hemorrhages and hematomas. Subsequent contrast-enhanced MRI depicted the heterogenous enhancement with peripheral enhancement . An ultrasound of the abdomen and an F-18 bone scan were negative for metastatic disease.
Thereafter, a right breast ultrasound-guided needle biopsy was performed. Vascular channels were lined by atypical, plump endothelial cells with hemorrhage and focal mitotic activity. Morphology suggested the possibility of angiosarcoma. Further immunohistochemistry demonstrated positive staining for vascular endothelial markers CD34, CD31, FLI-1, and erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS)-related gene (ERG) oncoprotein but not for cytokeratin . The proliferation index (Ki-67) was estimated at 40%. So, a diagnosis of primary angiosarcoma of the breast (pT4N0M0) was made.
The patient had coagulation dysfunction for tumor-related excessive bleeding, decreased fibrinogen and platelet count, prolonged prothrombin time, and elevated D-dimer levels. She received red cell concentrates, cryoprecipitate, fibrinogen, platelets, and fresh-frozen plasma, but the anemia and coagulation did not improve significantly. A decision to undertake angiography (DSA) and tumor vascular embolization was taken to reduce the risk of bleeding and allow safe surgical resection .
After the risks associated with the surgery were explained to the patient and her family, she accepted them and wanted to be operated on as soon as possible. She underwent a right total mastectomy in March 2021, and all surgical margins were negative. Postoperative pathological examination revealed angiosarcoma with tissue necrosis, hemorrhage and 19.5 × 15.3 × 6.6 cm in size . Histopathologic examination showed the tumor was composed of atypical endothelial cells with different degrees of differentiation, forming irregular vascular cavities that coincide with each other, forming papillary and diffuse infiltration. Tumor cells exhibit fusiform or irregular shapes with little cytoplasm and hyperchromatic nuclei .
After consultation with the patient and her family, she received planned radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The patient received Adriamycin-based chemotherapy every 3 weeks for eight cycles. Medical oncology planned a 50 Gy intensity-modulated radiation therapy to the chest wall (2 Gy per fraction over 5 weeks), but she was unable to complete the radiation therapy due to her poor physical condition.
The patient presented with a 3 cm × 1.5 cm bleeding right chest wall mass 5 months after removal. She was treated with surgical resection with a diagnosis of local tumor recurrence by histological examination. She presented again with a chest wall tumor that was bleeding profusely 1 month after surgery for a recurrent tumor and was admitted to the emergency department. A chest and abdominal CT scan with contrast showed multiple metastatic lesions in the chest, bone, liver, spleen, and lung. She was anemic despite the transfusion. The patient's condition has not yet improved. She left the hospital arbitrarily.