Our patient is a 38-year-old African-Ugandan man, of Bantu ethnicity. He presented to the Emergency Department of Mulago National Referral and Teaching Hospital with complaints of protrusion of a mass per anus, abdominal pain, low-back pain and vomiting for one day. These were associated with passage of loose, bloody and mucoid stool. Moments prior to the onset of these symptoms, he felt the ‘normal’ urge to empty his bowels. Upon bearing down he was unable to empty his bowels normally and found that he had to exert extra effort. He reported a sudden protrusion of a mass consisting of his ‘gut’ through his anus, accompanied by excruciating anal pain. Moments later the protruding mass began exuding a bloody and mucoid discharge. This was followed by severe low-back pain, generalised abdominal pain, vomiting and constipation. Because of these symptoms, he was first taken to the local district hospital from where he was referred to the National Referral Hospital without any intervention. The rest of his medical history was unremarkable.
Prior to all these events he was reportedly in good health. He first had overt haematochezia three years ago, and had had three episodes over this period. On each of these occasions there was an accompanying loose, mucoid stool motion. There was also an unusually strong effort exerted to effect voiding of stool. During those periods he also had on and off low back pain, which increased in intensity with each subsequent episode. The pain was relieved with analgesics and bed rest. He partly attributed this pain to his occupation of subsistence fishing; a laborious undertaking. He had no history of protrusion of a mass per anus previously, even on heavy exertion. He has had tenesmus and a feeling of incomplete bowel emptying on a few occasions. However, he had neither a history of abdominal swelling nor one of significant weight loss.
On physical examination, he was in pain, alert and maintained a knee-elbow posture. He was afebrile (temperature, 37°C), moderately dehydrated, but was not pale (hemoglobin level was 12.7 gm/dL), and had no significant peripheral lymphadenopathy. His radial pulse was 98 beats/minute, regular and synchronous with other pulses, and his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg. He had a moderately distended abdomen that moved with respiration. Further examination was done in the operating theatre with the patient under sedation. Blood grouping was also done. An intravenous line was instituted for fluid therapy and antibiotics were administered (1 gm, ceftriaxone and 500 mg, metronidazole).
Continued physical examination under sedation showed no visible peristalsis and no obvious masses palpable per abdomen. His liver, spleen, and kidneys were not palpable, and a tympanic percussion note was heard throughout the abdomen. On auscultation, his bowel sounds were increased in frequency and pitch. The rectal examination revealed a large, sausage-shaped mass protruding from the anal verge consisting of the anal canal, rectum and apparently, parts of the terminal sigmoid colon. It was 15–20 cm in length, with an anterior convexity. The lower antero-inferior aspect had a sessile, polypoid growth from the mucosa . It was covered with a bloody, mucoid exudate . There was also extensive oedema and areas of haemorrhagic foci, but no formed stool. The gut was viable with no signs of gangrene. The rest of his systemic examination was unremarkable.
A diagnosis of precipitous intussusception with rectal prolapse, causing intestinal obstruction, was made. General anesthesia was induced with the patient placed in the lithotomy position. The protruding mass was gently raised and a digital examination of the anal verge and canal attempted. The anal canal admitted only a finger tip anteriorly, and approximately 2 cm of the examining digit posteriorly. An incisional biopsy of the anterior polypoid growth (‘lead point’) was taken. Gentle but steady pressure was applied to the mass in a distal-to-proximal direction. Gradually, the mass was reduced completely over a period of about 5 minutes. At the end of the manoeuvre there was passage of flatus per anus and a reduction in abdominal distension. A digital rectal exam confirmed complete reduction of the prolapse and the intussusception, with the polyp palpable in the anterior aspect of the lower third of the rectum (5 cm from the anal verge). Histopathologic examination of the biopsy revealed an adenoma.