A 40-year-old male with a body mass index (BMI) of 37 kg/m2 but otherwise had no significant medical history presented with symptoms of headaches, diminished hearing on the right, and ataxia. Computed tomography (CT) and subsequent contrasted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large right-sided CPA lesion with a circumscribed, extra-axial, contrast-enhancing portion and a diffuse, infiltrating, and sparsely contrast-enhancing portion within the adjacent cerebellum suspicious for intraparenchymal invasion. Patent bilateral codominant lateral venous sinuses were noted on preoperative imaging .
Given the unclear extent of local invasion, the patient underwent a keyhole retrosigmoid craniotomy for diagnostic tumor debulking and subtotal resection. Intraoperative frozen pathology returned as meningioma while final pathological specimen revealed a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (NET). Postoperative contrasted MRI demonstrated patent venous sinuses. CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was inconclusive for a possible primary source. Subsequent Dotatate positron emission tomography scan utilizing gallium-68 revealed increased uptake in the tail of the pancreas.
The posterior fossa tumor was initially followed with repeat MRI at 3-month intervals. At 6 months, some growth was noted. After a multidisciplinary discussion, the patient underwent a translabyrinthine approach for definitive surgical resection. While the patient had serviceable hearing, given the tumor extent and risk of hearing loss even with a retrolabyrinthine approach, a translabyrinthine approach was chosen for increased surgical freedom and improved resection. Intraoperative findings were significant for a well-circumscribed extra-axial component that was resected as well as an intraparenchymal portion largely homogenous with surrounding normal brain tissue not amenable for resection. Total operative time was 481 min. No sinus injury was encountered and no fixed retractors were used. Postoperative contrasted MRI again revealed patent venous sinuses . Prophylactic subcutaneous heparin (5000 U every 8 h) was started and the patient was mobilized on postoperative day 1. He was continued on prophylactic heparin until discharge on postoperative day 5. The patient did well after surgery with mild gait instability and expected ipsilateral hearing loss.
The patient was discharged to an inpatient rehabilitation unit where on postoperative day 10, he developed significant headaches. CT demonstrated hyperdense signal throughout the venous sinuses. CT venogram confirmed the presence of thrombosis within the ipsilateral internal jugular (IJ), sigmoid sinus (SS), transverse sinus (TS), SSS, and superficial cortical veins but without associated hemorrhage . Hypercoagulable workup including prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time (PTT), international normalized ratio, platelet function, protein C and S levels, and factor V Leiden mutation was negative.
Given the relative proximity to surgery, the patient was started on therapeutic anticoagulation in the form of intravenous heparin with a PTT goal of 50–70 s to preserve reversibility should hemorrhage occur. The patient’s symptoms resolved after treatment was initiated and was ultimately transitioned to apixaban before discharge, which he remained on for 6 months. The patient received adjuvant external beam radiation therapy and started on lanreotide for the treatment of his NET. Magnetic resonance venogram at 6 months demonstrated complete recanalization of the SSS with partial recanalization of the IJ, SS, and TS. The patient remained asymptomatic at 6 months follow-up .