A 73-year-old man consulted a general hospital with a chief complaint of a hard mass in his precordia. He consulted our university hospital one month later. He was diagnosed with localized osteosarcoma of the sternum by clinical imaging (Figure A, B) and needle biopsy. Histological examination of the biopsy specimens revealed pleomorphic spindle-shaped atypical cells with osteoid, and he was diagnosed with osteosarcoma (Figure ). He was treated with 4 cycles of preoperative chemotherapy with ifosfamide 2 g/m2 on days 1 to 5 and doxorubicin 20 mg/m2 on days1 to 3 every 3 weeks followed by wide resection which involved the sternum, bilateral costal cartilages, and pleura, chest wall reconstruction with mesh, and plastic reconstruction with a latissimus dorsi muscle free flap. Histological examination of the resected specimens revealed a necrosis rate of 95% and a microscopically negative surgical margin. Pleural effusion was observed after surgery, and fine needle aspiration cytology revealed tumor cells in the pleural effusion. Two cycles of postoperative chemotherapy with ifosfamide and doxorubicin and 10 cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin 300 mg/m2 on day 1 and etoposide 100 mg/m2 on day 1 were administered every 4 weeks. No obvious lung or pleural metastasis was observed on chest computed tomography (CT) after these treatments. Eleven months after the surgery, blood tests showed a mild decrease of hemoglobin from 8.6 to 7.8 g/dl in one week, and he vomited fresh blood at the toilet of our hospital on the day of the blood test. Gastrointestinal endoscopic examination was performed promptly and showed a tumor on the gastric body that was like a type IIa + IIc gastric cancer (Figure ). Fresh bleeding was observed at an ulcer on the tumor surface, and staunching was performed with clippings and injections of ethanol and hypertonic saline-epinephrine (HSE) (Figure ). Two units of red-cell transfusions derived from 400 ml of whole blood were administered. Six days later, biopsy was performed by gastrointestinal endoscopy, and histological examination of the biopsy specimens revealed pleomorphic atypical cells with osteoid, and the diagnosis of the stomach tumor was metastasis from osteosarcoma. Partial gastrectomy with a wide margin was performed by laparoscopy to prevent re-bleeding, and the histological diagnosis was the same as that of the biopsy (Figure A, B). Most osteosarcoma cells expressed vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the gastric metastasis (Figure B inset). One month after the partial gastrectomy, a single lung metastasis was observed on CT, for which stereotactic radiation therapy was performed as a palliative therapy. The patient remains stable as of eight months after the radiation to the lung.