A 52-year-old male with a past medical history of morbid obesity, diabetes mellitus, essential hypertension, and hyperlipidemia presented to the emergency department with intermittent chest pain for 3 days. The chest pain was substernal, 8/10 in intensity, dull in character, radiating to the neck and jaw, without aggravating or relieving factors, and was associated with exertional dyspnoea and diaphoresis. Home medications included metformin 500 mg twice a day, lisinopril 5 mg once a day, and atorvastatin 20 mg once a day. The review of systems was pertinent for fatigue, headache, and chills. Upon presentation, the vital signs and physical examination were unremarkable.
Upon further evaluation, the electrocardiogram and chest radiography were unremarkable. The initial laboratory revealed mild anaemia, mild thrombocytopenia, elevated D-dimer of 3.85 mg/L (normal range, 0.19–0.52), and troponin-I of 3.1 ng/mL (normal, < 0.06). The temporal trends of laboratory parameters are listed in .
Given elevated D-dimer values and the presence of dyspnoea and chest pain, a computed tomography (CT) of chest was performed which excluded a significant pulmonary embolism; however, it did reveal a hypodense area in the centre of the cardiac silhouette which was reported as a possible artefact vs. the presence of air containing cavity .
The patient was admitted with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) protocol and pharmacotherapy with aspirin, statin, beta-blocker, intravenous nitroglycerin, and unfractionated heparin was initiated. Within the following few hours, the patient developed worsening chest pain, dyspnoea, and hypoxia requiring 4–5 liters of oxygen through a nasal cannula. A repeat electrocardiogram showed diffuse ST depressions, elevations in aVR and V1, and elevated troponin-I of 4.8 ng/mL. Emergency cardiac catheterization (see , ) revealed non-obstructive coronary artery disease and normal ejection fraction with elevated end-diastolic pressure of 32 mmHg.
During the procedure, the patient’s condition deteriorated with worsening hypoxia, confusion, and agitation requiring endotracheal intubation. Over the next 12 h, the patient had temperature spikes up to 39.1° C, tachycardia with heart rate above 140 bpm, and hypotension with mean arterial pressure less than 50 mmHg. The septic shock protocol which included intravenous fluids administration at 30 mL/kg and broad-spectrum antibiotics was initiated after the blood, urine, and sputum cultures were drawn. The patient was started on anti-microbial therapy including anaerobic coverage with vancomycin, aztreonam, and metronidazole. Prophylactic antiviral therapy with acyclovir was also given for possible encephalitis.
Further investigation revealed an elevated C-reactive protein of 30 mg/dL (normal, < 0.9), leucocytosis, lactic acidosis, and worsening kidney functions. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was negative for infective endocarditis but demonstrated an abnormal echogenic focus of unknown significance in the mid and basal septal wall (corresponding abnormal area of the CT chest) (; see , and). CT abdomen and pelvis with contrast was negative for any focus of infection. The lumbar puncture had elevated total white blood cell count (18, normal range 0–7) but was negative for bacterial or viral growth suggestive of cerebritis. Blood, urine, and sputum cultures were negative after 24 h from admission.
Despite aggressive treatment modalities with antibiotics, pressor support, and mechanical ventilation, the patient continued to deteriorate with multi-organ failure. The patient developed cardiopulmonary arrest with asystole rhythm and could not survive.
The following day, the patient’s blood culture grew C. perfringens, which opened questions regarding the source of infection and the presence of an abnormal area of focus on imaging modalities. Therefore, we requested an autopsy after a discussion with the family. The cardiac autopsy revealed an abscess containing cavity in the interventricular septum, communicating both with the right and left ventricles . The pathology of the myocardium showed significant neutrophils in the interstitium, abscess formation, and active myocyte damage consistent with acute myocarditis. The pericardium had extensive deposition of the fibrin admixed with neutrophils consistent with fibrinous pericarditis . No other finding known to be associated with increased risk of gas gangrene was noted on autopsy. Moreover, a retrospective discussion of the CT chest with the radiologist concluded that the hypodense air density lesion in the heart was most likely an emphysematous abscess of the interventricular septum.