A 3-month-old boy presented with a mass in the lower back, which was present since birth. It initially measured 3x2 cm with a tuft of hair and gradually increased in size. There was no associated bowel or bladder disturbance, no paucity in lower limb movements, or any discharge history from the swelling. On examination, the mass measured 10x15 cm and was soft in consistency, non-tender, non-fluctuant. It extended from L1 to the right gluteal region. Anthropometric parameters were normal for his age. Investigations revealed normal hemogram and normal biochemical parameters, including alpha-fetoprotein levels (85.9 IU/ml; reference range 5-877 IU/ml). The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbosacral spine revealed large subcutaneous mass in the lumbosacral region on the left side measuring 6.5 x 3.7 x 5.6 cm along with intensely enhancing solid component and multiloculated cystic areas. In addition, a bifid spinous process of L4-L5, S1 was noted. The clinical possibilities considered included lipoma, lymphangioma, meningocele, rhabdomyosarcoma, or sacrococcygeal teratoma.
The lesion was excised. No capsule could be identified peroperatively. On gross examination, the lesion contained both solid and cystic areas and measured 9x5x3 cm. On microscopy, a poorly circumscribed tumor was identified, which revealed immature mesenchymal cells arranged in long fascicles and trabeculae intercepted by fibrocollagenous tissue composed of bland fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. The tumor also showed lobules of mature adipocytic tissue (A and B). Few dilated blood vessels, some with stag-horn morphology were observed, more at the periphery of the lesion (C). The immature mesenchyme was characterized by round to elongated cells with vesicular chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli and moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm (D).
Additionally, there was evidence of sarcomatous transformation with the presence of islands featuring increased cellularity and brisk mitotic activity ranging from (3-4/hpf) (A-D).
The immature mesenchyme demonstrated immunopositivity for vimentin. Smooth muscle actin (SMA) highlighted the fibroblasts and myofibroblasts amidst the neoplastic component. CD99 showed diffuse strong perinuclear dot-like positivity. Cytokeratin, myogenin, melan A, desmin, and HMB45 were negative. S-100 highlighted the adipocytes. CD34 highlighted the blood vessels while was negative in all other three components (A-F). The tumor was also evaluated for ETV6-NTRK3 fusion and was found to be negative. Such triphasic morphology favored FHI, albeit with sarcomatous transformation.
Subsequently, a metastatic workup of the child was done, which included a bone scan and CT chest, both of which were normal. The child was started on intermediate-risk rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) protocol (consisting of vincristine, adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide) in view of the sarcomatous component. Presently, the child has completed 8 weeks of chemotherapy and is disease-free at the last follow-up (two years from the diagnosis).