A 46-year-old man presented with a six month history of gradually worsening numbness and paresthesia on the palmar aspect of the left thumb and thenar eminence.
Static two point discrimination in the median nerve distribution of the index and thumb showed a hypoaesthesia compared to the contralateral side. Tinel's sign of the wrist and forearm and Phalen's sign were negative. Active forearm pronation against resistance in slight flexion, resisted active forearm supination and resisted active index and middle finger flexion did not elicit pain. Grip strength was equal bilaterally. No masses were detectable on examination of the hand, wrist and forearm. No history of vaccination, viral infection or medication within the previous year was offered.
X-rays of the cervical vertebrae, elbow, forearm and hand were initially reported as normal. However, on postoperative revaluation the X-ray of the elbow was seen to demonstrate a well-circumscribed mass in the anterior aspect of the proximal forearm . Electromyography showed prolonged sensory latency in the distribution of the median nerve corresponding to compression in the region of the pronator teres (pronator syndrome).
Conservative treatment (anti-inflammatory medication and a diurnal long-arm splint) for one month did not result in any improvement. Surgical exploration was therefore performed under regional anesthesia and hemostatic tourniquet. The surgical incision began just medial to the biceps tendon and distal to the elbow flexion crease and continued to the mid-forearm between the flexor and extensor muscle masses. The medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve was identified and retracted. The pronator mass and the biceps tendon were identified. An intermuscular mass of adipose tissue was identified just lateral to the superficial head of the pronator teres, the dissection was not difficult but the median nerve was enveloped by the tumour . Microsurgical techniques were used to allow an extracapsular and non-traumatic dissection. A complete excision of the tumour of 8 cm × 6 cm × 3 cm was performed . The median nerve had an hourglass deformity as a result- of its compression . Histopathological examination of the tissue removed at surgery confirmed the presence of well-differentiated mature fat cells (lipoma). There were no neural or neoplastic features.
At follow-up, 14 months after surgery, the patient noted complete return of the sensation and resolution of the paresthesia.