This case concerns a 43-year-old Colombian woman with a personal history of asthma and a family background of Still’s disease. At the age of 21 years, she went to an alternative therapist for relief from severe diarrhea. The therapist administered an unknown intramuscular alternative medication, shortly after which the patient experienced a seizure-like episode. Ever since, the patient has experienced intermittent and progressive muscle weakness, dyspnea with minimal effort, and fatigue.
The patient initially consulted alternative medicine options and did not attend the allopathic medical specialist while her symptoms were intermittent and moderate for 12 years. She did not visit a general physician until her symptoms worsened and could no longer be managed. At 33 years of age, the patient was hospitalized in a tertiary referral center in Bogotá for two months, where numerous tests were performed, revealing various findings such as severe muscle fatigue in daily life activities, moderate physical deconditioning (functional class III), a moderate decrease in inspiratory and expiratory ventilatory muscle strength, low body mass index (BMI of 19.59 kg/m2), State-Trait Anxiety Inventory score indicating a low state of anxiety (17 points) and medium trait anxiety (21 points), a Beck II depression test indicating minimum range depression (11 points), a change in quality of life in all its dimensions, a deficit in self-care in all of its components, and a change in phonatory pattern. The patient was treated with physical therapy, supervised pulmonary rehabilitation, and nutritional education. She improved her functional capacity and quality of life, but the moderate physical deconditioning persisted.
Over the next four years, the patient presented progressive arthralgia and worsening myalgia and began experiencing new symptoms such as whole body swelling, headache, and nausea after exposure to environmental factors such as pollution, aerosols, personal care products, solvents, paints, and car exhaust smoke. In the history of her illness, the patient presented numerous infections, anaphylactic-like reactions, and respiratory distress secondary to respiratory hypersensitivity with intolerance to bronchodilators. She was managed with respiratory therapies with no further complications.
Numerous specialists conducted various tests in which IgE always showed elevated levels. Due to her worsening symptoms and reports of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, generalized pruritus, and urticaria related to several foods, the patient underwent allergy tests (RIDA qLine® Allergy, product number: A6342 Panel 3, method: indirect ELISA food-specific IgE antibody; R-Biopharm, Germany), which were positive for allergy to egg whites, starches, walnuts, chocolate, seafood, pork, milk, and food coloring.
In October 2015, the patient was hospitalized due to a new episode of acute respiratory failure. At the time, she reported new reactions to penicillin, crystalloids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, muscle relaxants, epinephrine, doxycycline, resins, dental products, deodorants, detergents, perfumes, and seafood. During hospitalization, she developed another four episodes of acute respiratory failure due to severe physical deconditioning. Diagnostic tests showed elevated C-reactive protein, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, vitamin D25 deficiency, and lung atelectasis. At that moment, she was diagnosed with laryngotracheitis.
In 2016, she continued presenting recurrent problems related to muscle weakness, fluid and electrolyte disorders, and allergic reactions to numerous substances. She, once again, underwent muscle and allergen tests (food-specific IgE antibody, tube-based AlaSTAT enzyme immunoassay; Diagnostic Products Corporation, Los Angeles, CA) that showed whole body weakness and deficient muscle flexibility and allergy to numerous environmental factors added to the previously diagnosed allergies (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, Dermatophagoides farinae, common meadow grass, fraxinus, homemade powder, penicillium, ragweed, cockroach, Timothy grass, grapes, pineapple, passionfruit, and tomato). Her doctors also conducted a work-up and ruled out the principal differential diagnosis . She received three new diagnoses: severe hypersensitivity, upper respiratory tract hypersensitivity reaction, and extreme chemical allergy.
She consulted our department in 2017 with numerous complaints including headache, dizziness, nausea, loss of balance, somnolence, hyperacusis, sensation of hyperthermia, discoordination, asthenopia, chronic diarrhea, vomiting, and dysmenorrhea. The physical exam showed dry skin and throat, moderate physical deconditioning (class III), cognitive impairment with memory loss, chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), malnutrition (BMI 18.5 kg/m2), and a moderate reduction in respiratory muscle strength accompanied by unstable march, intolerance against certain odors, extreme respiratory tract hypersensitivity, congestive pharynx, and expiratory breath sounds. The Quick Environmental Exposure and Sensitivity Inventory (QEESI) and Nethercott criteria were applied, reaching the diagnosis of MCS with severe deconditioning syndrome .
It is worth mentioning the patient’s personal perception of the disease and its impact on her lifestyle. She had to abandon her architecture career and move out on numerous occasions to avoid triggers (construction materials, dust, varnishes, polish marble, among others). Currently, the patient is being treated with supplemental nutrition, respiratory and physical therapy, oxygen, avoidance of triggers, and for acute crises, corticosteroids, and terbutaline. Due to the difficulty in diagnosing and managing her case, the patient has a poor general condition and no desire for additional medical interventions.