A 70-year-old male smoker (45 py), ex-farmer, was admitted to our department because of fever (38.8°C), dry cough and dyspnea. His symptoms commenced 5 days before his admission. He reported the same symptoms 8 months earlier when he had been admitted to another hospital. A chest radiograph had shown a large right-sided pleural effusion and diagnostic thoracentesis had revealed a neutrophilic transudate. The fluid had been drained (700 ml of fluid) and the patient had left the hospital asymptomatic with a normal chest X-ray rejecting any further investigation.
His past history revealed atrial fibrillation (treated with digoxin), and post-traumatic epilepsy, after a road accident 1 year previously, treated since then with sodium valproate 500 mg/day.
On admission, the patient was febrile, tachypneic and looked moderately ill. Physical examination of the chest showed dullness on percussion at the middle and lower part of the right hemithorax as well as decreased breath sounds. The rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable. Standard laboratory studies demonstrated mild anemia (Ht = 32.2% and Hb = 9.7 mg/dl) and slightly increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR = 47 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (CRP = 2.8 mg/l). No leukocytosis or eosinophilia was observed. A postero-anterior chest X-ray showed a right-sided pleural effusion. Diagnostic thoracentesis revealed a neutrophilic transudative pleural effusion [total cell count = 100/μl, mainly neutrophils (65%)], glucose = 95 mg/dl, LDH = 30 IU/L, total proteins = 3 g/dl, albumin = 1 g/dl). A therapeutic thoracentesis (drainage of 1200 ml of fluid) resulted in dyspnea relief. Further laboratory investigation, including serum complement analysis, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, thyroid hormones, antineutrophilic cytoplasmatic antibodies, immunoglobulin levels, serologic tests for hepatitis A, B and C, as well as for common viruses and atypical infectious agents, disclosed no apparent pathologies. HIV tests were also negative. Serum protein electrophoresis was also normal.
The echocardiography examination was normal. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest performed 1 day later revealed pleural fluid accumulation in both pleural cavities , while spiral CT pulmonary arterial angiography obtained simultaneously was negative for pulmonary embolism.
After exclusion of all possible reasons for the observed transudative pleural effusion, sodium valproate was discontinued and replaced with gabapentin (300 mg/day). During this period, the patient did not receive any other medication. Patient follow-up at 15 days, 1 and 2 months after his admission showed no relapse.
Seven months later, the patient had an epileptic episode and he changed his therapy on his own, from gabapentin to sodium valproate again. A month later, he was readmitted to our hospital because of dyspnea, fever, mild anemia with elevated CRP on laboratory tests and a right-sided pleural effusion on chest X-ray. Examination of the pleural fluid showed a transudative effusion with a small number of cells (90/μl), mainly neutrophils (87%).
Sodium valproate was discontinued and gabapentin was re-administered in higher doses (400 mg, twice a day), in order to avoid seizure relapse. This treatment was gradually followed by alleviation of the symptoms, elevation of hematocrit and normalization of CRP. No pleural fluid recurrence was observed after a sequential follow-up, up to 6 months later.