A 19-year-old boy born out of non-consanguineous marriage with normal birth and developmental history, presented with insidious onset, gradually progressive neurologic illness for 9 years. He developed progressive unsteadiness of gait resulting in swaying on either side while walking. His parents also noticed progressive slurring of speech and scoliosis of thoracic spine. He developed involuntary, brief jerky movements of his upper limbs for last 2 years. The severity of illness had increased to such an extent that the patient became bed-bound for 6 months. There was no history of fever, headache, vomiting, tremor, visual impairment, hearing loss, abnormal behavior, cognitive decline, seizures, altered sensorium, bladder symptoms, diabetes mellitus, alcohol or drug abuse.
On physical examination, thoracic scoliosis (convexity toward the left side) and pes cavus deformities were present. Conjunctival telangiectasia and slit-lamp examination for Kayser–Fleischer rings were negative. Higher cognitive functions and cranial nerves examination including bilateral fundi were normal except gaze evoked nystagmus in both the eyes. Motor system examination revealed hypotonia, distal amyotrophy and weakness (Medical Research Council Grade 4/5) in all the four limbs. Interestingly, frequent abnormal, brief, jerky movements were observed in both upper limbs (Additional file : Video). These involuntary jerky movement of arms appeared spontaneously without pain or abnormal behavior. It involved the supraspinatus, deltoid, biceps and brachioradialis muscles. It used to worsen by fatigue and mental stress, but not by change in posture or position. The jerks were not observed during sleep. Generalized areflexia and positive bilateral Babinski sign were present. Pain, touch and temperature sensations were intact but vibration and joint position senses were impaired below the knees. Romberg’s sign was positive. Pancerebellar features were present including dysarthria with scanning character, gaze evoked nystagmus with fast component toward the side of gaze, finger–nose–finger and heel-to-shin incoordination, dysdiadochokinesia, truncal and limb ataxia.
Routine hemogram and serum biochemistry including vitamin B12 level and thyroid function tests were normal. Peripheral blood smear for acanthocytes was negative. Electrocardiography (ECG) and 2D-Echocardiography were normal. The compound motor action potentials (CMAPs) showed decreased amplitude in bilateral median, ulnar, peroneal and tibial nerves. The sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) were non-recordable in bilateral sural and superficial peroneal nerves. Conventional electroencephalogram (EEG) and 24-h video-EEG did not show any epileptic activity during abnormal movement of limbs. Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) was normal. Surface electromyography (EMG) recordings of supraspinatus, deltoid, biceps and brachioradialis muscles showed semi-rhythmic, myoclonic bursts with a rate of 3–4 Hz without activity in other muscles. The duration of EMG bursts was variable ranging 100–350 ms in these muscles. From surface EMG, the myoclonus seems to originate in the C5–C6 spinal cord segments. We also performed EEG–EMG recording and EEG back-averaging technique to rule out any cortical association. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of spine and brain showed scoliosis of dorso-lumbar region with convexity towards the left side and vermian atrophy, respectively . Genetic study of nucleated cells in peripheral blood by “triplet repeat primed PCR (polymerase chain reaction) Assay” of frataxin gene revealed expansion of >66 GAA repeats in the intron 1.
The patient had four siblings including two sisters and two brothers. One of his 12 years old younger brother had similar complaints of progressive scoliosis, involuntary, brief, jerky movement of arms, unsteadiness of gait and swaying toward either side during walking for 3 years. Genetic counseling was done and prognosis of disease was explained to the family members. He was started on high dose coenzyme-Q and supportive treatment along with physiotherapy and occupational therapy. Clonazepam (0.5 mg twice a day) was given for spinal segmental myoclonus. There was no response to treatment. He is under regular follow up for the last 2 years with worsening of symptoms.