A 37-year-old African American healthy immunocompetent woman presented to an emergency department with chief complaints of abdominal pain, anorexia, cough, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea for 5 days. She admitted to tobacco use, drinking two to three alcoholic drinks two to three times per week, and denied substance abuse. Of note, the patient had not been drinking alcohol for the week prior to her presentation due to feeling unwell. Review of systems was significant for neck pain, productive cough with blood tinged sputum, fatigue, diffuse abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Her vital signs were normal except for tachycardia (heart rate, 110 b.p.m.). On physical examination, she had diffuse tenderness to palpation on abdomen. Laboratory tests were significant for leukocytosis with bandemia (16.7 K/μL, band 15%) and elevated lipase (>2,250 IU/L). Ultrasound of the abdomen was unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was significant for pancreatitis with a small amount of ascites . Based on these findings, patient was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis. At this point, the etiology of pancreatitis was unclear because the patient had not had alcohol for 1 week. She was transferred for admission to a general medical unit for the treatment of acute pancreatitis with unknown etiology.
On hospital day 2, the patient became progressively more tachycardic (heart rate, 135 b.p.m.) and tachypneic (22 breaths/min), developed worsening leukocytosis (19.5 K/μL), and became febrile (38.8°C) and hypoxic (SpO2 88% on room air). At this time, i.v. cefepime and metronidazole were started empirically. She was transferred to the intensive care unit. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with i.v. contrast showed development of bilateral pleural effusions, with scattered ground glass and consolidative airspace opacities of both lower lobes of the lungs. Of note, pancreatitis was resolved. Her serum lipase was normalized. Blood cultures from the day of admission were found to be positive for F. necrophorum. Further questioning into the patient's symptoms revealed that she had suffered from a sore throat 1 week prior to her other symptoms when she presented to the emergency department, and that she was still experiencing right-sided lateral neck pain. A bedside ultrasound showed a partial thrombus in the right internal jugular vein, which was confirmed on formal Doppler studies . A CT scan of the soft tissue of the neck with contrast showed a thrombus within the right internal jugular vein as well as new confluent opacities in the upper lungs bilaterally, consistent with multifocal pneumonia suspected to be due to septic emboli . At this point, the diagnosis of LS was confirmed. Intravenous metronidazole was continued and anticoagulation therapy was initiated with heparin infusion followed by warfarin. The patient's symptoms improved. On discharge, metronidazole was switched to i.v. for 4 weeks on discharge followed by 2 weeks of oral amoxicillin-clavulanate. She successfully completed her treatment without complications.