We present the case of a 49-year-old male patient, a non-smoker with a BMI of 33, a history of knee arthroscopy, and treated for hypothyroidism. No family burden was noted. The patient was seen in the emergency department of a university hospital for right subcostal pain spreading to the back and epigastrium after a dietary mistake. Among other complaints, he reported a temperature with a maximum of 37.5st C.
Laboratory showed only mild inflammation (CRP 15.6 mG/L, white blood cell count 13.7 × 106/L). Ultrasound and subsequent CT scan confirmed bile duct dilatation with no evidence of other pathology in the abdominal cavity. The patient was admitted to the gastroenterology department and underwent ERCP examination with papillosphincterotomy and biliary sludge extraction. The procedure was performed by an expert endoscopist with 20 years of experience and well-tolerated by the patient. In the following course, despite antibiotic therapy, the clinical condition deteriorated. Therefore, a follow-up CT scan was performed four days after the procedure and described advanced appendicitis with subhepatically located appendix. , . The patient was referred for acute revision and transferred to the surgical ward. The procedure was performed the same day by the head of the department. Due to the advanced findings, perioperative necrosis of the colon ascendens with mesocolic vein thrombosis was found, at the cost of open right-sided hemicolectomy, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.
Targeted antibiotic therapy was administered, Proteus mirabilis was repeatedly cultivated. However, the condition was still not favorable, a follow-up postoperative CT scan 5 days apart revealed an intra-abdominal abscess which was drained under CT control, and portal vein thrombosis which was treated conservatively. . Both Clavien Dindo grade IIIa. The patient was treated with imipenem/cilastatin 500 mg/500 mg antibiotics 4 times daily for 14 days and subcutaneous application of low molecular weight nadroparin at the therapeutic dose (Fraxiparine©). Further course in the standard ward was already without complications. The drain was flushed regularly and withdrawn when there was no secretion. The patient was discharged in good clinical condition to home care provided with oral antibiotics sultamicillin 375 mg 2 times daily for 1 month and nadroparin for 3 months. The entire hospitalization lasted 56 days. At follow-up, the patient was free of problems, and a follow-up ambulance colonoscopy was performed 5 years later and showed no signs of pathology. The patient developed a incisional hernia about one year after surgery, but it does not cause any problems and so far he prefers conservative management.