A 47-year-old female without any ophthalmic history presented to the ophthalmic emergency department complaining of pain, hyperemia and photophobia in the right eye (OD). The symptoms started during a cosmetic procedure of HIFU (Ultraformer, Medsystems, Brazil) around the right upper eyelid area. The treatment was put on hold as the symptoms started, and the patient did not receive the application to the left eyelid. The procedure was performed by a trained dermatologist without any eye protection device. More detailed information about the probe and the power was not available.
The initial uncorrected visual acuity was 20/30 OD. Biomicroscopy showed mild ocular hyperemia and a cornea with three punctiform epithelium defects with stromal infiltrate and local stromal edema, with an adjacent clear cornea . The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 16 mmHg in the OD. The anterior chamber showed anterior chamber cels 4/4+, an iris without lesions, and a transparent lens. Fundoscopy showed no abnormalities. The patient was treated with prednisolone 10 mg/ml (Predfort, Allergan, Brazil) eye drops QID in the first week and then tapered off until the completion of 30 days of treatment. The patient was referred to a cornea specialist and, after 5 days of treatment, the symptoms smoothly regressed, and the IOP remained at 16 mmHg.
After 21 days, the patient presented a full regression of symptoms, with uncorrected visual acuity of 20/20 (1.0) in the OD, slip-lamp biomicroscopy with a nonhyperemic eye, and an uninflamed anterior chamber. In the cornea, a healed epithelium with three stromal opacities remained, extending through the entire thickness of the stroma without edema. The opacity extension was registered on corneal Optical coherence tomography (OCT) . Corneal topography was slightly irregular but symmetrical, and no flattening or steepening was seen in area of the opacity. At the six-month appointment, the patient had no complaints; however, biomicroscopy showed iris atrophy and lens opacity in the inferior temporal quadrant, coincident with the area of initial and residual corneal opacity. The cataract was anterior cortical and did not reach the visual axis. No treatment was required so far, and her vision remained at 20/20 (1.0) OD. The unharmed left eye remained at 20/20 at all time points.