A 40-year-old Caucasian man with a body mass index (BMI) of 29 was admitted to our hospital with a 5-day history of fever. His physical examination revealed anorexia and fever (temperature > 39°C). His white blood cell count was 11,350 cells/mm3 with 5800 lymphocytes/mm3. His C-reactive protein level was 51 mg/L. His liver function test results were alanine aminotransferase 68 IU/L and aspartate aminotransferase 75 IU/L. His prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were within normal limits. Multiple blood cultures were negative.
The results of serological tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), hepatitis A immunoglobulin M (IgM), hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C virus, Coxsackie B virus and toxoplasmosis were negative. Viral capsid antigen and Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen IgG antibodies were positive, suggesting a past infection with Epstein-Barr virus. The serological test for CMV ELISA was positive for IgM antibodies (CMV IgM > 50 U/ml). The result of a CMV pp65 antigenemia assay was also positive, suggesting acute CMV infection.
On day 6 after admission, the patient complained of diffuse abdominal pain. An abdominal ultrasound revealed a small increase in the size of the spleen and the presence of free peritoneal fluid. During the next 24 hours, his abdominal pain worsened with the addition of rebound tenderness. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed the presence of a thrombus about 7 mm in diameter located at the proximal superior mesenteric vein .
An emergency laparotomy was performed. The small bowel as far as the distal ileum and its associated mesentery had diffuse edema and ischemic lesions . Furthermore, a segmental infarction of the proximal jejunum 50 cm long was present. An extensive enterectomy of about 100 cm of jejunum, including the necrotic segment, was performed, followed by an end-to-end anastomosis.
Neither the patient nor his first-degree relatives had a history of vasculopathy or thrombosis. Anti-coagulation therapy was administered preoperatively when the diagnosis was established in the form of small-fractionated heparin (enoxaparin sodium 6000 IU twice daily) and continued for 1 month postoperatively. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on the 11th postoperative day.
One month later the patient underwent a complete coagulation profile check, including anti-phospholipid antibody, factor VIII, protein C and protein S levels, as well as factor V Leiden and prothrombin 20210A mutations, that showed no deficiency. Six months later the patient was healthy and free of any symptoms.