A 67-year-old male with a history of type II diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder, and alcoholic cirrhosis was admitted to our hospital for medical optimization prior to a planned transarterial chemoembolization procedure for recently diagnosed hepatocellular carcinoma. The patient was feeling well at the time of admission with no significant acute complaints. Admission vitals were unremarkable, and his admission labs were notable only for chronic thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 27,000 per microliter.
In anticipation of his upcoming procedure, two units of apheresis platelets were ordered with a goal of raising his platelet count above 50,000 per microliter to prevent bleeding. Shortly after initiation of the first platelet transfusion, the patient complained of chills and was noted to have a temperature of 100.8 F. The transfusion was stopped, and the patient was administered acetaminophen and diphenhydramine. Approximately 1 hour later, the patient developed tachycardia, tachypnea, and hypotension and was found to have an increased temperature of 104.9 F.
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit of our facility where he was aggressively fluid resuscitated and started on vasopressors due to persistent hypotension. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated with piperacillin/tazobactam and vancomycin. Within a few hours of admission to the ICU the patient developed severe DIC requiring aggressive blood product replacement and intubation for airway protection due to development of a large hematoma at the site of his right internal jugular central line.
Blood culture results were available approximately 18 hours after the transfusion reaction and revealed bacteremia with a Gram-variable organism. Cultures were grown on MacConkey agar and had variable lactose fermentation. Given morphology and lactose fermentation results, the specimens were sent for immediate matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization—time of flight (MALDI-TOF), which positively identified them as genus Acinetobacter. Cultures were obtained from the unit of platelets, and the patient had been transfused with grew Acinetobacter as well, identified via the same methodology. Antibiotic coverage was changed to tobramycin and meropenem to cover possible resistant strains of Acinetobacter. Unfortunately, over the subsequent 24 hours, the patient's vasopressor requirements continued to rise. Given his ongoing clinical deterioration, further aggressive treatment was felt to be unlikely to improve his condition. A family meeting was held, care was withdrawn, and the patient expired shortly after. Autopsy revealed the likely cause of death to be septic shock with multiorgan failure. Bacterial susceptibility results available following the patient's death revealed full susceptibility to meropenem but only intermediate susceptibility to piperacillin-tazobactam.
The case was reported to the FDA, and samples were sent for genomic sequencing. Per the FDA, from May 2018 to October 2018, there were four patients from three states who experienced sepsis after platelet transfusions contaminated with Acinetobacter. Sequencing demonstrated that both the patient and platelet bag Acinetobacter isolates were molecularly related. The platelet donor was investigated, and no Acinetobacter isolates were identified in the patient's urine, perianal area, or multiple skin sites. During their investigation, swabs from the platelet agitators at the platelet manufacturing facility, as well as the hospital platelet agitator, identified Acinetobacter .