A 51-year-old female patient with a history of bipolar disorder and hyperlipidemia underwent a colonoscopy after a fecal occult blood test returned positive. Colonoscopy revealed a 30-mm-sized semi-pedunculated tumor in the lower rectum (Rb) and a black protruding lesion extending upwards into the anal canal. Based on these findings, ARMM was diagnosed . A laparoscopic rectal amputation was performed, and pathological analysis of tissue specimens revealed peripheral discontinuous melanin deposition . The tumor had invaded the submucosa, and one lymph node metastasis was detected. Histopathological findings indicated diffuse proliferation of atypical cells with prominent nuclei of varying size accompanied by melanin deposition . Immunostaining was positive for HMB-45 , S-100 , and SOX-10 . Based on these findings, stage III ARMM was diagnosed, and the patient was followed up without postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy.
At postoperative months 3 and 8, CT revealed no recurrence. At postoperative month 11, CT revealed a 14-mm-diameter tumor with a faint contrast effect at the margin of S7 . The tumor showed low signal intensity in the hepatocellular phase of gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , and positron emission tomography (PET)–CT indicated a large accumulation of FDG . Based on these findings, a liver metastasis of ARMM was diagnosed.
Surgical resection is recommended for postoperative oligometastatic recurrences of malignant melanoma . In the present patient, a single liver metastasis recurred 11 months after surgery for the primary lesion. A complete resection was possible via minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery; therefore, we decided to perform a laparoscopic partial resection of S7. The operative time was 4 h 8 min, and the amount of bleeding was 30 g. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7.
Macroscopically, a 16-mm solid nodule was observed together with melanin deposition . Immunostaining was positive for HMB-45 , S-100 , and SOX-10 , confirming the diagnosis of a liver metastasis of ARMM. Nivolumab was started as adjuvant chemotherapy, and 7 months after the surgery for the metastasis, the patient is still alive without any recurrences.