A 60-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with fever, chills, productive cough, and dyspnea for last two weeks, which had exacerbated for preceding three days despite taking oral antibiotics for about 10 days. Since he had been diagnosed to have bronchial asthma three years ago, he had taken the combined inhaled medicine of corticosteroid and a long-acting β2 agonist. However, he had no previous history of structural lung diseases including pulmonary tuberculosis and immunocompromised disorders such as HIV infection. He was an ex-smoker with 20 pack/year smoking history and his occupation was a farmer. On physical examination, inspiratory crackles were heard mainly on the left middle and lower lung fields. Chest radiography showed pulmonary consolidation with air bronchogram in the left lower lobe, which also showed fluid shifting sign . Chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bronchopneumonic infiltration with abscess formation in the left lower lobe, accompanying left pleural effusion . Bacteriologic examinations including Gram stain with sputum, pleural fluids, and bronchial washing fluids revealed no definitive causative organisms. Pleural tissues were also obtained through needle biopsy, in which the acute suppurative pleural inflammatory reaction was found and some tissues were cultured to examine any bacterial or fungal growth. As a result, there was no evidence of growth of bacteria or fungi for seven days they had been cultured.
Firstly, levofloxacin was prescribed as a single intravenous regimen. Up to hospital day 3, however, his clinical manifestation did not respond to the antibiotic therapy and even worsened . We decided to change the antibiotic regimen to aztreonam and metronidazole as a combination regimen. On hospital day 7, his symptoms including fever started to be resolved and then followed by radiologic improvement on chest radiography. After his discharge, we got a final bacteriologic report describing that M. lentiflavum was isolated from pleural specimen biopsied. The antibiotic regimen covering NTM (etambutol, ciprofloxacin, rifabutin, and clarithromycin) was prescribed to him in out-patient department, and his remnant lesions kept being improved , showing bronchiectasis and multiple smaller nodules of a tree-in-bud pattern in the left lingular segment and the left lower lobe .