A 63-year-old male patient was admitted to the department of cardiology because he had been suffering from recurrent anginal pain. The patient had a history of 2 MIs 10 years ago, as well as primary arterial hypertension for the last 20 years. The patient also had a history of hypertensive cardiomyopathy, and de novo renal carcinoma, which was diagnosed recently. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed good ejection fraction and no significant valve lesions. Coronary artery angiography showed stenoses in S2-50%; S4-75%; S11-75%; S12-75%; S13-90%; S6-65%; S8-75%; S10-100%. Abdominal CT revealed mixed polycyclic contours on the lower edge of the right kidney, with solid and cystic elements of a hypervascularized tumor of 10 cm (Figure
). Deformation of the kidney contour was evident. A council was arranged in the presence of a cardiologist, a cardiac surgeon, an urologist and an oncologist where it was agreed that the patient would undergo a simultaneous operation of CABG under CPB and right nephrectomy. The kidney tumor had not metastasized. Decision to do concomitant operation was taken because of multiple coronary lesions and recurrent angina even during hospital stay. After the induction of anesthesia the surgical team started by making the incision, the technique used was the extended sternotomy, it involves making a median sternotomy and then continuing it through a right sub-costal incision (Figure
). There were two major reasons for using this technique, first this enables the cardiac surgeon to intervene quickly in case the patient’s condition begins to deteriorate under the nephrectomy, second this technique avoids turning the patient around mid-way through the operation under general anesthesia to lay him on the back for sternotomy after having finished nephrectomy through a lateral incision. The retroperitoneum was accessed via Kocher technique, and the right kidney was removed. The size of the removed kidney was 10 × 5 × 9 cm, and the size of the removed tumor was 8 × 5 × 9 cm. The adrenal gland was left in place, no excessive hemorrhage was encountered, one drain was left in the abdominal cavity and the abdominal incision was closed in an effort to minimize wound exposure time and hence decrease the risk of infection. There was no difficulty in removing the kidney through this approach. CABG was performed under CPB. In total, six distal anastomoses were made. One of which was anastomosis of the left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. The entire operation lasted 5 hr 50 min., of which 1 hr 50 min for nephrectomy and 4 hr for CABG. Postoperative pathological investigation of the tumor revealed the presence of renal cell carcinoma pT3a N0 M0, G2.The patient was discharged on the 7th post-operative day in good condition. One year postoperatively the patient underwent abdominal ultrasound and thoracic X-ray, both tests revealed no metastases.