A 56-year-old Caucasian Greek male was referred to the emergency department of our hospital with a two-month history of recurring fever, loss of appetite and swelling in his neck.
Upon admission, he was obtunded and hyperthermic (axillary temperature, 38°C). The patient had a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min and a heart rate of 100 beats/min. He had no skin lesions. Upon physical examination, he was found to have bilateral cervical, axillary and inguinal lymphadenopathy. His lymph nodes were tenacious, unmovable and tender, and measured from 1.0 × 1.5 cm to 3.0 × 3.5 cm. A respiratory examination revealed mild bilateral inspiratory fine crackles. Chest X-rays showed right hilar lymphadenopathy. Laboratory data showed hemoglobin levels at 10.81 g/dl, a white blood cell count of 6,800 cells/mm3 (70% neutrophils, 14% lymphocytes, 12% monocytes, 1% eosinophils) and a platelet count of 346.000 cells/mm3. His international normalized ratio was 1.11 and his activated partial thromboblastin time was 32.8 seconds.
The patient's erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 64 mm/h, and his C-reactive protein concentration was 9.97 mg/dl (normal range < 0.6 mg/dl). His total bilirubin was 0.13 mg/dl, his serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) was 113 IU/l, his serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) was 36 IU/l, his total protein was 7.69 mg/dl, and his creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) was 1777 IU/l. His renal function tests were within normal ranges, and an examination of his cerebrospinal fluid revealed no cells and its biochemical composition was normal. A Mantoux test was positive (20 mm), an arterial blood gas analysis while breathing room air showed pH 7.39, PaO277 mmHg, PaCO2 40.6 mmHg, and HCO3 25.1 mmol/l. A protein electrophoresis did not show any monoclonal spike. Serolologic tests for hepatitis A, B, and C viruses and HIV were negative.
An ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed hepatosplenomegaly and a computed tomography (CT) of the brain demonstrated no evidence of parenchymal lesions. A CT scan of the neck showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the right cervical chain, measuring up to 3.5 cm . A chest CT scan revealed numerous paratracheal lymph nodes over the superior-anterior mediastinum, measuring up to 2.8 cm . An abdominal CT showed lymph nodes in the lesser omentum, the mesentery, the anterior pararenal space, and the upper and lower para-aortic regions, measuring up to 2.5 cm .
Cervical lymph node and bone marrow biopsies were performed. The bone marrow biopsy was normocellular with mature hematopoietic elements. The lymph node was completely effaced with a lot of epithelioid cells and occasional Langhans giant cells, constituting well-defined granulomas with caseous necrosis, typical of TB. Immunohistochemically, the cells were negative for CD3, CD20, CD30, kappa and light chains. A Ziehl-Neelsen stain for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) was negative, but the culture grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. The patient was started on antituberculous treatment with the standard four-drug regimen consisting of rifampin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol and isoniazid. After two months of treatment, he was symptom-free, with a prominent reduction in most lymph node swelling. The patient was started on a two-drug regimen of isoniazid and rifampin for seven months. At the end of the therapy, the patient had residual lymph nodes in the neck and in the mediastinum.