10-year old girl presented with early menstrual cycles. The condition started at age of one year when her parents noticed that their child has developed abnormal vaginal bleeding. Her cycles were regular, each cycle lasted for 3 days.
The patients had a negative drug history, the family history for any relevant genetic information or psychosocial history was negative.
The patient has well developed breasts, axillary and pubic hair at the age of five, and seven respectively. The parents also gave a history of difficulty in speech especially articulation and abnormal generalized body movements epilepsy since early childhood. She also had attacks of an inappropriate laugh.
A multidisciplinary team consultation were made and they advised for hormonal assessment and MRI of the brain.
EEG showed an organized background activity, alpha activity in the anterior leads and beta activity in the posterior leads, in responding to opening and closing the eyes, photic stimulations and hyperventilation showed epileptic discharges, with episodes of generalized epilepsy .
Serum TSH levels showed 2.04 u/molL, serum LH 5.49 mlU/mL, serum FSH 4.89 mlU/mL, serum estradiol less than 5 pg/mL, IGF 219 ng/mL, serum cortisol 210 nmol/l, ACTH 10.3 pg/mL, serum prolactin 20 ng/dl, serum parathyroid 25 pg/dl.
MRI of the brain showed an evidence of 1.5 cm suprasellar right hypothalamic lesion suggestive of hamartoma, .
The patient received leuprolide and antiepileptic medications and follow-up. During the follow-up period she developed 1 attack of convulsion per week.
The surgical team advised for surgery, during surgery resection of the tumor was performed through trans-callosal anterior inter-forniceal approach and the mass was sent for histo-pathological examination.
The operation was done by a specialist neurosurgeon and the management supervised by a specialist endocrinologist.
Histo-pathological examination showed neurons infiltrating gliotic brain tissue in a very haphazard manner, immunohistochemistry showed a positive staining for GFAP.
Four years after surgery the patient has attacks of chronic headache with no convulsions, MRI of the brain showed an evidence of poorly enhancing lesion about 6 mm in the hypothalamic region suggesting recurrence .
The patient currently is on anticonvulsant medications with few attacks of convulsions per week, and she has intellectual disabilities and low school performance.