The index case was a 57-year old man with ESRD due to diabetic kidney disease, on hemodialysis for 14 years. Other medical problems included hypertension for > 30 years, peripheral neuropathy and multiple arteriovenous dialysis access revisions. Medications were valsartan, amlodipine, doxazosin, metoprolol, cinacalcet, lanthanum carbonate, pantoprazole, zolpidem, and vitamin D2. Blood pressure was managed with three to four medications for many years. There was a remote history of sleep apnea that resolved after 45 kg weight loss, and no history of smoking or COPD.
Physical examination (after erythrocytosis developed) revealed blood pressure 126/74, pulse 84, dry weight 93 kg, body mass index 30.4 kg/m2. Head and neck examination, cardiac, respiratory and abdominal exam were normal. Extremities showed 2+ symmetric pulses, no peripheral edema, and non-functioning dialysis grafts in his right and left upper arms and left thigh, with a right femoral tunneled dialysis catheter in place. Neurologic exam revealed diminished sensation to pinprick and altered proprioception in both feet.
The patient experienced recurrent episodes of asymptomatic intradialytic hypotension , which persisted despite gradually increasing his dry weight to 97 kg and discontinuing anti-hypertensive medications between months 3–7. In month 8, midodrine 5 mg by mouth for blood pressure support was started prior to each dialysis session, increasing to a second 5 mg dose after two hours of dialysis in month 9. This resolved the intradialytic hypotension. Midodrine was discontinued in month 14, causing relapsing hypotension; midodrine reinstitution in month 17 resolved the hypotension again .
Investigation for the cause of hypotension included an echocardiogram, which demonstrated concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, 55% left ventricular ejection fraction, normal right ventricular function, and absence of pulmonary hypertension, pericardial effusion or valve defects. Adrenal and thyroid function tests were normal. An endocrinology consultant concluded that the hypotension was due to diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
Prior to the intradialytic hypotension episodes, the hemoglobin concentration ranged between 10.3–12.0 g/dL. The patient never required ESA therapy. The patient’s hemoglobin concentration increased over six months, peaking at 18.5 g/dL. The temporal relationship between monthly mean nadir blood pressure on dialysis and hemoglobin concentration is shown in Figs. a and a.
Between months 6–10, the patient experienced thrombosis of the right brachiocephalic and left femoral grafts. In month 8, he was diagnosed with a deep venous thrombosis involving the left posterior tibial and proximal superficial femoral veins, which was treated with warfarin.
Laboratory investigation demonstrated normal platelet counts, peripheral blood smear, and partial thromboplastin times, EPO level of 100.0 mIU/mL (normal range 3.7–28.4), negative factor V Leiden and negative JAK2 (V167F) gene mutations. Computed tomography of the patient’s chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed no renal or liver masses, but did show multiple, bilateral kidney cysts .
Queries to nephrologists in two large groups revealed four additional subjects with ESRD and unexplained (non-smokers without COPD, obstructive sleep apnea, malignancy, ESA or iron therapies) sustained hemoglobin concentration > 13 g/dL for > 6 months . All patients had prolonged episodes of intradialytic hypotension over several months, which preceded the erythrocytosis. Three of the five subjects had documented acquired renal cysts, and multiple vascular access thromboses .
The relationships between nadir intradialytic systolic BP and mean monthly hemoglobin concentration for all five patients are plotted in Fig. . In each case, linear regression revealed a statistically significant (P < 0.05) inverse correlation between blood pressure and hemoglobin concentration. To further evaluate the association between hypotension and hemoglobin concentration, a comparative analysis was conducted using average monthly nadir systolic BP as a continuous, independent variable and hemoglobin concentration as the predefined binary outcome (months when mean hemoglobin concentration < 13 g/dL or ≥ 13 g/dL). We employed a multilevel generalized growth model with a logit link approach (MPlus software, 2012) which accounts for within-subject variability in BP and hemoglobin concentrations. Lower BP was associated with a significantly increased odds ratio for a change from low to high hemoglobin concentration (OR = 1.163, 95% CI = 1.090, 1.241).