In December 2005, an 81-year-old woman came to the attention of the othorinolaryngology surgeon complaining of a painless, nodular, firm mass of the left parotid gland arisen a few months before. The patient underwent a fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) and 3 samples were sent to Department of Pathology. Although the CT scans suggested a benign lesion, the finding of atypical cells indicated a malignant tumor. Thus, the patient underwent a total parotidectomy with a complete excision of the lesion.
Axial contrast-enhanced CT scan showed a well-defined, oval, smooth mass in the depth of the left parotid gland, confined to the glandular parenchyma, slight enhancing and localized in proximity to the posterior facial vein and external carotid artery, with no sign of infiltration. The parotid gland displayed a normal morfo-volumetric aspect. Coronal T2-weighted , axial T2-weighted and axial T1-weighted images showed a well-defined nodular mass with a moderately high signal intensity in T2-weighted images , and a homogeneous low signal intensity in T1-weighted images .
All the images revealed sharply outlined profiles, suggesting a benign lesion.
Grossly, the parotid gland contained a well circumscribed gray-white nodule, partially plurinodular in structure, firm on the cut surface and 2.2 cm in diameter.
Histologically, the tumor was characterized by a biphasic cell population represented by myoepithelial and ductal cells. The myoepithelial cells were large, polygonal, with clear-staining cytoplasm and irregularly shaped nuclei. The ductal elements were composed of cuboidal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and uniform, round voluminous nuclei. The cells appeared to grow in sheets with an organoid pattern. Atypia was mild or absent. Mitotic figure count was very low. Moreover, spread to an intraparotid lymph node was observed . A diagnosis of EMC was made.
US, CT and MRI are widely used in the diagnosis of parotid gland tumors. In particular CT and MRI are useful in the detection of salivary gland tumors and in assessing their extent . Irregular tumor margins and infiltration into adjacent structures suggest malignancy. However, as for other human tumors, only histology can definitively establish the real nature of a lesion, given that some malignant tumors may mimic benign lesions at CT and MRI scans [-].
Salivary gland tumors are 12-times more frequent in the parotid gland than in the submaxillary gland, a difference that can not be explained only on the basis of gland size. Most parotid gland lesions are benign (83%) and are largely represented by mixed-type tumors . CT and MRI imaging are well characterized for the latter lesions and have also been described in the following malignant parotid tumors: carcinosarcoma , mucoepidermoid carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma, carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma, ductal carcinoma, myoepithelial carcinoma, sebaceous carcinoma and lymphoma [-].
Initially reported by Donath et al. , EMC arises predominantly in the parotid gland, more rarely in the submandibular and minor salivary glands.
To our knowledge, diagnostic imaging findings of EMC have been previously reported only few times [-].
In the report by Witterick et al. , the management of the lesion appears quite unusual. The right parotid mass was examined by US imaging in a follow-up period during which the size remained the same. Tumor resection was performed after a FNAC revealed malignant cells. Even though parotid EMC is a low grade carcinoma with a very slow growth, the absolutely imperceptible tumor enlargement described in the report seems to be contradicting with the intrinsic malignant nature of the lesion.
In the report by Silvers et al. , a case of EMC is radiologically described: CT scan showed a fairly well defined heterogeneous lesion with smooth margins and slight enhancement. MR images showed a lesion with intermediate T1-weighted signal intensity and a relatively high T2-weighted signal intensity.
More recently, Tas et al. reported a case of EMC with MRI showing an irregular and heterogeneous mass, as typically seen in other more common parotid malignant tumors.