A 79-year-old Caucasian, right-handed man without notable clinical history, excluding daily smoking of cigars and occasional alcohol consumption, presented to the emergency department with aphasia and right hemiparesis due to an ischemic stroke with proximal left middle cerebral artery occlusion (day 0). The rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable. Admission National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 7, and he was treated by intravenous thrombolysis (3.5 h after symptom onset) and two-pass mechanical thrombectomy (at 5.5 h) with Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction 3 recanalization and stability of the neurological deficits. On day 1, his clinical condition worsened (NIHSS score 11), with mutism, right facial palsy, dysphagia, right hemianopsia, and right arm paralysis and he had an urgent gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to exclude early recurrence, hemorrhagic transformation and arterial reocclusion. There was no evidence of early recurrence, nor of hemorrhage on the susceptibility-weighted angiography (SWAN) or on non-enhanced fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI sequence. Left middle cerebral artery was permeable . For newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation, enoxaparin was started after the aforementioned MRI on day 1 at 60 mg twice daily, which was switched to apixaban 5 mg twice daily on day 6. On day 2, he had a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. Urgent MRI showed multiple left hemispheric diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) hyperintense spots and a left hemispheric sub-arachnoid hyperintensity on FLAIR , which was not present on the previous FLAIR images and was compatible with a subarachnoid hemorrhage. This diagnosis was excluded by SWAN MRI sequence on the same MRI and a normal cerebral computed tomography (CT) the same day. The diagnosis of Hyperintense Acute Reperfusion Marker (HARM) due to extravasation of gadolinium into the cerebrospinal fluid, explained by brain-blood barrier (BBB) disruption [, ] was retained. An EEG on day 2 did not show epileptic abnormalities. Supra-aortic trunk echo-Doppler showed small, non-stenosing bilateral plaques of the internal carotid arteries.
The patient’s condition improved, with an NIHSS score of 4 on day 9 (persistence of aphasia, mild gait instability, and facial paralysis). Day 9 MRI did not show evidence of HARM. However, 28 diffuse dot-like hemosiderin depositions compatible with numerous microbleeds were detected by SWAN in the left hemisphere only (ipsilateral with HARM and stroke). Only two of these microbleeds appeared where a DWI hyperintensity had previously been present. Blood tests showed high C-reactive protein (20 mg/L) and creatinine (114 μmol/L), although he had no history of chronic kidney disease and no clinical arguments for an infective endocarditis, which was excluded with thanks to normal transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography and two negative blood cultures. Despite the increased risk of intracerebral hemorrhage associated with the appearance of microbleeds, we did not interrupt apixaban treatment due to the high risk of recurrent ischemic stroke in this patient with symptomatic atrial fibrillation, and due to and the very low DWI volumes of the ischemic lesions (< 3 cc). This decision was taken after a multidisciplinary discussion with the cardiologists.