A 46-year-old Japanese woman with a 9-year history of rheumatoid arthritis, which had been impossible to control even with methotrexate and several biological agents, was referred to our hospital because of leukocytopenia, proteinuria, hypocomplementemia, and positivity for anti-nuclear antibody.
On admission, she was 164.5 cm tall and weighed 58.1 kg. She was afebrile, and blood pressure was within normal limits at 104/64 mmHg. Multiple joint swellings with tenderness were evident in the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and pitting edema in her bilateral lower legs. She had been treated with abatacept and methotrexate for her RA. Laboratory examinations demonstrated anemia, lymphocytopenia, positivity for anti-nuclear antibody and anti-DNA antibody, hypocomplementemia, proteinuria, and hematuria . A specimen obtained by percutaneous kidney biopsy revealed active and severe lesions such as a massive mesangial matrix and cell proliferations with extensive deposition of immune complexes in mesangial areas and subendothelial lesions. She was then diagnosed as having SLE and LN class III (A/C), according to the ISN/RPS classification criteria . Abatacept and methotrexate were discontinued, and the patient was started on initial LN remission-induction therapy with 45 mg of prednisolone (0.8 mg/kg) and 3 mg of tacrolimus daily. This was selected instead of intravenous cyclophosphamide pulse therapy as the patient was unmarried and cyclophosphamide often results in impaired fertility.
Her polyarthritis improved immediately, but her urinary protein excretion increased and the serum creatinine level became gradually elevated after the start of therapy. Glucocorticoid pulse therapy followed by 45 mg of prednisolone and 500 mg of MMF daily, instead of tacrolimus, led to gradual improvement of the proteinuria and serum creatinine level. At that time, her peripheral lymphocyte count was almost stable at 920/μl and serum the IgG level was decreased to 670 mg/dl. The dosage of MMF was increased to 1500 mg and prednisolone was tapered by 5 mg every 4 weeks.
Two months after admission, the patient complained of upper abdominal pain, and laboratory examinations demonstrated liver dysfunction and coagulation abnormalities. Side effects of MMF were suspected and the agent was withdrawn, but the clinical symptoms and laboratory abnormalities rapidly worsened. Thrombotic microangiopathy associated with SLE was suspected, and additional glucocorticoid pulse therapy together with continuous heparin infusion and plasma exchange were started. Two days later, multiple blisters developed on the patient’s skin and she was diagnosed as having disseminated VZV infection. Despite immediate administration of acyclovir, the liver dysfunction and coagulation abnormalities worsened rapidly along with a severe hemorrhagic tendency. Massive blood transfusion and continuous catecholamine infusion proved ineffective, and the patient died of hemorrhagic shock 7 days after the onset of abdominal pain .
At autopsy, the skin lesions showed positive immunostaining with anti-VZV antibody in the epidermis, dermis, and interstitial tissue, and intranuclear inclusion bodies were also identified . The liver tissue showed severe, extensive necrosis upon hematoxylin–eosin staining and the remaining normal tissue except for the bile ducts showed positive immunostaining with the anti-VZV antibody . Although a serum sample collected at the time of admission was negative for VZV-IgM and positive for VZV-IgG, another serum sample collected at the time of blister formation was negative for both VZV-IgM and VZV-IgG and positive for VZV-DNA, thus indicating recursive VZV infection after the initiation of LN remission-induction therapy.