A 27 year old woman presented with intense pruritis for two weeks. She also complained of myalgia and generalized weakness of equal duration. Her past history was significant for rheumatoid arthritis and dermatomyositis, and was on medications for that. She had stopped her medicines four weeks ago, which included prednisone, azathioprine, and hydroxychloroquine. After further questioning, she mentioned that she gets paroxysms of palpitations occasionally associated with dizziness. She denied any syncopal episodes, chest pain, or headache along with these symptoms.
Physical examination revealed erythematous, scaly eruption, also known as Gottron's papules over the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints . She also had violaceous eruption (heliotrope rash) on the upper eyelids, accompanied by eyelid swelling , diffuse erythroderma , psoriasiform changes of scalp , and abnormal capillary nail bed change . At the time of initial examination, she had unremarkable vital signs, respiratory and cardiovascular examination. Laboratory investigations including Creatnine Kinase level, troponins, metabolic panel, and complete hemogram were within normal limits. Baseline electrocardiogram (EKG) showed normal sinus rhythm with no abnormal changes. Chest radiograph did not show cardiomegaly or infiltrates.
Telemetry monitoring revealed several episodes of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia with heart rate reaching up to 220 beats per minute (bpm). EKG was obtained during one such episode which showed supraventricular tachycardia with rate of 200 bpm . A two-dimensional echocardiogram was obtained which was within normal limits. Additional imaging studies including cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and cardiac computed tomogram were not performed due to low yield. In addition to high dose oral prednisone, she was immediately started back on her other medications. She was given metoprolol for the tachyarrhythmia. Telemetry monitoring did not show any recurrent episodes of arrhythmia over the next 24 hours. Rash and other symptoms improved considerably over the next two days, and she was discharged home on the above medications.