A 19-year-old Asian male came with multiple, irregular, nodular masses in his penis after a hair oil or candlenut oil injection . He underwent an oil injection for the purpose of enlarging his penis. Penile injections had been performed a year before presentation by some untrained, non-medical person. Two months prior, he felt the skin around his penis become darker, there was slight discomfort on his penis, and there was mild pain when an erection occurred. He did not have any symptoms of early ejaculation or erectile dysfunction. The pain diminished when resting. There was a history of oral medication and corticosteroid use one month before the consultation at the surgery polyclinic, but the discomfort persists. He did not have any surgical history or systemic diseases previously. Physical examination revealed that there was a small ulceration, slight fibrosis, and small, irregular, and multiple nodular masses without inguinal lymph node involvement. The preoperative laboratory findings, including urinalysis, complete blood count, and blood chemistry, were within the normal range. The imaging, including thoracic X-rays and ultrasonography of the abdomen, was normal. The MRI examination was not available at this primary general hospital. He was diagnosed with candlenut oil-induced sclerosing lipogranuloma of the penis (Soebhali classification 2) with a late reaction, including a painful and ulcerative penis. The indication for surgery in this case was pain and ulceration in the penile area. He was then scheduled for surgery. One general surgeon and one medical doctor at a primary general hospital carried out the surgery.
Considering there was no involvement of the scrotal skin, the scrotal flap became the choice over a skin graft for a better cosmetic and functional outcome. The surgery performed was a one-stage lipogranuloma surgical excision with a scrotal flap and V—Y plasty, including circumcision. A careful wide excision and removal of the penile lipogranuloma using Metzenbaum and monopolar cautery was carried out in all areas affected by the oil injection, starting from the dorsal portion of the penile to the ventral portion, from the skin to the level of the Buck fascia, without damaging the dorsal neurovascular bundle. After the penile lipogranuloma was completely removed, an incision and undermining of the lower penoscrotal junction skin were performed with precise measurements of the penile length and width. Then the exposed penile shaft was bent past the detached skin (penile scrotal invagination). The exposed penile shaft was sealed, utilizing bilateral covering from the detached skin, and the detached skin was approximately sutured to the neck of the glans penis. The closure of the ventral part of the scrotal flap was completed with a bilateral horizontal incision (a V-shaped incision) and suturing up the subcutaneous tissue in an inverted Y shape with the placement of a modified surgical drain from a sterile glove . The schematic illustration is shown in .
Postoperative management includes fluid maintenance, intravenous analgesics, and antibiotics. Removal of the drain and changing of the bandage were performed on postoperative day two, and the patient was discharged. He came to the polyclinic two times after surgery, at a two-week interval and a one-month interval, and showed no signs of complications such as surgical site infection or recurrence of pain or stiffness [, , , , ]. The operative procedure was successful, and the patient experienced positive functional and aesthetic outcomes; he denied any difficulty in erection or pain. His perspective on the procedure was, “I'm delighted that the pain disappears when an erection occurs.” His feedback was positive and showed satisfaction.