The patient is a 21-month-old girl who was presented to Myelin Disorders Clinic at Tehran University of Medical Sciences due to developmental delay; particularly in motor, and language aspects. She was the sixth child of consanguineous parents and was born at 40 weeks of gestational age through an uneventful vaginal delivery with birth weight and head circumference of 3000 g (Z-score -0.5 SD) and 33 cm (Z-score -0.7 SD), respectively.
Her mother had a history of two abortions with unknown etiology. One of her sisters had behavioral problems and one of her brothers had stuttering speech. The patient didn’t achieve her normal developmental milestones completely until now. At this age, she has acceptable social interactions, obeys one-step commands and need to be supported significantly in order to sit, and has the ability to make sounds. Her maximum speech ability does not exceed sounds’ expression. One of the chief complaints reported by her mother was her feeding and swallowing problems.
During the last clinical examination, she had a white subconjunctival lesion named lipodermoid on the lateral aspect of the left eye , diffuse melanosis on the back , atrophy of buttock muscles in addition to strabismus, pendular nystagmus, truncal hypotonia, pes planus, and hyporeflexia with + 1 deep tendon reflexes (DTRs). Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) score was 3/5. Her weight was 7 kg (less than 3rd centile, Z-score -3.8 SD) and HC was 43.5 cm (Z-score -2.34 SD).
Basic metabolic tests including plasma lactate level, serum ammonia, Tandem Mass Spectroscopy (MS/MS), urine organic acid analysis and creatine kinase were all normal.
At 16 months of age, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed delayed myelination, along with the presence of hyperintensity in the globus pallidus, which had not been reported in previously documented cases. Additionally, there was observed atrophy of the cerebellar hemisphere and vermis .
Whole exome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis was preformed as described previously . Called variants were filtered considering minor allele frequency (MAF) > 0.01 based on the Gnome Aggregation Database (gnomAD v3) Consortium, and Iranome population databases [, ]. Benign annotated variants according to American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) recommendations and clinical databases including Human Genome Mutation Database (HGMD) Professional and ClinVar were excluded from the analysis [, ]. The remaining variants were once again filtered based on the clinical information of the patient. Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) database was used to extract associated genes with the patient’s phenotypes. The following HPO terms were applied in the analysis: Generalized hypotonia (HP:0001290), Dysphasia (HP:0002357), Cerebellar atrophy (HP:0001272), Neurodevelopmental delay (HP:0012758), Abnormal corpus callosum morphology (HP:0001273), Brain imaging abnormality (HP:0410263), Fever (HP:0001945), Scanning speech (HP:0002168), Abnormality of the kidney (HP:0000077). The remaining variants were analyzed considering ACMG recommendations and the disease associated with each gene based on the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Men (OMIM) database. The candidate variant was checked in Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) software in order to see the depth of coverage and blat score of the reads showing the variant . We ended up with a novel homozygous frameshift 2 nucleotides deletion in the ATCAY gene [NM_033064.5:c.883_884del, p.(Lys295AspfsTer52)] .
Genomic DNA of the proband’s parents were extracted. The genomic region covering the variant in the ATCAY gene was PCR-amplified using Forward primer: CATGGCTCTGTCTGGACCTA, and Reverse primer: GGCCCCTTAAACCTCTTTTG designed by online primer3Plus tool . The PCR products were sequenced using a 3500 Applied Biosystems capillary electrophoresis machine. The sequencing chromatographs were analyzed using the CodonCode aligner software. The identified variant was confirmed by the segregation analysis in her parents . It was classified as pathogenic based on the ACMG recommendations and considered as the cause of the disease in the proband.