A 21-year-old man post total resection of the right parietal glioblastoma was diagnosed with lumber metastasis. At the age of 20, without any significant family history or past medical history, he presented to a local emergency department with impaired consciousness and left hemiplegia. Computed tomography (CT) showed intracranial hemorrhage in the right parietal lobe, and hematoma evacuation was conducted. Dilated veins were observed around the hematoma and the patient was diagnosed with intracranial hemorrhage from venous hemangioma. Five months after the operation, he began to complain of headache, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an enhanced lesion in the right hemisphere which was rapidly increasing in size. Partial removal of the mass and external decompression was conducted. Then he was referred to our institute for resection of the remaining mass and adjuvant therapy. Gross total resection of the tumor, placement of carmustine wafer in the resection cavity and cranioplasty were conducted at our institute . Pathology was consistent with glioblastoma, isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)-wildtype. The patient was ambulatory post-operatively. Radiotherapy combined with concurrent and adjuvant temozolomide (75mg/m2/day) per the Stupp regimen was conducted. Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT) of 60Gy was conducted at the edematous area surrounding the tumor, and IMRT of 50Gy at the tumor removal site. Four cycles of temozolomide (150mg/m2/day) were administered during the maintenance phase. At the same time, bevacizumab (10mg/kg) was administered twice, two weeks apart.
At 6 months after the resection of tumor at our institute (14 months after the first operation), the patient presented with severe back pain. CT showed an osteolytic mass on the body of the first lumbar vertebrae and MRI showed an enhanced lesion constricting the spinal canal . There was no spinal metastasis. The patient did not present symptoms of spinal cord compression such as bladder and rectal disturbance or lower extremities paralysis. Brain MRI showed no intracranial recurrence, and whole spine MRI and whole-body CT showed no other lesions. Needle biopsy of the mass on the first lumbar vertebrae showed densely infiltrating spindle-shaped cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm accompanied with regions of necrosis, which was consistent with glioblastoma . The cells were positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and its MIB-1 index was 30%. Posterior decompression with fixation and postoperative radiotherapy of 30Gy were conducted to relieve the pain. He further received one more cycle of temozolomide (150mg/m2/day) and two more administrations of bevacizumab (10mg/kg, two weeks apart). Three months after the diagnosis of lumbar metastasis, however, disease progression with multiple metastasis to the lymph nodes, the lungs, and the liver was found, prompting the transition to best supportive care.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Tokyo (#G10028). DNA was extracted from FFPE tissue samples and analyzed using the Illumina Infinium Human Methylation EPIC Bead Chip array according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All DNA methylation analyses were performed using R version 4.1.0. Methylation values were calculated as β values. The following filtering criteria were applied: removal of probes overlapping with single-nucleotide polymorphisms, those mapped to chromosomes X and Y, or the Illumina control probes. Copy number alterations were calculated using signal data from the methylation array using the conumee Bioconductor package version 1.26.0.
Primary and metastatic samples had overall copy number status in common such as chromosome 1p loss, 16 loss and 22q loss; however, the metastatic sample had more prominent copy number alterations, including newly acquired 4 gain, 7p loss, 7q gain, 8 gain, 13q gain, 19q gain, and 20 loss .