A right-handed, 43-year-old Tunisian man, without previous psychiatric history, presented with frequent and easily provoked spells of emotions (typically manifested by inappropriate laughing and crying). The patient was a nonsmoker and a teacher.
The patient had been crying for no reason more than ten times a day, but it was also observed that occasionally he could not stop laughing. According to his family, these brief fits of crying and laughing occurred in situations appropriate to the context and appeared like an uncontrolled exaggeration of a normal mood. These symptoms appeared after an ischemic stroke, 8 years ago. During the first year post-stroke, these symptoms were concomitant with partial somatic seizures (headache) diagnosed by a neurologist. These seizures were treated with carbamazepine. This treatment was stopped after 5 years of evolution without seizures. However, the gradual worsening of emotional disorders and their effect upon social and professional life led his family to make an appointment in our outpatient psychiatry service.
During the mental examination at admission, the patient presented with good appearance, was alert, cooperative, oriented in time and space, and had passive dependent personality traits. There were no manic and depression symptoms. Neurological examination revealed discrete hemiparesis in the left hemibody. The Mini-Mental State Examination score was 28/30.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the presence of multiple acute lacunar infarcts of lenticulocapsular and right semiovale regions. Electroencephalogram was normal during excessive laughing and crying.
Authors ran a brief test battery to exclude other organic causes, including blood chemistry, thyroid function, folic acid, vitamin B12, CRP, summary analysis of urine type II, coagulation studies, illicit drugs in urine and alcohol in blood, chest radiography, HIV, hepatitis C and hepatitis B viral markers, and syphilis serology, which revealed no significant alterations. EI was diagnosed.
Treatment with sertraline (50 mg) was initiated. The EI symptoms improved remarkably. After 6 months he presented with hypomanic symptoms such as expansive mood, decreased need for sleep, increased goal-directed activity. MRI did not reveal another stroke. So, we made adjustments in pharmacotherapy to valproic acid (1,000 mg/day) and benzodiazepine. He remained euthymic in the next 5 months of follow-up until he progressively presented with worsening of EI. We proceeded with another pharmacotherapy adjustment adding paroxetine 10 mg once a day. Four months later, he was asymptomatic. Medication with low-dose paroxetine was continued. Written, informed consent was obtained from the patient.