A 53-year-old woman presented to our emergency room with drowsiness and left-side hemiparesis. She complained of progressive headache and weakness on the left side within the past month. Plain computed tomography and contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain demonstrated a nearly 6.8 cm × 4.5 cm right temporoparietooccipital intraaxial cystic tumor with surrounding diffuse perifocal edema that caused a midline shift toward the left and right lateral ventricle .
For tumor removal, emergency craniotomy with decompression was performed. The extracted mass was soft and grayish, exhibited partial necrosis, and discharged yellowish fluid when cut piecemeal. The tumor mass was nearly entirely removed. A histopathological examination of the specimen revealed glioblastoma (World Health Organization grade IV) featuring nuclear atypia, cellular pleomorphism, mitotic activity, and considerable necrosis . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were focal positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; Fig. d) and negative for cytokeratin (CK) or S100. Staining for p53 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1 R132H) revealed negative results. The Ki-67 proliferation index was approximately 30% .
After tumor removal, the patient recovered well and received a complete course of proton beam therapy (50.4 Gy in 28 fractions) in another medical center. After 3 months of therapy, MRI conducted during her regular follow-up revealed a mild interval enlargement of the right temporoparietal GBM, measuring 4.2 cm × 3.5 cm at the largest diameter. For a more complete tumor resection, a second craniotomy for removing the recurrent GBM was performed under navigation assistance. A soft and necrotic mass with areas of rubbery consistency and gross appearance was extracted. After the surgical removal of the GBM, eight Gliadel wafers were implanted along the cavity walls and floor. Pathological reports indicated radiation necrosis and recurrent GBM with bizarre pleomorphic astrocytes —which were positive for GFAP —and with a high Ki-67 proliferation index (approximately 20%; Fig. h). The patient was administered a complete course of oral chemotherapy with temozolomide and targeted therapy with intravenously bevacizumab. The subsequent brain MRI revealed mild recurrent GBM at the right temporal lobe along the surgical margin . After 12 months, the patient presented with progressive headache, body weight loss, and easy fatigue. Under the suspicion of tumor recurrence, brain MRI was performed, which revealed obvious tumor recurrence along the surgical margin. Moreover, tumor seeding in the fourth ventricle caused obstructive hydrocephalus, midbrain compression, and midline shift to the left . A third craniotomy for removing the recurrent GBM was performed approximately 15 months after the GBM diagnosis. A histopathological examination of the extracted specimen revealed a bimorphic histopathological architecture, comprising gliomatous (approximately 30–35%) and sarcomatous (approximately 65–70%) components. The gliomatous component consisted of high-grade glioma and considerable necrosis. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated positivity for GFAP, a high Ki-67 proliferation index (approximately 40%), negativity for vimentin, negativity for silver staining, and positivity for phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN). The sarcomatous component was composed of spindle-shaped sarcoma cells with increased cellularity, arranged in an interlacing pattern. Extensive necrosis was evident. Immunohistochemical examination revealed negativity for GFAP and IDH-1(wild-type), a high Ki-67 index (> 50%), positivity for vimentin, positivity for silver staining, and negativity for PTEN. The patient complained of urine incontinence, progressive and intractable back pain, and bilateral flank soreness approximately 1 month before this admission. Contrast L-spine MRI revealed an intradural tumor at T11–L1 level at the ventral aspect with conus medullary invasion . Because of the patient’s urine/stool incontinence along with her unusual persistent back pain, T11–L1 laminectomy was performed to remove the intramedullary tumor 1 week after the third craniotomy. A soft and grayish tumor that bled easily and originated from the ventral side of the conus medullaris was noted. The metastatic spinal tumor was completely removed. Pathological examination confirmed glioblastoma with marked nuclear pleomorphism, microvascular proliferation, and focal necrosis . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for GFAP and negative for P53 and IDH-1. The Ki-67 index was approximately 30% . After the metastatic spinal tumor was removed, the intractable back pain was alleviated markedly, but the problem of urine/stool incontinence was not ameliorated. The patient died in January 2019, 20 months after the GBM diagnosis.