A 23-year-old female Chinese university student presented to the emergency department with acute onset dyspnoea, chest pain, palpitations and dizziness for 2 days. Her vital signs included a blood pressure of 105/79 mmHg with a pulse rate of 110 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 16 per minute and oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. Initially she was treated in ED with full dose anti-coagulation for suspected pulmonary embolism overnight while awaiting CTPA the next morning. Further examination demonstrated an incidental finding of a continuous machinery cardiac murmur best heard at the left parasternal border, loudest in systole (5/6), and 3/6 in diastole with a palpable thrill across the precordium. There was no relevant past medical history or significant family history. Her medical check-up performed during her application for an Australian student visa was unremarkable.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia. Laboratory results demonstrated negative high sensitivity troponin I and positive D-Dimer (1.12 mg/LF). Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) was negative for pulmonary embolism, with no other abnormalities noted.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was subsequently performed for investigation of the new continuous murmur – other conditions apart from an SVA which can present with continuous murmurs include; patent ductus arteriosus, coarctation of the aorta, coronary arteriovenous fistulas and an aortopulmonary window. TTE showed normal left and right ventricular size and systolic function. To the unwary eye, the colour flow at the RV inflow view may appear like tricuspid regurgitation. However, the continuous wave Doppler clearly demonstrated a continuous wave form throughout systole and diastole . Additionally, a significant left-to-right shunt was detected on the colour Doppler between the right coronary sinus and the right atrium . Interestingly, Doppler echocardiography detected diastolic flow reversal in the thoracic descending aorta which is more commonly seen in severe aortic regurgitation .
The patient then underwent transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) which showed a rupture of the right sinus of Valsalva aneurysm with shunting into the right atrium . The left-to-right shunt in the right atrium was directed towards the centre of the tricuspid valve, imitating significant tricuspid regurgitation. The tricuspid valve itself was normal in structure and function. A small saccular aneurysm of the right coronary sinus was seen extending into the junction between the right atrium and ventricle. A trileaflet aortic valve was noted with no regurgitation. There were no associated atrial or ventricular septal defects.
CTPA images were retrospectively reconstructed which visualised the SVA and shunt, likely originating from the right coronary sinus into the right ventricle .
Since the patient had an acutely ruptured SVA, a surgical repair was proposed given significant left-to-right shunting and to prevent RV overload. She underwent open-heart surgery with excision of the aneurysm and pericardial patch repair of the right coronary cusp-SVA fistula . At routine outpatient follow-up 4 weeks later, she reported no further symptoms, resolution of her cardiac murmur and successful repair on repeat transthoracic echocardiography.