A 68-years old woman, with no previous medical history, presented with severe weight loss, shortness of breath and cough (ECOG PS: 2). A chest x-ray followed by a thorax-abdomen-pelvis computed tomography (TAP CT) showed the presence of a 53 mm large mass in the left lower lobe (LLL) with pericardial involvment and a 30 × 18 mm large lesion with similar morphological features in the upper lobe of the left lung. Multiple bilateral lung nodules and a 26 mm large carinal lymphadenopathy were also reported . Bronchoscopic and CT-guided biopsies were attempted without success, ending up with a surgical exploration and complete removal of one lung nodule. Pathology proved a malignant stromal tumor with endothelial phenotype, consistent with a pulmonary localization of KS. Immunohistochemistry resulted positive for CD31, CD 34 and HHV-8; Ki67 10% . Physical examination ruled out any suspicious skin lesions, while upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy excluded mucosal localizations. Anti-HIV antibody and HIV antigen tests were both negative.
Given patient’s refusal of any medical treatment, she was started on a surveillance program. The first reassessment proved PD according to RECIST 1.1 criteria, with the appearance of a new nodule in the right mid lobe (RML), an increase in size of the known lesion in the LLL (60 mm) and a stability of the carinal lymphnodes . Despite the persistence of symptoms, due to patient’s choice, no treatment was started. A new radiological assessment, performed after 5 months from diagnosis, showed a minor reduction in size of the lymphadenopathies and an almost complete resolution of the nodule in the RML. Given radiological evidence of disease regression and improvement in symptoms, the patient underwent a further TAP CT five months later, showing PR, with a reduction in number of lung nodules and reduction in size on both the lesion in the LLL and carinal lymphnodes . Up to date, at nineteen months from diagnosis, disease is still in remission with stable pulmonary nodules and no evidence of systemic spread, in absence of any medical treatment. The patient is still on surveillance through three-monthly clinical assessment and six-monthly TAP CT, asymptomatic, ECOG PS: 0.