A 69-year old Chinese female patient presenting intractable intermittent fever, dry cough, chest tightness and right lower abdomen pain for 2 days was sent to our hospital for further novel coronavirus pneumonia and cancer treatments. On January 28, 2020, the patient developed a 38.4 °C fever, accompanied by fatigue and muscle soreness. This patient denied any medical, trauma or surgical history. Laboratory tests indicated slightly increased neutrophil percentage (74.0%) and decreased lymphocyte percentage (18.6%). A chest computed tomography (CT) scan on February 1 showed a few ground-glass opacities in the lower lobes of both lungs, suggesting suspicion for ‘infectious lesions of both lungs’ . Tests for influenza virus and other infectious agents were negative. However, the novel coronavirus nucleic acid test was not taken due to her mild symptoms and lack of nucleic acid detection kits. After treatment with Ceftriaxone and Abidol, her fever was not moderated yet. On February 8, a repeat CT scan showed ground-glass opacity lesions significantly increased compared with the previous one . Laboratory tests revealed remarkably decreased lymphocyte count (0.63 G/L), but normal neutrophil count (4.38 G/L). With adding methylprednisolone to the original treatment, patient’s fever gradually reduced to normal. Although the patient denied any contact with confirmed case in this period, a throat swab was obtained and the nucleic acid test for SARS-CoV-2 came back positively on February 20. However, she reappeared with fever on February 24, with a body temperature of up to 38.3 °C, and accompanied by dry cough, chest tightness and abdominal pain (especially in the right lower abdomen). Due to the poor curative effect in the local hospital, she was transferred to the infectious disease ward in our hospital on February 26. An abdomen CT scan indicated the tumorous lesion of the ascending colon with perforated and local wrapped changes on February 27 . The patient was diagnosed with ‘Severe novel coronavirus pneumonia’ and ‘Incomplete bowel obstruction: Colon cancer?’. Thereafter, the patient obtained a treatment for novel coronavirus pneumonia with Abidol and Moxifloxacin, as well as the corresponding symptomatic and nutritional support therapies. After above treatments, however, the patient still demonstrated intermittent fever while other accompanying symptoms were significantly relieved since February 29. Paradoxically, the follow-up results of nucleic acid retests for SARS-CoV-2 were negative on February 29, March 2 and March 10, respectively, with positive results of serum SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies on March 2, suggesting recovery from novel coronavirus pneumonia.
It is recommended to perform an aggressive surgical treatment for the patient, considering the fever caused by tumor, the risk of tumor progression and potential recurrences of abdominal pain, and even subsequent complete bowel obstruction which could make the general condition worse or be readmitted again. Furthermore, the patient did however present extreme motivation for surgery in an excellent general condition, optimistic mental state and well-nourished status despite the weight loss throughout the whole treatment period. Additionally, no other comorbidity factors contraindicated the operation. Based on carefully preoperative evaluation and preparation, our team performed an exploratory laparotomy for this patient via continuous epidural anesthesia, which took around 3.5 h, on March 11, 2020. Upon entering the abdominal cavity through a midline incision, we found that the tumor was approximately 6.0 cm × 5.0 cm, originating from the starting portion of ascending colon. The lesion was wrapped by omentum and surrounding tissues and accompanied by inflammatory adhesions to lateral abdominal wall and a portion of terminal ileum, which was consistent with CT scan results . No invasion to surrounding organs was found. Therefore, the right colectomy with lymph node dissection was performed. Five days after surgery, the patient could exhaust and defecate from the anus, suggesting relatively late recovery of bowel function. Until March 20, she gradually recovered without postoperative complications and was discharged on the 9th day after operation. Currently, the patient is being followed up closely as an outpatient.
The pathologic examination found a 5.0 cm × 5.0 cm ulcerative mass in the ileocecal area 1.0 cm from ileocecal valve, showing a gray white surface and necrosis in the center grossly. Microscopically, tumor invaded into the subserosal adipose tissue without lymph node metastasis, diagnosed as mucinous adenocarcinoma in the histologic diagnosis with pT3N0 . Of note, the significant degeneration, necrosis and slough of focal intestinal and colonic mucosal epithelial cells were observed in terminal ileum and ileocecal area surrounding the tumor, respectively .