Our patient was a 26-year-old female who presented to the neurosurgery clinic with a sudden onset severe and continuous headache which was localized to the occipital region. It was exacerbated with postural change and associated with vertigo and vomiting. She was being managed along the lines of migraine for the past 5 years and only sought neurosurgical evaluation once her symptoms became severe during the last year. Neurological examination revealed no unusual findings other than a mild dysdiadochokinesia in her right hand.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 56 × 55 × 47mm, thick-walled infratentorial, and extra-axial lesion within the cisterna magna, which appeared hyperintense on T1-weighted images and hypointense on T2-weighted images . There was an internal well-defined area at the right lateral aspect showing T1 hypointense rim and a signal dropout on susceptibility-weighted images. A stalk emerging from the posterior aspect of the lesion extended through the occipital protuberance and ended just beneath the skin causing its puckering. The lesion caused cerebellar compression and effacement of the fourth ventricle, thus causing dilation of lateral and third ventricles.
Suboccipital craniotomy was performed with the patient in a prone position. Intraoperatively, a greenish solid cumcystic lesion was found. The inside contained hair follicles, a tooth, and fluid with mobile-oil-like consistency. An external ventricular drain was placed through a separate incision at Keen’s point set at 15 cm of H20.
Histopathology revealed features consistent with mature teratoma. The cyst wall was lined by stratified squamous epithelium with underlying skin appendages. Areas of calcification with hemosiderin-laden macrophages and foreign body type giant cell reaction were also seen. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 4th postoperative day.
She remained symptom-free on her initial follow-up visit but complained of headache and vomiting on her last follow-up (at 9 months). The MRI scan then showed postoperative changes with a mildly dilated fourth ventricle but no evidence of residual or recurrent disease. Our patient, however, did not follow-up further after this last visit.