A 67-year-old Sri Lankan woman was referred by a general practitioner to evaluate high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) incidentally detected while investigating for acute febrile illness. On admission to the ward she was asymptomatic. There was no history of prolonged fever, altered bowel habits, myalgia, or arthralgia; there was no history of backache, or urinary or bowel symptoms. No significant weight changes or change in appetite were noted. A symptomatic evaluation and systemic review was found to be normal.
She had been previously diagnosed as having hypertension, dyslipidemia, bronchial asthma, and osteoarthritis of bilateral knee joints. Her prescribed medication was rosuvastatin 5 mg taken at night with hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg taken in the morning, and glucosamine sulfate preparation and Ecosprin (aspirin) 100 mg taken at night. Two years before this presentation she presented to a surgical department with a history of painful neck lump and was found to have cervical lymph adenopathy which was biopsied under local anesthesia. The histological appearance favored granulomatous inflammation without caseation. Atypical mycobacterial infection/fungal granulomata/TB with superadded pyogenic infection were considered for the differential diagnoses. She was given category 1 antiTB medications and managed as TB lymphadenitis; treatment continued for 6 months and was completed in liaison with a pulmonologist.
During the current admission a complete blood count (CBC) showed evidence of mild anemia. Her hemoglobin level was 9.1 g/dl; her mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was 86.5 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) was 27.8 pg, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) was 31.4 g/dl. A direct blood film examination showed normocytic normochromic, mildly hypochromic microcytic anemia. Mild anisopoikilocytosis was noted. Her white blood cell count (WBC) was normal in number and found to have lymphocytes predominance. However, there were no features of lymphoproliferative disorder. Mild eosinophilia and plasmacytoid lymphocytes were seen. Platelet count and morphology was normal. Her ESR was 102 mm/hour and was persistently high throughout the period of evaluation. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) was within normal range. Baseline liver and renal profiles were normal. Urine Bence Jones proteins were negative. A skeletal survey did not reveal any abnormality. A chest X-ray was normal and sputum for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) was negative. Lactate dehydrogenase level in serum was normal. Serum protein electrophoresis indicated elevated alpha fraction, beta 2 fraction, and polyclonal increase of gamma fraction. Urine analysis had evidence of pyuria but culture was sterile. Urine for AFB was negative. As she was asymptomatic and screening was negative she was discharged from the ward and followed up as an out-patient.
A month after discharge she presented with fever and recurrence of lymphadenopathy to a local chest clinic and a biopsy revealed noncaseating granulomata. Immunohistochemistry did not reveal any evidence of hematological malignancy. A TB polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative. She was started on category 1 anti-TB treatment.
While on antiTB treatment for 2 months she was admitted to this hospital with history of symmetrical arthritis of bilateral hands and legs, persisting intermittent low grade fever without chills or rigors, and backache. She complained that both large and small joints were painful and swollen. She was diaphoretic and had vomiting, severe loss of appetite, and excessive sweating. She did not have any history of rashes. She had no history of jaundice.
On examination she was febrile, diaphoretic. Bilateral extremity edema was noted but her joints were not inflamed. Abdominal, chest, cardiac, and neurological examinations were normal.
Her ESR was 130; in CBC, her WBC was 12,000 with 82% neutrophils. Her CRP was 200. Her creatine phosphokinase (CPK) level was normal. Possible sepsis was suspected and she was started on intravenously administered ceftriaxone. Her serum calcium level, acetylcholine esterase level, and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her whole spine were normal. Baseline renal and liver profiles were normal except for mild elevation of transaminases. AOSD, sarcoidosis, polymyalgia rheumatic spectrum disorder, and remitting seronegative symmetrical synovitis with pitting edema (RS3PE) syndrome were taken in a differential diagnosis and further evaluated. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) full report did not show any evidence of neurosarcoidosis, TB PCR/culture was negative, and purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test was less than 5 mm. Her antinuclear antibody (ANA)/rheumatoid factor (RF) was negative. Extractable nuclear antigen profile including anti-U1 ribonucleoprotein (RNP) was negative. CSF, serial blood cultures, and serial urine cultures were sterile. Peripheral blood rapid infection detection and PCR amplification for known bacterial and fungal species were done and found to be negative for trace DNA/RNA. Serum ferritin was mildly elevated. Antibiotics were changed in liaison with microbiology team into meropenem and vancomycin and continued for 10 days without success. Persistent fever with raised inflammatory markers was noted even after 3 weeks. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography were normal. Hepatitis serology, retroviral screening, antibody against cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) were done and found to be negative. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of her chest and abdomen was done and no evidence of TB or fungal infections was identified. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, colonoscopy, and serial ultrasonography were normal.
After extensive diagnostic workup, finally we came to a conclusion and she was diagnosed based on Yamaguchi criteria as having AOSD presenting with granulomatous lymphadenopathy; she was started on intravenously administered methylprednisolone pulse therapy 500 mg, 250 mg, and 250 mg in 3 consecutive days followed by low-dose maintenance steroids and her condition remarkably improved. Her disease remission was characterized by resolving lymphadenopathy, normalization of inflammatory markers, and dramatically improving clinical symptoms. She was discharged for follow-up as an out-patient as she was in disease remission. She was reevaluated after 6 months and 1 year and reported no additional problems and she was doing her normal everyday life.