A previously healthy 62-year-old Hispanic gravida 5 woman (2 spontaneous abortions), presented with a 3-week history of increasing shortness of breath, palpitations, extreme weakness, new-onset hot flashes, and right flank pain. Physical examination was remarkable for tachycardia (heart rate ~ 100 ×), temperature of 37.7 °C, speech compromised by shortness of breath, eyes with pale conjunctivae (with no erythema, chemosis, or exophthalmos), thyroid gland normal to palpation without nodules (~ 15 g), heart sounds increased in frequency with a systolic tricuspid murmur, basal lung breath sounds decreased to auscultation, hepatomegaly of ~ 5 cm below the right costal margin extending to the epigastrium (with hardness and tenderness to palpation in this area), as well as hyperreflexia and tremor. Chest X-ray and renal ultrasound demonstrated normal lung and renal findings but multiple liver nodules.
She was referred to our institution for evaluation and management. Laboratory tests indicated normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 8.1 g/dL), elevated lactate dehydrogenase at 3054 U/L (122–222), alkaline phosphatase 434 U/L (40–29), and elevated T4 with suppressed TSH consistent with thyrotoxicosis . Her echocardiogram showed pulmonary hypertension (65 mmHg), dilated right atrium and ventricle, tricuspid regurgitation, adequate left ejection fraction, and a previously unknown atrial septal defect with inter-auricular communication with a right to left shunt and high risk for embolism. Contrast-enhanced 18FDG PET-CT showed hepatomegaly with multiple large FDG-avid liver masses, with a focus of FDG avidity in the stomach with no structural correlate .
Her thyroid function tests and thyroid scan with technetium 99m pertechnetate (99mTcO4−) were consistent with thyrotoxicosis due to hyperthyroidism . Graves’ disease was ruled out in the setting of no signs of Graves orbitopathy, no goiter, and negative thyroid stimulating antibodies (TSI index < 1.0 and thyroid receptor antibody < 1.00 IU/L). At presentation, she also had mildly altered liver function tests [AST 137 U/L (10–50), ALT 70 U/L (8–54), total bilirubin 1.8 mg/dL (0.3–1.3].
She was started on propranolol and antithyroid drug (methimazole 30 mg/day). Upon stabilization of severe thyrotoxicosis, upper endoscopy was performed, showing a ~ 5 cm bleeding lesion in the greater stomach curvature . Gastric biopsy was consistent with choriocarcinoma with extensive necrosis with no evidence of concurrent conventional adenocarcinoma nor endodermal sinus component; immunostaining with antibodies against hCG, GATA3, LPH, PLAP, and CK7 was positive . Neoplastic cells had strong and diffuse membranous reactivity to PD-L1 antibody.
Subsequently, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin hormone (β-hCG) was found to be extremely elevated at 2,408,171 mIU/mL. Other tumor markers (CA-125, CEA, and AFP) were measured and unrevealing. After this workup, an extragonadal germinal tumor (primary gastric choriocarcinoma) with extensive liver metastases and paraneoplastic hyperthyroidism was deemed the most likely diagnosis.
The patient was treated initially with methotrexate (200 mg/m2) and subsequently with etoposide and cisplatin. Methimazole was titrated down from 30 to 10 mg/day, achieving euthyroidism. The thyrotoxicosis was effectively controlled with antithyroid drug and concurrent chemotherapy.
One month after initial diagnosis, the patient was readmitted with hemorrhagic hypovolemic shock due to gastrointestinal bleeding and acute liver failure with severe coagulopathy (AST 1346 U/L, ALT 500 U/L, total bilirubin 5.6 mg/dL, altered coagulation: INR 2.17, fibrinogen 111 mg/dL). Methimazole was discontinued upon liver failure onset. She required intensive care therapies with a multidisciplinary team, but unfortunately died ~ 1.5 months post presentation in the setting of multiple organ failure.