The White British patient received a domino liver transplant for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis when he was 66 years old (in 2009). The donor of the liver had the most common form of the TTR mutation (Val30Met). The recipient was a never-smoker and had no significant alcohol history. He had a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (diagnosed at age 62, with retinopathy from age 66) and hypertension. He subsequently developed chronic kidney disease with exacerbations, low vitamin B12 replaced with injections, pulmonary embolism, paroxysmal supra-ventricular tachycardia, heart failure, transient ischaemic attack, and episodes of weight loss. At the point of referral to outpatient neurology (age 76), he was taking tacrolimus and prednisolone for the transplant, plus medications to manage his vascular risk, clotting tendency, diabetes and heart failure, amongst other problems (see Table ). He was widowed, and a retired office worker. He lived alone with carer support 5 times per week.
He first noticed neuropathic symptoms 8 years post-transplant (at age 74), alongside some weight loss. This began as a numbness and paraesthesia in his feet, which progressed over 2 years to include sensory involvement of his knees then hands, and motor involvement in his ankles. His mobility became significantly impaired, at some times needing a wheelchair; this was complicated by chronic infection of the right knee and calf, and development of a Charcot knee joint. He had also noticed some dizziness on standing, but without loss of consciousness; he had not experienced gastrointestinal disturbance.
On examination, he had blood pressure 143/78 and heart rate 68, with no significant postural blood pressure drop. He had a moderate to severe peripheral neuropathy, including bilateral reduced ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion (power MRC grade 1/5) as well as reduced inversion and eversion. In the upper limbs, power was intact aside from MRC grade 4/5 of first dorsal interosseous and adductor digiti mimimi bilaterally. Pinprick and light touch were impaired in a length-dependent manner as far as his knees and over his fingers. Vibration sense was impaired as far as the anterior superior iliac spines.
He had evidence of impaired renal function [serum creatinine (130 µmol/L), low creatinine clearance (31 mL/min), raised albumin:creatinine ratio (56 mg/mmol), and urinary protein loss (0.6 g/day)]. Immunoglobulins were normal, with no paraprotein. Bence Jones protein was absent and serum free light chain kappa:lambda ratio was normal. N-terminal pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide (NT-proBNP) was raised at 938 ng/L. He had normal liver function tests.
Nerve conduction studies were not possible in the lower limbs due to significant oedema and chronic skin changes. In the upper limbs, superficial sensory responses were unobtainable; motor responses in general showed mild slowing (median nerve velocity 35 m/s) but more pronounced loss of amplitude (median nerve 0.5 mV). Overall, this was considered suggestive of a predominantly axonal polyneuropathy.
Peripheral nerve biopsy was not undertaken due to concerns over poor healing. In the context of this and the ATTR status of his donor liver, he was referred to the UK National Amyloidosis Centre. Serum Amyloid P component (SAP) scintigraphy showed no evidence of visceral amyloid deposits. There was no evidence of cardiac amyloidosis on echocardiography or diphosphono-1,2-propanodicarboxylic acid (DPD) scintigraphy. A fat aspirate contained ATTR amyloid deposits, typed by mass spectrometry. Minimally invasive biopsies are usually preferred over nerve biopsies for the diagnosis of ATTR amyloid neuropathy ; in this case the diagnosis was highly likely given the identification of amyloid deposits alongside the clinical presentation.
Regarding potential alternative explanations for his peripheral neuropathy, his vitamin B12 level had been well controlled by injections. He had suffered from diabetes since 4 years prior to his liver transplant, and only experienced minor neuropathic symptoms 8 years after the transplant, which then rapidly progressed over the next 2 years. His glycated haemoglobin (HbA1C) level was 49 mmol/mol and had been at a similar level throughout. As such, diabetes was considered unlikely to be the sole cause of such a rapidly progressive and profound sensori-motor neuropathy.
Initial management was supportive. In light of the confirmation of presence of ATTR amyloid deposits and the classical clinical phenotype, the patient was commenced on patisiran, a small interfering RNA therapeutic, at the standard dose of 0.3 mg/kg every 3 weeks. However, he then suffered a stroke resulting in impaired mobility and necessitating cessation of patisiran treatment. The peripheral neuropathy had remained stable on examination for the duration of patisiran treatment, and it was too brief to expect clinical improvement. Four years after the onset of neuropathic symptoms, he passed away secondary to complications of his comorbidities (including the stroke).