A 44-year-old female with type 1 diabetes was diagnosed with electrolyte abnormality of unknown cause and examined by a nearby physician. She visited an orthopedic clinic due to pain in both knees and was diagnosed with bilateral osteoarthritis . Six months later, her knees developed varus deformity and the pain worsened. X-ray findings revealed bilateral proximal tibial fractures and she was referred to our hospital. The range of motion (ROM) of the knee has slightly extension restriction. The hip-knee-ankle angle was –10.7 degrees for the right and –23.3 degrees for the left. The bone mineral density in the left femoral neck by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry was 0.383 g/cm2 (T-score:–3.7). Endocrinologic examinations, in addition to diabetes type 1, revealed hypogonadism, hypothyroidism, hypoadren-ocorticism, and celiac disease; she was diagnosed with APS2. Blood examination showed low serum phosphate P (1.3 mg/dL), low 25-hydroxy vitamin D3, and high alkaline phosphatase (ALP), but normal serum calcium, 1,25-dihydroxy Vitamin D, parathyroid hormone, and fibroblast growth factor 23. She was suspected of secondary hypophosphatemic osteomalacia due to intestinal malabsorption caused by celiac disease and treated with gluten- free diet, oral phosphorus, and alfacalcidol. Oral phosphorus preparations were started by monobasic sodium phosphate P monohydrate at 20 mg/kg/day and the dose was adjusted according to the value of serum phosphorus as appropriate. Alfacalcidol was started at 0.5 μg and continued at the same dose. Three months after the initial visit, the value of serum phosphate P increased from 1.3 to 2.8 mg/dL , so we performed open wedge high tibial osteotomy on the right side to correct the varus deformity after the fracture because of rapid progression of varus deformation and difficulty in walking by the limitation of range of motion ROM. Three months later, we performed gradual correction, using a ring external fixation device (Taylor spatial frame; (TSF) for the left side. Six months later, we removed external fixator and converted to internal fixation with a locking plate . At the time of conversion, to fix the osteotomy section while maintaining correction and reduce the risk of infection, we replaced the rings and struts of external fixation with the sterilized ones and performed internal fixation with the lateral plate in the state of external fixation by minimal invasive plate osteosynthesis method MIPO . Two years postoperatively, X-ray showed bone union on both sides without secondary dislocation. The patient was able to walk with a cane. Her knee ROM was almost full recovered and varus deformity was also improved (the medial proximal tibial angle of the right tibia changed from 78° to 87°, the left changed from 68° to 86°). Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication.