A 50-year-old lady, left handed, was referred to the department of neurological surgery, because of a drug-resistant epilepsy. She had a medical history, featured by the onset of seizures since early childhood. The patient was treated over several years with a combination of different anti-epileptic drugs, but she never obtained a complete control of seizures. During the past 2 years before admission, the patient experienced the worsening of crises. These were featured by mental confusion, reduced consciousness, dyskinesia in the upper right limb, and gaze deviation towards the right side. The crises occurred with a frequency of 3–4 episodes per day and occasionally had secondary generalization. She had also hypothyroidism. When the patient was hospitalized, neurological examination revealed moderate mental impairment with slowed speech and gait. Neuroradiological assessment was performed. Brain computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of a densely calcified lesion involving left temporal lobe and insula . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) documented the presence of a hypointense (both in T1 and T2 sequences), nonenhancing lesion, surrounded by a hyperintense area detected by long-TR sequences . The patient was scheduled for surgery.
The patient was positioned supine with the left shoulder elevated and head 60° rotated to the right side and fixed by radiolucent three-point Mayfield clamp. Preoperative CT scan with and without iodinate contrast was performed after positioning. Images of postpositioning CT scan were merged with preoperative MRI and used for neuronavigation. Motor evoked potentials, somatosensory evoked potentials and direct monopolar and bipolar cortical and subcortical stimulation were used for neuromonitoring. The intraoperative imaging protocol used in the present case has been previously detailed.[,,] Under general anesthesia, a left frontotemporal craniotomy was performed. Using intraoperative ultrasound (i-US) and neuronavigation, lesion was approached through a trans-sulcal approach transtemporal (T1-T2). i-US revealed a hyperechoic tumor and calcifications were clearly visible. Intraoperatively, lesion was distinguishable from normal white matter, albeit, in some areas, it appeared infiltrating. Calcifications were detected and resected. According to the institutional intraoperative protocol for intra-axial brain tumor, we also used 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) fluorescence, but the tumor was not fluorescent. When resection was deemed complete, intraoperative CT (i-CT) was performed and a small calcification was detected. The images of i-CT scan were used for updated neuronavigation, which was useful to localize and resect the small calcified tumor remnant. Complete resection of the lesion was achieved as confirmed by last i-US acquisition and final i-CT. Neuromonitoring did not document any variation of during all surgical procedure.
Postoperative MRI confirmed the radical resection of the lesion . Postoperative course was uncomplicated and the patient was discharged on the 6th postoperative day, without any neurological deficit. The frequency and intensity of crises eventually decreased, but the pharmacological therapy was not modified, as electroencephalographic alterations still persisted also during follow-up.
Grossly, the tumor sample consisted of multiple fragments, markedly hard in consistency, measuring 2 cm in aggregate diameter. Histologic examination showed an extensively calcified and hypocellular lesion , mainly composed of abundant calcifications, ranging from small calcospherules to larger and confluent psammomatous bodies, intermingled with a much smaller component of bland looking, small and roundish oligodendroglioma-like neoplastic cells , showing small rounded nuclei, perinuclear halos and arranged in an infiltrative manner; in addition, tumor exhibited a less represented, spindled, astrocytic-like component . Some neoplastic cells were vaguely distributed around capillary blood vessels, resulting in a focal formation of perivascular pseudorosette-like structures. No Rosenthal fibers or eosinophilic granular bodies were found. Neither necrosis, nor mitoses, nor microvascular proliferation was identified. Immunohistochemically, neoplastic cells were strongly and diffusely stained with CD34 , glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2 (OLIG2), and retained the α-thalassemia X-linked mental retardation syndrome (ATRX) nuclear expression. No immunohistochemical staining was obtained with isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1)-R132H, synaptophysin, chromogranin-A, epithelial membrane antigen, neuronal nuclear antigen (Neu-N), and BRAF-V600E. Ki-67 proliferation index was unremarkable (<1%). Molecular analyses showed absence of IDH1/IDH2 and BRAF mutations. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for 1p/19q codeletion was negative. Based on both morphological and immunohistochemical features, a diagnosis of “PLNTY” was rendered.