A 31-year-old Hispanic woman presented 10 days postpartum with a one-day history of vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and frontal headache. The patient’s pregnancy course had been complicated by preeclampsia without severe features, chorioamnionitis, and iron-deficiency anemia that was present before delivery. The patient underwent a primary low-transverse cesarean section at 40 weeks and 0 days that was complicated by an estimated 600 mL blood loss. The patient experienced persistent vaginal bleeding following delivery, but her postpartum course was otherwise uncomplicated. She was found to have a hemoglobin of 5.8 g/dL on postpartum day 3 and was transfused with one unit of packed red blood cells which increased her hemoglobin to 8.1 g/dL. The patient was discharged in stable condition later that day.
One day prior to the current presentation, the patient reported intermittent vertigo, gait ataxia, nausea, and bilious emesis. She subsequently developed a mild frontal headache. In addition, there had been persistent vaginal bleeding since her cesarean section. The patient denied fevers, chills, dyspnea, diplopia, syncope, falls, focal neurologic deficits, sensory loss, and photophobia.
The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable aside from a remote induced abortion. Appropriate prenatal care had been provided during pregnancy. The patient had a 16 pack-year smoking history, but she had quit all tobacco products upon learning that she was pregnant. She also endorsed occasional alcohol use prior to her pregnancy. There was no recreational drug use or significant family medical history.
Vital signs were within normal limits upon presentation. Physical examination revealed left leg ataxia; National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 1. Laboratory studies (reference ranges in parentheses) revealed platelet count: 1,003,000 /μL (164,000-446,000/μL), white blood cell count: 22,300 /μL (4800–10,8000 K/μL), hemoglobin: 11 g/dL (12–16 g/dL), mean corpuscular volume: 75 fL (81.4–97.8 fL), red blood cell distribution width – standard deviation: 52.1 fL (36–50 fL), serum iron: 22 μg/dL (40–170 μg/dL), total iron binding capacity: 683 μg/dL (250–450 μg/dL), percent iron saturation: 3% (15–55%), erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 39 mm/hr. (< 20 mm/hr), and C-reactive protein: 5.84 mg/dL (< 0.75 mg/dL). Urinalysis revealed cloudy urine, moderate occult blood, moderate leukocyte esterase, 20–50 white blood cells per high power field, and few bacteria. Peripheral blood smear showed anisocytosis and macrocytosis.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head without contrast showed patchy hypoattenuation involving the left cerebellar hemispheres suspicious for acute or subacute infarct . Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain without contrast showed an extensive acute infarction of the left cerebellar hemisphere in the territory of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) as well as a left vertebral artery occlusion . CT angiography of the head and neck showed a left vertebral artery dissection with significant flow limitation originating at the C4 vertebral body level extending into the intracranial vertebral artery and involving the left PICA .
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and started on a heparin infusion. An extensive hypercoagulability workup was initiated; this included evaluation for mutations involving BCR-ABL, protein C, protein S, antithrombin III, factor V Leiden, prothrombin, anti-cardiolipin, beta-2-glycoprotein, MPL codon 515, CALR Exon 9 mutation, and V617F JAK2 mutation. No genetic abnormalities were identified. An echocardiogram with bubble study was also obtained and showed no evidence of right to left shunting. The patient’s thrombocytosis was determined to be a reactive event that occurred due to severe hemorrhage during delivery that was superimposed on pre-existing iron-deficiency anemia from pregnancy. Follow-up CT scans of the head at 6 and 24 h were unchanged and showed no evidence of hemorrhagic transformation. The patient improved clinically and was discharged on therapeutic-dose enoxaparin and hematology/oncology follow-up after a four-day hospital stay.