A 57-year-old woman presented with a one-month history of pain and swelling in her right foot, which were worsened by activity and improved with rest. She was reviewed at the onset of symptoms and diagnosed with cellulitis for which she was unsuccessfully treated with antibiotics. She remained physically active and independent of all activities of daily living with no physical restrictions. There was no history of preceding trauma. Physical examination revealed a hard, non-mobile mass measuring 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm on the dorsal aspect of the third metatarsal of the right foot . There was overlying erythema and tenderness on palpation.
All laboratory results were normal. Plain X-rays of the right foot showed an irregular 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm bony mass at the neck of the third metatarsal with narrowing of the medullary cavity . Computed tomography (CT) of the right foot demonstrated a fracture of the neck of the third metatarsal, osteolysis at the fracture site and soft tissue swelling . Bone scintigraphy showed increased tracer uptake suggesting abnormal bone metabolism at the neck of the third metatarsal .
She underwent surgical excision of the lesion. An incision was made through the skin and subcutaneous tissue and the soft tissue was dissected to expose a hard, greyish-white, coarse, irregularly shaped osseous mass measuring about 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm × 1 cm, which was adherent to the neck of the third metatarsal. The mass was removed along the cortical surface and a transverse fracture line was found on the metatarsal neck. The fracture was stable and undisplaced.
Histopathology revealed maturely differentiated bone, cartilage, and fibrous tissue. Fibrous composition was observed between trabecular bones. Some chondrocytes showed mildly atypical features indicating a diagnosis of the BPOP . Immunohistochemistry: Ki-67 (+ 10%), SMA (+), S-100 (−), CD68 (scattered +), Bcl-2 (−), CD34 (−), CD19 (−), Caponin (+), Desmin (−), EMA (−).
Following surgery, plaster immobilisation was performed and removed after 6 weeks. Repeat X-rays after 6 weeks showed a healed third metatarsal with no signs of recurrence. She underwent physiotherapy and was followed up at regular monthly intervals for 1 year, with no post-operative sequelae.