A 68-year-old male suffering from intractable low back pain was referred to our pain clinic. He was previously treated in another hospital with transdermal fentanyl patches Fentos Tape® 6 mg/day and fentanyl sublingual tablets Abstral® 100 μg as required (usually 0–2 times/day) for this condition. He was originally admitted to our hospital for a stent-graft insertion surgery for thoracic aorta aneurysm. Although the patient’s postoperative pain was not predominant, his major complaint was regarding a worsening in continuous low back pain, leading to refuse rehabilitation. X-ray images showed an old L-4 lumbar compression fracture , whereas we considered it may not sufficiently explain his severe pain. He also started to present behavioral problems confronting to the medical staff when requesting for more opioids. After interviewing his wife, we determined that the patient may be using the fentanyl sublingual tablets not for pain control but for anxiety reduction. The resident physician and his attending nurse witnessed and recorded short myoclonus-like convulsions during the nighttime.
We suspected opioid-related disorders and investigated the patient’s medical history for inadequate opioid use. His wife said that his personality used to be active, social, and industrious. However, 2 years before, he was diagnosed as terminal stage of cholangiocarcinoma by his family practitioner. This may be a misunderstanding, because his medical examinations including abdominal CT scans performed in our hospital revealed no sign of cancer. Erroneously believing that he had cancer, the patient became depressed, refusing further examinations, and his low back pain worsened. He also misunderstood that his low back pain was related to cancer metastasis. First-line analgesics, including acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and duloxetine, were prescribed, but none yielded satisfactory results. The patient only requested opioid prescription of transdermal fentanyl for his lumbar pain. His medical record showed that he had visited three different hospitals for his intractable pain symptom. During this period, the dose of transdermal fentanyl was gradually increased, as well as prescribed fentanyl sublingual tablet on an as-needed basis.
At the beginning, in order to rule out the possibility of opioid tolerance and pseudoaddiction, we switched opioids from fentanyl to equivalent dose of oral morphine (controlled-release formulations, P-guard®). However, no significant changes were observed in the pain symptom, as well as in the frequency of fentanyl sublingual tablet requirement. After that, the oral morphine was reverted to the transdermal fentanyl. Then, according to the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD)-10 , we diagnosed the patient with opioid-related dependence (Additional file ). In consequence, we developed a treatment plan that focused on fentanyl detoxification and replacement therapy with a weak opioid, tramadol. Before beginning treatment, we carefully explained to the patient and his wife about inappropriate fentanyl use and suspected opioid dependence. At first, in collaboration with the palliative care team, we informed them the importance of interrupting the use of fentanyl sublingual tablets and obtained their consent. Next, we reduced the dose of transdermal fentanyl 1 mg per 4–5 days replacing with oral tramadol (Onetram®, sustained-release tablet) . During this treatment period, the patient developed mild to moderate withdrawal symptoms, such as abdominal pain with diarrhea, insomnia, and anxiety. These symptoms could be effectively managed by supportive treatment, i.e., abdominal pain was treated by scopolamine butyl bromide, and the insomnia and anxiety were controlled with ramelteon 8 mg, clotiazepam 5 mg, and trazodone hydrochloride 25 mg. The patient did not complain about pain exacerbation throughout the treatment , and no additional analgesic was required. The hospital psychiatry liaison team continued to provide the patient and his wife with information, counseling, and education regarding the treatment of opioid dependence. After the completion of our treatment program, his activities of daily living drastically improved, and the patient could start rehabilitation. The final prescription was tramadol 300 mg/day without fentanyl, which continued to be prescribed for his lower back pain. However, unfortunately, he died due to an aortic dissection of stent-graft edge 65 days after surgery.