The patient was a 55-year-old Chinese woman who was admitted to hospital with numbness and weakness of limbs in July 2020.
She experienced numbness and discomfort in the extremities without any obvious cause, with limited movement and inability to walk on their own for ten days. In the following days, her gait gradually became unsteady, and she developed weakness of her lower limbs.
The patient presented to the local oncology hospital with a history of breast cancer 2 years ago and underwent radical mastectomy after 8 chemotherapy sessions at that time. The patient was reviewed regularly for two years after surgery, and no recurrence was observed.
There was no family history of neurological or autoimmune disorders.
Neurological examination revealed weakness of proximal muscles of lower limb at grade 3 on the Medical Research Council scale, and she had signs associated with cerebellar degeneration, such as mild dysarthria and clear ataxia, especially with prolonged speech. However, her cranial nerves and cognitive function were normal.
Cerebrospinal fluid examination and routine hematological, biochemical, and serological tests were normal. The neuron-specific enolase in blood was 45.90 ng/mL and the precursor of gastrin-releasing peptide was 976 pg/mL, suggesting the possibility of SCLC. Indirect immunofluorescence test (IIFT), for blood paraneoplastic anti-Hu antibody IgG was negative, and anti-Yo antibody IgG was positive (+ +, 1:10). Cerebrospinal fluid paraneoplastic anti-Hu antibody IgG was negative and anti-Yo antibody IgG was positive (+ +, 1:3.2). BLOT test for blood paraneoplastic anti-Hu antibody IgG and anti-Yo antibody IgG was positive (both + + +), and cerebrospinal fluid paraneoplastic anti-Hu antibody IgG was positive (+) and anti-Yo antibody IgG was strongly positive (+ + +). No tumor cells were detected in microscopic examination of cerebrospinal fluid .
The patient had two paraneoplastic antibodies examined in the cerebrospinal fluid, but no associated tumor cells were detected, and no significant meningeal enhancement was seen on the cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), so there was insufficient evidence for the diagnosis of leptomeningeal disease. However, considering the low positive rate of tumor cells in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with carcinomatous meningocele and related neurological paraneoplastic syndrome, the possibility of leptomeningeal disease was not excluded.
The MRI of cranial and cervical spine did not reveal any significant abnormalities, and electromyography showed that the motor nerve wave amplitude of both upper limbs was reduced proximally. Chest computed tomography (CT) suggested a space-occupying lesion in the right lung . Tracheoscopic biopsy confirmed SCLC .