A 17-day-old, premature, female infant was transferred to our neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for failure to thrive, severe metabolic derangements, and severe, intractable diarrhea. She was a 34 5/7 wk gestation infant of African American descent born via vaginal delivery to a 22-year-old gravida 3, para 1-0-1-1 woman. Prenatal labs were mostly unremarkable except for a Penta screen that was abnormal with a 1:81 risk of Trisomy 18. Amniotic fluid was noted to be meconium-stained with a duration of rupture of membranes of 5 h. There was no diagnosis of polyhydramnios, although the delivery team did notice a large amount of amniotic fluid. Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The birthweight was 2.445 kg (62.7% percentile), length was 47 cm (69.2%), and head circumference was 34 cm (93.1%). The infant was admitted to the NICU for prematurity and respiratory distress. Family history was significant only for a maternal uncle with a history of gastroschisis. There was no known consanguinity.
Upon admission to the outside NICU, the patient was intubated for surfactant administration and subsequently extubated to nasal continuous positive airway pressure. She was treated with ampicillin and gentamicin for 5 d from birth for a diagnosis of clinical sepsis. On day of life (DOL) 1, she was started on feeds of breastmilk via orogastric tube, which were fortified the following day. Overnight, she developed extensive watery diarrhea. On DOL 4 she was noted to be down 25% from birthweight and developed significant metabolic acidosis with a serum CO2 level of 6 mmol/L and acute kidney injury (creatinine 3.02 mg/dL). She had profound electrolyte derangements including hypernatremia of 157 mmol/L, hyperkalemia of 9.2 mmol/L, hyperchloremia of 128 mmol/L, hyperglycemia of 227 mg/dL. She had unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 15.2 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 1.2 mg/dL), was started on phototherapy. Patient had leukocytosis to 25,000/µL with immature-to-total (I:T) ratio of 0.10. She was then made nil per os (NPO) while electrolyte abnormalities were corrected with normal saline and sodium bicarbonate replacement. Stool studies were sent and the culture was found to be positive for campylobacter antigen. The patient was subsequently treated with 3 d of azithromycin. Mother’s breastmilk was sent for microbial studies and was found to be positive for coagulase negative staph and rare E. coli. Patient’s blood cultures from admission and DOL 4 resulted negative.
Over the following 2 wk, she was again started on various feeding regimens of donor expressed breast milk, conventional cow’s milk formula (Similac Sensitive), and casein-based extensively hydrolyzed formulas (Alimentum). Every feeding trial resulted in a relapse of profuse, watery, non-bloody stools and electrolyte derangements, requiring cessation of enteral feeds. On DOL 17, the patient was transferred to our institution for further work-up and management of refractory diarrhea with feeds associated with dehydration and failure to thrive. At the time of transfer, the patient was receiving TPN with SMOFlipid® (soybean oil, medium chain triglycerides, olive oil, and fish oil). Physical exam on admission revealed signs of moderate dehydration including sunken eyes, dry skin, and capillary refill about 4 s. The patient continued to have significant loose stools (approximately 8/d). Infectious disease and gastrointestinal consults were obtained. With the patient’s history of positive campylobacter stool antigen test and leukocytosis, the clinical picture was initially thought to be consistent with infectious diarrhea. Stool studies, a full sepsis work-up, and maternal HIV testing were performed and the results were negative. A gastrointestinal (GI) pathogen, PCR panel which tests for 21 of the most common bacterial, and viral pathogens implicated in infectious diarrhea were also negative. Stool was positive for abundant leukocytes and occult blood. Stool and blood cultures were repeated and found to be negative. Stool osmotic gap was 30 mOsm/kg, and the newborn screen results were positive for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, which were subsequently confirmed following further testing. Over the hospital course, she developed worsening unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, thought to be secondary to TPN-induced cholestasis.
On DOL 19, the patient continued to have diarrhea despite strict NPO, raising suspicion of a secretory diarrhea. An extensive work-up was initiated including EGD and flexible sigmoidoscopy, which were visually normal and the results of a duodenal biopsy showed, “well preserved enterocytes with well-preserved brush borders with no evidence of brush border loss or MIVD.” The infant also continued to have electrolyte abnormalities, most significantly hyponatremia and hypochloremia. Stool sodium (Na) and chloride (Cl) were significantly increased while urine Na and Cl were decreased .
Once the infant’s electrolytes were stabilized and diarrhea improved, she was started once again on trophic feeds with Enfalyte, which were then advanced to amino acid-based formula (Elecare). Although initially tolerated, relapse of severe diarrhea occurred within 48 h. After this time, a congenital secretory diarrhea genetic panel that was sent weeks earlier returned positive for homozygous mutation for MYO5B c.1462del, p. (Ile488Leufs*93), which caused diarrhea with microvillus atrophy.
Based on the above work-up, she was diagnosed with MIVD. Treatment was supportive with IV nutritional support and correction of electrolyte imbalance. She was transferred to a bowel transplant center for evaluation and subsequently transferred back to our institution to be maintained on intravenous TPN until reaching a weight of 6.5 kg, at which point she will be placed on a waiting list for a bowel transplant.