A 59-year-old male presented to our hospital due to dizziness, fatigue, and increasing abdominal distension. He was 123 kg. A physical examination found markedly distended abdomen and temporal and extremity muscle wasting, along with tachycardia and tachypnea (blood pressure 100/66 mmHg, heart rate 112/min, and respiratory rate 24/min). Laboratory tests showed anemia (hemoglobin 8.1 g/dL), hypoalbuminemia (albumin 2.6 g/dL), and renal failure (creatinine 3.44 mg/dL). Tumor makers (CA19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen) were within normal range.
Abdominal CT scan revealed a 43 cm extremely large mass occupying most of the abdomen and pelvis . The left kidney was not identified. The mass contained mixed densities of a combination of fluid and soft tissue component. No masses were seen in chest CT.
Due to the large size of the mass, he resulted in limited oral intake and was started on enteral feeds. However, he failed to thrive, and became hypotensive with melena. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed some blood in the stomach; however, a celiac angiogram showed no evidence of active bleeding. He was intubated and started on pressors and blood transfusion. The decision was made to explore the patient urgently. Upon entry, the transverse to left colon (splenic flexure) was ischemic, and this portion was resected. A large retroperitoneal mass was noted. The mass was cystic with murky foul-smelling fluid in it. During dissection of the mass, there was an area of weakness that spontaneously ruptured with extrusion of the cyst contents of the mass all over the abdominal cavity and the retroperitoneum as well as spillage onto the floor. A significant amount of the fluid in the cyst was suctioned out. Once the mass was partially decompressed, the opening in the mass was repaired to allow control of the spillage. Ultimately the mass was resected after dissecting it free from is attachments. On further exploration, a perforated anterior duodenal ulcer was noted, which was repaired.
The largely cavitary mass with fibrous capsule was 43 × 42 cm and 13.0 kg (a sum of suctioned content and spillage during the surgery and the resected specimen) and contained a large amount of necrotic tissue . A portion of the left kidney was identified at the periphery of the mass . Despite the extremely large size, the tumor was confined to the kidney and no invasion into the perirenal adipose tissue or renal sinus was identified . Microscopically, the tumor consisted of papillary structures lined by single layer of tumor cells with low-grade nuclear features and contained foamy macrophages . Nucleoli were appreciated at the higher magnification. Importantly, a rim of atrophic renal parenchyma was circumferentially appreciated, confirming renal origin. A panel of immunohistochemistry revealed tumor cells; positive for PAX8 , cytokeratin 7 , vimentin, and CD10. The final pathologic diagnosis is type 1 papillary RCC with nuclear grade 2.
Postoperative cure was complicated requiring tracheostomy and mechanical ventilation. He developed intra-abdominal abscess requiring drainage and antibiotics in the intensive care unit. Due to his ongoing deterioration and minimal hope of recovery, comfort care measures were initiated. He deceased 1 month later.