A 70-year-old man who presented to the emergency department with an acute onset of vertigo and gait instability triggered by rotating his head to the right. The main differences in comparison with previous episodes of imbalance triggered by head rotation were the duration of symptoms (several hours) and the presence of mild signs of cerebellar involvement at the neurological examination.
He denied having any cervical trauma or injures. His vascular risk factors also included moderate smoking, dyslipidaemia and arterial hypertension.
His medical history included peripheral chronic arteriopathy and previous episodes of left neck and occipital pain followed by light-headedness, sweating and blurred vision triggered by rotating his head and associated with severe spondylotic changes in the cervical spine and foramen magnum stenosis. Previously performed cervical spine computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) identified degenerative changes in the atlantoaxial and left-axial facet joints with right rotation of the C2 cervical vertebrae . However, given the imbalance between perioperative risks and clinical paucisintomaticity, a neurosurgical approach was discouraged.
No other relevant events were reported in his personal and family history.
At hospital admission, his neurological examination was normal except for a significant left lateropulsion in the Romberg position and a wide-based gait. No other signs of brainstem involvement were appreciable.
Routine blood tests were unremarkable, apart from moderate dyslipidaemia as an additional cerebrovascular risk factor.
Static neuroimaging: Brain CT and MRI identified subacute bilateral cerebellar ischaemic lesions (with left prevalence) involving the area supplied by the posterior inferior cerebellar artery, while magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed right VA dominance. Moderate carotid atheromasia was also appreciable. Ultrasound examination of the neck arteries in the neutral position and CT angiography (CTA) did not show haemodynamic abnormalities in the Vas and excluded signs of arterial dissections or severe stenosis of the vertebrobasilar system, confirming a right VA predominance . Conversely, ultrasound examination of the left VA in both the V1-V2 and V3-V4 segments with slight contralateral head rotation (approximately 20°) showed a Doppler waveform demodulation known as stump flow, which suggested distal VA steno-occlusion .
After having his head mobilized following CTA execution, the patient presented an episode of loss of consciousness without prodromic symptoms. Thus, dynamic causes of vertebral occlusion and related symptoms were considered, and the absence of a flow signal in the left V3-V4 VA was documented by ultrasound examination while the head was turned to the right. Dynamic vertebral DSA with anteroposterior and lateral projections secondary to left C1-C2 bone spur compression confirmed the clinical suspicion of BHS[,]. Moreover, the left V3 and VA appeared elongated and exhibited irregular luminal injection and focal parietal ectasia, probably due to repeated microtrauma of the artery wall .