A 47-year-old male patient was admitted to the department of orthopedic surgery with a chief complaint of persistent pain and swelling on the right hand for the past two months. The patient had experienced a thorn injury at a dorsal aspect of the hand while pruning a palm tree 12 months ago, and the thorn was surgically removed at another institution 5 months prior to the visit to our institution. Postoperatively, the patient had routine oral antibiotics (cephalexin 500 mg q 8 h) treatments for 7 days. The patient reported that he had not had any clinical symptoms of pain, swelling, and tenderness until the one month before the first surgery.
The patient, whose occupation was a solider of Republic of Korea marine Corps, did not have previous underlying diseases or a history of prior fungal infection. Physical examination indicated stable vital sign with focal tenderness, swelling, and mild heating sense over the dorsal aspect of 3rd metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint area without cutaneous lesions. The patient did not show any evidence of initiating pain during flexion and extension of the 3rd finger. Initial laboratory findings, including white blood cell counts, eosinophil counts, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were all in the normal range. Human immunodeficiency virus was negative.
Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right hand indicated a thin elongated fluid collection at the dorsal aspect of 3rd finger MCP joint level, enhancement along the extensor tendon of 3rd finger, joint effusion with thick enhancing synovium at 3rd MCP joint, suggesting abscess, chronic extensor tenosynovitis, and septic arthritis, respectively . Consequently, emergent surgical incision and drainage was planned upon impression of chronic extensor tenosynovitis, abscess, and septic arthritis at the 3rd MCP joint. Intraoperative findings revealed severe adhesion of soft tissue with granulation and infective tissues and partial rupture at 3rd MCP joint capsule . Meticulous debridement and massive irrigation were performed along with intraoperative tissue culture and biopsy. In addition, we performed fungus culture from tissue specimens on Sabouraud’s dextrose agar media plate (Asan Pharm. Co., LTD, Seoul, Korea), incubated at 30 °C. Bacterial culture, acid-fast bacilli stain, and tuberculosis-polymerase chain reaction were negative from the tissue specimens. On the eighth cultivating day, grayish soft fungal organisms were evident on the media. Microscopic examination of the cultured isolate with lactophenol cotton blue revealed an Alternaria species. Genomic DNA was extracted from fungal cells of the Alternaria species colonies. The primers used to amplify and sequence the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) gene for fungus were ITS1, 5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3′ and ITS4, 5′TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′. The fungus was identified as Alternaria alternata with 100% homology according to the BLAST program and compared with the similar sequences in the Gene Bank . A phylogenetic tree was constructed based on ITS gene sequences, using the maximum likelihood method implemented in MEGA 6 .
Furthermore, histopathology indicated chronic active inflammation with round-shaped fungal elements and multinucleated giant cells with positive periodic acid Schiff and Grocott Methenamine Silver stains. Postoperatively, the patient was treated with oral itraconazole (200 mg q 12 h) for 9 consecutive months. Itraconazole was well tolerated without any side-effects. At the end of the treatment with the anti-fungal agent, the patient was symptom-free with laboratory findings in normal ranges, indicating total resolution with no clinical relapse.