A previously healthy 57 years old woman admitted to our hospital due to dyspnoea. Two weeks before admission she had right sided pleural pain followed by dyspnoea, without cough and without fever, these increased with time and therefore she referred herself to the hospital. Her physical examination suggested right sided pleural effusion, laboratory tests showed leukocytosis (WBC-19000/mm3 with 89% neutrophils), HGB-12.5 g/dL, platelet count 400,000 platelets/mm3, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 34 mm/hour. C-reactive protein level was highly elevated – 45 mg/dL (normal range 0–0.5 mg/dL). The results of chemistry panel were normal except for mildly elevated alkaline phosphatase – 157 u/l (40–130 u/l).
A chest CT performed on admission showed massive right pleural effusion, with right lung athelectasis. Chest tube was inserted to the pleural cavity and evacuated only small amount of purulent fluid, although streptokinase was injected to the pleural cavity four times. Antibiotic treatment was started using IV Cefuroxime (750 mg three times a day) and oral Roxithromycin (150 mg twice a day) for 4 days without signs of improvement.
A repeated CT performed 4 days after admission, showed a massive amount of right sided pleural effusion with right middle and lower lobe athelectasis. Therefore, a right sided thoracotomy was performed. A significant amount of pus and fibrin was drained during the procedure, and the lung expanded normally after the pleura was decorticated on that side. Pus from the empyema (before and after starting antibiotic treatment) was cultured several times both for common pathogens as well as Mycobacteria but turned to be negative. Pathological examination of the pleura that was removed during the procedure showed fibrotic pleura covered by pus and fibrin without evidence for any organism. Given the clinical gradual and atypical course of the patient with the negative stains and cultures results, the pleural pus and fluid were also tested for M.pneumoniae using PCR. DNA was extracted from the pus using the DNAeasy tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). First we have utilised a Mycoplasma genus specific PCR amplifying 16SRNA DNA, doing direct amplification using the same thermal profile and GPO-3/MGSO primers as described in ref . In this test one negative and one positive controls were used for 10 samples. Surprisingly a positive typical band at the size of ~270 bp was found, suggesting the presence of Mycoplasma spp. in the sample. Therefore, we further used two sets of M.pneumoniae specie specific PCR reactions to identify if it is M.pneumoniae. The first was a nested PCR using the primers of the ATPase gene in the same conditions as described in ref . This test was shown in our lab to have a detection limit of ~20 CFU/ml (Nir-Paz et al. data on file). Two negative controls were included for every 8 samples tested in order to exclude contaminations during the nested reaction as well as a positive control for 16 reactions. This test gave a typical band at the size of 104 bp suggesting that the existence of M.pneumoniae. In order to confirm that finding, we have performed another M.pneumoniae specific PCR using the P1 gene. A direct PCR using the same primers and conditions as described in Ref was performed. In this test one negative and one positive controls were used for 10 samples. Again this PCR gave a typical positive band at the size of 466 bp, confirming the presence of M.pneumoniae DNA in the sample. Unfortunately, only convalescent serum that was taken 30 days after the initial admission was available for serology, and it was indeterminate with a titer of 1:80 using the Serodia-Myco II assay (Fujirebio, Tokyo, Japan), and IgM negative using Mycoplasma pneumoniaea IgM EIA (ANILabsystems, Helsinki, Finland).
After the surgery, the patient was gradually recovered with intravenous azythromycin treatment (500 mg once a day) for 10 days followed by 5 more days of oral therapy (250 mg once a day), In addition she was treated with oral Pyranocarboxylate (400 mg twice a day) for the first two weeks after surgery.
The CRP level dropped to 9.5 mg/dl after the operation and two weeks later, the CRP level decreased into normal levels (0.2 mg/dl). At this time point the patient fully recovered without any breath or pain complaints and no residual fluid was seen in the chest X -ray.