A 75-year-old Chinese female patient was admitted to a local hospital for sudden loss of consciousness and limb weakness. Four days prior to admission the patient had suddenly lost consciousness while eating. After taking 0.6 mg nitroglycerin under the tongue for about 10 min, her consciousness was restored, but she continued to feel chest tightness and discomfort. An electrocardiogram upon admission showed ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, aVF, V3R-V5R and V7-V9, reciprocal ST-segment depression in leads I and aVL, and an IIIA-V block , suggesting inferior, anterior, and posterior MI. Coronary angiography revealed 90% stenosis of the proximal segment of the anterior descending branch, occlusion of the distal branch of the posterior left ventricle and multiple branches, and diffuse lesions in the middle segment of the right crown, with the most severe stenosis reaching 85%. The middle segment of the right coronary artery was suspected to be the affected vessel as autolysis of a thrombus was noted, and a partial thrombus had spread to its distal branches (See Supplementary Figure S1.a, Additional File ). The patient underwent emergency percutaneous intervention in middle segment of the right coronary artery (See Supplementary Figure S1.b, Additional File ). Twenty hours prior to admission, the patient presented with sub-acute onset of bilateral upper limb weakness (Medical Research Council (MRC) sum score was 54), which gradually progressed from the distal to proximal end, and numbness. This was followed by weakness in bilateral lower limbs, which showed a similar progression with an impairment in the ability to hold urine. No obvious abnormality was found on cranial computed tomography (CT); thereafter, the patient was transferred to our hospital. The patient had previous histories included hypertension, type 2 diabetes, atrial fibrillation, and cerebral infarction without gastrointestinal infection and respiratory tract infection prior to the onset of MI. On clinical assessment, her ventricular rate was high (105 bpm) with atrial fibrillation rhythm; she had a blood pressure of 169/97 mmHg and temperature of 37.1 °C. A physical examination showed hypotonia of all four limbs, complete quadriplegia, superficial hypoesthesia in the extremities, bulbar palsy (dysarthria, decreased pharyngeal reflex, disappeared cough reflex), and tendon areflexia. Cerebellar system, fundus examinations and other cranial nerves showed no abnormality.
Her complete blood count, blood picture, C-reactive protein level, serum electrolyte levels, and hepatic and renal function were all normal. Her serum protein levels were as follows: total (6.5 g/dL), albumin (3.039 g/dL), and globulin (3.5 g/dL). Serum Mycoplasma pneumoniae antibody- immunoglobulin (Ig) M, EBV antibody to viral capsid antigen-IgM, EBV antibody to nuclear antigen of IgM, cytomegalovirus (CMV) antibody-IgM, and CMV pp65 antigen in peripheral blood leukocytes and human immunodeficiency virus antibody test results were all negative. B-type natriuretic peptide: 526.44 pg/mL (Normal 0–100 pg/mL); Procalcitonin: 1.69 ng/mL (Normal < 0.05 ng/mL). Serum IgG anti-ganglioside antibody test was positive with anti-GT1a antibodies (+ +), anti-GM1 antibodies ( +), anti-GM2 antibodies ( +), and anti-GM4 antibodies ( +). Repeated brain CT showed no abnormality. The family refused a lumbar puncture. Due to her critical condition, nerve conduction studies and electromyography could not be performed.
Later, she developed respiratory muscle weakness with low oxygen saturation and had trouble coughing and expectorating. This eventually progressed to respiratory failure, and she required endotracheal intubation and ventilator-assisted ventilation.
After diagnosis of GBS, the patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg; a standard single IVIg dose [0.4 g/kg bodyweight/day]) and supportive care. Despite completing 5 consecutive days of IVIg therapy, her clinical symptoms did not improve. Later, the patient subsequently developed severe pneumonia, septic shock and rhabomyolysis. At the request of her family, she was discharged on the 23rd day of hospitalization. The patient died due to respiratory failure and circulatory collapse two days following discharge.