A 70-year-old woman came to our hospital complaining of left chest pain. On chest computed tomography (CT), a left pneumothorax and multiple metastatic lung tumors were observed. Thirteen years earlier, she was diagnosed with adult granulosa cell tumor of the right ovary, pStage-IA, and surgery was performed. Nine years earlier, she had a recurrence, and multiple lung metastases were observed. An aromatase inhibitor that suppresses endogenous estrogens was started four years earlier. She had a history of osteoarthritis of the knee. She had no smoking history. On admission, SpO2 was 97% (room air), and breath sounds were attenuated on the left. Blood cell counts and biochemical tests showed no abnormal findings and no elevation of tumor markers including estradiol. The level of CA125 was 15.1 U/ml. A preoperative CT scan 13 years earlier showed a large ovarian tumor in the pelvis. The most recent F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose (F-FDG) positron emission tomography CT (PET-CT) showed no evidence of recurrence in the pelvis. When pneumothorax appeared, collapse was stronger in the left upper lobe than in the left lower lobe. Therefore, the metastatic lesion located just below the pleura in the upper lobe was considered to be the lesion responsible for the pneumothorax.
After hospitalization, the pneumothorax was improved by left thoracic drainage. The patient was discharged without reappearance of the pneumothorax. After discharge from the hospital, mild recurrence of pneumothorax was observed on chest X-ray, but it resolved spontaneously without requiring re-drainage. After 6 months of outpatient follow up, the patient re-developed a left pneumothorax . Thoracic drainage was performed again, and the pneumothorax improved. However, since this left pneumothorax was the second one, surgical treatment was selected. Thoracoscopic suturing and pleurodesis using talc were performed in the upper lobe of the left lung. A leak test showed air leakage from the nodule at the interlobar margin of the lateral left upper lobe, which was speculated to be the responsible lesion ( A,D). Two nodules in the apex of the left upper lobe were resected for histopathological examination ( B,C,E,F). On pathology, a diffuse growing tumor composed of monotonous spindle cells that was consistent with metastasis of granulosa cell tumor was seen . Despite the absence of a smoking history, emphysematous changes were observed around the tumor. After this surgical treatment, the pneumothorax has been cured without recurrence.