A 28-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 0, was admitted to our department due to severe uterine bleeding (pictorial blood loss assessment chart score>100), resulting in tachycardia, pallor, and sweating. She referred an interesting clinical history.
At the age of 26 years, a 80.4×73.5 mm myomic nodule was diagnosed on the right side of the uterine wall by routine gynecological sonography. Following failure of therapy with enantone (11.25 fl), it was proposed for laparoscopic myomectomy surgery performed on 31/01/2014.
At the age of 27 years, the patient had a spontaneous miscarriage at eighth week of gestation, for which a uterine curettage was performed.
Six months later, the patient was admitted for another uterine curettage owing to spontaneous miscarriage at 7 weeks and 4 days of gestation.
Sonography revealed the presence of two gestational sacs, one on the left with embryonic nonpulsating echoes and one on the right with no embryonic echoes but only the yolk sac.
In the latter, the chorion appeared thickened and irregular with thin residual myometrium. Doppler showed a rich vascularization of the chorionic tissue. The presence of placental thickening, a very high β-hCG value (214,199 mUI/mL) and a cystic right ovary, suggested the occurrence of gestational trophoblastic disease.
At the age of 28 years, sonography and CT scan showed an uterus with slightly increased volume with innumerable, coarse, and serpiginous vascular ectasia in the peripheral muscle tissue ( and ).
These ectasias were fed by arterial branches from hypogastric circle at both sides and right ovarian artery.
The abnormal circulation showed wide sacciform dilatation in the vascular wall reaching 23 mm diameter. Refluent circulation was directed toward the hypogastric veins and the external iliac arteries.
The patient showed surprise because she had never heard of this disorder and dismay for fear of not being able to cure it. She was not on bed rest, and she had not taken extra medicines.
Three months later, the patient came to the Emergency Room of Obstetric and Gynecology Department of A.O.U San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi D’Aragona, with massive uterine bleeding. Her hemoglobin level was 5.4 g/dL, red blood cells (RBC) 2.15×106/µL, and hematocrit 19.3%.
She was transfused with four blood bags of concentrated red cells.
The patient was carried to interventional radiology where she signed an informed consent and was treated with UAE in the angiography room (in the presence of an anesthetist).
This team has treated similar cases using the same technique of embolization in the same University Hospital. The five cases of uterine arteriovenous malformation (AVM) treated with this technique did not affect the fertility of the patients. Patients were advised to wait for a period of 6 months before becoming pregnant and a CT scan was performed after embolization to ensure the disappearance of AVM. All the patients became pregnant without complications. None had abortions.
Uterine artery embolization (UAE) is a mini-invasive technique.– It includes peripheral artery access (preferred femoral) and injection of embolic stuff in uterine arteries. Usually, only a femoral artery access is sufficient to reach both uterine arteries.
In our case, through percutaneous access from right femoral artery to both hypogastric arteries, uterine arteries were reached, where a bilateral superselective catheterization was performed (Terumo-SP). After angiographic morphological study of the target vessels, the embolic material (Onyx: ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer [EVOH]) was injected .
It is composed of a part of properly embolic material (EVOH) and a solvent, which prevents the Onyx solidification into the catheter (DMSO).
The embolization was stopped when the nidus appeared totally embolized by Onyx .
The patient was monitored for 5 days in our department, and treated with oral iron supplement, folic acid, and meropenem.
She was submitted to control sonography and CT that confirmed the disappearance of vascular ectasia.
Five months after UAE, the patient became pregnant.
Sonography showed the presence of a single gestational sac in uterus, containing an embryonic pole with cardiac activity, with a 10 mm crown rump length (CRL), according to amenorrhea period.
Ultrasound showed a placenta with an anterior insertion with a little area of abruption (5×2 mm) at the superior pole.
The patient, bed resting, was treated with vaginal and intramuscular progesterone, acetylsalicylic acid, and spasmolytics.
Screening exams and prenatal tests (Duo Test and fetal DNA research in maternal blood) were negative.
At 32 weeks of gestation, the patient stopped therapy with acetylsalicylic acid and started enoxaparina 40,000 U (1 fl s.c./die).
At 37 weeks, the patient went into spontaneous labor, necessitating a cesarean section to have better control of bleeding risk.
No adverse events occurred during delivery. At the time of delivery, the neonatologist was present and confirmed the absence of neonatal pathological changes.
The patient and her child went home on time.