The patient was a 49-year-old female who complained of dizziness and blurred vision for more than 10 days. Neurological examination showed no significant abnormal signs, and the patient reported no history of irradiation, chemical exposure, or trauma. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed in the outpatient department: Mixed-signal shadows were observed in the sphenoid sinus and right parasellar region, along with an uneven distribution of high T1 weighted image (WI) signal; T2 weighted image (WI) shows that the upper layer is of high intensity and the lower layer is of equal intensity, and there is a clear dividing line between them. The tumor showed no enhancement on contrast-enhanced MRI. The length of the lesion was approximately 33 mm .
For further treatment, the patient was transferred from the Otolaryngology Department to the Neurosurgery Department of our hospital. Craniocervical computed tomography angiography(CTA) demonstrated a localized defect of the sphenoid and right occipital slope in the sphenoid sinus, with a low-density shadow in the corresponding area and local envelopment of the right internal carotid artery. Based on the preoperative imaging examination, the patient was diagnosed with a space-occupying lesion in the right parasellar region. The patient underwent transnasal neuroendoscopic resection of the right parasellar space-occupying lesion. We used a 0.01 % adrenaline saline tampon to push aside the turbinate and nasal septum on both sides to provide enough operating space for the endoscope. We then used a rigid 30° endoscope with an outside diameter of 4 mm (Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, Germany) to remove the tumor. Cystic tumor lesions were identified during the operation , along with local absence of bone in the right parasellar slope. The tumor was cut open, releasing an opaque, soy sauce–colored, opaque fluid and revealing brown deposits in the cyst. Complete resection of the cyst wall and contents was performed . The right internal carotid artery, the right trigeminal nerve, and the cavernous sinus were visible . Fluid gelatin (Johnson, New Jersey, USA) was injected into the bleeding site to stop the bleeding. The sellar floor was reconstructed with artificial dura mater (Tianxinfu, Beijing, China), and after this reconstruction, no cerebrospinal fluid leakage was observed. On the second day after the operation, no residual tumor was found on MRI. After 6 months, craniocerebral enhancement MRI was repeated, as shown in Fig. c and d; this scan showed no residual tumor near the sella and no local recurrence. After 12 months of follow-up, no tumor recurrence was observed.
The histopathological diagnosis of the tumor was CP, the tumor was characterized by partial keratosis , and the cystic contents of the tumor were accompanied by significant cystic changes .Moreover, with a well-differentiated, irregularly arranged squamous epithelium , surrounded by palisade-lined columnar epithelium.