This 38-year-old woman had dysphonia for 1 year when she first attended our service. At onset, there had been a change in the quality of her singing voice over the course of a week. Her voice was dysphonic but had preserved articulation. No infective symptoms were recalled. She had also been aware of intermittent facial twitching, mainly around her eyes during times of stress, or after drinking coffee. Soon after the onset of her dysphonia, she was examined by an ENT surgeon and a neurologist. Fibreoptic naso-endoscopy revealed an abducted left vocal cord with only flickers of movement. The rest of the neurological examination was normal. MRI of her brain and CT of the chest and neck looking for a structural cause were unremarkable.
There was a strong family history of MND/ALS with her father, paternal aunt and uncle all affected. Genetic testing in her father had demonstrated an SOD1 mutation (Val149Gly). Our patient had elected not to proceed with predictive gene testing.
Over the first 12 months, her dysphonia gradually worsened. She had difficulty with coughing and developed dysphagia to some solids, such as bread, with a feeling of food stuck in the pharynx. There were a few occasions of nasal regurgitation when trying to swallow. Although she described intermittent exertional breathlessness, spirometry showed a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 125% predicted. At this point, she sought genetic counselling and proceeded to genetic testing. Before the test results were known, the geneticist referred her to the MND service for assessment, due to concern over her symptoms.
Neurological examination at that time revealed severe dysphonia, with a nasal, breathy voice but no dysarthria. The cough was bovine and there was left palatal weakness. Occasional fasciculations were present in the periocular muscles. The rest of the neurological examination was normal. Repeat naso-endoscopy confirmed a failure of the soft palate to close completely on the left-hand side. The left vocal cord was now paralysed. A repeated MRI of the brain and cervical region showed no abnormalities. Over the subsequent month, the patient appeared to have an accelerated deterioration in her condition with increased dysphonia, more widespread facial fasciculations and the onset of fasciculations in her shoulder girdle. Examination confirmed this along with new weakness in the intrinsic muscles of her left hand and left-finger extensors. Evidence of upper motor neuron involvement was also present with brisk reflexes in the left arm. Electromyography demonstrated sparse fibrillation potentials and minor neurogenic changes in the arms and simple fasciculation potentials in the tongue. Nerve conduction was normal. Repeated respiratory function showed that her FVC was now 84% predicted, and maximal respiratory pressures were reduced. Genetic testing results confirmed the presence of an SOD1 mutation (Val149Gly). Serial neurological examination a month later showed further deterioration with mild wasting of the tongue along with fasciculations, increased wasting in the left hand and pathologically brisk reflexes of the left upper and lower limbs. Following discussion, the patient elected to explore non-invasive ventilation, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy and injection thyroplasty to assist with symptom management.