A 70-year-old female with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) caused by diabetic nephropathy had been treated with PD for 19 months, she underwent temporary hemodialysis and PD protocol adjustments three times due to edema of both lower limbs caused by volume overload because the daily total ultrafiltration volume was about − 200 mL to − 400 mL and the daily water intake was not strictly limited (the specific amount was not recorded), with no residual urine output during that period. She presented to our hospital on February 28, 2019, complaining of abdominal pain. At first, the abdominal pain could be relieved after PD, however, after 1 month, the PD could not alleviate the pain. On admission, her body temperature was 38.4 °C, pulse and blood pressure were normal without any antibiotics or corticosteroids. Physical examinations revealed a soft abdomen with tenderness and rebound tenderness, indicating peritonitis. The skin at the exit-site of the PD catheter and the subcutaneous cuff were without crust formation or erythema, painless, not swollen, and no purulent discharge was observed. Laboratory analysis revealed that the whole blood showed a white blood cell count (WBCC) of 10.17 × 109/L with 89.1% segmented neutrophils, hemoglobin of 7.7 g/dL, and a platelet count of 373 × 109/L. The level of C-reactive protein (CRP) was 211.2 mg/L, procalcitonin (PCT) was 2.940 ng/mL, albumin was 19.2 g/L, blood urea nitrogen was 10.15 mmol/L, and creatinine was 544 μmol/L. The dialysate was turbid, for which the WBCC was 967 × 106/μL with 82.3% neutrophils . Therefore, the physician suspected PDAP clinically, which was thought to be a transcatheter infection, because there were no signs of PD catheter exit-site infections (ESI) or tunnel infections (TI). Empirical therapy was performed with intravenous levofloxacin and continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), which included cefotiam with intermittent intraperitoneal vancomycin. After 4 days, cultures of dialysate revealed the presence of gram-positive bacilli, which were unidentified to the species level in successive cultures. This supported the diagnosis of PDAP, although the causative organism was unknown. The patient still complained of severe, persistent abdominal pain, with a temperature of 37.4 °C, whole blood WBCC was 9.94 × 109/L with 85.2% segmented neutrophils, the level of CRP was 124.9 mg/L, PCT was 2.260 ng/mL, and dialysate that was cloudy and yellowish, with a cell count of 1444 × 106/L with 83.6% neutrophils. All of these were indicative of a persistent infection. Because conventional cultures demonstrated unidentifiable and fast-growing gram-positive bacilli, the time of culture was prolonged by the laboratory, which tested the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) to identify the sensitivity of the pathogenic bacteria. There were no antimicrobial breakpoint criteria for this bacterium; only MIC values or antibacterial ring diameters were reported. The results of MIC for aztreonam, cefixime, cefotaxime, ceftriaone, clindamycin, erythromycin, pristinamycin, teicoplanin, and vancomycin were less than 20 μg/mL, which could help the physician select antibiotics to some extent. Therefore, the therapy was switched to intravenous moxifloxacin, and cefotiam and amikacin were combined intraperitoneally on day 6. The abdominal pain has relieved on day 16, during the dynamic review of ascites tests; inflammatory indicators gradually returned to normal , indicating the peritonitis was under control. However, the family and the patient herself refused to remove the peritoneal dialysis tube. Because of the secondary nosocomial infections, including oral fungal and lung infections, the peripheral blood inflammation indicators increased again, and she was discharged on day 22, March 21, 2019, and died a few days later.
On March 26, we received the results of a bacterial culture in dialysate from laboratory identified as M. smegmatis, collected on day 6 without sensitivities results. According to clinical experience and the literature, we concluded that M. smegmatis is rarely pathogenic; therefore, further tests were performed to determine the pathogen. To verify the growing bacteria in this patient, the stored sample, coded R1904155ADPN257, was retested using mNGS with permission from the family of the patient. The results identified M. smegmatis (24,708 reads), M. abscessus (9224 reads), M. goodii (8305 reads), and three sequence fragments from each of these species were compared with those available in GenBank sequence database respectively. All shared a high degree of homology with the bacterial sequences in GenBank database. The three sequence fragments most closely matching M. smegmatis in the NCBI database were all M. smegmatis, including one identified as M. smegmatis MKD8 (GenBank accession number CP027541.1) and the other two as M. smegmatis genome assembly NCTC8159 (GenBank accession number LN831039.1). The three sequence fragments most closely matching M. abscessus in the NCBI database were all M. abscessus FLAC046 (GenBank accession number CP016192.1). The three sequence fragments that most closely matching M. goodii in the NCBI database were all M. goodii X7B (GenBank accession number CP012150.1). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) confirmed that the three bacteria were present in the specimen, and their cycle threshold values were 16, 18, and 15.5, respectively. These results were different from those of routine cultures, especially that of M. abscessus, which were suspect bacterial species and pathogenic bacteria in the dialysis effluent. There were very high sequence similarities in the different species of NTM. In order to validate mNGS results, we performed first whole-genome sequences on R1904155ADPN257, three primer pairs were also used to specifically amplify the target fragments and the PCR results are shown in Fig. b. The above fragments were aligned separately in the NCBI database, and the final results demonstrated that three species, M. smegmatis, M. abscessus, and M. goodii, coexisted simultaneously in the specimen.
Thus, we confirmed that the patient was afflicted with a mixed infection of PDAP caused by multiple NTM. We did not suspect that M. smegmatis was responsible for the peritonitis.