A 69-year-old female was diagnosed with TA at the age of 19 years, and steroid therapy controlled the diseases; however, her renal function declined gradually with renovascular hypertension developing as a complication of TA. At the age of 61, PD was initiated because hemodialysis was inappropriate because of severe aortic regurgitation and peripheral arteriosteogenesis that precluded the creation of an arteriovenous fistula.
The patient remained stable on PD for more than 5 years, with well-preserved residual renal function (RRF) and peritoneal function and only one episode of peritonitis, without any cardiocerebrovascular events. However, a gradual decline in RRF was accompanied by a concomitant increase in serum C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. The patient was evaluated for other inflammatory diseases, such as malignancies, infections, and autoimmune diseases including TA reactivation; however, nothing abnormal was detected. She also suffered from fatigue and vomiting; therefore, the increase in CRP indicating inflammation was considered to be due to malnutrition, inflammation, and atherosclerosis (MIA) syndrome resulting from inadequate renal replacement therapy with PD, evident from the RRF decline, leading to the accumulation of uremic solutes. Transition to hemodialysis or combination therapy with hemodialysis and PD were considered to improve her clinical condition; however, hemodialysis was challenging to the limitations associated with TA. Seven and a half years after the initiation of PD, she received a living-related KTx from her husband .
The immunological profile of the KTx was as follows: ABO, incompatible (from B+ to O+); human leukocyte antigen (HLA), six mismatches; complement-dependent cytotoxicity, negative; flow cytometric lymphocyte crossmatch test, negative; and donor-specific antibodies (DSA), positive against HLA-DQ4 with a mean fluorescence intensity of 3683. She had severe arterial calcifications: bilateral external iliac arteries were disrupted, and many corkscrew vessels ran from the internal iliac arteries toward the femurs as compensatory vessels . The internal iliac arteries were comparatively smooth, and living KTx surgery using the left donor kidney was performed in her right iliac fossa by end-to-side anastomosis with the right internal iliac artery. The intermittent claudication in the legs did not worsen after the surgery. The right ankle brachial index declined from 0.40 to 0.31, which was considered negligible, because a change of 0.15 or above is considered significant . Total ischemic time, warm ischemic time, and onset of diuresis were 1 h 18 min 9 s, 5 min 16 s, and 14 min 53 s, respectively. Immunosuppression was induced with tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, methylprednisolone, and basiliximab. Rituximab, two sessions of double-filtration plasmapheresis (DFPP), and one session of plasma exchange were also performed as desensitization therapy because of ABO incompatibility and DSA positivity. Her creatinine level was almost stable; however, urinary protein was detectable even 3 months later. The protocol and episode biopsy performed at the time revealed chronic active antibody-mediated rejection (CAAMR), with Banff 2015 scores of g2 and cg1b . Peritubular capillaries exhibited focal C4d positivity by immunofluorescence (C4d2). We considered that this histological change was caused by anti-HLA antibodies and was not due to ABO incompatibility because ABO-related AMR tends to occur especially within 2–7 days posttransplant and does not occur more than 1 month posttransplant owing to accommodation [, ], which leads to the excellent outcome in ABO-incompatible recipients in our country . The patient was treated with pulse methylprednisolone, rituximab, and two sessions of DFPP for CAAMR. Although the urinary protein was still positive for 1 year after KTx, the mean fluorescence intensity of DSA against HLA-DQ4 declined to 2426 and the renal graft function was preserved throughout the follow-up period .