A 50-year-old woman (height 156 cm, weight 79.2 kg) was diagnosed with uterine myoma and right ovarian tumor and was scheduled for transabdominal hysterectomy and right salpingo-oophorectomy. The preoperative evaluation showed no comorbidity except obesity. Preoperative 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated no abnormality . Standard monitoring, including limb lead ECG, non-invasive blood pressure monitoring, and pulse oximetry, was applied when the patient entered the operating room. Before the induction of general anesthesia, an epidural catheter was uneventfully inserted through the intervertebral space between the 12th thoracic vertebra and the first lumbar vertebra. General anesthesia was induced with a target-controlled infusion (TCI) of propofol (target concentration 4.5 μg/ml), continuous infusion of remifentanil 0.25 μg/kg/min, and intravenous fentanyl 200 μg. The patient’s trachea was then intubated following the administration of 50 mg of intravenous rocuronium (Rocuronium Bromide Intravenous Solution®; Maruishi Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Osaka, Japan). Intraoperative anesthesia was stably maintained with a TCI of propofol (1.5–2 μg/ml) and infusion of remifentanil (0.05–0.15 μg/kg/min), combined with intermittent boluses and continuous infusion of epidural levobupivacaine 0.25% (total 40 ml). The capnometer and bispectral index (BIS) were also monitored during the management of general anesthesia, while neuromuscular monitoring was not used. BIS ranged 30–50 during surgery. A total of 70 mg of rocuronium, other than the abovementioned 50 mg, was administered during the 177-min surgery.
After surgery, propofol and remifentanil infusions were ceased, and sugammadex (Bridion®; MSD, Tokyo, Japan) 200 mg was intravenously administered. Approximately 1 min after the sugammadex administration, the patient’s heart rate started to decrease from 87 bpm, reaching 36 bpm over 3 min, accompanied by hypotension (41/20 mmHg). ST depression in lead II appeared simultaneously, which was confirmed retrospectively by checking the electronic anesthesia chart, although an anesthesiologist who was in charge of the intraoperative management did not notice it in real-time. Airway pressure under positive pressure ventilation was stable. Atropine 0.5 mg was promptly injected intravenously, but her hemodynamics did not improve. Intravenous adrenaline 0.5 mg was added 2 min after the atropine injection despite the lack of signs suggesting allergic reactions, such as skin rash or urticaria. Her heart rate and blood pressure quickly recovered to 130 bpm and 100/54 mmHg, respectively, and remained stable thereafter. However, the tidal volume of spontaneous breathing fluctuated around 250 ml, leading to hypercapnia (end-tidal CO2 58 mmHg) and alveolar hypoventilation (SpO2 93% [FiO2 1.0]). Neuromuscular monitoring was then applied for the first time, and the train-of-four ratio ranged 0.92–1.07. Chest radiography indicated no abnormalities, and bilateral breath sounds were clear. Furthermore, transthoracic echocardiography, performed approximately 30 min after sugammadex administration, indicated the normal systolic function of both ventricles. Nevertheless, the patient had an inadequate level of consciousness, was unable to follow instructions, and BIS showed 70–80. The patient was subsequently transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and sedated, with her trachea intubated to apply 10 cmH2O of pressure support.
At arrival of ICU (approximately 1 h after the bradycardia occurred), 12-lead ECG was obtained. It showed sinus rhythm (heart rate 102 bpm), whereas downsloping ST depression in leads II, III, aVF, and V3-6, as well as ST elevation in lead aVR, were noted, implying myocardial ischemia in the broad region . Serum tryptase and histamine were not assessed because typical allergic reactions were not observed. After a 9-h overnight observation, we confirmed the adequate recovery of tidal volume and alertness, and then her trachea was extubated. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 8 without any sequelae.