A 32-year-old Caucasian gentleman had a bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement at the age of 17 for bicuspid aortic stenosis. Whilst awaiting redo surgery for a stenosed bioprosthetic aortic valve, he presented with a 1-week history of abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhoea. In addition, he reported malaise, lethargy, and weight loss. He had no history of drug abuse or any recent travel. In addition, he had good dental hygiene with a routine dental check 2 weeks prior to presentation. He had no other past medical history. He had pyrexia and dyspnoea with signs of decompensated right-sided heart failure with raised jugular venous pressure, abdominal tenderness, and jaundice. He had no stigmata of IEC with an ejection systolic murmur on cardiac examination.
Initial blood investigations revealed deranged liver function tests with ALT of 64 IU/L (1–55 IU/L), ALP 190 IU/L (30–130 µ/L), and bilirubin 176 µmol/L (1–20 µmol/L), renal impairment with creatinine of 352 µmol/L (50–98 µmol/L) equating to an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 19 mL/min/1.73 m, and anaemia with a haemoglobin of 87 g/L (120–155 g/L). Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with no abnormalities. Transoesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated a complex, cavitating aortic root abscess adjacent to the left and the non-coronary cusps of the aortic valve. This was complicated with perforation into the right ventricle. (, Video 1) An emergency redo surgery was performed with a mechanical aortic valve replacement (St Jude USA), annular reconstruction and graft replacement of the ascending aorta after debridement of the aortic abscess.
Following the operation, the patient remained septic and continued to spike temperatures with static inflammatory markers. Although all blood cultures and the intraoperative tissue cultures were negative, he was treated with meropenem broad spectrum antibiotic. On his 7th postoperative day, he had pericardial effusion and tamponade for which he had pericardiocentesis. Eventually, bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing from the intraoperative tissue valve specimen was performed; revealing A. aphrophilus infection and the antibiotic was changed to intravenous ceftriaxone after 2 weeks. He decided to self-discharge from the hospital, but he continued to take his intravenous ceftriaxone. However, 2 weeks after discharge, the patient developed neutropenia and his antibiotic was changed to oral ciprofloxacin.
One week later, he was readmitted with dyspnoea on minimal effort, night sweats, and fever. Transthoracic echocardiography showed an enlarging abscess cavity around the aortic annulus, with fistula formation and significant blood flow into the right heart chambers. (, Video 2) computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of pseudoaneurysms .
He had a further redo sternotomy with a mechanical aortic valve and root replacement (25 mm ATS valve conduit, ATS Medical, USA). Annular reconstruction was performed as the previous patch repair had dehisced revealing a large peri-annular abscess with fistula into the right ventricle. The patient became coagulopathic with fibrinogen of 0.35 g/L (1.5–4.5 g/L) with poor right ventricular function and a venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was inserted with femoral venous drainage and arterial return to the right axillary artery. The VA-ECMO was removed after 3 days. The patient continued intravenous meropenem and ciprofloxacin for 6 weeks. He had a follow-up echocardiogram that showed a well seated valve with no abscess, and this was confirmed by a follow-up CT. He made a good recovery and was discharged. Five months later, he had a purpuric rash which resolved, after investigations and blood cultures, he was diagnosed by the dermatologists of having non-specific viral-induced rash, he has been asymptomatic since and remains under follow-up.