A 47-year old man of Puerto Rican descent presented with recent gross hematuria and a history of lower abdominal pain of 1-2 years duration. Other comorbidities included hypertension and Type II diabetes mellitus. He had a 20-year history of heavy smoking. Colonoscopy three years prior to presentation revealed no evidence of adenomatous polyps or colorectal cancer.
Urine cytology revealed the presence of numerous red blood cells, as well as atypical urothelial cells. A subsequent CT scan revealed a mass in the mid-right ureter suggestive of a ureteral neoplasm . A ureteroscopic biopsy revealed urothelial mucosa with papillary architecture, suspicious for invasive urothelial cell carcinoma. Subsequent colonoscopy revealed synchronous tumors in the ascending colon and splenic flexure , and biopsies confirmed both lesions were adenocarcinomas. A two-centimeter flat lesion was also identified in the transverse colon, and biopsy was consistent with a flat adenoma with focal high-grade dysplasia.
The three tumors were resected in a combined operation, and the patient recovered from surgery without complication. The urothelial cell carcinoma was high-grade, pT3 N2 Mx, Stage IV, and the more advanced colon adenocarcinoma was moderately differentiated, pT3 N1 Mx, Stage IIIB. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin and taxol combined with radiotherapy, and is disease-free at the time of publication.
A comprehensive family history was taken and a formal pedigree was assembled . The patient's father died of colon cancer shortly after diagnosis at age 55, and three other paternal family members had cancer in an unknown site. The patient's paternal grandmother died at an early age of unknown causes. Four maternal family members had cancer in unconfirmed sites, and one had acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Although the patient's family history did not satisfy Amsterdam Criteria II, the early age-of-onset and presence of synchronous tumors fulfilled the Revised Bethesda Criteria . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) on surgical specimens was as follows: MLH1 stained negative and MSH2 stained positive in all tumors , strongly suggesting a mutation in MLH1. Differential staining for cytokeratins 7 and 20 confirmed distinct histological origin of the ureteral and colon tumors . Accordingly, the patient was referred for genetic counseling and germline mutation testing.
PCR amplification and sequencing on a peripheral blood sample identified the novel c.866_867insCA MLH1 insertion into exon 10 . This frameshift mutation is predicted to produce a truncated, nonfunctional protein product due to a premature stop codon within exon 10 at amino acid residue 297. Review of the available databases revealed this specific mutation had not been previously reported.