A 66-year old male patient was admitted to the emergency service with a six-week history of complaints of hiccup and fever. Hiccups mostly correlated with lead stimulation. The patient had a diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy and underwent dual chamber pacemaker and implantable cardioverter defibrillator implantation (ICD) due to atrioventricular complete block three months ago in another hospital. A coronary angiography was performed before the procedure showed normal coronary arteries. Six weeks after the implantation, the patient had fever and was given antibiotic therapy in another hospital. The medical history revealed diabetes and hypertension for 10 years.
On admission, the patient had a fever of 39.5°C, blood pressure of 100/50 mmHg and heart rate of 100/min. Pulmonary sounds were rough and there was no crepitation. A 2/6 pansystolic murmur was audible at all cardiac foci. There was mild edema in both legs. There were splinter hemorrhages in the nails .
An electrocardiogram showed pacemaker rhythms. A bigeminy ventricular extrasystole was noted. A chest x-ray revealed a bilateral reticulonodular pattern. There were bilateral pleural effusions. The cardiothoracic index was increased. The pacemaker generator implanted in the left pectoral region was present along with two (atrial and ventricular) leads, which appeared to extend into the heart .
Laboratory tests revealed a WBC of 12.300/m3, sedimentation of 62mm, and CRP of 235 mg/L. HbA1C level was 6.2%. The patient with these clinical manifestations was hospitalized with the diagnosis of unknown fever and hiccups in the department of infectious diseases and was initiated on drug therapy with sulbactam+ampicillin+ciprofloxacin. His blood culture yielded positive result for methicillin-sensitive staphylococcus aureus. His body temperature tended to decrease for a while but increased again to 39°C on day nine, upon which the patient was designated to undergo transthoracic echocardiography. The hiccups continued with intervals. A transthoracic echocardiography showed global hypokinesia of the left ventricle with a low ejection fraction (EF= %35). Besides mild mitral insufficiency, the patient had moderate tricuspid insufficiency. There was an amorphous and mobile mass measuring 2x2.1 cm that was consistent with vegetation, both floating freely on the atrial surface of the tricuspid valve and attached to the pacemaker lead and was continuous inside the ventricle. The mass appeared to be obstructing the tricuspid orifice intermittently .
These findings confirmed the diagnosis of lead-related infective endocarditis. Given the presence of resistant fever and the size of the mass, lead extraction was planned. The patient was initiated on antibiotic therapy with sulbactam+ampicillin+rifampicin. Upon his request, the patient was transferred to the center where the pacemaker had been implanted. In the mentioned center, the pacemaker lead was extracted and implanted as a temporary transvenous pacemaker. Antibiotic therapy was given for two weeks. After the signs of infection disappeared, a dual chamber pacemaker and ICD were implanted in the patient. After implantation, antibiotic treatment was continued for two weeks. The patient who was followed-up 3 months later was in pacemaker rhythm. He did not complain hiccups, was in good condition and had no signs of infection. There was no echocardiography vegetation.