A woman aged 52 years with no prior trauma presented with severe pain, swelling and increased local heat in the proximal area of the right knee. The patient’s symptoms developed 3 weeks prior to her arrival at our hospital. She initially presented with pain in both knees at the local clinic and was treated with physical therapy and hyaluronic acid injections. The left knee pain resolved following treatment. However, the right knee pain persisted, and the patient reported that the pain and increased local heat had extended to the more proximal area. Furthermore, the patient developed a high fever of over 39 °C 2 weeks after first treatment. She was referred to our hospital with a suspected distal femur bony malignancy.
The patient had no past medical history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hepatitis, or systemic infection. The patient’s Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) test, and liver and kidney function tests were normal. Notably, she had a salphingectomy 15 years prior, and a single tooth extracted approximately 4 months prior to presentation. She received prophylactic antibiotics before the tooth extraction.
On the physical examination, an increased local heat in the proximal area of the right knee without an external wound, or draining sinus was confirmed. Body temperature was 38.8 °C. Laboratory test results showed the following: leukocytes 7260/μL (neutrophil 79.1%), absolute neutrophil count 4050, C-reactive protein (CRP) 21.26 mg/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 72 mm/h. We conducted synovial fluid analysis on the fluid extracted from the right knee joint. Synovial fluid analysis revealed a white blood cell count of 870/mm3, a polymorphonuclear leukocyte of 45%, and no crystals were found. Anteroposterior and lateral radiography of the right knee revealed multifocal osteolytic changes in the distal metaphysis area of the right femur. The lesion had an irregular margin but no sclerotic rim (Lodwick classification type 1B). There was no definite destruction of cortical bone. However, a subtle cortical thickening lesion suggesting solid type of periosteal reaction was found at superior aspect of lateral femoral condyle (arrow head, a) . The axial (a), coronal (b), and sagittal (c) T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right knee, which were previously performed at another hospital (with lacking information of T1 weighted and enhanced image), are shown in Fig. . Multifocal intraosseous lesions (6.1 × 2 × 2 cm) at metaphysis and diaphysis of the distal femur were observed with no destruction of cortical bone. However, double-contour periosteal line, which suggesting periosteal reaction (arrow head, A and B) at lateral aspect, and marrow edema were found in the adjacent tissues (asterisk, B). Considering the patient’s age, location of the lesion, margin, and absence of cortical destruction, we suspected osteomyelitis rather than a bony malignancy.
Still considering the possibility of malignancy, we made a 5 cm longitudinal incision in the anterolateral aspect of the distal femur. We split the vastus lateralis muscle and made an oval-shaped bony window in the lateral aspect of the femur. We evacuated yellowish pus-like intramedullary abscess, and the tissues were sent for Gram staining, routine culture, acid-fast bacillus (AFB) culture, fungus culture, and pathology test. Tissues were collected from various sites, and frozen pathology test was performed to exclude the possibility of malignancy. The emergency frozen pathology examination showed an absence of malignant cells. Continuous, massive marginal debridement and irrigation were performed. We inserted a negative-pressure drain into the intramedullary canal through the distal femur bony window. Intravenous first-generation cephalosporin (Cefazolin, 2 g/q8hr) was empirically used to target methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, which is still the most common cause of osteomyelitis. The tissue culture, fungus culture, AFB culture, AFB smear, and tuberculosis (Tb) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests were negative.
Six days post-surgery, pathologic examination of a bone biopsy specimen revealed acute and chronic osteomyelitis. Furthermore, colonies of filamentous bacteria that were rimmed by neutrophils with sulfur granules, which are indicative of actinomycotic colonies, were present. However, we were unable to confirm the exact species of Actinomyces. As a result, the treatment plan was altered, and intravenous penicillin G potassium (400 million IU/q6hr) was administered to target the actinomycotic osteomyelitis. The patient received repeated curettage and debridement on postoperative days 13, 27, 41, and 54 because of continuous pus- like discharge through the suction drain and abnormal ESR and CRP results. The specimens obtained on days 13, 27, and 41 were still positive for sulfur granules on pathologic examination. However, the culture tests remained negative. The specimen obtained on day 54 was normal on following pathologic examination. At postoperative day 60, the yellow pus-like discharge decreased in volume, and the ESR and CRP results were normal. The drain was removed, and the wound was closed. Penicillin G potassium was Intravenously administered for 8 weeks followed by amoxicillin-clavulanate taken orally at a dosage of 625 mg every 6 h for 6 weeks. CRP and ESR were tested at 2-week intervals. After confirming the CRP and ESR values were normal for 3 consecutive intervals and that there were no signs of recurrence (local heating, pain, swelling, or painful range of motion), we discontinued the oral antibiotics. Antibiotics were discontinued after total 14 weeks of treatment.
Follow-up was performed at 6 months, 1 year, 3 years and 5 years after surgery. At the follow-up, X-rays showed that the bony window was not fully recovered, but there was no evidence of recurrence or pathological fracture . During the 5-year follow-up period, CRP and ESR levels remained normal, and there were no symptoms of recurrence, such as local heating, swelling, and pain. In addition, the patient had full range of motion in the affected knee. The patient is satisfied with the result of treatment and enjoy daily life with no discomfort.