A 45-year-old Japanese woman presented with intermittent abdominal pain in the left upper quadrant for more than 5 months. Two months after the onset of symptoms, the patient visited a clinic and was treated with medication; however, symptoms recurred two months later. A 40 mm well-demarcated low-density mass was detected on computed tomography (CT) scan, and she was referred to our hospital for further examination.
She had no other symptoms, such as fever, nausea or vomiting, urinary or defecation disorders, and had no significant past medical history and abdominal laparotomy. Laboratory examination revealed no specific abnormal findings. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the mass was a non-enhanced fatty tissue and seemed to have a pedicle attached to the parietal peritoneum . Atypical lipomatous tumor or well differentiated liposarcoma were considered as differential diagnosis; however, benign lipoma was strongly suggested by the imaging findings.
Although a benign lipoma was strongly suspected, the tumor was considered to have caused her intermittent abdominal pain because no other abnormalities were present. Therefore, we decided to perform a laparoscopic tumor resection.
The operation was performed with four-port trocars: a 12-mm trocar at the umbilicus, three 5-mm trocars at the right and left hypochondriac and right lumbar regions. The tumor was observed as a lipomatous, smooth, and whitish-yellow surface lesion attached to the parietal peritoneum in the left hypochondriac region with a narrow pedicle . The pedicle was twisted; however, no ischemic changes were observed in the tumor. There was no adhesion of the tumor to any other organs or the greater omentum. The tumor was easily removed only by dissecting the pedicle and extracted from the umbilical port after insertion of a retrieval bag .
The patient recovered without any complications and was discharged on postoperative day 2. The resected tumor was 50 × 45 × 20 mm in size, and histological findings showed diffuse proliferation of mature adipocytes with collagen fibers and was finally diagnosed as fibrolipoma . The abdominal pain was relieved after surgery without recurrence of abdominal symptoms during the one-year follow-up period.