A 33-year-old male patient complaining of abdominal pain and distension was initially diagnosed as bowel obstruction and went through enterolysis and omentum majus biopsy . Several days after the first surgery, the patient appeared a relapse of abdominal pain and received exploratory laparotomy and bypass operation. Then, the patient’s physical condition turned to go downhill with intermittent fever and cachexia. Afterwards, the patient was referred to our clinic with sIAI, hypoalbuminemia, hydrothorax, poor incisions healing, and suspected fistula with intestinal juice flowing from the incision.
After the patient was admitted to our hospital, he presented with intermittent high fever (39 °C) and cachexia. Anti-infection therapy, acid suppression therapy, digestive juices secretion suppression therapy, total parenteral nutrition (PN), and double-pipe drainage were utilized to maintain the patient’s homeostasis. To relieve the symptoms, we decided to carry out OA to locate the source of enteric fistula effluent and control the IAI. During the procedure of exploration, the fistula was found situated at the place where the side-to-side anastomosis was carried out during the bypass operation . The volume of enteric fistula effluent reached a peak of approximately 2500 mL/d, corroding surrounding tissue and incision continuously, thus making the orifice of the fistulous tract and incision unlikely to heal spontaneously. Afterwards, high-resolution computed tomography and contrast-mediated fistula angiography confirmed the existence of the EAF , the area of which reached 8.5 cm2, thus making most other isolation techniques inapplicable and invalid.
With the intention of blocking the enteric effluent to improve fistula healing, restoring EN, and carrying out definitive surgeries earlier, we attempted to implant a “fistula stent” to plug the EAF. After investigating the anatomy of EAF from fistulography and measuring the actual inner diameter and tortuosity of the bowel with fingers, we utilized Solidwork software to build the model of a hollow and curving pipe stent with a small protuberance and integrated wall. The following data were collected: inner diameter of 14 mm, thickness of pipe wall of 0.5 mm, length of 14 cm, and bend pipe instead of combined two straight ones. The whole model was saved in Standard Template Library (STL) form to be recognized by 3D printer .
Thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) is a synthetic and biocompatible material with strong tenacity and good flexibility, which has been applied widely in medical devices such as catheter and vascular graft. Our team has been investigating the properties and biocompatibility of TPU for years and the safety of TPU-made stent is assured. We collaborated with Nanjing Normal University and utilized Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM), which is one of the most classic and mature techniques of 3D printing, to build the “fistula stent” from STL file .
Nine days after carrying out OA, the stent was implanted into the bowel through the orifice of the fistulous tract and proved to suit the trend of bowel ideally . No obstruction was observed around the orifice of the fistulous tract. Then, contrast-mediated fistula angiography was conducted to verify the effectiveness of the stent with the contrast agent flowing past the stent without obstruction . The protuberance was fixed with threads to avoid displacement due to peristalsis or postural changes . After the implantation, there was an obvious decrease in the amount of enteric fistula effluent and increase in stool frequency and capacity. Four days after implantation, we restored the patient’s EN by nasal feeding, which was started from 500 mL and increased to 1500 mL during the following 3 d. No abnormal or subjective discomfort was observed during the whole process.
Several indexes of the patient were recorded in which we regarded the amount of lost enteric effluent (Vloss) as the most significant one. In the duration of therapy, Vloss was equal to the amount of drainage fluid from the fistula orifice minus the amount of fistula irrigation fluid. EAF in this patient belonged to high flow fistula (> 500 mL/d) because the scope of the orifice of the fistulous tract occupied nearly half of the intestinal wall . Though it was still higher than 400 mL/d, leakage of enteric effluent was notably reduced after the implantation. With the increase in the amount of EN per day from 500 mL to 1500 mL, Vloss floated upwards within a short time and gradually turn to decrease by degrees.
Seven days after implantation, no sign of pyrexia or obvious infection existed and the general condition of the patient was improved with frozen abdomen formed steadily and drainage unobstructed. Considering the good physical condition of the patient and the blocked EAF, skin grafting on the abdominal wall was conducted successfully. Timely blocking of EAF laid the foundation of the skin graft healing. Ten days after skin grafting, the abdomen had granulated around the EAF and the orifice of the fistulous tract had also decreased to a very small size . During the follow-up, we observed that the orifice of the fistulous tract was enlarged due to the change in abdominal incision and body position, so we used butterfly-shaped adhesive to strain the bilateral abdominal walls to control the Vloss further. The patient is receiving EN in good condition and waiting for definitive intestinal anastomosis and abdominal closure, in which the “fistula stent” will be drawn from the orifice of the fistulous tract.