This 40-years-old male presented with painless scrotal swelling that progressively increased in size for one month. He also had low-grade fever, general malaise, and night sweats, but denied a history of cough. He initially received Coartem®(Artemether/Lumefantrine) as a treatment for clinical malaria at a rural health facility where laboratory services are limited. The symptoms did not improve, and he was subsequently referred to Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital, a tertiary health care facility. He did not have any chronic illnesses and his serology for the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) had been done and documented as negative before referral. At the time of presentation, he worked as a mechanic and denied exposure to anyone with chronic cough or history of tuberculosis treatment. He was not a smoker or an alcoholic. He was married and denied having multiple sexual partners.
On examination, he was a well-nourished male, had a Bacillus Calmette Guerin (BCG) scar on his right deltoid, and his vitals were stable .
The cardiovascular, neurological status, respiratory, and abdominal examination were all normal. The Chest X-ray was normal . His physical examination was significant for a fluctuant nontender left scrotal mass measuring 5cm × 8cm. It was neither translucent and nor ulcerated. A scrotal ultrasound scan showed a grossly enlarged left scrotum with a hyperechoic left testis. The right testis was normal. Fine needle aspiration revealed pus, which was positive on Xpert® MTB/RIF Ultra (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), with rifampicin resistance detected. A left orchidectomy was performed with clinical suspicion of a non-viable left testis, which was then sent for histopathology. The histopathology showed areas of caseous necrosis, granulomatous Langhan type giant cells, presence of mature lymphocytes and atrophic seminiferous vesicles, as shown in pictures A-D . The Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) staining of the testis was negative. The patient was initiated on the non-injectable treatment protocol for DR-TB. He is now better on week 8 of treatment and the presenting symptoms; fever, night sweats, and general body weakness have since resolved.