A 46-year-old male visited the emergency department of our hospital on April 23, 2015 due to fever and headache for three days and impaired memory for half a day. The patient had experienced fever three days before, with a peak body temperature of 38.5 °C. No other discomfort was described. He had visited other hospitals before and was diagnosed with an upper respiratory infection based on haematological findings. However, his condition did not improve after treatment with intravenous levofloxacin. Within a half a day, he developed impaired memory, concomitant with speech disturbance, poor response, no significant limb movements and convulsions before being referred to the emergency department of our hospital. The patient had no medical history. No histories of food and drug allergies were obtained. The patient denied any prior history of smoking, heavy drinking or drug abuse. On arrival, the initial physical examination revealed the following: body temperature 38.0 °C, pulse 100 beats/min, respirations 26 breaths/min, blood pressure 144/76 mmHg, delirium, speech disturbance, equal size and round shape of bilateral pupils with diameters of approximately 3.0 mm, sensitive to light reflex, basically normal cranial nerve examination, limb muscle strength Grade V, negative bilateral pathological signs, and no ataxia. The patient’s neck was soft, and there were no signs of meningeal irritation. No significant findings were found on the cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations. No skin rashes or bleeding sites were observed after examining the entire body. The laboratory test results were the following: haematology: white blood cells (WBC), 12.5 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage, 87.6%; C-reactive protein (CRP), 56 mg/L; procalcitonin (PCT), 2.8 ng/mL; and D-dimer, 3.2 μg/mL. A chemistry panel and screens for infectious diseases and cardiac markers were generally normal. No abnormal findings were observed on chest X-ray or electrocardiogram. Brain computed tomography (CT) showed a curved high-density mass at the left sylvian fissure area and an ischemic lesion of the left temporal lobe .
As an emergency diagnosis, massive cerebral infarction (probable atherosclerosis of the left internal carotid artery system) was considered, and intracranial infection could not be excluded; appropriate treatments included aspirin for anti-platelet aggregation, atorvastatin for lipid regulation and plaque stabilization, and cefuroxime and acyclovir for anti-infection.
The patient experienced aggravated unconsciousness after two hours of admission, and physical examination showed the following: lethargy, aphasia, equal size and round shape of bilateral pupils with diameters of approximately 3.0 mm, sensitive to light reflex, shallow right nasolabial folds, immobilization of right limbs upon orbital pressure, movable left limbs, positive right pathological signs and negative left pathological signs. Further revascularization therapy was considered, and the patient was immediately transferred to undergo brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). On the way to the radiology department, the patient experienced further aggravation of unconsciousness and entered a light coma, concomitant with limb seizure, gazing to the left of bilateral eyes, equal size and round shape of bilateral pupils with diameters of approximately 2.0 mm, and disappearance of the light reflex. Appropriate treatments included midazolam for epilepsy, mannitol for dehydration and intracranial hypotension. After termination of the seizure, re-examination of the brain CT showed a curved high-density mass at the left sylvian fissure area and a massive low-density area in the left temporal lobe with many high-density plot areas scattered within it. CT images also showed compressed deformation of the left ventricle and a shift of the brain midline to the right . Considering that the patient developed haemorrhagic transformation, he was admitted to the emergency intensive care unit for further management.
Eighteen hours after admission, the patient experienced further aggravation of unconsciousness and entered a moderate coma, concomitant with high fever (body temperature 39.9 °C), bilateral pupils: left versus right = 5.0 mm versus 3.0 mm, respectively, disappearance of the light reflex, increased muscle tone of the right limbs, and positive pathological signs of bilateral limbs. The brain CT re-examination showed expansion of the bleeding area, with overt signs of brain herniation. The patient underwent emergency left frontal temporal craniotomy, removal of the intracranial hematoma and a decompressed craniotomy performed by neurosurgeons. The intraoperative findings were as follows: dark red appearance of the left temporal brain tissue, concomitant with subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH); an ostomy of approximately 0.2 cm was created along the left temporal sulcus; a visible purple blood clot was observed, concomitant with surrounding contused brain tissues; and a large vascular embolization could be observed in the hematoma cavity. Approximately 10 mL of the hematoma and contused brain tissues were removed and sampled for pathological evaluation. Histopathological examination showed haemorrhage, oedema and inflammatory changes in brain tissues, neutrophil infiltration into the vascular walls and surrounding tissues, and microvascular purulent thrombosis . The patient was transferred to the neurologic intensive care unit for further treatment after the operation. During the course of the treatment, negative findings were found for Chlamydia pneumoniae, mycopsslasma, influenza, tuberculosis, the TORCH panel, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); the sputum culture was negative, and the blood culture suggested Staphylococcus aureus. No abnormal findings were found on chest X-ray or ultrasound. In addition, two transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) examinations were normal, and there were no observations of valvular dysfunction or neoplasm. The following final diagnosis was considered: massive cerebral infarction, consistent with haemorrhagic transformation (the left internal carotid artery system, inflammatory thrombus), Staphylococcus aureus sepsis and symptomatic epilepsy. After two months of vancomycin anti-infective treatments and supportive and symptomatic treatment, the consciousness of the patient improved gradually, and several blood cultures were negative. He underwent rehabilitation and was discharged from the hospital on the 72nd postoperative day (POD). At discharge, his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was E4V4M6, and the modified Rankin scale score was 3.