The patient was a 43-year-old Kurdish woman who presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a 2-day history of hemoptysis, dyspnea, and pleuritic chest pain. She also complained of a 10-day history of overnight fever and chills, and generalized arthralgia 20 days prior to the recent admission. Her past medical history was unremarkable except for uterine leiomyosarcoma which was diagnosed 5 months earlier. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large solid mass measuring 113 mm × 206 mm which was located superior to the uterus and was connected by a stalk to the uterine fundus. A core needle biopsy confirmed the diagnosis. She underwent a hysterectomy and left salpingo-oophorectomy 1 month prior to the recent hospitalization. Chest CT scan was performed before surgery and did not show metastatic lesions. She did not use any drugs prior to admission and had not received chemotherapy for sarcoma. Her familial history was unremarkable for malignancies or thrombotic events. She denied alcohol or cigarette consumption. She was single, a housekeeper, and had no children.
On the day of admission, her vital signs were as follows: heart rate = 120 beats/minute, respiratory rate = 20/minute, blood pressure = 125/80 mmHg, temperature = 37 °C. Oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. On general examination, she was neither pale nor cyanotic. Respiratory distress was not detected. Results of physical examination of the respiratory and cardiovascular systems were within normal limits. Lung auscultation and percussion were normal. Examination of the limbs was unremarkable except for 1+ pitting edema of both lower extremities up to the ankles. No arthritis was obvious, and the range of motion of the joints was normal. Examination of cranial nerves was unremarkable. Deep tendon reflexes were 2+ and bilateral plantar reflexes were downward. Proximal and distal muscle strength was 5/5.
Laboratory test results on the day of admission were as follows: hemoglobin of 12.8 mg/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 84 fl, white blood cell count (WBC) 10.2 × 103/mm3 (differential count: neutrophils 78%, lymphocytes 12%, monocytes 10%), platelet count 363 × 103/mm3, creatinine 0.7 mg/dL, international normalized ratio (INR) 1, prothrombin time (PTT) 24 seconds, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 290 IU/mL (normal: 207–414 IU/mL), aspartate transaminase (AST) 31 IU/L (normal: 0–31 IU/L), alanine transaminase (ALT) 27 IU/L (normal: 0–34 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 213 U/L (normal: 64–306 U/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 119 mm/hour, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 2+. Venous blood gas (VBG) was as follows: pH = 7.52, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) = 34, bicarbonate (HCO3) = 28.
The calculated score for the Wells criteria was 6.5 (score of 1 for hemoptysis, 1 for having cancer, 1.5 for tachycardia, and 3 for having no alternative diagnosis more likely than pulmonary thromboembolism [PTE]) . As a result, PTE was suspected, and CT pulmonary angiography was performed. Multiple soft tissue nodules were seen in the field of both lungs suggestive of metastatic lesions. A mass measuring 54 mm × 46 mm with density similar to soft tissue was detected in the apicoposterior segment of the left lower lobe. A thrombus was observed in the left infero-posterior pulmonary vein . Transthoracic echocardiography recorded a left ventricular ejection fraction of 55% and pulmonary artery pressure of 35 mmHg. The right ventricle size was normal. She was started on unfractionated heparin 80 units/kg immediately and 8 units/kg per hour intravenously. Administration of warfarin tablets 5 mg/day was started the next day. Five days after reaching INR > 2, heparin was discontinued and she was discharged in stable condition with warfarin tablets 5 mg/day. After discharge, she was referred to a radiation oncologist for the management of metastatic cancer. She was followed up in the pulmonology clinic about 5 months later. She was on warfarin 5 mg daily and she had no recurrence of symptoms. She was receiving gemcitabine 675 mg/m2 every 21 days intravenously in combination with 100 mg/m2 docetaxel on day 8 intravenously as a chemotherapy regimen for metastatic uterine leiomyosarcoma.