A 54-year-old female patient presented with right buccal swelling for 2 years and headache for 2 mo to the Department of Head and Neck Oncology Surgery, West China College of Stomatology, Sichuan University.
The patient visited a local hospital and started anti-inflammatory and analgesic drugs as they considered the symptoms to be caused by cold and toothache, but the pain did not improve significantly. The patient again visited Guangyuan People’s Hospital seeking further treatment. The biopsy taken showed the spindle cell tumor in the right maxillary sinus, which was further examined by immunohistochemistry. The patient denied any shortness of breath, nausea, dysphagia, hoarseness, loss of consciousness and any neurological or constitutional symptoms at any time.
The patient had no previous medical history.
She was a non-smoker with no specific family history.
On extra-oral examination the mass located in the right face was non-tender, fixed and non-pulsatile and sessile . The patient did not have any palpable lymph nodes or associated neck masses. Upon intra-oral examination, an obvious buccal swelling covered with slightly red oral mucosa was present. The majority of the mass was located in the right maxillary sinus and involved the base of the maxilla.
The patient underwent biopsy of the mass using gingival incision extending as far as the upper first molar teeth under local anesthesia. Biopsy reported a grade I primary extracranial meningioma with low mitotic activity. Hematological examinations were within normal limits.
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a well-circumscribed heterogenous lesion with a necrotic center and was relatively hypointense on T2-weighted imaging .
Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated the presence of a large, well-defined soft tissue mass measuring about 7 cm × 6 cm × 6 cm occupying the entirety of the right maxillary sinus, affecting nearby sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses, without affecting the dura mater or endocrinal structures. The surrounding structures were compressed by the mass, and the mass extended from the roof of the oral cavity into the skull base. CT on bone window setting showed an expansive mass with a high density area in the right maxillary sinus. The anterior and lateral walls of the maxillary sinus were thinned and destructed by the expanding mass, with erosion of the wall of the right maxillary sinus as well as orbital floor. . Imaging study based on comprehensive detection of the lesion revealed that there was no evidence of intracranial extension and metastatic nests.