In March 2023, a 23-year-old female patient presented to our hospital's thyroid surgery department with a history of bilateral thyroid nodules detected during a routine physical examination for 3 years. She had no known medical history or chronic diseases and no hoarseness or compression symptoms. Thyroid function, anti-peroxidase antibody, and calcitonin levels were all within normal limits. Ultrasound showed a solitary solid nodule measuring 2.5 × 2.0 mm with unclear margins and a regular shape in the left thyroid lobe, with a longitudinal-to-transverse ratio greater than 1. A solitary solid nodule measuring 5.5 × 3.5 mm with unclear margins and a regular shape, with punctate calcification inside, was found in the right thyroid lobe. No abnormal lymph nodes were found in the neck. The patient underwent bilateral thyroid nodule fine-needle aspiration biopsy and BRAF gene testing, with results indicating bilateral papillary thyroid carcinoma and positive BRAF gene V600E mutation. Neck-enhanced CT revealed bilateral thyroid nodules and the right subclavian artery branching from the aortic arch on the distal side of the left subclavian artery . Due to the patient's young age and aversion to a midline neck incision, she underwent endoscopic thyroid surgery via total areola approach for radical resection of bilateral thyroid cancer, including total thyroidectomy and ipsilateral and contralateral central compartment VI lymph node dissection. During the surgery, a small nerve was discovered that wrapped around the inferior thyroid artery and passed upward along the tracheoesophageal groove on the right side. Further dissection revealed a cord-like grayish-white structure emanating from the neck sheath and extending horizontally to the posterior aspect of the thyroid gland. Careful dissection along this cord-like structure revealed a nerve running horizontally inward to the thyroid cartilage below the inferior horn, which was identified as NRLN . The postoperative period was uneventful, with no changes in the patient's voice and no numbness in the extremities. According to the postoperative pathological examination, the patient was found to have bilateral micro-papillary thyroid carcinoma.