A 97-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a chief complaint of complete rectal prolapse measuring > 5 cm. The patient had no significant medical history.
The patient had no problem regarding surgical tolerance and had a history of undergoing laparoscopic anterior suture rectopexy without sigmoid resection under general anesthesia for complete rectal prolapse one year prior. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 1 week postoperatively. However, her dementia worsened (Hasegawa’s dementia scale: 5/30 points) after the operation, and moderate-to-severe aortic valve stenosis was first diagnosed with heart failure 6 months after the operation. The ejection fraction was 65.4%, and echocardiography revealed diffuse thickening of the left ventricular wall.
Nine months after the initial surgery, she experienced a recurrence of complete rectal prolapse measuring approximately 5 cm. Considering the coexistence of advanced age, severe dementia, and aortic valve stenosis, surgery under general anesthesia was not indicated. Perineal stapled prolapse resection in combination with the Thiersch operation was planned because of its minimal invasiveness and shortened hospital stay. The procedure was performed by a team of two surgeons in the jackknife position under spinal anesthesia. The jackknife position was selected instead of the lithotomy position due to serious hip joint contracture.
The prolapse was completely pulled out and fixed using Allis clamps , then cut along its long axis with three linear staplers (× 2 cartridges in the 0 o'clock direction, × 1 cartridge in the 6 o'clock direction) (Powered Echelon Flex gold 60 mm) , and resected along its short-axis direction with four linear staplers . The cross-section of the linear staples was reinforced with 3-0 Vicryl suturing. After rectal resection, the Thiersch operation using 1-0 nylon thread 1 cm away from the anal verge was additionally performed . The operative time was 24 min and the intraoperative blood loss was 1 mL. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged two days postoperatively without any postoperative complications. Three months after the operation, no recurrence was observed and defecation function was good with improvements of Wexner score (18 → 5) .