A 55-year-old male patient with yellow staining of the skin and sclera for 2 weeks. No obvious abnormalities were observed upon admission. The patient underwent a prior splenectomy. There was no other notable history of past illness. The initial laboratory tests showed 340 U/L alanine aminotransferase, 73.5 μmol/L total bilirubin, 96.9 U/mL carbohydrate antigen 19–9(CA19-9), 3.74 g/L IgG4, and 327 U/L plasma total amylase. The abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed occupancy of the pancreatic head with dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary ducts and enlargement of the gallbladder. Enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) examination revealed a mass with an abnormal signal shadow, low signal on T1WI, an equal signal on T2WI, a slightly high signal on diffusion weighted imaging, and uneven enhancement, which was lower than the normal pancreatic tissue. The celiac trunk and its branches were surrounded, and both the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts had expanded like soft vines .
The positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) examination revealed a low-density lesion in the head of the pancreas, approximately 2.3 cm 2.1 cm in size, locally protruding behind the head of the pancreas, and increased FDG metabolism (SUVMAX 6.91). Pancreatic cancer was considered and the lesion involved the adjacent common bile duct. There were two retroperitoneal metastatic foci located posterior to the head of the pancreas . EUS showed an irregular hypoechoic mass in the uncinate process of the pancreas with irregular borders, invading the lower common bile duct with an inner diameter of 9 mm. The superior mesenteric artery was immediately adjacent to the mass . Then laparoscopic puncture histopathology showed fibrous tissue proliferation with a large number of plasma cells and lymphocyte infiltration in pancreatic tissue. This finding when combined with the immunohistochemistry results was consistent with IgG4-related autoimmune pancreatitis (IgG4 about 90 cells/high power field (HPF)); no cancer cells or pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia were observed . The patient was given prednisone 5 mg qd as long-term steroid treatment in the following month, then discharged from the hospital.
After one month, the patient was admitted to the hospital again because the enhanced MR examination revealed a mass in the head of the pancreas, which appeared larger. The patient was deemed to still have indications for surgery and a laparoscopic pancreaticoduodenectomy + laparoscopic retroperitoneal lymph node dissection + intestinal adhesion release was performed. During the operation, a hard mass was observed in the upper part of uncinate process of pancreas near the root of abdominal trunk, which invaded the pancreatic segment of bile duct and the bile duct was dilated with a diameter of 1.2 cm. The lesion did not involve the main pancreatic duct, which was about 0.2 cm wide. The head of the pancreas was seen to be edematous and lobulated. After resection of the lesion, anastomoses pancreaticum using Blumgart anastomosis. The operation lasted 10 h and 400 ml of bleeding. Routine pathology after surgery revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in the lower segment of the common bile duct wall, approximately 1.7 × 1.5 × 1.0 cm in size, with positive nerve invasion and indicated metastatic adenocarcinoma of the abdominal trunk root mass . Four of the 16 regional lymph nodes showed metastasis. Vascular involvement was negative, major duodenal papilla and pancreatic duct were not involved, and all resection margins were negative for tumor. A large amount of lymphocyte infiltration was observed in pancreatic tissue, and no obvious intraepithelial neoplasia was observed. The patient had diarrhea after operation, the rest of the general situation was good, and was discharged 10 days after operation. He was treated with the mFOLFRINOX regimen postoperative chemotherapy. A follow-up CT scan at 4 months post-surgery confirmed that the patient was in remission. During the postoperative follow-up, the total amylase dropped to the normal range at about 10d after operation, the C-reactive protein dropped to the normal range at about 3 months after operation, and the plasma IgG4 levels increased at about 2 months after operation ( 3.41 g / L). CEA and CA19—9 have gradually increased since the follow-up.