The 27 year old man presented in our hospital with dyspnea, fatigue, dizziness, palpitations and central cyanosis with following personal history. He is the sixth child from six normal pregnancies. His family history was negative for congenital defects. After birth, a holosystolic murmur was heard along the left side of sternum and the diagnosis of Vitium cordis congenita was given based on physical examination, chest radiographs, and electrocardiogram in pediatric cardiology centre in Belgrade. Cardiac catheterization was proposed in that time. As a child, the patient had normal growth and mental development. During that time he had marked cyanosis right after a long physical activity. At the age of six he was revisited at the same Institute and they proposed to do the cardiac ultrasonography back in Kosovo. The cardiac ultrasonographic result at that time was the single ventricle. Urgent catheterization and adequate surgical treatment was considered however, not performed.
The patient condition was stable with marked cyanosis just after a long physical activity until a few months ago. In our hospital he presented complaints of dyspnea, fatigue, dizziness, palpitations, and central cyanosis. In physical examination systolic murmur, tachycardia 120/min and pulmonary congestion were evident. An electrocardiogram indicated sinus tachycardia of 120/min, right axis deviation, high QRS voltage ST segment depression in inferior leads. Chest X ray signified cardiomegaly and pulmonary congestion. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed: a single ventricle, bicuspid aortic valve and aneurismatic wall of interatrial septum were seen. . The transventricle diastolic diameter was 101 mm, low ejection fraction, mitral regurgitation gr. I, aortal regurgitation gr. I-II, and tricuspidal regurgitation gr. III with PSAP = 90 mmHg. Transcutaneous oxygen saturation was 80–89%. Abdominal echosonography signify considered liquid in Morrison recess. The important laboratory findings were hyperviscosity and erythrocytosis.
He was treated with cardiac glucozides, carvedilol, diuretics, and anticoagulants. He was discharged at stable condition with recommendation for cardiac surgery evaluation abroad since in our country it is not established yet. He couldn't get proper financial support to resolve this medical condition.