A 66-year-old Caucasian man presented with a 10-month history of episodic severe cramping abdominal pain, associated with loose stools. Each episode lasted for a few days and would resolve spontaneously. The patient's medical history included renal cell carcinoma and nephrectomy, transurethral resection of the prostate for benign prostatic hyperplasia, and hypertension, He denied any use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, any history of urticaria or laryngeal edema, any drug allergies, or any family history of angioedema. He had not recently changed his diet or started new medication.
We gave our patient an extensive evaluation, which included several esophagogastroduodenoscopies and colonoscopies over the span of one year, with normal endoscopic findings. Colonoscopies performed between attacks did not show any evidence of inflammation. Histological examination of biopsies did not reveal any atypical cells or expanded collagen bands. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen performed when the patient was asymptomatic showed a normal small bowel . A colonoscopy performed during an acute attack revealed non-specific colitis, and CT of the abdomen performed at the same time showed a thickened small bowel and ascending colon with a moderate amount of free fluid in the abdomen. Abdominal arteriography showed a patent celiac artery and superior mesenteric artery (SMA).
The surgical department was consulted and patient underwent an exploratory laparatomy. An appendectomy was performed and a cecal biopsy obtained, which was normal. However, our patient continued to have similar attacks.
A small bowel series was performed, and showed mucosal irregularities and intramural edema of the distal ileum. Our patient was hospitalized and treated with intravenous hydration. He was afebrile at this time. Laboratory investigations revealed that his white blood cell count was 12.7 × 109/L with 89.4% polymorphonuclear lymphocytes (reference range 4 to 11 × 109/L and 41.5% to 65%). Haemoglobin was 17 g/dL (reference range 13 to 18.0 g/dL) consistent with hemoconcentration, and the chloride was low at 99 mmol/L (reference range 95 to 107 mmol/L). Results of liver function tests and levels of amylase and lipase were within normal limits.
A repeat inpatient CT scan showed extensive concentric right and transverse colon thickening, and concentric thickening of several small bowel loops with ascites . CT angiography of the abdomen showed the previous finding of a patent celiac artery and SMA.
Further laboratory analysis revealed a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Stool analysis gave negative results for Yersinia, ova and parasite, and standard culture. Levels of prostate specific antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibody, methemoglobin level, and urine porphobilinogen levels were within normal limits. Celiac serology testing and testing for anti-nuclear antibody and carbon monoxide levels were negative. C3 levels were within normal limits. Levels of C4 (< 8 mg/dL; reference range 15 to 50 mg/dL), CH50 (< 10 U/mL; reference range 29 to 45 U/ml) and C1 inhibitor (< 4 mg/dL; reference range 14 to 30 mg/dL) were all low, supporting a diagnosis of acquired angioedema (AAE) with isolated bowel involvement. It is possible, although rare, for a de novo genetic mutation to lead to angioedema.
Our patient's symptoms improved with antihistamine and supportive treatment, with danazol treatment planned on an outpatient basis for prophylaxis after discharge. However, our patient had no recurrences of similar episodes during follow-up after discharge and we decided not to start him on any prophylaxis. He has had no attacks since discharge.