A 70-year-old woman underwent LSC due to POP-Q stage III cystocele. Following subtotal hysterectomy, mesh was fixed to the anterior and posterior vaginal walls, and the uterine cervix was fixed to the sacrum with mesh. As the preoperative cough stress test during prolapse reduction was negative, concomitant anti-incontinence surgery was not performed.
Although MUI only occurred occasionally before LSC, it severely worsened directly after LSC (SUI 5–6 times and UUI 1–2 times a day). She had urinary incontinence while sneezing, coughing, carrying her grandchildren, and during physical exercise such as brisk walking and jumping. With successive coughs, massive incontinence occurred with urinary urgency. It was necessary for her to change 80cc urinary pads four times a day.
The patient and her family were informed beforehand of the risk of urinary incontinence worsening after prolapse surgery. However, they became quite distressed at the extent of the worsened incontinence. Anticholinergics decreased the amount of UUI but not SUI. During a cystoscopy, there was no mesh exposure or tumor, but an unusual cord-like appearance was revealed in the center of the bladder trigon and posterior wall resembling a “Central Road” . A stress test proved leakage accompanied by coughing and straining, and this leakage was prevented by supporting the paraurethral tissue with two fingers (Bonny test). A 1-h pad test resulted in a leakage of 44 g/h. Uroflowmetry was normal (maximum flow rate 24 mL/s, voided volume 491 mL, and residual volume 22 mL). Videourodynamics verified SUI without detrusor overactivity under anticholinergic medication. Chain cystourethrography showed that the bladder neck was open, with the posterior vesicourethral angle widened atypically .
Following LSC, the patient received a midurethral sling procedure (transobturator tape) 18 months later. Intraoperative cough stress tests were used to adjust the tape tension. During 20 months of follow-ups, both SUI and UUI were completely cured without medication, and urinary pads were not needed. Cough stress tests and 1-h pad tests results were negative. Videourodynamics did not show urodyanamically proven SUI or detrusor overactivity.