A 54-year-old Caucasian man with a history of ischemic stroke and ischemic cardiomyopathy presented to our emergency department with constant left-sided lower abdominal pain and decrease in urination of one week's duration. Four months prior to presentation, he had noticed pain and swelling in his left groin. Because of his concerns of a hernia, he sought clinical evaluation. His family physician sent him for an ultrasound of the scrotum, which revealed a left-sided varicocele. He was then referred to a urologist. For one week, he developed continuous, unrelenting left-sided abdominal pain localized primarily in the left lower quadrant. He had diminished appetite and noted a 12-pound weight loss during the prior one month. Because of decreased urinary frequency, he came to our emergency department for evaluation. His family history was negative for malignancy. His physical examination revealed a hard mass occupying the entire left abdomen, crossing the midline, and extending to the pelvic brim, as well as the presence of a left-sided varicocele. He had no lymphadenopathy or hepatomegaly and no clinical signs of hormone access of 1.7 from a baseline of 1.0, hyponatremia (serum sodium 130 mmol/L), and normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 10.9 g/dL, hematocrit 34.5%, mean corpuscular volume 82.5 fL, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin 26.1 pg.) His hormonal evaluations, including fasting blood glucose, serum potassium, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), morning serum cortisol, and androgen levels, were normal. Renal ultrasound showed that the left kidney was inferiorly displaced by what was thought to be an enlarged spleen. His home medication of lisinopril was discontinued. Intravenous fluid was started. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis performed after the patient's renal function improved showed a large retroperitoneal mass on the left side displacing the left kidney inferiorly and the spleen superiorly with T5 epidural compression . Thrombus was also identified in the left renal vein extending into the inferior vena cava. A CT chest scan showed bilateral pulmonary nodules compatible with metastasis. Anti-coagulation therapy, a 5 mg/day dose of warfarin adjusted according to International Normalized Ratio levels and five days of 1 mg/kg enoxaparin administered subcutaneously every 12 hours for bridging therapy were initiated because of thrombosis of the blood vessels. The patient's acute kidney injury improved after intravenous fluid and anti-coagulation treatment. During the course of his hospitalization, he was seen by our medical oncologist, who managed his anti-coagulation therapy and arranged for the biopsy. A CT-guided biopsy of the abdominal mass was performed. Immunohistochemistry showed malignant cells with abundant amounts of eosinophilic cytoplasm and a rosette pattern of the cells around his blood vessels. Occasional, very enlarged, bizarre nuclei were observed. Mitoses were rare but could be identified . Immunohistochemistry performed to detect primary adrenal origin was positive for calretinin, melan-A, vimentin, and synaptophysin. His Ki-67 proliferation index was 12%. This presentation was consistent with primary ACC. The diagnosis of ACC stage IV was made. Laboratory tests performed for hormornal evaluation, including fasting blood glucose, serum potassium, cortisol, and urinary metanephrine levels, were normal. A nuclear cardiac stress test was performed, which showed borderline anterior ischemia and mild to moderate systolic dysfunction with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 38%. Unfortunately, the adrenal mass was determined to be unresectable because of local unresectability and metastatic disease.
Mitotane, an adrenocorticolytic drug, was started at an initial dose of 1 g/day and the dose was later increased to maintain plasma levels between 14 μg/mL and 20 μg/mL, which was well tolerated. Irradiation of the lesion at T5 that was causing the epidural compression was followed by combination chemotherapy consisting of etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin. The patient understood that the goal of therapy was to control his symptoms and hopefully to achieve better quality of life and prolonged survival.