A 48-year-old Caucasian male with no significant previous medical history presented at the surgical emergency department of our hospital due to the suspicion of rectal neoplasia based on the results of an abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed the day before at another institution. Imaging findings included a circumferential rectal wall thickening, with infiltration of the perirectal fat and invasion of the mesorectal fascia, associated with perirectal fat lymphadenopathy. A radiological diagnosis of a rectal malignant neoplasia staged as T4N2MX was given .
The patient performed the previous exam due to complaints of anorectal pain, hematochezia, and constipation over the previous 2 weeks. He denied having fever, night sweats, abdominal pain, weight loss, or any other symptoms. He also denied abdominopelvic trauma, recent traveling to tropical destinations, anal sexual intercourse, and a personal or family history of colorectal cancer or IBD. He reported a family history of pancreas neoplasia (in a 2nd-degree relative) and cervical (a 1st-degree relative) and breast (2nd-degree relatives) cancer.
Physical examination was unremarkable and showed hemodynamic stability. Digital rectal examination identified a palpable circumferential rectal mass at 6–8 cm from the anal verge.
Laboratory results showed a white blood cell count of 8.5 × 109/L (N = 4.0–10.0), hemoglobin 14.3 g/dL (N = 13.0–17.5), and C-reactive protein 2.52 mg/dL (N < 0.50), with normal liver and renal function. Carcinoembryonic antigen was negative (3.5 ng/mL; N < 5.4).
In view of the clinical and imaging findings, the patient was referred to rectosigmoidoscopy that revealed an extensive and circumferential ulceration of the rectal mucosa with elevated geographical borders and exudate. Some aphthoid erosions at the proximal limit of the endoscopic mucosal ulceration were also observed .
Biopsy specimens showed acute ulcerative proctitis with reactional changes of the crypts, goblet cell depletion, diffuse lymphoplasmocytic inflammatory infiltrate, and granulation tissue in the lamina propria. No microorganisms, spirochetes, or cytomegalic inclusion bodies were identified. Immunohistochemistry for Cytomegalovirus (CMV) was negative. There was no evidence of dysplasia or malignancy in these samples .
A full STI screening was performed. HIV-1 serology proved positive with CD4+ count of 251/mm3 (N = 700–1,100). Additionally, an elevated C. trachomatis IgA-specific antibody titer (52.000; N < 5.0) suggested LGV disease. The diagnosis was confirmed by C. trachomatis positivity on nucleic acid amplification testing on a rectal swab.
Other infectious causes of acute proctitis, including N. gonorrhoeae, T. pallidum, HSV, CMV, other fecal bacteria, and parasites, were excluded. When faced with these results, the patient ended up mentioning that he had had unprotected anal sex with men before the onset of symptoms.
A diagnosis of LGV-associated proctitis in a newly diagnosed HIV-infected man was made. The patient started treatment with doxycycline 100 mg twice a day for 21 days. He also underwent antiretroviral therapy with bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir for HIV infection.
His symptoms dramatically improved after beginning antibiotic therapy. Two weeks later, rectosigmoidoscopy was repeated and there were clear signs of a progressive resolution of the ulcerative proctitis. A 3-month follow-up colonoscopy showed complete mucosal healing with scattered scars on the rectal mucosa .