The patient was a 23-year-old lady with end stage renal failure (ESRF) secondary to glomerulonephritis. She had been receiving automated peritoneal dialysis (APD) for 5 years before presenting to the emergency department with an asymptomatic right sided clavicular lump. The lump was treated conservatively by the attending emergency physician. During one of the subsequent APD clinic follow-ups, she again raised the concerns of the persistent right clavicular lump. She was referred to the orthopaedic surgeon for a second clinical opinion. Ultrasound scan of the clavicle was carried out. It reported the lump as an isoechoic lesion in which the possibility of an abscess formation cannot be ruled out. In order to further clarify the nature of the lump, a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan with gadodiamide (Omniscan, GE Health Diagnostics, Amersham, UK) at a dose of 0.1 ml/kg was carried out. 2 days after the MRI scan, she experienced a febrile illness which lasted for more than two weeks. The illness was associated with migratory joint pains, a feeling of malaise and fatigue. Concurrently, she was noted to have multiple dusky erythematous nodules over her lower limbs with corresponding pitting edema up until the ankles . A skin biopsy of the lesion revealed erythema nodusum (EN) in which the lymphocytes and histocytes were reported to have infiltrated the subcutaneous layers, mainly involving the fibro adipose septa and also the lower part of the dermis. There was also necrosis of the adipose tissues. Perivascular lymphocytic infiltration was seen in the upper dermis. Blood chemistry panel showed moderate aneamia without leukocytosis. Rheumatic fever screening, Anti-Streptomycin O Titre (ASOT) and mycoplasma antibody tests were negative. Similarly, the echocardiogram showed good ejection fraction without any vegetation or valvular lesion. She was provisionally treated as having possible streptococcal infection with EN. She responded well with intravenous antibiotic and subsequently discharged well. However, three months later, she complained of gradual skin tightening over her fingers, dorsum of the hands and feet . Soon she became semi wheelchair-bound due to the worsening contracture of her joints. A repeated skin biopsy over her shin showed changes compatible with NSF with CD 34 positive cells in the dermis. The diagnosis was explained to the patient and family. A permanent catheter was inserted and she was started on hybrid therapy (APD supplemented by twice per week high-flux hemodialysis). Her Kt/V improved (2.25 to 2.94) after a period of intensive hybrid therapy. A trial of low dose prednisolone was initiated and she was referred to occupational and physiotherapist for rehabilitation of her stiff joints.
Unfortunately, despite dialysis treatment intensification, she succumbed to cardiac arrhythmia.