A 76-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital owing to dyspnoea upon exertion. He had a medical history of interstitial lung disease treated with low-dose steroids, along with hypertension and diabetes mellitus. On admission, the physical examination was normal. Laboratory data showed that the brain natriuretic peptide level was normal and troponin was not detected. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm without ST-T changes. His left ventricular ejection fraction was 65% by the modified Simpson method. Coronary computed tomography revealed three-vessel coronary artery disease. Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed and revealed a 90% stenosis of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA), a 90% stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery, and a 90% stenosis of the proximal left circumflex (LCX) artery (see , ).
The patient was diagnosed with effort angina pectoris upon exertion, and his SYNTAX score was 14. Therefore, we planned to treat his three vessels by using PCI. First, PCI of the RCA was performed. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) was performed after wire crossing and showed fibrous plaque and moderate calcification with a 270° calcium arc in the culprit lesion. After pre-dilatation with a cutting balloon (diameter, 2.5 mm), non-flow-limiting dissection occurred; this was a type C dissection according to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute criteria.
An everolimus-eluting stent (diameter, 3.0 mm; length, 38 mm) was successfully implanted and completely sealed the dissection, and post-dilatation with a noncompliant balloon (diameter, 3.25 mm) was performed at the proximal edge of the stent. Intravascular ultrasound revealed adequate stent expansion without stent edge dissection .
After the procedure, the patient experienced paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with bradycardia and hypotension. He had no chest pain, and electrocardiography and laboratory tests revealed only non-specific changes. Edoxaban and clopidogrel were prescribed at discharge.
Two weeks later, at the time of the PCI of the LCX, we observed severe stenosis from the distal stent edge to the distal RCA. Therefore, we changed the PCI target from the LCX to the RCA. The RCA was crossed by a conventional wire. Intravascular ultrasound revealed that the wire was in the true lumen and that a hematoma extended from the middle of the stent to the distal segment ( and , ). Although we could not identify the entry of the dissection, we empirically implanted an everolimus-eluting stent (diameter, 3.0 mm; length, 28 mm) to cover the distal edge of the previously implanted stent. However, blood flow was not restored, and IVUS revealed that true-lumen compression caused by the hematoma continued from the additional stent to the bifurcation of the atrioventricular branch and posterior descending branches. Thus, fenestration was required and was performed via a cutting balloon (diameter 3.0 mm) in the distal RCA. After successful fenestration, RCA blood flow was restored (see , and ).
Subsequently, we preformed PCI of the LCX and LAD within two months. Eight months after PCI of the RCA, we performed follow-up CAG because of the abovementioned treatment course, despite the absence of symptoms. Coronary angiography revealed an absence of restenosis in the three vessels and that the blood flow of the RCA was well maintained .