Fifty-four-year-old female patient, postmenopausal, with a family history of a maternal aunt with breast cancer (62 years).
Patient detected a tumor in her left breast of 3 years of evolution, without pain, without nipple involvement nor changes in color.
The patient has controlled hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
Clinical examination showed an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 1. Lymphatics: 6 cm left axillary conglomerate. Breasts: Two tumors in the left breast, one in R12 of 5.5 cm, at 2 cm from the nipple, the other in R2 of 2.5 cm, without skin involvement.
The mammography and breast ultrasound showed signs suggestive of left breast multicentric compromise associated with ipsilateral nodal involvement. The Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System (BIRADS) score was 6.
Chest computer tomography (CT) showed signs suggestive of a malignant neoformative process of the left breast associated with ipsilateral nodal involvement . Abdominal CT and bone scans were without metastatic lesions.
The core biopsy of the left breast reported the following: The R12 lesion corresponds to an infiltrating carcinoma of the breast, invasive ductal carcinoma not otherwise specified (NOS)/invasive breast carcinoma of no special type (NST) with lobular pattern infiltration areas, and histological grade noted high, lymphovascular invasion was present, but perineural invasion was not observed. Immunohistochemistry analysis determined that the tumor was negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), cerbB2 (or human epidermal growth factor, HER2) , positive for e-cadherin, and had 60% positive for ki67 . The lesion in R2 corresponds to an infiltrating carcinoma of the breast, NOS/NST with areas of infiltration of lobular pattern, and histological grade noted that neither high, lymphovascular infiltration or perineural invasion were observed. Immunochemistry analysis had similar characteristics to those described in radius 12 (R12; clockwise), with negative staining for ER, PR, cerbB2, positive for e-cadherin, and 60% positive for ki67 In both lesions, significant intertumoral lymphocytic population less than 10% was not identified.