Patient is a 42-year-old woman with a past medical history of uterine leiomyomas. She underwent several fertility treatments in her youth, including ovarian stimulation, hormonal therapies (GnRH agonist), and myomectomies (two were performed at ages 30 and 33 and measured 2 cm in diameter) overall; nevertheless, all failed. She got tired of doctors and treatments so she stopped going to follow-up visits.
In recent years, her leiomyomas had grown to a worrisome size, and in the last year, she began to experience heavy bleeding, frequent spotting, and anemia, so she went to her gynecologist.
On clinical examination, an otherwise healthy patient with no signs of right-sided heart failure symptoms, including swelling and shortness of breath, was encountered; her vital signs were normal however, on her lower abdomen, a palpable mass 10 × 10 cm mass was discovered, along with some mild discomfort in the lower abdomen and pelvis. No other masses or lymph nodes were found at that time. Due to this, complementary exams were needed, Complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 11 mg/dl, EKG was normal and a contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a 17.6 × 7.2 × 10.3 cm uterus. It had multiple soft tissue density fibroids with central calcifications, the largest one measured 4 × 5 × 2 cm and was in close contact to the parametrial vessels.
Upon reviewing the venous phase of the CT, we were surprised to discover that within the lumen of the right internal iliac vein, the right common iliac vein, and the inferior vena cava (IVC), there was a mass causing a heterogeneous filling defect that extended from the uterus into the right atrium. All other organs were normal at that time.
With these findings, a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was done, revealing that the 3 × 1.5 cm mass moved freely into the cardiac chambers without compromising the tricuspid valve or any other structure . The mass reached the heart through the IVC; and moved freely with the cardiac cycle. The patient was admitted and was started on enoxaparin on an initial presumption of hypercoagulability. Intravascular leiomyomatosis, intravenous thrombus, Budd–Chiari syndrome, right atrial myxoma, renal cell carcinoma, and primary leiomyosarcoma were among the differential; therefore, a cardiothoracic assessment was needed. After the patient was informed of her prognosis and the possible resection of all tissues involved, a thoracic and abdominal approach was decided.
At laparotomy, a radical hysterectomy was completed, thoroughly removing the pelvic tumor; care was taken to completely remove the cardinal ligament, rectovaginal ligament, and vesicouterine ligament. Once that was completed attention was placed on the infundibulopelvic ligament, broad ligament, and then round ligament. The ureter was identified and uterine artery was cut. After amputation of the vagina, pelvic lymphadenectomy is performed.
Following this, a median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) were initiated to begin the thoracic approach. Once a deep hypothermic circulatory arrest was achieved, a veno-cavotomy was done in the infrarenal IVC, which allowed the complete removal of the 5 × 1.5 cm tan-cream luminal mass from the IVC and iliac veins. The venacavatomy was closed in a one-layer fashion, and then attention was placed on the heart. The right atrium was exposed, and the 1.5 × 14 cm whiteish solid mass was removed from the right atrium and inferior vena cava under TEE guidance. Once the tumor was removed, CPB was re-established. The heart was de-aired, and the patient was rewarmed and weaned off CPB without complications. Post CPB, another TEE examination confirmed that the cardiac chambers were free from tumors.
The excised masses consisted of 2 pieces each measuring 5 × 1.5 cm and 14 × 1.5 cm. Pathology confirmed an intravascular leiomyoma. The masses had multiple fascicles of uniform, spindle-shaped smooth muscles without dysplasia or atypia. On immunohistochemical staining, it showed positivity for muscle actin. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful; she was discharged from the intensive care unit (ICU) on postoperative day three and admitted to the general ward. After she tolerated a full diet, she was discharged under strict surveillance and with long-term nonsteroidal estrogen receptor antagonist therapy.
Two years after the initial surgery, the patient is doing well without signs of recurrence.