The 55-year-old, Turkish female patient experienced generalized tonic clonic seizures which started 2 years previously and had become persistent during the last 3 months, despite antiepileptic treatment. In addition, the patient had complained of speech defects, forgetfulness, perception deficit for 2 months, cognitive disorders and a weakness in the right side of the body for the 2 days prior to admission. The patient had history of an operation in her left maxillary area due to basal cell carcinoma 7 years previously and then history of radiotherapy due to relapse 2 years later the operation. She had treated with a total dose of 56 Gy radiation, administered in 15 fractions to her left maxillary region, and she had no chemotherapy history.
During neurological examination it was found that the patient experienced confusion and disorientation. However bilateral papilledema was detected on neurological examination. In addition, the patient had right hemiparesis. Her muscle strength grade was 3 (active movement against gravity) in the right side of her body. A cranial CT scan showed hypodense lesions in the left frontal lobe (3 × 4 cm) and in the left temporal lobe (6 × 4 cm). No significant edema was observed around the lesions, which compressed the left lateral ventricle and did not show contrast enhancement . Cranial MR imaging showed in the left frontal region 3 × 4 cm and in the left temporal region 6 × 4 cm lesions, which were hypointense in T1 , hyperintense in T2-weighted images. These lesions observed with mild peripheral contrasting. They made us think about cystic masses. An EEG showed reduced bioelectrical activity in the left frontal and left temporal regions. A course of antiepileptic treatment was organized for the patient. The patient, who was using 2 × 500 mg Sodium valproate, was given dual antiepileptic therapy, starting with 3 × 100 mg Phenytoin. In addition, steroid treatment was begun. However, despite this treatment, the patient experienced loss of consciousness, a generalized tonic-clonic seizure, an increase in right hemiparesis. Her muscle strength grade became 2 (active movement with gravity eliminated). As the result of these, the patient was taken to surgery. She underwent a left temporal craniotomy. Transcortical cystic fluid was reached. The content of the cyst was aspirated. In the left frontal region, craniectomy was performed to a certain degree and the cystic fluid was aspirated.
Under microscopic examination of the cyst fluid, blood elements, an amorphous substance consisting of fibrinoid and hyaline material, low number of histiocyte and lymphocyte cells were observed. In the examination of material taken from the walls of the cyst and surrounding brain parenchyma, perivascular lymphocyte infiltration and macrophages were observed and hemosiderin loaded macrophages were found. These findings made us think of reactive gliosis. Also there were no evidence of neoplastic cells in the examination of cyst fluid, cyst wall and surrounding brain parenchyma.
In the early post-operative period, significant improvements were observed in the patient's consciousness, speech and right hemiparesis. Her muscle strength grade became 4 (active movement against gravity and resistance). The patient, whose follow-up still continues at our clinic, has not been experienced any postoperative seizure or neurologic deterioration. In postoperative follow-ups using images made for control purposes, it was observed that both cystic structures got smaller ( and ).