A 45-year-old man presented with decreased right visual acuity (VA) accompanied by periocular pain lasting for 1 week. Ophthalmological examination revealed that the patient’s right eye was only able to perceive light (best-corrected VA, light perception/0.9 in decimals, measured using a Snellen chart) and had relative afferent pupillary defect of grade 3, diffuse disc swelling, and inferior disc hemorrhage. Neurological examination showed normal muscle strength in all extremities, no sensory deficits, normoactive deep tendon reflexes, and no signs of bladder or bowel dysfunction. Orbit MRI revealed T2 high signal intensities and diffuse contrast enhancement along the right anterior and posterior optic nerve, as well as perineural enhancement . The results of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed a red blood cell count of 0/μL, a white blood cell count of 1/μL, and a protein level of 27 mg/dL. CSF oligoclonal band measured by isoelectric focusing was negative and IgG index was 0.64. The result of a serum AQP4-IgG flow cytometry assay using AQP4-M23-expressing live cells was negative . Right ON was suspected, and intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg pulse therapy) for 5 days followed by oral prednisolone (60 mg daily) were prescribed. The right VA of the patient was improved to 0.5 (visual Functional System score improved to 2 from 5).
The second right ON attack (0.15/1.0) occurred 4 months after the first ON when the prednisolone dose had been tapered to 10 mg daily. Thus, azathioprine 50 mg twice per day was started in a remission state between the second and third ON (4 months prior to the third ON). The average thickness of a retinal nerve fiber layer measured by spectral-domain optical coherence tomography was decreased in the right eye (right 51 μm and left 105 μm) . The third (hand movement/0.9) and fourth (finger count/1.2) right ON attacks occurred 6 and 10 months after the second ON, respectively, while the prednisolone dose was maintained at 5 mg daily and azathioprine was 75 mg twice per day. Following these attacks, the patient developed left central serous chorioretinopathy (0.15/0.9) associated with long-term steroid use. The 25 mg dose of prednisolone was thus tapered out at this point. Nevertheless, right ON recurred 2 months later for a fifth time (hand movement/0.9) when the patient was under azathioprine treatment only. At this time, the patient developed monocular blindness. The pattern-reversal visual evoked potential showed an abnormal waveform in the right eye with diminished amplitude. The left eye presented a relatively preserved response with prolonged P100 latency (118 ms) . Serum from the patient sampled at the time of the fifth ON attack was tested for MOG-IgG1 using a cell-based assay utilizing full-length human MOG (Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK) . The result of this test was positive.
Despite continued immunosuppressive treatment and due to the repeated ON attacks and the side effect of the steroid (chorioretinopathy), the patient was administered RTX (375 mg/m2, 3 weekly infusion for induction and 3 maintenance doses under CD19+ B-cell monitoring over 29 months). Although one mild ON attack (no light perception/1.2) occurred in the patient’s right eye during RTX treatment, the rate of relapse decreased markedly and the patient’s visual function was well-maintained. However, 32 months after the initiation of RTX treatment, we became unable to maintain RTX treatment due to insurance issues (denial for reimbursement). As a result, the treatment was switched to mycophenolate mofetil (250 mg twice per day) combined with oral prednisolone (5 mg every other day). The patient’s CD19+ B-lymphocyte level was restored to 2 and 4% at 9 and 11 months after the last RTX infusion, respectively. Subsequently, 2 more left ON attacks (hand movement/1.0 and hand movement/0.15) occurred within a one-month interval . The titer of MOG-IgG1 was measured by a geometric mean fluorescence (G-mean) ratio of the MOG-expressing cells bound to IgG1 using in-house flow cytometry. The G-mean ratio was calculated for each sera as followings: G-mean values of the patient’s sera / G-mean values of the healthy control. The titer was not associated with the continuation or cessation of the RTX treatment .