A 57 year-old female was referred with 1 year of progressive peripheral vision loss. Additional symptoms included 6 months of progressive nyctalopia and 2 months of photopsias. Her ophthalmologic history was notable for nuclear sclerotic cataracts bilaterally and a complete posterior vitreous detachment bilaterally. Medical history was significant for insulin-dependent type 2 diabetes mellitus without retinopathy and hypertension. The patient reported a family ocular history of a brother with glaucoma.
Ophthalmologic exam demonstrated best corrected visual acuity of 20/25 bilaterally. Color vision testing by both Ishihara plates and Farnsworth D-15 was without deficits. Goldmann visual fields (GVF) showed moderate to severe constriction bilaterally with enlarged blind spots and scattered mid-peripheral scotomas . Dark adaptation threshold measured with Goldmann-Weekers dark-adaptometer was measured after 45 min in the dark and was elevated by 1.0 log unit at fixation and 2.5 log units peripherally OD, and 0.7 log units at fixation and 2.5 log units peripherally OS.
Intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg bilaterally with briskly reactive pupils without afferent pupillary defect. Slit lamp exam of the anterior segment was notable for deep and quiet anterior chambers and 1+ nuclear sclerosis bilaterally, and trace anterior vitreous cell in the right eye only. Fundus exam demonstrated Weiss rings bilaterally, mild disc pallor, and severely attenuated retinal vessels with perivascular pigment in both eyes. There was moderate bone spicule pigmentation in the mid-peripheral retina, greater in the right eye than the left eye. . Macula optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated severe outer retinal atrophy with central sparing of ellipsoid zone and outer nuclear layer bilaterally and trace intraretinal cystic fluid in the right eye . Fluorescein angiography (FA) was also obtained and in both eyes showed peripheral non-perfusion with late scattered vascular leakage and disc leakage . Fundus autofluorescence demonstrated diffuse hyperautofluorescence circumferentially in the parafoveal region, bilaterally . Full-field electroretinography (ERG) performed with a Ganzfeld electroretinogram was recorded using the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision protocol, and was consistent with advanced, symmetric rod-cone degeneration bilaterally .
Laboratory tests, including antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, c-reactive protein, complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, complement C3, complement C4, rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, cryoglobulin, lupus anticoagulant, angiotensin converting enzyme, lysozyme, Ebstein-Barr virus antibody, cytomegalovirus antibody, bartonella antibody, viral hepatitis panel, HIV, lyme antibody, syphilis treponemal screen, and quantiferon gold, were all negative. HLA testing was negative for HLA:A29, B51, and B27 antigens. An anti-retinal autoantibody panel ordered through the ocular immunology laboratory at the Casey Eye Institute was positive for anti-retinal antibodies against 30-kDa carbonic anhydrase II protein and 46-kD enolase protein. Serum protein electrophoresis was performed with an elevated M-spike of 0.38 g/dL (IgG lambda subtype). The patient was referred to an oncologist who diagnosed her with MGUS.
There was no family history of retinal dystrophy, and a 267 genetic retinal dystrophy panel through the Ocular Genomics Institute at Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary was inconclusive. Given the relatively rapid progression in conjunction with vascular leakage on FA and the positive anti-retinal antibodies, the clinical picture was consistent with autoimmune retinopathy (AIR). Given concern for possible cancer-associated retinopathy (CAR), oncologic screening was reviewed and included a normal mammogram 9 months prior to presentation, negative fecal occult blood test 2 months prior to presentation, colonoscopy without malignant lesions 5 years prior, and normal pap smear 1 year prior. CT of the chest and abdomen and MRI of the brain and orbits were also negative for malignancy.
The patient was started on prednisone 70 mg (1 mg/kg-day) with a slow taper and mycophenolate mofetil 1500 mg twice daily was initiated within the next month. She had multiple episodes of skin peeling, which resolved after discontinuing mycophenolate. Methotrexate 15 mg weekly was initiated and the patient continued tapering prednisone down to 20 mg daily over a period of 6 months. On this regimen, she had improvement in her visual acuity, to 20/20 bilaterally, and GVF , resolution of macular edema on OCT , and decreased vascular leakage on FA . Her fundus examination remained stable. She was tapered off prednisone completely over another 4 months. One month later on methotrexate monotherapy, the patient was noted to have progressive constriction of GVF in the right eye. Methotrexate was increased to 17.5 mg weekly. Four months later, the visual acuity was 20/25 bilaterally and the patient noted a subjective decrease in peripheral vision in the right eye. Continued bilateral progression on GVF , return of macular edema bilaterally, and further attenuation of parafoveal ellipsoid zone in the right eye were noted. A single sub-Tenon’s methylprednisolone acetate injection (40 mg) in her right eye, the worse eye, was used to bridge the patient to rituximab infusions. After the first two rituximab infusions (1000 mg each) there was improvement in GVF constriction and resolution of macular edema in both eyes. The visual acuity was 20/30 bilaterally. The patient missed her subsequent scheduled infusions due to transportation issues, and when seen 6 months after her last infusion she had a decrease in visual acuity to 20/40–1 in the right eye and 20/30–1 in the left eye, recurrence of mild cystoid macular edema bilaterally, and enlarging central scotoma in the right eye. She has recently restarted rituximab infusions. Throughout her clinical course her MGUS remained stable.