One month following cadaveric kidney transplantation a 45-year-old Caucasian man, under tacrolimus, micophenolate mofetil (MMF) and steroids immunosuppression developed PTDM. Thirty months after transplantation histological graft changes characterized by mesangial sclerosis, mesangiolysis with glomerular capillary ectasia and microaneurysms appeared (Additional file ). Diagnostic criteria for PDTM were consistent with current American Diabetes Association (ADA) clinical practice recommendation to diagnose diabetes in the general population .
The deceased donor was a 58-year-old man whose cause of death was cerebral hemorrhage. The cold storage time was 12 h. The recipient’s cause of end stage renal disease (ESRD) was autosomal polycystic kidney disease. Non-modifiable recipient risk factors for diabetes were, excluding polycystic kidney disease, male gender and family history for diabetes, while donor non-modifiable risks included male gender, deceased donor. The donor history was negative for diabetes or insulin resistance. A week after transplantation, the recipient developed a moderate hypertension requiring doxazosin treatment resulting in good blood pressure control. The patient‘s BMI was always within normal range values. Basiliximab was used as induction therapy. The maintenance immunosuppressive regimen included tacrolimus, MMF, and methylprednisolone. To treat the PTDM, repaglinide was introduced with a poor glycemic control; consequently it was substituted with insulin followed by acceptable glycemic levels: HbA1c 6.7% (52 mmol/mol). At time of PTDM diagnosis creatinine serum level (SCr) was 1.5 mg/dL and 24-h proteinuria was 300 mg . Glycosuria was detected persistently in the first six months after transplantation and the basal glucose monitoring showed glycemia levels that didn’t exceed 180 mg/dL. To achieve further improvement in diabetes management, tacrolimus was replaced with cyclosporine (CyA). Steroids were rapidly tapered and stopped. To minimize calcineurin inhibitors (CNI) toxicity, which was revealed in a 1-year-protocol biopsy, everolimus was introduced thereby lowering CyA through levels. A mild mixed dyslipidemia was controlled with atorvastatin and omega-3 fatty acid. A second graft biopsy was performed 30 months after transplantation due to renal function decline, SCr was 2.2 mg/dL, 24-h 200 mg microalbuminuria appeared, and BMI was 21. Although treatment with doxazosin and bisoprolol were titrated at each follow-up control, blood pressure always ranged between 140 and 160/90–100 mmHg . The patient did not accept angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) and/or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) because of associated side effects, cough and erectile dysfunction respectively. The main clinical and laboratory data are shown in Fig. . At this point Donor Specific Antibodies, serum C3 and C4 levels and autoimmunity tests were negative, microalbuminuria/creatininuria ratio was 56.82 mg/g. Histological analysis surprisingly showed mesangiolysis, glomerular capillary ectasia and microaneurysms . It was observed in about 30% of glomeruli; moreover sclero-hyalinosis, basal membranes thickness in 20% of glomeruli and typical nodular glomerulosclerosis as showed in Fig. panel b, in few glomeruli. C4d staining was negative and no evidence of immune deposits was detected. According to our post-transplant biopsy protocol, sample collection for electronic microscopy was not performed. After transplantation glycosylated hemoglobin never exceeded 6.9% (52 mmol/mol). A serial Ultrasound Doppler performed on kidney transplant every six months showed Renal Resistive Index (RRI) that didn’t exceed 0.65. A retrospective re-analysis of pre-implant donor biopsy confirmed no diabetic injury .