A 49-year-old woman, who had undergone hysterectomy and right oophorectomy for uterine myoma and ovarian cyst 9 years prior, visited her family doctor with a symptom of right chest pain. Physical examinations and laboratory data were normal. Computed tomography, however, showed multiple solid lung nodules in the bilateral lungs . The maximal nodule size was observed in a 40-mm lesion in the right upper lobe (RUL) apex . Only two tumors, in the RUL apex and right lateral basal segment (S9), included a cystic fluid-filled component . Positron emission tomography revealed moderate avidity (maximum standardized uptake value, 4.93) only in the RUL apex lesion . Because multiple metastatic lung tumors of uterine leiomyoma were suspected, diagnostic wedge resection of the tumor in left lower lobe under video-assisted thoracotomy was performed. The pathological findings were leiomyoma, similar to the original uterine myoma, and a definitive diagnosis of PBML was made. Following PBML diagnosis, treatment with medroxyprogesterone was initiated; however, the lesion in the RUL apex rapidly increased in size (especially the cystic component) from 40 to 120 mm over the subsequent 7 months . The lesion in the right S9, in contrast, remained at a size of 20 mm. Given the risk of rupture and malignant transformation of the tumors, right upper lobectomy and partial lung resection of the right S9 via lateral thoracotomy were performed. The large cystic tumor, which occupied most of the RUL volume, had a dark-red surface and contained 330 ml of serous fluid . The right upper lobectomy was successful to excise the entire tumor. Examination of the cystic fluid showed a high level of CA125 (1199 U/ml). Pathologically, macroscopic findings revealed that the RUL tumor included minute bleeding in the solid component adjacent to the monolocular cystic change ; however, there was no bleeding in right S9 cystic lesion . Microscopic findings showed tangled spindle-shaped cells with positive expression of α-smooth muscle actin, estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor on immunohistochemical staining . There was little atypia and no tumor necrosis. Consequently, the cystic tumors were also diagnosed as PBML. Treatment with medroxyprogesterone was resumed and there was no evidence of new lesions or progression of residual lesion after 4 years of follow-up.