Fifty-seven-year-old Caucasian male was admitted into hospital with a 6-month history of epiphora. Physical examination revealed a painful mass in the right orbital region. A complex examination was performed. Ultrasonography showed a tumor mass in the area of the right lacrimal sac with clear margins. Contrast-enhanced head and neck MRI revealed a soft tissue mass of 17 × 17 × 19 mm with moderate vascularization in the area of the right lacrimal sac and proximal part of the right nasolacrimal duct with destruction of the right orbital lamina of the ethmoid bone . Fine needle aspiration biopsy revealed SCC.
Via PET/CT lymph node involvement and metastasis were excluded . Thus, the diagnosis of the lacrimal sac SCC, T4aN0M0, stage IV Jones classification, stage III Song et al. classification was confirmed [–].
The primary surgical procedure was indicated. Despite close contact of the tumor mass with the right eye and eye muscles and the risk of R1 resection, the patient did not provide consent for extended resection. Organ-sparing endoscopic-assisted lacrimal sac tumor resection extended via a part of the right orbital lamina, and nasolacrimal duct resection was performed. First, the lateral nasal wall mucosal flap was dissected via a nasal endoscopic approach. After anterior ethmoidectomy, a lacrimal sac tumor with a part of the orbital lamina was mobilized. A skin incision surrounding the tumor was made, and the lacrimal sac tumor resection en bloc with the right orbital lamina, the nasolacrimal duct, and the skin flap were completed. The skin defect was closed via a cheek flap, and the nasal endoscopic reconstruction of the lateral nasal mucosal wall was performed. Blood loss was 50 mL, and there were no intraoperative complications, Class-Intra 0 . The postoperative course was uneventful, Clavien-Dindo 0 . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 1 (POD 1), and sutures were removed on POD 10. Histological examination confirmed lacrimal sac keratinizing SCC grade 2 (Ki-67 98%) with invasion to the orbital plate periosteum and nasolacrimal duct and R1 resection at the level of the medial rectus and superior oblique muscles .
Chemoradiotherapy (CRT) was initiated on POD 27. Additive radiotherapy 60 Gy (fraction 5 × 2 Gy/every week) was combined with weekly cisplatin (40 mg/m2, 240 mg/m2). No significant side effects were observed during the treatment. At the time of this study, the follow-up period was 18 months, and no signs of local or distant relapse or side effects were observed.
Complex molecular-genetic testing was performed, considering the rarity of the disease. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed a stable MSI status, positive PD-L1 status (SP263 and 22с3), CPS = 38, TPS = 3%, positive HER2/Neu (3+), and panNTRK-negative expression. Additionally, PD-L1 was overexpressed, as determined by qPCR. Using FISH, c-erbB2 (HER2) amplification was identified (HER2:CEN17 = 2, 5) .
We examined the gene expression activity of all human genes (approximately 21,000) in the tumor tissue using >34 K gene expression markers and hybridization techniques: PD-1, TIGIT, CTLA4, IDO1, LAG3 and epidermal growth factor receptor overexpression and wild-type TP53 were found. In addition, elevated expression of the A2b receptor, TGFb1, and COX-2 was observed.
Finally, next-generation sequencing target oncological panel (500 genes, Oncomine Comprehensive Assay v4.4, an Ion S5 System) identified the FGFR p.G388R variant, BAP1, MLH1, and RB1 deletions. Low tumor mutation burden was identified (4, 76 mutations/megabases).