A 56-year-old male patient who had been on hemodialysis for 2 years for diabetic end-stage renal disease underwent deceased kidney transplantation in the right iliac fossa. Pre-transplantation induction treatment consisted of basiliximab, together with an immunosuppression regimen that included tacrolimus, mycophenolic acid, and methylprednisolone. No bleeding or other complications were observed during surgery. Anastomosis of the external iliac artery and vein and the renal artery and vein was performed and renal perfusion was started. JJ stent was not inserted. There was no bleeding in the anastomotic area and renal parenchymal blood flow was normal as viewed via Doppler ultrasonography (USG), performed in the operating room. After the anastomosis, immediate diuresis was observed. Surgery was completed without complications and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Perdipine and fentanyl were infused intravenously for blood pressure (BP) and pain control, respectively.
The patient’s urinary output was maintained at an average of 100 cc per hour. His initial vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 145/85 mmHg; heart rate, 92 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; and body temperature, 36.5 °C. They remained stable during the first 6 h after surgery. On postoperative day (POD) 1, His medication included immunosuppression such as tacrolimus, mycophenolic acid, and methylprednisolone. He did not take any anti-coagulant medications. The patient’s urine volume decreased to an average of 29 cc per hour. Saline infusion and diuretic treatment were performed to increase urinary output but no change in urine volume was observed. His serum creatinine level was 6.6 mg/dL preoperatively and 5.2 mg/dL on POD 1 . No BP surge occurred on POD 1. Doppler USG showed no evidence of hydronephrosis but the renal cortex was compressed by a 28 mm deep SH . USG did not reveal evidence of rejection, renal vein thrombosis, or anastomotic stenosis in the graft artery or vein. The resistive index (RI) increased to 0.98–1 and diastolic flow reversal was observed .
On POD 2, the patient’s urinary output decreased further, to an average of 8.7 cc per hour, and subsequently to essentially zero. There was no change in the size of the SH or in the RI value in follow-up Doppler USG of the kidney. The serum creatinine level was 6.03 mg/dL. There was also no BP surge or allograft pain complaint. Hemodialysis was performed to relieve the volume overload. PK due to SH was considered to be the cause of the 6 h of continuous anuria. Emergency surgery was performed and SH covered about 75% of the entire kidney surface area was found . Oozing was observed at several sites but there was no leakage of the arteriovenous or ureter anastomosis. A capsulotomy and hematoma removal was performed to alleviate the pressure on the renal parenchyma. Complete hematoma was not done due to extensive location across kidney surface. A biphasic sound was recorded via handheld vascular Doppler. There were no abnormalities in cortical blood flow. Additional hemostasis was performed at the oozing site. No immediate surgical complications developed. We were told that neither SH nor allograft dysfunction occurred in the recipient of the other kidney from the same deceased donor.
On POD 3, urine excretion decreased to an average of 9.6 cc per hour and the serum creatinine level was 4.7 mg/dL, attributed to the effects of hemodialysis. Additional hemodialysis was carried out for volume control and urinary output increased to an average of 78 cc per hour on POD 4. A decrease in creatinine level to 2.2 mg/dL and an increase in urinary output to an average of 200 cc per hour were recorded on POD 7 . Doppler USG revealed that the hematoma had decreased to a depth of 18 mm and the RI value was 0.7. At discharge, the patient’s creatinine level was 0.98 mg/dL. He is currently being followed up in our outpatient department. His renal function has been maintained and he continues to take immunosuppressants.