The patient was a 49-year-old woman. At 13 years of age, she developed acute obstructive hydrocephalus and underwent VP shunt surgery. She subsequently underwent seven shunt revisions due to various shunt complications. On two occasions, the peritoneal portion of the catheter was left in the abdomen for safety reasons. Most recently, a shunt catheter was placed into the left abdominal cavity via the left temporal and thoracic wall when she was 48 years old.
The following year, she visited our hospital for a routine exam. Physical examination and blood test findings were normal. However, she returned just 3 days later with abdominal pain and fever. Physical examination revealed peritoneal irritation. Computed tomography (CT) suggested migration of a shunt catheter into the lumen of the small intestine in the right side of the abdomen with an enlarging abscess cavity .
We performed an emergency exploratory laparoscopy suspecting acute peritonitis associated with intestinal perforation caused by one of the shunt catheters. CT results and detailed records from her multiple surgeries indicated that there were three separate shunt catheters in her abdomen at the time of surgery: a functioning shunt catheter on the left side, a nonfunctioning catheter in the right abdominal cavity left during a previous reconstruction 6 years earlier, and another nonfunctioning catheter in the pelvic cavity from the third surgery . One of the nonfunctioning catheters was responsible for the intestinal perforation.
Prior to laparoscopic intraperitoneal observation, we pulled the functioning catheter out from the abdominal cavity to place an external drain for the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). We then inserted a laparoscope through the umbilicus and observed the abdominal cavity. Next, we removed the free migrated shunt catheter found in the pelvic cavity. Finally, we removed the catheter that had perforated the intestine, and the perforation was sutured and closed with 3-0 Vicryl. The peritoneal cavity was irrigated with 10 L of warm saline, and a 19-Fr Blake drain was placed.
Postoperatively, Enterobacter cloacae was detected in both ascites and CSF culture, and meropenem plus vancomycin was administered to control the infection. A liquid diet was started on postoperative day 5. The CSF gradually became clear, but bacterial cultures remained positive even 2 weeks after the operation. After confirming that the CSF became aseptic, we constructed a new VP shunt on postoperative day 25. First, the neurosurgery team removed the functioning VP shunt system and placed the new one in the ventricular cavity. The gastrointestinal surgery team then dissected severe adhesions of the abdominal wall laparoscopically and secured a space for a shunt catheter in the pouch of Douglas to complete the reconstruction.
Postoperatively, antibiotic treatment was continued as prophylaxis against meningitis. Fortunately, there were no signs of infection, and she was discharged home 45 days after the surgery for peritonitis.