We report here the case of a 5-year-old girl who underwent bone marrow transplantation for SDS-associated bone marrow failure at a very young age, presenting with a slowly progressive development of dysglycemia characterized by spontaneous hypo- and hyperglycemia.
The child was born into a family without any specific previous history; only a paternal cousin had mental retardation of unknown origin. The girl was born at 37 + 6 weeks' gestation with a weight of 1920 g (500 g < 3rd percentile) and a length of 43.5 cm (2.5 cm < 3rd percentile), indicating small for gestational age (SGA). She was born with a connatal infection (an indication for antibiotic therapy) and was placed on CPAP therapy for respiratory adaptation disorder, which was discontinued on day 4 of life. At birth, she had a postnatal petechial rash on the extremities and was found to have severe thrombocytopenia, which was treated with platelet concentrate substitution. Due to severe muscular hypotonia, nutrition was initially provided only through a gastric tube. Genomic DNA sequencing was performed on the basis of clinical features with marked muscular hypotonia, laboratory findings (tricytopenia: thrombocytopenia, microcytic hypochromic anemia, agranulocytosis) and apparent pancreatic insufficiency (significantly decreased pancreatic enzymes in serum and stool) suggestive of Shwachman-Diamond syndrome . SDS was diagnosed based on the molecular genetic detection of two compound heterozygous mutations in the SBDS gene: SBDS, exon 2, c.183_184delTAinsCT, pLys62delins*, and SBDS, exon 4, c.523 > T, p.Arg175Trp. The detected mutations are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner: the 183_184TAinsCT mutation is reported to be one of the most common causes of SDS [–], and the c.523 > T mutation was first described in 2006 in a 5-year-old patient with a severe, distinctive clinical picture of SDS .
At the age of 26 days, the patient was transferred to the Immunology and Stem Cell Transplantation Clinic. During her continuous hospitalization for the first six months after birth, she suffered from an abscess of the right labia with a recto-cutaneous fistula (released by surgical intervention) and recurrent secondary infections requiring antibiotic therapy. She received regular platelet and erythrocyte replacement and was started on pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy. She continued to require tube feeding and supplemental parenteral nutrition, but did not achieve adequate weight gain. At 3 months of age, she underwent allogeneic bone marrow transplantation from her HLA-haploidentical father .
Treatment with glucocorticoids was started 2 weeks after bone marrow transplantation for obliterative bronchiolitis requiring oxygen supplementation. She remained in the hospital until 10 months of age and was readmitted at 1 year of age for pulmonary hypertension and partial respiratory failure with persistent oxygen requirements. Pulse therapy with methylprednisolone was started at the age of 1 year 3 months because of suspected pulmonary GvHD. It is noteworthy that the patient passed this period without hyperglycemia. Thereafter, treatment with hydrocortisone was continued until the age of 2 years and 8 months. From the age of 1 year, recurrent hypoglycemic episodes were observed, with spontaneous glucose levels as low as 39 mg/dl, notably without ever presenting clinical symptoms of severe hypoglycemia.
Diagnostic workup of spontaneous hypoglycemia was attempted twice under inpatient conditions, but was terminated prematurely and without diagnostic results each time at the request of the parents. Repeated changes in tube feeding formulas and modifications of feeding times and duration did not improve the incidence and frequency of hypoglycemic episodes at this time.
At 2.8 years of age, she was started on regular immunoglobulin replacement for chronic IgG deficiency. At the age of 4 years, neurological examination revealed that cognition, motor development, and speech development status corresponded to developmental standards of 10–27 months. Throughout the course, the girl did not eat or drink per os, so nutrition and hydration were entirely dependent on gastric tube feeding, combined with additional parenteral nutrition via a central venous line at night until the age of 3 years. Table provides a comprehensive overview of the clinical phenotype of our patient and categorizes the patient's characteristics into typical and atypical conditions in SDS patients.
Beginning at 1.8 years of age, self-monitored blood glucose levels were significantly elevated, and HbA1c increased to 6.8%, indicating manifest diabetes mellitus. At the same time, spontaneous hypoglycemic episodes persisted. Table details the progression of diabetes with a gradual increase in the autoimmune process and the key characteristics of this case of SDS-associated diabetes mellitus are summarized in Table . The mild progression of diabetes, combined with feeding difficulties and, most importantly, the occurrence of spontaneous, ultimately unexplained hypoglycemic episodes, led to the decision to postpone initiation of insulin therapy at this stage. Tapering of the hydrocortisone dose and repeated modifications of the tube feeding regimen led to a relative improvement of hyperglycemic as well as low-normal to hypoglycemic episodes at this stage. After these interventions, HbA1c dropped to 6.2% at two years of age, but glycemia remained unstable. Subsequently, up to the age of 4 years, HbA1c gradually increased again , and continuous glucose monitoring (CGMS) was initiated. CGMS data revealed a slowly deteriorating glucose homeostasis with prolonged periods of hyperglycemia after tube feeding . A steady and unfavorable decline in time in range during her fifth year of life (time in range 48%, time above range 47%, time below range 5%, glucose variability 43%, cumulative CGMS data over three months from 4.6 to 4.9 years of age) led to a diagnostic reassessment and reevaluation of therapeutic options at 4.9 years of age. A standard-dose OGTT with extended measurements of glucose, insulin, and c-peptide was performed, revealing rigid insulin and c-peptide secretion consistent with marked beta-cell dysfunction and severely reduced beta-cell capacity .
The clinical constellation of manifest diabetes mellitus in a child with marked neurocognitive retardation, failure to thrive, and unexplained spontaneous hypoglycemic episodes, in addition to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and complete dependency on gastric tube feeding, presents a major therapeutic challenge. After consideration of standard (e.g., insulin) and experimental (e.g., GLP-1 analogues) treatment options, a short inpatient trial of glibenclamide was initiated. Sulfonylurea administration had no beneficial effect on the glycemic profile (7-day CGMS data: time in range 49%, glucose variability 47.2%, mean glucose 178 mg/dl; maximum administered glibenclamide dose 0.2 mg/kg/d) and was subsequently discontinued. As sulfonylurea treatment proved unsuccessful, a new formula (Nutrison advance Diason, Nutricia) with a specifically low glycemic index was introduced prior to transition to insulin pump therapy. Figure illustrates the glycemic control before and after the introduction of the high-fiber formula diet , showing improved glycemic variability with significantly fewer hyperglycemic episodes and almost no hypoglycemic episodes. The time in range before and after the dietary intervention for the two-week period was 62% and 81%, respectively. This provided a basis for delaying the initiation of insulin therapy, which is associated with a greater risk of hypoglycemia. Favorable glycemic control has been maintained over a now twelve-month follow-up period of continued tube feeding with a high-fiber formula. Recent 14-day ambulatory glucose profiles indicate time in range (sensor glucose 70 to 180 mg/dl) of 78%, 19% of readings in the 181 to 250 mg/dl range, and only 2% of readings above 250 mg/dl. Reassuringly, only 1% of readings were below 70 mg/dl and no hypoglycemic episodes (sensor glucose < 54 mg/dl) occurred . Stabilization of glucose variability was also sustained, with all analyses of the coefficient of variation over the past 12 months remaining below 35%.
Basic laboratory screening for growth hormone deficiency revealed IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels in the lower normal range (IGF-1 48 ng/ml, reference range: 22–145; IGFBP-3 1598 ng/ml, reference range: 1388–4151). At 4.9 years of age, weight and height were 5.72 kg and 67 cm, respectively (< 3rd percentile for age and sex, respectively). Figure shows the girl's growth charts, which indicate severe retardation in height and weight. Since growth hormone deficiency could at least contribute to the recurrent hypoglycemia, two growth hormone stimulation tests with arginine infusion were performed. These tests showed a maximum peak secretion of hGH of 10.8 μg/l, which excluded growth hormone deficiency. No other endocrinopathies were detected.