A 25 years old Caucasian male patient with trisomy 21 and end stage renal disease, due to chronic pyelonephritis was considered for a pre-emptive kidney transplant. His creatinine level was 6.5 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen and GFR were 95 mg/dL, and 14 ml/min respectively. The 54 years old adoptive mother was the only available donor. She had no story of hypertension nor diabetes mellitus. Her creatinine level was 0.9 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen and GFR were 25 mg/dL and 99 ml/min respectively. Preliminary assessment for donation showed no contraindications, except for the computed tomography angiography (CTA) that revealed a single right renal artery with focal irregularity, without significant stenosis, suggesting mild monolateral arterial FMD . The right kidney’s relative function assessed by Tc99m-mercaptoacetylgtriglycin scintigraphy, was 43% ; so it was considered by mutual agreement for retrieval. Then, any extra-renal FMD involvement was ruled out by thorough radiological assessment, including thoracic, neck, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasonography of the supra-aortic trunks. Therefore, donor right side nephrectomy was performed. During the stage of bench surgery reconstruction, the affected 2.5 cm long segment of the renal artery was removed and sent for histological examination. The sample obtained was fixed in 10% formalin and wholly embedded in paraffin. Paraffin-embedded tissue block was cut into 2- to 3-μm sections and stained using hematoxylin–eosin and Masson’s trichrome. The residual renal artery length was considered too short and unsafe for the anastomosis. Therefore, a cryopreserved iliac artery graft from a deceased donor was used for the right renal artery end-to-end extension . The cadaveric iliac graft was ABO-compatible. Since the risk of immune response was very low, no cross-matching test was performed before implantation. The kidney was transplanted to the recipient’s left iliac fossa. The renal vein was anastomosed to the external iliac vein. A cryopreserved cadaveric iliac artery graft was prepared to bridge the gap created by removing the affected segment of the donor’s renal artery. End-to-end anastomoses were performed between the vascular graft and the end of the renal artery (bench procedure) distally, and the end of the internal iliac artery of the recipient proximally . Lich-Gregoir ureteral implantation technique was used to anastomose the ureter to the bladder. Interestingly, the first warm ischemia time was 3 min. The cold ischemia time, including 40 min of bench surgery stage, was 2 h and 45 min. The anastomosis time lasted 39 min. Induction immunosuppression consisted of methylprednisolone 125 mg and two doses of basiliximab 20 mg given on operative days zero and fourth. At the time of reperfusion 10 mg/kg of metilprednisolone were administered. Maintenance immunosuppression was based on triple regimen (tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone). The vessel graft was not soaked in antibiotic solution before implantation, as the patient received preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis (Piperacilline).
No intraoperative nor post-operative complications were reported. The allograft function promptly resumed. In fact, on the seventh post operative day, serum creatinine level decreased from 6,5 mg/dL to 1,5 mg/dL, while glomerular filtration rate and blood urea nitrogen were 68 ml/24 Hrs and 40 mg/dL respectively. Doppler ultrasounds performed at the end of the procedure and on the first three post-operative days showed adequate patency of vascular anastomosis. The histological analysis with hematoxylin–eosin stain of the biopsy made at the time of bench surgery showed a segment of arterial wall characterized by alternating thinned and thickened areas within the media, with a haphazard arrangement and proliferation of both smooth muscle cells and the surrounding collagenous stroma, which was pointed out by the Masson’s trichrome staining. These morphological and histochemical findings were consistent with the diagnosis of FMD of the renal artery, medial fibroplasia subtype. The donor was discharged from the hospital on the fifth postoperative day with good blood pressure, serum creatinine level of 0,96 mg/dL, glomerular filtration rate of 75 ml/ 24 Hrs, and blood urea nitrogen of 29 mg/dl. After transplant, creatinine level, glomerular filtration rate and blood urea nitrogen were adequate during 9-months’ follow up of donor and recipient.