A 63-year-old Hispanic man with a past medical history of colon cancer in remission and hypertension underwent placement of bilateral subthalamic nucleus (STN) electrodes at our institution. He had an 8-year history of idiopathic PD prior to his DBS surgery, with bradykinesia as the predominant symptom. He developed motor complications after levodopa treatment including wearing off, “delayed on,” and dyskinesias. Preoperative neurological testing with the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) showed a 62% improvement after levodopa challenge. A neuropsychological evaluation revealed no cognitive deficits. His case was evaluated by the interdisciplinary movement disorders committee at the University of Miami and he was considered a good candidate for DBS.
He had bilateral STN leads placed in a single procedure. He was awake during this surgery with intravenously administered dexmedetomidine used for anesthesia. Trajectories were planned from a preoperative high resolution contrasted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) obtained the week prior to surgery using the Medtronic StealthStation 7 System. Leads (Medtronic Model 3389, Minneapolis, MN, USA) were placed using the Integra (Plainsboro, NJ, USA) Cosman-Roberts-Wells (CRW) stereotactic frame. Microelectrode recordings and macrostimulation through the leads were used to optimize final electrode location. On both sides our patient showed significant improvement of motor symptoms with no side effects, as assessed by a movement disorders neurologist, and the first and only pass was used for final electrode placement on both sides. He received prophylactic antibiotics (vancomycin and cefepime) before and after the procedure. Postoperative computed tomography (CT) 2 hours after surgery demonstrated properly placed electrodes in the STN with no evidence of hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke or edema . He was admitted to a ward and discharged at his neurological baseline the morning after surgery with the intention of returning 1 week later for placement of DBS extension cables and generator.
Several hours after returning home, still on the first postoperative day, he developed severe headache and nausea and presented to our emergency room that evening. His headache was reported as having rapid onset, 10/10 strength, bilateral, and emanating from the top of his head. He remained neurologically intact and there was no evidence of fever. A laboratory work-up, including complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic panel (BMP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and blood cultures was non-remarkable. In addition, the surgical incision was intact and showed no evidence of erythema or discharge. A CT obtained in the emergency room showed well-placed DBS leads, but with peri-lead hypodensity suggestive of edema on the left side, extending from cortex to the subcortical nuclei . The region of edema was on average 2.1 cm in diameter at the cortex and 1.5 cm in diameter when subcortical, but was not observed at the tip of the electrode. Hemorrhage or significant mass effect was not observed.
To further evaluate these findings, we next obtained a contrasted MRI of his brain . T2 sequences suggested peri-lead edema extending from the cortical surface the distance of the lead and beyond the tip, to the pars compacta. The edema was most prominent at the cortex. This dominant component of edema, along the proximal third of the electrode, was 3.6 cm in length in the anteroposterior dimension and 2.1 cm wide. The edema surrounding the distal two thirds of the electrode was cylindrical with a 1.5 cm diameter and involving the posterior limb of the internal capsule. Contrast enhancement or diffusion restriction was not observed.
Given the clinical findings, imaging, and laboratory results we ruled out ischemia or infection and presumed this to be a reactive self-limited process. He was admitted for observation and intravenously administered dexamethasone was started (10 mg bolus, followed by 4 mg every 6 hours). Ondansetron was given for nausea. By the following morning his symptoms had resolved and he was discharged home on a 6-day oral steroid taper.
At an interval follow-up 1 week later, he remained at his neurological baseline with no recent headaches or nausea. A new CT showed complete resolution of edema . He noted a subjective bilateral improvement of motor symptoms, suggestive of microlesion effect, through the entire week. He underwent the second stage generator and extension cable implants with no complications and has had good control of his PD symptoms since.