A 58-year-old man, without any medical history or cardiovascular risk factors, was admitted to the emergency department for sudden right brachiofacial weakness. He recovered partially, but facial palsy persisted. Brain DWI-MRI revealed two cortical infarcts in the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory, in the parieto-occipital and the frontal lobe .
He was then referred to our Stroke Unit. The neurological and general examination was normal, except for moderate hypertension (SBP between 140 and 150 mmHg). Cervical and intracranial CT angiography did not show any abnormalities such as stenosis, occlusion, or dilatation. Forty-eight hours of telemetry and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) did not detect any abnormalities. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a significant patent foramen ovale (PFO) without an atrial septal aneurysm. Biological testing including homocysteine, glycemia, lipid profile, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, and lupus anticoagulant toxic screening was normal.
At discharge, he was treated with aspirin (160 mg), atorvastatin (80 mg), and perindopril at 2 mg daily. The diagnostic conclusion was a cryptogenic stroke, and a multidisciplinary meeting was held to discuss the relationship between PFO and stroke for possible closure. The PFO was considered to be “high-risk” as there was a large right-to-left shunt with more than 30 microbubbles in the left atrium within the three cardiac cycles of seeing opacification in the right atrium. The RoPE (Risk of Paradoxical Embolism) score was 7, indicating that the PFO was causally related to the cryptogenic stroke, with an attributable fraction of 72% .
Two months later, when the patient was back to work, he exhibited sudden aphasia. MRI revealed a new and recent ischemic lesion in the left MCA territory visible on DWI, and another older lesion in the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) territory, which had been absent on the previous imaging . There was no wall thickening nor wall enhancement on high-resolution contrast-enhanced MRI.
Venous ultrasound examination of the lower limb was normal, and a body CT scan excluded an inflammatory or neoplastic lesion or large vessel vasculitis. A more extensive thrombophilia screening, including antithrombin III, Factor II and V Leiden mutations, C and S proteins, antiphospholipid antibodies, and inflammatory markers (CRP), was unremarkable.
In line with the advice from cardiologists, aspirin was replaced with an oral anticoagulant (5 mg apixaban twice daily), to close the PFO and to insert a cardiac monitor.
The PFO closure was performed 8 months after the first stroke, after ensuring that there was no paroxysmal rhythm disorder on the cardiac monitor during the previous 6 months.
During the following months, the patient complained of new symptoms consisting of paresthesia in the right hand and foot, posterior headache, asthenia, psychomotor retardation, and unsteadiness, and thirteen months after the first symptoms he presented right leg paresis. A brain MRI showed a new recent ischemic lesion in the left cingulate cortex on DWI in the left ACA territory as well as other new lesions in the left MCA territory (in the frontal lobe) compared with the previous MRI 12 months earlier. There was still no vessel stenosis or occlusion and no wall enhancement.
The biological screening was resumed (anti-phosphatidylethanolamine and anti-annexin V; JAK2-CALR-MPL mutation; antinuclear factor; rheumatoid factor; ANCA; cryoglobulin; multiple serologies including HIV, B, and C hepatitis; syphilis; QuantiFERON-TB®-Gold; alpha-galactosidase activity; and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria clonal component) but remained negative. Ophthalmic examination by fluorescein angiography was normal. On lumbar puncture, there was no meningitis or protein increase, no bacteria visualized or virus (PCR), nor intrathecal synthesis. New TTE and cervical ultrasound remained normal. Electroneuromyography showed an isolated deceleration in the left ulnar nerve. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed narrowing in a distal branch of the left ACA and in the posterior temporal artery consistent with intracranial vasculitis . Anticoagulation was replaced by dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 75 mg + clopidogrel 75 mg).
Finally, blood B. burgdorferi sensu lato serology testing was highly positive, with IgG 118 U/mL on ELISA, confirmed by Western blot. The patient was then hospitalized one month later for a new CSF examination. The serology was still positive on ELISA but doubtful on immunoblot IgG (only one band, IgG VIsE-Mix positive against two required for confirmation). There was still no sign of meningitis on CSF analysis, but the serology was highly positive, with IgG 18 IU/mL [high if > 9] and intrathecal synthesis of specific antibody [index > 2]. Doxycycline 200 mg twice daily was then initiated for four weeks, with good tolerability.
In the following weeks, the patient reported dramatic improvement, with disappearance of his asthenia, dizziness, and right arm paresthesia. Finally, upon re-interviewing of the patient, he reported a tick bite two years prior to his first stroke, with a skin lesion compatible with erythema migrans, but he never suffered from arthritis or pain, nor did he have clinical signs of cranial or radiculoneuritis.
Atorvastatin and clopidogrel
were stopped, maintaining only aspirin.
On follow-up, there was no new ischemic lesion on MRI performed 5 months after the end of treatment, and he experienced no further cerebrovascular events (last visit 18 months post antibiotic therapy). At the last visit, the patient reported that he had recovered without any sequelae and had resumed all his previous activities including sports .