A 24-year-old, 165-lb male Caucasian patient with diabetes mellitus type 1 presented to the emergency department with a complaint of abdominal pain accompanied by nausea and vomiting. The patient stated that he was unable to self-administer basal insulin for two days after he ran out of insulin pen needles. His vital signs on presentation revealed blood pressure of 84/53 mmHg, heart rate of 103 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and temperature of 98.2 °F (36.7 °C). Physical examination at time of presentation showed that he was ill-looking, with dry oral mucosa and poor skin turgor. Initial diagnostic tests showed high anion gap, metabolic acidosis, ketonemia, and hyperglycemia, prompting the start of diabetic ketoacidosis management and subsequent intensive care unit (ICU) transfer . At this time, the patient only had a gauge-22 peripheral line placed at the dorsum of his left hand after multiple unsuccessful attempts at placing a larger peripheral line gauge.
In the ICU, efforts at internal jugular vein central line placement were unsuccessful as well due to the patient’s low volume status, making the target vein extremely difficult to cannulate even by increasing Trendelenburg tilt and doing venipuncture at end inspiration. Right subclavian vein catheterization using the infraclavicular approach was instead performed. However, the postprocedure chest X-ray showed that the catheter was somehow in the aorta . Blood gas obtained from the subclavian central line revealed arterial placement, prompting removal of the catheter with no serious consequences to the patient . A right femoral line was successfully placed, and continuous management of diabetic ketoacidosis was achieved with eventual normalization of the anion gap and clinical improvement of the patient. The patient stayed in the intensive care unit for 2 days and was then transferred to the medicine floors for continuation of glucose management with eventual discharge on the 4th day after case management; social work assisted in securing his insulin supplies, and diabetic education was performed.