A 52-year-old man with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department of Firuzabadi Educational Hospital in Tehran, Iran, with acute, generalized abdominal pain. The patient was not taking any medications, and there was no medical history suggesting an underlying condition related to chewing disorders. The patient reported no nausea, vomiting, or other gastrointestinal symptoms except for obstipation over the past three days. There was no tenderness, guarding, or rebound tenderness in the initial examination.
Laboratory assessment yielded normal results without any evidence of leukocytosis, raised inflammatory biomarkers, or abnormalities in urinary analysis. Standing abdominal and pelvic radiographs were normal showing no signs of pneumoperitoneum or air-fluid levels. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound showed an inter-loop fluid collection in the right lower quadrant. Accordingly, the patient was admitted to the hospital.
During hospitalization, a serial examination of the abdomen was performed in terms of the presence of tenderness, rebound tenderness and guarding, all of which were normal. Serial rectal examination also revealed no abnormalities. However, after 24 h of hospitalization, the patient's abdominal pain intensified and localized to the right lower quadrant. Physical examination now revealed mild abdominal distension and right lower quadrant tenderness and rebound tenderness. Additionally, the patient had not tolerated oral intake for the past 12 h and had not defecated during hospitalization.
Repeated abdomino-pelvic ultrasound showed dilated jejunum loops with no evidence of appendicitis. In our center, CT-san capabilities were unavailable. Due to severe abdominal pain and tenderness in the right lower quadrant, the patient's obstipation and oral intake intolerance, with suspicion of intestinal obstruction, the patient was immediately transferred to the surgery room and underwent exploratory laparotomy through a midline incision. During exploratory laparotomy, dilated small intestine loops with intraluminal masses in the ileum terminal were discovered. The ileum diameter before and after the obstruction site measured 5 cm and 1 cm, respectively. Additionally, necrosis, and sealed perforation were found 50 cm proximal to the ileo-ceal valve, where an Enterotomy was performed. The Enterotomy revealed large bezoar masses in front of the ileocecal valve, causing partial bowel obstruction . A sample was resected and sent for pathological assessment . The bezoar masses were successfully extracted, and since approximately 2 cm of the ileum showed necrosis, 50 cm from the ileocecal valve, resection of the necrotic segment and ileo-ileal anastomosis were performed. The enterotomy site was repaired in two layers using 2–0 Vicryl suture. To prevent any complications during postoperative recovery, a thorough examination of the small and large bowel was conducted before closing the abdomen.
Postoperative recovery proceeded smoothly. The patient was initially transferred to the intensive care unit and, on the second post-surgery day, to the surgery ward in stable condition. Due to mild ileus in the early post-operative period, a normal diet was not initiated until the fifth day after the surgery. On the fifth post-surgery day, the patient successfully tolerated a normal diet, and the abdominal skin was closed on the sixth post-surgery day. The patient was discharged the following day. The patient's medical history revealed that he had ingested Chenjeh Kebab, a kind of Persian roasted lamb pieces. According to the pathology report, inadequately masticated met pieces were identified as the etiology of bezoar formation. The patient underwent a follow-up two months later, and no clinical problems were observed.
The patient provided informed consent for reporting his condition and treatment approaches for educational and academic purposes.