We report the case of a 22-year-old pregnant women, G2P1, diagnosed with placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) and referred to our institution at 31 weeks of gestation for further care and management. Earlier, at 25 weeks of gestation, the patient reported vaginal spotting. An ultrasound performed by her primary obstetrician was suggestive of a placenta percreta. At 30 weeks, she experienced a preterm premature rupture of membranes and moderate vaginal bleeding requiring her admission in a primary care hospital. During her stay, she received tocolytics, antibiotics and steroids. Strict bed rest was prescribed but no thrombosis prophylaxis was administered given her history of vaginal bleeding that lasted one week. Upon confirming the diagnosis of placenta previa with accreta spectrum on a pelvic MRI, the patient was referred to our tertiary care center to schedule her delivery.
Eight months earlier, she underwent a cesarean section due to a protracted labor. Postoperatively, she received no prophylactic anticoagulation. Besides, she was taking oral contraceptives for three months because of a persistent vaginal bleeding; she stopped them three months before pregnancy. The patient reported no relevant past medical or surgical events. Her father died at the age of 42 of an ischemic stroke and two uncles had histories of non-specific thromboembolic events.
On admission, the patient was afebrile, hemodynamically stable and did not complain of pelvic pain. She noted only light to moderate persistent vaginal bleeding. Urgent ultrasound showed a viable fetus with appropriate biometrical parameters and no amniotic fluid. Fetal cardiotocography revealed regular uterine contractions. She underwent urgent delivery by cesarean section and hysterectomy under general anesthesia according to our specially developed technique [, ]. The placenta was previa, anteriorly located and slightly lateralized to the left and reached the uterine serosa without perforating it. The placenta was bulging under a thin uterine serosa with a lot of neo-vascularization at this level.
The total estimated blood loss during surgery was 1800 ml. This large amount of intraoperative bleeding was essentially from the vagina, which was unfortunately uncontrollable before removing the uterus completely. The anesthesiologist in charge had to transfuse the patient with allogenic red blood cells (RBC; 7 units), fresh-frozen plasma (FFP; 6 units) and platelets (1 unit) to maintain her hemodynamic stability. Since more than four RBC units were transfused in less than one hour, the transfusion was considered massive and 1:1 ratio of FFP to RBC scheme was used. At the end of surgery and transfusion, an evaluation of complete blood count (CBC) revealed a hematocrit level of 32% and hemoglobin level of 10.8 g/dl. The patient was also normothermic and hemodynamically stable. She was waked up from anesthesia and was transferred to ICU for postoperative surveillance. At ICU admission, she was hemodynamically stable with normal neurologic examination.
Two hours later, the patient became cyanotic and went into cardio pulmonary arrest. Cardiac monitoring showed pulseless ventricular tachycardia. Arterial blood gases showed hypocapnia (PaCO2 of 30 mmHg) and hypoxia (PaO2 of 61 mmHg). Characteristic S1Q3 wave detected on electrocardiography was associated with hypoxia and hypocania, which were highly suggestive of pulmonary embolism (PE). She was intubated and received 40 min of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. A transthoracic echocardiogram done in ICU showed a thrombus in the right ventricle. Urgent pulmonary angiogram after hemodynamic stabilization confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral massive PE .
So the patient underwent an urgent thoracotomy and an extracorporeal circulation was used. During surgery, a simultaneous transesophageal cardiac ultrasound was done showing a dilated right ventricle containing clots. A pulmonary artery thrombectomy was performed and multiple clots were retrieved from the pulmonary artery .
Once the situation was stabilized, an inferior vena cava filter was placed via an abdominal incision and external iliac vein catheterization. After weaning from extracorporeal circulation, an intraoperative transesophageal cardiac ultrasound revealed the presence of a new free-floating thrombus in the right atrium and right ventricle . A second extracorporeal circulation using new cannulation of the large vessels was initiated and a second embolectomy was performed. The patient was transferred to the cardiac surgery care unit (CSU) for surveillance. While at CSU, she was placed on therapeutic intravenous heparin for anticoagulation and had compressive pneumatic stockings in place at all times.
Two days later, the patient experienced a major hemoperitoneum with distended abdomen and tachycardia due to massive anticoagulation that necessitated a second laparotomy to achieve hemostasis. Only blood clots were found in the peritoneal cavity without active source of bleeding. All vascular pedicles were controlled and the vaginal cuff was re-sutured. Intraoperative evaluation of CBC revealed a hematocrit level of 26% and hemoglobin level of 8.7 g/dl. Intraoperative allogeneic RBC (4 units) and FFP (5 units) were transfused. The rest of her post-operative course was uneventful.
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 13. She received acenocoumarol per os for a lifetime anticoagulation. A follow-up was organized with a hematologist to perform a full thromboembolic disease work-up. A panel of tests for hypercoagulability was performed and showed: protein S deficiency, presence of circulating lupus anticoagulant, heterozygous methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) mutation and genotypes of plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI), human platelet antigen (HPA), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), and apolipiprotein E (Apo E) with a moderate risk for thrombosis.
The pathologic report confirmed the diagnosis of abnormally invasive placenta type percreta (grade 3a, according to FIGO classification): hysterectomy specimen showing villous tissue reaching the uterine serosa and in multiple places breaching the serosa and invading the extrauterine adipose tissue with a fibrous reaction at this level.