We report the case of a 48-year-old Sri Lankan man who was admitted to our facility with an intermittent fever associated with joint pains and a skin rash for three months. He had an inflammatory type symmetrical arthralgia confined to large joints with early morning stiffness for 30 minutes. Skin rash, which was non-itchy, non-scaly and non-photosensitive, appeared initially on the trunk but became generalized within a period of two weeks. He was overwhelmed with marked malaise, severe anorexia, weight loss of 19 kg over three months with significant hair loss and multiple painful oral ulcers. He had a watery diarrhea of three to four bowel movements a day of one month duration associated with occasional episodes of vomiting and a vague abdominal pain. His past medical history was unremarkable except for two uncomplicated episodes of malaria about twenty years previously. He denied either exposure to high risk sexual activities or intravenous drug use. He did not consume alcohol and was a non-smoker.
On examination, the patient was ill looking, febrile (temperature of 38.4°C), dyspneic and moderately pale. Jaundice, finger clubbing, cyanosis and lymphadenopathy were absent. He had a generalized erythematous maculopapular skin rash involving the palms and soles , a non-scaring alopecia and multiple shallow ulcers in the oral mucosa. On admission, his pulse rate was 100/minute, his blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg and his respiratory rate was 46/minute. Breath sounds were reduced in the base of the right lung with occasional rhonchi heard over both lung fields. He had a tender, firm hepatomegaly of 14cm span with a smooth surface and a regular edge. There was no splenomegaly, abdominal masses or ascites. His rectal examination was unremarkable but several non-painful ulcers were present in his scrotum. Optic fundus showed cotton wool spots around the disc; otherwise his neurological examination was normal. Deformities or edema of the small or large joints were absent but joint line tenderness was demonstrable in his wrist, elbow, shoulder, knee, and ankle joints bilaterally. However, his spinal movements were preserved and movements of the pelvic and shoulder girdles were painful at full range.
Laboratory tests revealed normochromic normocytic anemia (hemoglobin: 8.7g/dL, mean cell volume: 86.5fL) with a total leucocytes of 5.4 x 109/L (neutrophils: 75%, lymphocytes: 19%), and a platelet count of 64 x 109/L. Inflammatory markers were elevated (erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 140mm; C-reactive protein: 60mg/dL) and he had an extremely high serum ferritin level of 34,674ng/ml. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed moderate hypoxia (PaO2: 78.7mmHg). Chest X-ray did not show evidence of consolidation or cavitations but his right hemidiaphragm was elevated. His liver functions were abnormal (aspartate aminotransferase: 252IU/L [<35IU/L], alanine aminotransferase: 69IU/L [<35IU/L], alkaline phosphatase: 1857IU/L [<300IU/L], gamma glutamyl-transferase: 2089IU/L [<54IU/L]) with a reversed albumin/globulin ratio (albumin: 1.9g/dL, globulin: 4.6g/dL). Serum billirubin (11.9μmol/L) was not elevated and serum creatinine (1mg/dL) was normal. Abdominal sonography revealed uniformly increased echogenicity of the enlarged liver but evidence of billiary obstruction or focal lesions was absent. A battery of serological investigations including enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), a hepatitis panel, blood testing for malaria parasites, rickettsial antibody, sputum for acid fast bacilli acid-fast bacillus acid-fast bacillus (AFB) and tuberculin skin test were all negative. Repeated blood cultures did not yield any bacterial growth and a venereal disease research laboratory screen for syphilis (VDRL) was non-reactive. His rheumatoid factor was 128IU/mL(<8IU/mL) but autoantibody screen including anti-nuclear factor, U1 ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex, anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA), antimitochondrial antibody (AMA) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were negative. Biopsy of the skin rash was inconclusive . Bone marrow examination revealed evolving marrow hypoplasia although evidence of marrow infiltration by metastatic deposits or granulomata was absent. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis in bone marrow aspirates was negative. His clotting profile was mildly abnormal with a prothrombin time of 15 seconds (INR: 1.3) and a partial thromboplastin time of 58 seconds (control 35 to 42 seconds).
His dyspnea and tachypnea, attributable to bronchospasm associated with systemic inflammatory reaction (SIRS) was probably worsened by high fever, marked myalgia, right hypochondrial tenderness with enlarged liver and anemia. Considering the possibility of sepsis, broad spectrum antibiotic treatment with intravenous meropenem 1g daily and metronidazole 500mg every eight hourly was instituted from the day of admission. His symptomatology and respiratory distress was only slightly improved with bed rest in a propped up position, antipyretics, salbutamol nebulization, analgesics and blood transfusions to correct the anemia. He underwent liver biopsy on day two of admission after the correction of clotting abnormalities.
A presumptive diagnosis of AOSD with granulomatous liver disease was made based on the clinical criteria of Yamaguchi and extremely high serum ferritin levels [,]. He was started initially on indomethacin 25 mg every eight hourly followed by intravenous methylprednisolone 1g daily pulses for three days under broad spectrum antibiotic cover. These measures failed to improve his clinical picture. He died on the sixth day after admission due to sepsis and multi-organ dysfunction. The liver biopsy revealed noncaseating granulomas in the background of fatty liver, later found to be culture positive for M. tuberculosis .