A 62-year-old woman presented to our hospital in November 2016 complaining of intermittent nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea and multiple masses in the liver found on routine abdominal computed tomography (CT) imaging.
The patient underwent right-sided modified radical mastectomy including lymphadenectomy with nipple and areola preservation 4 years ago at a local hospital. No lymph node metastases were detected. Postoperative pathology revealed poorly-differentiated NEC of the right breast with a size of 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm × 1 cm. Immunohistochemical staining revealed expression of chromogranin A (CgA), synaptophysin (Syn), and hormone receptors [estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR)]. Staining for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) was negative. The Ki-67 index was 50%-75%. Curative resection was followed by four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with the pirarubicin and paclitaxel regimen. The patient had been receiving endocrine therapy after operation and regular follow-up every 3 mo.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient dined any personal and family history.
The physical examination revealed no obvious abnormalities.
Laboratory examination revealed no obvious abnormalities.
An initial imaging evaluation by enhanced abdominal CT revealed multiple masses in the liver, with the largest one measuring about 8.4 cm × 6.3 cm. Chest CT showed a mass on the right front chest wall and a small nodule in the upper lobe of the right lung.
The liver lesions were further evaluated by abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which revealed multiple masses in the liver with the largest one measuring about 8.8 cm × 6.7 cm. A whole body bone scan revealed increased bone metabolism in the second anterior rib on the right, which was considered local bone invasion caused by chest wall masses combined with previous chest CT findings.
Further clinical work-up including upper endoscopy and colonoscopy did not reveal further pathological findings, not providing any evidence of another possible primary tumor.
The pathological consultation performed at our hospital of the primary breast lesion showed an NEC in the right breast with no metastases in the axillary lymph nodes. Immunohistochemical staining revealed expression of Syn, CgA, and hormone receptors (ER > 50%, slightly weaker expression of PR). Staining for HER-2 was negative. The Ki-67 index was approximately 50%.
This patient underwent a liver and chest wall biopsy at our hospital. Liver and bone metastases of the NECB were detected. Immunohistochemical analysis of a biopsy taken from the lesion in the liver and chest wall showed an NEC with positive expression of CgA and Syn as well as strong expression for ER (> 95%). The expression of O6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) and somatostatin receptor SSTR2 was negative. The Ki67 index was approximately 70% .