A 61-year-old woman who was normally fit and well with a background history of CADASIL syndrome presented to the emergency department with chest pain and feeling dizzy and unwell. She had no other risk factors for coronary artery disease. CADASIL diagnosis was made in a regional specialist neurological centre and she was under follow-up. Her cardiovascular examination revealed an initial blood pressure of 167/81 mmHg, heart rate of 81 b.p.m., and her electrocardiogram showed anterior ST-segment elevation with a raised initial high-sensitivity troponin level which was 1551 ng/L (0–15 ng/L). On auscultation, her chest was clear and heart sounds were essentially normal. Jugular venous pressure was normal and there was no peripheral oedema present. Her bedside focused transthoracic echocardiography showed anterolateral regional wall motion abnormalities with akinesia in the anterior segments with a visually estimated left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%. She underwent emergency radial coronary angiography which showed an abnormal appearance of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) suggestive of SCAD. She had a long segment of irregular filling of the mid anterior descending artery with a tubular stenosis. The proximal LAD, the circumflex, and right coronary arteries were angiographically normal. Given the appearance of thrombolysis in myocardial infarction Grade 3 flow in the LAD territory and recognizing the potential risks of percutaneous intervention in the setting of SCAD, she was, therefore, managed medically with dual antiplatelets (Aspirin and Clopidogrel) for 3 months, Bisoprolol, Ramipril, and Atorvastatin . The duration of dual-antiplatelet therapy was limited as no stent was deployed and a reported natural history of vascular healing in SCAD. Intravascular imaging was not used to confirm the suspected angiographic diagnosis given the reported vascular complications with instrumentations in SCAD such as extending the coronary dissection with wire or imaging catheter and guide catheter iatrogenic dissection., A repeat transthoracic echocardiogram has not been performed yet.