A 78-year-old man presented at the emergency department with increasingly disabling lower back pain. His past medical history revealed transurethral resection of the prostate and lumbar spinal stenosis. In addition, he was recently diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia for which he received induction chemotherapy 1 month earlier. During this course, he developed a perforated diverticulitis for which he underwent resection of the sigmoid. Subsequently, he developed a candidemia with C. krusei and micafungin treatment was started. Since ophthalmoscopy, echocardiography and ultrasound of the liver did not reveal any signs of septic foci, micafungin was continued until 14 days after the last positive blood culture. After the first cycle of chemotherapy a complete remission was achieved.
His current complaints started 3 weeks before presentation. He noticed progressive lower back pain radiating to the buttocks and hips hampering his walking. He did not experience loss of motor or sensory function. On presentation, the patient was hemodynamically stable without fever. Neurological and physical examination were normal except for a rigid gait. The patient weight was 77 kg. Blood chemistry showed a slightly elevated CRP of 38 mg/L (normal range < 8 mg/L) and a mild leukocytosis of 12.9 × 109/L (normal range 4–10 × 109/L). An MRI of the lower lumbar spine showed a spondylitis of the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies with remarkable sparing of the intervertebral disc . Furthermore, intraspinal epidural expansion of inflammation with an abscess in the posterior epidural space was revealed with notable involvement of the posterior elements . A small second abscess in the right erector spinae muscle was punctured and aspirated for culture . After puncture, empirical treatment with flucloxacillin (6000 mg/24 h IV) was started. In addition, with his recent candidemia in mind and MRI findings suggesting an atypical pathogen, anidulafungin (loading dose of 200 mg IV, followed by 100 mg/day IV) was added to the treatment. After 6 days culture of the abscess showed C. krusei. Susceptibility testing showed the following minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC): for amphotericin B MIC 0.5 mg/ml, anidulafungin 0.023 mg/L and voriconazole 0.5 mg/mL. Antimicrobial therapy was narrowed to anidulafungin. Because of the low bone penetration of anidulafungin, oral voriconazole (200 mg/twice daily) was added. Considering the infection and risk of derailment upon chemotherapy induced neutropenia, further treatment for acute myeloid leukemia was halted.
Three months after starting the anidulafungin plus voriconazole regimen with adequately controlled serum levels, a gradual increase in backpain and expansion of inflammation on MR-imaging warranted posterior decompression and stabilization from the L2 vertebra to the pelvis. Voriconazole was switched to liposomal amphotericin B (3 mg/kg). Culture of a peroperative bone biopsy (level L4–5) showed persistent infection with C. krusei, sensitive to anidulafungin (MIC 0.016 mg/L) and with a low MIC for voriconazol (MIC ≤0.12 mg/L, no clinical breakpoint for C. krusei). In this material, no anidulafungin could be detected by high-performance liquid chromatography, suggesting insufficient penetration in bone. Concentrations of voriconazol were not measured due to limited available biopsy material. Determing levels of liposomal amphoterocin B seemed redundant, as this had not been started at the time of biopsy. Nevertheless, due to severe muscle cramps, amphotericin B therapy was switched back to voriconazole, with a trough concentration of 3 mg/l, and the daily dose of anidulafungin was increased to 300 mg. As serum concentration of anidulafungin did not correlate to bone concentration there was no target concentration. Serum levels were monitored through concentrations. At a anidulafungin dose of 300 mg/day the trough concentrations were between 9.9 and 18.7 mg/L. This in contrast to through concentrations of 2.8 to 3.5 mg/L when anidulafungin was dosed 100 mg/day. This treatment will be continued until 6 months after surgery. Complete relieve of symptoms was noted after surgery and the patient experiences no side effects of the current treatment. Unfortunately, 7 months after initial chemotherapeutic treatment his acute myeloid leukemia relapsed. He currently undergoes treatment with azacitidine.