The recipient was a 54-year-old male patient with end-stage liver disease due to alcoholic liver cirrhosis. He had undergone radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma in segment 8, endoscopic variceal ligation for esophageal varices, and thrombolytic therapy for a PV thrombus extending from the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) to the right PV branch . Because of uncontrolled ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, and gastrointestinal bleeding caused by portal hypertension, LDLT was considered in the patient. The Child–Pugh score was 11 points (grade C) and the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score was 10. The recipient’s liver had standard PV anatomy , but there was PV thrombus remaining despite the thrombolytic therapy .
The living liver donor was his 53-year-old spouse with no pre-existing disease, and a right lobe graft was planned for the transplantation. The graft-to-recipient weight ratio (GRWR) calculated from computed tomography liver volumetry was 0.96. The estimated GWRW of the left lobe graft was 0.55, which did not meet our criteria of GRWR > 0.80 in our institution. The recipient was ABO blood type-incompatible, and thus preoperative rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil were administered according to the institutional protocol . Since the donor’s liver had a type III PV anomaly , portal Y-graft interposition was planned for PV reconstruction in the LDLT. Although the recipient’s PV used as a Y-graft had a thrombus, a previous study suggested that the thrombus can be removed from the portal Y-graft on the back table . Thus, the use of an autologous portal Y-graft was considered as an interposition graft.
In the donor surgery, in order to prevent iatrogenic injury to the donor's remnant PV, two right liver PV branches were cut separately. To use the thrombosed PV as autologous Y-graft interposition, after ligation of all the small branches from the hilar PV, the portal Y-graft was resected from the recipient. On the back table, a thrombus extending from the main PV to the right PV branch was easily removed without damaging the PV wall . Subsequently, the right and left limbs of the portal Y-graft were anastomosed to the anterior and posterior portal branches of the right lobe graft on the back table . The right hepatic vein and segment 8 vein (V8) were reconstructed to be a single orifice using the recipient’s left internal jugular vein . Under cross-clamping of the inferior vena cava (IVC), the reconstructed liver venous orifice was anastomosed to the recipient’s IVC. The main PV of the Y-graft was then anastomosed to the remnant main PV of the recipient using a growth factor of 1 cm . In order to modulate the recipient’s portal inflow, the inferior mesenteric vein was ligated and the left gastric artery and vein were dissected using a surgical stapling device.
The operation time was 545 min and the intraoperative blood loss was 1355 ml. No anticoagulant was administered after PV reconstruction according to the protocol for the cases in which PV thrombectomy was performed . The recipient and donor were discharged on postoperative days 13 and 9 respectively without any complications. The recipient remains well with the patency of the portal Y-graft one year after the liver transplantation.