A 26-day-old Asian male neonate with Down syndrome presented with a history of high-grade fever, poor sucking, poor cry, and reduced activity of 1-day duration. He was born by emergency lower segmental cesarean section to a 43-year-old primigravida mother at 34 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 1.68 kg. Antenatal history was complicated with pregnancy-induced hypertension and reversed diastolic flow in umbilical arteries during third trimester. The baby had been exclusively breast-fed since birth and did not have vomiting or diarrhea.
On examination, he was febrile, 38.3 °C (101 °F), and had mottled skin. His pulse rate was 170 beats per minute, with prolonged capillary refilling time and cold peripheries; his blood pressure was 89/53 mmHg. Precordial evaluation revealed dual rhythm and a grade 3 ejection systolic murmur at the pulmonary area. His respiratory rate was 50/minute with signs of moderate respiratory distress. His anterior fontanel was flat, both pupils were equally reactive to light, and examinations of spine and extremities were normal. A provisional diagnosis of septic shock was made and initial resuscitation with supplementary oxygen and normal saline bolus was carried out; intravenously administered flucloxacillin and cefotaxime were commenced.
A complete blood count revealed total leukocytes 6500/mm3 (neutrophils 72%, lymphocytes 17%, and monocytes 9%), hemoglobin 13.2 g/dl, and platelet count 349,000/mm3. Random blood glucose was 123 mg/dl and C-reactive protein level was 38.6 mg/L. A lumbar puncture was performed 4 hours after the first dose of antibiotics and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed: leukocytes 11/mm3 (ten polymorphonuclear cells and one lymphocytes), protein 124 mg/dL, and glucose 52 mg/dL. Blood culture yielded growth of group D Streptococcus, which was verified as Streptococcus bovis biotype 2 by manual analysis (demonstrating growth in MacConkey broth agar and Bile Esculin agar and absent growth in 6.5% sodium chloride medium) and by the automated bacterial identification technology. The organism was sensitive to penicillin and ampicillin; therefore, flucloxacillin was replaced by intravenously administered benzylpenicillin. CSF Gram stain demonstrated no organisms and cultures of CSF were negative probably due to antibiotic administration prior to lumbar puncture. Two-dimensional echocardiography revealed a small ostium secundum atrial septal defect without evidence of infective endocarditis. Karyotype confirmed trisomy 21.
Intravenously administered benzylpenicillin and cefotaxime were continued for 21 days during which the baby showed complete recovery. There were no neurological complications during acute or convalescent periods. The follow-up after 6 months confirmed normal neurological examination except for hypotonia due to Down syndrome and normal occipitofrontal circumference.