The patient was a 51-year-old Caucasian man referred to the medical center with chief complaints of shortness of breath and cutaneous lesions on his cheeks and nose . Shortness of breath had begun 3 years ago with the severity of modified medical research council (mMRC) II, but the severity had increased to mMRC III in the previous week, and dry coughs had also emerged. In the physical examination, a generalized wheeze was auscultated. He had no organomegaly and was not edematous.
The patient mentioned no familial or psychosocial history. He had a history of hospitalization 3 years before due to palpitation and dyspnea without chest pain. He was also diagnosed with ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF). In addition, he was diagnosed with hypertension (HTN) due to a blood pressure of 180/100. His echocardiography presented an ejection fraction (EF) of 20%, severe global hypokinesia, and mild mitral regurgitation (MR). However, angiography indicated no severe coronary disease in that hospitalization. Considering the patient’s VF and the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy, implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICD) were implanted. After being discharged from that cardiac center, amiodarone with a dose of 200 mg twice daily, furosemide tab 20 mg twice daily, spironolactone tab 25 mg twice daily, carvedilol tab 6.25 mg twice daily, losartan tab 25 mg once daily, rosuvastatin tab 10 mg once daily, and acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) tab 80 mg once daily was prescribed. Since that day, he did not refer to any medical center for follow-up and has continued using amiodarone with a daily dose of 400 mg and a cumulative dose of about 438 g. The physical examinations revealed that upon referral to the medical center, his oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 96%, blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg, body temperature was 36.5, and heart rate was 80 bpm. The patient reported smoking (20 p/y) since he was 19. However, he stopped it 10 years ago.
The skin lesions had started to appear in the last 3 weeks. The lesions were in the form of blue-gray discolorations in the skin of the nose and cheeks.
After admission, amiodarone was discontinued and replaced with mexiletine cap 200 mg thrice daily due to skin lesions. ICD analysis revealed a VT episode terminated by a 20 J shock that lasted 38 min. The results of thyroid function tests were normal. In the 12-lead electrocardiography (ECG) obtained from the patient, P pulmonale and left anterior hemiblock were detected. Moreover, in precordial leads, evidence of incomplete right hemiblock was observed. The serial troponin assay (× 3) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) showed negative results. The lung images indicated air trapping , and the results obtained from the pulmonary function test showed signs of obstructive lung disease, both in favor of pulmonary emphysema. The patient was discharged after a week with mexiletine cap 200 mg thrice daily, ipratropium bromide spray four puffs four times daily, and fluticasone/salmeterol 250/50 mg two puffs twice daily.