A 66-year-old man was referred to the Haematological and Transfusional Medicine Department of an urban general hospital in December for persistent fever and night sweating. The patient was affected by hypertension, diverticulosis, haemorrhoidal bleeding and by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with periodic exacerbations.
Starting in June, the patient reported weakness, increased blood glucose serum levels and decreased body weight. In November, swelling of superficial lymph nodes, fever and nocturnal sweating had occurred. The laboratory test results showed normocytic normochromic anaemia (haemoglobin, Hb, 9.5 g/dl), white blood cell count (WBC) was 7170/mm3 with 85% neutrophils and 11% lymphocytes, 7.13 mg/dl C-reactive protein (CRP) with normal values < 0.8 mg/dl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 59 mm/hour, fibrinogen 597 mg/dl (normal range 150–450) and beta 2-microglobulin 5.21 mg/litre (normal values 1.42–3.21 mg/litre). Levels of Ca 15.3, Ca 19.9, PSA, TPA, alpha-fetoprotein, FT3, FT4, TSH, vitamin B12 and folic acid were in the normal range. Serological tests for CMV, Toxoplasma gondii, VZV, Brucella, HBV, HCV and HIV were negative. The Tuberculin Sensitivity Test with 5 IU of Purified Protein Derivative (PPD) was performed with negative results. Markers for autoimmune diseases (ANA, APCA, ASMA, and ENA) were in the normal range.
In December, because of persistent fever, weakness, nocturnal sweating and loss of 7 kg in body weight, the patient was referred to the Haematological Department. Blood examinations documented a persistent increase in ESR (90 mm/hour) and CRP (6.7 mg/dl) levels and a progressive haemoglobin decrease (nadir 8 g/dl); dosage of cytokines showed increased levels of IL-6 (12.7 pg/ml, normal values < 4.1), IL-10 (20.5 pg/ml, normal values < 9.1) and TNF-alpha (32.4 pg/ml, normal values < 8.1); the study of B- and T-lymphocyte subpopulations by RT-PCR (CD5, CD19, CD20, Sig, CD3, CD7, TCR) gave normal results. Blood transfusions and iron therapy were performed. In January, total body computed tomography (CT) scanning showed cardio- and splenomegaly. Non-complicated diverticulosis in the descending colon and sigmoid colon and anal haemorrhoids were revealed by colonoscopy. A trans-oesophageal echocardiogram showed mitral prolapse with regurgitation but no valvular vegetation was found. A dental X-ray was negative for dental abscess or caries.
In February, the patient was referred to the Infectious Disease Department. On admission, four consecutive blood cultures were performed. Gram-positive aerobic-anaerobic coccobacillary bacteria were isolated from all specimens and identified as Leuconostoc spp. resistant to vancomycin and trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole. Therapy with parenteral levofloxacin (500 mg intravenous bid) was started. After 2 weeks of parenteral therapy, the patient's conditions improved, but because of persistence of fever and increased levels of ESR (59 mm/hour), the therapy was continued with oral moxifloxacin. A blood culture specimen was examined with PCR for sequencing of 16S ribosomal RNA. The molecular analysis did not confirm the previous diagnosis and the microorganism was identified as Lactobacillus casei.
In March, haemorrhoidectomy was performed. During the postoperative period, the patient developed respiratory failure with an increased ESR (100 mm/hour). Chest CT scanning revealed multifocal pneumonia. Blood and sputum culture results were negative. A 7-day course of parenteral therapy with amoxicillin-clavulanate (2 g bid) was added to the moxifloxacin. In April, after 6 weeks of fluoroquinolone therapy, the patient was feeling well: fever, weakness and nocturnal sweating had resolved, the haemoglobin and CRP serum levels were in the normal range, ESR was reduced (51 mm/hour) and antimicrobial therapy was stopped.
Three months after the end of antibiotic therapy, the patient was hospitalized because of a new episode of multifocal pneumonia, likely to be secondary to a previous upper respiratory tract infection. During the hospitalization, an abdomen CT scan demonstrated normalization of spleen size. A trans-thoracic echocardiogram confirmed the presence of cardiomegaly and mitral prolapse with regurgitation. Blood and sputum cultures were negative. The patient was successfully treated with intravenous ampicillin-sulbactam (2/1 g tid) and oral levofloxacin (500 mg qd). No microorganisms were isolated in blood, sputum or urine.
Six months after the bloodstream infection with Lactobacillus casei, the patient reported a marked increase in body weight with complete normalization of ESR (8 mm/hour), CRP (0.5 mg/dl), and Hb values (13 g/dl). Now the patient is on the waiting list for cardiac valvular replacement.