In September 2014, a 30-year-old woman, resident in northern Italy, was referred to Umberto I University Hospital in Rome with a diagnosis of mansonellosis. She reported a month’s stay in India in 2006, in Santo Domingo in 2012 and in Australia in February 2014. In April 2014 a transient oedematous swelling on the left abdominal wall was noticed, with a creeping eruption followed by the occurrence of a subcutaneous nodular painless mass (≈1.5 cm) in the iliac region. Routine laboratory investigations resulted within normal ranges, and ultrasound examination of the node showed nonspecific inflammation. In May, analogue temporary swelling appeared on the contralateral inguinal region, associated with local itching, reddening and intermittent joint discomfort in both knees. Biochemical values were within the normal range, whereas WBC count was 7300/μl with 1100 eosinophils/μl (15.7 %). Lyme disease was suspected due to the presence of erythema migrans skin lesions and arthralgias: however, an enzyme-linked fluorescent assay (ELFA) was performed and resulted negative. A month later, an ultrasound examination of the iliac swelling evidenced a well-defined cyst (0.9 × 0.7 cm) with uniform anechoic content and a big filamentous formation in continuous movement. A fine-needle aspiration of the lesion was performed for parasitological, cytological and histological exams. One hour after this procedure, in the same area, pruritic dermatitis and swelling with rapid extension to the adjacent areas were observed , which regressed after antihistamines administration. The prompt microscopic wet examination of the aspired material revealed very small mobile elements compatible with microfilariae (Additional file ). A filariosis was suspected and the patient started doxycycline 100 mg, bid. Cytological examination reported acute inflammation. After Giemsa staining, microfilariae were attributed to Mansonella ozzardi. For this reason the patient was treated with ivermectin, 6 mg. A second dose of ivermectin (6 mg) was administered 14 days later. Doxycycline was interrupted after a 14 days course. In July, the same symptomatology occurred about 10 cm aside, eosinophilic count was normal, and ultrasound analysis evidenced static remains of a worm. The patient was then referred to Tropical Medicine Unit of the Umberto 1° University Hospital in Rome.
On first examination, the patient was asymptomatic and her physical examination was negative. Nevertheless, the following investigations were performed: i) revision of the Giemsa stained film; ii) molecular analyses of the biological material previously sent for histological analysis; iii) searching for microfilariae in peripheral blood; iv) serological test to detect reactivity to filarial antigens.
Slides were revised by microscopy; microfilariae were measured, and identified based on their morphological features. DNA was extracted from the paraffin block according to a previously reported method , and a cox1 (about 650-bp) gene fragment was PCR-amplified by using filarioid-generic primers as previously described . The amplicon was purified and sequenced; sequences were aligned using ClustalW program and compared with those available in GenBank . Finally, a blood sample was obtained on which the search for microfilariae by microscopy (on thick smears Giemsa stained after Knott’s concentration) and by PCR and finally testing for antibodies to antigens of Onchocercidae filariae by means of an ELISA test (Acanthocheilonema vitae, Bordier Affinity Products, Crissier, CE) were performed. The sensitivity and specificity of the ELISA test are respectively 95 and 98 %. It is important to note that this test does not differentiate between different filarial infections.
The revision of the slide previously considered positive for M. ozzardi showed many microfilariae sized 312-350 × 7.5 μm, without sheath, with an obtuse cervical end and a sharp threadlike caudal end curved in the form of an umbrella handle . These features, incompatible with morphology of M. ozzardi, are fully compatible with that of the zoonotic D. repens, as confirmed by molecular analyses: sequences obtained (accession number KT899073) evidenced 100 % identity with the cox1 sequence of D. repens (accession number DQ358814.1). Extensive examinations on the peripheral blood, including molecular testing, failed to detect circulating microfilariae. Finally, serology for Onchocercidae filariae confirmed the reactivity to filarial antigens.
An ultrasound examination of the node one month after the biopsy and treatment with doxycycline and ivermectin did not show any images compatible with living parasites and physical examination did not point out any nodule to remove, therefore we did not pursue any surgical treatment, and we did not prescribe any antihelmintic drugs. On May 2015, 8 months after D. repens was diagnosed, WBC count was 9200/μl with eosinophils 160/μl (1,75 %). Nowadays, more than a year after D. repens diagnosis, the patient occasionally suffers from transient urticaria-like symptoms, mild inguinal pain and knees arthralgia, symptoms that are likely due to D. repens. She is still on follow-up to evaluate if new signs of parasitic infection, such as eosinophilia or evidence of new nodule develope.