An 11-month-old male child was posted for cervical meningocele excision of redundant sac with simple skin closure in the neurosurgery operation theater (OT) of our institute. The patient had come with the complaints of soft swelling of around 3 cm × 3 cm over the nape of the neck since birth which was expansile in nature. There were no other complaints, the patient’s neurological examination was unremarkable and the patient was neurologically intact. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain + whole spine of the patient showed the meningocele at C2C3 region . On the day of the surgery, after confirming the nil per oral status, the patient was taken up inside the OT. A routine induction was done with intravenous (i.v.) propofol 18 mg and i.v. atracurium 5 mg, the patient was intubated with 4.5 mm uncuffed endotracheal tube and was maintained on oxygen, nitrous oxide, and sevoflurane to achieve a minimum alveolar concentration of 1. The surgery was carried out in prone position and was uneventful. Intraoperatively, sac with the neck was defined, the redundant sac was excised, neck closed with primary skin closure. The patient’s vitals were stable throughout the surgery. The patient was reversed with i.v. Glyco 20 mcg plus neostigmine 0.5 mg after the confirmation of tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) % of 90%, extubated and was shifted to postanesthesia care unit (PACU) at around 10:40 am.
The patient was conscious and responding. Supplementary oxygen was provided through Ventimask. On arrival, the patient’s heart rate was 110 beats/min, SpO2 was 100%, the blood pressure was 90/46 mmHg, and the shifting EtCO2 was 37 mmHg. At around 12:30 pm, the patient developed sudden tachycardia of around 205 beats/min followed by bradycardia with fall of heart rate up to 30 beats/min within few seconds followed by asystole. The patient became unresponsive at the same time. Cardio pulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR) was initiated immediately with chest compressions and bag and mask ventilation. Inj. adrenaline 100 µg bolus was given. The patient was revived after one cycle of CPCR. The patient was intubated, ventilated and was shifted for a computed tomography (CT) brain. The CT brain did not show any significant findings . The patient regained consciousness, but was sedated and electively ventilated for 2 days. The patient had 4/5 power in all four limbs in immediate postoperative period. Inj. dexamethasone 0.75 mg QID i.v was given for 3 days post the event. The patient was hemodynamically stable throughout the postoperative period and maintained the blood pressure of 80–90/40–50 mmHg which was very crucial to maintain the cord perfusion. The neurological status improved in 3 days and the patient was weaned of the ventilator over 3 days. The patient was extubated on the 3rd postoperative day after meeting all the extubation criteria. A postoperative MRI was planned to confirm the diagnosis of cord edema but could not be done as the patient’s parents did not give consent for the same, and the patient was discharged against medical advice on the 5th postoperative day without any neurological deficit. The patient was followed up at 3 months with no neurological deficit or any sequelae of the event telephonically as the patient did not come for routine follow-up.