A 52-year-old Japanese man with alcoholic liver cirrhosis and a history of previous esophageal varices and hepatic encephalopathy was referred to our hospital. At admission, he was afebrile, icteric, and anemic and complained of abdominal pain due to accumulated ascites. He had none of the neurological symptoms of neuroacanthocytosis . He was alert, with a blood pressure of 126/66 mmHg, a heart rate of 108/min, a respiratory rate of 20/min, and an SpO2 of 95% (room air). Laboratory data are shown in . He was found to have pleural fluid, ascites associated with liver cirrhosis (Child–Pugh C with 12 points) and hypoalbuminemia, and chronic kidney dysfunction. His indirect bilirubin concentration and reticulocyte counts were increased, and his haptoglobin concentration was decreased, while his vitamin B12 and folate levels were normal. A blood smear showed spur cells rather than fragmented red cells (, ). Assessments of serum lipid concentrations showed markedly reduced triglyceride, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, lipoprotein (a), phospholipid, apo-AI, and apo-AII concentrations . Mild splenomegaly was noted. He was slightly diabetic with high serum glycoalbumin (21.5%; reference 11.6–16.4%) and showed coagulopathy, including thrombocytopenia, prolonged APTT, and hypofibrinogenemia, as well as reduced AT-III. Assessments of coagulation factors showed that factor II, V, VII, and IX activities were all reduced, while factor VIII was not. ADAMTS13 activity was within the normal range . Blood smear preparations after incubating the patient's serum with control RBCs of the same blood type for 24 hours clearly showed formation of spur cells, indicating that this patient's dyslipidemia was responsible for spiculated control RBCs (data not shown). The patient was diagnosed with SCA.
He had been drinking prior to his admission; however, during his stay in the hospital for 4 weeks, he was in a state of complete abstinence. After admission, he was first treated with ascites drainage, RBC transfusions, occasional albumin, and FFP infusions. Thereafter, two courses of plasmapheresis (2,400 mL/course) were performed over 3 weeks' duration.
The patient's reticulocyte counts decreased from 22.4% before to 4.5% after plasmapheresis. He also experienced increases in concentrations of total cholesterol, from 121 mg/dL to 214 mg/dL; phospholipids, from 112 mg/dL to 197 mg/dL; and apo-AI, from 48 mg/dL to 89 mg/dL. However, his lipoprotein (a), LDL cholesterol, and apo-AII concentrations, all of which were low before plasmapheresis, remained unchanged after, and his serum concentrations of indirect bilirubin and LDH did not improve significantly . Plasma fibrinogen concentrations improved rapidly after each course of plasmapheresis, but gradually declined to subnormal levels. The percentage of spur cells was unchanged or increased slightly. The patient's general condition gradually improved with the disappearance of pleural fluid and ascites, and Hb concentration >8.0 g/dL without RBC transfusions. He was subsequently able to be discharged.