A 59-year-old female patient was admitted to Hebei General Hospital complaining of chest and back pain for 6 months. Before admission, the patient has misdiagnosed the pain as lumbar spine disease or muscle pain. After acupuncture and moxibustion and drug treatment, the symptoms did not improve significantly. And pain in both lower limbs eventually appeared. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed in a local hospital, indicating paravertebral mass of the left inferior lung lobe. The patient had no chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart disease. After admission, the physical examination found that the patient had mild tenderness in the left chest and back, and the complete electrocardiogram examination showed no obvious abnormalities. A contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest in our hospital showed paraspinal lesion of 46 × 41 × 41 mm in the posterior mediastinal, indistinguishable from the left inferior lung lobe . The lesion showed obvious uneven enhancement in the CT image, which boundary with the thoracic aorta was unclear, and ground glass shadow was visible around the edge of the lesion. The lesion was radiologically diagnosed as a neurogenic tumor.
After excluding surgical contraindications, the patient underwent VATS. The left fifth intercostal axillary line approach was taken. The tumor was found to be located in the posterior inferior mediastinum under thorascopic exploration. The lesion compressed the thoracic aorta and was close to the posterior chest wall and spine . The tumor was completely resected during surgery, and part of the tissue was sent to rapid freezing pathology exams, which indicated spindle cell tumor . Immunohistochemical staining of the complete lesion suggested leiomyosarcoma: CKpan (−), Vimentin (+), according to (−), SOX10 (−), SMA (+), NF (−), CR (−), Ki - 67 (active area about 40% +), Desmin (+), the EMA (−), P53 (−). The patient recovered well and was discharged on the sixth day after surgery. Postoperative radiotherapy was taken. The patient was reexamined by chest CT at 1-month and 4-month after surgery and no recurrence was found.