We report the case of central vein stenosis in a 60-year-old male Caucasian German dialysis patient. Our patient became dialysis-dependent in the 1970s because of postinfectious glomerulonephritis. During a 40-year history of end-stage renal disease he underwent renal transplantation three times with several years of dialysis in-between. In the meantime, and after the failure of his last renal transplant, the insertion of numerous central vein catheters from both his internal jugular veins was necessary to provide temporary dialysis access during recurrent arteriovenous fistula problems. After the final failure of an autogenous left arm access, a transposed brachial-basilic access was created in his right arm.
Three years later, our patient reported swelling of his right arm and dry cough. In additional, a clinical investigation showed facial edema and jugular vein engorgement. Color Doppler sonography revealed a reversed flow in his jugular vein, in a cranial direction and a turbulent flow in his brachiocephalic vein without clear delineation of a stenosis. Computed tomography venography coronal views of his neck and upper chest revealed subtotal stenosis of his right brachiocephalic vein with collateral circulation from his internal jugular vein over the external jugular veins, sinus cavernosus, paravertrebral veins and the veins of the mediastinal cavity. Conventional catheter phlebography via a venous transfemoral access showed subtotal stenosis of his right brachiocephalic vein over a length of nearly 4cm . Subsequently, the stenosis was dilated by balloon angioplasty (MAXI balloon 12/40mm, Cordis®, Bridgewtaer, NJ, USA, and Atlas balloon 16/40mm, Bard®, Murray Hill, NJ, USA). Because of the acute elastic recoil of the vein, a self-expanding stent (Sinus XL Stent 22/60mm, Optimed®,Ettlingen, Germany) was placed with a good post interventional result .
Four weeks after stent implantation, our patient’s facial edema and jugular vein engorgement were resolved, and color Doppler sonography showed normal jugular vein flow. The shunt volume measurement by Doppler sonography showed a flow volume of 2.5L/min.