A 20-years-old male, nonsmoker, without significant past medical history, presented to the outpatient clinic of Guthrie Robert Packer Hospital, Pennsylvania, the USA with complaints of ongoing lower back pain for 6 months. The pain was controlled with over-the-counter medicines (oral tablet acetaminophen 500 mg/dose, and/or oral tablet naproxen 500 mg/dose) initially but lately, in the last 2 weeks, the pain has been getting progressively worse, unresponsive to the over-the-counter analgesics (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) and was associated with rapid onset bilateral lower extremities weakness and numbness. He also complained of inability to pass urine and perianal anesthesia. On physical examination, his motor strength was decreased in both lower extremities (power 3/5 each lower limb) and sensory function and reflexes were normal. The rest of the musculoskeletal and neurological examinations were within normal limits without tenderness of the hips or back. He had a low-grade fever (37.3°C).
His laboratory parameters were normal except for an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (38 mm/h). X-ray of the whole spine, chest and abdomen were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine demonstrated a 4 cm enhancing soft tissue mass at the L4/L5 vertebra extending into the spinal canal with compression of the thecal sac without destruction of the vertebral body .
He was immediately admitted and treated with intravenous steroids (Injection dexamethasone 10 mg IV followed by 4 mg tablet dexamethasone q6h; subsequently tapered off post-operatively). Further workup with CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed aggressive lytic lesions in the L4 spinous process with soft tissue extension into the spinal canal with no other site of distant metastasis. A core needle biopsy showed a small, round blue cell neoplasm, suggestive of a primitive neuroectodermal tumor .
The tumor was markedly positive for CD99 stain (MIC2) and vimentin stain .
The patient complained of worsening weakness of the lower extremities; hence, he underwent primary resection of tumor measuring 8 × 4.5 × 2.5 cm with decompression and L4/5 laminectomies. Post resection, he continued to have right lower extremity numbness but reported improvement in daily activity performance. The final surgical pathology of the resected spinal mass showed a malignant small round cell tumor, 6 mitoses/10 hpf, grade 3, poorly differentiated, pT1 pNx, with negative margins. Additional molecular studies were done and he came positive for the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 with t(11;22) (24q;12q), consistent with the diagnosis of ES. His postoperative positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan showed post-procedure changes with dorsal seroma without any focal uptake to suggest a residual tumor .
After 3 weeks from surgery, our patient was subsequently treated with 14 cycles of vincristine 2 mg/m2, adriamycin/doxorubicin 75 mg/m2, cyclophosphamide 1200 mg/m2 (VDC) with mesna rescue alternating with ifosfamide 1800 mg/m2 and etoposide 100 mg/m2 (IE). He tolerated the treatment well in the initial few cycles, but later, he had a few episodes of neutropenic fever requiring hospitalization. Concomitant radiotherapy was also started after cycles of chemotherapy. He received 5040 cGy radiotherapy (180 cGy per fraction, over 5.5 weeks) to tumor bed (L3/L4 spine level) with volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) technique.
Two-year post-follow-ups, the spine biomechanics were maintained without pain flare-ups of the lower back. There was full recovery in the strength of the lower limbs. He had no evidence of disease on a repeat MRI lumbar spine two-year after the surgery .