A 56-year-old Turkish male patient had been diagnosed with incarcerated inguinal hernia after presenting to a different general surgery center due to swelling in the right groin. Because of the anesthesiologist’s decision to evaluate him as ASA E due to pulmonary problems, he had been operated under local anesthesia. Perioperatively, ischemic alterations had been observed in the incarcerated small intestine loop. Intestinal viability had not been evaluated completely. Monitoring of the patient had been decided prior to application of resection, and following the reduction of the intestinal loop back into the abdomen, herniography had been applied with propylene mesh. The case had been referred to the Emergency Surgery Department of our teaching and research hospital due to development of abdominal distension, presence of air-fluid levels on erect abdominal direct radiographs (EADR), and absence of gas-feces expulsion during the post-operative period. We evaluated the patient in Emergency Service. Laboratory results showed normal CBC values. Biochemical parameters were as follows: CK : 794 U/L (0-270), AST : 72 U/L (0-38), LDH : 555 U/L (240-480), Ca : 7.2 mg/dl (8.4-10.3). EADR of the patient displayed air-fluid levels on the abdomen. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) showed considerably dilated intestinal loops, intestinal content moving to and fro, and grade 2 bilateral renal parenchymal disease.
Laparotomy was performed due to consideration of intestinal ischemia. Serous fluid of an amount of 200 cc was found in the abdomen and aspirated. Serosal surface of the ileum exhibited ischemic areas in patches. Lembert 3.0 silk sutures were applied to those areas. Pezzer drain (No. 30) was placed from the right portion of the abdomen extending through rectovesical site. Feces evacuation was observed on the postoperative 3rd day. After reaching the amount of 20 cc drainage, the drain was removed on the postoperative 5th day. Following removal of the drain, around 20-30 cc serous discharge was observed daily from the drain site. Abdominal distension was present until the postoperative 6th day. The case which had shown expulsion of gas and feces, exhibited a reduction in distension followed by total resolution. The case showed no discharge from the drain site on postoperative 8th day and discharged in good health. One day after the discharge, our patient applied to another healthcare center with the complaint of a herniated intestine from his drain site which gets larger by time. He was referred to our clinic from this center with the prediagnosis of intestinal herniation. Initial evaluation in Emergency Service revealed absence of evacuation of feces and gas. The EADR taken showed gas accumulation but no fluid-air levels. A tissue of 5 × 4 × 3 cm, which was irreducible, edematous, and appearing like ischemic and similar to an intestinal loop, was determined to be protruding from the drain site . He was operated with the diagnosis of intestinal herniation at the drain site. During the operation, proximal 2/3 of the gallbladder was determined to be protruding out of the abdomen from the drain site . Mesentery of the gallbladder was intact. Hilar cholecystectomy was conducted and the gallbladder was removed. Diameter of the drain site was observed to be around 1 cm . Eventually the drain site was closed one by one from inside the abdomen with 1.0 silk sutures.