A 25-year-old man, teetotaller, with no previous comorbidities presented to the emergency department with history of abdominal pain and fever for 1 month. He had received empirical antibiotics and proton pump inhibitors without any symptomatic relief. There was no history of similar complaints in the past and the family history was non-contributory. On examination, the patient was malnourished with body mass index of 16.9 kg/m2. He was febrile, blood pressure of 118/62 mmHg, pulse rate of 112/min, and respiratory rate of 14/min. Abdominal examination revealed mild epigastric tenderness without any rigidity and bowel sounds were intact.
Results and reference values, according to age and sex, of the most relevant laboratorial tests performed in our patient at presentation
On abdominal ultrasonography, a liver abscess of 4.7 × 4.7 cm in the left lobe of the liver was noted and a percutaneous pigtail catheter drainage under local anaesthesia aspirated 100 mL of anchovy sauce-like pus. Although no amoeba was cultivated from the pus, the polymerase chain reaction from the pus was positive for Entamoeba histolytica. Therefore, he was started on intravenous metronidazole 400 mg thrice daily.
After 2 days, he developed shortness of breath associated with severe chest pain. He had tachypnoea, muffled heart sounds, and jugular venous distension associated with hypotension. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed cardiac tamponade with massive purulent pericardial effusion (, Video 1).
He underwent emergency subxiphoid percutaneous pigtail catheter drainage under local anaesthesia leading to symptomatic relief; however, he continued to have chest pain and chest X-ray showed bilateral empyema and percutaneous pigtails under local anaesthesia were inserted into both pleural cavities draining around 200–300 mL serosanguinous fluid. His fever persisted and there was 100 mL of daily drainage from pericardial drain. Cultures from the drain grew Acinetobacter baumanii, and the patient was started on intravenous colistin along with intravenous metronidazole. An abdominal ultrasonography reassessment revealed no residual abscess in the liver, so the liver catheter was removed. Still, there were residual collections in the pleural and pericardial cavities. A repeat transthoracic echocardiography revealed minimal fluid anterior to the heart with 10 mm pericardial effusion lateral and posterior to the left ventricle. Pigtail was repositioned and 20–30 mL of pus aspirated. Non-contrast computed tomography abdomen and chest showed a 5.7 cm thick purulent pericardial collection on the lateral side of the right ventricle and bilateral empyema in lung .
A decision for surgical drainage was considered and a pleura-pericardial window was performed under general anaesthesia draining 800 mL of pus. Following post-operative Day 1, he improved symptomatically and his fever alleviated. The rest of the post-operative days were uneventful and the pleural and pericardial drains were removed after 7 days. Following surgery, he recovered well and the fever subsided. The patient was discharged after 10 days of surgery. He started his job after 1 month of discharge and is doing well after 1 year of follow-up with no recurrence of the disease.