This patient was a 15-year-old girl who presented with a short history of progressive headache, dizziness, diplopia and visual blurring. Ophthalmology review confirmed papilloedema. Pre-operative brain MRI image demonstrated a hyperintense lesion in the third ventricle, consistent with a colloid cyst . She underwent a right frontal craniotomy for excision of the cyst through an interhemispheric transcollosal approach. The post-operative period was uneventful, and she was discharged home on the fifth day. Ten days after the operation, she was readmitted for progressive disturbance in behavior that started 3 days after the operation, including inappropriate sexual actions; tearing clothes and throwing napkins at hospital staff; using inappropriate language, talking loudly and singing in public settings; voluntarily emptying her bladder in public; as well as making a mess while eating. She also showed symptoms of remarkably sparse verbal output, short-term memory deficits, easy distractibility, excessive sleepiness, and fatiguability. Apart from her behavioral changes, her preoperative diplopia and swelling at the operative site were getting progressively worse. She did not show any signs of limb weakness, primitive reflexes, gait apraxia, or paratonia.
Postoperative brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)/ computed tomography (CT) were done under sedation and MRI showed evidence of an 8 mm incision in the anterior part of the body of the corpus callosum . There is also bilateral frontal parafalcine gyral edematous changes along the operative bed that is more on the right side . It showed mild high signal in the DWIs, FLAIR, and T2WIs without significant changes in the ADC map. A CSF collection localized in the subgaleal scalp was seen. There was also a linear rim of intraventricular subependymal hematoma collection measuring 3.8 × 0.5 cm at its maximal AP and TS dimensions with small petechial foci seen just above the anterior part of the body of the corpus callosum. Size of the lateral ventricles was only slightly prominent, and the other cerebral ventricles were of normal size. There was no evidence of infarction.
She received inpatient dexamethasone 4 mg IV injections every 6 h for a total of 2 days followed by injections every 8 h. Aspiration of the CSF scalp collection was done with removal of 20 mL of clear xanthochromic CSF. Her behavioral symptoms then steadily improved and disappeared after 2 weeks from initiation of therapy. She was discharged on dexamethasone 2 mg PO b. d. for 5 days, followed by dexamethasone 1 mg PO b. d. for another 5 days. Her short-term memory has been slower to improve (as per her parents, there has been “95% improvement in memory”) and residual memory deficits are still present 6 months after the surgery, such as trouble remembering where she placed objects or memorizing word passages. According to her parents, she does not remember her episode of behavioral disturbance or most of the events that occurred during her second admission to the hospital. However, she recalls that she “was not talking much because she was afraid that she would say something wrong.” Her diplopia has resolved completely. At school, she maintains good academic performance.