An 18-year-old woman experienced vertiginous dizziness and binocular diplopia 1 wk before admission.
The patient’s symptoms started 1 wk ago. Diplopia was more pronounced in her right gaze. She was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of diabetes, which was confirmed at a local clinic. The patient was not overweight, and her body mass index was 20.5 kg/m2.
She was born by cesarean section at 36 6/7 wk. Her birthweight was 3800 g, which was significantly higher than that of her discordant twin sister, who weighed 2600 g. The patient was admitted to the Department of Pediatrics at the age of 3 and 5 years because of recurrent seizures with hypoglycemic events. Subsequent evaluations including brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and extensive laboratory testing failed to ascertain the cause. However, she successfully attained developmental milestones during infancy and childhood.
Her paternal grandfather and maternal grandmother had diabetes. Other family members, including parents and twin sibling, did not have diabetes. She did not have a relevant family history of MS or other neurological disorders.
Neurological examination revealed an addction deficit of the left eye with abducting horizontal nystagmus of the right eye on attempting right gaze, which was compatible with left internuclear ophthalmoplegia. Mild left peripheral-type facial palsy (House-Brackmann grade I) was noted. Other cranial nerve functions; facial sensory examination; motor, sensory, and cerebellar function tests were unremarkable.
Subsequent laboratory test results were consistent with those of type 2 diabetes. Serum C-peptide level was normal, while insulin level was increased at 13.7 μIU (reference range: 1.1-11.6 μIU). Glycated hemoglobin was 10.4% (reference range: 4.3%-6.1%). Her anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody levels were normal. Other laboratory evaluations, including anti-nuclear antibody, viral and parasite markers, anti-aquaporin 4 antibody, and anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody, were all negative. Cerebrospinal fluid-specific oligoclonal bands were identified by isoelectric focusing technique.
Brain MRI revealed a symptomatic lesion involving the left medial longitudinal fasciculus and facial colliculus in the posterior pons , accompanied by multiple enhancing lesions in the left parietal, right occipital, and right temporal lobes.
The diagnosis of MS was made based on the McDonald criteria 2017 revision. Intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy at a daily dosage of 1 g was initiated. On day 5 after methylprednisolone infusion, bradycardia was observed . Electrocardiography (ECG) revealed marked sinus bradycardia with a heart rate (HR) of 35 beats per minute, T-wave flattening, and T-wave inversion . The serum potassium level measured at the time of bradycardia was 4.0 mmol/L (reference range: 3.5-5.1 mmol/L) . As steroid-induced bradycardia was suspected, oral prednisolone was discontinued. Echocardiography and Holter monitoring were unremarkable, except for sinus bradycardia. The cardiac enzyme levels were normal. Her ECG changes returned to baseline 2 days after steroid discontinuation . Further evaluation was conducted to elucidate the underlying conditions. Diagnostic exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous variant of the HNF4A gene (NM_175914.4: c.1045C>T [p.Gln349*]). It was classified as a pathogenic variant according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines, with evidence levels of PVS1 (null variant), PM2 (absent from population databases), and PP3 (deleterious in silico predictions). The same heterozygous mutation was reported in a study involving a large cohort of MODY.