A 35-year-old woman was incidentally diagnosed with a left unruptured internal carotid-ophthalmic artery aneurysm with a maximum size of 6.1 mm and neck size of 3.6 mm [ and ]. Endovascular treatment with FRED was scheduled. Two weeks before treatment, the patient was premedicated with 100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel daily. The day before the procedure, using the VerifyNow point-of-care platelet assay (Accumetrics, San Diego, CA, USA), the aspirin reaction unit and P2Y12 reaction unit (PRU) were measured at 493 and 192, respectively. Both values were considered to be within adequate platelet inhibition function, and no preoperative enhanced antiplatelet therapy was needed.
Under general anesthesia, a 7-French shuttle sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) was placed with a coaxial system at the cervical portion of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) through the right femoral site. A Headway27 microcatheter (MicroVention Inc.) was navigated distal to the aneurysm using a microguidewire (ASAHI CHIKAI 14; Asahi Intecc Co., Ltd., Aichi, Japan). Moreover, the SOFIA SELECT EX (MicroVention Inc.) was used as a distal access catheter. The size of the FRED was determined according to the diameter of the ICA vessel proximal (3.3 mm) and distal (3.2 mm) to the aneurysm. A 3.5 mm diameter and 17 mm long FRED was adequately deployed through the microcatheter across the neck of the aneurysm under appropriate therapeutic heparinization . Post deployment angiography revealed intra-aneurysm contrast stagnation after FRED deployment . Full expansion of the FRED was confirmed using cone-beam computed tomography angiography. The patient awoke without any neurological symptoms.
However, only 1 h following the procedure, the patient presented with conjugate deviation toward the left side, right severe hemiparesis, and total aphasia. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no evident acute cerebral infarction. However, magnetic resonance angiography revealed the aneurysm, which meant that the FD was no longer covering the aneurysm. Furthermore, a signal defect of the left ICA terminus, which meant that the FD was located there, and decline of the flow of the left peripheral middle cerebral artery (MCA) were also observed by magnetic resonance angiography. Immediately, after the MRI, angiography was promptly performed, although the patient’s symptoms gradually improved. An angiogram revealed some in-stent thrombi with distal migration of the FRED [ and ]. Initially, one of the left M2 inferior trunk branches was occluded by an embolic thrombus, and the left temporo-occipital area was avascular . However, during the preparation of recanalization, the thrombus spontaneously migrated distally, and the flow gradually improved without any specific treatment. The final angiogram revealed almost complete recanalization, except for the delay of the flow in the left MCA temporo-occipital area [ and ]. At that time, the patient’s symptoms completely improved. Thus, we administered a bolus of 20 mg prasugrel per oral and intravenous drip of argatroban, leaving the migrated stent in situ. The MRI on the day after the treatment revealed only a small cerebral infarction in the left temporo-occipital area without any evident neurological symptoms .