A 55 year-old man with past medical history of copper deficiency (Human Swayback), atrial fibrillation and new diagnosis of decompensated cryptogenic cirrhosis, was transferred to our facility for inpatient liver transplant evaluation due to acute on chronic liver failure with a MELD-Na score of 29.
Ten years prior to presentation, the patient started experiencing lightheadedness, dizziness, unsteady gait, mental fog, lower extremity weakness, memory loss, slurred speech, hand tremors, hallucinations and headaches. He underwent extensive neuropsychiatric and metabolic evaluation significant for a serum ceruloplasmin of 14.4 md/dL (normal 15–30 mg/dL), serum copper < 5 mcg/L (normal 15–60 mcg/L) with negative 24-h urine copper—diagnosed with Swayback disease. The patient was subsequently placed on copper supplementation 2 mg per day. The patient unfortunately was lost in follow up and he continued to take copper up to 8 mg per day. Three years after starting copper supplementation, the patient started experiencing severe diffuse abdominal pain, requiring multiple emergency department visits, opioid use, umbilical hernia repair and ultimately exploratory laparotomy. At the time of the exploratory laparotomy, the liver was noted to have cirrhotic morphology. After surgery, the patient developed signs of hepatic decompensation manifested by refractory ascites requiring paracentesis and hepatic encephalopathy. Due to worsening MELD-Na score and development of hepatorenal syndrome, the patient was transferred for inpatient liver transplant evaluation to our hospital.
Inpatient liver transplant evaluation was significant for hemolytic anemia hemoglobin 6.6 g/dL (baseline 13 g/dL), MCV 108.7 fL, low haptoglobin < 14 mg/dL and increased lactate dehydrogenase 239 U/L. Total bilirubin was 6.3 mg/dl, direct bilirubin 3.8 mg/dl, alanine aminotransferase 51 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 190 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 68 U/L, creatinine 1.45 mg/dL, cystatin C 1.35 mg/L, ceruloplasmin 10.9 mg/dl, serum copper 1.73 mcg/ml and urine copper > 6210 mcg/24 h. Physical exam revealed scleral icterus, no Kayser-Fleischer rings on slit-lamp, abdominal distention with positive fluid shift and diffuse abdominal tenderness on palpation. Patient denied any alcohol use. A serological evaluation for other causes of liver disease was negative including the ATP7B gene for Wilson disease. A transjugular liver biopsy was performed that demonstrated ongoing portal/segmental inflammation with ballooning degeneration and diffuse hepatocellular copper accumulation on rhodamine stain . Copper had been discontinued at admission. Zinc gluconate 50 mg by mouth three times daily was started. The patient was felt to be a good candidate for transplant, was listed with a MELD-Na score of 47 and ultimately underwent orthotopic liver transplantation. The liver explant was pale golden-tan with micro-macronodules. The copper concentration was 5436 mcg/g on dry weight . The patient’s chronic abdominal pain subsided after liver transplant.