The patient was a 60-year-old male with bladder cancer (cT2aN0M1) that progressed to multiple lung metastases . The condition of the patient at the time of admission indicated the probability of primary lung cancer. Therefore, the patient underwent TURBT and lung biopsy. Pathological examination after TURBT confirmed the presence of high-grade UC (pT2), and lung tumor biopsy confirmed metastases of UC. The patient did not undergo local treatment after TURBT.
Three courses of GC chemotherapy (gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2, days 1, 8, and 15; cisplatin 70 mg/m2, day 2) were administered for metastatic UC, which resulted in the decrease of lung metastases . However, occurrence of a bone metastatic (left femoral neck) tumor was observed following the chemotherapy . The left femoral neck was replaced after resection of the metastatic tumor. A clean surgical margin was confirmed by pathological examination. During the resection procedure, lung metastases increased due to drug withdrawal . Subsequent administration of four courses of pembrolizumab resulted in complete eradication of the lung metastasis. As the administration of pembrolizumab continued for nine courses, a new bone metastatic tumor (right femoral neck) appeared ; hence, right femoral neck tumor resection and bone replacement were repeated. The surgical margins were then cleaned and confirmed by pathological examination. Thereafter, pembrolizumab administration was continued for up to 20 courses, with no recurrence or adverse events. Pembrolizumab was discontinued once the patient showed CR to avoid potential side effects. Two years and 11 months after initiating treatment for metastatic UC, CR was maintained , and we confirmed that no local recurrence was visually detected using a cystoscope.
The lung tumor biopsy site and excised bone metastasis specimen were stained with PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx, revealing a CPS of <1%, indicating low PD-L1 expression . CPS can be calculated using the following equation: CPS = Number of PD-L1 staining cells (tumor cells, lymphocytes, macrophages)/total number of viable tumor cells × 100.