A 35-year-old Albanian male farm-worker without relevant medical, physical, or psychosocial history was brought to our emergency room in a state of major hemorrhagic shock with an injury inflicted by a horse bite, just 5 hours prior to admission. His arm was heavily deformed with skin, fascia, and muscles torn from the humerus, which was visible at the bottom of the wound . Due to thrombosis of the lacerated vessels, there was no bleeding at time of admission. Pulse was missing on the right radial and ulnar arteries, and movement was limited. It was impossible to correctly examine nerve function due to difficulties in communication caused by the state of shock. We covered the wound and started resuscitation.
The patient was confused and anxious, and his skin was pale, cold, and sweaty. He was breathing rapidly. The pulse on his left radial artery was weak, rapid, and thready. Pulse in his right arm was missing. His fingernails and lips were blue, and his capillary refill time was 5 seconds. He had blood pressure of 70/40 mmHg, heart rate of 130 beats/minute, and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation of 92%. His hematocrit was 18%, and his hemoglobin was 6.8 g/dL. His platelet count was normal, and his white blood cell count was slightly elevated (11.0 × 109/L). His glucose, cholesterol, urea, and creatinine concentrations were all within normal range. His total bilirubin was moderately elevated (32.4 μmol/L), and his transaminase level was normal. He had a significantly high level of C-reactive protein (55.8 mg/L). His urine was clear. No serology or microbiology was performed. Due to the urgency of the case, no additional diagnostic evaluation (radiography, duplex scan, angiography, or neurography) was performed. Hemodynamic resuscitation was initiated immediately. Two large-bore intravenous catheters (16-gauge) were inserted. Crystalloids and colloids were administered rapidly, and red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) were ordered. Induction agents etomidate (0.3 mg/kg), fentanyl (3 μg/kg), and rocuronium (1.2 mg/kg) were administered. The patient was intubated and escorted to the operating room. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (0.7–1.3 minimum alveolar concentration), atracurium, and fentanyl. To achieve hemodynamic stability, vasopressors (dopamine 5–7 μg/minute) were used until several units of red blood cells and FFP were brought from the transfusion desk. To minimize the possibility of rebleeding, permissive hypotensive resuscitation was maintained.
At the operating table, we found large lacero-contusive and avulsive wounds with parts of biceps and brachialis muscle, fascia, and subcutaneous tissue completely torn from the humerus. After careful debridement, we approached the medial neurovascular bundle of arm, where we found complete laceration of the brachial artery, brachial and basilic vein and intact deep brachial artery, ulnar nerve, brachial nerve, and antebrachial cutaneus nerve . We dissected these structures and obtained proximal and distal control. Due to extensive laceration of the brachial artery, it was not possible to perform end-to-end anastomosis. This was not the case with the brachial vein, which we were able to mobilize, debride, and reconstruct by end-to-end anastomosis. To reconstruct the brachial artery we used a 10-cm segment of saphenous vein harvested from the leg and implanted it between two ends of the debrided brachial artery . The lacerated basilic vein was ligated. Afterwards, the muscles were sewn. Finally, a suction drain was placed. One week after surgery, following formation of granulating tissue, autologous skin graft was used to close the wound.
After surgery, patient resuscitation continued. The patient was put on a broad spectrum of intravenous antibiotics (vancomycin and metronidazol), and antitetanus and antirabies prophylaxes. Enterococcus was isolated from the wound. The bacteria resulted sensitive to the mentioned antibiotics, thus we continued with the same treatment. The local infection was treated with frequent debridements. However, major blood loss and hemorrhagic shock caused by laceration of the brachial artery, brachial and basilic vein, infection, limb ischemia, and massive destruction of soft tissue of arm and forearm led to complicated postoperative course and caused renal failure. Therefore, the patient underwent several sessions of hemodialysis. Once the treatment was completed, the renal function, as well as the local and general condition of the patient, improved significantly.
The patient was discharged 3 weeks after the surgery. Follow-up clinical examination, electoneurography, and electromyogaphy of arm muscles (performed 6 months, 1 year, and 5 years after discharge) showed no signs of sensory or motor deficit .