A 67-year-old male presented with an ulcer in the right ventral tongue, approximately 2 cm in the greatest dimension. He was then found to have SCC of the tongue, which immunohistochemical staining showed to be p16 negative. He underwent right partial glossectomy with skin graft reconstruction and selective neck dissection, pathology was pT1N2b with negative margins and no extranodal extension. He then received adjuvant radiotherapy. His post-treatment positron emission tomography (PET) showed a metabolic response in the neck, but a new spiculated right lower lobe mass and hilar and subcarinal nodes were found. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) from the hilar node showed malignant squamous cells. IHC demonstrated strong staining of the tumor with cytokeratin 5 and p40 and no staining with TTF-1, napsin A, and p16, Therefore cytology was consistent squamous cell carcinoma, however unable to exclude a second primary right lung SCC with hilar node involvement. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) with FoundationOne was performed for both primary tongue tumor and hilar lymph node.
Both specimens had the same TP53 (R273H) and BRCA2 (W563*) mutations. The specimen from the hilar lymph node had FAT1 (Q1138*) and TERT promoter (−124C > T) mutations in addition to TP53 and BRCA2. BRCA2 allele frequency was 50% suggesting germline mutation. His family history of cancer included his mother with multiple myeloma and his father with lung cancer and melanoma. So, the patient was referred to genetics and a blood test confirmed germline BRCA2 mutation. The variants of unknown significance (VUS) were also identical in both specimens. Having the identical TP53 mutation and VUS in both specimens was consistent with metastatic disease from SCC of the tongue. The patient was treated with carboplatin/5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) and cetuximab with initial partial response in lung nodule and hilar lymph node however, he subsequently had progression with bone metastasis. He was briefly on olaparib, and then pembrolizumab without response so he transitioned to hospice.