A 63-year-old woman of short stature was first admitted to our hospital three days after onset of acute aphasia, headache and a moderate right-sided hemiparesis. Medical history included type 2 diabetes, arterial hypertension, and past smoking. The patient had no history of mental retardation or cognitive decline up to the time of her acute illness. Whereas childhood and early adulthood were reportedly normal, she had developed hearing loss and diabetes at the age of 45 years. She was also diagnosed with cardiomyopathy that was initially thought to be of hypertensive aetiology, and had a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and renal insufficiency. Of note, the patient had two miscarriages, and one newborn child died within the first hours after birth. There was no history of previous frequent headaches. Her medication included aspirin, lercanidipine, candesartan, atorvastatin, fluticasone, salmeterol and insulin.
On admission, she presented with moderate fluent aphasia and moderate weakness of the right arm and leg. Laboratory testing revealed severe hypovolemic hyponatremia (116 mmol/l) and hyperglycaemia (19 mmol/l). Plasma osmolality was low (284 mmol/kg), whereas urine osmolality (457 mmol/kg), and urine sodium concentration were high (91 mmol/l). In addition, serum lactate (2.7 mmol/l), and serum creatine kinase (576 IU/l) levels were elevated. Computed tomography (CT) on admission showed hypodense areas within the left temporal lobe without signs of haemorrhage. CT angiography showed few calcified plaques in both carotid bifurcations without a relevant stenosis or occlusion of intracranial or extracranial arteries . Emboli detection on transcranial doppler was not performed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensities within the cortical grey and white matter of the left temporal lobe . The patient was diagnosed with ischaemic stroke in the territory of her left middle cerebral artery and transferred to the stroke unit. Duplex sonography confirmed moderate atheroma of the right and left carotid bifurcation without relevant stenosis, which was considered a possible cause. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed left ventricular hypertrophy, but no cardiac sources of embolism. Electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring showed no atrial fibrillation. Glycated haemoglobin was elevated (8.7%). LDL cholesterol was normal (1.15 mmol/l). Antiplatelet therapy was switched from aspirin to clopidogrel, and the patient was discharged after two weeks to a neurorehabilitation hospital with persisting moderate fluent aphasia.
Two weeks later, the patient was readmitted due to recurrence of the right-sided hemiparesis which now also involved her face. MRI revealed enlarging FLAIR hyperintense signal changes in the mesiotemporal area extending towards the left parietal lobe and left insula. In addition, new FLAIR hyperintense signal changes were also present in the right temporal pole . CT angiography again showed no vessel occlusion. The patient was diagnosed with a recurrent stroke. Holter-ECG over 4 days did not reveal any atrial fibrillation. Transoesophageal echocardiography did not reveal any patent foramen ovale or other cardiac source of embolism, but 4 mm thick plaques in the aorta were visible which were considered an additional possible cause for recurrent strokes. Clopidogrel was stopped and oral anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist (Phenprocoumon) was started.
During the second hospitalization impaired consciousness, recurrent vomiting and disorientation occurred. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed generalized slowing, and frequent multifocal rhythmic epileptiform discharges as well as sharp slow waves as signs of epileptic activity. Clinical course and EEG findings improved under antiepileptic therapy with lacosamide and levetiracetam. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed normal cell count, normal protein, negative herpes simplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and elevated lactate levels. Laboratory screening for vasculitis turned out negative. Considering the longstanding nicotine abuse and hyponatremia, paraneoplastic encephalitis was also considered. However, CT thorax was normal and paraneoplastic antineuronal antibodies in serum (Anti-Hu, Anti-Yo, Anti-Ri, Anti-CV2, Anti-Ma1, Anti-Ma2/Ta, Anti-Amphiphysin, Anti-VGCC, and Anti-NMDA-receptor antibodies) turned out negative.
The patient was again discharged with residual aphasia and was able to return home where she was cared for by her husband. Six months later, the patient presented at the emergency department with disorientation, aggression, mutism and refusal to eat, drink or take her medication. She was diagnosed with organic psychosis and admitted to a psychiatric hospital. The patient was finally readmitted again nine months after initial hospitalization with repeated falls and progressive apathy. On admission, the patient was mutistic.
At this point, MRI showed progressive brain lesions involving both temporal and occipital lobes, characterized by a FLAIR-hyperintense oedema with signs of a local mass effect . Of note, these lesions crossed the boundaries of vascular territories. The parts of the lesions involving the cortex appeared hyperintense on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and hypointense on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps, consistent with cytotoxic oedema. In contrast, subcortical regions appeared hyperintense on ADC maps, consistent with vasogenic oedema.
Taking into account the clinical presentation with recurrent stroke-like episodes, encephalopathy, seizures, headache and lactic acidosis, as well as the medical history including hearing loss, short stature, cardiomyopathy and diabetes, we suspected MELAS as the underlying cause. A detailed family history revealed hearing loss in a brother, and transient visual disturbances as well as a history of acute hearing loss in a sister .
A biopsy of the vastus lateralis muscle showed signs of mitochondrial myopathy, including sub-sarcolemmal accumulation of mitochondria on Gomori trichrome staining (so-called “ragged red fibers”), neutral fat deposits and prominent cytochrome C oxidase (COX) negative and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) hyperreactive muscle fibres . Finally, the diagnosis of MELAS was confirmed by positive genetic testing for the m.3243A > G mitochondrial DNA mutation in the MT-TL1-gene - the most common mutation in patients with MELAS - in peripheral blood (7% heteroplasmy), as well as in the muscle biopsy (76% heteroplasmy).
The patient’s state worsened rapidly. The diagnosis and the lack of curative treatment options were discussed with her husband, who decided to care of the patient at home. The patient died shortly thereafter.