A 26-year-old Caucasian man with history of diabetes mellitus presented to our emergency department complaining of diffuse headache that had developed two months prior to presentation. He also reported nausea and vomiting that became progressively worse. He denied fever, chills, photophobia or any other symptoms. He was born in Mexico and moved to California when he was 18 years old. A physical examination revealed a temperature of 37°C and mild neck stiffness but an examination including funduscopy and ophthalmologic examination was otherwise normal. Initial laboratory findings indicated a white blood cell count of 6500/mm3 with 75% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 15% lymphocytes and 8% monocytes. His serum glucose was 90 mg/dL. The remainder of the laboratory data was normal. An initial computed tomography (CT) scan of his head showed hydrocephalus . A lumbar puncture was performed and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed an opening pressure of 400 mmHg, with 330 white blood cells/mm3 with 14% neutrophils, 45% lymphocytes, 38% monocytes, 3% eosinophils, 3 red blood cells/mm3, a protein level of 84 mg/100 mL and a glucose level of 43 mg/100 mL. A Gram stain and India ink stain of CSF were negative and final bacterial, viral, fungal and mycobacterial cultures were negative. Our patient was initially started on antimycobacterial therapy for empiric treatment of possible tuberculous meningitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain revealed an absence of meningeal enhancement, dilated lateral and third ventricles, with aqueduct stenosis and a possible small cystic area in or adjacent to the inferior aqueduct . An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of the CSF was positive for immunoglobulin G (IgG) cysticercosis antibody, with 1.31 optical density units (OD) (positive result > 0.50 OD). His serum IgG cysticercosis antibody was positive with 4.42 OD. The serological diagnosis was confirmed by enzyme-linked immunoelectrotransfer blot assay performed for both serum and CSF. On further history, our patient mentioned that he used to eat undercooked meat when he was in Mexico. A diagnosis of extraparenchymal NCC was made. Our patient underwent endoscopic removal of the cyst and three weeks of therapy with albendazole (15 mg/kg/day) and corticosteroids was initiated. Postoperatively, our patient had a full range of extraocular movements, no periaqueductal injury and complete resolution of his presenting symptoms. Pathology findings confirmed the diagnosis of NCC .