A 73-year-old white man with non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy diagnosed for at least 2 years, in functional New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III despite optimal medical therapy, with left bundle branch block and a QRS duration of 125 msec was evaluated for CRT with defibrillator (CRT-D) device implant. A pre-implant transthoracic echocardiographic examination was performed with infusion of contrast agent to improve diagnostic accuracy in the assessment of LV systolic function and wall motion analysis. The real-time three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiographic (RT3D-TTE) approach using the “full-volume” mode showed an ejection fraction (EF) of 27.5 %, an end-systolic volume (ESV) of 126 ml, and a high Systolic Dyssynchrony Index (SDI) 9.6 % with a more delayed mechanical activation in the basal-middle-apical posterior and anterior interventricular septum segments of his LV, respectively .
We implanted a CRT-D device with a quadripolar LV lead placed in the posterolateral branch of his coronary sinus. After recording the right ventricle (RV)-to-LV electrical delay at each of the four LV rings (A1=87 ms, A2=92 ms, A3=91 ms, A4=94 ms), we chose the A4 unipolar vector for LV pacing.
At the 1-month post-implant follow-up he showed worsening heart failure symptoms becoming NYHA class IV. Therefore, we performed an echocardiographic examination using contrast agent for the evaluation of intracavity blood motion at mechanical index of approximately 0.4 and high frame rates (70 to 90 Hz). The recorded clips of 1-month post-CRT implant, as well as of basal echocardiographic examination, were processed by echo-PIV, an optical method where the contrast agent bubbles are tracked from one frame to the next to calculate the instantaneous blood velocity fields. From these, the orientation angle (φ) of the global hemodynamic forces exchanged between blood and surrounding tissues is estimated. This angle ranges from zero, when flow force is predominantly along the base–apex direction, up to 90 degrees when it becomes transversal.
At pre-implant, the polar histogram showed the orientation and relative magnitude of blood-induced intraventricular forces were not properly aligned along the LV axis (highest φ; value 39.7°; Fig. : 3a); relative magnitude of blood-induced hemodynamic forces were not properly aligned along the LV axis .
At 1-month post-CRT an echo-contrast examination was also performed during biventricular pacing protocol which provided the use of the four LV unipolar and A1–A4 pacing vectors. According to previous conjecture [, ], the biventricular pacing with the A1 unipolar LV vector , showed the most longitudinal flow force (smallest φ; value 25.4°) and was then selected as optimal configuration for CRT pacing. At 6-months follow-up, 12-lead electrocardiogram (EKG) post-CRT demonstrated a QRS duration of 126 ms , and the patient showed a significant improvement in NYHA class (II) and LV EF (53.2 %) with a significant reduction in ESV (57.1 ml versus 126 ml), and a low SDI (2.3 %) by RT3D-TTE approach ; these settings provided a positive response to therapy, which was associated with improved alignment of intraventricular forces ; LV flow was more regular and the associated hemodynamic forces followed the base–apex orientation .