A 58-year-old Asian woman was admitted to our hospital for multiple nodular legions in the pancreas. She had undergone right nephrectomy for RCC 20 years earlier. Since then, she had undergone soft tissue resection of the right shoulder (2005), partial left nephrectomy (2006), and partial chest wall resection (2007) for metastases from RCC, and she was started on interferon therapy in 2007. In 2008, during routine follow-up, abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple space-occupying legions in the pancreas, but she had no subjective symptoms. Her carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels were within normal limits. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed multiple stained nodules in the pancreas . 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) showed FDG accumulation in the tail of the pancreas (standardized uptake value, 2.5) , but no other accumulations of FDG elsewhere in her body. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed three stained nodular legions (one each in the head, tail, and body of the pancreas), but no evidence of dilatation of the main pancreatic duct or bile duct . Preoperative differential diagnoses included pancreatic endocrine tumor and metastatic carcinoma. On the basis of these findings and her previous medical history, she was diagnosed with multiple isolated metastases to the pancreas from RCC.
As metastases occurred while the patient was being treated with interferon, surgery was indicated. Intraoperative ultrasonography showed more than four nodules in the pancreas from the head to the tail, but there was no evidence of lymph node swelling or peritoneal dissemination. She underwent PPTP with splenectomy. Because all blood supply to the stomach comes from the left gastric artery via intramural vessels and all blood drains from the stomach through the left gastric vein, close attention was paid to preservation of these vessels. Her pancreas contained ten macroscopic and more than eleven microscopic metastatic lesions . Their pathological diagnosis was compatible with metastatic clear cell RCC, similar to the primary RCC resected 20 years earlier .
Two weeks after PPTP, the patient fell during a hypoglycemic episode and broke her right femur. Subsequently, however, her control of blood sugar was generally satisfactory. Adjuvant therapy consisted of interleukin (IL)-2 (70,000 U/week) for 2 years, after which IL-2 therapy was discontinued because the patient was experiencing severe nausea and vomiting. There was no evidence of RCC recurrence 28 months after PPTP, but she changed hospitals thereafter. We were informed by a local hospital that she died as a result of gastrointestinal bleeding 35 months after pancreatic resection.