A 61-year-old man (height, 157 cm; weight, 56 kg) was diagnosed with recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma with cirrhosis in the right hepatic lobe and was scheduled for laparoscopic hepatectomy. He had no clinical cardiopulmonary or brain disease.
The operation was performed under combined general and epidural anesthesia. Anesthesia was induced with propofol 70 mg and fentanyl 100 μg. After administration of rocuronium 30 mg, tracheal intubation was performed. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane, a 40 to 50% oxygen–air mixture, and continuous infusion of remifentanil 0.15 μg × kg−1 × min−1. The arterial blood pressure, pulse oximetry, capnography, and central venous pressure were monitored continuously. Volume-controlled ventilation was adopted to obtain an end-tidal CO2 (EtCO2) level of 30 to 40 mmHg.
The patient was placed in the head-down position during surgery, and intra-abdominal pressure was maintained to 10 cmH2O. During the pneumoperitoneum, the tidal volume was adjusted to 500 ml, and the respiratory rate was adjusted to maintain the EtCO2 at 30 to 40 mmHg. The fluid management strategy was adjusted to maintain CVP about 5 mmHg.
Laparoscopic hepatic resection was started after clamping the branches of the vascular pedicle, commonly known as the Pringle maneuver. During the hepatic resection, the EtCO2 dropped from 40 to 21 mmHg, and ST elevation was observed in lead II and ST depression was observed in lead V5 of the electrocardiogram . At this time, the electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and the blood pressure was almost stable; however, the central venous pressure slightly increased from 7 to 13 mmHg. After the operation was stopped, arterial blood gas analysis showed a divergence between the partial pressure of CO2 (67.4 mmHg) and EtCO2 (21 mmHg). Although gas embolism was strongly suspected, coronary artery spasm could not be ruled out because the ST change in leads II and V5 was suspected to be associated with the right coronary artery. The electrocardiographic changes improved shortly thereafter , and the surgery was resumed after administration of a coronary vasodilator (nicorandil, 3 mg/h) and β-blocker (landiolol, 5 mg). The surgery was completed without further problems.
After the surgery, the patient’s hemodynamic state was stable and tracheal extubation was performed smoothly 20 min postoperatively. Although the patient could speak and had alert consciousness, he exhibited muscle weaknesses in the right arm and leg. Obvious cerebral bleeding was not detected by emergency computed tomography immediately after surgery; however, magnetic resonance imaging performed the next day revealed cerebral infarction in the broad area of the left cerebral cortex . Transthoracic echocardiography was performed to determine the cause of the cerebral infarction, but no intracardiac defects were found. The patient was able to walk independently with a cane and was discharged 21 days after the surgery.