A 77-year-old man presented to our hospital with back and epigastric pain. His past medical history included spinal canal stenosis. At the previous hospital, computed tomography (CT) revealed a tumor in the pancreatic head close to the PV. Additionally, PV stenosis was observed near the hepatic hilum, which was not the location of the tumor and serpiginous collateral vessels appeared around the extrahepatic bile duct. Pancreatic head cancer was suspected, along with a vascular anomaly. The patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and surgical treatment.
The patient did not have jaundice or symptomatic cholangitis. A blood test revealed that the blood count, biochemical examination, and tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and DUPAN-2, were within the normal range, while carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), SPan-1, and carbohydrate antigen 125 were elevated (208 U/ml, 54.8 U/ml, and 45.9 U/ml, respectively). No diabetes mellitus was detected in blood tests.
An enhanced CT examination performed at our hospital revealed that the tumor in the pancreatic head was close to the PV without apparent direct invasion and the CTPV, which included two main collateral vessels and small vessels, existing around the hepatic hilum . The portal vein was obstructed in the hepatoduodenal ligament, where it was clearly separated from the tumor. Also, the CT images showed no signs of liver cirrhosis or portal hypertension in the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and splenic vein (SV). Hemangiomas and cysts were detected in the liver. There was no evidence of hepatic metastasis in the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Although a lung nodule of 6 mm in the middle right lobe was detected in the CT images, no other distant metastasis was found . Preoperative 18F fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed that the tumor in the pancreatic head had a maximum standardized uptake value of 6.46. Meanwhile, there was no marked uptake in the nodule in the right lung or any other body area .
A histological examination using endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration confirmed that the tumor was an adenocarcinoma. Staging laparoscopy was performed to determine the presence of micrometastasis in the abdominal cavity and value lavage cytology. As a result, no metastasis to the liver or in the peritoneal cavity was revealed. The intraperitoneal lavage cytology was negative. This patient was diagnosed with resectable PDAC based on these results, and we administered gemcitabine and S-1 for 6 weeks (two cycles) as neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The planned chemotherapy cycles were completed without any major adverse events, and the size of the pancreatic head cancer was slightly reduced (30 to 28 mm). However, the nodule in the right lung did not change in size. In the blood test, CA19-9 and Span-1 significantly declined (16.8 and 12.4 U/ml, respectively). To exclude the possibility that the lung nodule was a metastasis, we performed resection of the lung nodule prior to pancreatectomy. Lung tumor was histologically identified as nodule derived from pneumoconiosis. After neoadjuvant chemotherapy and confirmation that the pancreatic head cancer was resectable without any distant metastasis, we decided that pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic head cancer was an appropriate treatment for the patient, despite the associated high risk of venous bleeding and intestinal congestion.
Lymph node dissection in the hepatoduodenal ligament was preoperatively planned to be omitted due to the risk of venous bleeding and intestinal congestion. A bypass catheter made from heparinized hydrophilic polymer, the Anthron tube (Toray Industries, Tokyo, Japan), was also prepared for intestinal congestion associated with the transection of CTPV. The surgery was performed through a chevron incision. The CTPV was visible through the hepatoduodenal ligament . The CTPV was only seen on the proximal side of the SV confluence, and dilation of the SV and SMV was not obvious. The blood pressure of the vessels in the CTPV area seemed high in accordance with the degree of bleeding; however, no other area had typical findings of portal hypertension. The most common bleeding site during surgery was the small blood vessels related to CTPV around the head of the pancreas. As a result, dissection of the pancreatic head along the PV was possible without massive bleeding. We dissected the upper edge of the pancreatic head and preserved major collateral vessels in the hepatoduodenal ligament. The bile duct was cut at the level of the common bile duct (i.e., the upper edge of the pancreatic head). Cholecystectomy was performed separately after the pancreaticoduodenectomy. CTPV also appeared around the gallbladder, and cholecystectomy required careful manipulation . Reconstruction was routinely performed using a modified Child’s method, and the surgery resulted in no uncontrollable bleeding or venous intestinal congestion. We did not use the Anthron tube that had been prepared preoperatively during the operation. The surgical duration was 505 min, and the estimated intraoperative blood loss was 985 ml.
Microscopic examination of the pancreatic specimens confirmed that the tumor was completely resected with a sufficient surgical margin. Pathological findings also showed that the tumor was a mixed-type invasive ductal and anaplastic carcinoma. The tumor size was 18 × 16 × 15 mm and the total number of the dissected lymph nodes was fifty. Peri-pancreatic head lymph nodes and the peri-gastric lymph nodes included five metastases. Microscopically, lymphovascular and venous invasions were observed. In addition, the tumor invaded the anterior tissue of the pancreas. These were defined as T1N2M0, Stage III according to the 8th edition Tumor-Node-Metastasis staging system, which was developed by the Union for International Cancer Control. The patient was discharged on the 23rd postoperative day with an uneventful course.
Unfortunately, multiple liver metastases were observed in the CT 3 months after surgery. CTPV remained stable without new angiogenesis and disappearance in the hepatoduodenal ligament.