A 56 years old male from Parsa (district) in Nepal presented to emergency department with fever and altered conscious for the last 3 days. His sensorium was progressively worsening, and thus, he was admitted to intensive care unit (ICU) with a diagnosis of meningoencephalitis. The patient was intubated at ICU admission, on day seven he developed ventilator associated pneumonia. Klebsiella pneumoniae and Acinetobacter baumannii were isolated from the sputum sample. He was on meropenem, but the isolates were susceptible to colistin, tigecycline and amikacin solely (beta-lactam antibiotics, fluroquinolones, doxycycline, gentamicin and cotrimoxazole were resistant on phenotypic Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method). Hence, amikacin was started with addition of intravenous and nebulized colistin. Subsequently, vital signs improved with resolution of fever. However, on day 18, he was febrile once again with drop in blood pressure. Inotropic support was maintained and both echinocandins and tigecycline were added to the regimen.
Although blood and urine cultures grew Providencia species, sputum samples were sterile. Microscopic examination of urine revealed plenty of pus cells, few epithelial cells and no erythrocytes. Patient was at septic shock and he was diagnosed as meningoencephalitis with overlapping ventilator associated pneumonia and urinary tract infection.
The recovered Providencia isolates were resistant to most of the drugs including colistin (intrinsic resistance). Culture of blood and urine revealed gram negative bacilli with non-lactose fermenting colonies on MacConkey and CLED (Cystine Lactose Electrolyte Deficient) agar respectively. The organism fermented glucose, but could not utilize lactose and sucrose on sugar fermentation test. Sulphite indole motility test revealed motile indole positive organism. Citrate utilization and urea hydrolysis tests were positive. To confirm that the organism belongs to the tribe Proteeae of family Enterobacteriaceae, phenyl pyruvic acid test was performed which was found to be positive . On the basis of aforementioned phenotypic tests, Providencia species were identified. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was done by Kirby Bauer method according to CLSI (Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute) which revealed pan-drug resistant isolate (resistance to almost all drugs available in the laboratory like amoxycillin/ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, amikacin, gentamicin, meropenem, imipenem, erythromycin, clindamycin, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, cefoperazone-sulbactam, ampicillin-sulbactum, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, doxycyclin and since Providencia species belongs to tribe Proteeae of family Enterobacteriaceae, they are intrinsically resistant to colistin and tigecycline and therefore drug susceptibility testing is not recommended for this group of organisms).
To characterize the drug resistance pattern, phenotypic detection of ESBL and Modified Hodge test were done according to CLSI guideline . ESBLs were tested by combination disk method in which ceftazidime (CAZ) and ceftriaxone (CTX) alone and in combination with clavulanic acid (CA) (10 μg) were used. An increase in zone of inhibition of more than or equal to 5 mm for either antimicrobial agent in combination with CA versus its zone when tested alone were negative, but Modified Hodges test revealed carbapenamase producing bacteria . Subsequently, phenotypic detection of MBL, KPCs, AmpC and co-producer were tested according to CLSI guideline and all were negative. On the background of positive Modified Hodge test and negative ESBL, MBL, KPCs, AmpC and co-producer, OXA-48 drug resistance pattern was brought into action. We used blank disc method for this purpose according to A Tsakris et al. which revealed indentation of growth toward both EDTA and EDTA/PBA disc indicating production of OXA-48 carbapenamase. The isolates were transported to India, where they were confirmed as Providencia vermicola by VITEK MS, which use matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of- flight (MALDI-TOF) technology. Added to that, the resistance pattern of the isolated colonies was processed by Xpert Carba-R (Cepheid) assay, which detect blaOXA-48 gene and OXA48 drug resistance pattern was confirmed. The patient was kept under isolation. On 31th day of admission he died of septic shock and lack of other antibiotic option (intrinsic resistance to colistin and unavailability of ceftazidime+ avibactam or aztreonam +avibactam combination in both Nepal and India for testing in laboratory or for systemic use in patient).