A 72-year-old, female patient with advanced gastric cancer underwent staging laparoscopy for suspected peritoneal dissemination 10 months previously. The laparoscopic examination found a small nodule in the peritoneum of the right diaphragm, which was excised for analysis using laparoscopic scissors. The peritoneal defect caused by the biopsy did not penetrate the diaphragm and was small enough (about 2 cm in diameter) not to require suturing or reinforcement . The slight bleeding that occurred after the excisional biopsy was successfully stopped using a soft-coagulation system (Valleylab™ FT10 SOFT COAG mode 60W, Fig. C). Microscopically the nodule was found to be a disseminated adenocarcinoma. Gastric adenocarcinoma cT4a(SE)N0M1(PER) cStageIVB was diagnosed based on the UICC–TNM classification, 8th edition.
The patient received S1, oxaliplatin, and nivolumab as first-line chemotherapy. After 11 courses of chemotherapy, she experienced a sudden onset of epigastric pain and visited the emergency department. She had mild tenderness around the upper abdomen without any signs of peritonitis. She had no history of trauma. Laboratory tests found no specific abnormalities. A chest X-ray and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed prolapse of the small intestine into the thoracic cavity without ischemic changes. Based on these findings, acute diaphragmatic hernia without strangulation was diagnosed.
Emergency laparoscopy was performed. Intraoperatively, the small intestine was found to have herniated into the right thoracic cavity through a diaphragmatic defect corresponding to the site of the previous peritoneal biopsy. The peritoneal disseminated nodules had resolved, and there was no sign of a recurrence. The incarcerated small intestine was atraumatically repositioned into the abdominal cavity. As there were no ischemic changes, no resection was required. The diameter of the hernial orifice had expanded to approximately 4 cm and was closed using a non-absorbable, 3–0 barbed suture . The operative time was 70 min, and blood loss was minimal. The postoperative course was uneventful.