Sibling 1 (Person F on pedigree diagram in ) was a 63-year-old Caucasian male who presented to his family physician with symptoms of dizziness, headache, and unstable gait. Along with these symptoms, the patient complained of immediate memory loss, impairment of immediate recall, as well as slurred speech for several days. He denied any symptoms of nausea, vomiting, or visual loss. The patient had only a medical history that included gastroesophageal reflux disease, diabetes mellitus, inflammatory bowel syndrome, and arthritis. Other than a slight slurring of his speech, his physical exam was without overt abnormalities. He subsequently received a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evaluation, which revealed a mass in the left temporal lobe approximately measuring 4.6 × 3.6 × 4.5 cm. Another lesion was discovered in the left occipital lobe measuring 1.7 × 1.5 × 1.7 cm [Figure and ]. Histological examination of fresh tissue revealed a malignant hypercellular astrocytoma with microvascularization, necrosis, abnormal mitoses, and bizarre nuclei [Figure and ].
Consequently, neurosurgery was consulted and two days after having presented initially with his symptoms, the patient underwent a left awake pterional craniotomy with left anterior temporal lobectomy and resection of the left mesotemporal lobe with stealth navigation as well as placement of eight gliadel wafers. He was discharged two days later with no focal deficits. A month later, the patient returned to his physician complaining of headaches, speech alteration, and right sided weakness. The night before the onset of these new symptoms, the patient again had episodes of severe headaches. MRI was performed and showed increase in size of the two previously noted lesions. The patient underwent a repeat pterional craniotomy with resection of the tumor. The patient was discharged a week later with a walker. The patient died four months later.
Sibling 2 (Person D on pedigree diagram ) was an 81-year-old Caucasian male with a history significant for colorectal cancer, prostate cancer, and malignant melanoma. The patient presented to the emergency department after several days of headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and dehydration. The initial computed tomography (CT) in the emergency room revealed a brain mass. Subsequent MRI studies showed a large peripherally enhanced lesion in the right temporal lobe extending from the dural to the ventricular surface [Figure and ]. Given his extensive history with different types of malignancies, there was initial concern of metastatic disease. A few days later, the patient underwent a right stealth guided craniotomy and microsurgical debulking with microscope and the Cavitron ultrasonic surgical aspirator. Frozen sections were sent for further analysis. The remainder of the tumor was then debulked superiorly, laterally, and inferiorly. Postoperatively, there were no complications and the patient was discharged four days later. Sibling 2 refused further radiation or chemotherapy. He died a few months after surgery. Histopathological evaluation and cytogenetic analysis on specimens were performed [, Figure and ].