A 25-year-old Portuguese man with an unremarkable medical, social, family, and environmental history sustained a stab wound injury to his right preauricular region with a broken glass while he was sitting in a bar. Immediate profuse bleeding ensued. Provisory tamponade of the wound was achieved at the place of aggression by two off-duty doctors, who pressed a piece of clothing against the wound. The patient was initially transferred to a district hospital, where profuse arterial bleeding was observed by the general surgeon on call. A temporary compressive dressing was applied under local anesthesia. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to a tertiary hospital.
At admission in the emergency room, 2 hours after the injury, the patient was slightly diaphoretic and presented with slightly pale skin and mucosae. The patient’s left radial pulse was strong, regular, and had a frequency of 101 beats per minute. The patient presented with a pulsating lesion in the right preauricular region and mild weakness in the territory of the inferior buccal branch of the FN . The remaining territory of the FN presented no changes. Pin-prick and light touch sensibility in the head and neck did not present changes. There were no signs of dysfunction of the other cranial nerves. The patient’s arterial blood pressure measured in his left arm was 110/75 mmHg. His physical examination was otherwise unremarkable.
However, in the operating theater, after the compressive dressing was removed, a large arterial bleeding was noted. Immediately, the bleeding was tamponaded, and a preauricular incision was made just deep to the subcutaneous musculoaponeurotic system of the face to expose the parotid gland. This gland presented an opening through which a section of the posterior and lateral flanks of the ECA was identified. To avoid inadvertent injury to the FN, the superficial lobe of the parotid gland was dissected posteriorly to anteriorly, thus exposing the FN and its branches. No lesion of the FN was observed. To minimize arterial bleeding, the incision was extended into a right lateral cervicotomy to expose the ECA after its origin in the carotid triangle , and this vessel was temporarily clamped. At the same time, the superficial temporal and posterior auricular arteries were digitally compressed at the tragus and at the mastoid apex, respectively, by the surgeon’s assistant. The ECA was repaired deep to the FN with interrupted 6/0 nylon stitches.
The surgery took 7 hours in total. At the beginning of the surgery, the patient’s relevant blood test results were as follows: normal coagulation tests and blood sodium, potassium, and chloride; hemoglobin concentration of 7.2 g/dl (normal range 13.0–17.0 g/dl); hematocrit of 26.7% (normal range 40.0–50.0%); red blood cell count of 2.9 million/mm (normal range 4.4–5.9 million/mm); white blood cell count of 8500/mm (normal range 4.5–11.0 × 104/mm); normal differential leukocyte counts; and normal renal and liver function tests. The patient received 3 red blood cell units during surgery because of intraoperative anemia. No further blood transfusions were needed postoperatively. At the end of surgery, the patient presented with the following significant blood tests results: normal coagulation tests and blood sodium, potassium, and chloride; hemoglobin concentration of 10.5 g/dl (normal range 13.0–17.0 g/dl); normal differential leukocyte counts; hematocrit of 31.1% (normal range 40.0–50.0%); red blood cell count of 3.28 million/mm (normal range 4.4–5.9 million/mm); white blood cell count of 9600/mm (normal range 4.5–11.0 × 104/mm); neutrophilia (8,590/mm [normal range 2.0–8.5 × 104/mm]); and normal renal and liver function tests. In the postoperative period, the patient was transferred to an intensive care unit and was nasotracheally intubated and ventilated. On the second day after surgery, a computed tomographic (CT) scan of the head and neck revealed marked edema and copious liquid in the right cervical-facial spaces. This, in turn, exerted a mass effect over the airways, with almost complete obliteration at the soft palate level . For this reason, the patient was kept intubated for 8 days. On the third postoperative day, the patient developed a salivary fistula through the preauricular wound that was treated conservatively with the placement of a nasogastric tube, a nil by mouth regimen, and compressive dressings. On the seventh day after surgery, saliva emission through the wound ceased. Only then was the nasogastric tube removed and food intake reinstated. On the eighth postoperative day, a CT scan of the head and neck revealed that the airway swelling had largely subsided, and the patient was extubated. He has remained eupneic on atmospheric air ever since. On the ninth day of hospitalization, the patient was transferred to the plastic surgery department. His wounds healed well. Seven days afterward, he was discharged to home with no deficits in the territory innervated by the FN. The results of all blood tests performed at that time were within normal values. No serological or microbiological tests were done during the treatment of the patient.
Two years after surgery, at his last follow-up visit, the patient had an inconspicuous scar and presented with no motor deficits in the territory of the FN. He claimed to be happy with the functional and aesthetic outcomes.
To better understand the anatomical rationale of this uncommon clinical case, we dissected the preauricular region of six cadavers (two females and four males) previously injected at the base of the neck with red- and blue-colored latex solutions in the common carotid artery and internal jugular vein, respectively. Injected cadavers were maintained at 4 °C for at least 24 hours before dissections were performed. The cadavers had no history or evidence of prior surgery in the head and neck region. Cadaver age at the time of death was 76.83 ± 6.21 years (ranging from 67 to 86 years).
In all cadavers, there was a small triangular space between the two main branches of division of the FN in which the ECA was not covered by the FN. This triangle occurred just before the ECA divided into the maxillary and superficial temporal arteries. The triangle covered the anterior third to the anterior half of this segment of the ECA . The angle between the two main branches of the FN (temporofacial and cervicofacial trunks) was measured using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). This angle was 98.5 ± 17.5 degrees on the right side and 99.7 ± 17.2 degrees on the left side, being on average 99.1 ± 16.6 degrees .