We describe the case of an 11-month-old healthy male who was found crying by his parents after falling on a trampoline with a marker pen in his mouth . A small amount of bleeding was observed in the mouth, and there was no evidence of impaired consciousness or respiratory distress. A local dentist and an otolaryngologist initially examined the patient, and he was sent home as no specific findings were noted. Although the patient had not ingest anything orally, he developed swelling in the neck 3 h after the incident, and was taken to a regional general hospital.
Laryngoscopy showed no evidence of perforation in the oral cavity or posterior pharynx. However, a computed tomography (CT) scan showed significant emphysema extending from the cervix to the mediastinum, suggesting an injured airway , and the patient was immediately transferred to our tertiary hospital.
On admission, vital signs revealed a temperature of 38.8 ℃, blood pressure of 85/60 mm Hg, and a heart rate of 180 bpm. Hematology revealed a white blood cell count of 6800/mm3 and a C-reactive protein level of 4.7 mg/dL.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, where he was mechanically ventilated, and antibiotic therapy with ampicillin/sulbactam and clindamycin was initiated. On day 3 of admission, a chest X-ray showed an enlarged mediastinal shadow, and a CT scan revealed deep abscesses in the cervical and upper posterior mediastinum with pneumomediastinum . His respiratory status was stabilized and he was weaned from the ventilator and transferred to a general ward on day 8, but the fever recurred on the same day. A CT scan showed no improvement in the accumulating abscess, and pharyngoesophagography performed on day 10 revealed contrast leakage from the left pyriform sinus into the mediastinum . Then, the antibiotic therapy was changed to meropenem and vancomycin regimens.
Surgical drainage of the abscesses was performed on the same day. A 3 cm incision was made on the anterior neck's left side, and the superficial cervical muscles were dissected along the midline due to significant adhesions in the surrounding tissue. The dissection was performed on the left side at the deep level of the sternohyoid muscle and advanced in a cephalad direction along the posterior side of the internal carotid artery and the jugular vein until the abscess cavity was reached. The cavity was found to be continuous from the pharynx to the mediastinum with discharge of pus and saliva. Two low-pressure continuous 15 Fr suction drains were placed: one in the posterior mediastinum and the other close to the pyriform sinus .
The postoperative antibiotic therapy was deescalated to ampicillin–sulbactam again on the postoperative day (POD) 3 and continued until 2 weeks postoperatively. Although pharyngoesophagography showed significant contrast leakage from the perforation site, the amount of contrast descending into the posterior mediastinum gradually decreased by POD 7 owing to continuous low-pressure suctioning. Based on these findings, the patient was initiated on enteral nutrition through a nasogastric tube with great caution, albeit relatively late. A CT scan on POD 13 showed a reduced abscess cavity, and pharyngoesophagography performed on POD 20 revealed the formation of a fistula from the abscess cavity to the skin. Consequently, the suction drains were replaced with open Penrose drains. With minimal leakage, the patient was discharged on POD 31, and management with the Penrose drains and enteral nutrition through a nasogastric tube continued at home.
The Penrose drains were removed on POD 54 , and salivary leakage completely ceased on POD 111. Tube feeding was discontinued, and the patient began oral feeding on POD 117 . His oral intake status was unproblematic, and his development was satisfactory.