A 75-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency room because she had fainted several times. Her past medical history was relevant for a mitral valve replacement with a bi-leaflet prosthetic valve 3 years previously, that was anticoagulated with warfarin (2.5–3.5 constant international normalized ratio (INR)). She was also using flecainide 100 mg b.i.d. for the treatment of atrial extrasystoles that started 2 years before admission. She referred that for the last 2 weeks, she had been taking a concentrated Chinese herbal tea made of goji berries (GB) for the prevention of COVID-19, drinking 1–2 glasses per day; she was not receiving any other medications.
On initial evaluation, she was unresponsive; her blood pressure was 85/60 mmHg, with a respiratory rate of 20 rpm. She had been complaining of dizziness, nausea, and extreme fatigue two days before. Cardiac auscultation revealed a closing click at the apex, there were no audible murmurs, lungs were clear, and there was no oedema or other signs of congestion. There rest of the physical evaluation was within normal. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a very wide QRS complex tachycardia at a rate of 160 b.p.m. with a left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology and northwest axis deviation, accompanied by periodic bursts and a cyclical increase in the QRS amplitude with repeated sequences of 5, 7, and 9 beats with apparent P-wave-like deflection before each burst ( and ). Based on the patient’s history and the ECG findings, flecainide toxicity was suspected and 100 mEq of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate, 300 mg of IV amiodarone, and 2 g of magnesium sulfate were administered; this resulted in a 140 b.p.m. regular monomorphic wide QRS tachycardia and no discernible atrial activity . As the pulse remained feeble, a 200 J electrical cardioversion was delivered and resulted in sinus rhythm with immediate onset of an atypical atrial flutter with a very wide P wave, LBBB morphology, and prolonged QTc interval ( and ) and improvement in consciousness and haemodynamic status. Laboratory results were remarkable: aspartate aminotransferase 152 U/L (10—42 U/L), alanine aminotransferase 92 U/L (10–42 U/L), lactate 797 u/L, troponin 57.7 ng/mL, prothrombin time 77.4 s (9.9–12.3 s), Partial thromboplastin time 46.7 s (25.2–36 s), and INR 7.18, electrolyte levels and renal function were unremarkable. Due to elevated INR, a dose of 10 mg IV vitamin K was administered.
An echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular systolic function without segmental wall motion abnormalities, mild pulmonary hypertension, and left ventricular hypertrophy; mechanical valve showed no abnormalities. After 8 h, her mental status improved; control laboratories showed an INR of two. A repeated ECG showed an atypical flutter with narrow QRS associated with slow repolarization, QTc 530 ms and asymmetric T-wave inversion in the anterior wall ( and ). The patient was started on enoxaparin and was later bridged to warfarin. She was discharged home 48 h after admission with oral amiodarone 200 mg qd, warfarin dose was the same as before the Lycium barbarum (Goji) intake. A pre-discharge ECG showed sinus rhythm at a rate of 87 b.p.m., atrial extrasystoles, and resolution of all morphological patterns associated with flecainide toxicity ( and ); the patient was cited to the outpatient cardiology clinic 1 week after discharge from the hospital with a new INR determination for monitoring and adjustment of warfarin dose.