We present the case of a 6-month-old female, diagnosed with Larsen syndrome. She presented with progressive upper and lower limbs spasticity, flexed neck, and bilateral resistant developmental dysplasia of the hip since birth. History and physical exam revealed delayed developmental milestones with spasticity in upper and lower limbs. A whole exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous variant in the FLNB gene consistent with autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome.
A brain MRI was done and it didn't show any abnormalities. However, the cervical spine MRI revealed a deformity of the cervical spine causing significant cord compression (Shown in ). A dynamic neck x-ray was done and showed cervical kyphosis, and anterior wedging of C3 and C4 associated with instability (Shown in ). An ultrasound was also done to confirm the diagnosis. Other musculoskeletal findings include hind feet, congenital metatarsus (Primus) varus, ulnar deviated wrists, generalized joint hyperlaxity and muscular hypertonia.
Under general anesthesia and hyperextension of the neck. After the neck was prepped and draped, a right transverse incision at the level of C3 using lateral fluoroscopic image to identify level was performed. After subcutaneous tissue and platysma muscle dissection, the carotid artery sheath was identified and dissected to reach the cervical spine; where a small right angle was used to retract tissues including longus coil muscles. C3 was identified by lateral fluoroscopy as well as C2-3 and C3-4 disc space. The microscope was used to magnify the field and corpectomy was started using a size 1 high-speed drill and Kerrison punch. Then, the space between C2 and C3 was measured by a ruler. Iliac crest allograft was prepared according to the space measured. Three holes, titanium, and 1.5 mm locking plate were used. The middle hole was used to fix bone graft to the plate by 1.5 *8 mm screw. The iliac crest graft was fitted inside the space and a 1.5*10 mm screw was inserted in C2 and C4. After, irrigation, closure of platysma, subcutaneous and skin was performed. An Intraoperative X-ray was done showing properly placed iliac bone graft after C3 corpectomy and fusion C2–C4 with plate and screws and with correction of the kyphotic deformity (Shown in ).
The patient was placed on abduction brace (pavlik harness) and the brace was used for 3 months to prevent early collapse. A cervical spine x-ray was done 4 months after follow-up showing properly placed plate and screws over the body of C2 iliac bone graft and C4 (Shown in ). The patient had noticeable improvement in neck spasticity and position.