A 61-year-old female was brought to the emergency department after experiencing severe headache with abrupt onset, nausea, and vomiting. Clinical examination on arrival showed a drowsy patient (GCS 14), with neck stiffness, but no cranial nerve palsies or other neurological deficits (Hunt-Hess 2); her blood pressure was 190/110 mmHg. Other laboratory blood tests were within normal ranges.
Non-contrast head CT and CT angiography revealed subarachnoid and intraventricular hemorrhage (modified Fisher 4) and two saccular aneurysms, one located on the right supraclinoid ICA with peripheral calcifications, measuring 20 × 12 mm, the second on the left MCA bifurcation, 6 × 4 mm . Due to its displacement by the aneurysm, only retrospectively was the fenestration identified on the CTA (not shown). Due to a larger maximal diameter, a higher aspect ratio, and the presence of a bleb, the ICA aneurysm was considered the most likely culprit of the subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Catheter angiography was performed the next day on a biplane Siemens Artis Zee machine (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany); 3D rotational angiography revealed a right ICA fenestration located between the ophthalmic (OA) and posterior communicating artery (PCom). The proximal part of the fenestration harbored a large saccular aneurysm projecting superiorly with the neck engulfing the origin of the fenestration ; due to the favorable neck and geometry of the aneurysm, endovascular coil occlusion was chosen as a treatment option without balloon or stent assistance. The decision was taken to clip the MCA aneurysm at a later stage because of its wide neck and the necessity to perform stent-assisted coiling, requiring dual antiplatelet therapy.
With the patient under general anesthesia, a right femoral approach via a 6F sheath (Cordis Corporation, California, USA) was used to navigate a 6F Chaperon guiding-catheter (Microvention, Tustin, California) in the distal part of the cervical ICA, through which a straight-tipped PxSlim (Penumbra, Alameda, California) microcatheter was introduced into the aneurysm sac, followed by packing with 8 Penumbra 400 coils (Penumbra, Alameda, California) until almost complete obliteration was achieved assessed by Raymond-Roy occlusion classification as IIIb (,). All catheters were continuously flushed with saline and unfractioned heparin throughout the procedure. After introduction of the first coil, a bolus of 5,000 IU of unfractioned heparin was administered intravenously to prevent thromboembolic complications. An Angio-Seal (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) closure device was used for hemostasis.
There were no intraprocedural complications. The patient received 10 ml/h i.v. nimodipine during hospitalization and her clinical condition and neurological status improved in the following days. Follow-up CT at 24 h did not show additional complications. The patient was discharged 15 days later with mRS 1, with a slight disorientation.