A 31-year-old, previously healthy Caucasian Swiss man was admitted to our hospital because of progressive weakness of the legs and muscle cramping which had developed over the course of a few hours. His clinical examination revealed paraparesis without sensory loss. Otherwise, the physical findings were unremarkable; his blood pressure in particular was within the normal range (130/80 mmHg). Biochemical analysis showed severe hypokalemia (1.5 mmol/L; normal range, 3.6 to 4.5 mmol/L), hypophosphatemia (0.42 mmol/L; normal range, 0.87 to 1.45 mmol/L) and mild hypomagnesemia (0.65 mmol/L; normal, 0.7 to 1.1 mmol/L). His calcium level was initially moderately elevated (with normoalbuminemia). His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed no arrhythmias, but changes characteristic of hypokalemia with increased amplitude of the U-wave were observed. His creatine kinase (CK) level was elevated (3425 U/L; normal value, < 190 U/L), indicating rhabdomyolysis. His renal function was moderately impaired (plasma creatinine, 110 μmol/L; normal range, 70 to 105 μmol/L). There was no evidence of hyperthyroidism (thyroid-stimulating hormone level, 2.3 mU/L; normal range, 0.27 to 4.2 mU/L). His level of active renin (measured on his second day in the hospital) was slightly elevated (90.5 mU/L; normal range, 5 to 50 mU/L), and his aldosterone level was within the normal range (117.2 ng/L; normal range, 30 to 200 ng/L). His urine had a low density of 1.010 g/mL (normal range, 1.020 to 1.030 g/mL), pH8.0, and contained traces of protein. The initial arterial blood gas analysis showed slight respiratory alkalosis (pH7.47, partial pressure of CO2, 4.39 kPa; partial pressure of O2, 8.91 kPa; HCO3, 24 mmol/L and base excess 0.7 mmol/L). His initial family history was non-contributory.
The patient ate a regular European diet without alcohol abuse and took no drugs (apart from smoking cigarettes). He had consumed roughly one and a half packets of original Fisherman's Friend menthol eucalyptus lozenges (Lofthouse of Fleetwood Ltd., Maritime Street, Fleetwood Lancs, UK) daily for the past three months, which corresponds to an intake of 60 to 90 mg/day of glycyrrhizinic acid.
The patient was initially treated with parenteral and enteral potassium, spironolactone und indomethacin. Within 24 hours, his potassium level began to rise and his neurological symptoms disappeared. After three days, the patient was asymptomatic; at this point, his potassium level had increased to 2.9 mmol/L (normal range, 3.6 to 4.5 mmol/L).
At the first follow-up visit two months after he was discharged from our hospital (while taking aldactone 100 mg, no potassium or magnesium supplements and having consumed no licorice), the patient still had intermittent cramping without signs of paresis. His potassium level had again dropped to 2.6 mmol/L (normal range, 3.6 to 4.5 mmol/L), and his magnesium level was low (0.56 mmol/L; normal range, 0.7 to 1.1 mmol/L). Repeat urinalysis showed increased urinary loss of potassium and magnesium with very low calcium excretion. His secondary hyperaldosteronism was clearly more pronounced than at the time he first presented to our hospital, with elevated levels of active renin (287.8 mU/L; normal range, 5 to 50 mU/L) and aldosterone (917 ng/L; normal range, 30 to 200 ng/L) in blood testing. Morning cortisol and urinary cortisol excretion were within the normal range.
Under these circumstances, we considered a tubulopathy causing renal potassium loss. The biochemical constellation of normal renal function, hypokalemia and mild hypomagnesemia was suggestive of Gitelman's syndrome.
We continued treatment with a low dose of an aldosterone antagonist (first spironolactone, later epleronone 25 to 50 mg/day), the highest tolerated dose of magnesium (10 mmol daily) and potassium supplements. On this therapeutic regimen, stable hypokalemia (at around 2 mmol/L) could be established.
As an outpatient, our patient reported a few episodes of muscle weakness and gait disturbance which followed nights with moderately severe alcohol consumption. After these episodes disappeared when the patient refrained from drinking large amounts of alcohol, more severe hypokalemia developed a few months later. The patient admitted that he had begun drinking large amounts of lemon juice, in the form of either seven or eight freshly prepared lemons daily or by consuming a total of 1 L of pure lemon juice daily. Another episode of symptomatic hypokalemia requiring admission to our hospital as an in-patient was poorly understood but later history taking revealed that the patient, having experienced weakness, thirst and moderate weight loss, decided to replace fluid by drinking, for two days, 5 to 7 L of fluid daily, of which 4 L were consumed in the form of sugar-containing iced tea. This time muscle weakness had progressed from his legs to his upper extremities. Apart from hypokalemia (1.2 mmol/L), hypophosphatemia was more pronounced (0.26 mmol/L) despite a moderate rise in creatinine (to 158 μmol/L). His sodium level was 132 mmol/L, and his fasting glucose level was somewhat elevated (8.6 mmol/L).
The patient had progressive truncal weakness and finally presented with respiratory failure, necessitating temporary mechanical ventilation. At this point, extreme hypokalemia of 1.0 mmol/L was evident; his creatinine level was 206 μmol/L. For reasons of his own, the patient had started a new diet with restricted sodium intake. Two days after being weaned from assisted ventilation, the patient insisted on being discharged from our hospital. Four days later he had a potassium level of 2.6 mmol/L and a normal resting ECG reading, and a prolonged QTc time was found only during a bicycle exercise test, during which he showed a normal exercise performance of up to 150 W.