A Chinese girl presented at the Orthopedics Department of Beijing Children’s Hospital at 3 years old with progressive scoliosis for surgical treatments. Her mother did not have regular check-ups during pregnancy. She was born full term with an uneventful delivery. Her parents claimed to have a non-consanguineous marriage.
The girl had a short stature, and by the age of 14 years, her height was 125 cm (< third percentile) and she weighed 32 kg (< third percentile) . She had normal neurodevelopment and normal brain density. She had facial dysmorphism, including a flat face, ptosis, retrognathia and type III hypocalcified amelogenesis imperfecta . Both of her hands and feet had brachydactyly , and the little finger of the right hand had displayed joint contracture since 10 years old . She had moderate hearing impairment in both of her ears. An As-type tympanogram at 226 Hz indicated ossicular fixation . She had hyperopia and astigmatism since a young age. Optical coherence tomography of the optic disc showed a light optic disc color in both eyes and an elevated cup-to-disc ratio, which indicated optic nerve atrophy. The optic nerve fiber layer was thin and the macula was normal (Supplementary Fig. ). Radiography was performed at 3, 4, 5, 10, and 14 years old before surgeries. The first time she had radiography performed, a fuzzy atlantoaxial articular surface and irregular vertebral bodies of the thoracic spine were observed . Spinal scoliosis developed over time and kyphosis appeared. In addition, she also had decreased hearing, mild hypermetropia, and astigmatism. Echocardiography showed a wide inner diameter of the aortic sinus. Abdominal ultrasonography was normal. In addition, no submucosal cleft, high arched/vaulted palate, hyperlaxity/hypermobile joint or dislocation was noticed.
After obtaining informed consent, we isolated DNA from peripheral blood samples obtained from the patient and parents using the Gentra Puregene Blood Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). A whole exome library was captured by a SureSelect Human All Exon Kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Target regions were sequenced and aligned to the GRCh37/hg19 human reference sequence. Variants were annotated and filtered by TGex . Variants were classified following the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) standards and guidelines . A homozygous nonsense variant c.100G > T / p.Gly34* in SLC10A7 (NM_032128.4) was identified as putative pathogenic variant. Sanger sequencing confirmed the variant was inherited from both parents.
The patient had her first surgery at 3.5 years old. During surgery, the spine was attached with single-side rods by interconnectors and fixed above and below the curve by pedicle screws at the vertebral body of T9, T10, L3, and L4 . She underwent lengthening twice at 4.5 and 5.5 years old respectively, and each time she was lengthened by 0.5 cm. From then, she had an X-ray every year to monitor the growth of her spine and progression of her scoliosis. At the age of 10.2, scoliosis progressed severely where the proximal end of single-side rods located. Therefore, surgery was conducted to change the single-side rods to dual rods to which pedicle screws were fixed at T1, T2, T3, T5, T8, T11, T12, L2, and L3 at the left side, and at T1, T2, T4, T5, T10, T12, L2, and L3 at the right side . She received lengthening surgeries twice again at the ages of 11.2 and 12.2, lengthened by 0.8 cm and 0.6 cm respectively. Notably, the surgeons had difficulty during every lengthening session and the effect was limited. The last surgery of final definite in situ fusion was performed at the age of 14.2 . At the last follow-up, she had a Cobb angle of 16.3° and no implant-related complications.