A 16-year-old Cameroonian girl presented to our emergency service with an acute exacerbation of a mild and intermittent right iliac fossa (RIF) pain of 5 days’ duration associated with anorexia and nausea. Her last menstrual period was 2 weeks prior to consultation. Her menarche was at the age of 12 years and she had a menstrual flow of 3 to 4 days with a regular cycle of 28 to 30 days. She was neither sexually active nor had a history of dysmenorrhea, and the rest of her past history was unremarkable. There was no vomiting, obstipation, fever, abnormal vaginal discharges, or urinary tract symptoms. On clinical examination, she was anxious with pain quoted 6/10 according to the visual analog pain scale, tachycardic (pulse rate of 110 beats per minute), and afebrile (maximum temperature of 36.8 °C). Her body mass index (BMI) was 34.2 kg/m2 and waist circumference 101 cm. She had tenderness at the McBurney’s point, and positive Bloomberg, obturator, and psoas signs. The clinical presentation suggested a presumptive diagnosis of acute appendicitis.
A complete blood count (CBC) with differentials, C-reactive protein (CRP), and a urine analysis were normal, and her pregnancy test was negative. An abdominopelvic ultrasound scan revealed an edematous right ovary measuring 5.7×2.1×4.5 cm, in the canal of Nuck (clearly visible in real-time motion; Fig. ). We therefore concluded on the diagnosis of an incarcerated right inguinal hernia of the ovary. An urgent gynecological review was made and she was immediately prepared for surgery. The timeframe from diagnosis to surgery was approximately 2 hours and 30 minutes. An incarcerated, edematous, but viable right ovary was found intraoperatively in her canal of Nuck. Her right fallopian tube, her uterus, and left adnexa were macroscopically normal. Her left internal inguinal ring was intact and her appendix was not inflamed. A right inguinal herniorrhaphy using the Bassini technique was done and the deep inguinal ring reinforced. Her postoperative period was uneventful and there were no new complaints after 6 months of follow up.