A 9-year-old boy complained of malaise, just a few minutes after his first summer swim in the sea; soon after, he presented generalized urticaria, dyspnea, conjunctival hyperemia, blurred vision and faintness. When first aid arrived, since anaphylactic shock was suspected, intramuscular steroids, intravenous antihistamine and nebulized salbutamol were administered, with rapid improvement on the part of the patient. The only thing of note in the child’s medical history was allergy to dust mite, and no other allergies were reported. There was no evidence of any insect bite or drug ingestion; an hour before the swim, the child had eaten his usual breakfast, with hot chocolate. Apparently, there was not contact with fish during the swim. The child had never complained of similar symptoms before and had never had urticaria after contact with water, be it seawater or tap water. No familiarity for allergic disease or chronic urticaria was reported. The child was referred to the local Allergy Department and in order to identify the offender, skin tests and specific IgE assays were performed. In detail, they tested allergy to milk, due the history of milk intake before the appearance of symptoms, and to insect venom and fish, because of the possibility of contact with insects and fish during the bath; all the tests were negative. Although the patient developed no symptoms on contact with tap water, an aquagenic urticaria was suspected, but the specific test was negative. Finally, a cold urticaria was suspected but the cold stimulation test (CST) was negative too. Given the severity of the reaction, prophylactic antihistamine therapy was commenced, but in spite of this, throughout the summer the patient continued to develop wheals all over his body after every swim in the sea , even in places where there had been no direct contact between the skin and the water. The child then came to our attention, at the Burlo Garofalo Institute for Maternal and Child Health in Trieste (Italy), the referral centre for allergic diseases in the north-east of Italy. There, based on the child’s clinical history, a diagnosis of an atypical form of cold urticaria (ACU) was formulated. The specific diagnostic test of ACU involves keeping the lightly clothed patient in a cold room (at a temperature of 4 °C) for 30 min; in our case, it was avoided because of the past patient’s severe systemic reaction. In any case, the boy’s history was fairly characteristic enough to confirm the diagnosis of this rare and often unrecognised chronic physical urticaria: typical diagnostic features of ACU are in fact the appearance of wheals after exposure to various sources of cold (such as seawater at the beginning of summer), also in areas not directly in contact with water and the negativity of the CST. Antihistamine therapy was continued for the whole summer with fair control of symptoms and self-injectable epinephrine was prescribed but the child has never used it.