Our patient is a 53-year-old Hispanic male with a medical history of tobacco use, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and HTN who presented to the emergency department with hematuria and diarrhea for 4 days. He additionally complained of symptoms of chronic sinusitis and epistaxis that occurred all year round. His medications at home included tramadol, celecoxib, glipizide, metformin, lisinopril, and metoprolol. Physical examination was only remarkable for 1+ pitting edema in his lower extremities bilaterally and dental caries. There were no signs of photosensitivity, malar rash, oral ulcers, lymphadenopathy, pericarditis, or sinus involvement. On admission, the patient was found to have a creatinine of 8.04 mg/dL (reference range 0.70–1.3 mg/dL). His baseline creatinine was 0.9 mg/dL less than eight months ago. His urinalysis revealed gross and microscopic hematuria, with RBC >100/HPF, 3+ protein, and no casts. A CT abdomen/pelvis was performed on admission which was unremarkable for any signs of obstruction; however, it revealed fibrotic changes in the lower lung bases. The urine protein creatinine ratio (UPCR) was 19.2 g/mg and low serum albumin was 2.7 gm/dL (reference range 3.5–5.7 gm/dL). ANCA antibody was positive; however, all viral markers (hepatitis B, C, syphilis EIA, and HIV), complement C3 and C4 levels, and autoimmune antibody profiles (ANA, rheumatoid factor, anti-ds DNA antibody, and antiglomerular basement membrane antibody) were all negative or within normal limits. The patient had high titers of myeloperoxidase (MPO) antibody. All other infectious workups such as urine culture and blood cultures were negative. CT of the lungs revealed interval worsening of fibrotic changes with honeycombing predominantly in the lung bases, suggesting usual interstitial pneumonia. Pulmonology was consulted and reported this was consistent with ANCA-associated lung involvement. Renal ultrasound showed normal kidney size with no hydronephrosis.
Renal biopsy was then performed which revealed membranous pattern glomerulonephritis with diffuse cellular crescents. There was moderate interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy with focal segmental fibrinoid necrosis . Light microscopy revealed 50% of sampled glomeruli had active cellular crescents . Immunohistochemical staining for phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R), thrombospondin type 1 domain-containing 7A (THSD7A), and neural epidermal growth factor-like 1 were negative. Immunofluorescence revealed granular capillary wall and mesangial staining for IgA (3+) and IgG (3+) . All the other stains were negative. Electron microscopy revealed extracapillary hypercellularity and segmental thickening in the glomerular capillary basement membranes with severe effacement of podocyte foot processes. There was no significant mesangial hypercellularity. Global subepithelial immune-type electron-dense deposits were identified, consistent with a membranous pattern with occasional intramembranous deposits.
Throughout his stay, the patient's creatinine continued to rise for which intermittent hemodialysis was initiated. The patient was also started on pulse dose steroids followed by maintenance steroids and intravenous cyclophosphamide. The patient reported a resolution of hematuria after the initiation of steroids; however, patient remained dialysis-dependent. The patient was discharged in a stable condition and scheduled for follow-up with the outpatient nephrology clinic.