In October 2017, a 39-year-old woman was involved in a car accident reporting an open contaminated elbow fracture-dislocation characterised by severe olecranon and posterior distal humeral condyle bone loss . The soft tissue envelope was damaged with muscle and skin loss (IIIB Gustilo classification). Olecranon fracture was type IIIB, according to Mayo classification. She also reported ulnar nerve lesions with a complete ulnar deficit and elbow instability with an annular ligament lesion.
She had been initially referred to another hospital. She underwent damage control surgery for wound toilet, debridement, and unstable joint stabilisation by using a Kirschner wire (K-wire) for ulnar-trochlear temporary arthrodesis. Finally, a bridging external fixation (EF) was placed to provide bone stability .
The patient refused amputation as a therapeutic solution based on the bone exposure and severe soft tissue damage.
Ten days after the trauma, she was referred to our hospital. Declaration of Helsinki and guidelines for good clinical practice were applied, and the patient expressed informed consent for surgery, photos, and clinical follow-up.
She underwent surgical exploration, toilet, and debridement . Wound exploration showed an ulnar nerve gap of over 7 cm. Cultural examinations were performed along with broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy.
Three days later, a third multidisciplinary plastic and orthopaedic surgical approach was performed: necrotic tissues including bone were debrided once again. Metaphyseal ulnar fracture was reduced by resorbable cerclage wiring, and the triceps tendon, completely detached, was sutured into the remaining part of the olecranon, covering the posterior distal humeral bone loss to obtain stability. The K-wire was removed, and EF was replaced by a dynamic external fixator (DEF) to allow elbow flexion-extension movement. Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) therapy was applied. Specific antibiotic and hyperbaric therapies were started.
Therefore, the reconstructive orthoplastic strategy was planned. The aims were firstly to provide an adequate soft tissue and skin coverage, and secondly to pursue elbow stability and bone gap restoration, in order to restore articular joint surface and mobility.
One month after the trauma, the infection was eradicated. She underwent plastic surgery to provide soft tissue coverage with a musculocutaneous latissimus dorsi rotational flap. Ulnar nerve gap was restored by harvesting the homolateral sural nerve, which was duplicated and end-to-end sutured, covered by the amniotic membrane .
Hand and wrist splints were placed to prevent claw hand. Elbow active flexion-extension ROM was from 40 to 90° and ten days after surgery prono-supination was unlocked. An intensive rehabilitative physio-kinetic therapy program was started.
The patient underwent periodic clinical and functional examinations as an outpatient to assess flap taking, scar quality, articular finger wrist and elbow mobility, muscle tropism, musculotendinous retraction, and finger position. A constant improvement was registered.
Magnetotherapy was prescribed 8 hours/day for eight weeks.
Electromyography was conducted three months after trauma, showing ulnar axonotmesis.
Six months after the trauma, the second step of elbow reconstruction was started. At that time, elbow active ROM in flexion-extension was 30–100° and ROM in pronosupination 30–40° . The quick disabilities of the arm, shoulder, and hand (DASH) questionnaire was performed, the result was 93.2 points. Due to young age, total elbow replacement was avoided.
Considering the olecranon bone loss, we planned the reconstructive phase by using a cadaver elbow allograft, proper sized with “ad hoc” harvesting by National Tissue Bank. Moreover, bilateral elbow CT was performed in view of the bone reconstruction surgery, 3D model production, and bone loss specific evaluation.
Being the percentage of olecranon articular surface bone loss was greater than 70%, a contralateral elbow was used to obtain affordable measures for ad hoc harvesting. For this purpose, we employed mirroring technique, producing a mirroring virtual model of the healthy elbow.
CT files of each elbow were imported on the software syngo.via Frontier (Siemens). We performed a semi-automatic segmentation by threshold and we exported each elbow 3D model for 3D printing .
The healthy left elbow model was imported on the software Meshmixer (Autodesk) in order to use “mirror” function. Thus, the mirror image was produced with respect to the sagittal plane of the left elbow, i.e., obtaining a healthy copy of the right elbow .
We printed the thermoplastic right elbow and mirrored elbow 3D models by 3D printer Fortus (250mc Stratasys) ( and ).
The duration of printing was 18.53 hours. The material cost was € 58.69.
The olecranon bone loss on VR was quantified by importing 3D models on software MiniMagics (Materialise) and Meshmixer. We chose landmarks to measure the healthy elbow 3D model .
Finally, right injured 3D model and mirrored healthy 3D model were imported on the Meshmixer software to perform “Boolean subtraction,” thus producing a new 3D model subtracting the right injured 3D model from the mirrored healthy 3D model. The two geometries were overlapped by using landmarks on coronoid . It allowed to obtain a proximal ulnar bone loss 3D model, in order to visualise the gap and to plan the graft surgery. shows the bone loss measurement.
To avoid bone infection prior to performing the orthopaedic surgery, DEF was removed ten months after the trauma: during forearm flexion movements over arm and biceps contraction, the ulna was still anteriorly dislocated. The articulated brace was positioned, granting flexion-extension and prono-supination.
Three months later, with the choice of proper cadaveric allograft from the National Tissue Bank and the request of second check for the harvesting phase, the patient refused the treatment, reporting no limitations in no-articulated brace activities.
Thirteen months after the trauma, at clinical examination, she presented intrinsic hand muscle ipotrophy, good finger recovery, and elbow active ROM: flexion-extension reached 10–120°, prono-supination was 40–55°. X-rays were performed, showing complete healing of the fractures. Quick DASH score resulted 75 points and Broberg-Morrey score resulted 33.5 points.
The flap showed a steady morphological resemblance to the surrounding tissues, as it progressively integrated into the receiving area. There was an edema regression and a scar enhancement; despite that, the scar remained hypertrophic in the proximal forearm.
The patient about two years after the trauma underwent a flap-defatting revision surgery.
Eighteen months from the DEF removal and almost two and a half years from the trauma, she did not complain of elbow instability, lifting low weights easily and resuming daily activities. Elbow active ROM in flexion-extension reached 5–130° and pronosupination was 45–60°. Elbow radiographs showed initial humeroulnar signs of arthrosis and modicum proximal radioulnar diastasis .
Quick DASH Score calculation was 93.2. Broberg-Morrey score was performed with a result of 71.5.