A 60 year-old male smoker was admitted in our teaching hospital for fever, intense asthenia, diffuse pain, myalgia, headache, oliguria and jaundice of one week’s duration. This patient was living in a rural area of Reunion Island and was working daily barefoot in sugar cane fields. At physical examination, cutaneous icterus and acute confusion (without neurological focal signs nor clinical evidence of meningitis) were noted. No hemorrhagic signs were reported at admission. Biological tests revealed severe acute renal failure (serum creatinine level = 1022 μmol/L) with hyponatremia at 126 mmol/l, thrombocytopenia (43000/mm3), leucocytosis (19600/mm3), mild cytolysis (alanine aminotransferase = 213 IU/L) and severe jaundice (serum bilirubin > 500 μmol/L). Slight rhabdomyolysis was also noticed (creatin phosphokinase = 4475 IU/l). Prothrombin ratio (PT) was in the normal range (70%) whereas activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was prolonged (59 s, normal range: 30–41 s). Fibrinogen level was high (8.9 g/l, normal range: 2–4 g/l). Lactate dehydrogenase and haptoglobin blood levels were normal; no schistocytes were seen on peripheral blood film. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed evidence of meningoencephalitis (white blood cells = 20/mm3, protein level = 2.5 g/L). Chest radiography was normal. Ultrasonography of liver and kidneys was unremarkable. Three hemocultures performed during fever peaks were negative. Severe leptospirosis with muscular, neurological, liver, renal and hematological involvement was suspected and quickly confirmed by positive blood and urine PCR. Leptospirosis serology (ELISA) was positive, concomitantly with IgM against Leptospira interrogans serovar icterohaemorrhagiae strain Verdun (titer = 1/800). Leptospirosis polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in CSF was negative. Hepatitis A, B, C and E, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and dengue serologies were negative whereas chikungunya serology was positive for IgG without IgM indicating a past infection (blood chikungunya PCR was negative). Rickettsia conorii, rickettsia typhi and coxiella burnetii serologies were also negative.Given the initial severity, the patient was monitored in the Intensive Care Unit where neurological worsening lead to tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation for 7 days. Parenteral amoxicillin (1 g t.i.d.) was administered for 10 days. Acute renal failure was treated with continuous veno-venous hemofiltration during 11 days, followed by 3 additional conventional hemodialysis sessions . Of note, a first episode of intestinal bleeding requiring the first red blood cell transfusion was reported on day 7. This bleeding complication unfortunately was unexplored. Because of reduced mobility, a persistent inflammatory state and the presence of a central dialysis catheter in the right femoral vein, low-dose prophylactic subcutaneous unfractionated heparin sodium (2500 units bid) was used between day 9 and day 14. Leptospirosis was considered to be effectively treated: recovery of renal function occurred after 21 days in hospital with a serum creatinine level slowly and constantly decreased to 329 μmol/l upon discharge. A slow improvement of serum liver profile was also observed (serum bilirubin at discharge = 44 μmol/L).
At day 15 , while thrombocytopenia had been completely resolved (259000/mm3), a second large lower gastrointestinal bleed with acute anemia was noticed (hemoglobin = 7 g/dL) requiring a red blood cell transfusion of 7 units. Standard hemostasis tests were normal. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was normal whereas colonoscopy revealed rectitis with pseudo-tumoral appearance of the recto-sigmoid junction . Pathological examination of rectal biopsies found no neoplastic change, but rather a nonspecific mucosal thickening, acute ulceration together with blue oval structures inside mucinous exudate containing eccentric nuclei, suggesting the presence of Entamoeba histolytica trophozoites . Attempted careful detection of cysts or trophozoites on saline-wet mount was negative in three consecutive samples of stools. However, indirect hemagglutination amebiasis serology was strongly positive (titer = 1/2048) suggestive of invasive pseudo-tumoral colitis i.e. an ameboma. Oral metronidazole (500 t.i.d) was introduced for 10 days followed by luminal decontamination with tibroquinol-tiliquinol association (Intetrix®, the only luminal amebicide available in France). Repeated liver ultrasonography did not find evidence of an amebic abscess. Of note, blood cytomegalovirus (CMV) PCR was found positive (3.03 log) with positive IgG serology, without IgM. CMV immunostaining of colic biopsies did not reveal evidence of viral colitis. This mild blood CMV reactivation was considered as an asymptomatic reactivation and no antiviral therapy was started.One month after discharge, a repeat endoscopy revealed slight and healing ulceration of the middle rectum . No new gastrointestinal bleeding was reported. The serum creatinine level was still decreasing to 156 μmol/L. Three months after discharge, the patient’s overall condition significantly improved and he felt able to work again. Physical examination was unremarkable. Serum creatinine was 111 μmol/L and amoebic serology titer was also decreasing (1/640). Serum liver enzymes were normal. Blood PCR for leptospirosis and CMV became negative.