A 57-year-old Asian man was diagnosed as lung adenocarcinoma with several bone metastasis (non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), T1cN0M1c stage IVB, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR): negative, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK): negative, programmed death ligand 1 (PDL1) tumor proportion score: 5%, Fig. a-c), and he was initially treated with cisplatin and pemetrexed for 4 months, followed by 2nd line pembrolizumab treatment (200 mg/3 weeks). Although his lung tumor decreased in size, levels of s-Cr gradually increased (from 0.88 mg/dl to 1.49 mg/dl) and the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) decreased (from 69.9 ml/min/1.73m2 to 39.3 ml/min/1.73m2) within 5 months after the pembrolizumab initiation . According to the Keytruda® prescribing information , pembrolizumab was discontinued, and he was admitted to our hospital. At admission, his height was 172.8 cm, his body weight was 88.1 kg, and his body mass index was 29.4 kg/m2. His body temperature was 36.4 °C, his pulse was 67 per minute, and his blood pressure was 144/92 mmHg. There were no episodes of hypotension at home or office visit. Electrocardiogram and computed tomography (CT) analyses denied arrhythmia, myocarditis or pericarditis, which could influence renal perfusion. There was no elevation in the C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. Despite the increase in s-Cr levels, serum cystatin C (s-cystatin C) levels were within the normal range (0.81 mg/L). 24-h creatinine clearance (Ccr) was 62.8 ml/min and urine creatinine was 1.8 g/day. Antinuclear and antineutrophil antibodies were negative. Urinalysis showed neither hematuria nor proteinuria nor an increase in urinary β2-microglobulin (β2MG) and N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase (NAG) levels. Gallium-67 scintigraphy showed no uptake in the kidneys. A renal biopsy was performed, which revealed neither glomerular nor tubulointerstitial abnormalities , thus denying pembrolizumab-induced tubulointerstitial nephritis and glomerulonephritis.
Retrospective evaluations revealed that the patient had developed asymptomatic hyperthyroidism with anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (23 IU/mL) and anti-TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) (6.31 U/l) 3 months after the initiation of pembrolizumab, which was followed by asymptomatic hypothyroidism without adrenal insufficiency . In summary, we diagnosed the patient with pembrolizumab-induced painless thyroiditis. Since the increase in s-Cr levels paralleled the decline in free T4 (fT4) levels, we suspected an association between hypothyroidism and increased s-Cr levels. Levothyroxine at a dose of 25 μg daily was prescribed and gradually increased. Levothyroxine treatment improved thyroid function tests as well as s-Cr levels, while the levels of s-cystatin C were elevated. 24-h Ccr after the improvement of increased s-Cr levels (s-Cr: 1.00 mg/dl, eGFR: 61.5 ml/min/1.73m2) was 50.7 ml/min and urine creatinine was 1.11 g/day. Without any abnormalities on renal histology in renal biopsy or any signs of other causes of renal dysfunction, such as hypotension and cargiological abnormalities, we concluded that the increased s-Cr levels were most likely caused by the rapid decline of thyroid function during the transition from hyperthyroidism into hypothyroidism induced by pembrolizumab. Pembrolizumab was resumed, and the patient’s thyroid and renal function remained normal .