We have obtained a written informed consent from the patient and her family for the analysis of the EEG data and publication of this case report.
An 88-year-old woman (height, 150 cm; weight, 40 kg) was conservatively treated for multiple myeloma and diabetes mellitus for approximately 20 years. One day, she suffered from stomachache and subsequently consulted her family doctor. She was diagnosed with sigmoid volvulus and received endoscopic treatment to release the volvulus. She recovered after the treatment, but abdominal pain reoccurred after 3 days. The attending physician diagnosed the patient with bowel perforation caused by the endoscopic treatment and resulting in sepsis. Thus, she underwent emergency Hartmann surgery.
Upon admission to the operating room, she manifested septic shock; her blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, and her heart rate was 100 beats per minute, with noradrenaline administration (0.3 μg/kg/min). Nevertheless, verbal communication was possible and the Glasgow Coma Scale was E3V4M6. Furthermore, we monitored the following variables continuously during anesthesia: electrocardiogram, pulse oximetry, end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration, direct arterial blood pressure, central venous pressure, body temperature (esophagus), and urinary output. EEG was monitored and recorded using a BSM monitor TM (NIHON KOHDEN, Tokyo, Japan) throughout the anesthesia period. Before anesthesia induction, the patient’s bispectral index (BIS) was 30, while her EEG displayed slow waves without burst and suppression . Anesthesia was induced by intravenously injecting ketamine (20 mg) and rocuronium bromide (40 mg). We used ketamine (1 mg/kg/h), propofol (1–2 mg/kg/h), fentanyl (total dose, 200 μg), and rocuronium bromide to maintain general anesthesia as a total intravenous administration of anesthesia (TIVA). The anesthesia record is shown in Fig. a. The EEG waves, 95% spectral edge frequency (SEF95), and suppression ratio (SR) values at anesthetic induction, during surgery, and at the end of the surgery are shown in Fig. b–d, respectively. The stored EEG was retrospectively analyzed using the BIMTUS 2 software TM (KISSEI COMTEC, Tokyo, Japan). We extracted a sample frequency of 128 Hz with the BIMTUS 2 software TM. 3-min EEG frequency analysis at anesthetic induction, during surgery, and at the end of the surgery is shown in Fig. b–d, respectively. EEG predominantly consists of slow-wave components without burst and suppression throughout the surgery. The relative slow-wave ratio [spectral power (0.5–8 Hz)/spectral power (0.5–30 Hz)] from before anesthesia induction to the end of surgery was 95.1%, whereas the relative alpha frequency ratio [spectral power (8–13 Hz)/spectral power (0.5–30 Hz)] was only 2.4% .
Although the patient received minimum amounts of intraoperative anesthetic drugs, she remained immobile and unconscious intraoperatively with BIS values of 30 to 40. She was then admitted to the intensive care unit with tracheal intubation and received ventilator management and continuous hemodiafiltration. After tracheal extubation, she developed postoperative delirium. Nonetheless, her cognitive dysfunction improved as her systemic condition recovered on postoperative day 5.