A 59-year-old male presented with a 6-month history of progressive chest pain on mild exertion, in the setting of a chronic coronary syndrome. He had a history of hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, and ischaemic heart disease with coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) 15 years ago in Syria. He also had PCI of native left circumflex (LCx) artery to left main stem (LMS) 2 years and PCI of LIMA-LAD anastomosis 1 year prior to his current presentation, in Egypt.
He was haemodynamically stable. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm with inverted T-waves inferolaterally (see ).
Despite optimization of anti-ischaemic medications i.e. Bisoprolol 2.5 mg once a day (OD), Isosorbide mononitrate 75 mg OD, and Ranolazine 750 mg twice a day, to maximum tolerated doses, the patient complained of persistent Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) class three angina and thus scheduled for invasive angiography.
Coronary angiography revealed a dominant right coronary artery (RCA) with ostial CTO and the mid to distal vessel filling from epicardial collaterals originating from the conus branch. The saphenous vein graft to the RCA was occluded. The previous LMS stent was widely patent. This stented segment extended to the distal LCx jailing the obtuse marginal system. There was a CTO of the proximal to mid LCx stent with bridging collaterals filling the distal artery. The LAD was occluded at its ostium. Left internal mammary artery-LAD was widely patent (see ). The previous LIMA-LAD anastomosis stent had a CTO with severe in-stent restenosis (ISR; see ). The distal LAD was filled from bridging collaterals.
The overall impression was severe three-vessel coronary artery disease with occluded LAD beyond the LIMA insertion. The patient was admitted for further investigations.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated moderate-severe impairment of left ventricle (LV) function with extensive regional wall motion abnormalities (RWMAs; see Video 1).
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was in keeping with ischaemic cardiomyopathy. It confirmed a mildly dilated LV with moderate impairment, ejection fraction (EF) of 36%, and RWMAs with areas of dyskinesis and wall thinning (see Video 2). The RCA territory was considered non-viable with 75% late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) of the basal and mid-inferior, inferoseptal and inferolateral segments. The basal anterior and anteroseptal segments supplied by the LAD were fully viable whereas the mid-anteroseptum and apical septum had 50% LGE with only partial viability. The basal and mid-anterolateral walls had 25% LGE with potential viability of the LCx territory (see ).
The consensus at the heart team meeting was to perform PCI of the LIMA-LAD in-stent CTO. Japanese-CTO score was 2. The procedure strategy involved targeting the lesion via the LIMA graft, for which a left radial artery approach, using a 6-Fr sheath was adopted. The LIMA graft was cannulated with a Williams guide catheter with additional support from a GuideLiner (Teleflex). The lesion was initially approached using a Fielder XT-A (Asahi) wire with assistance of a Caravel (Asahi) microcatheter. The wire was then exchanged for a Confianza Pro 12 (Asahi) to puncture the proximal cap. We then switched over to a Turnpike LP (Teleflex) that was brought right up to the proximal cap and exchanged the Confianza Pro for a Pilot 150 wire (Abbott Vascular). This facilitated distal cap penetration and advancement of the Turnpike LP to the distal LAD. The Pilot 150 was switched to a balanced middle-weight wire (Abbott Vascular). Pre-dilatation of the lesion was performed using a 1.2 Mini Trek (Abbott Vascular) coronary dilatation catheter, followed by a 2.0 Mini Trek (Abbott Vascular), 2.5 NC Euphora (Medtronic) and finally 3.0 NC Euphora (Medtronic). At this stage, we opted for DCB angioplasty and used a 3.0 × 30 mm SeQuent Please (B Braun) that was inflated for 1 min. The angiographic result was very pleasing with thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI)-3 flow in the distal LAD (see ).
The final pictures showed a proximal dissection of the LIMA likely from GuideLiner induced trauma but with evidence of TIMI-3 flow (see ). The patient remained haemodynamically stable throughout the procedure. He was discharged home the following day on dual antiplatelet therapy i.e. Aspirin and Clopidogrel for 6 months.
No angina was reported on follow-up review at 3 months. However, repeat TTE at that stage did not show any improvement in the LVEF. A check angiogram of the LIMA graft at 6 months showed good run-off and the dissection had healed.