A 57-year-old man with metastatic high-grade clear cell RCC presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with complaints of diarrhea and poor oral intake, and was found to have AKI on laboratory analysis. The patient had been diagnosed with localized left-sided high-grade clear cell RCC 5 years prior, for which he underwent nephrectomy. His disease subsequently recurred to the bones, lungs, bilateral adrenal glands, lymph nodes, and brain necessitating stereotactic brain radiosurgery and bilateral pleural catheter placement for malignant pleural effusion drainage. At presentation, he was on third-line combination therapy with lenvatinib (oral TKI) and everolimus (oral mTOR inhibitor). He had previously progressed on a 4-month course of first-line therapy with pembrolizumab (ICI) plus axitinib (oral TKI), which was discontinued 6 months prior to presentation, and a 3-month course of second-line cabozantinib (oral TKI) monotherapy, which was discontinued 3 months prior to presentation . His other past medical history included a diagnosis of hypertension that was controlled with amlodipine 10 mg daily and carvedilol 6.25 mg q 12 h. He also had a history of hypothyroidism that was treated with levothyroxine 150 mcg daily.
His pertinent physical exam findings included decreased bibasilar breath sounds with well-positioned pleural catheters and 2+ bilateral pitting pedal edema. He was started on empiric antibiotics and intravenous (IV) fluids. Laboratory results were notable for a serum creatinine (Cr) of 2.28 mg/dl (201.6 μmol/L) from a baseline serum creatinine of 0.96 mg/dl (84.88 μmol/L), or AKI stage 2 (Cr 2.0–2.9 times baseline) by Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) criteria . He had an albumin level of 2.0 g/dl (20 g/L); normal range, 3.5–5.5 g/dl (35-55 g/L). His urinalysis revealed a specific gravity of 1.023, protein ≥ 500 mg/dl, 1 white blood cell/high power field (HPF), 0 red blood cell/HPF, and 1 hyaline cast. A 24-h urine collection revealed 2.85 g of protein. A non-contrast CT scan confirmed colitis and, notably, decreased tumor size of his metastatic disease . Due to his near-nephrotic range proteinuria, serologies were sent and found to be negative for anti-glomerular basement membrane, anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-nuclear antibodies, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Complement levels were also normal.
The differential diagnosis causing his AKI was broad due to his complicated medical history and clinical presentation and included acute tubular necrosis (ATN) secondary to colitis, infection, TKI or mTOR therapy, thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) secondary to TKI therapy, AIN secondary to antibiotics or ICI therapy, and/or GN secondary ICI therapy or cancer. With supportive management, his kidney function continued to deteriorate, and the patient agreed to undergo a kidney biopsy. Light microscopy revealed enlarged glomeruli with subtle basement membrane spikes on silver stain, without mesangial or endocapillary hypercellularity, fibrinoid necrosis, or hyaline thrombi. Mild arterial and arteriolar sclerosis, and mild acute tubular epithelial injury were also present. By immunofluorescence microscopy, there was global granular capillary loop staining for immunoglobulin (Ig) G and C3, as well as kappa and lambda light chain. There was no significant staining for IgA, IgM, or C1q. Electron microscopy (EM) revealed glomerular basement membrane thickening with associated subepithelial electron-dense deposits. Rare segmental mesangial and subendothelial deposits were also present . A diagnosis of secondary MN was favored due to the presence of subendothelial deposits that are only seen in cases of secondary MN. Staining for antibodies to phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) and thrombospondin type-1 domain-containing 7A (THSD7A) were both negative . Though the patient had evidence of tumor regression on therapy, a diagnosis of paraneoplastic MN remained a possibility; however, continued RCC therapy for treatment of possible paraneoplastic MN was not an option due to the patients declining renal function. Due to the patient’s history of ICI therapy, we suspected that the patient may be presenting with late-onset ICI-associated MN from his first-line therapy with pembrolizumab.
After discussing the biopsy results with the patient and the possibility that he may be presenting with late-onset ICI-associated MN from his prior RCC therapy, the patient consented to therapy with rituximab (1 g IV, day 1), a monoclonal antibody targeting CD20 on B cells. He tolerated the therapy and had no adverse issues associated with rituximab. His serum Cr stabilized and improved to Cr 2.64 mg/dl (233.43 μmol/L) at discharge from a peak Cr 3.83 mg/dl (338.57 μmol/L). Two weeks after discharge, his follow-up laboratory results showed a Cr 1.50 mg/dl (132.63 μmol/L) with a serum albumin of 2.7 g/dl (27 g/L) and a urine protein-to-creatinine ratio of 3.15 g/g. He received his second dose of rituximab (1 g IV, day 14) and was concurrently restarted on lenvatinib and everolimus. Five months after his ED presentation, he ultimately succumbed to complications from his metastatic RCC.