Following a 1-year period of frequent episodes of headaches, neck pain and progressive coordination and balancing problems, a 12-year-old right-handed boy (LD) was admitted to hospital. Medical history consisted of repeated falls with a brief loss of consciousness at the age of 2 years. A neurological and cardiological work-up including repeat EEG (electroencephalography) and ECG (electrocardiogram) revealed no abnormalities. Growth and developmental milestones were reported normal. He was born at term after normal gestation and labor and there had been no perinatal or postnatal problems. His scholastic achievements had always been above average levels and there was no familial history of developmental disorder or learning disability. Both his parents and two brothers (14 and 16 years old) were healthy.
The neurological examination on admission revealed mild hypotonia, dysmetria (finger-to-nose test) and balancing problems (Romberg test). No speech or language problems were observed but in-depth linguistic assessments were not performed. MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) of the brain showed a tumoral mass lesion in the fourth ventricle extending to the foramen magnum, invading the vermis and cerebellar parenchyma bilaterally and exerting mass effect on the tentorium, pons and cerebellum . The third and lateral ventricles were enlarged due to secondary obstructive hydrocephalus. A ventricular drain was installed and the tumor was removed following a surgical incision from the inion to C7 and of the vermis of 3 centimetres. Subtotal tumor resection was achieved because of tumoral invasion in the brainstem. Anatomopathological examination disclosed a medulloblastoma (grade IV).
Early postoperative MRI of the brain revealed subtotal tumor resection with tumoral residue located posteriorly right to the resection cavity, cranial to the vermis. Remission of the hydrocephalus was observed. However, postoperative sequelae included tissue damage at the level of both caudate nuclei, moderate dilation of the 4th ventricle, involvement of the cerebellar peduncles with a slight extension towards the corpora quadrigemina at the level of the inferior colliculi . Reduction of ventricular enlargement was found as well. In the first 4 days after surgery, the patient adequately produced only a few words (e.g. ‘yes’, ‘mother’) and some short sentences (‘I have to pee’, ‘I know that’). Behavioral initiation was markedly reduced. Drip food was given as oral intake was impossible because of insufficient oral control and sialorrhea.
Clinical neurological examination showed asymmetric peripheral muscle weakness (more severe at the right side than at the left side), but the peripheral reflexes were symmetrically preserved and cranial nerves were unimpaired. Ataxia, hypotonia, dysmetria and akinesia were found. He developed a general state of apathy during the first days after surgery.
Due to leakage of cerebrospinal fluid at the insertion point of the drain and increased hydrocephalus, a new external drain was installed in combination with a ventriculostomy 2 weeks after surgery. The drain was removed one week later. On repeat CT 1 month after surgery (7/10) the ventricular volumes had diminished.
At day 5, he developed akinetic mutism. Auditory comprehension for daily conversation seemed intact since he succeeded to accurately answer yes/no questions in a non-verbal but slightly delayed way using his hands. He had marked difficulties moving his mouth, tongue and eyelids on request (voluntary movements) although automatic movements were carried out flawlessly (e.g. when swallowing or during spontaneous eye-blinking). He could not produce any sounds on command but when coughing or laughing, phonation was clearly audible. Marked presence of automatico-voluntary dissociations clearly indicated buccolabiolingual and eyelid apraxia. A bilateral paresis of the trochlear nerve (right > left) was present and a right paresis of the abducens nerve induced diplopia. After 1 week postsurgery, speech therapy was started to practice orofacial movements and to initiate speech. Under the guidance of the speech therapist peroral food was slowly built up successfully 2 weeks after surgery. Physiotherapy was started which resulted in increased movements of the arms and legs. Ataxia, hypotonia and akinesia were still present at 3 weeks postsurgery.
Aside from apathy, he displayed emotional instability, infantile behavior and he was extremely frustrated and unhappy not being able to speak. A psychiatric evaluation three weeks after surgery confirmed that frustration occurred secondary to mutism.
Four weeks after surgery the boy gradually started to speak again. Spontaneous output was severely adynamic (few words/sentences) at week four but became more fluent in the following weeks. The patient spoke with a clear dental articulatory setting: all alveolar sounds (/t/, /d/, /n/ and /l/) were consistently pronounced with the tongue tip against or between the teeth. In addition, the patient had a falsetto voice quality with an average fundamental frequency of 490 Hz. The patient was able to lower his voice on command, but this sounded forced and unnatural. Speech was further characterized by the prolongation of speech sounds (e.g. ‘kammmm’ instead of ‘kam’ (comb)), the devoicing of consonants (e.g. ‘pank’ instead of ‘bank’ (bank), mostly in initial position), hypernasality and self-corrections. In addition, speech tempo was relatively slow (2.5 syllables per second). This is significantly slower than in a reference sample of adult male and female speech in Verhoeven et al. in which articulation rate amounted to 4.23 syllables per second. The speaker’s speech rhythm was quantified by means of the pairwise variability index (PVI) proposed by Ling et al. . This index is based on measurements of vowel duration (vocalic PVI) and the duration of the intervocalic intervals (intervocalic PVI). In this patient, the vocalic PVI amounted to 33.4: this is considerably lower than 65.5, which is the reference value for Dutch suggested in Grabe and Low . However, PVI is between that of French (43.5) and that of Spanish (29.7). This indicates that the patient’s speech rhythm is more syllable-timed than the Dutch stress-timing and this confirms the overall auditory impression of staccato speech.
Aside from staccato speech, none of the typical signs of (ataxic) dysarthria such as distorted vowels, imprecise consonants, excess and equal stress, and irregular articulatory breakdown were observed. By marked contrast, typical characteristics of apraxia of speech (AoS) were found including articulatory groping and segmentation. Formal investigation of motor speech by means of the Diagnostic Instrument Apraxia of Speech (DIAS) was performed at six weeks postsurgery. The DIAS consists of a set of eight tasks that measure the typical characteristics of AoS . The tasks include: performance of buccofacial movements (on command, after imitation), repetition of consonants and vowels, repetition of sequential and alternating sequences (diadochokinesis) and repetition of words (non-compounds, compounds, with/without consonant clusters). If three or more characteristics (Ca) are present, AoS is diagnosed. In this patient deviant speech features included a much worser performance for alternating sequences than for sequential sequences (Ca3), articulatory groping (Ca4), initiation problems (Ca5), syllable segmentations (Ca6), cluster segmentations (Ca7), and an articulation complexity effect (Ca8). As six out of the eight typical features were met, AoS was diagnosed . Although buccolabiolingual praxis had improved, apraxia was still formally diagnosed by means of the DIAS ; articulatory groping was observed and the performance of articulatory movements improved when imitating (see Table ).
Additional linguistic and cognitive assessments were carried out at 6 weeks postsurgery on the basis of the ScreeLing , the Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (CELF) , the Boston Naming Test-NL (BNT) [, ] and verbal fluency tasks (phonological, semantic fluency) . The ScreeLing revealed normal phonological (24/24, cut-off 19) and semantic functions (21/24 cut-off 19) while syntax (18/24, cut-off 19) was impaired. The CELF yielded defective results on all five indexes (receptive language index: percentile 8.1, expressive language index: percentile 6.3, language content index: percentile 1.6, language form index: percentile 5.5, language memory index: percentile: 0.4). Visual confrontation naming (BNT: 38/60, z = −2.22) and verbal fluency (phonological: z = −2.90, semantic: z = −3.10) were also impaired (see Table for detailed results). In summary, linguistic test results indicated a general language production/perception impairment (CELF, indexes 1–4) with prominent wordfinding difficulties (BNT) and syntactic impairments (ScreeLing). In addition, he presented verbal working memory deficits (CELF, index 5) and verbal executive dysfunctions (verbal fluency).
Although the right hemiparesis improved, the boy was bounded to a wheelchair. Hypotonia, ataxia and diplopia persisted. Affective/behavioral symptoms diminished but overall frontal behavioral disinhibition with infantile features (continuously laughing, (falsetto voice), interdental articulatory setting) were still present 6 weeks after surgery. The infantile behavior decreased when the family was not present in the room.
A grade IV medulloblastoma was treated by means of a program of radiotherapy (boost of 30.6Gy in 17 extra fractions of 1.8 Gy) and a preventive program of craniospinal radiotherapy (23.4Gy in 13 fractions of 1.8Gy). During the radiotherapy concomitant chemotherapy was given (Vincristine 1.5 mg/mt 1×/week * six cycli). During the entire period of radio and chemotherapy patient suffered from frequent headaches, nausea and infections which made extensive cognitive assessment impossible.
He was admitted to a rehabilitation center in between the four cycli of chemotherapy where he entered a multidisciplinary therapy program (speech therapy, physiotherapy, ergotherapy). Clinical neurological investigations at 6 months postsurgery showed almost symmetrical strength with remission of the right hemiparesis. The patient started walking again but ataxia remained. Speech and language improved but slowed speech, articulatory groping, segmentation and wordfinding difficulties were still observed. No formal language tests were performed. He spoke with a normal tonal voice but the falsetto voice reappeared occasionally. After 8 months planned neurocognitive examinations were cancelled because of regrowth of the tumor.