A 26-year old man presented to the emergency department at Hamad Medical Corporation (HMC) in Doha, Qatar, with a three-day history of severe colicy epigastric and right upper quadrant abdominal pain, radiating to the back, associated with two episodes of vomiting and constipation. This was his first time to have such pain. He had past surgical history of open appendectomy during adolescence and was currently on oral medications for sciatica (prednisolone 5 mg BID for one-week, Naproxen 225 mg BID and Gabapentin 300 mg daily). Otherwise, he had no comorbidities, and the other systemic review was unremarkable. No recent travel or interaction with sick contacts was mentioned at the initial encounter at the emergency department.
The patient had normal vital signs. Abdominal examination revealed severe epigastric and right upper abdomen tenderness. Otherwise his examination was unremarkable at that time. Initial labs including CBC, complete metabolic panel were within normal range. Imaging including abdomen and chest x-rays, and CT angiogram abdomen were normal; however, US abdomen showed gallbladder sludge but with no signs of cholecystitis. Hence the patient was admitted by the surgical team with an initial diagnosis of possible persistent biliary colic.
During the night of admission day (day 0), the patient was still having severe colicy pain that required high doses of opioids, paracetamol and NSAIDs. Repeat set of all labs were undertaken and due to the colicy nature and persistent severe pain, a CT with oral contrast was done to exclude proximal bowel obstruction that might not have shown on the previous CT with IV contrast. The CT was normal, and the labs showed slightly rising transaminases (AST 94 IU, ALT 95 IU). The patient was kept nil per oral, on pain medications with IV hydration and a repeat set of labs were ordered to be done in 8 hours (early morning of day 1). During that time, the patient started to develop, for the first time, a few vesicles on the chest wall, his liver enzymes were rising (AST 375 IU, ALT 263 IU), and other labs were normal. When questioned specifically about having contact with someone with similar vesicular rash, the patient reported that one of his roommates had such eruption one week ago and did not seek medical advice as it improved on its own. The patient also did not remember having chickenpox during his childhood.
The diagnosis of VZV hepatitis was immediately considered and the medical team was involved. Full hepatitis work up was undertaken on this admission day 1 during which the patient was still having severe pain, the rash progressed, and liver enzymes were rapidly rising. Viral panel came out to be positive for VZV PCR, but other (metabolic, toxicology, viral) work ups for hepatitis were negative. Thus, acyclovir was started by the infectious disease team. On day 2, the patient was shifted to the ICU as he was developing confusion, high INR, DIC and multiorgan failure that progressed rapidly despite all supportive measures. The patient died on day 3. illustrates the sequence of events.