A 4-year-old male patient reported to the outpatient department of Jaipur Dental College with complaint of pain in all teeth since 15 days. Pain was severe, generalized and continuous, associated with swelling in right side of the face. A positive history of recurrent fever after every 3 days since 2 months, accompanied with lethargy and progressive weight loss, was reported by parent.
He was a healthy and well-nourished child at birth without any contributory past medical, dental and family history.
On general physical examination patient was conscious to time, place and person and responded to his mother only. His height and weight was 80 cm and 08 kg respectively [normal range (91-104 cm) and (13-24 kg) respectively] which was less than the normal, this showed the child to be undernourished. He had thin extremities, prominent ribs and pot-shaped belly.
The vital signs were within normal limits. Conjunctiva, oral mucosa and nails showed pallor with yellowish discoloration of sclera, with no signs of clubbing and cyanosis.
He had no pitting pedal edema with only slight enlargement of liver and spleen.
The axillary, inguinal and submandibular lymph nodes were palpable, about 2 to 3 in number, round to oval in shape measuring approximately 1 to 3 × 1 to 2 cms in size. They were firm, tender and slightly mobile. Skin showed multiple papules on the chest, upper abdomen and right thigh measuring 0.1 × 0.1 mm in size. Hairs were thin, spare and golden brown in color and no seborrheic dermatitis was present. Nails showed horizontal brown line near nail bed.
Extraoral examination revealed brachycephalic, frontal bossing with straight profile and incompetent lips.
Oral hygiene was very poor with fetid odor. The oral mucosa appeared to be pale. The floor of mouth showed greenish yellow pseudomembrane obscuring the alveolar ridge and labial vestibule, loose teeth, along with hyperplasia of gingiva in relation to 41, palate showed similar lesion with hyperplasia of the palatal gingiva which was scrappable and tender on palpation . He had a mixed dentition (11, 51, 53, 21, 63, 73, 75, 83, 85) showing precocious eruption of permanent incisors. Periodontal status of the patient was poor with mobility and recession in maxillary centrals and mandibular canines.
With the parents consent, the child was subjected for the hematological and radiographic investigations. The occlusal radiograph showed generalized bone loss giving a floating tooth appearance. There was slight radiolucency with well-defined cortical borders in relation to 85 and 75 with the absence of permanent tooth buds .
Anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral skull views showed multiple radiolucencies in the skull vault measuring approximately 0.5 to 1 × 0.5 to 1 cm, which had smooth well-defined punched out margins, with hypoplasia of the mandible. Similar lesions were present in the pelvic bone and spine .
Hematological values were within normal limits except the Hb% (5.2) which was critically reduced. SGOT (54 IU/ ml) and SGPT (42 IU/ml) were slightly elevated.
Blood smear report showed anisopoikilocytosis, hypochromic, micro- and macrocytes along with tear drop cells without presence of any immature cells.
The histopathological report showed normal cells with numerous eosinophils and histiocytes and numerous chronic inflammatory cells and candidal hyphae .
Based on the histological and radiographic features a final diagnosis of Langerhans cell histiocyosis (LCH) with multiorgan involvement was given along with anemia and superimposed candidiasis.
The patient was admitted to the hospital and immediate treatment was started. After 3 days slight improvement was seen in the Hb% (9.3) but platelet count (0.28 lac/cumm) was severely decreased and appearance of multiple purpuric spots seen all over the body, measuring 1 × 1 mm in size (approximately). There was increase in the pedal edema in the right feet and blotting of stomach .
The bone marrow aspiration report showed normocellular partially diluted marrow showing mild erythroid hyperplasia.
He did not respond to the treatment and succumbed to death after 10 days of his first visit who reported in a terminal stage of LCH with multiorgan involvement.