A 57-year-old female presented with gross hematuria. She underwent distal gastrectomy and ovarian resection for gastric cancer and bilateral ovarian metastases 11 years ago, with a pathological diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Adjuvant therapy with an oral fluoropyrimidine (S-1) was followed for about 1 year, but sigmoid colon metastasis was subsequently found. Five years prior to the embolization, she underwent sigmoid colon resection and received adjuvant S-1 therapy for one year. Three years after that, due to right extraperitoneal recurrence in the right pelvic wall, she underwent ileocecal resection with concomitant right ureter resection, right urethra-bladder anastomosis, partial rectal resection, and hysterectomy. Adjuvant therapy with S-1 plus docetaxel has been ongoing for 10 months. However, a recent computed tomography (CT) revealed a narrowed sigmoid colon due to peritoneal dissemination. As a result, a colostomy was created, and the patient's hematuria worsened after the operation. Subsequent CT imaging showed a massive hematoma in the right ureter and bladder, along with right hydronephrosis in the noncontrast phase . Pseudoaneurysms were detected around the right ureter in the arterial dominant phase and in the volume-rendered image .
Right femoral artery catheterization was performed under local anesthesia using the Seldinger technique. A 3-Fr diagnostic catheter (Hook type; Medikit; Tokyo, Japan; 65 cm) was inserted through a 3-Fr sheath and placed at the right renal artery. Renal arteriography showed the ureteral branch , and a 2.2/2.4-Fr microcatheter (Carnelian Marvel; Tokai Medical; Aichi, Japan; 135 cm) was advanced in the branch. The arteriography demonstrated multiple tiny pseudoaneurysms . Gelatin sponge particles were made by pumping it back and forth about 20 times using two syringes attached on a three-way stopcock . The particles with size distribution of mainly < 1 mm were used for the embolization. Postprocedural angiography revealed the disappearance of the pseudoaneurysms. Subsequently, right internal iliac arteriography was performed. Although aneurysms or extravasation were not clearly seen, the iliolumbar artery ran near the abovementioned aneurysms and was embolized using the gelatin sponge particles as well. The patient was discharged without any complications 10 days after the embolization. One month after the embolization, follow-up contrast-enhanced CT indicated no aneurysms or hematoma in the ureter and the bladder. However, her bone metastases and peritoneal dissemination were exacerbated, and her disease condition was uncontrollable. She died 5 weeks after the embolization.