A 15-year-old Japanese girl was referred to our hospital because of a 2-month history of a painful mass in the dominant right thenar region. She had no history of acute injury and had not participated in any sports activity. An examination of the thenar region revealed that it was swollen and well circumscribed, and a firm mass was palpable. Minimal local tenderness and warmth were noted. Her thumb movement was slightly restricted, with pain. Her laboratory findings, including white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level, were normal.
Radiographs of the hand showed well-demarcated calcification or ossification just volar to the carpals; there was no suspicion of a previous bone injury or periosteal reaction. Ultrasound revealed a lesion with a firm surface. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass within the thenar eminence with peripheral edema.
An incisional biopsy was performed for a definitive diagnosis. Histopathologically, most of the mass comprised immature fibroblastic tissue with a mild degree of mitotic activity, and some osteoid was also observed . The combination of histopathological and radiological findings revealed a distinct “zonal pattern”: The innermost portion of the mass comprised fibroblastic tissue; the intermediate zone comprised ill-defined trabeculae and/or osteoid; and the periphery comprised calcification and mature lamellar bone. On the basis of these histopathological findings, a diagnosis of myositis ossificans was made.
The patient’s pain persisted and occurred spontaneously, and the prognosis of the firm mass was unfavorable. We decided to perform a marginal resection after radiographically confirming the maturation of the lesion without accompanying destructive growth. Radiography showed that the superficial thenar muscles (the flexor pollicis brevis and its superficial head as well as the abductor pollicis brevis) remained intact; however, deeper structures such as the opponens pollicis and the deep head of the flexor pollicis brevis were completely occupied by the myositis ossificans. Both the adductor pollicis muscle and the flexor pollicis longus tendon were clearly separate from the lesion. The resected specimen was well circumscribed and showed a distinct zonal pattern of myositis ossificans characterized by the presence of fibroblastic tissue with chronic inflammatory cells, osteoid, mature lamellar bone and surrounding muscle.
The patient was treated with a splint post-operatively. At the 7-month follow-up examination, the patient was asymptomatic and exhibited normal function and a full range of motion of all digits of the hand, particularly thumb flexion, abduction and apposition. The surgical procedure produced a good outcome, as evaluated with the disability/symptom score of the Japanese Society for Surgery of the Hand version of the Disability of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand questionnaire ; that is, 52.5 points pre-operatively and 7.8 points at follow-up.