A 28-year-old woman presented from jail to the emergency department with headache, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and watery, bilious diarrhoea for 2 weeks. She also reported substernal chest pain that wrapped around her right chest and radiated down her left arm as well as tingling of her left face. Her chest pain was associated with dyspnoea. Her history was significant for multiple psychiatric and behavioural disorders including intentional FB ingestion as well as self-inflicting injuries. Incidences included admissions for swallowing pins, needles, and soda can tops, inserting FBs in an abdominal surgical incision 1 month ago leading to abscess formation and requiring irrigation and debridement, and witnessed stabbing of hypodermic needle in the left internal jugular vein about a year ago requiring retrieval of the needle by interventional radiology.
In the emergency room, her blood pressure was 135/98 mmHg, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, pulse rate was 134 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 97%. She was afebrile with temperature of 99.1 F (37.3°C). Her physical exam was significant for normal heart sounds, tenderness to the left upper quadrant and two healing wounds with granulation tissue in the right lower quadrant. Because the patient reported concerning chest pain, cardiac enzymes were ordered. Troponin T was 0.797 ng/mL (normal range, 0.00–00.04 ng/mL), creatinine kinase-MB (CK-MB) was 21.6 ng/mL (normal range, <5.0 ng/mL), and total was creatinine kinase (CK) 437 U/L (normal range, 22–195 U/L).
The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with inferolateral T-wave inversions. Chest X-ray showed a linear density in the mediastinal area concerning for a FB . A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed and revealed a 2 cm × 2 cm left atrial mass that appeared attached to the septum without obstructive physiology , a mildly enlarged left atrium, preserved ejection fraction of 60%, and normal right heart size and function. The mass was concerning for a left atrial myxoma.
A cardiothoracic surgical consultation recommended the removal of the left atrial mass based on symptoms and risk of embolization. In the context of symptoms and elevated cardiac enzymes, a pre-operative diagnostic coronary angiography was performed. The angiogram showed normal coronaries but also showed a 5 cm long linear finding in the mediastinal area . During the surgery, the left atrial mass was visualized. As the surgeons resected the mass, a hypodermic needle was exposed. It appeared to be attached to the roof of the left atrium and surrounded by fibrotic tissue. Surgical pathology described the specimen as tan-grey with areas of pinpoint haemorrhage, and it was identified as an organizing thrombus with focal basophilic debris and 5 cm hypodermic needle.
Her post-operative course was uneventful, and she was discharged 3 days later.