The index patient was 28-year-old Caucasian man, with a history of stunted growth, bone fractures, hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis. He had first sought medical attention at age 25 when he presented with renal colic and was diagnosed with kidney stones and nephrocalcinosis.
He complained of muscle and bone aches, polyuria and polydipsia. Physical examination revealed postural hypotension, dehydration and several keloids after minor injuries. Medullary sponge disease was excluded by an intravenous pyelogram and a computed tomography. Blood tests showed mild hypernatremia, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, markedly elevated plasma renin and aldosterone, mild hypophosphatemia, hypercalcemia and normal renal function . Spot urine samples were consistently alkaline with mild (1+) proteinuria and low specific gravity. Urine biochemistry revealed sodium wasting, accounting for dehydration and postural hypotension, potassium wasting, increased fractional excretion (FE) of uric acid (17%), increased FE of phosphorous (14–24%) and hypercalciuria. The ratio of tubular maximum reabsorption of phosphate over glomerular filtration rate (TmP/GFR) was consistently below normal range. Serum creatine phosphokinase and lactic dehydrogenase were normal. Urine protein was increased (0.5 g/day) and comprised mostly albumin. Urine b2-microglobulin was slightly elevated. PTH levels were at the lower normal limit, 25-OH-Vitamin-D was low, 1–25-(OH)2-Vitamin-D was elevated and urine cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) was low. A bone biopsy showed reduced volume of cortical and trabecular bone and increased osteoid, compatible with osteomalacia and osteopenia.
A water deprivation test revealed partial nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Urine acidification was intact and glycosuria was absent. Eye examination was unremarkable.
Summarizing the main clinical features observed in the proband, included: 1) Salt wasting causing hypotension, hyperladosteronism, hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Metabolic alkalosis was accompanied by elevated urine calcium and chloride levels similar to those found in Bartter’s syndrome; 2) phosphaturia and hypophosphatemia leading to elevated calcitriol and osteomalacia; 3) hypercalcemia due to increased calcitriol synthesis leading to hypercalciuria, lithiasis and nephrocalcinosis; 4) partial nephrogenic diabetes insipidus attributed to nephrocalcinosis, hypercalcemia and hypokalemia; 5) albuminuria and LMWP; 6) hypouricemia, hyperuricosuria and hyperoxaluria.
Based on the above considerations the proband was treated with potassium and phosphorous (1 g/day) supplements orally, that were well tolerated. Three years later a second bone biopsy showed marked improvement in bone pathology. The body weight increased from 53kgr to 63kgr, physical stamina had improved, musculoskeletal pains, kidney colics and hypercalciuria had resolved, and electrolyte abnormalities had waned off. A new ultrasound showed stabilization of nephrocalcinosis and absence of kidney stones. More importantly, his everyday life improved after treatment.
In the differential diagnosis we considered phosphaturic syndromes such as hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria. Due to the presence of proteinuria, Dent disease was also a consideration, although b2-microglobulin was marginally elevated in the initial work up. However, it was substantially increased 3 years later (5 times the upper normal limit). Targeted mutation analysis did not reveal any mutations in the chloride voltage-gated channel 5(CLCN5), the sodium-hydrogen exchanger regulatory factor (NHERF1) and the solute carrier family 34 member-1 (SLC34A1) and member-3, (SLC34A3). A syndrome of elevated serum phosphatonins was excluded based on the elevated calcitriol levels.
Four years after admission he developed nephrotic range proteinuria (4 g/day) and the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) progressively declined to 65 ml/min/1.73m2. At this point, phosphate and potassium supplements were withdrawn. A renal biopsy revealed a FSGS pattern of injury, mild interstitial fibrosis and interstitial calcium deposits with rupture of tubular basement membranes (TBMs). Electron microscopy showed focal fusion of podocyte foot processes and marked thickening of TBMs . Institution of an angiotensin receptor blocker, improved proteinuria and stabilized renal function for some years. However currently, i.e., fourteen years after initial presentation, proteinuria and eGFR have reached 3 g/day and 30 ml/min/1.73m2 respectively.
To resolve the conundrum and clarify the underlying pathophysiology, we obtained written informed consent from all family members and proceeded to perform whole exome sequencing (WES), along with clinical and laboratory examination. This analysis identified the c.1893C > A variant in the exon 18 of the OCRL gene, (Asp631Glu, rs754567476) as a potential cause for the disease phenotype. Next, we verified the mutation by Sanger sequencing and genotyped all family members (12 out of 14) except the two newborn proband’s twin sons. The Asp631Glu mutation, was segregated with the disease in this family ; the two hemizygous males, presented phosphaturia and LMWP, whereas the two female carriers presented only mild phosphaturia. A computational assessment using the VarSome software, showed that the Asp631Glu variation is classified as likely pathogenic (Class 4 based on the ACMG classification), when considering the co-segregation with the disease in the family.
In order to explain the Bartter-like phenotype we also searched for relevant mutations. This search revealed only two calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) variations a) a homozygous common polymorphism (c.2986G > T, Ala986Ser, rs1801725, ACMG class-1) that has not been associated with Bartter-5 and b) a heterozygous rare (1/135.882) variation (c.2878C > T, Pro970Ser, rs1352202616, ACMG class-3). Three out of 4 family members with the Pro970Ser variant presented a deregulation of calcium metabolism in the form of hypercalcemia, and/or hypercalciuria . However, this finding is obscured by the fact that they also carried the Asp631Glu OCRL mutation, which is also associated with hypercalciuria and hypercalcemia too.