A 64-year-old woman with a 14-year history of diabetes developed 2 months of confusion and apathy. She could not recall recent events, got lost in her residence, and had difficulty in recognizing her family members. She had insomnia, delusion, intermittent paraphasia, and difficulty in word comprehension. Her activities of daily living declined, but without urinary or fecal incontinence. She denied alcohol abuse or any form of malnutrition.
On admission, the patient's initial vitals were within normal parameters, temperature of 36.6 °C, heart rate of 65 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 19 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 141/58 mmHg. On neurologic examinations, she was alert but apathetic, with hypomimia and mild bradyphrenia. Her spontaneous word count decreased, and she had difficulty in communicating. She was disorientated to time and place and her family members. She had distractibility but could follow commands to complete simple actions such as closing her eyes or raising her limbs. She had difficulty in the oculomotor examination and could not complete the head impulse test, visual gaze, and visual pursuit. She showed non-persistent horizontal gaze-evoked nystagmus without obvious ophthalmoplegia and asymmetric eye position. Her bilateral faces were symmetrical, and she did not show hearing or swallowing disorder. She could walk independently but slowly and showed no apparent ataxia or gait unsteadiness. She had almost normal strength and tone in her extremities, normal reflexes, and plantar flexor responses. Her sensation was intact. Examinations identified no involuntary movement or obvious dysmetria. Her serum tests including complete blood count, serum chemistry and lipids profile, liver function tests, hypercoagulability studies, D-dimer levels were normal. She had a slightly elevated blood glucose level (7.2 mmol/L, reference range 2.5–4.5 mmol/L). Her chest X-ray and electrocardiogram examination were normal.
Based on these manifestations, metabolic or toxic encephalopathy and immune-mediated encephalitis were initially considered. Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders and autoimmune encephalitis were preferentially suspected. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was then conducted. MRI showed T2 hyperintensities involving the dorsolateral medulla oblongata, tegmentum of the pons, vermis of the cerebellum, periaqueductal region, and the bilateral mammillary bodies . There was no contrast enhancement lesions. These imaging findings raised the suspicion of WE. Further probing of the patient's history revealed that she had experienced transient hypoglycemia due to insulin overdose 2 months earlier. She was then treated with glucose intravenously in a local hospital. Her hypoglycemia improved rapidly; however, several days after glucose treatment, she developed altered mental status. Considering that excessive glucose intake increases the demand for thiamine, this treatment might lead to thiamine deficiency, a presumptive clinical diagnosis of WE was made. A high dose of thiamine was administered empirically. Thiamine hydrochloride (500 mg) dissolved in 100 mL of saline was administered intravenously every 8 h for 3 consecutive days, followed by 250 mg for 5 days and 100 mg for 5 days. Her clinical condition improved rapidly. The gaze-evoked nystagmus was diminished 3 days after treatment. About one week later, the apathy and confusion improved. She could identify her family members and communicate using simple language. Her memory improved gradually. There was no side-effect or unexpected event during the thiamine treatment. She got an almost complete recovery after 2 weeks of treatment, and was discharged home with a slow tapering regimen of oral thiamine, starting at a dosage of 60 mg per day. Last follow-up 9 months after the onset revealed no clinical manifestations.