A 33-year-old man was hospitalized with episodic headache for more than 4 years.
Four years ago, the patient had a sudden headache without obvious inducement, presenting dull pain radiating to the left shoulder, lasting for about 10 h each time, accompanied by nausea and vomiting, which could be relieved after rest, without any symptoms such as disturbance of consciousness, unstable walking, and numbness of limbs.
The patient was in good health prior to the present illness.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
The patient's neurological examination was normal and other physical examination showed no abnormalities.
Tumor marker examination showed that cancer antigen 125 was 336.20 U/mL (normal range ≤ 35 U/mL), and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 13414.00 U/mL (normal range ≤ 37 U/mL).
Head and neck computed tomography angiography showed a massive soft tissue mass at the left paraspinal level of 1-2, with a clear boundary . The mass penetrated inward through the foramen magnum into the spinal canal of the cranio-cervical junction to the front of the cervical spinal cord . The artery supplying blood to the tumor was tortuous . On a contrast-enhanced scan, the lesion size was 4.0 cm × 4.7 cm × 3.4 cm (anterior and posterior diameter × left and right diameter × upper and lower diameter), showing uneven and obvious enhancement. There was a curved blood supplying artery in the lesion, locally surrounding the left vertebral artery with adjacent bone invasion. MRI examination showed that compared with adjacent muscles, the lesion showed isosignal on T1-weighted images (T1WI) , slightly higher signal on T2-weighted images (T2WI) , high signal on TIRM fat inhibitory sequence, and significantly higher signal on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) . The enhancement showed uneven and obvious enhancement, and the lesion invaded the anterior medulla oblongata through the left atlantoaxial foramina with a clear boundary. The protrusion of the mass locally compressed cervical spinal cord on T2WI .
Finally, postoperative histopathology showed ovoid tumor cells separated by fibrous tissue into nests or bundles, with atypical mitosis . Immunohistochemistry staining revealed S-100 protein (+), CD56 (+), synaptophysin (+), epithelial membrane antigen (±), Ki-67 (40%+), SMARCB1 protein (+), SRY-related high-mobility group box 10 (+), human melanin black-45 (HMB45; +), and melanocyte marker (Melan A; +) . Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed 54% of the positive cells in 100 tumor cells, which was in line with EWSR1 gene break .