A 46-year-old male presented to our hospital with a complaint of progressively blurred vision and metamorphopsia in both eyes. He also suffered from night blindness since childhood and had been diagnosed with RP with a positive family history. Otherwise, he denied any history of other systemic diseases.
At presentation, his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/400 in the right eye and 20/400 in the left eye (Snellen). Anterior segment examination revealed dense nuclear sclerosis in both eyes. With dilated fundoscopy, both eyes presented advanced RP, including peripheral retinal atrophy with bone spicule-shaped pigmentation in the mid-periphery, waxy pallor of the optic nerve head, and attenuation of retinal vessels. Severe macular involvement with profound pigmentary change was also noted in both eyes. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography revealed a stage IV FTMH of 320 μm in diameter with retinoschisis in the right eye and another stage IV FTMH of 495 μm in diameter in the left eye. The axial length was 23.24 mm in his right eye and 23.43 mm in his left eye. Electroretinography showed diminished waves, both in rods and cones, in both eyes.
In his right eye with cataract, FTMH, and retinoschisis, 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy, ERM/ILM peeling with inverted ERM/ILM flap technique, and C3F8 gas tamponade were performed combined with phacoemulsification and posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation under retrobulbar anesthesia. Indocyanine green (ICG) staining was used intraoperatively for ILM peeling.
In his left eye, 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy, ERM/ILM peeling with anterior lens capsular flap technique, and C3F8gas tamponade were performed combined with phacoemulsification and posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation under retrobulbar anesthesia. The technique of lens capsular flap was similar to that presented by Yang in 2016 . In brief, the circular anterior capsular flap was harvested by continuous circular capsulorhexis, and then it was stained with 0.125 % ICG and preserved in a balanced salt solution. Afterward, the flap was cut into a size a little larger than that of the FTMH using scissors and was translocated to the FTMH using micro forceps. Both surgical procedures were demonstrated on video (see Additional file 1).
Three months after surgery of the right eye, OCT confirmed successful closure of the FTMH, and BCVA improved to 20/100. One month after surgery of the left eye, OCT confirmed successful closure of the FTMH, and BCVA improved to 20/125. The pre-operative and post-operative imaging are shown in Figs. and .