A 73-year-old woman suddenly developed right hemiplegia and severe aphasia and was transported to our emergency service 47 min after onset. Her medical history included hypertension and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Anticoagulants have been discontinued because of a few episodes of falls although she had previously received oral anticoagulation. Blood pressure was 105/75 mmHg without any significant difference between right and left limbs. No cardiac murmurs were audible. Twelve-lead electrocardiography (ECG) showed tachycardic atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 150 beats/min but no significant ST-T changes, although the baseline was undulating due to patient movement . Glasgow Coma Scale score was 9 (E4V1M4). The patient was mute and could not follow any commands. She presented with right hemiplegia and showed left-ward conjugate eye deviation that could not be overcome with oculocephalic stimulation. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 21. Blood glucose level was 189 mg/dL, serum creatinine level was 0.66 mg/dL, hemoglobin was 10.8 mg/dL, and platelet count was 16.9 × 104/μL. No abnormalities were evident on chest roentgenogram.
We immediately performed magnetic resonance imaging following the stroke management protocol in our institute. Diffusion-weighted imaging showed hyperintense lesions at the left basal ganglia and corona radiata . A susceptibility vessel sign was seen in the proximal portion of the left middle cerebral artery . Magnetic resonance angiography revealed proximal occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery . Alteplase at a dose of 0.6 mg/kg (the dose approved in Japan) was administered 43 min after hospital arrival [, ], immediately followed by endovascular thrombectomy as bridging therapy . After thrombectomy with a stent retriever (Solitaire 2, 4 × 20 mm; Medtronic, California, USA), complete recanalization was obtained 95 min after hospital arrival . Cardiac rhythm monitoring during the endovascular procedure did not show significant findings other than the tachycardic atrial fibrillation.
Aphasia and right hemiplegia improved immediately after completing mechanical thrombectomy and she began to complain of chest pain. A detailed medical history was elicited and revealed that she experienced chest discomfort just prior to the development of weakness in the right extremities. No symptoms suggestive of angina pectoris had been present prior to this episode of chest discomfort. Twelve-lead ECG showed ST elevation at II, III, and aVF and ST depression at V2–V6 . Transthoracic echocardiogram showed decreased motion of the posterior wall and interventricular septum, and serum troponins were elevated. Coronary angiography revealed a filling defect in the right coronary artery, but distal flow was rapid and adequate . Distal occlusions were identified in the left circumflex small branch and the diagonal branch . No stenotic lesions suggestive of atherosclerotic pathology were identified. Because we considered that myocardial perfusion was sufficient overall, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was not performed.
The occlusions of the left middle cerebral artery and coronary arteries were assumed to have occurred nearly simultaneously, with cardiogenic embolism due to atrial fibrillation considered as the most likely etiology . No deep vein thrombosis of the lower limbs was evident on ultrasonography. On day 5 after admission, oral rivaroxaban was started at a dose of 15 mg/day (the standard dose in Japan) . Bisoprolol (0.625 mg/day) was initiated for rate-control purposes. The patient was discharged for rehabilitation on day 22. The modified Rankin Scale score at 3 months after stroke onset was 2. The patient experienced no recurrence of cerebral or myocardial infarction at 6 months after discharge.