A 60-year-old woman visited our hospital complaining of vertigo. She was hypertensive (169/87 mmHg). Her height was 156 cm, weight 48 kg, and no Cushingoid features were evident. Her complete blood count and serum biochemistry values were within normal limits, including a serum potassium level of 3.7 mEq/L. Endocrinological tests revealed a high urinary aldosterone level (8.1 μg/day), but showed a normal serum aldosterone level (160 pg/mL). Dexamethazone suppression test (1 mg) suppressed endogenous cortisol secretion (2.3 μg/dL). Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation testing demonstrated that the peak aldosterone (pg/mL)-to-cortisol (μg/dL) ratio was increased (16.1). The aldosterone (pg/mL)-to-renin (pg/mL) ratio increased following oral captopril administration (45). Furosemide stimulation testing showed decreased renin activity (3.8 pg/mL). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed two left adrenal masses with maximum diameters of 12 mm and 9 mm and both masses appeared smooth and well circumscribed . Iodine-131 aldosterol scintigraphy demonstrated specific uptake in left adrenal regions . Based on these results, a diagnosis of primary aldosteronism was made. In addition, to localize the laterality of the lesion, an adrenal venous sampling study was subsequently performed. After intravenous injection of ACTH (250 μg), the concentrations of aldosterone on both sides increased (right: 25,600 pg/mL, left: 15,900 pg/mL), and the aldosterone (pg/mL)-to-cortisol (μg/dL) ratio in the right adrenal vein was higher than in the left or inferior vena cava (59.3, 40.0 and 7.9). This suggested that aldosterone was over-produced in the bilateral adrenal glands. She was diagnosed as having aldosterone-producing macroadenomas in the left adrenal and aldosterone-producing microadenomas in the right adrenal. We recommended treating the bilateral aldosterone-producing adenomas with an anti-aldosterone drug, however, the patient expressed a strong desire to have all of the functioning tumors extracted.
A two-step operation, consisting of left partial adrenalectomy and then right total adrenalectomy, was planned. The left partial adrenalectomy was performed through a single-port by a transumbilical approach. Under general anesthesia, the patient was positioned in the right lateral decubitus 60° flank position. A multichannel port (SILS™port, Covidien, Mansfield, USA) was inserted through the center of the umbilicus. The SILS™port could be placed through a 2 cm incision. A 5 mm flexible laparoscope (Olympus Surgical, Tokyo), Opti4 laparoscopic electrodes (Opti4, Covidien), and bent instruments (Roticulator Endo Mini-Shears, Covidien) were used. The descending colon was dissected from Gerota's fascia and retracted medially. The linorenal and phrenicolienal ligaments were taken down to facilitate medial rotation of the spleen. To expose the hilum of the kidney, the tail of the pancreas was retracted medially. After the left renal vein was found, we identified the central vein and the left adrenal gland, and then removed as much fat as possible. Two xanthous tumors were identified in the center of the left adrenal gland . The left adrenal gland was separated from the upper pole of the kidney, but not from the surrounding tissue wherever possible in order to preserve the blood supply. While preserving the central vein, the two tumors in the center of the gland were resected using an ultrasonic scalpel . Both resected sites were coagulated using a vessel sealing device and sealed with fibrin glue. The specimen was removed using an EndoCatch bag (Covidien) . The operative time was 123 minutes and blood loss was only minimal.
The patient could be discharged from hospital within 72 hours. We planned to treat her right adrenal microadenoma in the months ahead.
We investigated the degree of pain using the visual analog scale (1-10 scale). On the first postoperative day, she experienced pain in the vicinity of her umbilicus (range, 2 to 4). By the second day, however, she was pain-free and did not need an analgesic drug. At discharge, the degree of pain was 1.
From the viewpoint of cosmesis, patient-reported scar satisfaction (1-10 scale) was 10 at one month postoperatively.