A 38-year-old female patient presented to our facility in October 2019 with chronic abdominal pain, swelling in the umbilical region, and pus discharge from the umbilicus for 7 months. The swelling started 3 months after an open appendectomy was performed in a peripheral private hospital using a right paramedian incision. One week after the appearance of swelling, the umbilicus started discharging thick offensive fluid, which was associated with abdominal pain. There was no fever, nausea, or loss of appetite. The patient reported a weight loss of 5 kg in 7 months. Conservative treatment yielded no improvement. As a result of an abdominal ultrasound scan, which suggested an intraperitoneal abscess , the patient was referred to our specialist outpatient department.
Upon presentation, the patient was depressed, dehydrated, and pale. The abdominal examination revealed an everted umbilicus with pus discharge and granulation tissue. In the umbilical region, there was a palpable intraabdominal mass that measured 20 × 16 cm, was moderately tender, and was fixed to the umbilicus but was otherwise mobile . There were no signs of peritonitis, and the abdomen was soft with moderate periumbilical distension. The right paramedian appendectomy scar had healed completely and was unremarkable. A routine blood examination showed a hemoglobin concentration of 9.6 g/dL and a white blood cell count of 3.0 × 109/L. Further diagnostic tests and imaging could not be performed due to financial constraints.
Based on the history and physical findings, a provisional diagnosis of an infected urachal cyst or postoperative intraabdominal abscess was made, and the patient was prepared for an exploratory laparotomy.
Intraoperatively, the abdominal cavity was clean. A well-circumscribed 18 × 16 cm adhesive mass was seen around the ileocecal junction. It consisted of an encapsulated lesion at its center, and an ileal segment, the transverse colon, and the umbilicus were all adhered to the mass . During adhesiolysis, the wall of the central lesion was accidentally opened, thus surprisingly exposing a surgical sponge and thick offensive pus. The bowel loops were further mobilized, resulting in a large mesenteric defect. Impaired blood supply to the dependent bowel loop necessitated the resection of a 10 cm long ileal loop, and an end-to-end ileo-ileal anastomosis was created. Adhesiolysis and mobilization of the lesion from the transverse colon led to a 3 cm iatrogenic defect, which was sutured. Finally, the encapsulated lesion, including the umbilicus, was completely resected . The resectate measured 10 × 8 cm in size and contained a retained surgical sponge within a confined collection of pus.
The postoperative period was uneventful. Bacteriological examinations were not carried out due to financial constraints. Consequently, empiric antibiotic therapy with intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole was administered for 5 days and was then switched to oral antibiotics, which were given for an additional 2 days. Early postoperative enteral feeding was well tolerated with normal bowel activity on the third postoperative day. The laparotomy wound healed by primary intention, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 9. Follow-up visits in our SOP clinic have also been unremarkable.