A 59-year-old Asian man was incidentally diagnosed with coronary artery calcification on follow-up CT for pulmonary sarcoidosis. His coronary risk factors were hypertension and dyslipidaemia.
The physical examination demonstrated the following vital signs: blood pressure, 113/66 mmHg and heart rate, 67 b.p.m. Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm with mild ST depression in Leads V4–V6. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular function and no significant valvular heart disease. Blood tests revealed normal renal function.
Because the patient presented with shortness of breath, which was thought to be due to coronary artery disease, coronary angiography (CAG) was performed. Coronary angiography revealed a severe stenosis of the ostial left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery and a CTO lesion in the proximal LCX . Collateral channels were observed extending from the right coronary artery (RCA) through the posterior descending (PD) branch to distal the LCX . The occlusion length of LCX CTO is expected to be long because the collateral channels from the RCA PD filled only the distal portion of the LCX. Subsequently, PCI was performed on the proximal LAD lesion, and a drug-eluting stent was implanted.
The patient received optimal medical therapy consisting of aspirin 100 mg o.d., prasugrel 3.75 mg o.d., atorvastatin 10 mg o.d., and ezetimibe 10 mg o.d. Stress myocardial perfusion imaging with single-photon emission CT revealed ischaemia in the posterolateral territory of the left ventricle, transient ischaemic dilatation, and left ventricle ejection fraction deterioration (see , and ). Therefore, an LCX CTO PCI was planned.
Coronary CT angiography was performed after CAG to determine the procedure strategy for LCX CTO PCI. Coronary CT angiography revealed a shorter occlusion length of the LCX CTO than expected based on the previous CAG ( and ). The estimated CTO length evaluated using CCTA was 4 mm. Chest CT was additionally performed to detect extracardiac collaterals. The chest CT indicated an extracardiac collateral flow from the bronchial artery to the distal portion of the LCX CTO ( and ). This bronchial collateral channel explains the discrepancy in anatomical recognition between CAG and CCTA.
We planned to perform LCX CTO PCI using the antegrade approach because the CTO length was short, and the CTO exit was confirmed using the bronchial artery injection. Furthermore, the retrograde approach through RCA PD channels was considered difficult and had a risk of complications because the collateral channels from the RCA were non-septal and relatively small, with the J-Channel score of 3. The J-CTO score was 1. The procedure was performed using the bilateral femoral approach with an 8 Fr, SPB 3.75 SH, 100 cm guiding catheter (Asahi Intecc Co., Ltd, Aichi, Japan) for the antegrade approach and a 5 Fr diagnostic catheter for retrograde angiography. A bronchial arteriography was also performed. We attempted to engage the catheter in the bronchial artery under the guidance of three-dimensional CT angiography of the aorta ( and ). We failed to engage the catheter in the bronchial artery using both Judkins Right 4.0 and Amplatz Left 1.0 types. However, we succeeded in engaging a 5 Fr, shepherd hook 12, 70 cm (SHK 12) catheter (Hanako Medical, Saitama, Japan) into the bronchial artery ( and ). Bronchial arteriography clearly revealed the CTO distal cap and distal true lumen of the LCX CTO ( and ). Dual injection showed CTO morphology with blunt proximal and tapered distal caps. The CTO lesion was approached using a Gaia-Next 2 (Asahi Intecc) guidewire supported by a SASUKE dual-lumen microcatheter (Asahi Intecc). Gaia-Next 2 could not pass through the CTO proximal cap, and guidewire escalation was performed using Gaia-Next 3 (Asahi Intecc) and Conquest Pro 12 (Asahi Intecc) guidewires. Eventually, the Conquest Pro 12 penetrated the proximal cap. The Conquest Pro 12 was gradually advanced into the body of the CTO lesion, and the wire was passed into the distal true lumen with distal visualization using bronchial arteriography. We then implanted a drug-eluting stent, which resulted in successful revascularization ( and ). The patient was discharged without adverse events. At 6 months post-PCI, the patient had no chest-related complaints.