A 76-year old male presenting as a one-month history of dry cough and left chest pain was admitted to our hospital. The patient had a past history of aortic stenosis, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and chronic atrial fibrillation, and he had smoked one and a half pack of cigarettes per day for 27 years from the age of 20 to 47. CT scan of the chest showed left hilar lung mass, left pleural effusion, atelectasis of the left lower lobe and multiple lung nodules predominantly in the right lung . Cytological examination of the pleural effusion revealed adenocarcinoma cells and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of pleural effusion cell block was performed to determine the primary organ from which the cancer developed. Malignant cells in the pleural effusion were positive for Cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and negative for cytokeratin 20 (CK20) . These cells were negative for two lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) markers; TTF1 and Napsin A, and IHC analysis could not determine the primary organ of the tumor. Adenocarcinoma cells in the pleural effusion were also negative for LUAD specific oncogenic driver mutations: EGFR mutation and ALK translocation determined using the PCR-invader method and the intercalated antibody-enhanced polymer (iAEP) method (HISTOFINE ALK iAEP® kit, Nichirei Biosciences, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) , respectively. The values of serum tumor markers were as follows: CEA 2.9 ng/ml (normal range, 0 to 5); CA19–92326 U/ml (normal range, 0 to 37); CYFRA 57.7 ng/ml (normal range, 0 to 3.5); pro-GRP 34.5 pg/ml (normal range, 0 to 80.9); PSA 0.96 ng/ml (normal range, 0 to 4). Although the primary organ was not clear, the patient was treated by the combination of carboplatin (AUC 5) and paclitaxel (200 mg/m2), which is one of the standard chemotherapy for both LUAD and CUP.
A tumor of the palate mucosa was noticed on physical examination of the oral cavity. The tumor of the palate mucosa was a small (major axis; 7 mm) and round mass with smooth surface. It located in the middle of his palate. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed this tumor in the palate; however, deep invasion was not observed . 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) indicated abnormal intake of FDG of the palate mucosa and both lungs, which were considered malignant lesions (Additional file : Figure S1). Multiple lymph node metastases, multiple bone metastasis, and pleural dissemination were also suspected.
A biopsy was performed for the tumor of the palate mucosa under the local anesthesia. The histology revealed an adenocarcinoma consisting of tubular or papillary proliferation of columnar-shaped tumor cells invading the subepithelial tissue . The tumor cells were positive for CK7 and negative for CK20, TTF-1 and Napsin A, which was consistent with the result of the pleural effusion. Whether the tumor of the palate mucosa was a metastatic or primary tumor remained inconclusive at this time.
Then, we evaluated the possibility of this tumor in the palate mucosa as a primary tumor. Most common malignant neoplasms of the palate mucosa are known to be MSGTs. Especially, SC is one of the common MSGT , however mammaglobin and S-100 protein was immunohistochemically negative and ETV6-NTRK3 (EN) fusion was not observed in fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis by using Vysis®LSI® ETV6 Break Apart Rearrangement Probe (Abbott Molecular/Vysis) (Additional file : Figure S2). Other MSGT such as AcCC, AdCC, PLGA, and MEC were also excluded as a diagnosis based on histological and immunohistochemical findings.
Because of the absence of EGFR mutation and ALK translocation, this case was registered to Lung Cancer Genomic Screening Project for Indivisualized Medicine in Japan (LC-SCRUM-Japan). The cancer genome screening of the fresh frozen tumor of the palate mucosa was performed using Oncomine® Cancer Research Panel (OCP, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), which successfully identified an oncogenic KRAS mutation at codon 12 (p.G12D). Furthermore, presence or abscense of KRAS mutation in pleural effusion was examined. Genomic DNA was purified from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cells of pleural effusion using Deparaffinization Solution (QIAGEN) and QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (QIAGEN). PCR was performed using 40 ng genomic DNA and the following primers; forward primer, 5′- AGGCCTGCTGAAAATGACTG -3′, and reverse primer, 5′- GGTCCTGCACCAGTAATATGCA -3′ (annealing temperature: 55 °C) . As a result, KRAS mutation at codon 12 (p.G12D) was also identified in pleural effusion by direct sequencing . The KRAS mutation is known to exist in one third of the LUAD, but it is quite rare in MSGT [, ]. Although the KRAS mutation is also known to be one of the common abnormalities in pancreatic and colorectal cancers , the possibility of metastasis from colorectal cancer is quite unlikely because gastrointestinal endoscopy did not show the presence of malignant lesions. The metastasis of pancreatic cancer is also unlikely from the results of CT scan and FDG-PET/CT. Together with the cytological similarities between tumor cells in the pleural effusion and those of the palate mucosa, we concluded that the tumor of the palate is a metastatic stage IV LUAD (cT3N3M1c according to the 8th edition of TNM staging of lung cancer). Adenocarcinoma, not otherwise specified (NOS), that shows glandular or ductal differentiation but lacks the prominent histomorphologic features was excluded as a diagnosis because the carcinoma in this study was characterized other, more specific types of carcinoma.
The disease progressed after two cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel. The patient received two cycles of immunotherapy with nivolumab as a second line therapy, but died due to disease progression four months after the first admission.