A 33-year-old man was admitted to our hospital complaining of abdominal fullness for 20 days. He had no medical history or medication. Physical examination and laboratory findings were unremarkable. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a large submucosal eminence at the side of the lesser curvature of the stomach near the cardia, growing intraluminally without ulceration, and obstructing the gastric cavity . Endoscopic ultrasonography showed that the lesion originated from the fourth layer of the gastric wall, i.e., the muscularis propria, exhibiting nonuniform and low echo, and was about 5x7cm in diameter . A space-occupying lesion of about 9.5 × 6.3 cm in the small curvature of the stomach near the cardia with a nonuniformly enhanced mass was found by enhanced computed tomography (CT, Fig. f). CT scanning of the small intestine showed no stromal tumor. Because the stromal tumor was close to the cardia, to better protect the cardia, we performed endoscopic submucosal excavation (ESE).
ESE procedure was performed as follows: (1) Argon knife was used to mark the border of the gastric stromal tumor; (2) Saline containing methylene blue and epinephrine was injected into multiple parts of the submucosa outside the marker; (3) A needle knife was used to cut through the mucous membrane; (4) Submucosa was circumferentially cut using the needle knife and an insulated tip knife was used to cut the mucosa along the lateral edge of the marker. Finally, the tumor was resected en bloc manner without bleeding, and an intact pseudocapsule was retained; (5) The wound was treated with thermal biopsy forceps to prevent delayed bleeding; (6) Stone fragments and traps were used to cut the tumor into small pieces, and finally foreign body mesh bags were used to remove the tumor from the body . The operating time was 90 min.
Histopathological examination confirmed that the tumor was a GIST of spindle cell subtype, and the mitotic index was less than 5 mitotic figures per 50 high power fields. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor cells were positive for CD117, Dog-1 and CD34 and negative for SMA, S-100, and Desmin, and the positive rate of ki-67 was 3% . The specimens were GISTs larger than 5 cm, with less than 5 mitosis per 50 high-power fields, which classified the patient into an intermediate-risk group according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) consensus criteria for risk stratification of GISTs . Detection of gene mutations included exon 9, 11, 13, 14, 17, and 18 of c-kit gene and exon 12 and 18 of PDGFRA gene. The results showed that exon 11 of c-kit gene was mutated (c.1679 T>G, p. V560G) (42.3%). We recommended that patients should take 1 year of imatinib as adjuvant therapy . Endoscopy showed the healed incision 4 months later. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and abdominal CT examination were performed 4 months after endoscopic treatment , and no signs of recurrence were found. During the follow-up of 8 months, the patient had a normal diet and no serious complications.