A 50 year old man presented with complaints of suprapubic swelling and difficulty in micturition for the last 4 months. He had to strain to pass urine and the flow was poor. Patient also complained of constipation for the last 2 months. No history of fever, vomiting, hematuria and bleeding per rectum.
On examination he had pulse rate of 86/min and blood pressure – 110/76 mmHg. General physical examination was within normal limit. Abdominal examination revealed a smooth, firm, slightly tender, nonmobile lump in suprapubic region reaching approx. 5 cm above pubic symphysis, lower limit not palpable. On digital rectal examination, a smooth spherical mass was felt anteriorly and laterally outside the rectal wall, rectal mucosa was normal.
Investigations revealed haemoglobin of 12.4 g/dl, total leucocyte count of 8900/mm3, platelet count of 2.54 lakh/mm, blood urea 33 mg/dl, serum creatinine 1.12 mg/dl, and serum electrolytes were normal. Liver function test showed serum bilirubin of total – 0.75 mg/dl, S.G.O.T. – 16 U/L, S.G.P.T. – 36 U/L, and alkaline phosphatase – 88 U/L. Urine examination showed pus cells (5–6/hpf) but the urine culture was sterile. Chest X-ray and ECG were normal.
Ultrasound examination revealed a cystic mass in the pelvis suggestive of a hydatid cyst with bilateral hydroureteronephrosis more on right side as compared with left. Liver and spleen were normal.
Computerized tomographic scan was suggestive of well - defined capsulated heterogeneously within, compressing the urinary bladder and rectosigmoid and reaching till the pelvic side walls – likely hydatid cyst, moderate hydronephrosis on right side and mild hydronephrosis on left side with dilated and tortuous both ureters (a–c).
Patient was put on one cycle of preoperative albendazole therapy (10–15 mg/kg/day) for 28 days. Exploratory laparotomy was done and liver, spleen, mesentery, omentum were found to be normal. A large tense hydatid cyst was noted in the pelvic cavity, densely adhered to urinary bladder, sigmoid mesocolon, rectum and iliac vessels laterally. Upper part of cyst was separated anteriorly from the urinary bladder and on left side from sigmoid colon and mesocolon. After mobilization hydatid cyst was isolated by packing surrounding area with 0.5% cetrimide soaked sponges and cyst opened under controlled condition. All daughter cysts and laminated membrane removed completely (a, b). The part of ectocyst which was densely adherent to vital neighbouring structures could not be removed. A drain was placed in pelvis and abdomen closed in layers. Final diagnosis was confirmed by histopathological examination.
Postoperative period was uneventful and patient was discharged on 5th postop day. Patient was put on 3 cycles of albendazole therapy. Each cycle of albendazole therapy was of 28 days duration. After each cycle patient was advised a gap period of 2 weeks, and in that period liver function test and complete blood counts were assessed and found to be normal. Patient was symptom free after 6 months of follow up.