A 63-year-old male patient was referred to the Oral Medicine and Periodontology Department, Faculty of Dentistry, Mansoura University, Egypt in April 2021. The patient was complaining of a burning sensation of the mouth especially the tongue and buccal mucosa.
The medical history was significant to chronic cholecystitis, right renal cyst, and right inguinal hernia. The patient had a COVID-19 infection one month before the oral lesion after traveling to another country. During COVID-19 infection, the patients reported various clinical signs and symptoms as sore throat, headache, hypogeusia, diarrhea, and bone ache.
He was advised to take his medications as well as staying at home until complete resolving the COVID-19 infection.
Intraoral examination revealed that there are painful erosive areas of the buccal mucosa and the dorsal surface of the tongue. The lesion of the left buccal mucosa shows a central erosive area surrounded by white radiating striae from the periphery of the lesion. (a, & ). The lesion is extremely painful and sensitive to touch resulting in difficulty eating and drinking.
Extraoral examination showed brown pruritic macules on the flexure surface of the arm that was detected with the oral lesion. Painful palpable submandibular lymph nodes were detected while the other extraoral features were normal.
The patient denied the possible triggers of the lesions as medication and psychological stress, while he reported getting an infection of COVID-19 one month before the appearance of those lesions. Family history was negative for any systemic disease that might affect the occurrence of lichen planus.
An incisional biopsy of the left buccal mucosa was obtained which revealed an oral lichen planus lesion with hyper-parakeratinized stratified epithelium, partially ulcerated, mild degree of acanthosis, liquefactive degeneration of basal cells, and prominent band like sub-epithelial lymphocytic infiltration which was compatible with the diagnosis of oral lichen planus. .
A skin biopsy was not performed according to the patient's desire. Additionally, similar lesions of cutaneous manifestations of lichen planus were reported in the literature . Laboratory investigations showed normal WBCs count and high C-reactive protein. Serologic analyses were negative for hepatitis C virus. The patient was prescribed topical corticosteroids three times daily for 10 days after mealtime then gradual withdrawal of the medication was performed in response to the improvement and healing of the lesion. 4 weeks later, the patient showed marked improvement in the pain scores as well as a decrease in the size of the oral lesions. b.
For follow up of the case, the patient was asked to visit our clinic every two weeks for 2 months then one visit per month. This report is in line with the SCARE criteria .