The patient is a 17 year-old African-American female, who had normal fat development until age 4 when she started losing weight and muscle strength. At age 6, she presented with bilateral proximal lower extremity weakness and had elevated levels of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), creatinine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and aldolase. T2-weighted (magnetic resonance imaging).
MRI images of her lower extremities showed hyperintensity in her quadriceps muscles consistent with myositis. On the basis of her clinical presentation, laboratory results and MRI, she was diagnosed with JDM. Her presentation was reported previously . On physical examination, she had generalized loss of subcutaneous fat including her face, a high-arched palate, micrognathia, a small mid-face and bilateral parotid enlargement. She also had progressive contractures in most upper extremity joints, calcinosis on her knuckles and mottled skin throughout her upper body. She had hepatosplenomegaly and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Her leptin level was < 0.7 ng/dL, and her DEXA scan showed 9.3% body fat. She was diagnosed with AGL, with associated diabetes and polycystic ovarian syndrome. In the next 7 years, she had severe elevations in triglycerides > 10,000 mg/dL and multiple episodes of acute pancreatitis and diabetic ketoacidosis. Echocardiogram performed at age 9 showed moderate aortic stenosis and atrial septal defect, ostium secundum type. She also had ovarian cysts and nephromegaly due to bilateral renal cysts. Despite being on methotrexate for JDM, her serum muscle enzyme levels fluctuated. For her lipodystrophy, she was treated with metreleptin .
Whole exome sequencing done at age 16 identified a heterozygous missense mutation (c.29C > T) in LMNA resulting in p.T10I substitution which is considered to be pathogenic . This was not maternally inherited. The patient’s father had sudden cardiac death at age 49, so a blood sample was not available. He was reported to be thin, especially on the face and was diabetic in the last 2 years of his life. Further he had history of thyroid cancer as conveyed by patient and her mother. The patient’s WES data was interrogated for pathogenic variants in the genes that might be related to JDM, such as TNF, HLADRB1, IL1RN, IL1A, IL1B, ISG15, BLK and CCL21. No pathogenic variants were found in these genes. Of note, PLCL1 gene was not covered in the patient’s WES data, hence was not screened. A muscle biopsy was obtained from her right quadriceps muscle which confirmed the earlier diagnosis of JDM, including perifascicular atrophy, perivascular mononuclear cell infiltrates and upregulation of sarcolemmal MHC1 . Immunofluorescence staining of skin fibroblasts from the patient and a control patient with Duchenne muscular dystrophy which is used as a non- LMNA related control both displayed positive nuclear staining for lamin A . However, LMNA mutant nuclei exhibited greater nuclear atypia and fragmentation compared to the control fibroblasts from an unrelated myopathy without LMNA mutations. Our results in Fig. are consistent with previous reports that scored atypical nuclei which reported that control fibroblasts have occaisonal atypical nuclei in ~ 19% of cells while the number of atypical nuclei in fibroblasts from patients with lamin A/C mutations were much more common (33–92%) . It should be noted that it is very reasonable to use Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) as a control, and although there is one report of a case study of a DMD patient with altered nuclear structure similar to LMNA related muscular dystrophy, further analysis showed this patient also carried a mutation in Nesprin-1, and patients with other mutations in dystrophin showed no significant differences in nuclear structure from non-disease human fibroblasts .