A 62-year-old woman with a previous history of colorectal cancer was referred to our surgical department for presenting bilateral adrenal masses found on an abdominal CT scan at month 9 follow-up , associated with increasing levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (last value: 320 pg/ml; normal value: <54 pg/ml) and low levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (86 ng/ml; normal value: 336–2,490 ng/ml). Her medical history revealed a laparoscopic right hemicolectomy for a colorectal cancer (pT4 N0 M0, pStage II) without requiring any adjuvant therapy.
Physical examination evidenced morbid obesity (body mass index (BMI): 49 kg/m2) and skin hyperpigmentation. She also referred long-time tiredness and weight gain. Laboratory tests evidenced a primary adrenal insufficiency associated with elevated tumour markers (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): 40.9 ng/ml; normal value: 1–5.2 ng/ml). Oral corticosteroid replacement was initiated (hydrotisone 20 mg and fludrocortisone 0.05 mg daily) showing immediate symptom improvement. Also, a central nervous magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was requested which showed no abnormalities in the pituitary gland and pheochromocytoma was ruled out in laboratory tests. Abdominal MRI is shown in . PET-CT was also performed showing hypermetabolic bilateral adrenal masses with no systemic disease .
After discussing the case in a multidisciplinary tumour (MDT) meeting, multiple CT-guided core biopsies were performed with a 14G needle using a posterior approach. Because of the impossibility to establish a definitive diagnosis on an imaging basis only, pathological assessment remains the gold standard of diagnosis. Differential diagnosis includes lymphoma, hyperplasia, hematoma, histoplasmosis and pheochromocytoma among others. As mentioned, a percutaneous CT-guided core needle biopsy was performed using the retroperitoneal approach. This route shows a minimal risk of seeding by preserving the posterior parietal peritoneum. Histopathology findings were primarily related to colorectal lineage, associated with patient’s cancer history. Based on this result, the decision was made for complete surgical resection. The patient underwent open bilateral adrenalectomy with two subcostal incisions . We chose to go with an open approach because of the size of both tumours and their relationship with renal vessels. She was discharged on post-operative day 6 without complications. Final histopathological examination confirmed a massive involvement by adenocarcinoma with multiple sites of necrosis in both surgical specimens.
In a new MDT meeting, it was decided to complete treatment with six sessions of chemotherapy (Capecitabine). At 1-year follow-up, she had normal CEA levels and abdominal CT scan and PET-CT without evidence of disease recurrence.