A 28-year-old Japanese male presented with cough and left-sided chest pain for 6 weeks. The medical, surgical, and family histories were unremarkable. He smoked approximately 20 cigarettes per day for 6 years and infrequently consumed small amounts of alcohol. Physical examination was unremarkable; the lungs were clear to auscultation. Chest X-ray revealed an enlarged mediastinum. A full-body CT scan showed a bulky mediastinal mass with right bronchial stenosis, lymphadenopathy in the right side of the hilum and supraclavicular region, and a mass in the right middle lobe measuring 4.4 × 3.0 cm . 18F-FDG PET/CT showed the involvement of multiple bones, including spine, scapula, ribs, sternum, pelvis, and femur .
The clinical course and patient background suggested a differential diagnosis that included lung cancer, lymphoma, and a mediastinal germ cell tumor (GCT). Laboratory investigations were significant for an elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase [LDH; 667 IU/L (normal range: 119–229 IU/L)], C-reactive protein [0.82 mg/dL (0.01–0.4 mg/dL)], soluble IL-2 receptor [770 U/mL (112–496 U/mL)], and AFP [163.8 ng/mL (0–20 ng/mL)]. Serum levels of β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG), carcinoembryonic antigen, pro-gastrin-releasing peptide, and cytokeratin-19 fragments (CYFRA) were within normal limits.
Pathology examination of tissue from an endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) biopsy of a mediastinal lymph node revealed a loosely cohesive growth pattern with prominent necrosis and degeneration and no clear pattern of differentiation . The tumor was composed of ovoid and spindle-shaped cells with anisocytosis, scanty cytoplasm, and irregular ovoid hyperchromatic nuclei .
Only a minor proportion (<5%) of the cells were positive for AE1/AE3. Squamous cell markers (p40 and p63) were weakly positive in 10–20% of the cells. Neuroendocrine markers (chromogranin and synaptophysin), leukocyte common antigen, myogenic markers (MyoD1 and myogenin), germ cell markers (placental alkaline phosphatase and hCG), c-kit, TTF-1, CA19-9, and CD30 were all negative. The surface markers of tumor cells obtained with flow cytometry were not compatible with lymphoma. A bone marrow aspiration and biopsy revealed infiltration of cells with pathologic features similar to those of the EBUS-TBNA biopsy specimen.
The clinical presentation of a mediastinal tumor in a young male with an elevated serum AFP suggested NSGCT, but findings of immunohistochemistry of tumor sections were not consistent with that diagnosis. An outside pathology consultation was obtained, and the diagnosis of NMC was suggested due to the pathologic and clinical characteristics. Thus, immunohistochemistry using NUT (C52B1) rabbit monoclonal antibody was performed.
While waiting for results of the immunohistochemical examination for NUT, serum levels of LDH increased to 993 IU/L on day 11, suggesting rapid disease progression. Because of the poorly differentiated pattern on histologic analysis, elevated serum AFP, and case reports indicating that cisplatin-based treatment showed some efficacy for treating NMC , we decided to start chemotherapy with BEP regimen (bleomycin 30 kU on days 1, 8, and 15; etoposide, 100 mg/m2 on days 1–5; and cisplatin, 20 mg/m2 on days 1–5; given every 21 days). On day 8 of the first cycle, the immunohistochemistry result revealed that most of the neoplastic cell nuclei were strongly positive for NUT in a speckled pattern . The diagnosis of NMC was thus confirmed. After two cycles of chemotherapy, CT showed tumor regression, and serum levels of LDH declined. Therefore, the BEP regimen was continued. However, after three cycles, CT showed tumor progression.
Because the performance status of the patient had declined, we considered single-agent chemotherapy to be most appropriate and started doxorubicin (75 mg/m2 every 21 days). Despite the change in chemotherapy regimen, serum levels of LDH continued to increase. Therefore, we judged doxorubicin to be ineffective, although CT scan after the first cycle of doxorubicin showed no change in tumor volume. We believed that local control of the mediastinal mass was most important for the patient at that point to prevent airway obstruction as the tumor progressed. Some authors have reported on the effectiveness of radiotherapy and chemoradiotherapy for NMC [, ], we therefore administered mediastinal radiotherapy with concomitant weekly docetaxel (30 mg/m2). Radiotherapy was planned with conventional fractionation, 60 Gy/30 fractions (fr).
CT after 16 Gy had been administered showed an apparent decrease in tumor bulk in the irradiated area, although it had increased in other areas. Docetaxel did not seem to be beneficial for systemic tumor control, and platelet counts had decreased by 2.9 × 103/μL; thus, docetaxel was discontinued after four cycles and radiotherapy alone was continued. The patient started to complain of pain in the lower back and right femur; MRI confirmed the presence of osteolytic bone metastases. Palliative radiotherapy (30 Gy/10 fr) for metastases in vertebrae L3–S1 and the right femur was concurrently started with irradiation to the mediastinum. Although the pain in the lower back and right femur were relieved, the patient developed painless proptosis in the right eye. While considering additional radiotherapy to prevent pain, we performed 18F-FDG PET/CT to evaluate the extent of metastases to the bones and other organs. It showed that radiotherapy had achieved good local control in the mediastinum, vertebrae L3–S1, and right femur, but there were many new sites of abnormal FDG accumulation . Moreover, there was an abnormal FDG uptake in a mass in the right orbital soft tissue , suggestive of orbital metastasis. Since then, the patient condition gradually deteriorated, and only palliative care was given. He died 4.5 months after the initial diagnosis of NMC.