A 52-year-old Sri Lankan man was transferred to the University Medical Unit (UMU) at the National Hospital of Sri Lanka, Colombo, for management of alcohol withdrawal. He had been a habitual heavy drinker with a daily consumption that was approximately 12 to 24 units of alcohol (as arrack, a locally brewed alcoholic beverage). His pattern of consumption had features of alcohol dependency such as tolerance, use despite knowing its harm, withdrawal features, neglect of alternate pleasures and unsuccessful efforts to cut down on usage.
On the day of admission, he had an episode of transient loss of consciousness with a fall and suffered a cut injury to his face. He was admitted to a surgical ward for wound care but developed features of alcohol withdrawal 48 hours after admission and was transferred to the UMU for further management.
He was restless and disoriented in time, place and person. There was a deep laceration over the left ear that was sutured. There were no clinical signs suggestive of hepatic or Wernicke's encephalopathy. He was managed with sedation, oral chlordiazepoxide, intravenous thiamin and adequate hydration. He did not develop seizures or fever during his stay in the hospital, and made a complete clinical recovery from the state of confusion within 72 hours.
The ECG on admission was essentially normal and did not show abnormalities of ischemic heart disease. However, an ECG on day four (since admission) showed ST segment depressions in leads L1, L2, V5 and V6 (see Figure ). The ECG on day five showed similar changes but they had progressed to significant (more than 2 mm) ST segment depression. The ECG on day six showed additional changes of deep T inversions in aVL and in precordial leads V2-V6 (see Figure ). Despite not having typical chest pain, he was anticoagulated with low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin) and was managed as for an acute coronary event (non invasive treatment strategy).
By this time, he had recovered from his delirium and was able to give a full history to assess his cardiovascular risk status. He had not had any acute coronary events in the past or any significant co-morbidity such as diabetes, hypertension or hypercholesterolemia. There was no significant family history but he was a heavy smoker (15 pack-years).
He had undetectable levels of Troponin I (sensitivity and specificity of approximately 90% at a cut-off of 0.5 ng/ml) on day six since admission. His liver enzyme levels in serum were elevated (ALT: 138 u/l, AST: 236 u/l). Serum sodium, potassium and creatinine were within the normal range. His hemoglobin level was 11.3 g/dl. There was no evidence of subdural hemorrhage on computed tomography (CT) scan which is an alternative cause for confusion and ECG changes. A subsequent echocardiogram showed septal and apical hypokinesia with evidence of ischemic left ventricular dysfunction.
He made a full recovery and was discharged on day ten with clinic follow up arranged. Since he was willing to abstain from alcohol, he was referred to counseling services at the University Psychiatry Unit.