Our patient was an 83-year-old African-American man, who was referred to our institution after originally presenting with difficult Foley placement at a local hospital. His medical history was relevant for benign prostatic hyperplasia, chronic renal insufficiency, arthritis and hypertension. His social history included tobacco use in the remote past. His vital signs and results of a review of systems were unremarkable. Results of a blood investigation showed a significant left shift with 82% segmented neutrophils. Urine analysis revealed cloudy urine, positive for leukocyte esterase, nitrites, small amount of blood and ketones. Microscopic examination of his urine showed 10 to 20 red blood cells (RBC) per high power field (HPF) and a field full of white blood cells (WBC) and bacteria. Our patient underwent cytoscopy after blood oozed out during initial catheter insertion. A complete investigation for hematuria including a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed that revealed a bladder mass. A TUR was undertaken, and histopathology confirmed the mass as being a high-grade bladder carcinoma. A follow-up metastatic investigation including a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, pelvis and bone were negative. Our patient developed increasing pelvic pain and significant hematuria. A radical cystoprostatectomy was subsequently performed revealing a multi-centric, ill-defined urothelial carcinoma (9 × 7 cm) infiltrating the right pericystic soft tissue and encompassing the right ureteral orifice. Our patient tolerated the surgical procedure well. His post-operative course was complicated by right deep venous thrombosis occluding the right common femoral vein. A histopathological examination of the bladder tumor revealed a high-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma completely involving the dome and posterior wall, and partially involving the anterior and right lateral walls. The tumor extended into the perivascular soft tissue and metastatic urothelial carcinoma was identified in a left pelvic lymph node (staging: pT3; pN2; pMx). Additionally, histopathological examination of the prostate revealed a bilateral, multi-centric adenocarcinoma, Gleason 4 + 4 with perineural and lymphatic/vascular invasion. Metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma was also identified involving the left and right pelvic lymph nodes (staging: pT3a; pN1; pMx). Interestingly, the left pelvic lymph node revealed a focus of both metastatic urothelial and prostatic carcinomas . The presence of two tumor types colliding in the same lymph node was confirmed using immunohistochemical stains, including CK7 and CK20, pan-CK and PSA. Additionally, both the primary tumors were stained with the same panel as an internal control. The focus of metastatic urothelial carcinoma was positive for CK7 , pan-CK, and negative for CK20, while prostatic carcinoma was negative for CK7 , CK20, and positive for pan-CK. In addition, the metastatic urothelial carcinoma stained negative for PSA , while the prostatic carcinoma was positive .