A 26-year-old woman with family history of hypothyroidism on her mother side was referred to our endocrine clinic because of clinical hypothyroidism and a thyroid hot nodule . After hypothyroidism diagnosis, the thyroid hormone replacement (500 micg/week) has been started and a thyroid sonography requested due to the feeling of lump in the neck by the patient. The ultrasonography findings were an enlarged thyroid gland with diffusely hypo echogenic pattern and heterogeneous echo texture. A 13*6 mm solid isoechoic nodule with regular and sharp margin has been detected in the thyroid isthmus without significant lymphadenopathy. Her first physician had requested a sonography guided fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) from the thyroid nodule. The cytology showed a hyper cellular smear containing monolayer sheets, nests, micro follicles and mild nuclear follicular cells pleomorphism in addition to pigment laden macrophages and multinucleated giant cell in hemorrhagic and colloid background.
The final cytological diagnosis was “suggestive of thyroid neoplasm”. The patient was referred to our clinic because of hot area in the thyroid gland isthmus (compatible with thyroid nodule) according to 99mTc pertechnetate thyroid scintigraphy report. Residual thyroid tissue had low uptake .
We requested an I131 thyroid scintigraphy to rule out the false hot nodule report by 99mTc scintigraphy, which confirmed the hot condition of nodule . So we decreased the thyroid hormone replacement dosage for definitive assurance of the hypothyroidism diagnosis. Three months after reduced drug doses, the TSH level increased to 25 IU/L. Color flow Doppler ultrasonography performed by a thyroid ultrasound specialist revealed a solid hypoechoic nodule of approximately 21*19*9 mm in diameters (compared to first sonography which the nodule was isoechoic and lower in size) with well demarcated margin. Increased blood flow was reported in thyroid nodule periphery in addition to thyroid parenchyma .
L-T4 substitution therapy was started again with full dose (700 micg/week) and fine needle aspiration (FNAC) was repeated because of increase in nodule size. Cytology report revealed an adenomatous nodule in background of lymphocytic thyroiditis. The thyroid function tests were acceptable in follow-up .The nodule size diminished to 11*5 mm at the four months full dose levothyroxine replacement therapy and disappeared after 8 months follow-up according to sonography report .