A 2-year-old boy was diagnosed with secundum atrial septal defect (ASD) and cor-triatriatum upon evaluation of an incidental murmur. He underwent surgical repair shortly after diagnosis (on 17/12/2019) and had a smooth postoperative course. 4 days after discharge, the patient presented to emergency department with generalized body swelling and facial puffiness, he had gained 2Kg since discharge, it was associated with hematuria and oliguria. On examination, the patient looked edematous with bilateral pitting edema, his weight was 9.67 kg, height 73 cm, head circumference 41cm, all growth parameters were below 3rd centile. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 115/67mmHg, heart rate 131 beats/minute, respiratory rate 35 breaths/minute, oxygen saturation 100% on room air, temperature 37C. Cardiovascular examination showed midline sternotomy scar, no visible pulsation, apex beat on the 4th intercostal space, normal heart sounds with no added sound and no murmur. Abdominal examination showed distended abdomen with abdominal girth 50 cm (2 cm above umbilicus), positive shifting dullness, no hepatosplenomegaly with bilateral ballotable kidneys. Other systemic examinations were unremarkable. The results of laboratory investigations are detailed in .
Abdomen and pelvis ultrasound were done and showed increased renal echogenicity and mild ascites. The patient was started on Prednisolone 60mg/m2/day and Hydralazine as needed. The patient continued to have worsening edema and respiratory distress, and he was started on regular Albumin infusion. During his hospital stay he was treated for Acinetobacter sepsis. 10 days from admission the patient continued to show progressive generalized edema and started to develop respiratory distress requiring non-invasive respiratory support. Transthoracic echocardiography showed intact atrial septum with no residual shunt. However, there was an atrial mass measuring 17 mm x 7 mm attached to the left atrial side of the interatrial septum, normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function (, and ). Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with sinus arrhythmia, and incomplete right bundle branch block.
The patient was started on heparin infusion and 3 days later he underwent surgical resection of the atrial mass. Histopathology revealed fibrocollagenous tissue with myxoid changes and foci of ulceration, acute and chronic cells’ infiltration with foreign body giant cell reaction. The patient had a smooth postoperative course with no complications. Given the positive blood culture on admission, he was treated with IV antibiotics for a total of 6 weeks as is recommended for infective endocarditis. He was also maintained on low molecular weight heparin injections for 6 months. As noted from , his platelet counts gradually decreased to normal levels with no intervention. No anti-platelet treatment was given.
From a renal perspective, he was started on cyclosporine and pulse prednisolone. He achieved complete remission within 72 hours and was discharged on cyclosporine and prednisone. He was admitted several times with relapses and renal biopsy showed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.