A 9-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat was presented to the first-opinion practice with a 2 day history of anorexia and vomiting. Physical examination was unremarkable; therefore, the cat was treated symptomatically with 1 mg/kg maropitant SC (Cerenia; Zoetis), 0.2 mg/kg dexamethasone SC (Dexadreson; MSD) and Hill’s Prescription Diet i/d. The following day the cat’s clinical signs had not improved – it developed abdominal pain and pyrexia, prompting its admission to the hospital.
Routine haematology showed a toxic neutrophilic left shift and Dohle bodies. Serum biochemistry was normal. Urinalysis, including multistick, specific gravity, culture and urine protein:creatinine ratio, showed borderline proteinuria . An abdominal-focused assessment using sonography for trauma was performed showing no effusion. Supportive treatment was initiated with intravenous fluid therapy (Vetiflex 11 [Hartmann’s]; Dechra), 1 mg/kg maropitant IV, 1 mg/kg omeprazole IV (Losec; AstraZeneca) and 0.2 mg/kg methadone IV (Physeptone; Martindale Pharma).
The following day the cat was referred for an abdominal ultrasound with a board-certified radiologist, which revealed peritoneal effusion in the cranial abdomen and hyperechoic mesentery. The pancreas was enlarged and hypoechoic. There were foci of hyperechogenicity in the cranial abdomen adjacent to the pylorus and possibly within the pancreas. There was thinning of the gastric wall with hyperechoic material within the gastric wall layers. At the level of the pylorus there was an area where hyperechoic material seemed to cross the entire gastric wall thickness. The suspicion of pancreatitis, peritonitis, gastric ulceration and gastric perforation with free gas in the abdomen was raised on the basis of the ultrasonography findings.
Serosanguinous fluid was retrieved via ultrasound-guided abdominocentesis. In-house cytology showed erythrocytes and occasional free bacteria; however, no intracellular bacteria were identified. The free bacteria were therefore judged to be of questionable clinical significance, and likely related to contamination of the staining solutions.
The cat was prepared for further imaging with a premedication of 0.2 mg/kg of methadone IV, 2 μg/kg of medetomidine hydrochloride IV (Dorbene; Zoetis) and 0.2 mg/kg of midazolam IV (Hypnovel; Roche). Induction of anaesthesia was performed with alfaxalone IV (Alfaxan; Jurox), and the cat was intubated and maintained with isoflurane in oxygen.
CT of the thorax and abdomen was performed. The thoracic images were considered normal. The abdominal images showed a small amount of peritoneal fluid and a few small gas bubbles within the peritoneum located adjacent to the lesser curvature of the stomach, at the level of the gastric body/pylorus . There was gas within the submucosal layer of the gastric wall and stripy areas of hypoattenuation were seen within the pancreas.
The findings were considered to be consistent with gastric wall ulceration, gastric pneumatosis, pneumoabdomen and peritonitis. Necrosis of the gastric wall was raised as a possibility. The pancreatic appearance was compatible with pancreatic oedema and/or pancreatitis.
The cat was administered 20 mg/kg cefuromixe IV (Zinacef; GlaxoSmithKline) and an exploratory laparotomy was performed. A sample of the abdominal effusion was collected for culture. Evidence of a diffusely abnormal gastric wall with generalized erythema and distension was found. A 2 cm × 2 cm focal area of thinned gastric wall was palpated along the lesser curvature of the pyloric antrum at the level identified on the CT scan. However, no evidence of a full-thickness perforated ulcer was found, and a partial gastrectomy was performed of this abnormal region identified at the junction of the cardia and pyloric antrum. An enlarged gastric lymph node was also excised. All samples were sent for histopathology and culture. An esophagostomy tube (14 Fr Mila) was placed at the time of surgery. Anaesthesia, as well as recovery, were routine.
The cat remained in hospital with the following treatment: 10 mg/kg metronidazole IV (q12h [Metronidazole; Braun]), 20mg/kg cefuromixe IV (q8h), 1mg/kg maropitant IV (q24h), 1mg/kg omeprazole IV (q24h). Analgesia with 0.2 mg/kg methadone IV was administered and adjusted based on Colorado Pain Score Composite, every 4 h. Enteral nutrition was provided with Royal Canin Recovery Liquid until the cat was voluntarily eating 100% of its resting energy requirements.
Histology of the stomach revealed multifocal areas of marked erosion of the gastric mucosa. The lamina propria was effaced and replaced by a layer of eosinophils and basophilic debris containing large quantities of erythrocytes and degenerate neutrophils. The muscularis layer had smooth muscle degeneration. No Helicobacter species were seen. No neoplastic process was identified.
The lymph node histology was consistent with neutrophilic lymphadenitis. Aerobic and anaerobic culture of the gastric tissue was negative. Extended aerobic and anaerobic culture, as well as fungal culture from the abdominal effusion, was also negative.
At the time of writing (12 months following surgery) the cat remains clinically well with no recurrence of gastrointestinal clinical signs and with no ongoing treatment.