The patient was a 63-year-old male. There were multiple scattered guttate erythemas and papules distributed across his body, accompanied by persistent itching for a duration of one week. On April 16, 2020, the patient underwent a laparoscopic distal gastrectomy to treat “differentiated adenocarcinoma of the gastric antrum.” Subsequent regular check-ups revealed multiple metastases in the cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes. The patient has been receiving 200 mg of the PD-1 inhibitor Sintilimab every three weeks for five cycles as of April 2021. The patient experienced sporadic erythemas and papules with multiple guttate lesions after completing the fifth cycle. Some of the lesions exhibited whitish scales and were accompanied by itching. There was no fever or joint pain. On August 4, 2021, when the patient sought consultation at the dermatology department, considering the possibility of guttate psoriasis, a skin biopsy was conducted for a comprehensive evaluation. The patient was in good physical health, had no prior personal history of psoriasis, and denied any family history of the condition. Clinical assessment: The patient’s overall health was satisfactory, marked by the absence of fever. Dermatological evaluation: revealed erythematous lesions and papules on the trunk and limbs, accompanied by minor scales, varying in size from rice grains to soybeans (refer to ). The body surface area (BSA) involvement is 8%, the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) is 6.5, and the Physician Global Assessment (PGA) is 2.3. Laboratory analysis: including blood routine, urine routine, biochemistry, and other parameters, demonstrated normal results. Histopathology of skin lesion: There was excessive keratinization, incomplete keratinization, and neutrophilic microabscesses within the stratum corneum; irregular hyperplasia of the epidermis, local spongiosis, thinning or absence of granular layer, neutrophilic pustules within the epidermis, dilated dermal papillary blood vessels, and infiltration of neutrophils and lymphocytes in the surrounding area (see ).