A 19-year-old female with a history of seizure disorder presented to the emergency department in status epilepticus. She had no prior history of cardiovascular disease or known family history suggestive of arrhythmia. She was unsuccessfully treated with lorazepam, then requiring escalation to propofol and endotracheal intubation. Enteral anti-epileptic therapy was started in conjunction with intravenous burst suppression using levetiracetam 1500mg BID, phenytoin 100mg TID, lacosamide 200mg BID and perampanel 6mg daily - titrated to EEG assessments over 48 hours. The patient also received a single dose of phenobarbital. The initials blood work up including complete blood counts, electrolytes, renal profile, hepatic profile and glucose were within the normal limits. On the third day of admission, the patient developed evidence of a wide complex tachycardia with a rate of 130bpm. Attempts to restore her rhythm with amiodarone, lidocaine, and electrical cardioversion has been failed. Careful assessment of her 12-lead ECGs revealed progressive widening of the QRS to 360 ms and prolongation of QTc to 640 ms via Bazett method . The ECG changes suggest toxic effects of sodium channel blocking agents. Initial treatment included repeated doses of intravenous sodium bicarbonate followed by an infusion with a goal of pH 7.45–7.55, continuous cardiac monitoring, discontinuing amiodarone and lidocaine, as well as down-titrating the antiepileptic agents. Phenytoin and perampanel were discontinued and the lacosamide dose was reduced by 50%. Despite these changes, the patient developed a refractory wide complex tachycardia– as such urgent dialysis was initiated to increase the rate of drug elimination. Of note her total phenytoin level was 73 μmol/L (adjusted for albumin), at the upper limit of normal and we couldn't measure the free phenytoin level. Upon initiation of dialysis, the patient's QRS and QTc progressively narrowed to normal within 12 hours . The patient's condition has been stabilized following the initial eight-hour run, and no further sessions were required.