A 57 -year-old female presented with incidental ultrasonic evidence of left upper pole renal mass in Nov. 2001. Further evaluation with abdominal Magnetic Resonance Imaging revealed a mass in the upper pole of the left kidney with radiologic characteristics of renal cell carcinoma . Left radical nephrectomy was performed sparing the left adrenal gland. The pathology specimen analysis showed a cystic mass 3 × 3 × 5 cm with yellowish friable tissue. Sections showed malignant epithelial cells, arranged in sheets. The picture was consistent with renal cell carcinoma, Grade II Fuhrman nuclear characteristics, confined to the capsule, neither pelvicalyceal nor vascular invasion was found (pT1bN0M0). Postoperatively she did not receive immunotherapy or chemotherapy. Apart from her hypertension which was well controlled with amlodipine and valsartan, subsequent clinical and radiological follow up showed no local or metastatic recurrence till 5 years after the operation then she stopped her visits. On October 2016 an incidental mass was found in the right adrenal gland during a checkup visit for the status of her right solitary kidney. Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography scan was done, revealing a well-defined mass with a smooth outline in the right adrenal gland measuring 54 × 48 × 39 mm with a central necrosis. The density of the solid component was 38 HU. In dynamic study the solid component showed significant enhancement after intravenous contrast administration . Thorough hematological, biochemical and hormonal investigations were performed; all were within normal range. The results of laboratory examination showed the adrenal mass to be nonfunctional. The condition was well clarified for the patient and consent was taken to do right adrenalectomy. Under general anesthesia, in left lateral position through right transcostal incision, right adrenalectomy was done . No any perioperative complications were recorded and she was discharged home on 4th post-operative day. Pathological examination revealed morphological and immunohistochemical findings in line with metastatic renal cell carcinoma, including positive staining for AE1/AE3, cytokeratin 7, vimentin, and CD10, and negative staining for CDX-2, inhibin, and synaptophysin (, ). During the last 2 years she has being on regular follow up. Whole body Positron Emission Tomography-Computed Tomography with fluorodeoxyglucose was performed, neither local nor metastatic recurrence was observed in any system.