A 49-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with a history of parenteral injection of 10 mL OP compound (Dichlorvos 76%) over a swelling on his left leg . The compound was injected by the patient himself as a therapy to decrease the size of swelling as suggested by his friends. Two hours after self-administration, the patient developed nausea and vomiting and was treated with antiemetics and discharged from the local hospital on the same day. The next morning patient developed abdomen pain associated with multiple episodes of vomiting and giddiness. The patient was then referred to tertiary care for intensive care.
On arrival at ED, the patient was conscious, oriented, tachypneic with an RR–35 CPM, PR–120 bpm, BP–160/90 mm Hg, temperature–36.8°C, SpO2–88%@RA, pupils–bilateral 3 mm sluggishly reactive, bilateral crepitations present on auscultation, and fasciculations were present. Bilateral plantar reflex and deep tendon reflexes were normal. The patient was immediately supported with 6 liters of oxygen on NRBM, stat Inj. Atropine 6 mg was given followed by Inj. Atropine 2 mg/hour infusion, the dose was titrated based on signs of atropinization. Inj. PAM 2 gm IV loading dose was administered over 30 minutes followed by a 500 mg/hour infusion. After 45 minutes of arrival into ED, his sensorium deteriorated, tachypnea worsened with abdomino-thoracic breathing pattern and emerging bilateral ptosis. The patient was intubated and mechanically ventilated in view of respiratory distress and low GCS. Arterial blood gas analysis showed pH:7.365, PO2:68.1, PCO2:43.7, and HCO3:23.5. The patient was not improving with conventional therapy for OP poisoning, raising the doubts of the swelling on the leg being a source/depot for prolonged toxin release. The leg swelling was then excised by the surgical team, biopsy showed granuloma with fungal hyphae, for which the patient was started on antifungal medications. He developed features of intermediate syndrome such as respiratory muscle weakness, proximal muscle weakness during ICU stay, and atropine infusion and ventilatory support were continued. The patient subsequently improved and was discharged.