An 84-year-old Caucasian woman presented for repeat gastroscopy for follow-up of a benign gastric ulcer. She gave a 12-month history of worsening abdominal pain, nausea, non-feculent vomiting, diarrhea and approximately 20 kilogram weight loss. She denied any hematemesis, melena or fever. At presentation our patient was frail and emaciated. Regarding clinical examination, there were no abnormal abdominal findings.
A chronic gastric ulcer on the greater curve of her stomach had been first diagnosed at gastroscopy eighteen months earlier. Since then she had undergone four further gastroscopies without any change. Biopsies had only demonstrated features of chronic inflammatory change. Helicobacter pylori had never been identified. Our patient was taking aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis and had been started on pantoprazole at 40 milligrams twice daily when the ulcer was first identified. Our patient's general practitioner confirmed prescription requests for this medication.
On this occasion, gastroscopy revealed a deep ulcer of the greater curve of the stomach that appeared to penetrate the muscular layer and was highly suspicious of a fistula. The pathological report of the performed biopsy showed chronic inflammatory changes. An abdominal CT demonstrated a fistula between the stomach and transverse colon and excluded malignant disease. Contrast CT successfully diagnosed a fistula, excluded locally invasive disease and allowed pre-operative planning in a single step. A colonoscopy showed no evidence of primary colonic disease and failed to visualize the fistulous opening .
At laparotomy there were dense adhesions between the greater curve of the stomach and the distal transverse colon. The gastric ulcer together with the fistulous track and colonic opening were excised en bloc and primary anastomoses performed as malignant disease could not be definitely ruled out. A feeding jejunostomy was performed . Histopathology showed chronic inflammatory changes consistent with gastric ulceration. No malignancy was identified.
Our patient was discharged to a peripheral hospital on the twentieth post-operative day tolerating an oral diet.