In January 2018, a 56-year-old woman came to our hospital complaining of obvious abdominal distension, lower extremity edema, and difficulty breathing for three days.
She had received diuretic treatment in a local hospital for lower extremity edema 5 d ago, following which the symptoms of edema improved.
In 2000, the patient underwent modified radical mastectomy for unilateral breast cancer with mammary ductal carcinoma (cT1cN0M0). The woman re-underwent modified radical mastectomy for breast cancer in 2003 due to contralateral breast cancer. In 2008, the woman underwent hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy for multiple uterine fibroids and dysfunctional uterine bleeding at the age of 46.
The patient had a history of hypertension for approximately 20 years, had blood pressures of up to 200/110 mmHg, and took oral Betaloc, Irbesartan, and Sulvastatin calcium tablets daily, with good blood pressure control achieved. The patient’s father died of cardiac cancer, and her mother died of coronary heart disease without a history of carcinoma. The patient had a total of 7 siblings, and the eldest sister had a history of double mastectomy for breast cancer. Figure is a detailed family diagram for the patient.
We performed a careful physical examination and found that the patient’s bilateral groin areas had several swollen lymph nodes, and the largest one was approximately 1 cm × 2 cm. The patient had edema (++), which was nondepressed, was positive in the abdomen, and had no obvious tenderness or rebound tenderness. Bilateral breath sounds were reduced, and percussion of the chest showed dullness. No obvious abnormalities were found in the gynecological examination.
The preoperative serum level of cancer antigen (CA)-125 was 1634.00 U/mL.
The patient’s abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan results on January 9, 2018 were as follows: (1) Bilateral pleural effusion, ascites, and subcutaneous edema of the chest and abdomen; (2) Mild pericardial thickening; (3) A small inflammatory lesion in the right lung; (4) Mediastinal and double inguinal lymphadenopathy; (5) Bilateral breast and uterus absence; and (6) Mild fatty liver. Gynecological ultrasound examination results on January 8, 2018 were as follows: (1) After hysterectomy; and (2) Pelvic and abdominal effusion.