A 44-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to the hospital following an unheralded episode of chest pain 12 h prior to admission. The patient described transient chest tightness occurring at rest, associated with diaphoresis, dyspnoea, and anxiety. This was followed by an intermittent ache radiating to the left arm. This was not associated with eating or a heavy meal. There was no history of illicit drug use; the only recent medication of relevance was of sildenafil 3 days prior for erectile dysfunction.
The patient was a former smoker of 10–15 cigarettes/day for 12 years, having stopped smoking 14 years ago. He reported drinking only 1–2 glasses of wine per week. He had a history of varicose veins but no other significant past medical history, family history, or other cardiac risk factors. Clinical examination was unremarkable. Clinical observations were within normal parameters.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated normal sinus rhythm without any specific ECG changes . Relevant abnormal bloods included a Troponin T of 777 ng/L rising to 1050 ng/L (normal <14 ng/L), a C-reactive protein of 30 mg/L (normal <6 mg/L), and N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide of 183 pg/mL (normal <100 pg/mL). All other blood tests and chest X-ray were unremarkable. Invasive coronary angiography demonstrated non-obstructed coronary arteries . The patient was treated as myocardial infarction with unobstructed coronary arteries (MINOCA). No intracoronary imaging was performed at the time.
Cardiac MRI (CMR) was performed to further delineate the diagnosis. This demonstrated hypokinesia in the mid to distal left circumflex artery (LCx) and mid to distal right coronary artery (RCA) territories with associated myocardial oedema on T2-STIR imaging. There were multiple focal areas of transmural late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the lateral and inferior walls . This pattern was in keeping with an ischaemic cause rather than myocarditis (which would be mid-myocardial and/or epicardial). Based on the CMR findings, the diagnosis of multiple focal embolic infarctions in the LCx and RCA territories was established.
To investigate the cause of embolism, bilateral leg ultrasound Doppler was performed but was negative for deep venous thrombosis. Thrombophilia screen was performed shortly after admission but during the period of presumed acute thrombosis and therefore inconclusive in supporting any significant predisposition for thromboembolism. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated normal left ventricular (LV) systolic and diastolic function with hypokinesia matching the CMR regional wall abnormalities, but no obvious intra-cardiac shunt, or other structural abnormality.
Further investigations to find an embolic source included a contrast bubble echocardiogram. A right-to-left shunt was demonstrated at rest and on the sniff, with an excess of 150 bubbles seen in the LV on the release of Valsalva (Video 1). These findings were consistent with a communication within the inter-atrial septum. A slit-like tunnelled patient foramen ovale (PFO) was further confirmed on transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) with no evidence of intra-cardiac thrombus .
Following confirmation of the right-to-left shunt on TOE, the patient was converted to oral anticoagulation with input from an adult congenital heart specialist regarding possible defect closure. Despite suitability for defect closure, this was not pursued due to the lack of local funding of this procedure for the indication for presumed embolic MI. Repeat cardiac MRI at 6 weeks and 6 months show resolution of oedema with residual late enhancement representing fibrosis in the areas of infarction . The patient remains well without any further admission with embolic phenomena.