One year before presentation to our hospital, a 40-year-old Japanese female presented to another hospital with lumpiness in her left breast. The patient had no medical history or family history of breast or ovary cancer. There was no history of drinking or smoking. At the previous hospital, a core needle biopsy revealed invasive ductal carcinoma, estrogen receptor-positive, progesterone receptor-positive, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative with a Ki-67 index of 23%. On the basis of the examination results, the patient was diagnosed with early breast cancer (cT1N0M0, cStage I) and underwent partial mastectomy with axillary lymph node dissection. After the mastectomy, the patient received radiation therapy (RT) with 50 Gray (Gy) in 25 fractions as initial irradiation for the left breast. After the initial irradiation of 50 Gy, she received 10 Gy in five fractions of a sequential boost for the tumor bed to a total dose of 60 Gy . Tamoxifen was administered after RT.
At 6 months after RT, she presented with a dull pain in her chest wall. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) revealed uptake of 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) in the sternum [maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 4.5] . Because the patient had a history of breast cancer and FDG-PET results showed a low possibility of malignant disease other than breast cancer, biopsy examination was omitted. The diagnosis was sternal metastasis of breast cancer. The patient had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Score of 1.
Although the patient was recommended chemotherapy and RT for bone metastasis of the sternum, she refused to receive chemotherapy and RT owing to concerns about damage caused by these therapies. She and her family requested PBT for her bone metastasis of the sternum. Treatment with the aromatase inhibitor and luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone agonists was also started at the previous hospital.
The patient was informed of the option of receiving PBT as an alternative to RT. It was difficult to use definitive RT of more than 60 Gy for the metastasis because the sternal metastasis was located close to the initial field of RT. We also considered stereotactic radiotherapy or volumetric modulated arc therapy for her bone metastasis. However, we did not select these therapies because of the increased risk of radiation-induced cardiotoxicity by X-ray treatment.
We gave the patient an explanation about late complications after PBT. She agreed to receive PBT in favor of tumor control despite late complications. The PBT system at our institute (Proton beam system, Mitsubishi, Tokyo, Japan) uses synchrotron and scattering methods. The gross tumor volume (GTV) included the bone metastasis of the sternum. The clinical target volume (CTV) was defined as GTV plus 0.5-cm margins and the whole sternum. We determined the CTV on the basis of the margins that surgery is performed on a solitary sternal metastasis. The planning target volume (PTV) was CTV plus 0.5-cm margins. The daily PBT fractions were 2.5 relative biological effectiveness (RBE) for PTV that received a total dose of 70 Gy RBE in 28 fractions. The overall treatment duration was 41 days. After initial irradiation of 50 Gy RBE in 20 fractions , the patient received 20 Gy RBE in 8 fractions of a sequential boost for the sternal metastasis alone to a total dose of 70 Gy RBE . The dosimetric comparison between PBT and photon beam therapy is shown in Table and Figure .
The acute side effect of grade 2 dermatitis according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.0. occurred during PBT , but there was no acute or late complication higher than grade 3. Four months after PBT, the patient became aware of pain near the radiation field after exercising.
Although the symptoms resolved in about a month, the hormone therapy was continued. At 3 years after PBT, the patient remains in complete remission without surgery or chemotherapy .
The timeline for the present case is shown in Fig. .