A 48-year-old woman presented to our outpatient neurology with a headache, nausea, and vomiting for one day. Her headache was persistent, tolerable and blunt in the right temporal region. She had a hypertension history for three years and had been controlled within normal range by antihypertensive drugs. She had no psychosocial and familial hereditary history. Neurological examination was normal. Routine blood tests, serum C-reactive protein level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate showed normally. Serum thyroid hormone and sex hormone level were also in the normal range. Serum anti-MPO and P-ANCA were weakly positive, while other indicators including antinuclear, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-dsDNA, anti-Sm, anti-RNP, anti-Scl-70, anti-RP3, anti-GBM, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in cytoplasmic, antibodies to neuro-paraneoplastic syndromes, neuromyelitis optica (NMO), myelin basic protein (MBP) and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) in blood as well as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were negative. Serum tumor markers were negative. Lumber puncture showed higher intracranial pressure with 240 mmH2O. Subsequent CSF analysis showed normal protein, glucose, and cell count. Testing on the bacterial, viral, fungal and cryptococcal pathogens of CSF was negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed multifocal white matter hyperintensity (WMH) lesions (cortico-subcortical) on T2 and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) associated mass effect, which were slight hypointense on T1 and didn’t enhance on gadopentetate enhanced MRI . Susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) revealed multiple cerebral microbleeds in cortical and subcortical areas . Magnetic resonance spectrum (MRS) demonstrated a normal spectrum. . Magnetic resonance angiography showed normally . Magnetic resonance venogram showed thinness in the bilateral transverse and left sigmoid sinus and decreased signal intensity . Further digital subtraction angiography excluded venous sinus thrombosis. The genetic sequencing showed ApoE ε4 homozygosity and a variant in SORL1 .
Based on these findings, we made a diagnosis of probable CAA-ri. We firstly treated the patient with dexamethasone 10 mg/day via venous for three days and then reduced it by half for three days, followed by oral prednisolone 60 mg/day tapered within six weeks (a weekly reduction of 10 mg). On the 3rd day of treatment, her headache was significantly relieved. MRI demonstrated that the lesions on FLAIR almost completely disappeared six weeks later . She presented to our clinic with complaints of a headache again after corticosteroid withdrawal for three months. MRI indicated CAA-ri relapsed and SWI showed that the microbleeds in cortical/subcortical areas were increased . We launched the methylprednisolone 1000 mg pulse therapy for her. Lesions on T2/FLAIR disappeared quickly. We recommended reducing the dose of corticosteroid gradually until a long-term administration of oral prednisone 5 mg/day. No recurrence was found and the lesions of microbleeds were not increased any more over the next four-month follow-up .