A 61-year-old man with a history of hypertensive cerebellar hemorrhage visited our hospital because of diplopia and fever. The diplopia was recognized when he gazed at the right side and disappeared with monocular vision. In addition, he became aware of right-ear hearing loss a few months before visiting the hospital. He was alert and had no paralysis. The deep tendon reflexes were normal, and any upper motor neuron pathological reflexes were not seen. His tandem walk was disturbed and leaned to the right side. An ocular examination showed faint right lateral gaze palsy. Fundus examination revealed papilledema. Laboratory results included the following: C-reactive protein 0.01 mg/dL (0–0.3 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase 142 U/L (119–229 U/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate = 24 mm/1 h (0–10 mm/1 h), albumin = 3.8 g/dL (4.0–5.0 g/dL), calcium = 8.6 mg/dL (8.6–10.1 mg/dL), angiotensin conversion enzyme = 7.7 IU/L (8.3–21.4 IU/L), soluble interleukin 2 receptor = 291 U/ml (145–519 U/ml), and immunoglobulin G4 = 40.6 mg/dL (4.8–105 mg/dL). Antinuclear antibody test was negative. QuantiFERON® blood tests were negative, and tests for Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasma, syphilis, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and human immunodeficiency virus were all negative. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study revealed a lymphocytosis and elevated protein levels: Cell count 349/mm3 (pleocyte 16/mm3, lymphocyte 333/mm3) and total protein 153 mg/dL. Oligoclonal band was negative.
The chest X-ray was normal and no bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy was seen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed intracranial mass lesions in the right hemisphere of the cerebellum and the left body of the lateral ventricle . Systemic enhanced computed tomography and positron emission tomography showed no extracranial lesions. Two weeks later, the right cerebellar lesion disappeared ; however, after 2 more weeks, the lateral ventricular lesion was enlarged and new mass lesions developed in the choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle [Figure and ]. A neuroendoscopic biopsy was performed on the lesion of the left body of the lateral ventricle . The histopathology studies revealed epithelioid granulomatous inflammation and large numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells infiltrating perivascular spaces . The biochemical examinations and blood and CSF culture revealed no organisms, and the histopathology findings ruled out vasculitis. Based on the clinical course and the exclusion of these other granulomatous diseases, isolated neurosarcoidosis was diagnosed. Methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day) was administered for 3 days, and the intracranial lesions almost disappeared . Corticosteroids were continued and gradually tapered off over a period of 12 months. No exacerbations or recurrences were found even up to a year later .