A 43 year old male patient was referred to our hospital for an elective laparoscopic sigmoidectomy due to complicated sigmoid diverticular disease. The patient complained of a 4 month history of mild lower abdominal pain that was predominately localized to the left lower quadrant. The pain was associated with alternating bowel habits and several episodes of bleeding per rectum mixed with stool. The patient also recently noticed onset of dysuria, pneumaturia, and fecaluria. His past surgical history is significant for bilateral laparoscopic hernia repair (TAPP) with mesh placement, which was fixed with tacks 7 years previously and varicocelectomy 5 years ago. He has no relevant medical history of note.
Examination of the patient revealed mild left lower quadrant tenderness to palpation. All laboratory markers were within normal limits. A CT abdomen and pelvis revealed multiple sigmoid colon diverticula, diffuse mural thickening of mid sigmoid colon with severe adjacent fat stranding, abscess formation adjacent to the sigmoid colon with air pockets sized 3 × 7 × 8 cm , and a colo-vesical fistula formation causing severe mural thickening in the roof of the urinary bladder with air pockets in the urinary bladder. Colonoscopy revealed multiple sigmoid diverticulitis and inflammatory sigmoid lesion that was biopsied; the lesion however could not be bypassed due to fear of perforation. Biopsy revealed mild chronic colitis and was negative for granuloma or dysplasia.
The patient was admitted and prepped for laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy and excision of colo-vesical fistula. Intraoperative findings revealed a sigmoid colon abscess, a colo-vesical fistula, left inguinal region mesh eroded into the colon from his previous laparoscopic hernia repair . Abscess drainage, excision of the colo-vesical fistula and sigmoidectomy with removal of the mesh was performed. The right mesh was in place.
Post operatively the patient was started on antibiotics (tazocin), had an abdominal drain that was removed post-operative day 5, and placement of a Foley's catheter for a period of two weeks with a follow up cystogram before removal. The patient had an uneventful post-operative course was tolerating oral meals and discharged on day 6 post operatively. Upon follow up in the outpatients department two weeks after discharge the patient was doing well with no complications reported.