A 46-year-old Japanese man suffered from IgA nephropathy, prior to be given tonsillectomy 29 years ago. Urinalysis revealed neither hematuria nor proteinuria after surgical removal of his tonsils. The patient experienced a sudden onset of Crohn’s disease 6 years ago. As a result, he was administered several medications to alleviate the symptoms of Crohn’s disease; initially, 5-aminosalicylic acid (ASA). Due to the unstable state of Crohn’s disease, an ileum resection was performed. Additionally, prednisolone, azathioprine (AZA) and infliximab were eventually incorporated in his treatment. Despite therapeutic drug intervention, his abdominal symptoms including diarrhea persisted. Consequently, he was then referred to our hospital because of proteinuria and urinary occult blood. An otolaryngologic check-up revealed no sinusitis, and residual tonsil and gross physical examination provided no remarkable findings. Abdominal CT displayed bilateral slightly atrophic kidneys. A laboratory workup showed a mild renal dysfunction (creatinine; 1.37 mg/dl, creatinine clearance; 69.1 ml/min), without any other abnormal findings of blood (IgG, 1492.3 mg/dl; IgA, 223.2 mg/dl; IgM, 33.8 mg/dl; C3, 101.4 mg/dl; C4, 22.7 mg/dl; CRP, 0.09 mg/dl, anti-streptolysin O, 109 IU/ml; normal range: 0–239; anti-streptokinase, ×1280; normal: < ×2560). Serologic tests for hepatitis B and C and HIV were all negative. Urinalysis showed proteinuria (2+) and occult blood (2+), with 5–9 red blood cells and < 1 white blood cells per high-power field in sediment. Twenty four-hour urine collection revealed a protein level of 1.44 g/day. To detect occult blood (1+ to 2+) and continuous proteinuria (2+ to 3+), a renal biopsy was performed to examine whether IgA nephropathy relapsed or other glomerular diseases occurred. Immunofluorescent examination of mesangial cells exhibited intense (3+) mesangial granular staining of IgA . Moderate (2+) granular staining of IgM and C3 in the mesangial area was observed. Examination by light microscopy revealed expansion of mesangial cells and fibrotic cellular crescents . These findings are consistent with IgA nephropathy. Given these observations, prednisolone of 40 mg/day was started, with 10–20 % reduction monthly and with every subsequent visit. After 1-year of treatment (5 mg/day dosage of prednisolone is continued), his urine protein levels decreased to 0.1 to 0.3 g/gCr, with no occult blood was detected.
Due to his clinical course, we strongly suspected the association between the occurrence of intestinal inflammatory disease and the exacerbation of IgA nephropathy. Based on the predominance of IgA2 subtype found in the intestinal immune system, the patient’s excised ileum and biopsied kidney species were examined to determine whether IgA2 subtype might be mainly involved in the exacerbation of IgA nephropathy. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that lymphocytes and plasma cells had infiltrated on the inflammatory ileum mucosa. In particular, at the layer of submucosa, total IgA, IgA1 and IgA2 positive cells were widely distributed, a number of IgA1 positive cells were observed as well as IgA2 positive cells . Alternatively, the patient’s kidney sample demonstrated that IgA1 was mainly deposited granular to mesangial areas . These results raised the possibility that inflammatory ileum derived IgA1 in our patient suffering from Crohn’s disease was in fact associated with the exacerbation of IgA nephropathy.