A 64-year-old woman known to have cirrhosis secondary to Hepatitis C was transplanted in our center to treat drug-induced fulminant hepatitis failure. The patient received a standard post-op immunosuppressive protocol (including corticosteroids, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil).
She also received caspofungin (70 mg at day 1 then 50 mg/day) according to ESCMID recommendations as targeted prophylaxis against IA during 15 days . The early post-operative period was associated with hemorrhagic episodes and peri-hepatic hematoma requiring several re-interventions whilst maintaining the antifungal prophylactic treatment. From post-operative day (POD) 31, the patient developed several septic shocks caused by Enterococcus faecium, Escherichia coli, and Candida glabrata, and all were treated by broad spectrum antibiotics and caspofungin was reintroduced.
On POD 63, the patient got fever resistant to antibiotics. Her chest CT-scan showed right-sided pleural effusion with passive atelectasis and alveolar opacity. Broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was performed and its direct examination displayed Aspergillus-like branched hyphae. At the same time, galactomannan (GM) antigen index (Platelia Aspergillus, BioRad) and (1–3)-β-D-glucan (BDG) (Cape Code) in serum, which were previously negative, became positive (GM antigen index > 6 (threshold index: 0.5), BDG = 234 pg/mL (threshold value: 80 pg/mL)). Aspergillus real-time PCR (qPCR), based on a target of 67-bp DNA fragment specific to the multicopy gene encoding the 28S rRNA of A. fumigatus, was positive in serum (Cq value = 35) . Eventually, based upon data from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Mycoses Study Group (EORTC/MSG) , the patient was classified as having a probable IFI. Caspofungin was then switched to voriconazole (200 mg twice/day). On Sabouraud media, at 37 °C, the culture of BAL showed growth of several greenish to brownish colonies of filamentous fungi with a powdery aspect. Macroscopic examination revealed brown colonies on Malt media and surrounded by a white mycelium. The reversed side of the colonies was yellow. On Czapek Yeast Autolysated Agar (CYA) media, the detected colonies were much greener in color with velvety texture. Microscopic examination of the colonies showed Aspergillus biseriate conidial heads with curved conidiophores . On the basis of these macroscopic and microscopic examinations, the species can be suggested but must be confirmed by molecular identification. The follow-up GM antigen index, even with voriconazole, remained positive (index> 6 at POD 65 and 70). Antifungal drug susceptibilities were determined by Etest on RPMI medium supplemented with 2% glucose. MICs were read at 48 h of incubation at 35 °C. MICs of amphotericin B, itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, micafungin, and caspofungin were 0.75 μg/mL, 12 μg/mL, 4 μg/mL, 6 μg/mL, 0.016 μg/mL, and 0.5 μg/mL, respectively. Since the antifungal susceptibility revealed elevated MICs to azoles, voriconazole was then switched to liposomal amphotericin B. Additionally the results of EUCAST method confirmed the high MICs to azoles. On POD 81, the patient died from multiple organs failure and refractory septic shock secondary to pneumonia. Autopsy was not performed.
A molecular identification of this Aspergillus was performed. Complete genomic DNA was extracted from a mature subculture on Sabouraud agar using QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen Sciences Ing.) after a step of bead beading in MagNA Lyser Instrument (Roche). The rDNA of partial β-tubulin and calmodulin genes were amplified as described by Samson et al. . Sequencing reactions were carried out for both strands. When compared with the partial calmodulin gene sequences available in the NCBI database, the highest identity was obtained with A. pseudodeflectus NRRL 278 strain (Genbank accession number EF652368.1) and NRRL 6135 strain (Genbank accession number EF652419.1) with nucleotide identity rates of 100 and 99%, respectively over a sequence length of 573 bp. For the partial β-tubulin sequences, identity rates of 99% were obtained with both strains, NRRL 278 (Genbank accession number EF652280.1) and CBS 596.65 (Genbank accession number EF591732.1). Phylogenetic trees of these two sequences, alone and combined, were built with the MEGA 6.05.1 software . The neighbor-joining method, using the Kimura two-parameter model with 1000 bootstraps replications, was applied to each data set. The sequence relatedness of our strain with the species strains type of section Usti is shown in Fig. .