A 56-year-old, 61-kg, 168-cm man was admitted to our institution for a routine physical examination. His vital signs were as follows: pulse, 100 beats/min, blood pressure, 140/100 mmHg; oxygen saturation, 95% on room air; and body temperature, 36.5 °C. No murmurs, dyskinesia or paresthesia were detected. The patient had no history of atrial fibrillation. His serum N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide concentration was slightly elevated (131 pg/ml), and his prothrombin time was 10 s. No abnormalities were found in the complete blood count or tumor markers. The serum procalcitonin level was 0.40 ng/ml, the cardiac troponin I level was 0.012 ng/ml, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 12 mm/h, and the C-reactive protein level was 3.10 mg/L. A blood culture was negative. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a well-defined pedunculated mass measuring 22 × 22 × 45 mm in ascending aortic lumen . Magnetic resonance imaging showed multiple asymptomatic cerebral infractions. No abnormalities were found on color Doppler ultrasound of the lower extremities. Furthermore, magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated atherosclerosis of the ascending aorta, and the mass was suspected to be thrombus .
The patient underwent a thrombectomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established by cannulation of the right femoral artery and right atrium. The ascending aorta was clamped proximal to the brachiocephalic trunk. A thrombus that was attached to the aortic wall by a stalk was located approximately 3 cm above the aortic annulus . The thrombus was removed. The implant site appeared to be an atherosclerotic plaque with extensive ulceration. The aortic valve was preserved. There was no sign of endocarditis, aortic valve insufficiency, or other pathological findings. The ascending aorta was replaced with a 24-mm-diameter artificial vessel (Woven Double Velour Vascular Graft; Maquet Cardiovascular LLC, Wayne, NJ, USA).
Histopathological examination revealed that the mass was a thrombus . The postoperative course was uneventful. No recrudescence or concomitant visceral or vascular embolism was observed. The patient was discharged 11 days after surgery. The patient was treated with oral aspirin for 6 months postoperatively.