A 24-year-old, otherwise healthy, male initially presented with a large, recurrent chondrosarcoma of the anterior skull base. This was the third recurrence in the last 5 years, with the tumor showing signs of aggressive growth. Radiotherapy had been previously attempted with no success. Gross total resection transcranially of the tumor with skull base reconstruction was successfully achieved, and patient was discharged home with no issues. The patient then developed severe, life-threatening epistaxis, 3 weeks postresection, for which he was rehospitalized. CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could not identify the source of bleeding. Brisk arterial bleeding despite intraoperative nasal packing prompted endoscopic and surgical exploration. Initially, the source was thought to be along the right skull base. A right Lynch incision was made during surgical exploration to ligate the right anterior ethmoidal artery. This incision started at the medial aspect of the eyebrow and continued inferiorly halfway down the nasal sidewall, and provided access to the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries as well as to the orbital apex, optic nerve, and entire orbital roof. However, this did little to control the brisk bleeding from the nasal cavity and facial incision, and did not allow for localization of the bleeding.
When the source could not be identified on surgical exploration, the wound was packed again and the patient emergently transferred to the DSA suite. The right carotid injections revealed postoperative alterations and failed to identify a definitive source of bleed. Subsequent left internal carotid injection revealed a large (12×10 mm) pseudoaneurysm arising from the anterior ethmoidal branch of the ophthalmic artery [Figures and ]. A C-arm CT (Dyna CT) carried out in the DSA suite further demonstrated cross-sectional bone anatomy and precisely localized this pseudoaneurysm in the medial anterior left orbit [Figures and ]. This additional anatomic distinction could not be attained with the DSA study alone.
The treatment options consisted of endovascular embolization versus surgical ligation. Although technically feasible, endovascular embolization via the ophthalmic artery was felt to be associated with an unacceptable risk of visual loss. However, with the precise localization of pseudoaneurysm on Dyna CT, the surgical approach was deemed more desirable and lower risk. Prompt surgical ligation with excellent hemostasis was achieved. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and monitored closely. He was extubated the following day with no recurrent epistaxis. Patient was eventually discharged to home at his baseline 5 days after being readmitted.