A 41-year-old Caucasian man, known to have generalized NF1 since the age of 21, presented at our clinic complaining of a swelling in his left forearm. He reported that his complaint started 1.5 years previously, when he noticed a slow-growing swelling. The patient was assured that the swelling was a simple lipoma that could be electively resectioned. The patient's history revealed no preceding trauma or inflammation. The swelling was not painful. His family history revealed no similar conditions, but his father and grandmother were operated on for bowel carcinoma. According to the physical examination, the patient had generalized cutaneous neurofibromas all over his body and some papillomas in his mouth. He is of average build and was of normal health and without any other systemic diseases. Local examination showed a hard, lemon-sized, non-movable tumour in the ventral aspect of the left middle forearm. The skin was not affected. The range of movement of the left forearm and hand were free, as was the range of movement at the wrist.
Radiological examination started with X-ray imaging of the left forearm. It showed a soft tissue tumour with no bone affection. Ultrasonography showed a 91 × 52 × 50 mm inhomogeneous condensed tumour with a well-defined border. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 95 × 55 × 49 mm well-defined, highly inhomogeneous tumour with liquid and fat equivalent parts. It displaced surrounding tissue .
Following radiological criteria, the tumour was suspected to be malignant. Therefore, we took an open biopsy of the central tumour region. Pathological examination revealed a heterogeneous tumour. There was a region of myxoid ground matrix with parallel elongated spindle-shaped cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and another region of enlarged cells with clear cytoplasm and hyperchromatic and deformed nuclei. We identified multiple apoptosis and some mitosis. Some regions of the tumour were necrotic. Moreover, thrombosed capillary vessels and necrosis were observed. In better differentiated tumour regions, there were lipoblasts with typical polylobulated hyperchromatic nuclei and circumscribed nucleolus vacuoles. According to immunohistochemistry, the lipoblast cells in the well-differentiated component tested positive for S100 protein, but the solid regions were negative. The S100 protein subtype is known as an immunohistopathological marker for defining tumour origins. In conclusion, a diagnosis of a malignant dedifferentiated high-grade liposarcoma was established.
The screening for metastases included computed tomography of the chest and abdomen, as well as bone scintigraphy and a fluorine-18-deoxyglucose-positron emission tomography examination. We found a lymph node metastasis in the left axilla, which was verified by an ultrasound examination. It was irregularly enlarged with a diameter of 23 mm. After consulting the tumour board in our hospital, two surgical options were discussed. The first was to perform a local radical tumour resection with a safety margin, on condition that there was no local spreading. This option was supported by the patient's wish to save his forearm. The second option was to perform an elbow exarticulation. Further treatment should have included radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Intraoperatively, a tumour-free edge was revealed, which allowed the surgeon to proceed towards the tumour resection, with a safety margin . Because the tumour was infiltrating the flexor carpi radialis muscle, both were totally resected. Nevertheless, the relevant nerves and both arteries could be saved, so that normal forearm function was maintained. The resected tumour measured 140 × 10 × 60 mm, with 110 × 30 mm covering skin tissue. The scar of the previous biopsy was resected. The pathological examination confirmed that the tumour was completely resected and the surrounding tissue was free of malignancy. After dissection by the pathologist, grossly, myxoid and jelly-like shiny regions were seen. Microscopically, necroses were seen in the following staining areas of the tumour: haematoxylin-eosin, periodic-acid Schiff and Elastica van Gieson. Other regions showed cellular areas with pleomorphic oval and spindle shaped cells with hyperchromatic nuclei with many atypical mitosis and apoptosis, as in the previous biopsy.
The resected axillary lymph node measured 20 × 20 × 25 mm. Macroscopically it showed lobulated and necrotic brown tissue. Microscopic findings proved it to be a metastasis of the above-mentioned tumour.
Pathology examination of the tumour in the forearm and the enlarged axillary lymph node confirmed the previous diagnosis of a dedifferentiated high-grade (G3) pT2a liposarcoma with left axillary lymph-node metastases. This correlated with stage IV disease, on the staging system of the American Joint Committee on Cancer.
The wounds healed primarly, with no motor, sensory or vascular complications . After successful surgery followed by a 2-week stay in hospital, the patient was discharged. The movement in the operated forearm was free, without limitation.
Ambulant, adjuvant radiotherapy commenced 6 weeks later. The total dose of radiotherapy was determined by normal tissue tolerance. External-beam radiotherapy (1.8 Gy/day, 5 days/week) was given to the left forearm region and to the supraclavicular region with a total dosage of 59.4 Gy. To protect the brachial plexus, the total dosage for the left axillary region was reduced to 50.4 Gy. After extensive discussion with the patient concerning adjuvant chemotherapy, he decided against it for fear of side effects. He has been followed-up and screened continuously every 3 months for possible further malignant transformations or local recurrence.