A 43-year-old male electrical engineer suffered a high-voltage electric shock injury (22,000 V). He stated that the current entered his body through his left arm, which was amputated due to severe burning. During hospitalization at an outside hospital, an ophthalmic exam was performed for the decreased vision in both eyes only after treatment at the intensive care unit, and bilateral cataract was found. He underwent cataract extraction and intraocular lens implantation in both eyes 3 months after the injury. Although cataract surgeries were uneventful, visual improvement was slight, and he was referred to our clinic for further evaluation. Because of the limited information at the referral, we could not confirm visual acuity at the time of the injury.
At the first visit, 9 months after the injury, there was a burn scar on his left face, and his left arm had been amputated. The best-corrected visual acuities (BCVA) were 20/40 in the right eye and hand motion in the left eye. There was no abnormal finding in the anterior segments, but the specular microscopy showed decreased endothelial cell count (1,838 cells/mm2) and hexagonality (49%) in the left eye compared to the right eye which showed a cell density of 2,463 cells/mm2 and hexagonality of 61%. Funduscopic examination showed no significant finding in the right eye , but a pigmented fibrotic lesion inferior to the pale optic disc, generalized vessel attenuation, and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) atrophy at mid-periphery were observed in the left eye . Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) examination revealed disruption and a focal defect in the ellipsoid zone in the right macula , and there was diffuse retinal atrophy in the left eye . On fundus autofluorescence, the right eye showed a hyperautofluorescent focus at the fovea , and the left eye showed diffuse hypoautofluorescence at the maculopapillary area . On fluorescein angiogram, the left eye showed diffuse stippled hyperfluorescence corresponding to the RPE atrophy . Both eyes showed peripheral leakage in the late phase implicating vasculopathy, which was more prominent in the left eye .
When reviewing the previous OCT images performed at the outside hospital, the left eye image 3 months after the injury showed atrophic change comparable with the OCT image at our clinic , but the right eye showed an impending macular hole with a very thin inner retinal layer . On OCT image 5 months after the injury, the outer retinal defect in the right eye had decreased .
He was regularly followed up until 18 months after the injury. There was further improvement in ellipsoid zone integrity on the OCT image of the right eye , and BCVA had improved to 20/32, while there was no change in the left eye .