This case involves a five-year-old Hispanic female with AOS who presented for revision of surgical release of a left clubfoot deformity. She also needed revision of right tenotomy and osteotomy for a calcaneovalgus foot deformity. She weighed 25 kg. Her history includes global developmental delay, craniosynostosis, encephalocele, hydrocephalus, amniotic band syndrome in all four extremities, syndactyly, tethered spinal cord, and uncontrolled seizures with a history of status epilepticus in infancy. Seizures were controlled at the time of presentation for surgery as last seizure was about 6 months before the presentation. Our patient had cardiac workup which was negative for congenital cardiac malformations (CCM). Her surgical history includes multiple cranial and lower extremity surgeries, and a ventriculoperitoneal shunt and revisions. Current medications include oxcarbazepine and polyethylene glycol. Airway exam was significant for dysmorphic features. This included hypertelorism, slightly deviated jaw, and retrognathia. Detailed airway exam was difficult as patient remained uncooperative and aggressive. Mother mentioned history of snoring but no tests to confirm obstructive sleep apnea were available preoperatively. Patient also had history of difficult intravenous access during previous operations.
As per mom, the child received her antiepileptic medications at home with pureed food on a routine basis. On the day of surgery, the patient did not receive her morning dose of antiepileptic medication, as her mother did not feel comfortable giving it without food. Given her aggressive behavior and history of uncontrolled seizures, premedication of 10 mg oral midazolam was given. The decision was made to have video laryngoscope and fiberoptic bronchoscope immediately available for intubation given the patient’s external airway features. Pediatric otolaryngology service was made aware of the possible need for surgical intervention and was immediately available.
Patient was calm when she arrived in the operating room. She was placed on forced air warming blanket. Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists monitors were placed. With slow inhalation induction, we were able to assist ventilation. Oral airway and some jaw thrust maneuvers were needed as anesthesia deepened. At this juncture attempts were made to establish intravenous access. Peripheral intravenous access was placed using vein finder device. After securing intravenous access, a bolus of propofol (50 mg) and 25 mcg (1 mcg/kg) dose of fentanyl was given in addition to assisted ventilation with sevoflurane to facilitate tracheal intubation. No neuromuscular blocking agent was used until the airway was secured. Direct laryngoscopy was avoided in anticipation of a difficult airway. A Cormack Lehane grade III view of the vocal cords was obtained via video laryngoscope. Endotracheal intubation was attempted with slight cricoid pressure to direct the endotracheal tube. Resistance was encountered and so the attempt was aborted. Second attempt was made with use of a bougie. Endotracheal tube then was guided into trachea over the bougie. This time the trachea was successfully intubated using 5.0 cuffed oral endotracheal tube. Placement was confirmed with auscultation and end tidal carbon dioxide. Maintenance of anesthesia was performed with sevoflurane and intermittent 10 mcg boluses of intravenous fentanyl. Rocuronium was added as surgeon requested surgical muscle relaxation. The patient remained stable during maintenance phase and was extubated without consequences. The recovery phase also remained unremarkable.