A 41-year-old man with an 8-mo history of right testicular enlargement.
On June 29, 2018, he underwent right orchiectomy and right inguinal lymph node biopsy. He had no history of trauma, fever, or other complaints. Physical examination showed unilateral enlargement of the right testicle without any superficial lymph node enlargement. The patient received a right orchidectomy. The histopathological diagnosis of DLBCL (non-GCB) was rendered. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections showed diffuse proliferation of medium-sized round cells. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the neoplastic cells expressed CD19, CD20, CD79a, and CD21 and were negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, CyclinD1, and ALK. Ki-67 was positive in 80% of tumor cells. BCL-2 was positive in 80% of tumor cells. BCL-6 was partially positive. C-myc was positive in 60% of tumor cells . The patient was diagnosed with DLBCL (non-GCB) IV. On July 13, 2018, four cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) were given at the local hospital. A follow-up abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed that the lymph nodes continued to enlarge beside the right iliac vessels. On November 13, 2018, a positron emission tomography/CT (PET-CT) scan showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes (4.3 cm × 2.7 cm) beside the right iliac vessels . Two cycles of R2-HyperCVADA (lenalidomide, rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) were given. A treatment intensification strategy was applied, and second-Line R-DHAP (rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine, and cisplatin) was administered. On July 15, 2019, a follow-up PET-CT scan showed that, in addition to the right iliac vessels, the lymph nodes continued to enlarge (4.3 cm × 3.8 cm) .
His past medical history included diabetes and cervical spondylosis.
No personal or family history was available.
Physical examination showed no palpable lymph nodes, organomegaly, or cutaneous lesions.
The peripheral blood and biochemical parameters (liver and renal function and serum lactate dehydrogenase level) were within normal limits. Bone marrow (BM) smear and biopsy did not show evidence of involvement by lymphoma cells.
On November 13, 2018, a PET-CT scan showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes (4.3 cm × 2.7 cm) beside the right iliac vessels and a high standard uptake value (SUV) with a Deauville score of 18.4 .
On July 15, 2019, a follow-up PET-CT scan showed that, in addition to the right iliac vessels, the lymph nodes continued to enlarge (4.3 cm × 3.8 cm). The SUV was high, with a Deauville score of 17. New viable lesions were found in the right adrenal gland, right seminal vesicle gland and surrounding prostate gland, and right groin .