A 76-year-old male presented with a 2-month history of nausea and vomiting associated with weight loss of more than 15 kg. A CT scan without contrast was performed on May 5, 2015, which revealed concentric parietal thickening of the gastric antrum associated with an increase in the size and number of locoregional lymph nodes. On May 7, 2015, the patient underwent an upper digestive endoscopy where an ulcerated lesion was observed in the angular incisure, which was infiltrating the small curvature and antrum, was friable, and there was a large quantity of necrotic material. There was no hiatal hernia, the pylorus was partially stenotic, and it was not possible to pass by the lesion. Due to symptoms of partial gastric obstruction, the patient underwent a laparoscopic-assisted total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y anastomosis and D2 lymphadenectomy on May 19, 2015, with a total duration of 4 h and intraabdominal pressure of 12 mm Hg. There were no intraoperative complications, the hiatus was not opened wide during surgery, and the diaphragmatic pillars were not sutured as this is not a standard of care in our service. Histopathological analysis revealed a moderately differentiated intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma, infiltrating the gastric wall to the serous layer and adipose tissue of the large and small curvatures, measuring 72 × 40 × 24 mm and located in the corpus and antrum. Lymphovascular invasion and the presence of perineural infiltration were additionally identified. The circumferential margins of the large and small omentum were cancer free. Carcinoma metastases were identified in 27 of 47 lymph nodes. Pathologic staging (TNM staging, AJCC 7th edition, 2010) was consistent with a pT4a pN3b gastric adenocarcinoma. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 10 days after surgery with no evidence of anastomotic fistula or any other type of surgical complication.
On June 22, 2015, the patient began adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX). Nine days after the second cycle, the patient was admitted to the emer gency room with emetic symptoms and intense epigastric pain. Electrocardiogram showed no abnormalities. A CT scan was performed and revealed small intestinal herniation through the diaphragm to the left hemithorax without distention of the aforementioned intestines, causing compressive atelectasis of the adjacent parenchymal lung . Liquid distention of the duodenojejunal portion was observed with abrupt tapering in the left thoracoabdominal transition. Given these findings, an emergency exploratory laparoscopy was performed, which took place 60 days after the total gastrectomy. The intraoperative findings revealed that 140 cm of the small intestine were herniated into the thorax. It was initially not possible to pass the small intestine through the iatrogenic orifice; therefore, a small incision was made in the left diaphragm. It was then found that 30 cm of the intestinal tissue was ischemic. Therefore, a portion of it was resected, and a primary anastomosis was performed. After the herniation correction and intestinal resection, the diaphragm was sutured with Prolene. The only minor postoperative complication was an acute high-ventricular-response atrial fibrillation which was treated with amiodarone. The patient was discharged home 9 days after surgery.