The patient was a 23-year-old woman with a history of thrombocytopenia. She owned a dog. On October 15, 2019, she suffered from headache (whole head), nausea, and vomiting, without any disturbance of consciousness. Before admission, she considered it to be “gastritis” and took Rabeprazole (10mg twice a day) orally, but her symptoms did not improve. And after 13 days, she developed fever, with a maximum temperature of 39°C. A lumbar puncture showed an intracranial pressure of 41.5 cm H2O, Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis (260 leukocytes/mm3), glucose 1.5 mmol/L, chlorine 116.5 mmol/L, and protein 1513 mg/L. Gram staining, Ziehl-Neelsen staining, and CSF culture were negative. A GeneXpert tuberculosis test was negative (Cepheid AB, Solna Sweden). The local hospital administered mannitol (250mL every 8h), meropenem (2g every 8h), and levofloxacin (200mg twice a day) treatment. At 15 days after onset, the patient showed weakness in both lower limbs and could not stand. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical and thoracic medullas showed abnormal signals in the spinal cord from the third segment of the cervical spinal cord to the 11th segment of the thoracic spinal cord, indicating myelitis . Therefore, empirical anti-tuberculosis treatment combined steroid (30 mg once a day) therapy was administered at the tuberculosis hospital for 10 days, and the patient’s fever and headache gradually resolved.
On November 13, she was transferred to our hospital due to weakness in both lower limbs. After receiving steroid therapy with a gradually decreased doses, her lower limb weakness and paresthesia improved. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 110 mm/h, and the anti-ribosomal P protein, anti-nuclear ribonuclear protein (anti-nRNP), anti-Sm antibodies and phosphorylated anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) results were positive. The result of the anti-nuclear antibody spot test was 1:80. On November 18, the patient’s blood and CSF were negative for anti-aquaporin 4 (anti-AQP4), anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (anti-MOG), anti-myelin basic protein (anti-MBP), and anti-oligoclonal bands (anti-OB) antibodies. We analyzed the CSF with mNGS, and twenty unique sequence reads of R. felis were identified, . Other detected sequences were within the ranges of laboratory references. The patient, who was able to walk with the help of others, was diagnosed with R. felis meningitis with immune-related myelitis. She was not given doxycycline and other antibiotics, and was discharged on November 22, 2019.
The patient could walk by herself at 2 and 4 months follow-ups after discharge, and immunity-related tests and MRI of the spinal cord showed no abnormalities at follow-ups 2 months .
A 29-year-old man was in good health and did not have any contact with dogs or cats. On August 25, 2019, he was admitted to a local hospital due to severe headache and a sense of periorbital edema who did not have the funduscopy examination. After 26 days, he was hospitalized again with aggravated headache and fever. A brain MRI revealed a Chiari malformation with syringomyelia. A neurological examination showed no abnormality. Lumbar puncture procedures showed increased intracranial pressure and pleocytosis: 29 cm H2O, 46 leukocytes/mm3 on September 29, as well as 35 cm H2O and 76 leukocytes/mm3 on September 30. After empirical treatment with mannitol (250mL every 8h) for 10 days, acyclovir (0.5g every 8h) and ceftriaxone sodium (2g every 12h) for 5 days, his fever improved but his headache continued.
The patient was diagnosed with an “intracranial infection” and was transferred to the Department of Neurology on October 9, 2019 (at 46 days after onset). His funduscopy showed papilledema. He was positive for anti-cardiolipin IgM antibodies, with elevated anti-cyclic peptide containing citrulline (anti-CCP) antibodies, and his ESR was 25 mm/h. Lumbar puncture procedures revealed 33 cm H2O and 46 leukocytes/mm3 on October 10. The CSF was negative for antibodies against herpes simplex virus, human cytomegalovirus, Rubella virus, Toxoplasma gondii, Epstein-Barr virus, and parainfluenza virus. Patients were continued to be treated with mannitol (125mL every 8h), acyclovir (0.5g every 8h) and ceftriaxone sodium (2g every 12h). On October 17, another lumbar puncture was performed, and the intracranial pressure was 25 cm H2O. mNGS of from the CSF detected 38 unique sequences of R. felis . The other detected sequences were within the laboratory reference ranges. The patient was diagnosed with R. felis meningitis and given doxycycline (100 mg every 12 h) for 14 days. The patient was discharged on October 22 with improved headache and reduced cranial pressure.
At 2 and 4 months follow-ups after discharge, the patient had no discomfort and was working normally .
About 2 mL CSF of each patient was collected and stored at −20 °C. Then, the samples were shipped on dry ice for PACEseq mNGS detection (Hugobiotech, Beijing, China). The DNA of CSF was extracted using TIANamp Micro DNA Kit (TIANGEN). The libraries were built using QIAseq™ Ultralow Input Library Kit (Illumina). Qubit (Thermo Fisher) and agarose gel electrophoresis were used to detect the DNA concentration and quality. The qualified libraries were finally sequenced on a Nextseq 550 platform (Illumina). Adapters, short, low-quality, and low-complexity reads were first removed from raw data. Human DNA reads were also filtered out after aligning to human reference database (hg38). The remaining reads were finally mapped to Microbial Genome Databases using Burrows-Wheeler Alignment software .The probable pathogens of samples were distinguished.