We report a rare case of a 32-year-old male, a known case of leprosy presented to our tertiary hospital in February 2017 with pain, swelling, burning sensation, and numbness of multiple joints. The pain started on his ankle and feet, with both hands and feet numbness 9 months ago. Joints swelling and pain gradually developed in the metacarpo-phalangeal joints, proximal inter phalangeal joints, and wrist joints with decreased hand grip . He also had recurrent episodes of low-grade fever and large maculopapular skin lesions (approximately 5cm in diameter) which was hypopigmented, with a roughly symmetric distribution, scattered throughout the back and arms, with central hypoesthesia. He had no painful or thickened nerve roots. Tenderness over right ulnar nerve and left common peroneal nerve were present.
Laboratory investigations revealed white blood cell count of 36,800 (normal 4000–10,000) (93% neutrophils), hemoglobin of 7.9 g/dl (mean corpuscular volume of 74.6 and mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 22.3), and platelet counts of 656,000. Inflammatory markers were raised (C-reactive protein [CRP] of 61 mg/l and erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR] of 87 mm/1 h). Blood and urine culture did not grow any organism. Further investigation revealed negative anti-nuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP), and normal complements. X-rays of hands and foot were normal.
Electromyogram and nerve conduction velocity indicated Mononeuritis multiplex affecting the nerves with preserved “H” reflexes suggestive of Hansen disease.
The patient was started on anti-leprosy drugs (dapsone, rifampicin, and clofazimine) which resulted into gradual improvement of skin lesions, but there was persistence of articular symptoms. Later during the course of treatment, he was started on oral steroid in view of CPN neuritis.
The patient had regular follow up in the outpatient clinic with infectious disease physician. Steroid was tapered slowly and the patient was improved clinically. Four months after initiation of treatment, the patient developed involvement of multiple joints including bilateral hip pain which was referred to knees (more on the left side).
Magnetic resonance imaging was suggestive of bilateral grade 2a avascular necrosis hip (Ficat-Arlet classification) for which he underwent bilateral core decompression with delayed weight-bearing initially. After that, the patient was improved symptomatically for 6 months but later on patient started aggravation of the left hip pain which was diagnosed as the left hip arthritis even though the patient had completed 13 months of anti-leprosy treatment till this time.
The patient was planned for total hip arthroplasty (THA) for the left hip arthritis and the patient was on anti-leprosy treatment, but intraoperative suspicious granulomatous tissue was observed and caseating necrotic fluid was present around the hip joint ;hence, planned THA was converted into staged THA with debridement and antibiotic spacer in the first stage and final hip prosthesis in the second stage.
During the first stage, debridement was carried out to remove infected and necrotic tissues as thoroughly as possible. Antibiotic (vancomycin + gentamycin) coated cement spacer along with beads was implanted for 6 weeks . These antibiotics were chosen empirically because we were not sure about the pathology of this infected tissue around the hip joint and leprosy being involving large joint is rare. Histopathological examination confirmed hip arthritis secondarily to leprosy . During this time, the patient had continued anti-leprosy treatment.
During the second stage, when the ESR and CRP were normal and the wound was well healed, antibiotic spacer was removed and final hip prosthesis was implanted. The patient was advised to continue with anti-leprosy treatment for 6 months. The patients were then evaluated based on the reactivation of infection, the Harris hip score system, X-ray, ESR, and CRP .