A 37-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 1, with a complaint of “blood pressure increased for 3 months” was admitted to the hospital at 37 weeks’ gestation. Her first delivery had occurred via a caesarean section because of a breech birth. Her current pregnancy had been unremarkable until 24 weeks’ gestation when she developed pregnancy induced hypertension and was treated with oral labetalol hydrochloride. She was also diagnosed with gestational diabetes mellitus at 28 weeks’ gestation; however, her prenatal examinations were irregular, and her blood glucose level was poorly controlled. On admission, a diagnosis of preeclampsia and gestational diabetes at 37 weeks’ gestation was made. After all post-admission evaluations, the patient delivered a 3,270 g healthy male neonate through a caesarean section. Intermittent pneumatic compression was applied to the patient’s lower extremities immediately after delivery, and prophylactic-dose low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) (Enoxaparin, 40 mg once daily) was administrated subcutaneously after surgery in view of the various high-risk factors for DVT.
The patient suddenly developed swelling and pain of the forearm and hand 30 h postoperatively, and the elbow joint could not be flexed. The pain increased when the elbow joint was passively flexed. There was no history of trauma, infection, intravenous cannulation, or a history of DVT. Although the patient denied having a familial history of thrombophilia, she never underwent any examination related to thrombophilia. Doppler ultrasound of the left upper extremity arteries and deep veins showed that the left upper extremity axillary vein was dilated, with spontaneous echo reflexes visible in the area, and a weak echo of 14.9 mm × 5.3 mm could be seen next to the local venous valve, where the blood flow was filled with defect . To rule out an abnormality of the pulmonary arteries and the thoracic outlet, we performed enhanced pulmonary artery computed tomography but no definite abnormality was detected. A thromboelastogram revealed normal findings. Blood coagulation and routine blood tests showed the following results: prothrombin time, 10.8 s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 27 s; D-dimer, 409 µg/L (range, 0–252 µg/L) (the level of D-dimer during the pregnancy fluctuates from 192–243 µg/L); white blood cells count, 12.8 × 109/L; haemoglobin, 124 g/L; and haematocrit, 37.97%. To rule out thrombophilia, we planned to perform thrombophilia-related examinations, including factor V Leiden, prothrombin 20210A mutation, protein C, protein S, and antiphospholipid antibody, but the patient declined the investigations due to financial constraints. Based on clinical manifestations and imaging findings, we made a diagnosis of left axillary vein thrombosis. We immediately started administering an adjusted-dose of LMWH (Enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg 12 hourly) subcutaneously and kept her left arm completely immobilised to prevent embolisation into the pulmonary artery or other fatal locations. On the fifth day of treatment, the swelling resolved, and the pain disappeared. Doppler ultrasonography of the deep veins of the left upper extremity showed that the thrombosis had disappeared. Her D-dimer level decreased to 344 µg/L. The patient was discharged and asked to continue anticoagulant therapy for 6 weeks. A Doppler ultrasound was performed on follow-up every month for 3 months; however, no abnormality was detected.