Over the course of six months, a 45-year-old Vietnamese woman with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidemia became progressively lethargic, somnolent, and forgetful. Originally thought by her physicians to have an endocrine issue, she was diagnosed with an intracranial mass on computed tomography (CT) scan when her husband found it difficult to arouse her at home and brought her to a local emergency department. She was referred to our institution for neurosurgical evaluation, at which time she was sleeping 16 hours a day, and was noted to ask the same questions repeatedly, forgetting the answers each time. She had gained 25 pounds during the months prior to the presentation. She did not complain of headaches or visual changes, and had no symptoms of diabetes insipidus. Her last menstrual period had been 3–4 years prior to presentation. Neurological exam was unremarkable [Extraocular movements were intact, visual fields were full, and there was no nystagmus. Muscle strength was 5/5 throughout, reflexes were brisk and symmetric, and gait was normal-based. There was no dysmetria or pronator drift.]
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast was obtained, revealing a 3.6 × 3.7 × 3.2 cm lobulated, heterogeneous, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery hyperintense, and avidly enhancing hypothalamic mass extending into the anterior third ventricle . The patient underwent subtotal resection via bifrontal craniotomy. Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to be rubbery and vascular, and it appeared continuous with portions of the hypothalamus and optic nerves. Postoperative course was notable for a triphasic water balance response and new-onset adrenal insufficiency treated with hydrocortisone. She also developed new psychiatric symptoms including paranoia and irritability beginning approximately 1 month postoperatively.
Histologic examination demonstrated a predominantly epithelioid neoplasm with areas of spindled cytology with a dense inflammatory infiltrate . The tumor demonstrated several architectural patterns, including retiform , chordoid , and strands, often embedded in a myxoid matrix, giving an appearance reminiscent of chordoma at low power. At high power, many cells demonstrated intracytoplasmic lumina with occasional erythrocytes. The tumor was sharply demarcated from the surrounding brain, with reactive changes, including gliosis and accumulation of Rosenthal fibers, suggesting slow growth . The tumor cells were strongly and diffusely positive for CD34 , and more focally positive for CD31 , FLI-1, and factor VIII, compatible with a tumor of endothelial origin; however, there was only scattered reactivity for Erg . An immunostain for SMA to rule out a fibroblastic process or leiomyosarcoma were negative, and an immunostain for ALK-1 performed to exclude inflammatory pseudotumor was negative. Immunostains for EMA , progesterone receptor, and S-100 were negative, which are less compatible with diagnoses of chordoid meningioma, chondrosarcoma, and chordoma. Immunostains for Oct-4 and PLAP performed to exclude a germ cell tumor were negative. Immunostains for cytokeratins CAM 5.2 and AE1/3 were performed to exclude a neoplasm of epithelial origin, and demonstrated only focal immunoreactivity, and an immunostain for TTF-1 was performed to exclude a metastatic carcinoma from a lung or thyroid primary was negative. Immunostains for CD163, CD3, CD20, and CD68 [Figure –] highlighted a marked lymphohistiocytic infiltrate throughout the tumor, however, immunostains for CD15 and CD30 were negative, arguing against a lymphoproliferative disease such as Hodgkin lymphoma, and an immunostain for CD1a to exclude a histiocytic process such as Langerhan's cell histiocytosis was negative. Immunostain for Ki-67 shows scattered positivity, demonstrating the moderate proliferative characteristics of this tumor . An immunostain for glial fibrillary acidic protein is negative in the tumor cells, but highlights the sharp demarcation of the tumor from the adjacent brain.