A late preterm 36-week female neonate was born from a non-consanguineous primigravida 31-year-old mother who had regular antenatal care, no underlying disease, normal diabetic screening, no risk of major thalassemia, no history of smoking, illicit drug, or alcohol use. The mother’s serology was normal for hepatitis B virus, VDRL, and anti-HIV.
During pregnancy, she developed isolated idiopathic polyhydramnios with many episodes of fetal bradycardia and had placental angioedema. The mother came up with labor pain and the membrane was artificially ruptured. No systemic analgesia was given during delivery.
The neonate was delivered vaginally, weighted 2,700 g and had an Apgar score of 6 in the 1st minute, 7 in the 5th minute, and 10 in the 10th minute. She then had bradypnea (respiratory rate 30 breaths/min) and oxygen desaturation down to 80% at 10 min of age. After putting on an oxygen hood at 10 L per min (LPM), oxygen saturation was increased up to 95–100%. At that time, her respiratory rate was 30 breaths/min. She received antibiotics because neonatal sepsis was suspected. Two hours after delivery, the neonate had an apneic episode with bradypnea and oxygen desaturation down to 49%. The patient was then put on a nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) and transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Her chest radiograph showed only perihilar streaking.
During hospitalization, the patient had multiple episodes of bradycardia, apnea and underwent endotracheal intubation at the age of 3 days. Multiple investigations were performed to find the cause. A chest radiography (CXR) showed no abnormal finding. An electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus bradycardia which was suspected from respiratory impairment. An electroencephalogram (EEG) didn’t show electroclinical seizure. A brain MRI showed no abnormality of the brain stem. A diaphragmatic ultrasonography showed symmetrical diaphragmatic motion without paradoxical movement. The patient’s complete blood count (CBC), electrolyte and serum glucose levels were normal. The septic workups which included a hemoculture as well as a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis and culture were also normal. Thus, apnea of prematurity (AOP), though, unlikely to occur with such severity at her birth gestational age, was suspected at that time and intravenous aminophylline was initiated as a treatment.
At 5 days of age, the patient had delayed passing meconium. A physical examination showed abdominal distension. There was bile content on orogastric tube. The barium enema was performed and showed relatively small caliber and abnormal contraction of the rectum without definite transition zone. Therefore, Hirschsprung disease couldn’t be totally excluded. The patient did not undergo rectal biopsy for a definitive diagnosis at that time because she could pass stools well after rectal irrigations.
The patient could breathe with ventilator support and her respiratory rate was 40–60 breaths/min. During sleep, the respiratory rate usually dropped to 40 breaths/min without spontaneous breath. However, blood gases and end tidal CO2 levels were normal. The first 2 extubation attempts at the age of 18 and 37 days failed because the patient became drowsy, had stridor and desaturation. Fiberoptic laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy were performed and revealed only erythema and swelling of the arytenoid without laryngomalacia or other airway abnormalities. The results of our investigation are summarized in Table . The third extubation to nasal CPAP was performed at the age of 50 days (post-conceptual age of 43 weeks). Intravenous dexamethasone was administered to reduce airway swelling before the extubation. After the extubation the patient had no stridor nor other signs of respiratory distress, but her monitor tracing showed bradypnea, desaturation, and hypoventilation without hypercapnic ventilatory response to respiratory acidosis. Her capillary blood gas confirmed severe respiratory acidosis (pH 7.11, PCO2 89 mmHg). We strongly suspected a diagnosis of congenital central hypoventilation syndrome and sent genetic testing of the PHOX2B gene mutation. The result showed heterozygous expansion of polyalanine, caused by GCG 20/25 repeat expansion . Unfortunately, we couldn’t do a full attended polysomnography because small size equipment for neonates was unavailable.
The patient was discharged at 3 months of age after a tracheostomy insertion. We gave multidisciplinary home respiratory care training including tracheostomy care, basic life support, simulation training for respiratory problem solving, and provided home visits. We changed the tracheostomy tube every 6 weeks and did follow-up surveillance including neurocognitive development.
At 3 years of age, the child presented with abdominal distension and a repeat barium enema was suggestive of Hirschsprung disease. She underwent trans anal anorectal pull-through surgery. A biopsy of the sigmoid colon revealed aganglionosis at proximal end and throughout the entire length of specimen confirming Hirschsprung disease.
Until now, the child was well managed on home ventilator support. Although the parents took good care of her, she had two episodes of pneumonia. She gradually caught up with her growth and development. Her mother can perform home respiratory care proficiently and we hope that she can be decannulated in the future.