A 31-year-old female patient had been undergoing maintenance hemodialysis since 2009 and had bone pain and chest tightness for one year.
The patient had been undergoing maintenance hemodialysis at the department since 2009. In 2014, the patient developed SHPT with an iPTH level of 1400 pg/mL, for which calcitriol pulse therapy was applied. Over the next 5 years, the patient's iPTH levels increased progressively, leading to bone pain, skin itching, and difficult-to-correct hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. In June 2018, a parathyroid B-ultrasound revealed parathyroid hyperplasia, and an electrocardiogram revealed a first-degree atrioventricular block . Total parathyroidectomy (PTX) with autotransplantation was performed, with four parathyroid glands completely removed during surgery and one resected parathyroid gland intramuscularly transplanted to the patient's right forearm. The iPTH levels decreased rapidly and were maintained at 40-80 ng/mL one month postsurgery and at 45-70 pg/mL on the side of the transplanted arm 3 months postsurgery. The patient's bone pain and skin itching were gradually relieved. However, 1.5 years later, the patient's iPTH level had risen again to 360-724 pg/mL, and the patient developed a serum calcium level of 2.37-2.86 mmol/L and a serum phosphorus level of 2.00-2.63 mmol/L. The patient was treated with intermittent use of paricalcitol and cinacalcet. The patient presented with bone pain, chest tightness and fatigue beginning in June 2020, and electrocardiography (ECG) revealed a third-degree or CAVB . The patient refused pacemaker therapy.
The patient had a medical history of systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephropathy. She had undergone regular hemodialysis for 12 years.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors or other genetic conditions.
The vital signs of the patient were as follows: body temperature, 36.5 °C; heart rate, 78/min; respiratory rate, 18/min; and blood pressure, 100/65 mmHg.
Her iPTH was > 5000 µmol/L, her serum calcium was 3.08 mmol/L, and her serum phosphorus was 3.47 mmol/L.
ECG revealed a third-degree or CAVB. Parathyroid nuclear scintigraphy (ECT)/CT parathyroid scintigraphy revealed a parathyroid adenoma. Color Doppler echocardiography showed calcification in the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve . Chest CT showed extensive calcifications of the left atrium and left ventricle .