A 17-year-old female referred with growth of terminal hair in androgen sensitive areas. Hirsutism was evaluated according to the Ferriman-Gallwey score. The total value was 34. She had severe hirsutism over sideburns, upper lip, and chin. She appeared very anxious and had low self-esteem with family history of hirsutism and diabetes. mellitus. She did not have oily skin and acne. Menarha had started when she was 14 years old. Oligomenorrhea was present. She was not taking any medication. Hirsutism had appeared three years before she came for visit. Her weight was 98 kg, height 163 cm, and BMI 36.9 kg/m2. She had central (android) obesity, and increased waist-to-hip ratio (> 0.80). Blood pressure was 160/100 mmHg. Acanthosis nigricans was present.
Laboratory investigation was performed with radioimmunoassay (RIA) and Immunoradiometric assay (IRMA) methods, in the Laboratory of Endocrinology, Department of Physiology and Immunology, University Clinical Center of Kosovo, Prishtina, Kosovo, in January 2012. Blood was taken in the early follicular phase, (before 8:00 in the morning, and for the evening cortisol, at 16:00). Blood was taken for assessing the progesterone level in the middle of cycle .
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was also performed. We measured the blood sugar before she drank liquid containing 75 g of glucose. We took blood to measure glucose, insulin and C-peptide every 30 and 60 minutes, for three hours ( and ).
Ultrasound tests of ovaries and abdomen did not show any changes, abnormal fluid, or mass. Magnetic resonance of head did not show any changes as well.
Etiology of her hirsutism was CAH, PCOS without polycystic ovaries but with oligomenorrhea, clinical and biochemical hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance, hypertension, obesity, and acanthosis nigricans. Metformin and cyproterone acetate/ethinyl estradiol were prescribed for her. She was treated with long-pulse alexandrite laser, 755 nm. After medical therapy and four laser treatment sessions at six-week intervals, there were marked improvements in hirsutism. Her body weight was reduced by 15 kg. Her follow up after six months showed improvements in hirsutism and regular menstrual cycle. She seemed very satisfied with the changes, her self-esteem was much higher, she reported feeling very happy ( and )