A 28-year-old female patient, gravida 1 para 0 without special medical history underwent a series of routine sonographic examinations during the first and second trimesters of the pregnancy. All these examinations before 29 weeks’ gestational age revealed normal fetal growth and no obvious abnormality in the bilateral adnexal area. The patient did not show any typical symptoms and discomfort before 29 weeks’ gestational age, but She complained of occasional mild abdominal pain after the gestational age of 29 weeks. At 29 weeks’ gestational age, routine obstetric ultrasound demonstrated a 9.7 × 8.5 × 6.4 cm complex structure in the left adnexal area. Blood tumor markers including carbohydrate antigen-125 (CA-125) and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were in the normal range. At the gestational age of 30 weeks, repeated abdominal ultrasound revealed rapid growth of tumor mass, measuring 25.0 × 15.0 × 13.7 cm. The cyst was found to have a 15.7 × 11.3 × 14.1 cm heterogeneous echogenicity, which was irregular cauliflower-shaped and had strong blood flow. Sonographic examination showed no ascites or pleural effusion . Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 30 × 17.4 × 18.9 cm cystic and solid mass on the left side of the pelvic cavity, and the solid component was irregular-shaped and cauliflower-shaped appearance . Blood tumor markers were as follows: CA-125 of 43.4 U/mL and AFP of 173.4 ng/mL. We used the international ovarian tumor analysis (IOTA) simple rules to evaluate the mass, and the tumor was classified as malignant according to IOTA simple rules. Maternal–fetal medicine, gynecologic oncology and neonatal intensivist consults were obtained. Due to rapid growth of the masses, and concern for malignancy, an elective cesarean section combined with exploratory laparotomy was recommended after dexamethasone was given to the mother to accelerate fetal lung maturation. She underwent an elective cesarean section at 33 weeks’ gestational age. A female infant was delivered (Apgar Score 9–10-10, weight 1610 g). Intraoperative findings revealed there was a solid and cystic mass measuring 35 × 20 × 15 cm in diameter with smooth surface, arising from the left ovary . The capsule of the tumor mass was intact, and there was no tumor infiltration in the left fallopian tube and the right adnexa. After careful examination of the pelvic and abdominal peritoneum and other organ surfaces (including the omentum, diaphragm, liver, and stomach), no suspicious invasive lesions were found. Gross examination revealed that the tumor was composed of cystic and solid components , and the wall of cystic component was thin and smooth, containing yellowish clear liquid. The tumor mass contained cauliflower-like solid components, measuring 18 × 17 × 15 cm . The intraoperative frozen pathological examination suggested left ovarian immature teratoma. Then, she underwent a left adnexectomy, pelvic mass resection, right ovarian biopsy, bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection, para-aortic lymph node sampling, and omentectomy. Peritoneal washings were also collected and sent for pathological examination. The final histological and immunohistochemical results confirmed the diagnosis of immature left ovarian teratoma (WHO II grade). The tumor was limited to the left ovary without involvement of the left fallopian tube, and no tumor infiltration was found in the omentum, pelvic and paraaortic lymph nodes. Tumor cells were also not observed in peritoneal washings. The tumor was staged as FIGO I C1 (the tumor was limited to the left ovary with surgical spill). After evaluation by oncologists, post-operative chemotherapy was recommended. Therefore, she underwent 4 cycles of BEP chemotherapy regimen. After 18 months of follow-up, there is no sign of tumor recurrence till now.