A 78-year-old man with a history of chronic kidney disease, coronary artery disease with three-vessel coronary artery bypass grafts, chronic heart failure with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 35%, and low-flow, low-gradient (LFLG) severe aortic valve stenosis initially presented to another institution with progressive dyspnoea, chest pressure, orthopnoea, and lower extremity oedema. His symptoms improved with non-invasive positive-pressure ventilation and diuretics, and he was subsequently transferred to our institution. Physical examination on admission was significant for bibasilar rales and a III/VI systolic ejection murmur which was heard loudest at the right upper sternal border. His vital signs were notable for a heart rate of 52 beats/min, blood pressure of 142/52 mmHg, and an oxygen saturation of 98% on 2 L nasal cannula. Pertinent labs included a pro–B-type natriuretic peptide of 18 100 pg/mL (normal <852 pg/mL), troponin I of 0.076 ng/mL (normal <0.034 ng/mL), and creatinine of 1.63 mg/dL (normal 0.70–1.30 mg/dL). Electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia with a first-degree atrioventricular block and a right bundle branch block (RBBB) .
Prior to this hospitalization, the patient was undergoing work up for aortic valve replacement for severe AS . Dobutamine stress echocardiogram revealed transaortic valve peak velocity of 4.97 m/s, peak pressure gradient of 99 mmHg, and an increase of LVEF from 35 to 45%. His prior coronary angiogram showed chronic total occlusion of the mid left anterior descending artery (LAD), obtuse marginal (OM), and right coronary artery (RCA). The left internal mammary artery graft to the LAD was patent. The saphenous vein grafts to the RCA and OM were occluded. The stent from the left circumflex artery to the OM was patent. Due to his medical comorbidities and a society of thoracic surgery short-term risk score of >8%, TAVI was recommended.
Computed tomography imaging revealed an aortic annulus of 906 mm2 with an average diameter of 34.0 mm . Severe aortic valve calcification was present . The patient had adequate coronary heights, aortic sinus diameter, and sinotubular junction diameter and height for TAVI. The peripheral artery vessel (>6.0 mm) was adequate for transfemoral vascular access. The Edwards S3 29 mm valve was 38% undersized for an aortic annulus of 906 mm2. As his aortic valve was severely calcified, there was potential for anchoring an undersized valve in position once deployed. Given his high surgical risk and severe and symptomatic aortic stenosis, the multidisciplinary valve meeting determined procedural intervention was necessary, but surgery was prohibitively dangerous. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation with off-label use of the Edwards S3 29 mm valve was deemed the only option given the technical challenges posed by the patient’s large aortic annulus. The increased risk for heart block, paravalvular leak, central valve regurgitation, and valve embolization were discussed among the multidisciplinary team and patient, who elected to proceed with TAVI.
The Edwards S3 29 mm valve was prepped with an extra 7 mL of volume on the side port of the stopcock that was connected to a syringe. At valve deployment, the extra 7 mL of volume was injected first, and the 33 mL of volume from the inflator was subsequently delivered. The patient had successful off-label TAVI via transfemoral approach (, see , ). There was trivial paravalvular leak seen by aortogram and echocardiography. There was no central aortic valve regurgitation. Post-TAVI invasive transaortic valve mean gradient was 5 mmHg. Given the patient’s underlying RBBB, he was monitored on telemetry for 48 h and there was no heart block detected. He was discharged with a cardiac monitor. Medications prescribed at discharge included the following: apixaban 5 mg two times daily, clopidogrel 75 mg daily, sacubitril–valsartan 24–26 mg two times daily, and furosemide 80 mg daily. At the patient’s 1-month follow-up appointment, he denied chest pain or shortness of breath with exertion and reported improvement in his exercise tolerance. Echo showed improvement in LVEF to 45%, unchanged trivial paravalvular leak, and normal bioprosthetic aortic valve function without significant transaortic valve gradient. Approximately 8 months post-procedure, the patient died from a non-cardiovascular cause.