A 68-year-old man was admitted with a 2-mo history of epigastric discomfort.
The patient presented with a complaint of intermittent, dull, and non-radiating epigastric pain. No associated nausea, vomiting, melena, or loss of body mass was observed.
The patient underwent distal gastrectomy for gastric cancer 6 years ago. Histological analysis revealed a moderately poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, staged at pT4aN2M0 IIIB. The patient recovered well after adjuvant chemotherapy, and he was followed regularly. No evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis was identified 6 years after surgery. His history included hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus controlled with medications for more than 10 years.
The patient reported consuming alcohol daily and smoking one pack of cigarettes per day for 42 years until he was 60 years old. His family history was negative for cancers.
The patient’s temperature was 36.5 °C, heart rate was 63 bpm, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 141/93 mmHg. The physical examination was unremarkable.
The laboratory work-up showed that the levels of the tumor markers CA19-9, CA-125, carcinoembryonic antigen, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, and alpha-fetoprotein were in the normal range. Other biochemistry test results were also within normal limits.
Abdominal computed tomography revealed postoperative changes. Chest computed tomography and cardiac ultrasound were normal. No nodal involvement or distant metastasis was identified.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a semi-circumferential, irregular, yellowish-colored and granular lesion in the esophagus (30-35 cm from the incisors) . Magnifying endoscopy with narrow band imaging (NBI) revealed aggregated minute yellowish spots with tortuous microvessels inside . Moreover, type B1 intrapapillary capillary loops (IPCLs) and intervascular background coloration were observed around the yellow spots . Lugo's iodine staining (1%) demonstrated a well-demarcated, irregular, unstained lesion . As endoscopic biopsy suggested a high-grade dysplasia with the accumulation of foamy macrophages histologically, the lesion was diagnosed as an early esophageal cancer with esophageal xanthomas.