A 42-year-old male manual laborer presented at the orthopedics department with the complaints of pain and restricted movement in the left shoulder following a motor vehicle accident. On examination, Glasgow Coma Scale 15/15 and left shoulder had swelling and tenderness at mid-third clavicle. Range of motion (ROM) is painful and restricted. Neurovascular examinations were normal. On plain radiograph shows suspected isolated coracoid fracture and CT confirms displaced isolated coracoid process fracture. Since the fracture was displaced >1 cm, to avoid non-union and weakness of the left upper limb, the patient was advised to undergo surgical fixation, pre-anesthetic fitness was obtained. Prophylactic intravenous antibiotics given at the time of anesthesia. Under antiseptic precaution, under supraclavicular block, the patient in beach chair position 5 cm incision made over coracoid process and the fracture site exposed and coracoid process found displaced. Fracture ends freshened and coracoid process reduced over its base and temporary fixed with K-wire. Under C-arm fractured reduction and K-wire position confirmed and length of screw measured indirectly. Using 3.2 mm cannulated drill, bit fracture fragments drilled and 4 mm × 22 mm cannulated screw with washer used to fix the fracture and position of screw and stability of fixation confirmed with C-arm. Postoperatively, further, two doses of intravenous antibiotic given. Wound inspected and dressed regularly. Suture was removed at the end of 2nd week. Initial 2 weeks shoulder immobilized in arm sling and gradual pendulum exercise was started as pain tolerable. At the end of 6 weeks, the patient reviewed found pain free and X-ray shows implant in situ and CT scan confirms implant position and fracture union. The patient advised to do active ROM as pain tolerable and advised to do restricted activities daily living. At the end of 3 months, he was able to do full ROM and X- ray shows implant in situ and fracture union and the patient advised to do his normal activity of daily living as before injury. At the end of 6 months, the patient reviewed and he had a pain-free full ROM in all directions. X-ray shows implant in situ and fracture union . He was able to do activities of daily living as before injury .