A 57-year-old woman was referred to our department from the gynecology department for preoperative consultation regarding robot-assisted surgery with a head-down position. She had no remarkable ocular medical history. At referral, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.7 with − 10.5 diopters (D) of myopic correction in the right eye (OD) and 0.9 with − 11.25 D myopic correction in the left eye (OS). The IOPs were 24 mmHg OD and 23 mmHg OS. The anterior chamber (AC) angle was wide open in both eyes (OU); an Emery-Little grade 1 nuclear cataract was observed OU; and the cup-to-disc ratios were 1.0 × 0.8 OD and 0.8 × 0.8 OS. After the successful gynecologic surgery, she visited our department for further ocular evaluation 2 weeks after the initial visit. The visual field mean deviation (MD) was − 8.15 decibels (dB) OD and − 4.73 dB OS, and the foveal sensitivity was 25 dB OD and 34 dB OS using the Humphrey Visual Field Analyzer (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA; central 30 − 2 program). Thinning of the retinal nerve fiber was detected OU by optical coherence tomography (OCT) (RS3000 Advance 2, Nidek, Gamagori, Japan). Based on the findings, she was diagnosed with POAG OU, and ocular hypotensive medication OU was prescribed. Two years later, the BCVA was 0.5 OD and 0.9 OS, and the IOP was 23 mmHg OD and 17 mmHg OS with four classes of medications. Because of insufficient IOP reduction, a triple procedure (microhook trabeculotomy OD and iStent inject W OS combined with cataract surgery) was planned . Two days after the uncomplicated surgery OD, a planned surgery was performed OS by one of the authors (MT).
After the implantation of a soft acrylic intraocular lens through a 2.2-mm-wide nasal corneal incision, the sleeve of the iStent injector was inserted into the AC through a 1-mm-wide superotemporal corneal side port, that created as a side port during cataract surgery, to place the stents in the nasal-side angle. To visualize the AC angle, a Swan-Jacob gonioprism lens (Ocular Instruments, Bellevue, WA) was used. After the trocar pierced the trabecular meshwork (TM)/Schlemm’s canal (SC), the delivery button was pressed; however, the stent did not eject but stayed at the tip of the insertion sleeve . Because the stent moved back into the sleeve after the button was released , implantation was attempted again. By pressing the button a second time, the stent was ejected but did not remain at the TM . The dislocated stent on the iris was removed using capsulorhexis forceps (Inami, Tokyo, Japan) . Observation by surgical microscopy showed that the two stents were connected to each other . The two stents then were implanted at the desired sites using another injector . Except for mild hyphema, no postsurgical complication occurred.
Observation of the explanted device under the multi-angle stereomicroscope showed that the two stents seemed to be connected by the broken trocar shaft . The device was returned to the company (i.e., Glaukos Corporation) for further inspection. An X-ray showed that the trocar shaft was broken at the part referred to as the “sprayed trocar” . By scanning electron microscopy observation of the broken trocar shaft , based on the report provided by the company, the surface features indicated tensile failure. Four months postoperatively, the BCVA was 0.3 OD without correction and 0.8 OS with − 1.25 D astigmatic correction; the IOP was 14 mmHg OU with 2 classes of medications.