A 46-year-old female patient with history of a 6-month hypochromic microcytic anemia of unknown cause, controlled hypothyroidism and breast cancer 11 years ago that required quadrantectomy and radiotherapy, currently in remission. She consulted for a 6 month oppressive abdominal pain located in the mesogastrium, additionally she had abdominal distention associated with nausea and liquid stools (without mucous nor blood), approximately 4–5 stools per day; denying weight loss or fever.
The patient mentioned that 10 months ago she had traveled to Egypt and that for 8 months she had had joint pain (medium and small), without edema or erythema. She denies any history of allergic, toxic or transfusion events; only mentioning a family history of rheumatoid arthritis. During her physical examination she was clinically stable with vital signs in normal ranges, no relevant findings were found. Lab results: Hemoglobin 12.2 g/Dl, Hematocrit 38.4% MCV 76,3 MCH 22.9, normal hepatic function, TSH 1.5 UI/mL, negative Antinuclear antibodies, Rheumatoid factor, anti-DNA and IgA anti-transglutaminase antibodies. Negative serial coproscopic and coproculture. IgA levels in normal ranges. Normal abdomen tomography.
Given the presence of chronic diarrhea, studies are initiated to rule out infectious causes; tests for celiac disease were negative. Physicians performed endoscopic studies: multiple esophagogastroduodenoscopies up to the second duodenal portion evidenced an erythematous pangastropathy with normal findings in the gastric biopsies (two of these had duodenal biopsies with normal findings), and a colonoscopy with normal-looking mucous.
Due to the persistence of gastrointestinal symptoms and the presence of anemia, physicians decided to perform an endoscope capsule, showing red spots in the duodenum and multiple ulcerations in the jejunum and proximal ileum covered by fibrin . A double balloon enteroscopy was performed showing an atrophic mucous throughout the path of the small intestine ; next to the ileocecal valve, there were small aphtoid ulcers. The jejunum and proximal ileum histological report showed macrophages with positive periodic acid-schiff reaction staining (PAS staining), being able to diagnose Whipple’s disease.
Antibiotics were initiated in 2 phases: Intravenous Ceftriaxone 1 g bid for 30 days; and at-home treatment with Trimethoprim / Sulfamethoxazole 160 mg/800 mg bid for 12 months. The patient is currently in the second phase of treatment with improvement of gastrointestinal and joint symptoms.