A 15-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with chief complaint of progressive visual loss in both eyes for 3 years. No ocular redness, pain, photophobia or tearing was noticed. She denied the experience of seizures, migraines or behavioral disorders. She was the full-term product of a normal pregnancy and delivery, remarkable only for her extensive port-wine birthmarks and the extra finger on the left hand. Her growth and development were normal. Her parents, sister and two brothers were healthy without the related signs.
General physical examinations revealed an otherwise healthy female with nevus flammeus affecting the bilateral forehead and extending to the left cheek, jaw, neck and forearm . Moreover, the lips and the palatine mucosa were also involved. Superfluous digit was found attaching on the radial side of left thumb, and distal digits of the biphalangeal thumb deviated radially . No remarkable abnormal neurological sign was found. The neuro-imaging demonstrated no leptomeningeal vascular malformations or cerebral atrophy .
Ophthalmic examinations showed a Snellen visual acuity of 20/2000 in the right eye (OD) and 20/125 in the left eye (OS). The best-corrected visual acuity of OD had improved to 20/200 (− 5.50 × 90°) and OS to 20/100 (− 1.50–1.00 × 95°). Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 58 and 42 mmHg for OD and OS, respectively. Slit-lamp examination revealed torturous and dilated conjunctival and episcleral vessels, Haab’s striae, enlarged corneal diameter (13.5 mm) bilaterally and a relative afferent pupillary defect in OD . Bilateral torturous retinal vessels and vertical cup to disc ratio of 1.0 were found . Gonioscopy showed an open angle with blood in Schlemm’s canal bilaterally . The subfoveal choroidal thickness of OD was 627 μm and OS was 683 μm as measured by optical coherence tomography. The axial length of OD was 23.95 mm and OS was 23.40 mm, and the central corneal thickness of OD was 597 μm and OS was 598 μm.
Notwithstanding the negative result of neurological examination, we made a diagnosis of SWS based on the cutaneous finding and ocular involvement.
After a three-week outpatient drug treatment with maximum IOP-lowering medications (fixed combination of latanoprost 0.005% and timolol 0.5% once a day, brinzolamide 1% twice a day and brimonidine 0.2% twice a day in both eyes), trabeculectomy with intraoperative application of mitomycin C was performed in both eyes due to the uncontrolled IOP (OD: 39 mmHg and OS: 23 mmHg). No adverse event was found postoperatively, except for the tendency of subconjunctival fibrosis of the bleb and elevated IOP (24-40 mmHg) in both eyes. Subconjunctival injections of 5-fluorouracil 5 mg were given weekly within the early postoperative follow-up (in total, 4 injections in OD and 5 injections in OS). Over next 3-month follow-up period, the IOP was controlled ranging from 12 to 16 mmHg bilaterally, and no IOP-lowering drugs were needed.