A 61-year-old man developed a sudden-onset headache and subsequent disturbance of consciousness while at work. On admission to a nearby hospital, his Glasgow Coma Scale score was 9 (E2V2M5), although pupil size and light reflexes were bilaterally intact. His medical history included hypertension, diabetes (HbA1c 6.5%), and Stanford Type B aortic dissection (treated conservatively), but he had currently no symptom. There was no family history of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Head computed tomography (CT) showed a diffuse and symmetrical SAH distributed mainly in the posterior cranial fossa . Three-dimensional (3D) CT revealed a fusiform aneurysm of the left intracranial vertebral artery with bleb formation; the right distal vertebral artery and basilar artery were poorly depicted . The patient was then transferred to our hospital due to difficulties in treatment at the initial site. We performed digital subtraction angiography (DSA). The left vertebral angiography showed a VADA of the left vertebral artery on the V4 segment, proximal to the origin of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) . The right vertebral angiography showed a pearl-and-string sign on the right vertebral artery proximal to the PICA origin, suggesting another dissection . Based on these and other angiographical findings [ and ], we focused on the rupture on the left side. We performed emergency endovascular parent artery occlusion (PAO) of the left vertebral artery, proximal to the PICA origin, using 15 detachable platinum coils under general anesthesia and systemic heparinization (activated clotting time 2–3 times above baseline). The left PICA was well preserved at the end of the procedure. When the patient awoke from anesthesia on postoperative day (POD) 1, he presented dysphagia, ataxia, and Horner’s syndrome. Magnetic resonance imaging diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed areas of high-intensity signal on the left cerebellar hemisphere and the left lateral medullary area.
On POD 10, follow-up magnetic resonance angiography and time-of-flight imaging demonstrated patency of the right vertebral artery and the double-lumen sign, although the right vertebral artery diameter was not increased [ and ]. However, repeat DSA on POD 16 showed that the left vertebral artery remained occluded, and a fusiform aneurysm (8 × 6 mm) was noted at the right V4 segment proximal to the stenosis [ and ]. Based on these findings, we planned a stent-assisted coil embolization for the right VADA to prevent rupture; thus, we started simultaneous aspirin (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel 75 mg/ day as prophylaxis. On POD 30, the endovascular treatment was performed through the left femoral artery approach. A 5 Fr FUBUKI guiding sheath (ASAHI Intec, Aichi, Japan) was placed in the right distal vertebral artery under general anesthesia and systemic heparinization. Headway 21 (Terumo Corp., Tokyo, Japan) was initially guided into the right vertebral artery distal to the aneurysm, and Excelsior XT-17 (Stryker Corp., Kalamazoo, MI, USA), shaped like a nautilus, was positioned inside the aneurysm. A framing coil (7 mm × 20 cm) was inserted partially through XT-17 , and an LVIS blue stent (4.5 × 10 mm) (MicroVention, Aliso Viejo, CA, USA) was deployed through Headway 21 into the right V4 segment distal to the aneurysm. Then, a Scepter C balloon catheter (4 × 10 mm) (Terumo Corp., Tokyo, Japan) was guided into the stent by exchanging the Headway 21. Detachable platinum coils were inserted stepwise through the jailed XT-17, while the intravascular lumen was secured by intermittent inflation of the balloon inside the stent [ and ]. Finally, intraaneurysmal embolization was completed using 10 coils, and a residual filling of the dome was confirmed on postoperative DSA . Postoperative DWI revealed no significant acute thromboembolism , and no additional neurological symptoms were observed, while the existing symptoms were unchanged. The patient received neurologic rehabilitation at another hospital and his symptoms resolved almost completely. He returned to work 3 months after the second treatment, with a modified Rankin scale score of 2.
Ethical approval for this study was granted by the Yokohama City University Human Ethics Committee (B191200034) in accordance with the research guidelines. The patient provided written informed consent for publication and use of the data in this report.