A 46-year-old man presented with a 9-year history of the left hip pain, limp, and restriction of movements, which was insidious in onset and gradually progressive. The restriction worsened over a period of time. He was a farmer by occupation and since the past 2 years, he could not do his daily routine activities such as squatting, sitting cross-legged, and walk freely beyond 5 min. Furthermore, there was associated with tingling and numbness. There was no history of trauma or any comorbidities. The patient had consulted for the above problems 4 years back and was diagnosed with synovial chondramatosis of the hip with early degenerative changes and underwent arthroscopic debridement of hip the details of which were not available. Post the procedure, he had mild symptomatic relief for a brief period but later relapsed and developed the same symptoms. Physical examination revealed tenderness over the left anterior joint line, mild swelling, with severe restriction of flexion, extension, internal and external rotation, and near-normal adduction and abduction at the left hip joint .
Plain radiographs and computed tomography (including three-dimensional reconstruction images) revealed diffuse synovial thickening in the left hip joint. Multiple large conglomerate calcified intra-articular bodies involving the left hip joint with typical ring-and-arc mineralization pattern were visualized . Degenerative changes involving left femoral head and thinning and erosion of quadrilateral plate of the left acetabulum were present. After discussing the various treatment modalities with the patient, excision biopsy with uncemented modular bipolar hemiarthroplasty was performed under spinal and epidural anesthesia in the lateral position with the posterior approach. Intraoperatively, multiple osteochondral bodies were noted with intra-articular and extra-articular extensions. Intra-articular bodies along with debris were removed and total synovectomy was performed. Many fragments ranging from 0.1 to 2.5 cm were removed . The histopathological examination of the osteochondral bodies and synovial tissue confirmed the presence of cartilaginous synovial metaplasia consistent with synovial chondromatosis . The loose bodies were composed of cartilage in various stages of calcification and endochondral ossification. Postoperatively, the patient immediately began a hip range of motion exercise followed by weight-bearing walking with a walker. Abductor weakness noted was strengthened with vigorous physiotherapy both passive and active assisted, and by 4 weeks postoperatively, he could return to work. Follow-up was done every 3 months until 18 months (, 7). Significant improvement in the range of motion at the left hip joint was noted .