A 46-year-old woman suffering from severe headache, nausea, and vomiting was admitted to our hospital emergency department (ED). She had a history of high blood pressure (not under treatment with drugs) and type II diabetes mellitus (under treatment with metformin); she did not report any known drug allergies. However, the anamnestic investigation revealed that the patient had been experiencing episodes of morning vomiting for about one year. For this reason, five months before being admitted to the Emergency Department (ED), the patient had undergone gastroscopy; this, however, did not reveal any abnormalities. On presentation, she was hypertensive (153/87 mmHg) and tachycardic (135 bpm); her respiratory rate was 24 breaths per minute (with respiratory fatigue, which caused generalised cyanosis). We noted that peripheral pulses were barely palpable bilaterally. Later, due to the worsening of the general conditions, the patient was tracheally intubated in order to secure airway patency; thus, the infusion of vasopressor agents was initiated to support circulation. Blood gas analysis showed worsening metabolic acidosis with normal electrolytes. The ECG recorded elevation of the ST segment in the anterolateral regions and poor progression of the R wave in the precordial regions. Blood chemistry test results are shown in . For these reasons, an emergency coronary angiography was performed. Upon arrival in the haemodynamics room, the patient presented with sinus tachycardia (130 bpm) and a blood pressure reading of 140/70 mmHg. An ultrasound scan was quickly performed while preparing the operative field and revealed the following:Kinetic alterations (anterolateral akinesia and hypokinesia of the apex); A moderate depression of the ejection fraction (about 40%); Ascending aorta of normal size; Absence of significant valvulopathies; No evidence of pericardial effusion.
Therefore, diagnostic coronary angiography was performed rapidly, documenting epicardial coronaries free from stenosing lesions. On ventriculography, the cardiac chamber appeared undilated with moderate global contractile dysfunction (FE of approximately 40%), as per Takotsubo syndrome of the mid-ventricular wall. During the procedure, further worsening of haemodynamic conditions (due to a phase of bradycardisation and decreasing pulse oximetry) resulted in pulseless electrical activity (PEA), with a return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC), which was reached after five minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Considering the silent medical history of the patient and the abrupt onset of her hypertensive crisis, a total body CT scan was required in order to reach a diagnosis. The brain scan results were negative, while the lungs displayed bilateral pleural effusion (maximum thickness 11.5 mm on the right side and 10.7 mm on the left side), with associated atelectasis of the left lung parenchyma. Finally, we found an 8.5 cm adrenal mass which occupied the superior cap of the left kidney. This mass displaced the pancreas tail up and forward, compressing the left kidney’s upper pole. In addition, there was a blood-type flap in the left perirenal area, as seen from the recent bleeding shown in . The [123I]-MIBG scintigraphy was also performed, which showed intense emission from a left-sided adrenal mass. The patient was admitted to intensive care because of the persistent haemodynamic instability, despite volume filling with crystalloids and norepinephrine infusion. The echocardiogram performed in intensive care showed a further reduction in the ejection fraction to 25%. As a further complication caused by refractory haemodynamic instability, acute renal failure was superimposed (treated by continuous renal replacement therapy). Continuous infusion of levosimendan was added as per protocol for the treatment of cardiogenic shock. Blood chemistry results are shown in . The dosage of catecholamines, vanillylmandelic, and homovanillic acid in the urine was not possible because it took 5–7 days. Considering the clinical situation and laboratory results (which showed increased blood levels of metanephrine and normetanephrine), which strongly indicated pheochromocytoma, an alpha-blocking therapy (Phenoxybenzamine, from 10 up to 80 mg/die) was initiated. After four days, despite the pharmacological treatments, haemodynamic instability persisted, with phases of marked hypotension alternating with phases of refractory hypertension. For this reason, an MDT was assembled to manage the patient. Urologists, radiologists, and anaesthesiologists agreed on a course of action: an open surgery performed under general anaesthesia. Monitoring included radial and pulmonary artery catheters; as expected, during tumour isolation, the patient developed a hypertensive crisis which was managed with continuous infusion of sodium nitroprusside and esmolol. We chose an anterior transperitoneal approach through bilateral subcostal laparotomy according to Chevron, which provided the surgeons with optimal exposure and confirmed this surgical approach’s usefulness in the excision of larger adrenal masses. Left kidney compression emerged during a direct inspection. After careful separation of surrounding structures and identification of the left renal vein, the adrenal vein was isolated and ligated in order to block the incretion of catecholamines, followed by the artery. The tumour’s size and the inflammatory reaction complicated cleavage, but the removal of the large mass was completed in 30 min, with an estimated blood loss of 150 mL. Hydrocortisone was administered to manage the expected transient acute adrenal insufficiency in the first 48 h. Hypotension developed early when the renal vein was clamped, and its management required norepinephrine infusion, in addition to discontinuation of the previous short-acting vasoactive drugs. Norepinephrine was gradually discontinued within the first 18 h. Hydrocortisone was tapered to 100 mg/day (from 200 mg daily) and replaced with same-dose oral cortisone; total cortisol and ACTH levels were monitored to guide therapy and were maintained within normal ranges. Histopathology revealed an adrenal pheochromocytoma characterised by solid and alveolar growth, moderate nuclear pleomorphism with the presence of hyaline blood cells, and rare mitosis (immunohistochemical examination: CK-, VIM-, EMA-, CD56+, synaptophysin+, chromogranin+, neuron-specific enolase (NSE)+, Ki67 equal to 1%). The neoplasm appeared delimited by a fibrous pseudo-capsule and showed almost complete haemorrhagic infarction with blood extravasations in the surrounding adipose tissue. There were no images of angioinvasion or adrenal gland infiltration (PASS score: 3). Without any metastases or recurrent symptoms or signs, the MDT maintained a close follow-up and withheld further treatment. The intensive postoperative hospitalisation continued until the stabilisation of the patient’s clinical condition and her transfer to the hospital ward. The patient also tested negative on genetic tests for familial syndromes that could cause the development of pheochromocytoma. Two years after diagnosis and surgery, she enjoys a disease-free life. The close follow-up includes urine catecholamine tests twice a year and magnetic resonance every two years. Metabolic tests were normalised since the first check-up visit, 6 months after surgery.