A 63-year-old Caucasian male with was initially diagnosed with angiosarcoma of the nose in October 2011 and underwent rhinectomy with negative margins followed by 3 reconstructive operations using a forehead flap. The patient also had a medical history of chronic lymphocytic leukemia which was untreated and being observed. In September 2012, the patient noticed two new lesions, one on his left cheek and the other on his right submandibular region and surgical resection occurred to remove these lesions in December 2012. Adjuvant treatment ensued with nab-paclitaxel dosed at 100 mg/m2 weekly on a 28-day cycle starting in February 2013 for 2 cycles. In November 2013, CT of the chest and abdomen demonstrated multiple new hepatic lesions and the patient was started on clinical trial with evofosfamide (TH-302) and received 4 cycles of treatment. The patient progressed on study and was referred to interventional radiology where he underwent bilobar radioembolization with Yttrium-90. Repeat CT examination following Yttrium-90 radioembolization demonstrated post treatment changes without significant decrease in size of the hepatic lesions . However, in December 2014 the patient developed a new right jaw mass and was started on another cycle of nab-paclitaxel.
The patient had noticeable disease progression with interval development of a right tongue mass. Staining of the patient’s tumor tissue with Roche SP142 revealed positive PD-L1 expression a measured by greater than 5% of the tumor cells staining positive. In 2015, based on the positive tumor expression, off-label treatment with pembrolizumab dosed at 2 mg/kg every 21 days was begun. The patient had concurrent radical excision of the right jaw soft tissue angiosarcoma with advanced flap closure. Subsequent restaging CT scans demonstrated a significant response of the liver lesion . After completion of 13 cycles of pembrolizumab he developed autoimmune hepatitis. The immunotherapy was held and the patient was started on prednisone with a step down taper. In March 2016, while on prednisone therapy, he had another CT study of the abdomen/pelvis that revealed a further decrease in size of the liver disease. Additional body scans and biopsy did not detect any new disease at this time.