A 24-year-old Chinese female with severe speech and swallowing difficulties, prominent lower lip concavity, and walking difficulties was admitted to our institution in July 2015. In 2006, she displayed abnormal right leg posture while running. She was unaware of the abnormality until her father told her. In 2012, she suffered from right leg spasms while sleeping as well as notable gait disturbance. In April 2015, she displayed dragging of the right leg with involuntary inversion of the right ankle and slowness of movement. In May 2015, she experienced an acute onset of severe speech and swallowing difficulties, and these symptoms were followed by drooling, prominent lower lip concavity and dystonic right hand postures several days later. The symptoms slightly progressed over 1 week and then stabilized. Subsequently, her symptoms fluctuated frequently over a 1 week period. Depression and anxiety could worsen her symptoms. The patient presented with global developmental delay since early childhood and exhibited no preceding illness or drug use. There was no family history of dystonia or Parkinson’s disease . The patient’s mother died of cerebrovascular disease at 30 years old.
The patient displayed prominent lower lip inversion . Due to severe hypokinesia of the tongue she was anarthric. The muscle strength was normal. She presented cogwheel rigidity of her right arm and both legs, particularly the right leg. She also showed markedly slow movements, including finger and feet tapping. Deep tendon reflexes of the legs were hyperactive. Ankle clonus was present bilaterally with more than 3 cloni. The right foot displayed a positive Babinski sign, whereas the left displayed a suspicious positive.
Both laboratory tests and routine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies were normal. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI; Fig. ) showed reduced white matter integrity of the corticospinal tract in the frontal lobe and subpontine plane. Genetic tests for spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) and hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) yielded negative results (HSP-associated and SCA associated genes included in the gene sequencing of the patient were shown in Additional file .). Next-generation sequencing of the patient revealed a heterozygous nucleotide substitution (c.829G > A) in ATP1A3 gene in exon 8 of chromosome 19, resulting in an amino acid substitution of glutamic acid (E) to lysine (K) at codon position 277 (p.E277K), which her father did not carry (Dystonia-associated genes included in the gene sequencing of the patient were shown in Additional file ).
The symptoms appeared to be slightly improved by the administration of trihexyphenidyl and baclofen. When she was admitted at our institution again 4 months later, ankle clonus and a positive Babinski sign were not observed, but deep tendon reflexes of the legs remained brisk.