A 50-year-old male referred to the surgical clinic due to suspicion for appendicitis from a periphery outpatient clinic presented with severe right lower abdominal pain and anorexia with subjective fevers. Had prior bouts of right lower abdominal pain for the last month and treated with over-the-counter analgesia however on this presentation pain was intolerable. No history of prior trauma, prior surgery, no known allergies nor known comorbid. During the course of this attack visited a periphery clinic and verbal report from an abdominal ultrasound showed features suspicious for appendicitis hence referred to our centre.
On examination he was alert, oriented, not pale with stable vitals. Had significant right iliac fossa tenderness and a positive psoas sign with rest of abdominal examination normal. Due to high suspicion for appendicitis an urgent computed tomography of the abdomen was performed which revealed a right iliac bone expansile lytic lesion with enhancing soft tissues abutting the iliacus muscle medially and gluteus minimus posterolateral suspicious for a metastatic bone lesion .
After initial resuscitation, pain control and baseline work up which revealed an elevated alkaline phosphatase in keeping with a lytic metastatic bone lesion, he was scheduled for an ultrasound guided biopsy by a consultant radiologist of the right iliac crest lytic lesion . Histological findings of the lytic bone lesion revealed diffuse infiltration of malignant follicles that were lined by follicular cells and contained luminal colloid with scalloping of the colloid within the periphery of the follicles with immunohistochemistry staining for thyroid transcription factor-1 suggestive of a metastatic FTC. A thorough examination post biopsy results revealed a nodular right anterior neck mass which moved on swallowing and presence of mild tracheal shift hence referral to oncology for adequate work up.
Oncological work up on CT neck revealed a heterogenous right thyroid mass with displacement of the trachea and multiple cervical lymph nodes suggestive of a primary thyroid malignancy . Of note, multiple pulmonary nodular lesions in the lower zones and left 5th rib heterogenous mass suggestive of metastatic disease on CT chest . A Tc-99m methylene diphosphonate whole body bone scan revealed findings consistent with a metastatic lesion in left scapula, right iliac bone, right ischium, multiple ribs and L4 vertebra. Abdominal imaging was otherwise normal, normal thyroid function tests but a significantly elevated thyroglobulin of above 30,000 ng/mL. A final diagnosis of metastatic FTC was made for tumour board discussion with radiologist, oncologist, nuclear physician, and general surgeon which concluded for the patient to undergo total thyroidectomy, followed by RAI.
Following total thyroidectomy histological analysis was consistent with a right lobe FTC and left lobe was found to have benign findings without tumour involvement. A postoperative radionuclide thyroid uptake scan to assess for remaining tissue revealed minimal residual thyroid tissue hence re-excision for completion of total thyroidectomy was done and achieved. Postoperative, he received RAI at dose of 200 mCi I-131 with 3 further subsequent doses at 6-month intervals to receive a total of 4 doses with serial post therapy whole body Iodine scans revealing a reduction in lesions with stable disease without evidence of disease progression . In between RAI therapies, he was on levothyroxine to resolve hypothyroidism symptoms as well as to achieve thyroid stimulating hormone suppression.
Currently he is 5 years post-surgery with the most recent RAI received 2 years ago without significant complains and has returned to daily function and resumed occupation of a driver. He is currently asymptomatic with daily thyroxine supplements and biochemical thyroid hormones assessment every 3 months for thyroxine dose adjustment.