A 64-year old woman with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus for more than thirty years and no previous history of malignancy presented with intermittent diplopia for about the last nine months, especially while going down the stairs. Diplopia was gradually increasing frequency and intensity in the previous few months. During the previous two months, the patient developed a severe headache, left eye ptosis, and hypoglycemic episodes. Further complaints include generalized weakness, loss of appetite, generalized musculoskeletal pain, and 6–7 kg weight loss within six months. Her hemoglobin A1C levels were around 7% in prior visits. Her family history was unremarkable.
In our initial physical examinations, she was obese (body mass index =34 kg/m2), and her blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. No lymphadenopathy and organomegaly were found. No other abnormalities were noted on physical examinations except for left eye ptosis (3rd, 4th, and 6th nerve palsy). But, she was not anisocoric, and the pupillary reflexes were normal on both eyes. The pupils were round and equal and reacted to light consensually and directly. Visual acuity was normal in both eyes. The other examinations of cranial nerves were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hypothalamus and pituitary indicated a heterogeneous enhancement of the sellar and suprasellar regions, enlargement of the stalk, parasellar dural enhancement with the involvement of both cavernous sinuses and internal carotid arteries, and thickening of the sphenoid sinus without any bone erosion. It was not possible to differentiate between pituitary tumor and infiltrated nasopharyngeal region. It suggested an infiltrative neoplastic lesion that compressed left III, IV and VI cranial nerves. Also, the thickening of the sphenoid sinuses and nasopharyngeal regions was seen .
Complete blood cell testing showed leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. As per whole blood count, red blood cell (RBC) and platelet counts were 4.69 Mil/ mm3 and 88,000/mm3, respectively. Also, white blood cell count (WBC) was 3100/mm3 (consist of 44% lymphocytes, 45% neutrophils, 8.7% monocyte, 1.6% eosinophil and 0.7% basophil). Hemoglobin and hematocrit were 12.9 g/dl and 37.6%, respectively.
To evaluate the patient for infiltrative disease, i.e., lymphoma, sarcoidosis, and tuberculosis, we tested serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels, which were reported in the normal range (LDH: 353 (230–460 U/L) and ACE: 51.1(8–52 U/L)). Also, the purified protein derivative (PPD/tuberculin) test was negative.
To rule out immunological diseases that could infiltrate cavernous sinuses and pituitary gland area (e.g., Wegener’s granulomatosis, Ig G4 related disease), immunologic assays were done. All serum immunology assays except perinuclear anti-neutrophil antibodies (P-ANCA or anti-MPO) were within their reference values i.e. immunoglobulin G (IgG): 1055 (700–1600 mg/dL), Ig A: 208 (70-400 mg/dL), Ig M: 45 (40–230 mg/dL), Cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil antibodies (C-ANCA or Anti-PR3): 4.9 (Negative: < 10 U/mL), and IgG4: 550.3 (39–864 mg/L). The result of P-ANCA was 23.5 U/mL (Negative: < 10). The bone marrow aspiration and biopsy were performed according to bi-cytopenia that showed cellular marrow without atypia.
Laboratory evaluation of hypothalamic and pituitary axis revealed a pan-hypopituitarism i.e. free T4: 0.6 (0.7–2.5 ng/dL), free T3: 0.18 (0.2–0.5 ng/dL), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH): 0.47 (0.3–4.2 μIU/mL), cortisol at 8 am: 3 (5–23 μg/dL), adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH): 24.78 (7.2–64 pg/mL), luteinizing hormone (LH): 1.2 (8.2–40.8 IU/L), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH): 5.3 (35–153 IU/L), prolactin: 9.7 (2.1–17.7 ng/mL), and insulin like growth factor-1 (IGF-1): 24 (33–220 ng/mL).
In cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analyses, protein and LDH were elevated . CSF cytology examination showed a few small lymphoid cells with irregular nuclei.
Pathologic findings of tissue biopsy of thickened nasopharyngeal mucosa reported a low-grade lymphoma. Cell immunohistochemistry (IHC) were positive for CD20 and Bcl-2 in most lymphoid cells (B-cells). Moreover, CD3 and CD5 were positive, and CD10 was negative in some lymphoid cells (T-cells). Also, CD-23 and cyclin D1 were negative, and cell proliferation index Ki-67 was about 10%. These findings revealed a low-grade B-cell lymphoma .
Chest and abdominopelvic high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) indicated no abnormalities and lymphadenopathy. So we concluded that the final diagnosis for the current patient was a primary lymphoma originated from the nasopharyngeal mucosa by spreading the upwards areas, including both cavernous sinuses, sellar, and suprasellar regions.
She received six courses of chemotherapy with CHOP: cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine sulfate, and dexamethasone plus Rituximab. Oral prednisolone (7.5 mg daily) and levothyroxine (50 μg daily) were prescribed simultaneously with chemotherapy, due to her pan-hypopituitarism. A few days after prednisolone usage, ptosis dramatically improved. MRI enhancement in the sellar and suprasellar regions and both cavernous sinuses were largely eliminated after the last chemotherapy course . Besides, hematological defects were improved significantly.
One month after treatment with prednisolone, the patient complained about polyuria and nocturia. Partial central diabetes insidious (CDI) was diagnosed based on more than 3 l 24-h urine volume, mild hypernatremia (Na: 147 meq/L) and low urine osmolality (urine specific gravity was 1.005 whereas the urine specific gravity in the first evaluation was 1.010). After chemotherapy courses central adrenal insufficiency, partial CDI and central hypothyroidism have been resolved.
We searched PubMed for articles published from Jan 1, 1990, to Aug 1, 2020, using the search terms “nasopharyngeal lymphoma”, “non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma of the nasopharynx”, “nasopharyngeal B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma”, “nasopharyngeal Hodgkin’s disease” in combination with the terms “pan-hypopituitarism”, “pituitary dysfunction”, “cranial nerves palsy”, “multiple cranial nerve palsy”, “oculomotor nerve palsy”, “isolated oculomotor nerve palsy”, “multiple cranial nerve dysfunction”,” III cranial nerve palsy”, “IV cranial nerve palsy”, “VI cranial nerve palsy”, “third cranial nerve palsy”,“4th cranial nerve palsy”,“6th cranial nerve palsy”. Articles published in English were included. We focused mostly on articles from case reports or case series.