We report a rare case of a 41-year-old Chinese woman with right-sided colon adenocarcinoma. Her medical history showed no obvious abnormality. No family history of colon cancer was reported. She was asymptomatic when a colonoscopy confirmed a mass in the caecum . A CT scan of the abdomen showed caecum wall thickness . No evidence of liver or lung involvement was noted.
In 2018, a right-sided colectomy was performed . Histopathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with lymphovascular invasion . Immunohistochemistry tests for MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, CD31, CD34 and D2–40 were positive. No mutations were detected in the KRAS, NRAS and BRAF genes. Genomic analysis was performed using the Illumina HiSeq Sequencing platform, which covered the complete exonic regions of the 425 gene, a selected set of intronic regions associated with chromosome rearrangement, regions affecting mRNA alternative splicing, and specific genomic loci associated with microsatellite instability (MSI). This test evaluates all of the mutation types, the tumour mutation burden (TMB), the status of the mismatch repair (MMR)-related genes, microsatellite (MS) status, and inheritance risk of the disease genes within the patient. We have tested not only the tumour tissue but also the blood samples of the patient. Blood DNA is the most commonly used sample for the detection of germline mutations in patients with non-haematological diseases. Germline mutations and tumour-specific mutations screened in comparison with blood negative controls. The test results revealed that her tumour was MSS with a (c.1093_1169 + 15dup) RAD54L germline mutation and a TMB of 377.0 Muts/Mb including ABCB1, AKT1, APC, ATM, BAX, BRCA1, BRCA2, ERBB2, PBRM1, TAP1, TP53, XPC, FGFR1, FGFR4, NF2, CDK8, NTRK2, RAD50, ATR, PIK3R1, SMAD4, SMAD2, POLE and POLH. Since the patient’s parents have passed away, germline mutation was unable to be tested. For humanitarian reasons, we can’t perform genomic analysis test for her child. According to the TNM staging system, she staged as IIA (pT3N0 M0). Subsequently, she was treated with 8 cycles of biweekly FOLFOX (5-FU, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin). Now she is one-year cancer-free.