A 40-year-old HIV-infected male patient, born and residing in the Nice area (Alpes-Maritimes, South-Eastern France), was admitted to hospital in June 2011 for persistent diarrhoea and weight loss (5 kgs). He had contracted HIV-infection in 1996, and his previous medical history included VL in 2000, (with clinical relapses in 2005 and 2009 but no renal involvement), high blood pressure, cerebral toxoplasmosis and Kaposi’s sarcoma in 2003, and pneumocystis pneumonia in 2006. His antiretroviral regimen included etravirine, darunavir and ritonavir. The latest CD4 cell count was 114 cells/mm3 (nadir: 46 cells/mm3) and HIV viral load was 162 copies/ml. Compliance with cART had frequently been sub-optimal. He presented with nephritic syndrome, urine dipstick analysis revealing proteinuria and hematuria, but no leukocyturia. Blood pressure was 150/100 mmHg, with peripheral œdema. All kidney tissue samples were obtained via needle biopsy. Light microscopy examination showed diffuse hyper-cellularity with thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, and immunofluorescence microscopy revealed IgG, IgM, C3 and C1q mesangial and endo-membranous deposits . According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) classification, the histological findings were typical of type III membrano-proliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN).
Diagnosis of VL was based on molecular methods using Leishmania infantum polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Taqman technology; Light Cycler target: kinetoplast mini-circle DNA) on peripheral blood and other biological samples, i.e. bone marrow, urine and kidney . In this patient, qualitative PCR was positive in both urine and peripheral blood. VL relapse was suspected and liposomal Amphotericine B (l-Ampho-B), 3 mg/kg daily, initially scheduled for 10 days, was prematurely discontinued due to deteriorating renal function and suspected drug-associated tubulopathy. The patient’s condition gradually improved and secondary VL prophylaxis consisting in monthly intravenous pentamidine infusions was initiated. During follow-up, creatinine levels remained stable and viro-immunological parameters improved. The patient was re-admitted in October 2013 for another relapse of VL. Poor cART compliance was suspected. The CD4 T-cell count and plasma HIV-RNA level were 79 cells/mm3 and 1,500 copies/ml, respectively. PCR was positive for Leishmania infantum with 992 parasites/ml in plasma and 322 parasites/106 cells in bone marrow. Treatment with l-Ampho-B was started, adapting dosage to renal function; fever resolved, parasitemia dropped to 312 parasites/ml and the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) remained stable. Antiretroviral treatment was switched from a twice-daily to a once-daily regimen, in order to improve compliance. The patient was discharged and continued secondary VL prophylaxis as an outpatient with L-Ampho-B.
Table summarizes baseline characteristics, renal impairment and clinical outcome for all four patients, while the main histological findings are described in Table .