A 23-year-old man presented rapidly worsening subacute pain and swelling in the right inguinal area. This had lasted for 4 days before admission. There was no history of dysuria, nausea, vomiting, or bowel habit change, and his visual analogue scale (VAS) pain score remained below 4. Moreover, the patient denied any history of systemic disease or previous surgery. His history was also negative regarding weight-bearing, chronic cough, trauma, or strenuous exercises before symptoms onset. Notably, the patient had no family history of testicular torsion. Physical examination showed right subinguinal erythema and tenderness. However, Prehn’s sign was negative, and there was no swelling of the testis and epididymis bilaterally . Inguinal hernia, infectious diseases such as orchitis or epididymitis, and an atypical presentation of testicular torsion were considered as possible differential diagnoses. A scrotal Doppler echography was performed, which revealed intact bilateral testicular blood flow and homogeneous testicular content . Mild hydrocele was noted. However, an indeterminate hypoechoic lesion was shown above the right epididymis, with multiple tubular structures and reactive fluid accumulation . The diameter was not greater than 2 mm. Valsalva manoeuvre during the ultrasound could not be performed due to the poor cooperation of the patient. A right inguinal hernia was suspected, and incarceration was not ruled out. Laboratory studies showed increased white blood cell count (1.2 × 103/μL; reference range, 4–10 × 103/μL) and elevated C-reactive protein levels (CRP; 3.21 mg/dL; reference normal range, < 0.3 mg/dL); however, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-HCG; reference normal range < 0.16 ng/mL) and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; reference normal range < 8.78 ng/mL) levels were within the normal limits. Urine analysis revealed microscopic hematuria without pyuria. CT showed a segmental ileal loop within the right inguinal area and multiple hyperdense tubular organs incarcerated into the right scrotum . Accordingly, omental incarceration was suspected, and diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. During the operation, we noted bilateral intact internal rings, while swelling and erythematous reaction over the right spermatic cord were noted, along with greater omentum adhesions . Postoperatively, the patient had only one episode of fever, which reached 38.2 °C. Consequently, the diagnosis was made of vasitis. Initially, he was treated with ceftriaxone as empirical antibiotic treatment, then switched to cefazolin plus gentamicin on postoperative day 3. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5, with the prescription to continue the antibiotic treatment (cephalexin) for seven more days. At subsequent follow-up visits, he denied any discomfort. No erythema, swelling, or tenderness was found during physical examination .