A 6 month old Sudanese female infant with a clinical diagnosis of Crigler Najjar Syndrome Type 1 (CN1) was referred for consideration of liver transplant. She was born to second degree consanguineous parents. The pregnancy was uncomplicated and she was delivered at term by lower segment caesarean section weighing 2.5 Kg. She was noticed to be jaundiced at birth and phototherapy was initiated. The diagnosis of CN1 became apparent in a couple of weeks in view of persistent unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia. Her unconjugated bilirubin ranged between 20 and 25 mg/dl, with conjugated fraction of less than 0.6 mg/dl. There was no evidence of haemolysis or liver dysfunction. The infant was exclusively breast fed and was developing appropriately for her age. The child was receiving home phototherapy every day at the time of referral. After admitting into our hospital we put her on standard 10 to 12 h of phototherapy every day.
Clinical examination revealed her to be icteric with normal systemic examination. Her weight and height were 6.9 kg and 65 cms respectively, both at 50 centile. Her development and neurology was appropriate for age. Apart from elevated unconjugated bilirubin, she had unremarkable full blood count, liver transaminases, coagulation profile, serum albumin and liver radio imaging(We performed liver ultrasound Doppler and CT abdomen with contrast as per the protocol).
Standard procedures were employed to obtain genomic DNA from the index case and her parents. The promoter region and all the five coding exons with the intron exon boundaries were PCR amplified. All the PCR products were purified and Sanger sequenced. Bidirectional sequencing was carried out and subjected to sequence analysis. PCR conditions and primer pair details are presented in Table .
A detailed pedigree of the family was recorded . Our patient was born to second degree consanguineous parents and there was no other case of CN1 reported in all the three generations. UGT1A1 full gene analysis was performed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by Sanger DNA sequencing. Molecular analysis revealed a normal wild type TATA box (A(TA)6TAA)sequence in our patient and her parents . Further analysis of the exon-intron boundaries in the patient revealed a novel homozygous 22 bp duplication (c.55_76dup) in the coding region of the Exon1 . This 22 bp duplication causes a frame shift leading to a premature stop codon resulting in a truncated 62 amino acids protein. Both parents of the patient were heterozygous for the 22 bp (c.55_76dup) duplication, indicating a clear recessive pattern of inheritance. No mutations were detected in the other coding exons.
Our patient subsequently received a living related left lateral liver segment from her father. She had a smooth intraoperative period and her postoperative period was unremarkable except for 2 episodes of biopsy proven acute cellular rejection which responded to steroids. Her immunosuppression was performed with Tacrolimus, Mycophenolate mofetil and low dose steroids. Post transplantation bilirubin levels normalized, unconjugated bilirubin levels were found to be 0.8 mg/dL and conjugated bilirubin was 0.3 mg/dL. Post-surgical monitoring of the infant was done with shared care between our team of doctors and Sudanese doctors who took care of her locally. She periodically got blood tests done with immunosuppression levels which are sent to us electronically for advice. She is currently well at 1 year follow up.