An 86-year-old Japanese female patient with a history of bilateral breast cancer was found to have a gastric mass on a medical examination. She was referred to our hospital for a workup and treatment. She had previously undergone surgery for right breast cancer at 72 years of age and subsequently underwent total mastectomy with level II axillary lymph node dissection. The pathological examination at that time revealed invasive ductal carcinoma with positive lymphovascular invasion (pT3N0M0 stage II). The tumor was positive for both estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR), and did not overexpress human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). A total of 50Gy of external beam irradiation therapy was administered to her residual mammary gland, followed by endocrine therapy with 20mg of daily tamoxifen administration for five years. She was found to have left breast cancer at the age of 79 years. A total mastectomy was performed with level II axillary lymph node dissection, and invasive ductal carcinoma with positive lymphovascular invasion (pT1N0M0 Stage I) was diagnosed. As before, the tumor was positive for ER and PR with no HER2 overexpression. She received extended adjuvant endocrine therapy of 1mg per day of anastrozole for five years.
On her current admission, our patient complained of dysphagia. Repeat gastrofiberscopy revealed a submucosal lesion in her middle esophagus located 27cm distal to her incisors , as well as the known type I tumor (semipedunculated type) of her gastric cardia . Biochemistry and blood testing did not reveal any abnormal values. Her level of squamous cell carcinoma antigen was elevated (5.4ng/mL); however, the values of the other markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 15–3, National Cancer Center-ST 439, cytokeratin 19 fragment) were within the normal ranges. Mediastinal computed tomography showed a mass lesion in her middle esophagus that had grown extraluminally and infiltrated the tracheal bifurcation and her left primary bronchus . There was no hepatic or pulmonary metastasis. Fine-needle aspiration cytology and a boring biopsy of the esophageal lesion were performed under ultrasonic monitoring , and a pathological diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the esophagus was obtained with positive ER staining on immunohistochemistry . A biopsy of the cardiac lesion revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the stomach . Neither hormone receptors nor HER2 were expressed in the gastric lesion. The expression status of the hormone receptors indicated that the esophageal lesion reflected metastatic recurrence of her breast cancer with coincidental primary gastric cancer (cT1N0M0 stage IA).
Although our patient’s dysphagia progressed, neither intensive chemotherapy nor highly invasive surgical therapy were considered to be indicated due to her general condition and age. The esophageal lesion was treated with 2Gy per day of external beam irradiation therapy for 30 days (for a total of 60Gy). It remarkably reduced in size after radiotherapy , allowing oral inoculation. The cardiac tumor exhibited no remarkable changes . Endoscopic submucosal dissection was considered for the gastric tumor. Unfortunately, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) demonstrated that the tumor had invaded her submucosal layer and it was judged to be inoperable due to the risk of bleeding and perforation. The administration of chemotherapy and endocrine therapy for her breast cancer was prioritized because the esophageal lesion of the breast cancer was much more advanced and critical for our patient’s status than the gastric cancer. She received metronomic medication with daily oral administration of tegafur-uracil (400mg per kilogram body weight), cyclophosphamide (100mg/day) and medroxyprogesterone acetate (800mg/day) based on her age and therapeutic history, as well as the biological subtype of the tumor and presence of the non-treated gastric cancer. She has since maintained a good performance status on outpatient treatment with chemo-endocrine therapy, and no disease progression had been noted to date, six months after the radiation therapy.