A 56-year-old man with a history of asthma, sinusitis, serous otitis media, idiopathic eosinophilia, recurrent idiopathic myocarditis, and idiopathic interstitial pneumonia was treated with prednisolone (PSL) at a dose of 27.5 mg/day. He had no symptom with steroid therapy. He complained of a persistent, pulsatile, occipital headache, and general malaise 2 weeks before admission, when the dose of PSL was reduced from 27.5 mg/day to 22.5 mg/day. However, he did not exhibit symptoms such as fever, weight loss, joint pain, rash, or diarrhea. A neurological examination revealed paralysis of the left abducens nerve. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed polycystic subdural hygroma and hematoma. In addition, with contrast enhancement, a diffuse thickening of the dura mater was observed . Whole-body computed tomography (CT) scans showed no signs of lymphadenopathy or malignant tumors. Gallium scintigraphy revealed diffuse accumulation in the kidneys; however, there was no accumulation in the lymph nodes and joints. Urinalysis showed a tubular defect (N-acetyl-beta glucosamines 45 IU/L, beta-2-microglobulin 9156 μg/L), suggesting interstitial nephritis. Microbial analyses and immunologic bioassays were uninformative. There was no complement consumption or eosinophilia. His serum IgG4 level was slightly increased (126 mg/dL) at the PSL dose of 22.5 mg/dL. However, one year prior to the study, it was higher (332 mg/dL), although the dose of PSL was 7 mg/day. Craniotomy was performed from the left side of the head with a burr hole, made a dural incision, and collected a sample. After biopsy and dural suture, it was confirmed that was no leakage of spinal fluid by the Valsalva test, preventing low intracranial pressure syndrome from occurring. Dural biopsy confirmed that the dura was 2 mm thick, and its surface was red and edematous, and very fragile. Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed a fibro-inflammatory lesion in the thickened dura due to lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates. Immunohistochemical analysis showed lymphocytic infiltration, 60 IgG4+ plasma cells per high-power field, and an IgG4+/IgG ratio greater than 50% . There was no evidence of a malignant tumor, histiocytic disease, or granulomatous disease. Staining for microbial pathogens was negative. We established a diagnostic of IgG4-RD based on clinical diagnostic criteria [, ], we established a diagnosis of IgG4-RD; the unexplained multiple organ disorders (as mentioned before) also suggested IgG4-RD. The symptoms improved quickly with oral PSL therapy (45 mg/day, 0.6 mg/kg/day) after 2 courses of methylprednisolone 1 g pulse therapy for 3 days, and the subsequent brain MRI showed complete regression of meningeal thickening, polycystic subdural hygroma, and hematoma. Thereafter, tacrolimus (3 mg/day) was added, and the PSL dose was reduced by 2.5–5 mg every two weeks to a final dose of 10 mg/day. The patient had no recurrence of headache with oral treatment using PSL (10 mg/day) and tacrolimus (3 mg/day), and his serum IgG4 level decreased to 9.6 mg.