A 76-year-old female patient presented to her general practitioner with pulsatile posterior right shoulder swelling for 2 months. She had a history of osteoarthritis but was otherwise fit and well and not taking any medication. An ultrasound scan (US) in the community demonstrated a 23 mm hypoechoic lesion in the right deltoid region with flow on color imaging. The patient was referred to the local Vascular Surgical Team, who advised an angiographic computed tomography (CT) scan, which demonstrated a 23 × 15 mm pseudoaneurysm arising from the circumflex humeral artery .
Clinical history revealed that the patient suffered from right-sided subacromial impingement and a partial supraspinatus tendon tear 15 years ago. The patient underwent arthroscopic subacromial decompression and rotator cuff repair 12 years ago.
She had an arthroscopic procedure combined with a mini-open approach, with the incision placed on the anterolateral aspect of the shoulder, 4 cm below the lateral edge of the acromion. The rotator cuff repair was carried out using one anchor in a single-row.
Given that the patient had symptoms for a long time and the findings were of a partial tear involving more than 50% of the thickness of the tendon with a good quality margin, the decision was made to repair the tear. She was then followed up immediately and for 3 months after the procedure. She had experienced intermittent shoulder pain between these consultations but continued to have a good range of movements, specifically abduction at 160°. She was discharged from the clinic, given the satisfactory clinical outcome. The patient denied a history of trauma or any procedure, including injections to her right shoulder, in the decade preceding her presentation with swelling.
The case was discussed at the multidisciplinary team meeting and referred to the interventional radiology team for catheter angiography and embolization. The right radial artery was accessed with a 5-French introducer sheath (Radiofocus® Transradial Kit, Terumo Corporation). Digital subtraction angiography of the axillary artery confirmed the presence of a pseudoaneurysm arising from the posterior circumflex humeral artery with no demonstrable outflow vessel . The inflow vessel was cannulated with a microcatheter (0.021” J-tip DirexionTM, Boston Scientific) and embolized with a selection of 3 mm and 4 mm coils (Nester®, Cook Medical) with satisfactory occlusion on the post-procedural angiogram and no immediate post-procedural complications.
A duplex ultrasound performed 12 months after the embolization confirmed thrombosis of the pseudoaneurysm and patent right axillary, brachial, and radial with satisfactory flow.