A 63-year-old woman admitted to our hospital with a mass at the sternum and right second to third costochondral cartilage. She had undergone bilateral mastectomy for breast cancer 13 years earlier. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 40-mm mass in sternum . Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed the maximum of the standardized uptake value of [18f]-fluorodeoxyglucose to be 7.30 at the mass in the sternum, with no other lesions detected . A percutaneous biopsy was performed, and the mass was diagnosed as solitary metastasis due to breast cancer. She received two courses of weekly paclitaxel and bevacizumab, and CT revealed shrinking of the mass in sternum, while the hot uptake on PET disappeared . We performed surgical resection with curative intent for a multimodality approach.
First, a latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap was harvested with the patient in left lateral position . We could not assert that the tumor was not infiltrating the pectoralis major muscle and the subcutaneous layer. Therefore, we decided to remove these muscles. Parasternectomy and removal of the right second and third costochondral cartilage, the pectoralis major muscle, and the subcutaneous layer was performed in the supine position . A prosthesis was created to fill the defect by sandwiching molded methylmethacrylate between polypropylene mesh . The prosthesis was fixed to the cut ends of the costochondral cartilage and the residual sternum . Finally, the harvested latissimus dorsi myoctaneous flap was transpositioned to cover the chest midline wound and the prosthesis .
The postoperative course was uneventful, and her respiration was normal without paradoxical movement of the thorax or hypoxemia. A histological examination revealed that viable cells of metastatic breast cancer account for 30% of total cells, and cicatrization of metastatic breast cancer accounts for 70% of total cells in the sternum and the intercostal spaces. Immunohistochemistry revealed positivity for estrogen-receptor (ER) and progesterone-receptor (PR) and negativity for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Furthermore, negative surgical margins at the stump of the sternum and costochondral cartilages were noted. Therefore, we decided not to do adjuvant therapy.
This patient has shown no complications and no recurrence in the four months since surgery. We planned to take CT every half year.