A 34-year-old woman was admitted on November 2013 because of an acute episode of aphasia. She has been previously diagnosed as an SS without antiphospholipid antibodies, because of livedo reticularis, transient ischaemic stroke, and confirmed obstruction of arterioles by an intimate proliferation in the skin biopsy. The physical examination at admission revealed livedo reticularis limited to the lower limbs, a systolic aortic murmur, disabling rotary vertigo, weakness of the left upper limb with paresthaesia.
A brain magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the stroke, showing a semi-recent right opercular ischaemic lesion of the middle cerebral artery.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a regular sinus rhythm, with sequelae of necrosis in the apicolateral territory . The 24-h ECG was normal. Transthoracic echocardiography showed akinesis of apical segments, preserved ejection fraction, significant thickening of the aortic valve leaflets resulting in a moderate aortic valve stenosis (valve area 1.58 cm2 and 0.89 cm2/m2, Vmax 2.94 m/s, mean gradient 22 mmHg) and a moderate-to-severe aortic insufficiency (vena contracta 8 mm, diastolic flow reversal in the descending aorta 0.19 m/s, EROA 0.22 cm2, regurgitant volume 58 mL), no mitral valve involvement . Transoesophageal echocardiogram was performed and ruled out embolic causes of stroke, such as patent foramen ovale (PFO), intracardiac thrombus, or vegetation.
Coronary angiogram was normal . Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) with late gadolinium enhancement showed transmural necrosis in the territory of the left anterior descending artery [segments 14–15–16–17: 15% of the left ventricular (LV)], and an intermediate sequelae in mid-inferior lateral and apical (segment 11). T2-weighted CMR showed an inferolateral apical hypersignal witnessing a recent ischaemic lesion . Furthermore, aortic insufficiency was confirmed with a regurgitant fraction at 30%. So, all these examinations were in favour of the diagnosis of ischaemia with no obstructive coronary arteries.
F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography revealed no vasculitis or infective endocarditis . Laboratory tests yielded negative results for lupus and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (normal anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-beta2 glycoprotein1, antinuclear antibodies, anti-ENA, anti-dsDNA antibodies, anti-Sm antibodies, and complement).
Treatment included aspirin 160 mg, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor 10 mg, beta blocker 5 mg, and corticosteroid therapy 8 mg.
The patient had regular follow-up. At 7 years follow-up visit, she remained asymptomatic, livedo reticularis extended to the upper limb. Echocardiography showed no change in LV morphology and function. Morphology of aortic valve was unchanged with thickened cusps, and aortic insufficiency was less important than initially (vena contracta from 8 to 4 mm and diastolic flow reversal in the descending aorta from 0.19 to 0.13 m/s, pressure half-time from 500 to 600 ms, SOR from 0.22 to 0.14 cm2, regurgitant volume from 58 to 35 mL), the aortic stenosis was still moderate (valve area 1.35 cm2 and 0.77 cm2/m2, Vmax 2.61 m/s, mean gradient 29 mmHg) . Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy showed preserved LV function with a necrosis in apical segments (10% of the LV).