The propositus in this family (IV6) is a 45 year old Caucasian female who was diagnosed with LPD at the age of 24. Childhood was unremarkable for medical conditions, starting at the age of 17 she had recurrent episodes of prolonged abdominal pain with nausea and vomiting. During multiple admissions to the emergency department, abdominal X-rays showed repeatedly intestinal obstruction. No further investigation regarding the cause for this abdominal pain was undertaken until the age of 24. During an abdominal gynecological laparatomy -conducted because of recurrent abdominal pain and dysmenorrhoe- multiple polypoid pedunculated lesions on the large bowels were seen (see Figure ), biopsy was not carried out because the lesions were well vascularized. On surgical abdominal exploratory laparotomy about 50 fibromatous tumors were found and removed from the serosal surfaces, small and large bowels, omentum and from the uterus. Histopathological analysis of these tumors revealed benign spindle cell tumors, classified as leiomyoma. Electron microscopy showed peculiar nodules consisting of mature fibroblasts, abundant collagen with a few admixed myofibroblasts. At the age of 29 the patient had another episode of severe abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting and abdominal distension, partial small bowel obstruction was seen again on abdominal X-rays. The patient had no further episode of abdominal discomfort until now and presented to us for further evaluation with abdominal bloating and discomfort. Other recorded medical conditions include Raynaud's disease (diagnosed at the age of 19), Prurigo nodularis with lichenification of the skin (onset of symptoms in adolescence, see Figure ) and recently diagnosed postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (diagnosed at age 44).
Her clinical exam of the abdomen revealed nothing except abdominal distension, no masses or tenderness were noted. Inspection of the skin revealed dry lichenificated skin on all extremities with prominent itching nodules (see Figure ). Laboratory findings were normal at admission.
The mother of the patient (III10) is now at age 82 and was diagnosed with Leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata at the age of 25. She also had recurrent episodes of severe prolonged abdominal pain and underwent exploratory laparotomy due to a ruptured appendix. Incidentally a large number of tumorous lesions was found, which were later on classified as leiomyomas. Interestingly this patient also was diagnosed with Raynaud's disease and has Prurigo nodularis-like skin lesions. The sister of this patient (III13) died at age 16 of peritonitis and sepsis. On post mortem examination intestinal obstruction due to multiple tumorous lesions was found as origin of peritonitis. Another brother (III17) died of peritonitis and gangrene of the bowels at the age of 20, resulting from intestinal obstruction of multiple pedunculated tumors (as reported by operating surgeon, 1939).
The grandfather (II3) of the propositus never was diagnosed LPD but has a past medical history of abdominal problems, including intestinal obstructions. Unfortunately no further information was available.
Three more members of the family are affected by LPD and furthermore have been diagnosed with Raynaud's disease and show Prurigo nodularis with skin lichenification. All three patients (IV2, IV3, IV4) had abdominal problems (e.g. prolonged severe abdominal pain) in their late teenage years and underwent explorative laparotomy, which showed more than 50 tumors in every case. The receptor status for progesteron- and estrogen-receptors was negative in these three patients. Patient V1 is the 10 year old son of patient IV2 and already had a complete intestinal obstruction, on explorative laparotomy more than 100 pedunculated tumors have been found in the abdominal cavity.
Patients IV5, IV7 and V2 reportedly have or had abdominal problems, but no confirmed diagnosis was available. No information on medical conditions, post mortem examinations or confirmed diagnoses was available for patients I1 and I2, grand-grandparents of the propositus (IV6).