The patient was a man in his 20s whose main complaints were pain in the lateral side of the right knee and discomfort and balance instability when climbing and descending stairs, especially during stair descent. During a judo match, he was injured when he twisted his right knee and consulted a local doctor. He was referred to our department 5 days after the incident under suspicion of injury to his right anterior cruciate ligament (ACL).
He was asked about the details of the injury. During the match, he attempted to resist his opponent by trying not to be lifted while on all fours, with his right knee flexed and his right foot firmly planted on the floor. We inferred that he was injured while changing his foot position and that his lower leg was subjected to internal rotation, causing forced varus on his knee and leading to the injury .
Physical examination of the right knee showed no swelling or fluid accumulation and the range of motion of the joint was not limited to 0° extension and 135° flexion; however, pain occurred around the fibular head in the deep flexion position. He had tenderness from the fibular head to its center. Manual examination revealed no anteroposterior or mediolateral instability (0°, 30°). The Lachman test and the Pivot shift test were negative. Pain around the fibular head was induced in the cross-legged position (four-shaped limb position) and the LCL fiber could not be palpated.
No bone damage was observed on plain X-ray images and no obvious instability was noted during 10 kg varus stress imaging (telos SE; Aimedic MMT) in the knee extension position and 30° flexion position. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormalities in the ACL, PCL, popliteus tendon, or biceps femoris tendon; however, signal changes and an abnormal course in the fibular head insertion at the distal part of the LCL were observed .
Based on these findings, a diagnosis of isolated LCL injury was concluded. We recommended reduced activity and the patient was followed up after 1 month. However, due to persisting symptoms, surgery was performed after consulting with the patient.
At the time of surgery, there was no obvious left-right difference in the dial test under anesthesia. Arthroscopic findings showed no abnormalities in the joints, including the ACL, PCL, and popliteus tendons, except for mild cartilage degeneration in the medial femoral condyle.
To identify the LCL, an arcuate skin incision of approximately 8 cm was made from the lateral epicondyle of the right femur to the fibular head , and the posterior margin of the iliotibial band was incised to approach the deep layer. Since the surface layer of the LCL was covered with scar tissue, an incision was made along the course of the tendon to expose the LCL . The volume of the LCL was poor near the fibula head and the scar tissue was continuous. However, it was judged to be an abnormal tissue; thus, the surrounding scar was removed, and the ligaments were isolated.
A gracilis tendon was harvested from the ipsilateral lower limb as a graft to reinforce the LCL. A φ4.5-mm bone hole was created in the head of the fibula in the anterior–posterior direction ( and ), the harvested gracilis tendon was inserted through the bone hole , and one end was sutured side-to-side with the LCL. The length-changing pattern was confirmed while applying tension to the graft, and an interlacing suture was performed on the LCL at 90° of knee flexion ( and ).
After the operation, the knee flexion was 30°, and a soft orthotic device with support was fixed. Two weeks after the operation, the range of motion exercise was initiated with the angle-restricted orthotic device of extension 30°/flexion 120°. The orthotic device was removed 8 weeks after the operation and the patient was allowed to jog 4 months post-surgery. The repaired LCL became palpable with the knee in the figure-of-four position and the pain around the fibular head and balance instability when climbing and descending the stairs resolved. We confirmed restoration of the LCL and the patient resumed competing in judo matches.