The index case (. II.6) was a 33-year-old woman, 23 weeks pregnant, with myopathic facies, myotonic phenomenon in hands, asthenia/tiredness and inverted V-shaped upper lip. As family history of interest, her father and grandparent suffered from eye cataracts and she had a brother with similar symptoms. Due to the absence of relationship with the paternal branch of the family, other possible data of interest were unknown. She had suffered two miscarriages at the time of the consultation, and one of her daughters showed developmental delay and hypotonia. With a suspicion of Steinert’s disease, neurologists requested a genetic study to confirm or rule out the presence of variants in DMPK gene that would support the diagnosis of DM1. In our laboratory, techniques of PCR (Adellgene Myotonic Dystrophy Screening kit, Diagnóstica Longwood) and Triplet Primed Repeat PCR, TP-PCR (Adellgene® Myotonic Dystrophy Confirmatory kit, Diagnóstica Longwood) are used for this purpose. Fragment analysis was carried out by the sequencer ABI 3130xl and the GeneMapper 4.0 software. Allele size detection limit by TP-PCR was 150 CTG, and the accuracy of PCR sizing was ± 1 repeat for the normal allele size range. In this case, the TP-PCR report revealed a result compatible with the diagnosis of Steinert’s disease, as an allele of about 5 ± 1 CTG repeats and a second expanded allele >150 CTGs (about 667 CTGs, confirmed by Southern-blot) were found in the patient’s sample.
At this point, it was considered a genetic study of the daughters of our index case, to analyse the presence of alleles associated with DM1. In one of them (. III.1), two alleles were found within the normal range (6 ± 1 CTGs, and 13 ± 1 CTGs), ruling out the disease. The other (. III.2) was a 5-year-old girl with psychomotor retardation and hypotonia, whose study result revealed one allele with >150 CTGs, confirmed by Southern blot, quantifying 1,333 CTG repeats. Since the woman was pregnant at the time of diagnosis, a prenatal study was also performed, and it allowed us to detect a congenital form of the disease (. III.3) with one allele of 2,600 CTG repeats. Despite this, the couple decided to continue with pregnancy. Their son was born with hypotonia, respiratory acidosis, breathing difficulties and hyperbilirubinemia. With 15 days of life, he required parenteral nutrition and combined tracheostomy and gastrostomy. He finally died at 4 months of age due to bradycardia and hypoperfusion.
Following this case of a congenital form of DM1, a genetic study was carried out on the child’s uncle (brother of our index case) (. II.7). He was a 29-year-old male with myotonic phenomenon in face and frontal baldness. As results, we found one allele within the normal range, and another expanded (333 CTGs). The patient and his wife were expecting a baby, so we continued with the family study, with the aim of finding out if the baby was also a carrier of the CTG trinucleotide expansion in the DMPK gene. For this purpose, a prenatal test was carried out, revealing a normal allele and another with about 195 CTG repeats (. III.4), not being possible to perform a Southern blot analysis to quantify the expanded allele due to insufficient prenatal DNA sample. In view of these results, and with the necessity of ruling out a possible germline mosaicism before thinking about a phenomenon of contraction in the number of copies, Southern blot was conducted after birth. The quantification of the expanded allele revealed 333 CTGs (as her father, without having expanded the CTG repeat size) , which made us discard both the possibility of a mosaicism and a contraction phenomenon in the number of CTG repeats.