A woman, 42-year-old former smoker without atherosclerotic risk factors, family history of cardiac disease, sudden cardiac death, autoimmune disease, or regular medication, required the emergency medical services due to acute and pressure-like chest pain of high intensity associated with diaphoresis and mild shortness of breath with a duration of more than 20 min unrelated to emotional stress or intense exercise at that time.
On physical examination, the patient was slightly anxious with stable vital signs (heart rate 90 b.p.m., blood pressure 122/67 mmHg, and respiratory rate 19/min with an oxygen saturation of 98% on ambient air). Normal S1 and S2 heart sounds were present, no murmurs, or gallops. There were no signs of heart failure present.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus rhythm and 3- to 4-mm ST-segment elevations in leads V2 through V6. General treatment measures—300 mg of aspirin, 600 mg of clopidogrel, one dose of 0.4 mg of sublingual nitroglycerine, and an unfractionated heparin drip—were initiated. The patient was transferred to our cardiology unit by the emergency services for an emergent coronary angiography, which showed a dual lumen defect (TIMI 0), suggestive of a possible intimal dissection of the left anterior descending coronary artery involving the first diagonal branch artery, the ramus intermedius coronary artery with an extension to the left main coronary artery (Type 1 SCAD). Given the presence of involvement of proximal segments, a guide was passed to the anterior descending artery, which allowed the recovery of coronary flow and two stents were placed in the proximal and mid left anterior descending coronary artery after balloon dilation in each one. An intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) demonstrated a near-circumferential haematoma extending deeply into the media of the left main coronary artery. Based on this finding, drug-eluting stent implantation over the dissection was performed with the support of a guidewire located in the anterior descending artery and another in the circumflex artery to obtain more stabilization for its placement. Normal blood flow was restored with no residual stenosis (TIMI 3). During the procedure, she received electrical defibrillation due to two episodes of ventricular fibrillation.
After catheterization, the patient was without chest pain and a normalization of the ST-segment with anterior Q-waves (V1–4) with mild T-wave inversion was observed in the ECG. She was sent to the coronary care unit in stable condition for observation. Haematological examination indicated a marked peak in cardiac troponin T (cTnT) to 117 ng/mL (reference range 0–0.05). Full blood count, kidney function, and electrolytes were normal. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed an apical thrombus, severe left ventricular dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction 30%) with anterior wall akinesia. Anticoagulation therapy was initiated. The patient remained asymptomatic and was discharged under medical treatment—antiaggregant treatment (aspirin plus clopidogrel), vitamin K antagonist, beta-blockade, ACE inhibitor, spironolactone, and a high-dose statin—and close medical follow-up by the heart failure team. Due to the strong association between SCAD and FMD, a complete screening for FMD took place computed tomography angiography with its presence in renal (typical ‘string-of-beads’ aspect of the right renal artery), lower limb (‘string-of-beads’ appearance on right femoral artery), and brain arteries were confirmed. At 3-month follow-up after discharge, a repeat transthoracic echocardiogram revealed persistent severe left ventricular dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction 30%) without apical thrombus. Subsequently, the patient has not had additional medical events, remaining without symptoms (New York Heart Association I) after 1 year of follow-up.