In January 2021, a 65-year-old man came to our institution because of an AAP after refusing medical advice to undergo surgery in another center.
The patient was hypertensive and had a history of past smoking and coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) 18 years earlier with a left internal mammary artery graft on the left anterior descending artery, a radial graft on the obtuse marginal-2 artery, and saphenous vein grafts (SVGs) on the obtuse marginal-1 and diagonal arteries. He had suffered transient sudden severe chest pains for 1 min 3 months previously, followed by progressive weakness, chest pains, and dyspnea.
Upon admission to the hospital, the patient had a temperature of 37.2 °C, a blood pressure of 128/72 mmHg, a heart rate of 73 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 14 breaths per minute, and an oxygen saturation level of 95% in room air. He was alert and in good general condition.
Cardiac auscultation revealed a regular heart rhythm without any murmurs, and chest auscultation was clear. An abdominal examination showed nothing unusual. The peripheral pulses were present (2+). Laboratory results demonstrated a hemoglobin level of 13.9 g/dL, a hematocrit level of 39.3%, and a platelet count of 153,000/mm3. Additionally, urinalysis and liver function test results were normal.
Aortic computed tomography angiography with contrast demonstrated a contrast-filled and outpouching wall, 44 × 33 mm in thickness, with mural irregularity. The wall protruded from the anterior aspect of the proximal portion of the ascending aorta, in favor of a pseudoaneurysm (neck diameter = 17 mm) at the substernal location just before the proximal anastomosis site of the first SVG (occluded) .
A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40%, a top-normal-sized (3.4 cm) ascending aorta, and a large (3.2 cm) echo-free space adjacent to the anterior wall of the ascending aorta just after the sinus of Valsalva connected with a 9 mm neck to the ascending aorta, suggestive of a large aortic pseudoaneurysm .