A 63-year-old male subject, a retired trader, presented to the University of Benin Teaching Hospital, Benin City, Nigeria, with a mass lesion involving the right side of the face of 6 months’ duration. There was no history of trauma, but the patient had experienced weight loss.
He had first presented to a general hospital from where he was referred to a neurosurgery center to rule out intracranial lesions. He underwent cranial computed tomography (CT) scanning which showed that the mass had no intracranial connection or extension and that the eyeball was intact . He was then referred to our clinic.
On ophthalmologic examination, the patient was not in distress, but the mass was very large involving the right side of the forehead, right eyebrow and the right upper eyelid such that it covered the cheek and extended down to the nostrils. The right eyeball could not be visualized . The mass measured 12×16×8 cm. Visual acuity was light perception in the right eye and 20/30 in the left eye. Examination of the left eye was unremarkable; the pupil was round, central and reactive to light. There was no palpable preauricular, postauricular, submandibular, cervical or peripheral lymphadenopathy at the time of presentation. Neurological and other systemic examinations were normal. Considering CT scan findings, it was assumed that the problem may be arising from the frontal sinus, therefore the patient was referred to an otorhinolaryngologist who performed an incisional biopsy on the mass.
Histology of the biopsy specimen disclosed sections of neoplastic tissue made up of small lymphocytes with mildly pleomorphic vesicular nuclei, arranged diffusely; most had plasmacytoid nuclei . A diagnosis of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma was made.
The patient was then referred to the hematology department, where chemotherapy was commenced after a complete workup. He was placed on CHOP regimen (cyclophosphamide 650 mg/m2 IV, days 1 and 8; adriamycin 45 mg/m2 IV, days 1 and 8; vincristine 1.5 mg/m2 IV, days 1 and 8 and prednisolone 20 mg PO, TDS). The mass was considerably reduced in size after the second course of chemotherapy ; after six courses it resolved completely, leaving a ptotic upper eyelid and a phthisical eyeball.