A 46-years old female presented to the emergency room (ER) complaining of bilateral, painful inguinal lymph nodes. She also endorsed progressive fatigue, fever, anorexia, and unintentional weight loss (twenty kilograms in the past month). Her past medical history was significant for Hashimoto’s hypothyroidism (diagnosed in 2010) and HIV (diagnosed in 2011). The patient was unaware she had HIV and was likely diagnosed in her home country of Cameroon. She immigrated to Canada in 2015, and had a medical assessment in 2016 with documentation indicating she had been diagnosed with HIV since 2011. Since at least 2015, the patient had not been on any antiretroviral therapy. To our knowledge, the patient did not have any AIDS defining illness. In terms of her obstetrical history, she was G2P2 and both pregnancies were spontaneous vaginal deliveries. There were no issues with the pregnancies. In Canada, she received social assistance benefits from the government for her living expenses. The patient was not employed but was enrolled in a social program to learn English and French, so that she could participate in the work force. She lived in an apartment with her two children (8 years old male, and 10 years old female). She had no extended family in Canada. Her home medications were levothyroxine (100 mcg PO daily), vitamin D (1000 IU PO daily) and calcium carbonate (500 mg PO BID); she was not on any antiretroviral therapy. The patient denied any smoking, drinking alcohol or using recreational drugs. CT abdomen-pelvis demonstrated enlarged inguinal and intra-abdominal lymph nodes. She was initially discharged from the ER to be seen in hematology clinic however she returned within a few weeks owing to visual and auditory hallucinations. Psychiatric assessment concluded there was an underlying organic cause for her presentation. On assessment, she was alert and oriented to person, place, and time. Her BP was 122/80, her HR 106 regular, her temperature was 36.7, and her oxygen saturation was 96% in room air. Abdominal exam demonstrated significant lymphadenopathy in the inguinal region. Neurological exam demonstrated pyramidal weakness in the right upper extremity as well as both lower extremities. She was hyperreflexive in both triceps and knee reflexes. She had reduced vibration sense in both her halluxes. Labs revealed a normocytic anemia (Hb 107 g/l MCV 90 fL, WBC 5.50 × 109/L, Plt 380 × 109/L) and a mild hypercalcemia (ionized Ca 1.48 mmol/l). LDH was 129 units/liter. Her peripheral blood smear demonstrated a few elliptocytes, rouleaux and polychromasia. It did not demonstrate any blasts. The HIV viral load was 123/mL & CD4 count was 89. She was COVID + but asymptomatic. Her TSH was 3.86 with a normal Free T4. Viral hepatitis panel was negative. Epstein bar virus (EBV) was positive with 6670 copies. Toxoplasmosis IgG was positive with but IgM was negative. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG was positive. Syphilis, cryptococcus and strongyloides serologies were negative. Peripheral blood smear was negative for malaria. CT head, performed prior to lumbar puncture, was unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed 39% lymphocytes and 16% blasts—the report did not state what type of blasts were found therefore the clinical significance of this finding was unclear. CSF cytology was negative for malignancy but showed rare monocytes. Flow cytometry was not performed on CSF. CSF glucose was low [0.4 mmol/L] and protein was high [0.46 g/l]. CSF fluid was negative for tuberculosis, herpes simplex virus (HSV-1 + 2), syphilis, and human polyomavirus two. No bone marrow biopsy was performed. CT chest demonstrated a right upper nodule in the chest with a ground glass appearance, but no thoracic lymphadenopathy. MRI brain with contrast showed significant confluent hyper signal T2 FLAIR within the subcortical and deep ventricular white matter of both cerebral hemispheres, corpus callosum, right posterior limb of the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle . There was also cranial nerve enhancement. Collectively, these findings were suspicious for leptomeningeal dissemination versus CNS infection. As such, the patient was initially started on ceftriaxone, ampicillin, vancomycin and acyclovir but the antibiotics were soon discontinued after further investigations. The patient was also started on nirmatrelvir/ritonavir (Paxlovid) for COVID. She was also started on bictegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir (Biktarvy). Despite a week of anti-retroviral therapy (ART) her CD4 count dropped to 49. A left inguinal node biopsy with flow cytometry showed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Flow cytometry also showed BL6, myc rearrangement (double-hit rearrangement), and CD20 positive. During her admission, the patient developed new urinary retention and new worsening bilateral lower limb weakness, resulting in the inability to walk. MRI lumbar-thoracic spine demonstrated a large lumbar intradural enhancing mass diffusely involving the nerve roots of the cauda equina and conus medullaris . Based on these findings the patient was diagnosed with SCNSL with intramedullary dissemination causing CES. The patient had Stage IV DLBCL. The patient was urgently transferred to another center to initiate high dose methotrexate (3 g/m2) and induction chemotherapy: cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone and rituximab (R-CHOP). The use of high dose methotrexate was justified based on previous studies which have used similar regiments to manage this complication. We did not repeat the LP to analyze the CSF. The patient also developed a subsegmental right lower lobe pulmonary embolism, found on a CT pulmonary angiogram. She was started on therapeutic low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) for 6 months. Following therapy, our patient regained the ability to walk and recovered neurological function. A repeat whole body PET scan demonstrated a reduction of hypermetabolic foci throughout the body post treatment. MRI of the cervical spine still showed suspected leptomeningeal enhancement in the anterior cervical spinal cord of C1/C2. There were no adverse or unanticipated events during the patient’s treatment.