A 59-year-old Egyptian man presented to our Emergency Department with a complaint of absolute constipation for 5 days associated with progressive abdominal distension and pain. Three days later, he could not tolerate any fluids or solid food and began to vomit, with no associated fever, weight loss, or previous attacks of bleeding per rectum. Also, there was no history of any medical illness or previous abdominal surgery.
On examination he was alert, afebrile, hemodynamically stable, and with no signs of dehydration. His abdomen was diffusely distended with no scars or any obvious hernias. There was lower abdominal tenderness and hyperperistalsis on auscultation. A digital rectal examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory investigations showed elevated serum creatinine level (3.9 mg/dl) whereas white blood cells count, serum sodium level, and serum potassium level were within the normal range.
A plain erect abdominal X-ray revealed multiple air fluid levels, which were suggestive of intestinal obstruction. A non-contrast abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan showed small bowel obstruction with a transition zone at terminal ileum while the appendix was not well visualized.
He was started on supportive therapy with intravenously administered fluids, antibiotics, and insertion of nasogastric tube and urinary catheter.
A decision for exploratory laparotomy was made due to doubtful diagnosis. A midline incision was done under general anesthesia. There were dilated proximal small bowel loops to a point where a long inflamed appendix was wrapped around a loop of terminal ileum. The appendiceal tip was adherent to the ileocolic mesentery, obstructing the ileal loop at two levels causing closed loop obstruction .
Release of the adhesive band was achieved by separating the tip of the appendix from the mesentery . The bowel loops were assessed and found to be congested, and regained their viability after 5 minutes’ application of warm saline packs. An appendectomy was done, one tube drain was inserted, and his abdomen was closed in layers. Histopathological assessment of the appendix revealed features of acute appendicitis.
He suffered from paralytic ileus for 2 days after surgery, which was managed conservatively. He was started on orally administered fluids on the third postoperative day and was discharged on the fifth postoperative day.