A 79-year-old woman presented with a 5-day history of colicky pain in the right lower abdominal quadrant, variable in severity, aggravated by food ingestion, and associated with nausea and abdominal distension. She also acknowledged new onset of constipation and vomiting. Past medical history included total gastrectomy, seven years before this admission, for a stage IA gastric adenocarcinoma. Ever since she had been followed-up annually and she remained free of disease in good health, except of cobalamin deficiency anemia for which she was taking high-dose oral mecobalamin supplementation. She also had an 8-year history of type II diabetes mellitus and a 10-year history of arterial hypertension.
On physical examination she was pale, in no acute distress, with mild tachycardia and normal blood pressure. The abdomen was moderately distended, with tenderness on deep palpation, in the right lower quadrant. All hernial orifices were normal and there was no evidence of incisional hernia at the gastrectomy scar. No significant weight loss or palpable mass was identified. Auscultation revealed hypoactive bowel sounds and digital rectal examination showed an empty rectal vault. Gynecological examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory analysis showed leukocytosis (13.4 × 109L-1) and anemia (hemoglobin 9.2 mg/dl). Hepatic and renal function values in addition to urinary tests were within normal limits. A plain abdominal film showed multiple air fluid levels. Computed tomographic (CT) scan of the abdomen with oral contrast showed the "target" sign of intussusception in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen , following the CT scan, the patient's pain and abdominal distension deteriorated and led to an emergent exploratory laparotomy. This revealed an ileoileal intussusception secondary to a 2.2 × 1.8 × 2 cm intramural mass in the terminal ileum, located 20 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve . The intussuscepted intestinal segments were obstructing the lumen, causing dilatation in the intestine before the intussusception. Further intraoperative exploration did not reveal any other pathological findings. An end-to-end ileoileal anstomosis was fashioned after gentle reduction and resection of the neoplastic segment; wide mesenteric lymphadenectomy was also performed. The patient made a very satisfactory recovery and was discharged after 7 days. Eleven months after surgery she is doing well.
The pathology report confirmed that the neoplasm was a small bowel GIST. The margins of surgical resection and all identified mesenteric lymph nodes were negative for malignancy. The tumor cells were pleomorphic with 7–8 mitosis in 50 high power fields. Immunohistochemical studies showed positive stains for protein S100, vimentin and c-kit and negative for desmin, actin, and CD 34. The tumor was estimated to have an intermediate malignant potential and the patient is under surveillance according to the guidelines of the European Society of Medical Oncology .