A 66-year-old Asian man who had hypertension for which he had been receiving medication for 20 years presented to our hospital. He had been a heavy smoker and drinker for more than 30 years. He had experienced progressive swallowing difficulty for 3 months and a body weight loss of 5 kg in 1 month. Endoscopy disclosed that a huge tumor was occupying the esophagus 30 cm from the incisor to the esophagogastric junction, with a biopsy determining poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. A whole-body PET-CT scan with 18F-FDG revealed a distinct FDG uptake in the lower esophagus , and clinical stage cT3N1M0 was subsequently categorized. A chemoport was inserted, and a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy was performed prior to neoadjuvant CRT. The patient underwent a two-cycle chemotherapy regimen with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil, in combination with RT in 25 fractions at 5000 cGy, with no obvious side effects being noted. Following the feasibility of definitive surgery for esophageal resection and reconstruction, a PET-CT scan was performed again 6 weeks later upon completion of CRT in order to evaluate the effects of the neoadjuvant CRT . It was at this time when a new FDG-avid lesion at the caudate lobe was discovered, and a formal report was written to address the liver metastasis .
The tumor markers, including α-fetoprotein (5.74 ng/ml), carcinoembryonic antigen (3.27 ng/ml), and squamous cell carcinoma–related antigen (0.3 ng/ml), disclosed nothing remarkable. A further imaging survey was performed to clarify the new lesion. Liver sonography showed focally mild prominence in S1 of the liver with a slightly hypoechoic appearance, and CT of the liver revealed focally less enhancement in S1 of the liver . Additionally, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver showed a low signal intensity on T1-weighted images, along with a high signal intensity on T2-weighted images, over the caudate lobe . The liver MRI in the formal report indicated the new lesion at the liver over S1 as being due to postradiation liver inflammation change rather than liver metastasis from esophageal cancer. Excluding the possibility of distant metastasis, a thoracoscopic esophagectomy with cervical esophagogastrostomy via the retrosternal route, along with a feeding jejunostomy, was performed smoothly 2 weeks later. A liver biopsy for both frozen section and pathology was also conducted during the surgery. The pathology report revealed esophageal cancer, specifically poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, pT3N1M0. A valuable photograph was taken during surgery that revealed inflammation of the caudate lobe. The photograph also showed a manifested dark red color due to liver congestion containing a soft, smooth surface without adherence to the surrounding tissue , with no palpable hard nodules being seen in the lesion. There was no obvious tumor metastasis or enlarged lymph node discovered in the abdomen during the operation. The histology elucidated sinusoidal congestion with attenuated hepatic cords, which were filled with erythrocytes. However, there was no evidence of liver metastasis . The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged with his oral intake performing smoothly, and a stable condition was observed during 12 months of outpatient department follow-up.