A 35-year-old Caucasian male presented to an Emergency Room of a Portuguese tertiary care hospital with urinary retention and diminished strength in the lower limbs. He had returned a week before from Angola where he had been working as a construction worker for the past 10 months . He had been vaccinated for yellow fever, poliomyelitis, typhoid fever and meningococcal disease in advance. Excluding an episode of malaria soon after his arrival to Angola, he was asymptomatic until 6 weeks before returning home to Portugal, when he and other co-workers had an acute onset of fever, vomiting and diarrhoea after sharing a meal. Over the following days, while he was still recovering, he woke up suddenly with pain in the umbilical area where he noticed three red spotted lesions that became enlarged and necrotic. He was told by a medical doctor that he had most likely been bitten by a spider and was treated with local dressings and analgesia, with improvement. One week later he developed fever, non productive cough, progressive dyspnoea and thoracic pain that he described as bilateral, oppressive and “belt-like”. Additionally, generalised myalgia and fatigue gradually installed. He was treated in a local clinic with antibiotics without resolution of symptoms. Unable to work, he returned to Portugal and visited another hospital in the same day for persisting fatigue and thoracic pain. Inflammatory parameters were not elevated and chest roentgenography was normal. He was sent home on analgesics. Six days later he presented to our tertiary care hospital complaining of worsening fatigue, thoracic pain and urinary retention.
Past medical history was irrelevant. The patient denied unprotected sexual contacts in the past ten months, intravenous drug use, blood transfusions or past surgical procedures. He had performed an ear piercing two months before in Angola.
On admission the patient was afebrile. Blood pressure was 124/68 mmHg, his pulse was regular with 80 beats per minute and respirations 14 breaths per minute. Neurological examination revealed diminished motor strength in lower extremities (grade 3/5), reduced tactile and pain sensations below L1, normal deep tendon reflexes and bilateral indifferent plantar responses. No cognitive dysfunction or neck rigidity was noticed. Ophthalmologic and cranial nerves examination was normal. A periumbilical triangular scar was observed, with no inflammatory signs. The remainder of physical examination was unremarkable.
Routine laboratory data was normal, including complete blood count (Hb 15.6 g/dL, WBC 9.07 × 109/L with 81% neutrophils, platelets 325 × 109/L), renal and liver function tests. Thick blood smear and rapid diagnostic test for malaria were negative. HIV test (4th generation ELISA) was positive and Inno-Lia™ test was indeterminate (positive gp41 band). Chest roentgenography was normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed 302 leukocytes/μL, glucose 0.56 g/L and protein content 0.74 g/L. Gram stain was negative. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain was normal, but MRI of the medulla showed extensive hyperintense signal in the long TR sequence throughout C4 to T11, especially in the posterior columns, suggesting inflammatory/infectious aetiology .
He was admitted with a diagnosis of acute transverse myelitis and treatment with ceftriaxone (2 g IV bid), ganciclovir (400 mg IV tid) and methylprednisolone (1 g IV qd for 3 days and then tapered to 1 mg/Kg/d) was started.
Over the two following days his clinical condition deteriorated, with intensifying upper thoracic pain, progressing hypoaesthesia up to T10 and dysaesthesia becoming more disabling and characterised by numbness and ice cold sensation. Constipation and urinary retention were also present.
A second lumbar puncture performed at day 3 revealed 15 leucocytes/μL, glucose 0.98 g/L and protein content 0.86 g/L. India ink stain was negative.
Doxycicline (100 mg bid) and human immunoglobulin (30 gr IV qd) were associated at this point. Ganciclovir was discontinued after negative CMV results .
Significant improvement was observed within the next days and one week later the patient was able to walk unassisted, with complete resolution of dysaesthesia, urinary retention and constipation. Three weeks after admission he was discharged home asymptomatic, having completed 21d of ceftriaxone, 7d of methylprednisolone, 7d of doxycicline and 5d of human immunoglobulin.
HIV testing was repeated before discharge: 4th generation ELISA was positive and Inno-Lia™ remained indeterminate (positive gp41 band). All cultures were negative, as well as several serology and PCR-based technique tests . Convalescent titters were repeated for Borrelia, Rickettsia conorii, West Nile Virus and Dengue, all negative. HIV-1, subtype K RNA copies were quantified in blood and CSF: 743.000 and 77.700 cp/mL respectively. By the time these results were known the patient was already improving significantly and no antiretroviral therapy was started. His CD4 count was 408/mm3 on admission and 760/mm3 in a second determination before discharge.
Three months later the patient presented to the outpatient clinic and was asymptomatic. HIV Inno-Lia™ test was then positive (positive p17, p24, p31, gp41 and gp120). He repeated a medullar MRI 8 weeks after discharge: previous findings had resolved completely and no pathological changes were found.
After one year of follow up he continued asymptomatic but with a CD4 count decline to below 400/mm3 his viral load had stabilized around 130.000 cp/mL. He started highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) with abacavir/lamivudine and efavirenz, and 6 months later he had undetectable viral load with increased CD4+ cell count.