A 34-year-old woman was referred to our hospital to evaluate an asymptomatic pelvic mass detected with transvaginal ultrasonography in a private clinic, which she had visited for treatment of infertility. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 112 × 62 × 58 mm hypervascular mass with a well-defined border. This mass compressed the bladder, uterus and rectum in the peritoneum . Subsequent contrast medium–enhanced and fat-suppressed T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) then revealed that the tumour had homogeneously high intensity, and T2-weighted images showed a mixture of isointensity in the muscles and high intensity of the tumour, as well as compression of the bladder, uterus and rectum . Contrast-enhanced CT and MRI revealed that the tumour was supplied with blood from the right pudendal artery. Laboratory data revealed no abnormalities such as squamous cell carcinoma antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 125, or carbohydrate antigen 19-9. We performed a transperineal biopsy, and the results of which established the diagnosis of SFT.
Before surgery, we performed embolisation of the feeder vessels with an absorbent gelatin sponge to reduce intraoperative blood loss because this SFT was hypervascular, supplied primarily by the right obturator artery and the internal pudendal artery, according to angiography . The next day, with the patient in the supine position, we separated the tumour from the right side of the rectum and uterus through a transabdominal approach, which would have been challenging in a narrow and deep pelvis. Laparotomy was performed through a midline incision. We approached the paravesical space and confirmed that the tumour invaded the retroperitoneal cavity. The tumour was well encapsulated and had abundant blood vessels around the tumour. We separated as much of the tumour as possible from the levator ani. It could be easily separated from the surrounding muscles. After the wound was closed, the patient was repositioned into the jackknife position for resection through the sacral approach. We made a paramedian skin incision and easily identified the elastic but hard tumour . We ensured the adequacy of surgical margins to prevent local recurrence and minimise bleeding. That is, the adipose tissue is left to cover the lesion. Finally, the tumour could be removed with en bloc resection. The tumour was completely excised over a period of 223 min with 250-mL blood loss, and no blood transfusion was required. We did not place the drain anywhere. The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on postoperative day 7.
Postoperative pathological study showed that the tumour was encapsulated and elastic but hard, and the cut surface was greyish-white . Microscopic study confirmed that the tumour capsule was not ruptured and was covered with adipose tissue. It was then revealed that the tumour consisted of proliferating, relatively small oval and spindle cells with prominent branching and a hemangiopericytoma-like vascular pattern. Cytological atypia was not significant. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumour cells were positive for CD34 and for signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) . The final diagnosis was also SFT. The postoperative course was uneventful; no adjuvant treatment was given because complete surgical resection was achieved. In the year since surgery, the patient has shown no evidence of tumour recurrence.