The case involves a 68 year old male with metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). His medical history was significant for well-controlled hypertension, stage 3 chronic kidney disease, and psoriatic arthritis which was controlled with hydroxychloroquine maintenance. He was referred to our clinic after presenting to a local provider with acute gross hematuria. He underwent a CT urogram that revealed a 7.3 cm mass in the right kidney with renal vein invasion and small, non-specific pulmonary nodules in the bilateral lung bases. He underwent a right radical nephrectomy within a month of his initial diagnosis. Pathology revealed a 6 cm (pT3a pNx) WHO grade 4 renal cell carcinoma, clear cell type. The tumor extended to the resection margin of the renal vein. Adjuvant radiation was not recommended at that time and he was placed on surveillance. Restaging scans four months after surgery showed stable sub-centimeter pulmonary nodules and multiple new hypodense hepatic lesions, the largest being 5.7 × 4.4 cm involving the central right hepatic lobe. No bone metastases were identified on imaging. A liver biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic ccRCC. He was then initiated on nivolumab 3 mg/kg and ipilimumab 1 mg/kg shortly afterwards. He tolerated the first cycle well but did develop a grade 1 rash involving his chest within a week of the infusion. This resolved with use of topical steroids. Two days following his cycle 2 infusion, he began to develop arthralgias that were attributed to a flare of his known psoriatic arthritis. On day 7 of cycle 2, he noticed progressive fatigue and nausea. On day 14 of cycle 2, he had an episode of emesis and was brought back to our clinic given his progression of symptoms. Routine labs at the time revealed new hypercalcemia to 12.8 mg/dL (previously 9.6 mg/dL two weeks prior) and that he had developed an acute kidney injury (creatinine 3.62 mg/dL, up from baseline of 1.6 to 1.9 mg/dL). He was admitted to our inpatient service for further testing, part of which is summarized in Table .
His inpatient workup was significant for an elevated 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (calcitriol) level of 142 pg/mL (reference 20–79 pg/mL) in the presence of low-normal 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25{OH} D) at 36.7 ng/mL (reference 30–100 ng/mL), suggesting alpha hydroxylation. Other hypercalcemia testing revealed an elevated phosphorus level of 5.4 mg/dL (reference 2.2–4.6 mg/dL), a suppressed parathyroid hormone (PTH) of less than 6.3 pg/mL (reference 14.0–72.0 pg/mL), a low parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) of 0.7 pmol/L (reference ≤ 4.2 pmol/L), an elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level of 273.0 pg/mL (reference 9.0–50.0 pg/mL), an elevated cortisol level of 37.03 mcg/dL (reference 3.09–22.40 mcg/dL), a normal alkaline phosphatase level of 110 U/L (reference 32–126 U/L), and a normal angiotensin-converting enzyme level of 62 ng/dL (reference 9–67 ng/dL). FDG-PET imaging showed multiple hypermetabolic mediastinal, hilar and intra-abdominal lymph nodes (max SUV of 15), as illustrated in Fig. . The liver lesions themselves were not FDG-avid but were stable in size, as were his prior lung nodules. He underwent a bronchoscopy with biopsy of four separate lymph nodes, none of which demonstrated malignancy nor granulomatous disease. He was initially treated with intravenous normal saline, calcitonin 4 units/kg every 12 h and 4 mg zoledronic acid. Despite seven days of aggressive treatment, his hypercalcemia persisted, as shown in Fig. . He was then started on 1 mg/kg of oral prednisone both for this calcitriol-mediated hypercalcemia as well as for his ongoing psoriatic arthritis flare. Within two days of starting systemic steroids, the patient’s calcitriol level normalized (56.6 pg/mL), as did his calcium level (8.9 mg/dL). He reported notable relief of arthritic symptoms immediately. He was then discharged home and slowly weaned down to prednisone 10 mg daily, which was continued for control of his arthritis.
As an outpatient, he was re-challenged with nivolumab and ipilimumab 1 month later. Restaging CT scans after cycle 4 revealed an overall partial response, with the largest liver lesion shrinking by 32% in the long-axis (3.6 × 3.9 cm from 4.4 × 5.7 cm), as seen in Fig. . Prior to receiving cycle 6 nivolumab maintenance, routine lab work showed the development of immunotherapy-related hypothyroidism for which thyroid hormone replacement therapy was started. He remains on nivolumab maintenance therapy with ongoing partial response of his disease, no recurrent hypercalcemia, and no further immunotherapy-related adverse events (irAE) to date.