A 64-year-old woman presented with a 3-month history of intermittent bilateral tinnitus, occasionally accompanied by dizziness. She had no history of major head injury or systemic infection. She visited an otology clinic where a temporal bone computed tomography (CT) scan of the petrous bone, semicircular canal, and hearing apparatus showed neither temporal bone lesions nor associated lesions in the ear; however, the scout film of the CT scan incidentally revealed a radiopaque nodule in the frontal area . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 2.5-cm mass with minimal marginal enhancement in the right parasagittal region in axial and coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images. The mass was hyperintense with a hypointense rim in T2-weighted images . The provisional diagnosis was a calcified meningioma originating from the falx. The patient was then referred to our neurosurgical department for surgical removal of the tumor. On admission, the physical and neurological findings were unremarkable. Her cognitive function was intact, and she had no sensorimotor deficit. Right frontal craniotomy was performed. After opening of the dura and retraction of the parasagittal gyri, a tumor was found attached to the falx in the mesial frontal lobe extra-axially. The tumor was as hard as bone and could not be broken by bipolar forceps, Cavitron ultrasonic surgical aspirators, or even cutting loops. The tumor had to be dissected apart from the falx surface in one piece .
Pathologic examination revealed lamellated bony trabeculae lined by osteoblasts, and the intertrabecular marrow spaces were occupied by loose fibrovascular tissue .
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged from the hospital with no neurological deficits after suture removal. During six months of post-operative follow-up, the frequency and degree of dizziness and tinnitus decreased progressively.
Osteomas are recognized as benign bone neoplasms of uncertain etiology. In the head, osteomas often arise from the periosteum of the frontal or ethmoid sinuses and the mandible [-]. Less often, osteomas may originate from the cranial bone in the convexity or the inner layer of the dura mater [-]. Osteomas attached to the meninges without relationship with the bone are even rarer. We reviewed related literature and summarized the data . Fallon et al. found intracranial meningeal osteomas in 5% of 200 adult autopsies. The tumors were usually located at the convexity dura and falx junction around the superior sagittal sinus. Solitary intracranial osteomas arising from the inner layer of the dura mater with no involvement of the cranium have been reported [,,,-]. The tumors usually establish themselves with a wide base and grow inward as an expanding mass with a well-defined border . The osteoma we report on here was a fungating nodule with a narrow neck attached to the falx.
On the basis of their natural history, intracranial osteomas are more benign than osteomas of the frontal sinuses . The tumor may cause pressure-related symptoms by compressing or displacing the underlying brain, and this depends on the location of the mass. When it appears in a silent area, it rarely causes sensorimotor deficit. Most commonly, such tumors are detected in patients presenting with headache or other non-specific complaints. The high frequency of head trauma history has been noted, and the possible importance of head trauma as a causative factor in cranial osteomas has been proposed [,]. In our case, there was no history of major head trauma. This intracranial osteoma was found incidentally on the scout image during a temporal bone CT scan.
The pathogenesis of osteomas without bone involvement is still unknown. A dural osteoma can be confused with “meningeal ossification or meningeal calcification” originating from the dura or the falx because of the similarities in CT and MRI examinations and microscopic appearance . This new bone might not represent a true neoplasm but possibly an osteogenic change in the cerebral meningeal tissue. However, meningeal ossifications are commonly multicentric and located on the dural-falx junction along the both sides of the superior sagittal sinus .
The factors leading to the genesis of intracranial meningeal osteomas are as yet unknown. New bone formation from the dura or falx has been postulated as one of the causes because the meninges may function as the periosteum of the inner table of the skull [,,].