In the following case report, the patient was 50-year-old female who was referred to our hospital for treatment of left-sided humeral nonunion having difficulties in doing day-to-day activities and decreased range of motion at left shoulder and elbow joint. She had a history of significant trauma 5 years back leading to left humerus shaft fracture with no distal neurovascular deficit and was managed with open antegrade 2nd generation IM interlock humerus nailing 5 years back elsewhere . Currently patient is disabled with debilitating pain and functional impairment. Shoulder movement is restricted with elbow flexion arc of 0–80°, shoulder abduction 0–45°, and shoulder forward flexion of 0–60° with fracture site mobility in both sagittal and coronal planes . The DASH was 65. X-ray of left full-length arm with two orthogonal views suggestive of humerus shaft fracture nonunion with peri-implant expansile osteolytic lesion at middle and distal third junction of humerus just at the tip of nail with distal locking screw outside the screw hole of nail leading to an unstable construct as well as there was some distraction at the fracture site which might be the possible cause of nonunion of fracture, other can be infective etiology but it was ruled out as blood parameters were within normal range and there was no wound and suture site were healed . Blood parameters for infective etiology were within normal limits.
Patient was operated under general anesthesia in the right lateral position as shown in . Implant removal done using Deltoid splitting approach over previous incision scar marks. Using posterior approach-Triceps splitting approach dissection carried out and radial and ulnar nerve isolated and protected. Fracture site identified and cystic bony lesion exposed as shown in . All the fibrous tissue, pseudo-capsule and sclerotic bone at the fracture site were excised and sent histopathology and culture sensitivity. Posterior cortex of lytic lesion nibbled out and curettage done and sent for histopathology . Distal medullary canal opened up using small reamer. 12 cm avascular strut fibular graft harvested from ipsilateral leg and prepared. Fibular graft placed in the medullary canal and fracture site docked and stabilized with 10-hole titanium extraarticular distal humerus locking plate . Post surgery wound was closed in layers after thorough wound wash. Postoperative X-ray . Histopathology report was suggestive off dead necrotic bone tissue with fibrous tissue without any infective cells with some callus tissue in all the samples.
Patient elbow was kept in universal shoulder immobilization till surgical pain subsides following which passive and active assisted range of motion of elbow and shoulder were started. Post-operative course was uneventful. Intraoperative culture was negative for any growth and histopathological report was showing dead cortical bone with fibrous tissue. Patient followed up routinely every monthly. Active range of motion of elbow at 12 months’ post-operative is 0–135° flexion arc and shoulder abduction is 0–170° shoulder forward flexion is 0–170° DASH score at 12-month follow-up is 10 (Improved from 65). 12-month follow-up X-ray shows absorption and consolidation of bone graft and fracture shows union. There is no local tenderness at fracture site with active range of motion of elbow and shoulder.