A 26-year-old female presented to the Breast & Endocrine Clinic after being referred from a district hospital with an increasing anterior neck swelling over a period of 6 months with symptoms of superior vena cava syndrome. She was previously well with no known medical, surgical or genetic problem. On physical examination, the patient had a congested facial appearance, with a large hard fixed anterior neck mass. She was ambulating well with neither features of respiratory compromise nor signs and symptoms of carcinoid syndrome. Initial differentials include a large multinodular goiter or thyroid malignancy. Chest radiography showed a widened mediastinum. In view of the large nature of the mass, we opted for a computed tomography (CT) of the neck and thorax instead of an ultrasound neck, as the CT scan would be able to delineate the anatomy of the mass in relation to its surrounding structures. The CT thorax showed a huge anterior mediastinal tumour with mass effect to the surrounding structures associated with multiple cervical and mediastinal lymphadenopathy . The thyroid, however, is grossly normal on the CT scan. The differential diagnosis has subsequently shifted to primary mediastinal lymphoma. A core biopsy of the neck mass was taken under ultrasonography guidance and histopathological examination showed nests of tumour cells, scant cytoplasm and salt and pepper chromatin. The tumour cells were diffusely positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin and the Ki-67 proliferative index is 50%. These constellations of finding were suggestive of high-grade small cell NETs.
As her tumour was unresectable, she was referred to our oncology team for chemotherapy. She had first completed 6 cycles of Etoposide and Cisplatin. However, the response was poor and she subsequently underwent a further 3 cycles of Irinotecan and Carboplatin. Follow up CT showed stable disease initially, but had turned into a disease progression a few months later. She subsequently underwent radiotherapy to the neck and mediastinum with a total of 30 Gy in 10 fractions.
Restaging CT scan showed enlarging anterior mediastinal mass with multiple new enhancing bilateral breast lesions and hilar lymphadenopathy (A). Upon reviewing the CT scan with the patient in the clinic, she complained of enlarging bilateral painless breast lumps over the past 3 months which was not previously present. She denied family history of breast and ovarian malignancies. Clinical examination revealed multiple mobile breast lumps with a firm consistency over bilateral breast of varying sizes. There was no axillary lymphadenopathy. This clinical picture is typical of a breast fibroadenoma. However, with her underlying history of a mediastinal NET, the diagnosis of breast metastases was kept in mind. Sonographic assessment of the breast was done to further characterize the lesions and showed multiple oval-shaped hypoechoic lesions with irregular margins and posterior acoustic enhancement (B). These suspicious features may represent primary breast malignancy or breast metastases.
With the possible diagnosis of breast malignancy, core biopsy of the bilateral breast lesions was performed instead of fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC). Histopathological examination of the lesions showed malignant cells infiltration in sheets and nesting patterns (A). Immunohistochemistry studies show that the malignant cells were positive for synaptophysin (B) and chromogranin (C), and the Ki-67 proliferative index was 50%. These cells were negative for mammaglobin (D). These features confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic NETs to the breast.
Despite the prompt initiation of second-line chemotherapy and radiotherapy, her tumour showed no signs of regression. She subsequently refused further treatment and was followed-up 3 monthly at our clinic to review her general well-being. She succumbed one year later due to neoplastic progression.