A 34-year-old woman presented at our hospital with a one-month history of low back pain. She had undergone spontaneous delivery of a baby girl at a local hospital two months prior to this visit and had been breastfeeding the infant. The onset of her low back pain began one month after delivery and gradually worsened.
Upon her initial visit to our clinic, a dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) was performed to assess her lumbar spine bone mineral density (BMD), revealing a Z-score of -2.45. Consequently, she was diagnosed with PLO and was advised to discontinue breastfeeding and to initiate oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation. However, her symptoms continued to worsen, leading to difficulty walking, and she was readmitted to the hospital one week later.
No trauma or fever was identified as a cause during the course of the disease. The patient had no history of chronic conditions, no exposure to cattle or sheep, no use of special drugs such as glucocorticoid.
The patient denied a family history of osteoporosis.
Upon readmission, the patient had a body temperature of 36.7 °C, height of 1.61 m, weight of 55 kg, and a body mass index (BMI) of 21.2 kg/m2. Physical examination revealed significantly limited range of lumbar motion and mild non-radiating pain upon percussion at the lumbar region. Muscle strength, sensation, and muscle tone in both lower limbs were found to be normal.
Laboratory tests were performed upon admission and the results are shown in Table . These tests included a complete blood count, sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein (CRP), calcitoninogen, and bone metabolism markers. Additionally, Brucella serum agglutination and tuberculosis antinuclear antibody tests were performed, with both yielding negative results. Serum calcium, phosphorus, and sex hormone levels are shown in Table .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine was performed upon admission, revealing abnormal signals in the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies and the intervertebral space. The contrast-enhanced scan demonstrated abnormally high signals surrounding the intervertebral space .
A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science as electronic databases. Citations were identified by employing a combination of the following keywords: “pregnancy and lactation-associated osteoporosis”, “spondylodiscitis”, “spinal infection”, “pyogenic spondylitis”, and “intervertebral space infection”, from the inception of each database through December 2022. The search terms encompassed the title, abstract, and topic terms. To date, no reports of concomitant PLO with PS have been identified.