We report the case of a 70-year-old elderly female patient (weight, 60 kg; height, 156 cm; body mass index 24.7 kg/m2). Laparoscopic right hemicolectomy and cholecystectomy were performed under general anesthesia. The patient’s chief complaint was sigmoid colon cancer with a duration of 10 mo, as well as liver metastasis (with a duration of four months) following postoperative chemotherapy.
The patient was admitted to a local hospital 10 mo prior due to abdominal pain, mucus, and bloody stools. Colonoscopy revealed sigmoid colon cancer and pathological results showed hypofractionated adenocarcinoma. After completing the relevant examinations, the patient received three cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Later, the patient developed colic abdominal pain focused in left lower abdomen that was accompanied by nausea and vomiting; intestinal obstruction was considered. Under general anesthesia, the patient underwent laparoscopic-assisted radical resection of the sigmoid colon cancer, left adnexal resection, double-lumen fistula of the terminal ileum, and chemotherapy with membrane infusion and release of intestinal adhesions.
Postoperative pathology of the sigmoid colon reported moderate-to-low differentiated adenocarcinoma with necrosis, small foci with phosphorylation, invasion of the muscular layer to the peri-intestinal fat, and visible nerve invasion. A pathological diagnosis of sigmoid colon cancer was made. After four cycles of postoperative chemotherapy, the patient was treated with three cycles of intravenous targeted drug infusion (four months prior), and the lesion was reduced on review.
The patient had no previous history of hypertension, diabetes, or coronary heart disease. She had a history of cerebral infarction for more than six months and had not undergone any special treatment.
The patient denied any relevant family history of cancer or chronic disease.
The patient had a temperature of 36.3 °C, a heart rate of 85 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 19 breaths/min, and a blood pressure (BP) of 139/97 mm Hg. Her height and weight were 156 cm and 60 kg, respectively. The patient showed normal development, a positive nutritional status, and clear consciousness. Difficult airway (Mallampati class II) was not detected during the preoperative evaluation. The nail-chin spacing was > 6 cm, mouth opening was > 6 cm, and head extension was > 35°. Cardiopulmonary examination findings were unremarkable, and the patient was classified as American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) class II.
The patient’s blood counts were as follows: Erythrocyte count 3.07 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 103.0 g/L; erythrocyte pressure volume, 31.7%; liver function: Alanine transferase 11.2 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 27.9 U/L, total protein 56.2 U/L, albumin 34.7 U/L, albumin:globulin ratio 1.61, total bilirubin 6.3 μmol/L. Other laboratory tests, such as routine urine and renal function tests, were within normal limits.
Abdominal computed tomography suggested liver metastasis . All other test results were unremarkable.