A 62-year-old Chinese man complained of intermittent weakness in the extremities (particularly the calves), muscle pain, and walking difficulty.
The patient’s weakness in the extremities started 30 years ago, but spontaneously recovered in one week after each instance. Twenty years ago, he was admitted to the hospital because of difficulty walking upstairs and a diagnosis of hypokalemia was made. The patient’s symptoms quickly improved with potassium replacement therapy. Despite any medicine treatment, his serum potassium levels ranged from 2.8 to 3.1 mmol/L in the past 10 years. The patient presented with muscle pain and walking difficulty 15 d ago. He took potassium chloride sustained-release tablets 1.5 g per day for 5 d. Furthermore, he described dark-colored urine for 3 days. Thus, the patient was sent to the hospital for further evaluation. There was no history of diarrhea or vomiting, signs of infection or alcohol intoxication. He denied ever taking any statins. Upon further questioning, a detailed history revealed that he had con-sumed liquorice water daily for 7 days preceding admission.
The past medical history revealed only type 2 diabetes mellitus since the age of 52. For that reason, he was treated with 10 mg of dapagliflozin and 25 mg of alogliptin daily.
The patient denied tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drug use. His family history was unre-markable, and there were no similar cases in his family.
On admission, the patient’s body weight was 60.0 kg, and his height was 168.2 cm. His blood pressure was 128/92 mmHg and his pulse rate was 86 beats/min. There was generalized paralysis in all four limbs (power grade 3/5). There was no sensory deficit. The examination of the thyroid and other systems was unremarkable.
Table shows laboratory data of the patient. Serum potassium level was 1.84 mmol/L. Serum magnesium was 0.68 mmol/L. Creatinine phosphokinase (CK) was 10117 IU/L, and he had marked hemoglobinuria. Fractional chloride excretion and fractional magnesium excretion were calculated as 1.9% and 4.4%, respectively. Urinary calcium/creatinine ratio was calculated as 0.24. Plasma renin activity and aldosterone concentration were within the normal ranges. Serum alkaline pho-sphatase and parathormone levels were normal. According to the laboratory tests, the level of CK at presentation was 30 times more than the upper limit of the normal range. Furthermore, the level of serum myoglobin (MYO) was significantly increased. Consequently, rhabdomyolysis was diagnosed.
Rhabdomyolysis can have various causes, such as metabolic disease, direct trauma to muscle, muscle necrosis due to ischemia, muscle inflammation, or exposure to drugs and toxins. Recent studies suggest that liquorice can induce hypokalemia and muscle weakness and can even lead to life-threatening rhabdomyolysis. However, considering the medical history, the patient had a history of hypokalemia for 30 years. Moreover, considering the results of the laboratory tests including hypomagnesemia, normal plasma renin activity, and aldosterone concentration, the etiology of pre-existing hypokalemia should be considered. With informed consent, we investigated the SLC12A3 gene of the patient. Sequence analysis of the SLC12A3 gene of the patient revealed that he had compound heterozygous mutations. One missense mutation was a heterozygous G to A base pair substitution at position 1567 in exon 12, which caused an Ala to Thr substitution at position 523. A second missense mutation, a hetero-zygous G to A base pair substitution at position 2542 in exon 21, causing an Asp to Asn substitution at position 848, was also present .
The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated a sinus rhythm with inverted T-waves on leads V1-V6 and ST-depression on leads V4-V6, but no prolongation of the QTc interval and U waves. Abdominal sonography did not reveal renal stones or nephrocalcinosis. Peripheral neuropathy in both lower limbs was found by examining the electromyogram. Muscle biopsy was rejected by the patient.