A 71-year-old female with a 3-year history of intense pain in ingesting solids and liquids was admitted to our Department on October 2013. The patient complained of sudden and violent pain accesses, especially localized at the left side of the pharynx, following the ingestion of solid foods and liquids. These episodes were getting worse in recent months, thus preventing the patient to lead a normal life. Preoperative neurological examination documented a mild left hypoacusia and odynophagia. No symptoms or signs related to compression of the X and XI c.n. were found.
Presurgical MRI examination was performed using a 1.5 T superconductive scanner (Magnetom Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany), gradient strength 26 mT/m, slew rate 200 T/m/ms and head coil. The baseline MRI protocol for neurovascular conflicts included:
Constructive interference in steady-state (CISS-3D) sequence; slice thickness 0.70 mm; two acquisitions; Magnetic resonance angiography performed by a time-of-flight (TOF-3D); slice thickness 0.88 mm; one acquisition.
The CISS-3D and TOF-3D data were transferred to a commercially available independent workstation (Leonardo Workstation, VD 30B, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). The data sets were processed by the “3D fusion” function of the Leonardo software. In the CISS-3D/TOF-3D fusion images, the nervous structures were automatically displayed in blue and the arterial vessels in deep red.
Presurgical MRI examination showed a significant anomaly of the PICA course. The vessel from its origin moved cranially describing a long intracisternal route. A double anomalous contact between PICA and IX, X, and XI nerves was present: At root entry or exit zone (REZ) and along the intracisternal tract of the nerve itself . This complex neurovascular assessment was well depicted on fusion images .
MVD was performed via a left suboccipital retrosigmoid approach. The intraoperative findings showed a loop of the PICA compressing the inferior surface of the IX c.n. and the superior surface of the X and XI c.n. . This artery had a very twisty course interposed between the ninth and tenth nerve and compressing both nervous structures. After dissection of the arachnoidal adhesions, a fragment of a previously prepared autologous muscle was interposed, thus obtaining an optimal decompression of the IX c.n. Neither MVD nor additional rhizotomy was performed for X c.n. because the patient did not present any related symptoms. For the same reason there was no need to perform an additional rhizotomy. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient left the hospital on postoperative day 7, with a complete regression of her symptoms. At 7-month follow-up, the patient is still pain-free.