A 32-year-old female was admitted to our institution with a 5-month history of swelling in the right parieto-occipital region. The swelling gradually increased to the present size of about 8 × 8 cm. The skin overlying the swelling appeared normal and the scalp was mobile over the swelling. There was no relevant past history such as head injury. Her family history was unremarkable. Her blood profile for biochemistry and hematology was within normal limits. The neurological examination was unremarkable except for exaggerated deep tendon reflexes on the left side of the body and left sided extensor plantar response (positive Babinski sign). There was no regional lymphadenopathy. A detailed examination of the whole body was performed to rule out any cutaneous or subcutaneous lesions.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of brain (plain and with contrast) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of brain (plain and with contrast) were done. Findings were suggestive of a calvarial soft tissue lesion in the right parieto-occipital region with destruction of the adjacent parieto-occipital bone with intracranial extra-axial extension. The lesion appeared hyperintense on spin-spin relaxation time (T2)/fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images. It also showed peripheral hyperintense rim on spin-lattice relaxation time (T1) images with postcontrast enhancement, not suppressed on fat suppression or fat saturation (FAT SAT) images. Dimensions of the lesion were 5.4 × 4.3 × 5.4 cm. There was indentation of the sulco-gyral spaces but no midline shift was seen. There was indentation of the posterior aspect of the superior sagittal sinus at places . On MRI, the differential diagnosis of the lesion was epidermoid or dermoid cyst. Additional studies like contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) thorax, abdomen, and pelvis and bone scan were negative for any metastatic lesions.
Patient was taken for surgery and complete excision of the calvarial lesion was done under general anesthesia in prone position . A linear incision was taken over the swelling. The galea appeared normal and so we could raise a plane between the galea and the tumor. The tumor was in the form of a complex cyst with intratumoral hemorrhage. A wide craniectomy up to the normal bone was done. The tumor was easily dissected from the underlying duramater. Except for some hyperemia, the duramater appeared normal and so it was not resected. Throughout the operation, an epidural plane was maintained. We did not attempt to reconstruct the bony defect at the time of initial surgery. Elective cranioplasty with Codman™ cranioplastic bone cement was done after completion of the adjuvant radiotherapy. The patient had an uneventful postoperative hospital stay and did not show signs of any neurological deficit. Postoperative CT scan of brain (plain and with contrast) showed complete excision of the calvarial lesion . On her latest follow up, 2 years postsurgery, there is no locoregional or distant recurrence.
Microscopic sections of the tumor showed dilated irregular vascular spaces filled with blood and fibrin. These spaces were lined by pleomorphic atypical endothelial cells. Many giant and bizarre tumor cells were also seen. Large areas of hemorrhage were seen. On immunohistochemistry, the atypical endothelial cells were highlighted by CD34, CD31, and factor VIII-related antigen. These findings were consistent with angiosarcoma of the skull .