Our patient was a 49-year-old female referred to the Department of Cardiac Surgery for scheduled surgery of pericardial neoplasia. Three years prior, the patient underwent a hysterectomy and adnexectomy owing to the ULMS. Considering the fact that the tumour was limited to the uterus, further chemotherapy or radiotherapy was not needed. Three months before admission to our institution, regular follow-up included magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen and pelvis and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest. The MRI of the abdomen and pelvis discovered neoplasia in the diaphragmic portion of the pericardium, whereas a CT chest scan showed the tumour mass adjacent to the apex of the heart. No other signs of primary disease relapse or metastases were found. The patient was asymptomatic, in good general condition, and the physical exam was unremarkable. After admission to our institution further workup included a heart MRI that confirmed the finding of the tumour between two layers of the pericardium and adjacent to the apex of the heart, whereas on the performed PET/CT scan, besides the intrapericardial tumour, the presence of other metastases was excluded. Coronary angiography revealed tumour vascular supply from the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) . The multidisciplinary team concluded that the patient was a candidate for surgery. Surgery included diastolic cardiac arrest achievement and resection of the tumour with macroscopically healthy edges width of 5–8 mm. Macroscopically, a parietal layer of the pericardium was completely free from the tumour that invaded only the apical myocardium of the left ventricle . Intraoperative histopathology showed resected edges free of tumour cells. The defect of the left ventricle was reconstructed with a polyester patch and polypropylene sutures placed around the defect .
Intra- and the postoperative course went uneventfully. Completed histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma with positive immunohistochemical stains for oestrogen and progesterone receptors confirming the uterine origin of the tumour.
The patient was discharged from the hospital after 13 days. The control CT scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis performed two, six and twelve months later did not show any relapse of the primary disease. Three months after the cardiac surgery, the patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin and dacarbazine. Consecutive control echocardiographs showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 55% and no pericardial effusion. One year after surgery, there are no signs of new metastases, the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status is grade 0, whereas New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class is I.