An 80-year-old man with a history of hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and diabetes mellitus presented with severe abdominal pain, distention, and tenderness. Spontaneous isolated SMA dissection was diagnosed based on abdominal CE-CT and measured 35 mm in major diameter and 6.6 mm in minor diameter with a large entry and re-entry . Vital signs were as follows: systolic blood pressure, 184 mmHg; respiratory rate, 22 breaths/min; heart rate, 124 beats/minute; and oxygen saturation via pulse oximetry, 100% with room air. Hemodynamic parameters were stable. After admission, abdominal pain worsened, and CE-CT revealed progression of the dissection.
Endovascular intervention was performed under local anesthesia. Superior mesenteric arteriography using the right femoral approach through a 4-French catheter (Shepherd; Medikit Co. Ltd., Miyazaki, Japan) demonstrated a dissection originating in the SMA and involving the jejunal arteries . The dissection measured 35 mm in major diameter and 6.6 mm in minor diameter, with a large entry and re-entry. We judged that coil embolization of the false lumen was suitable. However, blood flow was considerable, and it was impossible to stabilize the coils. Accordingly, an approach was taken via the bilateral femoral arteries with 4-French systems to embolize the false lumen using a 1.8-French micro-balloon (LOGOS®; PIOLAX, Inc., Yokohama, Japan) and the double-catheter technique. First, the re-entry through the true lumen was occluded with the micro-balloon to prevent coil migration . Second, using a 2.2-French 2-marker catheter (Coiling Support; HI-LEX MEDICAL®, Hyogo, Japan), eight detachable coils (3 pieces, 4 mm × 10 cm; 3 pieces, 3 mm × 8 cm; 2 pieces, 2.5 mm × 5 cm; GALAXY G3™, Johnson & Johnson, New Jersey, USA) were placed in the false lumen. The micro-balloon was contracted, and the stability of the coils was confirmed. Finally, the micro-balloon was slowly pulled to the point of entry and re-expanded, and three detachable coils (3 pieces, 3 mm × 8 cm) were placed in the false lumen . Arteriography showed disappearance of the dissection with blood flow in the SMA and jejunal arteries without perfusion delay .
On postoperative day 2, the abdominal pain resolved. The post-treatment course was favorable, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5.