A 16-year-old male with a goiter was referred to Nippon Medical School in May 2015. His medical history was unremarkable until 14 years of age (2013). His father and grandmother had hearing impairments. One year before the referral, the patient had complained of fatigue and a goiter and had consulted a family practitioner. A thyroid function test showed TSH < 0.1 μIU/mL, FT3 of 2.70 pg/mL, and FT4 of 3.6 ng/dL. The doctor misdiagnosed this thyrotoxicosis episode as Graves’ disease without performing an ultrasound examination or confirming the presence of antithyroid antibodies and treated the patient with thiamazole 20 mg. Three months later, the patient showed hypothyroidism (TSH 265.7 μIU/mL and FT4 0.4 ng/dL) , and the doctor reduced the thiamazole dose. However, SITSH (TSH 12.3–18.2 μIU/mL and FT4 2.0–2.1 ng/dL) continued for 1 year, and the patient was referred to our hospital with a treatment plan of thiamazole at 5 mg and 10 mg doses alternating every other day. His thyroid function was indicated by TSH of 13.64 μIU/mL, FT3 of 4.51 pg/mL, and FT4 of 1.41 ng/dL. We considered his SITSH to be a phenomenon of the transition from hypothyroidism to hyperthyroidism, and we thus decreased the thiamazole to 5 mg. His SITSH continued for the next 3 months, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed pituitary swelling. Because we could not exclude the possibility that the patient had TSHoma, we stopped thiamazole and admitted him to our ward for differential diagnosis of SITSH.
The patient’s height was 158 cm, and his body weight was 52.3 kg. His temperature was 36.9 degrees, his heart rate was 83 beats per minute, and his blood pressure was 128/73 mmHg. In his usual SITSH state, thyroid ultrasonography showed a moderate goiter, slightly heterogeneous hypoechogenicity, and moderately rich blood flow . TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb), thyroid-stimulating autoantibodies (TSAb), and thyroid-peroxidase antibodies (TPO-Ab) were all negative, and only anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (Tg-Ab) were positive. The thyrotropin-releasing hormone test showed a normal TSH response, and the octreotide and bromocriptine test did not suppress the TSH levels. Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) was within the normal range. These data suggested that his SITSH was unlikely to be due to TSHoma. Then, we examined whether the patient’s family members had SITSH, and we identified SITSH in his father and his older brother. We found a genetic mutation of thyroid hormone receptor-beta (TRβ) exon 9, methionine 334 threonine, which was the same mutation reported by Mannavola et al. [, ], and we diagnosed the patient with RTH.
He developed a second case of thyrotoxicosis in November 2015, but it was mild and short. For the next two and a half years, his condition was stable as SITSH.
In January 2018, he complained of tachycardia and fatigue caused by a third episode of thyrotoxicosis. His TSH was suppressed, and TRAb remained negative. The technetium-99 m (Tc-99 m) thyroid uptake was 0.6%, which was low compared to his usual state (9.7%). Therefore, we diagnosed this third episode of thyrotoxicosis as painless destructive thyroiditis. Thyroid ultrasonography during the third episode of thyrotoxicosis detected a moderate goiter, slightly heterogeneous hypoechogenicity, and moderately rich thyroid blood flow . The patient’s thyroid function returned to his usual SITSH state without any treatment within 1 month. The hypoechoic area became invisible, and echogenicity and homogeneity returned to the original condition in January 2019, 16 months after the last episode of painless thyroiditis .