An 87-year-old Asian man visited his primary-care physician with a 3-day history of fever and severe malaise. He had no history of diabetes mellitus or active disease. He was admitted and treated with intravenous meropenem (MEPM) at 1 g/day and oral levofloxacin at 500 mg/day by his primary-care physician on day 1. The next day, a Gram-negative bacillus was detected from two sets of blood culture bottles. The patient was then transferred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. He was conscious. Body temperature was 37.7 °C, heart rate was 80 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 14 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 113/70 mmHg. There were no significant findings on physical examination, chest X-ray, plain computed tomography of the head, whole-body contrast-enhanced computed tomography, transthoracic echocardiography, or colonoscopy. Blood testing revealed a white blood cell count of 8080 cells/μl, a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 18.01 mg/dl, and a procalcitonin level of 1.02 ng/ml. Blood and urine cultures were negative. Intravenous MEPM (3 g/day) was administered at our hospital owing to a lack of improvement on the previous treatment (day 2). He was afebrile on day 3. CRP level decreased to 4.05 mg/dl on day 5. A blood culture taken by the previous physician reportedly revealed C. sakazakii. Antibiotic therapy was changed to ceftriaxone at 2 g/day based on the results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing on day 6 . This treatment was stopped on day 10 after confirming normalization of CRP levels and negative results for blood culture. After discontinuation of antibiotic therapy and discharge from our hospital, the patient showed good progress without recurrence of fever. Biochemical analyses using the MicroScan WalkAway 96 system (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA) identified the causative organism as C. sakazakii . However, the colonies on the blood agar medium unexpectedly showed grayish coloration, differing from the yellowish coloration of typical Cronobacter colonies . MALDI-TOF MS using Microflex LT with the Biotyper v3.1 database (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) was therefore conducted. MALDI-TOF MS identified the bacterium as E. asburiae on three independent analyses (log score values of 2.19, 2.08, and 2.20, matching with E. asburiae type strain DSM 17506). Finally, multilocus sequence analysis using five housekeeping genes (fusA, gyrB, leuS, rpoB, and hsp60) confirmed our isolate as E. asburiae (TWCC 57976). Nucleotide sequence data reported are available under the DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ) accession numbers LC427844 to LC427849.