A 33-year-old male patient with a past medical history of hypertension, type II diabetes mellitus, and renal transplant presented to an outside ED at approximately 7 pm, one hour after suffering a rattlesnake bite to his right third digit. The patient reported that he was prescribed tacrolimus 10 milligrams (mg) daily and prednisone 10 mg daily for rejection prophylaxis. His initial vital signs were within normal limits. Laboratory workup showed a prothrombin time of 10.4 seconds (s) (reference range 11–13.5 s), international normalized ratio 1.0 (reference range 0.8–1.1), a fibrinogen of 240 mg per deciliter (dL) (200–400 mg/dL), and platelets of 192,000 per microliter (μL) (150,000–450,000/μL). The patient received three doses of hydromorphone intravenous (IV) injection for pain control and underwent serial measurements of his digit across the span of his seven-hour observation recommended by the Unified Treatment Guidelines for snakebites.
Laboratory workup was repeated at 9:15 pm, and values were unchanged from his initial measurements aside from a fibrinogen of 183 mg/dL; however lab tests were not repeated immediately prior to discharge. The initial emergency physician administered 1 mg ceftriaxone and discharged the patient with a prescription for oral analgesia and an antibiotic at 1 am. The documentation at the time of discharge noted that the patient’s pain was under control and that his finger had no evidence of injury aside from the puncture wound.
At 11 am later that day, the patient presented to a second ED with complaints of significant swelling and discoloration of his right arm. The physician documentation at that time was that the third digit of his right hand appeared necrotic. His workup at that time was significant for platelets of 69,000 per μL and an INR of 2.1. The patient was started on five vials of CroFab antivenom and was transferred to our facility at 1 pm. On arrival to our facility, the patient was noted to have a PT of 22.9s and INR of 2.4 and his platelets had rapidly improved to 203,000/μL. In consultation with the South Texas Poison Control Network, the emergency physician and admitting physician started the patient on maintenance dosing of antivenom with two vials every six hours and initiated laboratory monitoring until resolution of his coagulopathy. The admitting physician also started the patient on IV clindamycin 900 mg every eight hours. A timeline of the events of the patient’s care is below .
He was then admitted to the general wards for two days. His coagulopathy and symptoms completely resolved by hospital day three. The patient was discharged home with primary care follow-up and a prescription for oral clindamycin and analgesia.