A 56-year-old male had been hit while diving in a swimming pool and presented with severe post-traumatic cervical pain, with active and passive movements. On clinical examination, he was conscious and oriented without any signs of lateralization. In addition, there was no motor or sensory deficit.
X-ray cervical spine did not show any abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain and cervical spine study showed C1 fracture; bilateral symmetrical fracture of the anterior and posterior arches of C1 (Jefferson’s fracture) with slight bilateral joint dislocation C1-C2 discreetly predominant on the left. Spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed straightness of the cervical spine, and no disturbance of the coronal statics, and no constitutional cervical ductal stenosis as a secondary stenosis. No abnormality of the medullary signal as well as paraspinal soft tissue. Cervical angioscan was not done in the first admission.
On admission, the patient was managed conservatively in the form of anxiolytics, calcium channel inhibitors, and strong opioid analgesics. No surgical intervention was required, and the clinical situation remained stable with pain improvement.
Patient was discharged 2 days after admission on conservative treatment and neck collar.
One week later, he presented with mild complaints of dysarthria, dysphagia, and dysphonia. Clinical examination found no deficit except deviated tongue and palate, without ptosis or anhydrosis. Normal blood pressure and oxygen saturation, but sinus bradycardia were observed and required intensive care unit admission.
CT angiography showed right internal carotid artery occlusive dissection and carotid wall hematoma just above the carotid bulb and showed ophthalmic artery opacification. Brain MRI excludes cerebral strokes.
The patient was observed in the ICU for a few days before he was discharged to the service. Introduction of curative anticoagulant was conducted. No surgical intervention had been proposed. The patient remains stable.