A 56-year-old male presented to the emergency room with complaints of cholestatic jaundice associated with pancreatic epigastralgia and deterioration of his general condition.
The patient reported that his symptoms had started 1 mo prior.
Three months before admission to our department, he had been diagnosed with and followed up for a left hilar lung squamous cell carcinoma, which had been discovered by bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy of the lung mass.
The patient self-reported being a 52 pack-year smoker, he had no family history.
The patient had obvious jaundice. The patient was afebrile but had epigastric tenderness.
Blood tests showed a disturbance of liver function based on the following findings: total bilirubin, 5.2 mg/dL (normal range: 0.3-1.9 mg/dL); direct bilirubin, 4.1 mg/dL (normal range: 0-0.3 mg/dL); gamma glutamyl transferase, 1088 UI/L (normal range: 12-64 UI/L); alkaline phosphatase, 450 UI/L (normal range: 40-150 UI/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 102 UI/L (normal range: 5-34 UI/L); alanine aminotransferase, 220 UI/L (normal range: 0-55 UI/L); and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, 40 U/mL (normal range: 0-33 U/mL).
Computed tomographic scanning revealed a tumoral hilar left process, dilation of the intrahepatic bile duct, 11 mm main bile duct and 4 mm Wirsung duct along with a 33 mm × 45 mm pseudotumoral mass of the pancreatic head .
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed and showed dilation of the main bile duct (16 mm) among a stricture (extending to 25 mm) located under the cystic duct. Minimal sphincterotomy was performed, and a plastic stent (10 Fr/7 cm) was placed . Good drainage was ensured. Histological examination of cytological brushing showed atypical cells, namely, category II of Papanicolaou. The patient’s jaundice regressed following these procedures, and his hepatic function blood parameters improved.
A multidisciplinary consultation meeting was held. The clinicians decided to begin chemotherapy for lung squamous cell carcinoma.
The patient received carboplatin and 80 mg/m2 paclitaxel every week; however, the treatment was stopped at the 4th week due to poor therapeutic tolerance.
Over the 4-d period after treatment cessation, the patient developed total aphagia associated with dysphonia. He also developed stage 4 New York Heart Association dyspnea and was deemed to be undernourished (nutritional risk index of 64). His performance status was 3. A computed tomography arterial portography scan showed a locally advanced left hilar mass invading the left main bronchus and fistulating into a paraseptal formation with intimate contact within the esophageal wall . The imaging examination also showed left lobar broncho-alveolitis and a cephalic pancreatic tumor invading the second duodenum and the antropyloric portion with dilation of upstream biliary ducts and no pneumobilia. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a tracheoesophageal fistula located 30 cm from the dental arches that easily crossed . A biliary stent was observed to partially migrate into the duodenum. EUS showed a 4-cm cephalic pancreatic mass invading the second portion of the duodenum . Fine-needle (22-G) aspiration of the pancreatic mass was performed and confirmed the presence of a carcinomatous proliferation containing nests and large tumoral polygonal cells with atypical voluminous irregular nuclei surrounded by eosinophils. Focal tumoral necrosis was also present, leading us to conclude that the mass was a well-differentiated keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemical examination of the mass showed expression of cytokeratin 5/6 . On the other hand, the cells did not express TTF1. The final histological report confirmed a poorly differentiated squamous cell lung carcinoma located in the pancreas. To address the migrated biliary stent and to ensure definitive and permanent biliary drainage before treating the tracheoesophageal fistula, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed first with placement of an uncovered metallic stent measuring 10 cm/10 mm .