Fever for 1 wk and drowsiness for 3 d.
The patient, a 58-year-old man, presented with high fever (> 40.0 °C) for 1 wk before admission, with simultaneous fatigue, occasional cough without sputum, and swelling of the left upper limb. The patient was referred to Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center (SYSUCC) at first because routine blood tests in his hometown showed white blood cell (WBC) count 34.9 × 109/L and hemoglobin level 67 g/L. In the next 6 d at SYSUCC, laboratory findings confirmed pulmonary abscess and bacteremia caused by K. pneumoniae. He was given antibiotic therapy of imipenem–cilastatin combined with voriconazole at normal dose. However, he still had high fever and gradually developed altered mental state, which presented as abepithymia and drowsiness. There was no headache, nausea, or vomiting. Based on a rapid increase in creatinine (from normal to 264 µmol/L) and bacteremia, he was diagnosed with acute renal insufficiency and sepsis and admitted to the Medical Intensive Care Unit (MICU) of the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University.
The patient had been well prior to onset of the present illness. He had no chronic illness such as diabetes mellitus, immunodeficiency, or psychiatric or psychological disease. He had no tuberculosis or lung cancer.
The patient was a non-smoker. He had no history of alcohol or illicit drug abuse. He resided in Guangdong, southern China. He had no recent travel, tick bites, or contact with sick people.
When the patient was admitted to MICU (day 1), his vital signs were as follows: Temperature 36.4 °C, pulse rate 95 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, blood pressure 126/85 mmHg, and pulse oxygen saturation 98% on 5 L/min oxygen flow rate. Low respiratory tone and fine crackles in the right upper lung were noted on pulmonary auscultation. There was no audible murmur on cardiac auscultation. Tenderness and hepatosplenomegaly were not detected. Tenderness in his left upper limb was noted. Both lower limbs had mild edema. He had abepithymia but was still conscious, oriented with Glasgow Coma Scale score 15, and had no neck stiffness. No rash was observed.
Laboratory tests from SYSUCC revealed WBC count 27.0 × 109/L with an elevated neutrophil ratio of 95.4%. The concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT) were 233.17 mg/L and 1.7 ng/mL, respectively. Glucose concentration was 7.11 mmol/L. Full blood culture grew K. pneumoniae . Cryptococcal antigen was negative. Galacto Mannan test and β-D-Glucan test both were negative. Concentration of G-lipopolysaccharides was 0.13 EU/mL. Bone marrow smear and biopsy confirmed no malignant tumor cells. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan found a lump that could not be identified as a tumor or infection in the upper right lung. Head CT scan showed no acute findings. CT scan of the left upper limb revealed no abnormality.
Laboratory data upon admission in MICU demonstrated WBC count 26.95 × 109/L with an elevated neutrophil ratio of 94.6%. CRP was 63.9 mg/L, PCT was 10.8 ng/mL, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 126 mm/h. Electrolytes were within normal limits. The concentration of glucose was 7.0 mmol/L with hemoglobin A1c in the normal range. Albumin level was 28.4 g/L. Creatinine was 341 μmol/L. Bedside cardiac ultrasound found left ventricular ejection fraction of 0.63 and no pericardial effusion. No intra-abdominal pathology was observed by bedside ultrasound. Chest CT scan found a 25 mm × 27mm, round, thick-walled cavity in the right upper lobe .