A 15-year-old male patient with no previous medical or surgical history , came to the clinic complaining of recurrent vomiting for two months, weight loss, and loss of appetite. The patient has no history of jaundice, changes in the bowel habits, or urinary symptoms. Also, the patient has no family history of any type of malignancy.
Vital signs were within the normal range. Patient presented with normal systemic examination except for abdominal examination which revealed a generalized distended abdomen with mild tenderness in the right upper quadrant with the presence of hepatomegaly.
Our workup included complete blood count (CBC) and liver function tests (LFT) which were within normal ranges. Tumour markers were ordered, Alpha Fetoprotein was 50.8 ng/ml (1.09-8.04), which is markedly elevated. Meanwhile, Cancer Antigen 19-9 (CA 19.9) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were within normal ranges ((CA 19.9 10.76 (0-37)) and (CEA > 0.73 (0-5)).
With intravenous (IV) contrast, we performed a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis which showed smooth liver contour without signs of cirrhosis with large right hepatic lobe lesion occupying almost the whole segment with heterogenous arterial enhancement and iso-enhancement in the port venous phase without significant washout measuring 13.1 x 9.2 x 13.3 cm in AP x t x CC dimensions as shown by .
There was also a hypodense centre with multiple foci of calcifications that displaces the right hepatic artery and vein without thrombus. There were lymph nodes involvement in porta hepatis and gastro-hepatic groups, the largest measurement was 2.9 x 1.9 cm. No significant retroperitoneal lymph nodes. There are no metastases were detected in the exam.
Liver MRI was done and showed Large right hepatic lesion show isointense T2 and low signal intensity on T1 with central hypointense T1/T2 with multiple foci of calcification and no diffusion restriction or fat component. measuring 13.1 x 9.2 x 13.3 cm in AP x t x CC dimensions. There were lymph nodes involvement in porta hepatis and gastro-hepatic groups, the largest measurement was 2.9 x 1.9 cm. No significant retroperitoneal lymph nodes .
After 5 days, the patient underwent an ultrasound guided TRU-CUT needle biopsy which showed Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma as shown by . Then, the case was discussed in the tumour board and the decision for a surgical resection was made.
The patient was admitted after 10 days from the tumour board meeting for resection. He underwent formal right hepatectomy with portal lymph node excision and open cholecystectomy. The postoperative hospital stay was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 in good condition. A histopathological review of the specimen showed well differentiated multifocal fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma with 1.4cm free margin . there is evidence of lymphovascular invasion in small vessel - the pathological stage is pT3,pN1.
The patient was followed in the outpatient clinic in good condition.. Then, our patient was referred to Medical oncology and chemotherapy was offered for the patient but patient refused. After 1 year patient return to our outpatient clinic and patient was revaluated and a positron emission tomography (PET) scan was done showed no singe of metastasis and offer chemotherapy aging and the patient accept and receive 2 cycles of cisplatin and Taxotere then 3 cycle of cisplatin and tacol then due to national shortage of this type of chemotherapy change to docetaxel and carboplatin for 3 cycle. and the patient is still following up with oncology team in good condition for 3 year.