A 10-month-old Han Chinese girl (weight 9 kg) with a history of head trauma was treated conservatively after being diagnosed as intracranial hemorrhage (brain computed tomography scan, brain CT). The patient had been suffered from convulsive attacks (more than 10 episodes/day in the recent 7 days) for 1 week when she was admitted to the Department of Pediatrics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. The seizure was characterized as paroxysmal attacks of perioral cyanosis and limbs convulsion, lasting for 2 minutes with spontaneous remission. Her vital signs was stable and within normal limits, and phy-sical and neurological examination revealed no remarkable abnormalities.
Brain CT showed left parietal lobe malacia (2.5 × 2.4 cm) and left parietal bone fracture (Figure
). Meanwhile, the interictal electroencephalogram (EEG) indicated rhythmic spikes in the left central, parietal and temporal areas (Figure
A). Routine full blood count and blood biochemistry were normal (serum ALP 162 U/L; <500 U/L reference range, Figure and Additional file
). Based on her disease courses, clinical presentations and auxiliary examinations (CT and EEG), posttraumatic epilepsy was diagnosed. After obtaining informed consent from the patient’s parents, LEV was administrated at an initial dosage of 9.25 mg/kg/d, then 13.8 mg/kg/d, 18.5 mg/kg/d for 1 week, respectively. A final dosage of 27.8 mg/kg/d was prescribed for maintenance therapy. The dose was increased gradually while the patient was seizure-free by the end of the second week after LEV administration.
Five months after LEV treatment, an elevation of serum ALP level (1613 U/L) was accidentally found from a periodical blood biochemistry test without any other abnormalities. One week later, the repeated laboratory test showed that serum ALP level was significantly increased to 4557U/L, accompanied by slightly elevated levels of creatine kinase (81 U/L, 26-140 U/L), creatine kinase-MB activity (50 U/L, 0-24 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (320 U/L, 109-245 U/L) and bone ALP (>300 U/L, 0-200 U/L). However, no discomfort or seizure activity was observed in this patient. Other related auxiliary examinations included parathyrin level (20.9 pg, 15-68.3 pg), abdominal ultrasound and CT (liver, hepatobiliary system, gallbladder, spleen and kidney), lower extremity long bones X-ray and EEG (Figure
B) were all normal. Also, no concomitant symptoms and other changes could explain the elevated serum ALP. Therefore, considering the possibility that LEV might be associated with the elevated serum ALP, LEV was discontinued. Surprisingly, the serum ALP level was decreased to 1156 U/L 10 days later. Twenty days after the discontinuation, the patient’s serum ALP level returned to normal (423 U/L). Six months follow-up indicated that the patient was fully recovered, manifesting no recurrent seizure attack or liver function abnormality. She was well developed and nourished during that period, observing from her height, weight, and body mass index.
Naranjo Adverse Drug Reaction Probability Scale was employed to assess the probability correlation of LEV administration and elevated serum ALP. A score of 6 was obtained (Additional file
), demonstrating LEV was a “probable” cause for the serum ALP elevation, and LEV even possibly led to liver function abnormality although LEV rechallenge was not executed in this patient.