A 57-year-old non-smoker woman with stage IV metastatic NSCLC with mediastinal lymph node and bone metastases (T1N2M1) harbored the activating L858R mutation of EGFR. There was no relevant gastric atrophy or pulmonary diseases information in her medical history. She had no family history of stomach disease or cancer. Her blood results were normal before treatment . The patient was treated with oral erlotinib at a dose of 150 mg daily. After 44 weeks of erlotinib treatment, she was readmitted to the hospital with general weakness. A computed tomography scan revealed marked significant tumor enlargement. Additionally,tumor response was assessed as progressive disease according to RECIST 1.1 guidelines . Hematological exams revealed severe pancytopenia . Anemia was manifested as megaloblastic anemia with elevated MCV and MCH (see Table ). The (total) vitamin B12 level was below the detection limit of 50.00 pg /mL [normal range180-914], but the folic acid, ferritin level and intrinsic factor antibody levels were normal. Bone marrow smear suggested megaloblastic anemia . She had.
been taking codeine and diclofenac sodium at least 3 months before the starting erlotinib. Additionally, she ate a balanced diet and did not consume alcoholic beverages. At the same time, she had no personal or family of gastric atrophy disease.
She did not suffer from anemia before the oral administration of erlotinib. In the absence of other causes, a diagnosis of erlotinib-induced severe megaloblastic anemia was decided. She immediately discontinued erlotinib and was treated with vitamin B12 supplementation, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and red cell and platelet transfusions. After 1 week of treatment, the hematologic parameters got better during the hospitalization . She received intramuscular vitamin B12 1 mg once a week outside the hospital. After 4 weeks of treatment, her hematologic parameters and weakness had markedly recovered . The vitamin B12 level (492 pg /mL) returned to normal. She underwent a repeat biopsy of progressive tumor tissue and genetic testing, which did not identify a secondary EGFR T790M mutation, and then she was treated with carboplatin and pemetrexed. In the subsequent chemotherapy treatment, she did not develop megaloblastic anemia.
All procedures in this study were conducted in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committees and the Declaration of Helsinki, as revised in 2013.Informed consent was obtained from the patients for this study, and they consented to any clinical information being published.