A 43-year-old African American male with a past medical history of type II diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, major depressive disorder, and tobacco dependence was hospitalized after a suicide attempt by ingestion of 480,000 mg of metformin. He presented with altered mental status and continuous vomiting. Initial vital signs showed a blood pressure of 90/52 mmHg, pulse rate of 50 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate of 40 breaths per minute. His point of care glucose was 100 mg/dL. He received several isotonic intravenous fluid boluses with 0.9% saline, was intubated for airway support, and received activated charcoal and polyethylene glycol via a nasogastric tube. The initial serum potassium was 4.9 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 10 mg/dL, creatinine was 1.2 mg/dL, bicarbonate (HCO3) was 16 mmol/L, anion gap was 22, serum lactate was 6.6 mmol/L, and arterial pH was 7.16. Labs 4 hours later showed serum potassium of 7.4 mmol/L, HCO3 of 12 mmol/L, and lactate of 11.8 mmol/L. Given the amount of ingestion, worsening lactic acidosis, and hyperkalemia, emergent high flux hemodialysis (HFHD) was initiated with an Optiflux 200 (Fresenius Medical Care, Waltham, MA, USA) on a Gambro Phoenix Hemodialysis System (Gambro, Deerfield, IL, USA) with a blood flow of 450 mL/minute, dialysate flow of 500 mL/minute, potassium 1.0 bath, and a bicarbonate bath of 36 mmol/L.
After 12 hours of dialysis, the metformin dialyzer clearance was 416 mL/minute, which is significantly better than earlier reports of 68–228 mL/minute . Labs at that time were significant for pH 7.12, bicarbonate 7, and lactate of 22.8 mmol/L (arterial blood gas). As the acidemia reached a critical level, the patient began to develop worsening hypotension and required initiation of norepinephrine and vasopressin. Dialysis was continued for an additional 8 hours after a break of 1 h. Due to the desire for rapid metformin clearance, intermittent hemodialysis (HD) was preferred over continuous hemodialysis. The next day, 21 hours after HFHD, the serum pH was 7.11, bicarbonate was 4 mmol/L, and lactate was 18.9 mmol/L (shown in Figs. , , ). Due to persistent lactic acidosis despite ongoing HD, THAM was chosen to augment the effect of HFHD.
The dose of THAM was calculated as follows: THAM (mL of 0.3 mol/L solution) = lean body weight (kg) × base deficit (mmol/L) . We chose three times the usual base deficit to increase serum HCO3 by 15 mmol/L rather than the usual five. We gave 1280 mL of THAM over 12 hours along with HFHD, enough to increase the serum HCO3 by 15 mmol/L. Due to hypoglycemia associated with THAM, the patient was also placed on a D10% dextrose infusion. After a total of 33 hours of HFHD, which included 12 hours of THAM infusion, the serum lactate corrected dramatically from 18.9 mmol/L to 4.5 mmol/L (shown in Fig. ) and the serum bicarbonate improved from 4 mmol/L to 20 mmol/L (shown in Fig. ). In fact, over the next 24 hours, the serum lactate normalized along with pH and bicarbonate levels. His pressor support was rapidly weaned off after THAM. The patient also underwent an upper endoscopy for coffee ground emesis, which revealed extensive necrosis with mucosal sloughing of the stomach and duodenum.
During the hospitalization, the patient developed hypervolemia and oliguric acute kidney injury secondary to presumed ischemic acute tubular necrosis with a peak creatinine of 8.6 mg/dL. After failing a trial of 120 mg intravenous furosemide, he was transitioned to continuous veno–venous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) for volume and solute management. Over the following days, the patient’s volume status improved, and he was extubated successfully. Due to slow return of renal function, he was placed on a protracted regimen of hemodialysis 3 days a week. By the time of discharge (hospital day 35), the patient’s urine output improved, the serum creatinine normalized to baseline of 0.8 mg/dL, and the patient no longer required hemodialysis.