A 65-year-old postmenopausal Japanese woman had become aware of a tumor in her right breast 11 months prior to presentation at our hospital. Previous diseases included acute lymphocytic leukemia (9 years earlier), unexplained peritoneal abscess (7 years earlier), and multiple cerebral infarctions (1 year earlier), but her familial history was unclear. Ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) revealed a huge, cystic right breast tumor with enlarged regional nodes. No other suspected lesions were identified by either systemic CT or bone scintigraphy. The patient underwent fine-needle aspiration of the mammary lesion, and the cytological diagnosis was carcinoma.
A well-demarcated, multinodular, red-brown tumor, which measured 15 × 15 × 15 cm, was found in the specimen obtained at breast removal. Histologically, this solid and cystic lesion consisted of medullary growth of carcinoma cells accompanied by a highly developed vascular or fibrovascular stroma and remarkable hemorrhage. The carcinoma cell nests varied in size, displaying a retraction artifact as well as antipolarity . The carcinoma cells were polygonal, occasionally showing a short spindle shape, and possessed finely granular, relatively eosinophilic cytoplasm and round-to-ovoid, fine-granular nuclei . Eighteen mitotic figures were counted in 10 high-power fields. The histological grade was estimated to be 2. No conventional in situ carcinoma component was observed. Macrometastases, up to 13 × 8 mm in size, showing the same morphological features as the primary site , were present in 3 of 15 dissected ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes.
The TNM stage diagnosis of pT3, pN1a, cM0, Stage IIIA, was definitely made.
Immunohistochemical examinations revealed primary and metastatic carcinoma cells to be diffusely positive for chromogranin A and the estrogen receptor (ER) (Allred's total score: 8) and to be focally reactive for synaptophysin and the progesterone receptor (PgR) (Allred's total score: 5). HER2 and cytokeratin 5/6 were negative, and the Ki-67 (MIB-1) labelling index was 36.2% at the hot spot. Band-like expressions of MUC1 and EMA were noted on the stroma-facing surface of the carcinoma cell clusters, accentuating the outlines of the micropapillary units. The primary antibodies used are detailed in Table .
Anastrozole (1 mg daily), an oral aromatase inhibitor, is currently being administered as adjuvant endocrine therapy, while chemotherapy was not concomitantly given, despite the relatively high MIB-1 index, based on patient background factors such as recovery from the brain infarct. She remains alive and well, 12 months after surgery, with no evidence of recurrence or metastasis.