An 11-year-old male from abroad admitted to outpatient clinic with progressive headache, nausea and vomiting which had been presented for a month. Neurologic examinations showed bilateral papillary edema and right-sided central facial nerve palsy. He had been investigated for right sided facial palsy at home and was diagnosed with an AVM located in the perimesencephalic region two years ago. Head CT showed enlargement of lateral and third ventricles with transependymal cerebrospinal fluid oozing . A prompt cranial MR revealed serpiginous signal void structures around the midbrain compatible with an AVM and enlargement of the vein of Galen and internal cerebral veins causing mechanical compression of the aqueduct causing an acute obstructive hydrocephalus caused . Cerebral DSA was planned for diagnosis and treatment planning, however; due to rapid deterioration in patient’s consciousness DSA was postponed and emergency right VP shunting was done in the same day. His conciseness improved, headache and vomiting disappeared immediately in the early postoperative period. Control CT scan showed good ventricular decompression . DSA was performed via right femoral access two weeks after the operation. Bilateral injection of internal carotid arteries showed enlarged posterior cerebral arteries bilaterally, supplying a diffuse AVM by the perforating arteries of the posterior lateral, medial choroidal and posterior communicating arteries. Venous drainage was into enlarged internal cerebral veins and vein of Galen. There was also some reflux to the deep tentorial and adjacent cortical veins due to high flow. The late capillary and venous phase was prolonged because of venous hypertension . The AVM was assessed as grade IV according to the Spetzler-Martin AVM grading system. A multimodal treatment protocol including endovascular embolization and stereotactic radiosurgery to portions of residual AVM was suggested. Patient was discharged on his family’s request as neurologically intact except for a mild right-sided facial palsy and was lost to follow-up.