A 61-year-old man diagnosed with RCC for nearly 3 years presented to our department because of a dry cough with occasional expectoration on February 22, 2022.
The patient was admitted to our hospital with “hematuria for 7 d” on August 5, 2019. A computed tomography (CT) scan on admission revealed right kidney and right renal pelvis occupancy, suggestive of malignancy. In addition, multiple nodules in both lungs were seen, and metastasis was suspected. A timeline of the episode of treatment is shown in Figure . After consultation and discussion, the patient agreed to undergo a laparoscopic radical right nephrectomy. Postoperative pathology revealed clear cell RCC of the right kidney. Following surgery, he was treated with oral sunitinib. A follow-up CT scan after 9 mo revealed metastases in the right adrenal gland, and axitinib was given to the patient. Three months later, CT imaging found that the metastases in the right adrenal gland and both lungs were significantly larger than before. He was thus treated with nine cycles of the immune checkpoint inhibitor sintilimab. However, a subsequent CT scan showed that the right adrenal metastasis was slightly enlarged, with multiple metastases appearing in the abdominal cavity, while the size of the lung metastases was unchanged. On July 19, 2021, four cycles of sorafenib in combination with sintilimab were administered. CT scanning revealed that the lung and abdominal cavity metastases were slightly larger than before, and new subcapsular metastases were detected on the right lobe of the liver. On December 14, 2021, he was switched to everolimus 10 mg once daily in combination with lenvatinib 8 mg once daily. However, on February 22, 2022, the patient developed a dry cough with occasional and little sputum, accompanied by mild dyspnea after activity. No fever or other discomfort was observed.
The patient had no past illness.
The patient had no specific personal and family history.
On physical examination, the patient’s basic vital signs were within normal limits, and his respiratory sounds were rough on both lungs, without dry or wet rales.
The initial blood investigations revealed the following: Leukocytes 5.17 × 109/L (reference range: 4.0-11.0), hemoglobin 121.0 g/L, platelet count 400 × 109/L, lymphocytes 15.9%, monocytes 6.8%, neutrophils 76.3%, eosinophils 0.6%, basophils 0.4%, high sensitivity C-reactive protein 37.0 mg/L (reference range: 0-5 mg/L), and procalcitonin 0.07 ng/mL (normal value < 0.052 ng/mL). Liver and kidney functions were normal, and sputum culture revealed normal oral flora.
CT scan on February 23, 2022 identified multiple patches and ground glass shadows in both lungs and scattered soft tissue nodules of different sizes in both lungs, suggestive of a pulmonary infection. The lung and peritoneal metastases were slightly smaller in size. The infection was treated with cefuroxime sodium, piperacillin sulbactam, and moxifloxacin injections, but the patient’s condition did not improve, and he still had a persistent dry cough. Another CT scan on the March 21, 2022 showed little to no resolution of the lung infection.