A 59-year-old man fell ~10 feet from a dump truck onto an outstretched arm. The patient was found to have a left open, severely comminuted distal radius and ulna fracture, and median nerve dysfunction . The patient was emergently taken to the operating room for irrigation and debridement, acute carpal tunnel release, and open reduction with internal/external fixation. After thorough debridement under sterile conditions, a 5 cm bone void remained within the distal radial metaphysis . Utilizing the Masquelet technique, antibiotic cement was placed into the defect for the initial stage of the treatment. A volar plate was applied to the patient’s distal radius to span the fracture. The ulna was fixated with a 3.5 mm compression plate, being definitive fixation for this fracture. Finally, a wrist-spanning external fixator was applied to the patient’s left upper extremity for more rigid fixation .
Four weeks later, the patient was taken back to the operating room; the external fixator was removed and a dorsal wrist-spanning bridge plate was placed using the prior incisions. A volar Henry approach was utilized to expose the volar aspect of the distal radius and remove the antibiotic spacer and plate. The proximal and distal aspects of the distal radius bone void were debrided until healthy and bleeding bone was visualized.
The ipsilateral tibia was chosen as the autograft bone harvest site to fill the void. After prepping and draping in a sterile fashion, Gerdy’s tubercle was identified by palpation and a 1.5 cm incision was made under fluoroscopy. During dissection, care was taken to divide the iliotibial band and periosteum in separate layers. Using the Avitus® Bone Harvester system (Shelton, computed tomography [CT]), a 1 cm corticotomy within the proximal tibia (PT) allowed entrance into cancellous tibial metaphysis. The bone harvester was then introduced through the cortical window as cancellous bone and marrow were harvested under fluoroscopy . The Avitus® Bone Harvester is a sharp curette with a hollowed tube connected to suction allowing efficient harvesting of cancellous bone and marrow into its handle. Approximately 35 cc of cancellous bone and 25 cc of bone marrow were harvested . The harvest site was then back-filled with synthetic calcium phosphate. Periosteum, fascia, and skin were primarily closed. The harvested bone graft and marrow were placed into the radial bone defect. Finally, a volar plate was placed to achieve adequate internal fixation.
Postoperatively, the patient’s left arm was placed into a sugartong splint for 2 weeks, allowing the skin to heal. He was also made non-weightbearing on his left lower extremity for a period of 6 weeks secondary to the large amount of bone graft harvested along with a body mass index of 44. By 2 weeks, the splint was removed and both the patient’s upper and lower extremity incisions had healed. He began weightbearing on his left lower extremity at 6 weeks without difficulty or pain. By 3 months, distal radius bony union was confirmed by both X-ray (XR) and CT (, ). A 3-month post-harvest XR was also taken of the left PT which demonstrated no complication .
After bony union had occurred, the patient was then taken back to the OR for a 3rd time for removal of dorsal bridge plating. He was weaned from a wrist orthosis and began extensive occupational therapy for wrist range of motion and strengthening. At 1-year follow-up, the patient had achieved 60° of wrist flexion, 40° of wrist extension with mild pain, which remains similar to baseline wrist pain before injury, and full finger range of motion . The radiographs do demonstrate ulnar positive variance of roughly 2 mm in the setting of moderate-to-severe radiocarpal arthritis. However, the patient has mild arthritic symptoms and functional range of motion.