A 1-year-old female child with bilateral lower limb deformities since birth, was referred to the orthopedic OPD of our tertiary-level hospital for needful orthopedic evaluation and management. She was born of a nonconsanguineous marriage, weighed 2200 g at birth, and was delivered by cesarean section for fetal bradycardia.
After the birth of her first child, the mother describes having an induced, medical termination of pregnancy 8 years ago, a few years following which she planned to have a child but developed secondary subfertility. After frequent follow-up to the gynecologist for secondary subfertility, she had a planned pregnancy. The mother began taking folic acid before conceiving; however, she did mention vomiting throughout the first trimester. She started having antenatal visits at 6 weeks of pregnancy. She had 12–14 antenatal hospital visits throughout the pregnancy. Her random blood glucose at 20 weeks was 93 mg/dl (5.16 mmol/l). Fetal ultrasound was performed two times, and an anomaly scan was performed at five months, all of which reported normal findings. The mother had gestational hypertension diagnosed at 40 weeks of gestation. There is no exposure to any drugs like sodium valproate, retinoic acid, or minoxidil.
She is the second child, with the first child being around 9 years older with no similar illness. The mother and father were 26 and 29 years old, respectively, at conception, with a history of diabetes only in a paternal granduncle as shown in Table . There is no history of congenital anomalies or inheritable diseases in her family.
She was diagnosed with bilateral secondary congenital talipes equinovarus (clubfoot) with a Pirani score of 5.5 and left hip subluxation secondary to sacral agenesis at birth. Repeated studies of the urinary and intestinal tracts have been reported as normal.
On examination, the patient’s weight and height were appropriate for her age. The patient was fair with the presence of bilateral clubfoot and a sacral pit at the lumbosacral junction . The genitalia looked normal. Both lower limbs appeared short with flexion contractures of the knee and hip. Her sacral and coccygeal bones could not be palpated. There was decreased tone in the lower limbs, with normal tone in the upper limbs. Ankle and plantar reflexes were difficult to detect during neurological evaluation. There was decreased sensation in the bilateral lower limbs. The anal sphincter was slightly diminished in tone with fecal and urinary incontinence while crying.