A 65-year-old man was hospitalized with a 1-month history of exertional shortness of breath and productive cough. He had a history of coronary artery disease and was under medical treatment with amiodarone (200 mg/day) for approximately 4 years, due to recurrent atrial fibrillation. On his first hospital admission the patient was in sinus rhythm with 86 beats per minute and blood pressure within normal range. His physical examination revealed fine, late inspiratory crackles on both lung bases and no other signs of congestive heart failure. Small bilateral pleural effusions were present on the chest X-ray, whereas CT scanning of the thorax revealed a pattern of pulmonary fibrosis that was attributed to chronic amiodarone treatment, after excluding other causes with fiberoptic bronchoscopy (bronchoalveolar lavage and transbronchial biopsy). A myocardial infarction was ruled out, amiodarone treatment was discontinued and the patient was discharged on sotalol 120 mg/day.
Twenty four hours later, he was readmitted to the emergency department with fever (up to 38.6°C), severe dyspnea and production of pink, frothy sputum. On second hospital admission the patient was cyanotic, restless and irritable [arterial blood gases (ABGs) without supplemental oxygen: pH: 7.49; pO2: 45 mmHg; PCO2: 35 mmHg; SpO2: 85%], with pulse of 145 beats/min, blood pressure 140/80 mmHg and respiratory rate of 35/min. Physical examination revealed regular tachycardic rhythm with S3/S4 gallop, whereas rales presented in all lung fields. His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus tachycardia, without evidence of acute myocardial ischemia. Blood count and routine serum biochemistry tests were normal. The patient was intubated and transferred to the ICU, where he was started on bronchodilators, furosemide diuresis and broad spectrum antibiotics (ciprofloxacin plus amoxycilline/clavulanic acid), as the initial impression was of an acute pulmonary edema due to decompensated heart failure or concomitant severe respiratory infection. However, plasma thyroid function tests were indicative of severe thyrotoxicosis that was attributed to chronic amiodarone treatment , [free T4:26 ng/dL, (normal range: 0.7–1.9); Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) <0.01 μIU/ml, (normal range: 0.38–3.80); free T3:9.5 pg/mL, (normal range: 1.4–3.8)] and he was begun on propylthiouracil (600 mg, po, tid), prednisone (30 mg, daily, IV), propranolol (40 mg, qid), furosemide (40 mg/h, IV) and low molecular weight heparin. At the same time, the patient remained under sedation with midazolame and remifentanyl and occasionally, under neuromuscular block with cis-atracurium. Antithyroglobulin, antimicrosomal and TSH-receptor antibody results were negative. The ultrasonography of the thyroid gland was more or less normal (slightly increased gland size) whereas color flow Doppler sonography (CFDS) demonstrated a heterogeneous pattern with decreased flow.
A slight clinical amelioration was observed a few days later , while serum free T4 and free T3 decreased promptly (FT4: 5.5 ng/dL, FT3: 5.13 pg/mL). All blood, urine and sputum cultures remained negative, whereas procalcitonin (PCT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were within normal range. Nevertheless, as the patient had difficulties in weaning from mechanical ventilation, he underwent a percutaneous tracheotomy during the 10th day of stay in ICU. Forty eight hours later, he developed tachycardia and hypotension. His plasma thyroid function tests were indicative of recurrent thyrotoxicosis . ST segment depression was observed in all ECG leads, without an increase on serum myocardial enzymes. Cultures of different origin remained negative. Deep vein ultrasonography, D-Dimers assay and transthoracic echocardiography were negative for pulmonary thromboembolism. His ventricular response was unable to control despite escalating doses of β-blockers, whereas inotropic support failed to restore the failing circulation. The patient ultimately developed multiple organ failure and was pronounced dead seven days later.