A 33 years old female Gravida 1, Para 1, with a previous history of pelvic inflammatory disease but no abdominopelvic surgery, was referred to the Obstetric unit of UTHB from a 153 km-distant district hospital for severe postpartum haemorrhage. The patient had experienced normal spontaneous vaginal delivery. The UTHB has 500 beds and 6 operating rooms. It conducts approximately 8,000 surgeries each year.
Upon arrival at the hospital, she had received 2 litres of Intravenous (IV) normal saline 0.9% and Lactate Ringer, epinephrine infusion and transfused with 2 units of packed red blood cells. Initially, a diagnosis of uterine atony was made and a haemo-static B-Lynch procedure performed without success.
As she continued to bleed following subtotal haemostatic hysterectomy, a further clinical examination revealed a posterior cervico-uterine tear that was repaired successfully. She was transfused with additional 11 units of packed red blood cells, 7 fresh frozen plasma, 5 units of platelets and 3 units of cryo-precipitate.
Due to a persistent hemodynamic instability she was admitted to the ICU, and an infusion of epinephrine was maintained for 2 days. On the day 3 postICU admission, she developed a progressive abdominal distention while she was still under the instruction of not taking anything by mouth (nihil per os).
A physical examination revealed an abdominal distension and tenderness on palpation, tympanic on percussion with decreased bowel sounds on auscultation. A plain abdominal X-ray showed dilated bowels .
A digital rectal exam did not reveal any faecaloma and a paralytic ileus was suspected. Results of laboratory investigations indicated that levels of Full Blood Count (FBC), electrolytes, lactate, urea, and creatinine were in normal ranges. The patient was managed by decreasing the frequency and dose of opioids and the insertion of the nasal gastric tube (NGT) for aspiration without improvement.
On day 5, the ICU treating team evoked the diagnosis of uncomplicated Ogilvie syndrome. A slow IV injection of neostigmine 2 mg mixed with atropine 0.5 mg was administered without improvement. A second same dose was given on the following day but patients showed no improvement. Endoscope specialist was contacted for decompressive colonoscopy but was not readily available. A tentative insertion of a recto-sigmoidal cannula with a flexible tube allowed a first flatus evacuation. A third dose of neostigmine 2 mg mixed with atropine 0.5 mg was administered and was followed by a significant evacuation of flatus allowing a decompression of the abdomen and relieve of symptoms. On day 6 of her admission in ICU, the patient was successfully extubated and weaned from ventilator. She was discharged from ICU on day 7 to the Obstetric Unit, and discharged from the hospital on day 11 post ICU discharge without any complication or reoccurrence of any sign of abdominal distention.