A 72-year-old woman with a history of hyperlipidemia, pre-diabetes and stage IIA pT2N0M0 left breast intraductal carcinoma treated with lumpectomy, adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy 11 years prior presented to the emergency room with acute on chronic chest pain. Upon presentation she reported a history of several months of intermittent substernal chest pain with exertion that was relieved with rest. In 2003 the patient had undergone a screening coronary calcification test scoring 1744, at the 99th percentile for age and gender. Coronary CT angiography at that time demonstrated a < 30% lesion in the proximal right coronary artery, minimal irregularities in the circumflex and obtuse marginal arteries and sequential 30% lesions in the mid left anterior descending artery. One month prior to presentation she underwent a Lexiscan stress electrocardiogram (ECG) study and single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) myocardial perfusion study which appeared grossly normal but demonstrated decreased radiotracer uptake at the apex consistent with apical thinning artifact given normal wall motion and left ventricular ejection fraction > 65%. Lexiscan stress ECG was normal.
At the time of admission her troponin was 0.05 ng/ml and she was treated with sublingual nitroglycerin, which relieved her chest pain. She was started on aspirin, pravastatin, metoprolol, heparin infusion, and went to catheterization laboratory for coronary angiogram within 24 h. Angiogram demonstrated severe 80% stenosis of the distal left main coronary artery, moderate to severe stenosis of the proximal left anterior descending, and tandem 95% proximal-mid lesions of the right coronary artery, with left-to-right collaterals to the distal right coronary circulation, and she was therefore referred to cardiac surgery for urgent three-vessel coronary artery bypass surgery.
She went to the operating room two days later. During takedown of the LIMA a six cm length of dense adhesions was noted and presumed to be related to her prior history of radiation for breast cancer. The LIMA proved to be encased in scar tissue and was deemed unsuitable as a conduit, and a saphenous vein graft was bypassed to the left anterior descending artery in its place. Due to the dense nature of the scar tissue on the mammary wall a specimen was sent to pathology.
Hematoxylin and eosin-stained histologic sections of the surgical specimen, designated left chest soft tissue mass, showed nests of tumor cells infiltrating within dense fibrous tissue with areas of necrosis and calcifications . The tumor cells had clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, pleomorphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli and brisk mitotic activity . The tumor cells extended into adjacent adipose tissue and were present at the resection margin. Immunohistochemical stains showed positive cytoplasmic staining for mammaglobin and gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15) but negative staining for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), Wilm’s tumor protein 1 (WT-1), calretinin, and GATA3. Immunohistochemistry for estrogen receptors (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR) was negative and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) was equivocal (staining intensity 2+, scale 0–3+). Confirmatory fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) testing showed no amplification of HER2. Overall, the morphology and immunophenotype was most consistent with metastatic/recurrent breast carcinoma.
By report, the patient’s prior left breast cancer was a two cm invasive ductal carcinoma positive for ER and PR and negative for HER2 by immunohistochemistry. The Ki67 proliferation index was estimated at 40%. As her surgical specimen was node negative without lymphovascular invasion she was treated with lumpectomy, followed by four cycles of docetaxol and cyclophosphamide, radiation therapy and anastrazole for 5 years.