An 80-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a complaint of gradually worsening dyspnoea on exertion for the past 3 months. He had also noticed increased ease of bruising for 1 month. In addition, he reported intermittent mild to moderate chest pain radiating to the shoulder blades. Other complaints included leg swelling, significantly decreased exercise tolerance, nausea and vomiting, loose stools, and a 20-pound weight loss over 3 months. His past medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, gout, and supraventricular tachycardia treated with ablation 14 years ago. In addition, the patient’s family history was significant for uterine sarcoma in his mother and breast cancer in his two daughters. At the initial evaluation, he was comfortable at rest, with a 2/6 systolic murmur over the left lower sternal border, petechiae on both shins, and 1 + bilateral pitting oedema.
Laboratory testing revealed new thrombocytopenia with increased platelet size and an initial platelet count of 47 000 per microliter (150 000–450 000 platelet/mcL), without anaemia or leucopenia. A peripheral blood smear revealed schistocytes. The lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was elevated at 478 units/L (140–280 units/L), but haptoglobin was undetectable, and the Coombs test was negative. Thrombocytopenia workup for a nutritional deficiency and autoimmune and infectious processes were negative. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia were ruled out given that there was no improvement with steroids and no history of heparin exposure. There was no evidence of chronic infection or other infectious processes. The Lyme antibody test was negative. His colchicine was also held as drug-induced thrombocytopenia was considered. His platelet count did not improve despite eliminating the possibility of drug-induced thrombocytopenia. Although an underlying bone marrow disorder was on the differential, a bone marrow biopsy was not thought to change management. The working diagnosis was thrombocytopenia due to low-grade disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), leading to microangiopathic haemolysis and consumption (characterized by schistocytes and an elevated LDH). There was also suspicion of an underlying malignancy or paraneoplastic process. The patient received platelet transfusion with poor response. He then was given two doses of immunoglobulin with an improved platelet count to 103 per microliter. In addition, due to his thrombocytopenia, the patient was not started on therapeutic anticoagulation.
A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) for dyspnoea evaluation revealed a non-compressing circumferential pericardial effusion and a large mass that practically obliterated the right ventricular cavity . The mass was also seen extending into the right atrium across the tricuspid valve and was poorly separated from the interventricular septum. The right ventricular systolic function was depressed. The left ventricular systolic function was normal. A CT scan of the chest identified an 11.4 cm × 5.1 cm × 7.4 cm multilobulated, low attenuation mass in the right atrium and right ventricle. The mass appeared to arise from the atrioventricular septum, extending into the coronary sinus. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) T1 weighted sequences acquired before and after contrast agent administration confirmed a large right ventricular infiltrative mass filled the right ventricle extending through the tricuspid valve into the right atrium. Part of the mass extending into the right atrium demonstrated a component of bland thrombi. The mass invaded the myocardium involving the interventricular septum and right ventricular free wall ( and ). Computed tomography scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and a whole-body positron-emission tomography scan were otherwise negative with no evidence of metastasis. A percutaneous myocardial biopsy was performed. The histology was reported as high-grade sarcoma with an epithelioid growth pattern. The immunohistochemistry was positive for CD34 and actin markers. The epithelioid components were highlighted by CD10 with rare BCL-2 and C-MYC positive cells. IN11 was retained. Vimentin and Ki-67 were diffusely positive. The pericardial fluid’s cytopathology after drainage showed only benign mesothelial cells. Given his advanced age and septal involvement of the mass, the patient was not considered for tumour resection.
The patient was discharged home and underwent outpatient chemotherapy with Doxorubicin. Subsequent sessions were scheduled but cancelled due to ongoing thrombocytopenia. The patient was also started on a Dexamethasone trial but was titrated off after no clinical improvement. After a multidisciplinary team, goals of care meeting, the patient elected to be discharged home for palliative care.