A 74-year-old male presented to the outpatient clinic after experiencing chest pain and shortness of breath on exertion for the previous 2–3 months. The patient had an unremarkable clinical examination, with blood pressure of 121/63 mmHg and heart rate of 80 b.p.m. Baseline electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. He underwent coronary artery calcium scoring via computed tomography scan and was found to be elevated at 404 (266 in the left anterior descending [LAD] artery and 138 in the left circumflex artery [LCx]). Transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal ejection fraction and no significant valvular abnormality. On follow-up, he reported progression of his symptoms with decreased exercise tolerance.
The patient had past medical history significant of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and obstructive sleep apnoea.
In our case, the key differential diagnoses were epicardial coronary artery disease, microvascular disease, and myocardial bridging.
Given his risk factors and continuing symptoms, our patient was scheduled for coronary angiography, which revealed mild proximal LAD disease with mid LAD myocardial bridging (see , ). No significant disease was noted in the LCx or right coronary artery. Right heart catheterization was performed given shortness of breath and due to elevated right ventricular systolic pressure of 45 mmHg on echocardiogram. Catheterization showed normal cardiac output of 6.0 L/min with normal haemodynamics, including pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 11 mmHg and mean pulmonary artery pressure of 20 mmHg. To better delineate the underlying pathophysiology, RFR of the mid-LAD was performed and noted to be normal at 0.92 . Further, we performed a thermodilution coronary flow reserve (CFR) measurement at rest and at maximal hyperaemia using Pressure Guidewire X (Abbott) and the Coroventis CoroFlow System (Abbott) with IV adenosine at a standard dose of 140 mcg/kg/min. This revealed a normal CFR value of 2.6 and a normal index of microcirculatory resistance value of 14 , ruling out microvascular disease and suggesting epicardial phenomenon for symptomology. Fractional flow reserve (FFR) at maximal hyperaemia was 0.69. As diastolic physiological indices are better parameters of physiological evaluation in myocardial bridging, we repeated full-cycle ratio following IV adenosine administration and found it to be abnormal at 0.80 with a diffuse rise across the myocardial bridging segment on pullback . This allowed us to better delineate the underlying mechanism of myocardial bridging contributing to exertional symptomology.
Our patient was treated with targeted medical therapy using a beta-blocker. Additionally, cardiac rehabilitation was pursued. Invasive surgical unroofing was preserved for failure of initial medical management.
On follow-up at 40 days, our patient reported improvement in exertional symptoms, with resolution of chest pain, and the dose of the selected beta-blocker was escalated (metoprolol, 25 mg daily to 50 mg daily).