In March 2017, a 42-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology due to hiccups, acid reflux, vomiting and dizziness for 7 days. She was diagnosed with reflux esophagitis 7 years ago without history of trauma. There was no obvious abnormality in her general blood tests, and the gastroscope suggested chronic superficial gastritis. The clinicians gave her omeprazole, but the symptoms were not significantly relieved. In the following month, she lost more than 10 kilograms and her symptoms worsened. Thus, she was admitted to the Department of Neurology in May 2017.
On admission, the patient had obvious hiccups, nausea, vomiting, accompanied by persistent dizziness. No obvious abnormality was found in her neurological examination. At noon the next day, she suddenly lost consciousness, accompanied by epileptic convulsions lasting several minutes, which resolved spontaneously without intervention. Blood tests suggested electrolyte disturbances (Na+ 114mmol/L, K+ 3.3mmol/L, Cl- 84.93mmol/L) and metabolic acidosis (PH=7.132, Lac 14.3mmol/L). She was treated immediately to correct electrolyte disturbances and acidosis. After her symptoms had stabilized, a brain and spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. It showed abnormal signals in the left posterior part of the medulla oblongata and continuous linear enhancement of the ventral meninges of the cervical spinal cord . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) test showed high protein (Pro 1009mg/L) and low chloride ion (Cl- 110.65mmol/L). The CSF glucose and white blood cells were in the normal range. According to the MR results, we initially considered it was a NMOSD and AQP4-IgG in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was tested. Then, the patient received intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) therapy (D1-4 1000mg/d, D5-8 500mg/d, D9-12 250mg/d, D13-15 120mg/d), followed by tapering oral prednisone (60mg/d initially). Meanwhile, the test results showed that AQP4-IgG was positive (CSF titer 1:10, cell-based assay (CBA)) and oligoclonal band test was negative. No obvious abnormalities were found in serum tumor markers, serum immunoglobulin levels (IgA 3.16g/L [1.00-4.20], IgG 11.90g/L [8.60-17.40], IgM 1.16g/L [0.50-2.80]) and other antibodies for autoimmune diseases (such as anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antinuclear antibody and so on). Creatine kinase, rheumatoid factor, anti-streptolysin O, C-reactive protein etc. were within the normal range, and the patient had no joint pain or any abnormality in muscle or skin. The diagnosis of connective tissue disease was also ruled out. The diagnosis of NMOSD was eventually confirmed. Then she started taking azathioprine (AZA) (2mg/kg/d). However, half a month later, she developed abnormal liver function (ALT 105U/L, GGT 63U/L), so the oral AZA was forced to stop. After that, her liver function slowly returned to the normal range.
At discharge, the patient did not have any symptoms of discomfort (Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score=0). She only maintained oral prednisone (60mg/d). After gradual tapering, she stopped taking prednisone in August 2017. She remained off medication until the second attack.
In March 2018, the patient had sudden urinary retention, constipation and weakness of both lower limbs. She was admitted to our department again. The muscle strength of both lower limbs was graded as 4/5 (Medical Research Council) (EDSS=3.5). MRI showed new abnormal lesions in the spinal cord at T3-T10 levels . She underwent 3-day urinary catheterization and was treated with IVMP (later changed to oral prednisone) and oral AZA (2mg/kg/d). However, she then developed fever, and her fatigue worsened. Urine culture confirmed a urinary tract infection. Therefore, she was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (20g/d, for 3 days) along with a full course of antibiotics. Unfortunately, the patient developed abnormal liver function again, so she stopped AZA completely and changed her treatment regimen to mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (1g/d). She stopped taking oral prednisone in July 2018, and only maintained MMF for long-term sequential therapy.
From April 2020 to March 2021, there were 3 independent recurrences totally, all of which were acute myelitis, and the patient’s symptoms were more serious than the second episode. During the 3rd attack, the muscle strength of her right lower limb dropped to grade 1/5, and she could only walk with the aid of a walker. After treatment with IVIG (20g/d, for 5 days) as well as oral prednisone (60mg/d initially, then on a tapering schedule), she was able to walk slowly on her own and gradually regained her muscle strength. However, approximately 5 months later, she experienced her 4th attack, when her right-lower-limb muscle strength decreased to grade 0/5. The myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) antibodies were both negative in serum and CSF, while the AQP4-IgG positive. Successively treated with IVMP and IVIG, she then suffered from repeated urinary tract infections and even gastrointestinal bleeding and hemorrhagic shock. Because of the adverse events, the clinicians decided to try immunoadsorption. However, after the first trial of immunoadsorption, she had a high fever which made the option of immunoadsorption unavailable. After receiving a long course of antibiotics and rehabilitation treatment, her muscle strength recovered to grade 3/5 at discharge. Unfortunately, about 4 months later, the patient had recurrent weakness of both lower limbs, and the muscle strength both decreased to grade 1/5, which was eventually confirmed as the 5th attack. Like before, she received treatment such as IVIG and antibiotics, and her muscle strength gradually recovered after discharge. What bothered us was that in periods of remission between these attacks, using MMF or tacrolimus still failed to delay the time to relapse.
In August 2021, the patient suffered the 6th recurrence. On admission, the EDSS score had reached 8.5, and her disability was still progressing (MRI is shown in ). Considering the poor response or intolerance to multiple immunosuppressants, we decided to change the treatment strategy with intravenous RTX. Although the test showed the peripheral CD19+B cells were sufficiently depleted (0.00%) two weeks after the first dose, she still experienced rash all over the body and urinary tract infection, which made RTX impossible for the subsequent treatment. (The time points, symptoms, AQP4-IgG titers, EDSS, serum Interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels and treatment details of each attack are shown in ).
In May 2022, 6 months after the induction therapy with RTX, the proportion of CD19+B cells recovered to 3.29% (EDSS=6.0). At that time, we noticed that relevant study had shown that OFA had good efficacy in another demyelinating disease, the RMS , and OFA had been marketed in China. Considering the patient was intolerant to RTX, we changed the sequential therapy to subcutaneous injection of OFA (20mg q4w, for 4 months). At follow-up after 4 months of OFA treatment, her MRI lesions were significantly reduced . We dynamically and closely monitored the levels of CD19+B cells .
In view of the fact that previous study had adjusted the usage of anti-CD20 mAbs according to the levels of B cells without reducing the efficacy , and dynamic monitoring showed that the CD19+B cells of our patient were fully depleted during the 4 months of OFA treatment, we decided to try to tune the usage of OFA. The dosing interval is then once every 6 weeks. During the treatment with OFA (more than 10 months), the patient’s symptoms were stable without recurrence, the EDSS score remained stable (EDSS=6.0), the proportion of peripheral CD19+B cells was maintained at a very low levels , the serum immunoglobulin were maintained at normal levels in the latest follow-up (IgA 2.41g/L [1.00-4.20], IgG 12.10g/L [8.60-17.40], IgM 1.00g/L [0.50-2.80]), and no adverse events occurred.