A 22-year-old female patient was admitted to Tiantai People’s Hospital of Zhejiang Province on 13 July 2020 after 1-hour duration of abdominal pain and distension following trauma.
The patient experienced sudden-onset persistent and unbearable abdominal pain, radiating to the lower back, with abdominal distension and nausea, and without vomiting, coma, dizziness, headache, chest tightness, shortness of breath, bloody vomiting, or hemoptysis. The trauma resulted from impact with bicycle handlebars on the upper abdomen during an electrical bicycle accident 1 h earlier.
She had no other complaints. Her sleep and appetite were normal, and her excretion and egestion were both normal.
The patient had an unremarkable medical history.
The patient grew up in her locality, denied any contact with contaminated water or radiation exposure, and did not smoke or consume alcohol. She had no gestational history, and her annual menstruation cycle was 13/year (q 4-6 wk/duration: 20-30 d).
Physical examination findings on admission: body temperature: 37.2 ℃, respiratory rate: 20 breaths/min, blood pressure: 118/63 mmHg, and heart rate: 103 beats/min. The patient had a clear mind, low mood, flat and soft abdomen, tenderness in the upper abdomen, no obvious rebound pain, bowel sounds: 2/min, and no shifting dullness. No other significant abnormalities were observed.
Serum amylase concentration: 1258 U/L (upper limit of normal: 135 U/L), white blood cell count: 17.8 × 109/L, neutrophils: 82%, red blood cell count: 4.51 × 1012/L, hemoglobin: 143 g/L, platelet count: 211 × 109/L, C-reactive protein: < 0.499 mg/L, and procalcitonin: < 0.02 ng/mL; liver and kidney function was normal, the levels of plasma lactate was normal.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT): The pancreatic head/neck was full in shape, and small lamellar high-density shadows were seen at the anterior edge, with a CT value of 64 HU. There was no edema and thickening of bilateral anterior renal fascia and no peritoneal or retroperitoneal effusion. The lesion was not significantly enhanced during contrast-enhanced CT, and some surrounding low-density exudative shadows were observed .