A 51-year-old man complaining of epigastric pain, vomiting, and diarrhea was found to have PVG and PI on CT without contrast in another hospital and was referred to our hospital. His medical history did not indicate liver cirrhosis, malignancy, or predisposing procoagulant state.
The patient had a blood pressure of 146/92 mmHg, a heart rate of 157 b.p.m., and a body temperature of 37.2°C. A physical examination showed a distended abdomen and tenderness over the whole abdomen with slight rebound tenderness. The laboratory data on admission showed a white blood cell count of 7,200/mm3 (normal range, 4,000–8,000/mm3) with 78.8% segmented neutrophils (normal range, <70%), C-reactive protein 24.59 mg/dL (normal range, <0.3 mg/dL), procalcitonin 12.65 ng/mL (normal range, <0.05 ng/mL), blood urea nitrogen 63.9 mg/dL (normal range, 7–20 mg/dL), creatinine 5.08 mg/dL (normal range, 0.5–1.0 mg/dL), prothrombin time 88.1% (normal range, 70–130%), activated partial thromboplastin time 35.8 s (normal range, 24–37 s), fibrinogen/fibrin degradation products 132.1 μg/mL (normal range, <10 μg/mL), D-dimer 51.4 μg/mL (normal range, <0.5 μg/mL), antithrombin III 97.8% (normal range, 80–120%), and lactate 4.9 mmol/L (normal range, 0.56–1.39 mmol/L). Blood cultures were positive for coagulase-negative staphylococci.
Abdominal X-ray showed a distended small bowel loop with remarkable PI , and CT with contrast in our hospital revealed a massive amount of air in the portal venous system and extensively throughout the small intestinal wall; however, portomesenteric vein thrombosis was not seen. Although vessel contrast enhancement was intact on CT, the partial attenuation of the contrast-induced enhancement of the bowel wall, bowel wall edema, and distension were identified, and bowel ischemia/necrosis due to non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia was suspected .
Emergency laparotomy was carried out, and a small amount of serous ascites was seen. Approximately 3 m of the small intestine from the ligament of Treitz appeared to show slight ischemic changes and extensive dilatation, however, immediate bowel resection was deemed unnecessary. Postoperative management included broad-spectrum antibiotics and continuous hemodiafiltration for the treatment of acute kidney injury. The next day, second-look laparotomy was carried out. As no bowel necrosis was evident, the abdomen was closed. Our final diagnosis was gastroenteritis, however, we could not identify the causative pathogen.
After surgery, the postoperative course was uneventful. Computed tomography was undertaken for follow-up after laparotomy on postoperative day (POD) 5, and thrombosis was noted in the right portal vein and the umbilical portion of the left portal vein . Heparinization was started on the same day and then changed to the oral direct factor Xa inhibitor edoxaban at 60 mg/day. On follow-up CT on POD 39, thrombosis in the right portal vein had disappeared completely, but left PVT showed spreading . As neither abnormal laboratory data findings nor complaints were seen, this patient was discharged and continued to take the oral anticoagulant. On follow-up CT at our outpatient clinic on POD 74, left PVT was still noted; however, the size had been reduced. Seven months after discharge, it had disappeared on follow-up CT without any thromboembolic complications, and edoxaban was discontinued.