A 15-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with a 12-year history of short stature and growth retardation. A physical examination on admission revealed that the weight and height of the patient was 36 kg and 1.37 m, respectively; both were less than three standard deviations of the same age. Special facial features of the patient were noted, including prominent posteriorly rotated auricles with looped helices, infraorbital skin creases, and a mildly foreshortened mandible. Other characteristic signs, including a webbed neck, low posterior hairline, and lack of breast development, were also found. The cuff blood pressure in both arms was 160/100 mmHg, and in both legs 110/80 mmHg. A cardiac examination demonstrated a grade 2/6 systolic ejection murmur in the second and third left intercostal spaces radiating to the suprasternal fossa and back. The chest x-ray was unremarkable. An ECG indicated cardiac hypertrophy and an echocardiography examination revealed a severe native aortic coarctation with a peak pressure gradient of 60 mmHg by Doppler image. The aortic valve was normal, and no signs of bicuspid aortic valve, aortic root dilatation, and dissection were found by echo. Renal ultrasonography was normal, but no obvious uterine and ovarian structures were found using gynecological ultrasonography. In view of these findings, a karyotype analysis was performed, and the result was a complete loss of the second X chromosome, revealing she had a pure 45, X karyotype . Based on these examination results, the patient was diagnosed with Turner syndrome with a severe native aortic coarctation.
Further evaluations and examinations for cardiac malformation were performed. A CT scan showed a severe aortic coarctation just beyond the origin of the left subclavian artery (LSCA) . At cardiac catheterization, under general anesthesia, the ascending aortic pressure was 138/85 mmHg and the descending aortic pressure was 90/72 mmHg. A descending aortogram confirmed a discrete lesion with a shelf-like in-folding and minimum diameter of 3 mm.
Due to the congenital dysplasia of the aortic wall and inherent vessel weakness in patients with Turner syndrome, and considering this was a case of severe aortic coarctation with the narrowest lesion being only 3 mm, we held a multidisciplinary team meeting for the case with surgeons and other colleagues to determine the appropriate choice of treatment. Finally, the interventional therapy of a covered stent implantation was considered to be suitable for this patient.