A 51-year-old female with history of bilateral retropectoral silicone breast implants placed in 1996 presented with a two-month history of progressively enlarging right breast. Imaging including ultrasound and MRI showed a large infiltrative mass involving the right medial chest wall musculature with right axillary adenopathy along with a peri-implant fluid collection. Ultrasound guided biopsy of right chest wall mass in November 2019 showed a CD30-positive, ALK-negative ALCL which was negative for DUSP22 and TP63 gene rearrangements . Staging PET-CT showed a dominant, coalescent, and infiltrative 13 × 10 × 20 centimeter mass centered in the right anterior chest wall with extension into the pleural/extrapleural compartment along with involvement of regional lymph nodes and osseous invasion of the ribs consistent with advanced disease . She was started on neoadjuvant chemotherapy with CHP-BV (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, prednisone, and brentuximab vedotin) and completed 6 cycles in May 2020 achieving a complete metabolic response. In July 2020, she underwent an anterior thoracotomy with resection of the right chest wall tumor, as well as ribs 3–5, partial sternectomy, en bloc removal of the right breast implant, right chest wall reconstruction with mesh/bone cement, thymectomy, serratus advancement flap, and adjacent tissue transfer. Her postoperative course was complicated by chest wall incision necrosis requiring debridement, washout and tissue transfer. Pathologic evaluation revealed viable residual tumor in the sternum, thymus, right anterior chest wall and lymph node samples. She went on to receive 36 Gy of radiation in 1.8 Gy fractions which she completed in November 2020. Restaging PET showed a complete metabolic response with SUVmax 3.9 and a Deauville score of 3 . This was followed by consolidative auto-SCT in February 2021 with abbreviated BEAM where she received 50% of the conditioning regimen (carmustine 300 mg/m2 × 1 day, etoposide 200 mg/m2 × 2 days, cytarabine 200 mg/m2 × 2 days, and no melphalan) due to compliance issues. She engrafted well with no complications post auto-SCT. Three months post auto-SCT, she was started on maintenance BV which was stopped after 12 cycles due to worsening neuropathy. She is currently doing well about a year post auto-SCT with no evidence of active disease.