A 67-year-old male patient presented to his local emergency department for evaluation of lower abdominal pain. He was prescribed antibiotics with minimal relief. Upon return for re-evaluation, a CT scan found him to have a large retro-hepatic mass involving the IVC. An abdomen MRI then uncovered findings concerning sarcoma of the retro-hepatic IVC . A biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma.
The patient was referred to our surgical oncology clinic, where he received a physical exam, which resulted in unremarkable showings; he denied any lower extremity swelling and was found without signs or symptoms of IVC compression. The consulted cardiac surgeons obtained a negative cardiac catheterization. A CT of the chest did not show metastatic disease. The clinic offered total liver explantation with back-table resection of the retro-hepatic IVC and tumor with a subsequent liver re-implantation on cardiopulmonary bypass.
The surgeons performed a sternal incision, isolated the intrapericardial IVC, and then extended the incision to below the umbilicus. After liver mobilization and gallbladder removal, the common duct, cystic artery and duct were ligated and divided. Dissection of the hepatic artery followed in the operation and moved to ligation and division of the gastroduodenal artery. The portal vein was then dissected in preparation for veno-venous bypass. For explantation, the IVC was mobilized completely out of the retroperitoneum.
The patient was then placed on full cardiopulmonary bypass to excise the liver and vena cava. Each was excised from above the renal veins to below the atrium, before being taken to the back-table for tumor resection. At that point, the patient was placed on portal venous bypass, which was connected to the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit. The leiomyosarcoma was circumferentially dissected en-bloc with the IVC, leaving only the origins of the right hepatic vein and the confluence of the middle and left hepatic veins . The cardiac surgeons anastomosed a 20 mm ringed Gore-Tex (GTX) interposition graft from above the renal veins to the IVC, below the diaphragm. They completed the in situ native vena reconstruction during back-table work.
After completing the IVC tumor resection, two separate, non-ringed 20 mm GTX grafts were utilized to reconstruct the hepatic veins before re-implantation. One graft was sewn to the origin of the right hepatic vein, and a separate graft was sewn to the confluence of the middle and left hepatic veins. These two grafts were then joined together to allow a single anastomosis directly to the right atrium anterior to the previously placed vena cava ringed GTX graft. Next, the surgeons removed the patient from the portal venous bypass. They re-anastomosed the portal vein end-to-end and perfused the liver thereafter. The patient was able to be weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass at this time.
The procedure moved to hepatic artery anastomosis in another end-to-end fashion at the level of the gastroduodenal artery. Protamine was administered, and the patient was decannulated. After achieving meticulous hemostasis, the biliary anastomosis was performed end-to-end over a biliary stent. A segment of the patient’s pericardium was harvested and utilized to patch the diaphragmatic opening triangularly, preventing compression of the GTX venous grafts. Last, the surgeons placed bilateral chest tubes along with an abdominal Blake drain in the patient prior to closing the pericardium, chest, and abdomen. The transesophageal echocardiogram revealed normal biventricular function. A total of one unit of packed red blood cells and one unit of cryoprecipitate were administered throughout the procedure.
The patient was extubated on the first post-operative day. His chest tubes were removed on the third post-operative day, and the intra-abdominal drain was removed on day 4. He was discharged home in stable condition on day 5. Other than intractable singultus, the hospital stay was usual. The patient’s 3-month follow-up visit was unremarkable, as well as his 3-month post-operative abdominal and chest CT scans .