A 77-year-old Chinese American male with stage IIIB (T4N2M0) NSCLC was referred for evaluation and management of progressive dyspnea in March. His past medical history included a 120 pack years smoking history and severe underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Four months prior to this presentation, he developed non-anginal anterior chest pain. A large 6 cm × 9 cm lung mass invading through the left anterior chest wall into ribs and manubrium was biopsied and found to be a squamous cell cancer . The patient underwent definitive radiation therapy with a good local response, but he had poor systemic tolerance to one course of the chemotherapy given post radiation. Even though he had severe COPD and pre-existing severe diffuse atherosclerotic vascular disease (coronary artery disease, status post coronary artery bypass, bilateral carotid endarterectomies, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia), he neither had any significant exertional dyspnea nor history of congestive heart failure prior to the cancer diagnosis and initiation of cancer therapy. A follow-up CT scan was performed in March . At the time of his progressive dyspnea, shrinkage of the left chest wall mass and left upper lobe infiltrates was demonstrated, but appearence of a new 3.9 cm × 4 cm left lower lobe (LLL) mass outside the previous radiation portal and new bilateral pleural effusions were observed. 18FDG-PET scan showed intense uptake (SUVmax 9.9) fusing to the new LLL mass, while the original left upper chest wall tumor site only revealed moderate uptake of SUV 2.6 consistent with post treatment changes.
On review of systems, the patient denied angina, orthopnea nor paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea that helped to rule out congestive heart failure. He had a non-productive cough and didn’t have hemoptysis. He also denied fever, chills or night sweats. Physical examination revealed dullness to percussion at the lung bases, consistent with bilateral pleural fluid. He had trace lower extremity edema. Other pertinent studies included a cardiac echocardiogram from two months prior, when the patient had a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 45–50%, and trace tricuspid regurgitation with an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 50 mmHg.
Left sided thoracentesis was performed twice for diagnostic purposes. The first tap removed 1000 ml of orange-red sero-sanguinous fluid, that on chemical analysis suggested a transudate as the pleural protein was only 3.0 with a serum protein of 6.2 g / dl (ratio < 0.5) and the pleural LDH of 122 is also < 0.6 of the serum LDH. The pH was 7.40 and pleural glucose was 104. Bacterial culture was negative and cytology revealed reactive mesothelial cell, histiocytes and lymphocytes. The pleural fluid cell count revealed a lymphocytosis of 596 /cu mm, neutrophils of 308 / cu mm while the peripheral WBC of 8370 / cu mm showed a lymphopenia with absolute lymphocyte count of 320 / cu mm. The fluid rapidly re-accumulated and on March 30th, only 18 days later, another 1400 cm3 of hemorrhagic effusions was removed but this time the chemistry was consistent with exudate with a pleural protein of 3.6 g/dl. Initial cultures for bacteria, fungi and mycobacterium were negative. Repeat cytology revealed reactive mesothelial cells, histiocytes, lymphocytes and blood without malignant cells.
Due to the continued lack of a treatable diagnosis, diagnostic bronchoscopy was performed on April 6th. Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) guided transbronchial needle sampling of regional lymph nodes and the LLL mass were negative for the tumor. However, transbronchial forceps biopsy of the LLL mass showed granulomatous pneumonitis with fungal elements consistent with capsule deficient Cryptococcus on H&E and gomori methenamine silver stain . Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) sent for pan-culture did not grow any pathogens, and the BAL galactomannan was negative at 0.36 (cutoff < 0.50). Subsequently, the pleural fluid collected on March 30th grew Cryptococcus neoformans after 10 days of culture.
The patient’s pulmonary cryptococcal infection with pleural involvement was probably attributed to his cancer and the treatment. His HIV test was negative. A serum Cryptococcal antigen (CrAg) was negative. He did not have neurologic symptoms, and a baseline MRI of the brain done at the time of initial cancer diagnosis was negative except for findings suggestive of chronic small vessel ischemic disease. Because pleural involvement was considered extrapulmonary spread of the infection, and his present CD4 lymphopenia was an ongoing risk for dissemination, he underwent a lumbar puncture with negative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) findings (including negative CSF CrAg). Serum galactomannan level was negative at 0.08. Upon retrospective review, the patient had a baseline lymphopenia of 950 / cu mm prior to the initial radiation and chemotherapy. The lymphopenia had never recovered with absolute lymphocyte counts (ALC) between 400 and 600 / cu mm. A T-cell subset checked at the time of the first thoracentesis revealed a CD 4+ cell percent of 24.3% (normal range 32–68%) and absolute CD4+ count of 112/cu mm (normal range 458–1344 /cu mm). Pleural fluid collected from the first thoracentesis on March 12th was analyzed for the presence of CrAg. It was negative by enzyme-linked immunosorbentassays (ELISA), but was positive by lateral flow assay (LFA).
Fluconazole therapy, dose adjusted for renal dysfunction at 400 mg PO q24 was started on April 9th. Subsequent follow-up for 10 months after initiation of the treatment showed progressive clinical improvements with resolution of dyspnea, cough, recovery of appetite and radiographic improvement in chest imaging . He finally came to us in April of 2015 for a checkup of his supraclavicular lymphadenopathy and chest CT scan showing new nodules of bilateral lungs in April of 2015. We performed fine needle aspiration and the reports showed malignancy. Hence, the patient refused to undergo further management and he passed away that year after six months.