A 43-year-old man was referred to our cardiology department for the evaluation of abnormal 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) findings. Electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia, high voltage in the left precordial leads, and inverted T waves in the inferolateral leads. PR interval, QRS duration, and axis were within normal range. Despite the symptoms of dizziness, the patient had not sought a medical opinion. He suffered from meningitis at 15 years of age and could barely hear with his right ear since then. He had no history of smoking. His mother had unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy, and a pacemaker was implanted for sick sinus syndrome. She died of heart failure a few years before the patient presented to our hospital. Clinical cardiac evaluation of the patient revealed a regular heart rate of 38 b.p.m., normal heart sounds, and no murmurs. Arterial blood pressure was 102/77 mmHg. Chest X-ray showed normal cardiothoracic ratio and no pulmonary oedema. Echocardiography showed normal ventricular systolic and diastolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction: 65%, E/A ratio: 1.8) and apical hypertrophy (maximal wall thickness: 16 mm) . The obstruction of left ventricle and valvular abnormalities were not shown. Laboratory examination revealed almost normal findings; however, proteinuria was noted. Coronary angiography showed no organic stenosis. Holter ECG revealed sinus arrest for >5 s, which was associated with pre-syncopal symptoms. Therefore, he was diagnosed with sick sinus syndrome, for which a dual-chamber pacemaker was implanted. Based on family history, a hereditary cardiac disease was suspected. However, his plasma alpha-galactosidase A activity had decreased (0.5 nmol/h/mL) compared with the normal value of >4.0 nmol/h/mL. Endomyocardial biopsy assessed using an electron microscope revealed lamellate deposits within cardiomyocytes. Renal biopsy revealed GL-3 deposits in the endothelial cells of glomeruli. The patient also exhibited a missense mutation of GLA genes in exon 7 that leads to an arginine-to-glutamine (R342Q) missense mutation. Thus, he was diagnosed with FD. He did not have the other involvement of FD. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT; agalsidase-β: 1.0 mg/kg: the mice recombinant form) was then initiated.
After the second administration of ERT, he developed a low-grade fever. After administering an antipyretic before next ERT, his fever subsided. Antibody analysis revealed an immunoglobulin-G, not immunoglobulin-E, for agalsidase-β. During the fifth administration of ERT, he suddenly experienced cardiopulmonary arrest. Electrocardiogram showed VF. Cardioversion was immediately initiated, and he was resuscitated.
Because the patient was unconscious after resuscitation, respiratory care using mechanical ventilator and target temperature management (TTM) at 35°C were performed. However, the target temperature was changed from 35°C to 36°C and was managed using percutaneous cardiopulmonary system because of the subsequent episode of VF storm. The 12-lead ECG obtained just before VF showed ST elevation in leads II, III, and aVF . Ventricular paced beats were increased because the mechanism of VF development was R on T in ECG monitor. He was confirmed to have no neurological sequelae after TTM, and there was an upgrade to an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) for secondary prevention. Cardiac MRI, performed to assess myocardial fibrosis, revealed no LGE in the myocardium . He underwent ERT (0.2 mg/kg agalsidase-α: the human recombinant form) again 2 months after the first VF development. He exhibited no infusion-associated-reaction. However, VF developed at midnight and was defibrillated by ICD. Coronary angiography was performed again because the ECG obtained before VF was suspected to show ischaemic ST-T changes. The patient had no organic stenosis in the coronary artery; however, spasms were induced following intracoronary acetylcholine injection (50–100 μg) in segments 1, 4, 6, 8, and 11 of the coronary artery . The patient had never had chest pain before then, but diltiazem (100 mg once a day) was administered. Ventricular fibrillation did not develop since then.