A 59-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with a 3-4-year history of diarrhea and abdominal pain.
He had intermittent abdominal pain in the lower abdomen.
He was taking medication for irritable bowel syndrome, which was poorly controlled.
He had no family history of malignancy.
The abdomen was soft and flat and showed no tenderness.
Blood tests on admission showed an increased alkaline phosphatase level (363 IU/L, normal range: 38–113 IU/L); however, no other hepatobiliary enzyme levels were elevated. The tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were within normal limits .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen incidentally revealed a 5-mm nodule-like mass in the pancreatic body. The nodule was not contrast-enhancing in the arterial phase and was faintly contrast-enhancing in the late phase . Magnetic resonance imaging findings indicated a slightly high-intensity signal on diffusion-weighted images in the same area as that identified on computed tomography. However, identification of obvious neoplastic lesions or abnormal signal areas using T1- weighted and T2-weighted images and dynamic studies was difficult, and there was no change in the caliber of the main pancreatic duct . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) performed 2 mo after the initial consultation revealed a 10-mm hypoechoic mass without a cystic structure in the body of the pancreas . Using Sonazoid® (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, United States), a contrast agent, the hypoechoic mass was identified as a hypovascular mass without contrast effect .
Because of the rapid increase in size within a short period and the possibility of malignancy, we performed EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) to obtain a definitive diagnosis. Histopathological examination revealed an atypical epithelium with papillary growth without a mucinous component. Some of the epithelium showed strong nuclear atypia, raising suspicion of an intraductal papillary carcinoma . This was considered an indication for surgery, and a combined distal pancreatectomy and splenic resection were performed 5 mo after the initial detection of the tumor. Macroscopically, a 4 mm × 4 mm borderline brownish nodule and surrounding fibrosis measuring 12 mm × 8 mm × 12 mm were observed at a distance of 3.5 cm from the proximal lateral section of the pancreatic tail. No continuity with the main pancreatic duct was observed, and there was no dilation of the main pancreatic duct or notable changes in the surrounding pancreas . Microscopically, the tumor was located within the branched pancreatic duct and exhibited intraductal tubulopapillary growth with stromal invasion around the branched pancreatic duct . There was no mucus production or cyst formation, and immunohistochemistry was positive for Mucin 1 (MUC1), negative for MUC2, partially positive for MUC5AC, and positive for MUC6 . Mild perineural invasion but no lymphatic or venous invasion with two direct infiltrations in the peripancreatic lymph nodes were observed. Both dissection and pancreatic margins were negative.