A 26-year-old woman presented to a headache specialty clinic for a possible diagnosis of vestibular migraine. She was referred by otolaryngology. She was experiencing recurrent bouts of dizziness, lightheadedness, nausea, and ataxia. The episodes started in her late teens and were always stereotyped. The attacks would begin with dizziness and lightheadedness (never vertigo) and eventually progress to the point where she would become nauseous and would vomit. She would then notice she could not walk in a straight line and would need assistance to ambulate. Her hands would become tremulous and she would have trouble writing. She also would develop slurred speech and blurred vision. She would sometimes develop a headache during her spells but this was not consistent and she did not feel the headaches were a dominant part of her syndrome. Uniquely, the only thing that could cause the attacks to subside was sleep. Sleeping just 15 min could relieve her symptoms completely. If she could not find time to sleep the episodes would remain unabated. Thus on work days her bouts could last 12 plus hours in duration. If however she could fall asleep immediately at the onset of an episode it would be gone when she awoke. The spells would occur on average once every 2 weeks with the longest span in between bouts of 6 weeks. She could also experience attacks several days in a row. She did not notice any circannual or diurnal pattern to her spells. The patient reported that stress, anxiety, fatigue, heat, caffeine, and alcohol could trigger her episodes. Her past medical history was significant for episodic migraine without aura and Vitamin B12 deficiency. Family history was significant for Tourette syndrome in her father and a paternal cousin. No familial migraine history was noted, nor did any family member have similar spells. Prior treatment focused on a vertigo syndrome including the use of meclizine and clonazepam without benefit. Neurologic examination in between attacks was normal. She was never examined during a spell as treatment provided at her initial consultation (see below) caused immediate cessation of her episodes. Brain MRI, MRA head and neck, and MR venography were normal.
A possible diagnosis of EA-2 was entertained. She became completely attack free on acetazolamide (250 mg bid) with a 2.5 year follow-up. Exon sequencing of CACNA1A revealed a novel heterozygous pathogenic variant in exon 19 denoted c.2496dupC, p.Asn833GlnfsTer1088 (p.Asn833fs). This variant is a duplication of a cytosine at position 2496, which results in a downstream change from asparagine to glutamine at amino acid position 833, with a resultant altered reading frame. This pathogenic variant had not been previously reported in the literature and was suggested to truncate the CACNA1A polypeptide by introducing a premature stop codon. Vestibular migraine was indeed in the differential for this patient. Some patients with this syndrome respond to acetazolamide, but the CACNA1A pathogenic variant has not been identified in this distinct migraine population [, ].