A 38-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital with weakness in his right limbs for 6 months and decreased vision in his left eye for 3 months.
The patient developed numbness of the right upper limb without obvious inducement in April 2019 and then experienced continuous numbness without an intermittent period; this was accompanied by weakness of the upper limbs, and then the above symptoms were aggravated with right lower limb weakness, which caused walking instability. In June 2019, the abovementioned symptoms were gradually aggravated with blurred vision and decreased vision in the left eye. In August 2019, the neurosurgery department in our hospital considered the possibility of demyelinating pseudotumors. After high dose dexamethasone treatment, the patient's right limbs remained weak, his visual impairment significantly improved, and the lesion was significantly reduced in size. However, in October 2019, his symptoms worsened, and the lesions appeared larger than before (see ).
The patient was healthy and had no history of surgery. His family history was negative, with no congenital diseases.
Physical examination: The following findings were observed: drooping of the left eyelid, decreased visual acuity in the left eye, left pupil:right pupil ratio = 4:2, dull light reflection, level 4 right limb muscle strength, and significantly decreased sensation to both deep and shallow stimuli in the right limb.
Laboratory examination: In August 2019, routine blood tests, electrolytes, liver and kidney function, coagulation function, tumor markers, and electrocardiography showed no obvious abnormalities. The cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed significantly increased levels of trace total protein, but there were no obvious abnormalities. Ferritin was significantly increased, but the CA125, CA199, CA153, CEA, and AFP levels were not abnormal.
In June 2019, a head MRI performed at an external hospital showed a lesion occupying the left thalamus and midbrain space. Considering the possibility of malignant tumors, PET-CT was performed and showed that tumor-like changes with demyelination were likely.
The MRI in August 2019 (as shown in ) revealed that the left thalamus and pontine had medium-to-low T1WI signals and medium-to-slightly high T2WI signals, and the enhancement appeared ring-like, nodular and irregular. Perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI) showed that the lesion area had hypoperfusion, the cerebral blood volume (CBV) and cerebral blood flow (CBF) were not significantly increased, and the mean transit time (MTT) and time-to-bolus peak (TTP) were delayed. On MRS, areas of interest were selected from the lesion and the contralateral area with normal contrast. The spectrum line shows that the spectrum in the left lesion was abnormal, the Cho peak was higher in the lesion than in the contralateral normal area, the NAA peak was significantly lower than that in the corresponding area, and the Lip peak was visible. Based on imaging, demyelinating pseudotumors or granulomatous lesions should be considered.
Surprisingly, a re-examination of the cranial MR findings in September 2019 (as shown in ) revealed that the extent of the left thalamic and pontine lesions was reduced compared to that on the initial images, and the margins were unclear. After applying contrast enhancement, the degree of enhancement was lower than that of the previous scan, and nodules were observed. Similarly, no obvious necrosis was seen inside. Considering that the possibility of demyelinating pseudotumors was high, lymphoma could not be completely excluded.
However, the cranial MR findings from October 2019 (as shown in ) showed that the left thalamus and pontine lesions were enlarged compared to those on the previous scan, and the edges were unclear. After the application of contrast enhancement, the degree of enhancement was stronger than before, and a nodular pattern was observed. There were obviously necrotic foci on the image, which typically suggest lymphoma.
In October 2019, under general anesthesia, the patient underwent total tumor resection, resection of left thalamus and pons lesions . Hemostasis was achieved, and preventative treatment for epilepsy was given after the operation.
Results and follow-up: The postoperative pathological analysis (as shown in ) revealed that the tumor cells were diffusely proliferated, had large nuclei, were round or oval, and had obvious nucleoli, visible mitosis, and more lymphocyte infiltration in the interstitium. The immunohistochemistry results were as follows: GFAP(-), Ki67 (~60%+), LCA(-), PLAP(+), OCT3/4(+), and SALL4(+); these findings were consistent with those of a GCT. The patient is now undergoing regular chemotherapy, with improvements in his symptoms, and he can live on his own and has the ability to work. There was no definite recurrence in postoperative follow-up.