A 73-year-old man fell while walking to get to the bathroom late at night and was injured his head, and visited a former medical institution by himself.
His consciousness was clear (Glasgow Coma Scale: GCS E4V5M6) and there were no abnormal neurological findings including loss of consciousness or amnesia. Head computed tomography (CT) was performed and detected no abnormal finding . He was diagnosed minor head injury and was hospitalized at midnight and discharged after brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) next day. Brain MRI also detected no abnormal findings as the previous head CT .
Three days later, he visited our hospital himself, because of the severe headache. Neurologically, he had a mild consciousness disturbance (GCS E4V4M6) and head CT revealed left ASDH with mass effect . As ASDH existed without cerebral contusion and acute brain swelling, we performed endoscopic evacuation of hematoma under local anesthesia with dexmedetomidine. After the skin was incised, we used a perforator attachment (Integra Life Sciences, disposable perforator diameter: 14 mm, Plainsboro, New Jersey, USA) with a cordless handle to make a burr hole. After perforation, the tip was exchanged from perforator to dilator attachment which we developed (S & B Corporation, Chiba, Japan), and the burr hole was extended to 25 × 30 mm. A rigid scope with a tip angle of 0 or 30° (KARL-STORZ, Tuttlingen, Germany) clearly showed a residual dark red clot. The clot was evacuated using a suction tube and was irrigated with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Tokushima, Japan). Then, the clot was evacuated under the endoscopic procedure through dilated burr hole and pulsatile bleeding from the cortical artery was observed, which was considered to be the source of the ASDH [Video 1]. No other obvious arterial or venous bleeding was observed. Hemostasis was performed using suction-monopolar coagulator (Covidien, Massachusetts, USA), [Video 1]. Postoperative CT and MRI revealed no re-bleeding and indicated the bleeding point . The patient’s consciousness disturbance was improved immediately after surgery. He stayed 10 days in our hospital and was discharged without neurological deficit.