A 40-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to hospital due to a 3-year history of limb inflexibility, which had become aggravated in the previous year.
Three years before presenting to our clinic, the patient developed a feeling of heaviness and inflexibility in the right lower extremity, which was aggravated after fatigue. It could be relieved after getting up in the morning or resting and was accompanied by emotional irritability and insomnia. She went to a local hospital. The doctor diagnosed her with anxiety and depression and administered paroxetine orally. After 3 mo, her symptoms were not alleviated; thus, she discontinued the drug herself. Two years ago, the patient began to gradually experience difficulties with limb movement. One year ago, the patient’s gait disorder progressively aggravated. It manifested as laborious lifting of the feet off the ground, stiffness of the lower limbs, leaning forward and a forward gait, inability to stop immediately, difficulty turning around, reduced arm swing, and other symptoms similar to Parkinson's disease. She could not take care of herself, so she visited our hospital for treatment.
The patient’s medical history was unremarkable.
The patient’s mother, grandmother, and uncle all had similar illnesses, and they eventually died because of related complications.
The patient’s vital signs were stable, and no abnormalities were found in cardiopulmonary or abdominal examinations. The patient exhibited bradykinesia, and slight horizontal nystagmus could be seen when staring left and right. There was mild lead tube-like increase in the muscle tone of extremities, a positive Romberg sign, hyperreflexia of tendons at extremities, and positive bilateral Chaddock sign and Gordon sign.
Routine laboratory tests showed no abnormalities, and thyroid function, blood ammonia, and ceruloplasmin were all within the normal range.
There were no obvious abnormalities in brain or spinal cord imaging.
In an electromyogram, the differentiation of the P15 and N20 somatosensory evoked potentials in both lower extremities was acceptable, with roughly normal incubation periods and reduced amplitudes. The incubation period of the P40 somatosensory evoked potential in both lower extremities was slightly prolonged, the waveform differentiation was poor, and the repeatability was also poor. The patient’s background rhythm in an electroencephalogram was slightly slower than normal.
Genetic test showed 18 and 65 CAG repeat units of the ATXN3 gene .