A 75-year-old woman diagnosed with severe aortic valve stenosis was admitted to our hospital for progressive exertional dyspnea in the last 3 years ago with New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III functional status. She had clinical comorbidities of Parkinson’s disease and pulmonary space-occupying lesions. Cardiac auscultation detected a 3/6 mid-systolic murmur with maximum intensity in the area of the right upper sternal border. Echocardiography demonstrated severe calcified aortic valve stenosis with mild-to-moderate regurgitation (valve area = 0.85 cm2; peak velocity = 4.23 m/s; and mean transvalvular gradient = 42 mmHg). Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) estimated by the two-dimensional methods was 61.4%. Multi-detected CT (MDCT) identified that the aortic valve was bicuspid aortic valve type 1 and a raphe with a bulky calcification between the left and non-coronary sinuses (, ). Further anatomical measurements on MDCT included an annular perimeter of 73.1 mm, an annular area of 414.1 mm2, and the left main coronary artery (LMA) ostium height of 11 mm and right coronary artery (RCA) of 14.1 mm . The dimensions of left-, right-, and non-coronary sinuses were 31.6, 30.7, and 30.7 mm, respectively . The average dimension and the height of the sinotubular junction were 27.6 and 16 mm . Measured on the plane of the right coronary ostium, the distance of the edge of the calcified nodule to right coronary ostium was 23 mm . The average internal diameters of the right femoral-, external iliac-, and common iliac arteries were 6.7, 6.5, and 7.3 mm, respectively. The patient was deemed at intermediate surgical risk with the Society of Thoracic Surgeons score of 5.13% and was recommended for surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR). However, the patients refused SAVR and were determined to undergo minimally invasive TAVR.
The procedure was performed in our hybrid operating room for TAVR as previously described . At the beginning of the TAVR procedure, bilateral coronary arteries were patent under intraoperative fluoroscopy . Balloon pre-dilatation was routinely performed to assess the supra-annular structure and evaluate the risk of coronary occlusion using a 23 mm × 40 mm Z-Med™ balloon based on the annulus perimeter derived diameter . Unexpectedly, the right coronary artery was invisible and the blood flow reduced in the LMA, immediately after balloon dilatation , indicating RCA completely occluded and LMA partially occluded by the native left coronary leaflet. The patient’s blood-oxygen saturation dropped sharply from 100 to 72%. Intraoperative transthoracic echocardiography revealed a transvalvular gradient of 20 mmHg following balloon deflation. Therefore, the multidisciplinary team decided to suspend the procedure. A careful and comprehensive reassessment of the patient’s anatomy was performed and the transapical TAVR with J-valve (JieCheng Medical Technology Co., Ltd., Suzhou, China) was planned for safety consideration.
Subsequently, transapical TAVR with J-valve was performed under general anesthesia 3 days later. A 23-mm J-Valve system was introduced and repeatedly adjusted to ensure the three graspers were properly placed in the left-, right-, and non-coronary sinuses and accurately surround the native leaflets. The prosthetic valve was gradually released after positioning at 1 cm below the aortic annulus under rapid ventricular pacing. The procedure was uneventful and the final fluoroscopy showed the proper position of the prosthetic valve and the patency of bilateral coronary arteries . The final echocardiography showed mild perivalvular leakage and the residual transvalvular gradient was 3 mmHg. The patient was discharged without obvious symptoms of heart failure and could carry out daily activities with ease after discharge. At 30 days follow-up, she had an NYHA class II functional status and echocardiography showed normal aortic valve function with a transvalvular mean gradient of 5 mmHg.