A 68-year-old Japanese woman complained of pain in the right upper arm, and a diagnosis of humerus fracture was made at a department of orthopedics in a local general hospital. Adenocarcinoma was detected by biopsy performed during surgery. Lung cancer was suspected on the basis of the findings of chest computed tomography (CT) showing a tumor in the left lower lobe of the lung, and the patient was referred to our hospital in April 2010. After further examinations, including transbronchial biopsy of the tumor in the left lower lobe, the patient was diagnosed as having advanced lung adenocarcinoma (T3N2M1b) with mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene (exon 21, L858R). Brain CT revealed scattered, small calcifications in both hemispheres , but no neurological abnormality was seen. The patient was treated with gefitinib, and a partial response was obtained 14 days after the initiation of treatment. However, the primary lesion showed regrowth at 263 days after the initiation of treatment, and the patient complained of nausea, headache, and difficulty walking and was readmitted to our hospital. Unsteadiness of gait was observed. Hematological and biochemical examinations did not detect any abnormal findings. Chest CT showed the primary lesion in the left lower lobe, which had not enlarged much since the first examination . In brain CT without intravenous contrast, the calcified lesion was shown to have slightly increased in size, and enlarged lateral ventricles were seen . T1-weighted gadolinium contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple enhanced tiny nodules .
On the basis of these findings, multiple brain metastases or leptomeningeal carcinomatosis was suspected, and lumbar puncture was performed. Atypical cells were detected, and we diagnosed leptomeningeal carcinomatosis of lung cancer. However, the patient’s general status worsened, and she died 356 days after the first medical examination at our hospital. Upon autopsy, a nodular lesion 2cm in diameter was detected in the lower lobe of the left lung. Adenocarcinoma of combined acinar and bronchioalveolar type was microscopically diagnosed, which was accompanied by microcalcification. The brain was swollen and edematous. The meninges were cloudy. On the cut surface, the third and fourth ventricles were dilated. Nodular lesions smaller than 6mm in diameter were detected in the brain parenchyma, including the cerebral cortex and basal ganglia. On microscopic examination, minute metastatic foci of adenocarcinoma that were extensively spread showed close cell morphologies with lung carcinoma. Microscopically, carcinoma cells were extensively disseminated, without formation of mass lesions, on the meninges from the cerebral cortex to the brain stem.
In accordance with the distribution of these lesions, the carcinoma cells frequently invaded into the Virchow–Robin spaces in the superficial brain parenchyma. In a certain region, the carcinoma cells on meninges had spread, in a continuum, into a superficial part of the brain parenchyma via Virchow–Robin spaces. In addition, nodular metastatic foci were detected in the brain parenchyma, including cerebral cortex, thalamus, and cerebellar hemisphere, in accordance with the macroscopic findings. These nodular lesions were accompanied by microcalcification, and the tumor cells were often seen to be arranged in perivascular space within these lesions . Tiny foci of metastasis were detected in the pineal body and in the choroid plexus of the third and fourth ventricles as well. Mass effects of the metastatic lesions were insignificant, and edematous change was not apparent at the metastatic foci. However, brain parenchyma was edematous in general, with wide perivascular spaces, which was probably due to the disturbed flow of cerebrospinal fluid after disseminated metastasis. We diagnosed miliary brain metastasis of lung cancer based on these findings of imaging and histopathological examination.