In November 2005, a 34-year-old Algerian woman was admitted to the infectious disease department for a suspected prosthetic mitral valve IE. She had a medical history of acute rheumatic fever when she was 10 years old. She had a mitral valve replacement with a prosthetic mechanic valve eight years ago. She was hospitalized at the end of a recent pregnancy because she needed intravenous heparin therapy in relay of oral anticoagulant for prevention of thrombosis of the mechanical valve prosthesis. Three days after delivery, she presented with a fever and peripheral catheter-related infection. The catheter was in place for six days; it was inserted at the admission of the patient to the high-risk pregnancy unit. The site of the catheter insertion appeared inflammatory and indurate. All three blood cultures (automated blood culture BACTEC 9240 system, Becton Dickinson, Le pont de Claix, France) grew on day 2 with S. maltophilia. Transoephageal echocardiography (TE) performed one day after the appearance of fever showed two small vegetations on the mitral mechanic valve without dehiscence. Based on the criteria established by Duke, the diagnosis of prosthetic mitral valve IE caused by S. maltophilia was confirmed. She was first treated empirically with vancomycin and gentamicin for 24 h. Antibiotics were then modified when we discovered Gram-negative bacillus growing in the blood cultures: imipenem and gentamicin were administered. She was treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (SXT, trimethoprim (TMP) 4800 mg/day and sulfamethoxazole (SMZ) 960 mg/day) and gentamicin 3 mg/kg/day intravenously in accordance with antimicrobial susceptibility. In fact, effective treatment was started two days after the onset of disease and she had no fever on day 2 of this treatment. No cardiac complications occurred. Gentamicin was discontinued after seven days. SXT was then given per os (TMP 4800 mg/day and SMZ 960 mg/day). On day 8, a TE showed no vegetation. Antibiotics were continued for a total duration of six weeks. She remained well and showed no signs of fever and had a normal TE at her three-month follow-up visit.