A 37-year-old Southeast Asian woman presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a 5-day history of abdominal pain, fever, and vomiting. Her past medical history was unremarkable apart from a laparoscopic cholecystectomy 10 months earlier. Upon presentation, the patient had high-grade fever, tachycardia, and hypotension suggestive of worsening sepsis, which eventually progressed rapidly to septic shock requiring high doses of noradrenaline and vasopressin. She was intubated, mechanically ventilated, and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) accordingly. Upon ICU admission, an abdominal computed tomographic (CT) scan with contrast revealed hypodense lesions occupying the right and left liver lobes with calcification foci suspicious of abscesses as well as mild intra-abdominal free fluid collection. Initial investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 10.4 g/dl and a white blood cell count of 18.9 × 109/L with 89% neutrophils. Her platelet count was normal. Her blood urea nitrogen was raised at 12.1 mmol/L (normal range 2.5–6.4 mmol/L), but her serum creatinine was within normal limits at 115 IU/L (normal range 71–115 IU/L). Her renal function was completely normalized following administration of intravenous fluids a few hours after ICU admission. The findings of blood film obtained for malarial parasites were negative. Notwithstanding this, liver function tests were remarkable with a total bilirubin of 25.3 μmol/L (direct 13.6 μmol/L, indirect 11.7 μmol/L), albumin 19.5 g/L, globulin 44.9 g/L, alkaline phosphatase 416 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 549 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase 765 IU/L, prothrombin time 16.5 with international normalized ratio 1.41, activated partial thromboplastin time 39.9 seconds, and glucose 5.5 mmol/L. The patient’s physical examination and chest x-ray were unremarkable. CT-guided percutaneous drainage of the liver abscesses with supplementary cultures was performed while blood cultures were derived accordingly. The analysis of the fluid drained from the liver abscess showed a high white blood cell count (11.8 × 103/μl) with polymorphic predominance (77%) and high bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase levels. Moreover, a gram-stained smear of the pus aspirated from the liver abscess showed few gram-negative bacilli and necrotic debris. All blood cultures as well as stool samples that were collected for 3 consecutive days grew E. tarda . Specifically, blood cultures were obtained under sterile conditions and were processed using BacT/ALERT 3D (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France). Strains of E. tarda were identified using the MicroScan WalkAway 96si system (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). We evaluated the drug susceptibility of the pathogen based on clinical breakpoints set by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute using E-test (bioMérieux) .
Notably, the results of all other infectious and systemic disease workup were negative. Upon ICU admission, piperacillin-tazobactam was initiated empirically (at a dose of 4.5 g intravenously every 6 hours) because the results of the aforementioned cultures were not available at that time. Forty-eight hours later, due to lack of clinical improvement and worsening shock despite fluid resuscitation, antibiotics were empirically once more upgraded to meropenem (1 g every 8 hours by intravenous infusion over 3 hours) and linezolid (600 mg intravenously every 12 hours). As mentioned in the paragraphs above, all cultures grew E. tarda. The antibiogram (available when the patient had already received the upgraded antibiotics for 48 hours) showed, interestingly, that the pathogen was resistant to piperacillin-tazobactam and carbapenems while being sensitive to gentamicin and ciprofloxacin. Hence, the antibiotic regimen was updated to ciprofloxacin (400 mg intravenously every 12 hours for 14 days) and gentamicin (400 mg intravenously once daily for 14 days) on the basis of the pertinent antibiogram. The clinical status of the patient gradually improved, and she was successfully weaned off vasopressors and the mechanical ventilator. She was discharged from the ICU 14 days after admission. Thereafter, she was transferred to the gastroenterology ward, where follow-up endoscopic studies revealed mild nonspecific enteritis that eventually resolved completely, and she was discharged from the hospital free of symptoms and in good health.