A 47-year-old man with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department in November 2018 with a medical referral for perforated microbial keratitis after undergoing tectonic penetrating keratoplasty (TKPK) at another institution. At presentation, his visual acuity was light perception with poor projection. Corneal scraping was performed for microbial culture and sensitivity, and topical moxifloxacin Q1H was initiated.
One day after admission, ophthalmic examination indicated corneal melting with profuse leakage. Corneal gluing was attempted but failed. Therefore, the patient underwent a tectonic penetrating keratoplasty (TPKP). After keratoplasty, the patient was prescribed topical medication (moxifloxacin QID) and prednisolone acetate 1% QID and systemic oral prophylactic valacyclovir for presumed herpetic infection based on history. Due to the persistent epithelial defect, an amniotic membrane overlay was performed. The membrane was 15 × 15 mm in size, placed with the stromal side down and sutured to the episclera with 9.0 Vicryl sutures using a purse-string technique. A 22-mm bandage contact lens was placed at the end of surgery, and a temporary temporal tarsorrhaphy was performed. The patient was discharged on the same medication regimen in addition to oral doxycycline tablets. The first corneal scraping culture indicated Streptococcus mitis and Streptococcus oralis. Culture and sensitivity for both the donor corneal rim and AMT remnants were negative.
Forty days following TPKP and 30 days following AMT, the patient continued to use topical moxifloxacin. After releasing the tarsorrhaphy and removing the contact lens, we noted that the AMT was partially absorbed, with a large whitish granular corneal membrane that stained with fluorescein and resembled corneal microbial infection . The granular appearance and consistency of the amniotic membrane raised suspicion of inflammatory infiltrate versus a secondary intra-amniotic infection. However, the cornea surrounding the granular membrane revealed minimal haze, absence of edema, or infiltration. Due to the negative culture of the amniotic membrane remnant, we decided to maintain the membrane and start topical gentamicin, while retaining prednisolone acetate 1% twice a day, and frequent lubrication. After two days, the granular membrane started to partially dislodge from the corneal surface, and a specimen was sent for culture, sensitivity testing and histopathological identification. Re-epithelialization was poor, and there were signs of persistent epithelial defects.
Histopathology indicated that a small piece of amniotic membrane stroma had been infiltrated with mixed types of acute and chronic inflammatory cells . Gram staining indicated infiltration of mixed-type inflammatory cells and gram-positive cocci. Acid-fast bacilli and GMS strains were negative for other organisms. These findings indicated subacute inflammation with gram-positive cocci. Corneal scraping cultures indicated Streptococcus mitis and Streptococcus oralis. The antibiotic regimen was thus maintained. However, the patient developed a persistent epithelial defect with severe thinning that was unresponsive to topical management. Hence, we elected to perform a conjunctival flap because of the poor visual potential.