A 47-year-old man with no history of smoking underwent right single LTX. He was engaged in an ITO manufacturing process from the age of 18 to 26. He underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) for right apical pneumothorax in X-21(year), since then he was transferred to non-indium desk work. One of his colleagues died of severe interstitial pneumonia in X-20. Following this incident, a cross-sectional study was conducted for all the employees involved in the ITO processing. Although VC was maintained (VC of 4.89 L), FEV1 was decreased (FEV1 of 2.40 L). Serum indium concentration and Krebs von den lungen 6 (KL-6) were significantly elevated (serum indium: 99 ng/mL, normal value 0.06 ± 0.03 ng/mL; KL-6: 1,190 U/mL, normal value < 500 U/mL). High-resolution computerized tomography (HRCT) showed reticulo-nodular shadow, ground glass opacity (GGO), and mild to moderate low attenuation areas on HRCT, which suggest emphysema. Lung disease due to ITO was suspected based on the features described above. He underwent the second VATS for left pneumothorax in X-17. Although serum indium and KL-6 levels declined slowly , obstructive pulmonary dysfunction progressed through the years . After the informed consent, he was listed for LTX at Tohoku University Hospital in X-2, and underwent right single LTX in X. The LTX was uneventful. His respiratory function one year before the LTX was FVC of 4.17 L (89% of predicted), FEV1 of 0.62 L (15% of predicted) and an FEV1-to-FVC ratio of 19%. Chest radiograph and HRCT showed multiple cystic changes, severe emphysema, and reticular-nodular shadow . After the LTX, His lung function improved significantly to VC of 2.98 L (65% of predicted) and FEV1 of 2.17 L (55% predicted), and oxygen therapy was discontinued. Anti-granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) autoantibody was negative, and α1 antitrypsin was at a normal level throughout the entire course of the disease.
The pathological finding of the specimen obtained by VATS for the right pneumothorax has been reported previously . It showed bullae and distal acinar emphysema. Cholesterol granulomas are observed in the peripheral lung. The surface of the cholesterol clefts was immune-positive for surfactant protein-A (SP-A), but little surfactants resided in alveoli. Mild infiltration of lymphocytes and brownish particles were observed in the stroma of bronchioles, but no fibrosis or obstructions were detected.
The specimen obtained by the second VATS for the left pneumothorax showed more severe air space enlargement than that in the first VATS specimen. The density of cholesterol cleft in cholesterol granulomas and the number of alveolar macrophages containing particles increased. Focal fibrosis with the destruction of elastic fiber framework were newly appeared.
In the right lung obtained by LTX, macroscopically, prominent cystic enlargement of the airspace was observed under the pleura from the apex to the base of the lung, especially in the upper lobe. White, fibrotic changes were occasionally intermingled with the cystic airspace enlargement . Microscopically, severe distal acinar emphysema was predominantly observed in the lung . Residual stroma showed various degrees of fibrosis and/or elastosis. Fibroblastic foci were observed occasionally . Some fibrotic areas showed severe perilobular fibrosis and honeycomb changes similar to usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern . In this area, smooth muscle hyperplasia and hypertrophy were prominent . Mild to moderate inflammation was observed in alveolar septa and respiratory to terminal bronchioles . Numerous cholesterol granulomas were detected in the air space . Some of the cholesterol granulomas had fibrosis surrounding them. . The surface of cholesterol clefts was immune-positive for SP-A , as well as in those of VATs specimens. Black to brown particles was deposited in the stroma and alveolar macrophages and giant cells engulfed them in the alveoli and stroma . Some particles contained micro-sized, clear, crystal-like materials . Few particles were observed in the residual area with few pathological findings. A very small amount of surfactant, which was positive for periodic acid Schiff (PAS) stain and immune-positive for SP-A , was detected in entrapped air space in the fibrotic area. Particles were also deposited in the hilar lymph nodes.
In summary, the histological findings of this case showed a mixture of distal acinar emphysema, severe perilobular fibrosis showing honeycomb changes. Deposition of particles and numerous cholesterol granulomas supported the diagnosis of indium lung.
Analysis using scanning electron microscopy with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM–EDX, SU3500, Hitachi High-Technologies GLOBAL, Japan) at the Center of Advanced Instrumental Analysis, Kyushu-University revealed that the deposited particles contained indium and tin . This result supported ITO deposition in the lung and was compatible with the history of ITO exposure and the deposition remains for decades.