More than 2 years ago, a 56-year-old woman had a skin rash on the face , eyelids, neck, chest and fingers of both hands and Raynaud's phenomenon in both hands, accompanied by finger ulcers , limb weakness, myalgia, dysphagia, joint pain, cough, airway constriction, intermittent fever, and palpable nodules on the chest wall, hip and left thigh. Her 6-min walk test result was 321 m. The CK, ALT and AST levels were normal; she was anti-MDA5 IgG positive; the Ro52 level was 280.26 RU/mL; the ANA titre was 1:1000; and the pattern was of the nuclear granular type. Chest computed tomography showed chronic inflammation of the lungs with multiple interstitial changes and multiple subcutaneous calcifications . Pulmonary function indicated decreased DLco (22%). Electromyography showed that the time limit and amplitude of light muscle contraction were normal and that the polyphase potential was increased. The diagnosis met the 2017 EULAR/ACR classification standard . Prednisone acetate combined with matimecophenol ester or cyclosporine and cyclophosphamide produced poor therapeutic effects. The patient had her skin rash, ulcers and dyspnoea relieved after approximately one month of treatment with prednisone (15 mg qd) and tofacitinib (5 mg qd). However, chills and fever with a maximum temperature of 40 °C occurred on February 25, 2021, and the patient had epigastric pain and tenderness, with a positive Murphy test. Abdominal colour Doppler ultrasound indicated cholecystitis. CT of the upper abdomen showed that the gallbladder was slightly enlarged, and the internal density was not uniform; the gallbladder wall was suspected to have uneven thickening and local nodular changes, and the border of the gallbladder was blurred. After treatment with prednisone (15 mg qd) and piperacillin tazobactam for 3 days, the patient still had fever, abdominal pain and a leukocyte count of 16.6 × 109/L. The treatment regimen was adjusted to imipenem/cilastatin to eliminate any infection for 7 days, until the patient had no fever. Cholecystectomy was performed on March 12, 2021, and a frozen section of the bottom of the gallbladder was sent for examination. A few tissues had acute and chronic suppurative inflammation with necrosis. Postoperative examination indicated acute gangrenous cholecystitis of the gallbladder. The patient resumed prednisone (15 mg qd) and tofacitinib (5 mg qd) treatment starting on March 30, 2021. Five months later, the rash on both hands and the face had subsided , the ulcers on both hands had completely healed , and the range of HRCT interstitial changes in the lungs was significantly decreased. Her 6-min walk test result was 506 m, and her DLco improved from severely impaired to mildly impaired. Subcutaneous calcification was reduced.