A 35-year-old male presented to the STI clinic at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, for evaluation of urogenital discharge and generalized lymphadenopathy involving the cervical, axillary and inguinal groups of lymph nodes. He had undergone surgical excision of ano-genital warts (AGWs) previously. He was bisexual, with multiple homosexual and heterosexual casual partners, with a history of unprotected receptive and insertive oral and anal sex. There was no history of past blood transfusion or intravenous drug abuse. He reported never being tested for HIV nor any other STIs. His medical history did not reveal any significant systemic abnormalities. On examination, he had scanty mucoid urethral discharge and multiple AGWs, with no lesions nor inflammation in the oropharynx and rectum. A Gram-stained smear of the urethral discharge under an oil-immersion objective of a microscope revealed 4–5 white blood cells, but no Gram-negative intracellular diplococci were seen. Microscopic examination of the urethral discharge was negative for any motile trophozoites, yeast cells and pseudohyphae. The patient was diagnosed clinically as a case of recurrent HPV infection with urethritis.
On investigation, his venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test was reactive (titre of 1 : 16) and his T. pallidum haemagglutination assay (TPHA) was positive. The patient was tested for HIV as per National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) guidelines strategy 2B, in which three rapid tests were done for confirmation of diagnosis. CD4+ counts were estimated on a FACS Count microbead-based system, as recommended by the National Guidelines on the Enumeration of CD4 Lymphocytes . The patient was HIV-1 positive, with a CD4+ lymphocyte count of 123 cells µl−1. He was seronegative for both hepatitis B surface antigen and anti-hepatitis C antibodies. Clinician collected urethral, rectal and oropharyngeal swabs were sent for detection of N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis and genital mycoplasmas. Culture of the discharge for N. gonorrhoeae was negative on gonococcal agar with vancomycin, colistin, nystatin and trimethoprim sulfate, and so was the PCR assay for C. trachomatis targeting cryptic plasmid at genital, rectal and oropharyngeal sites. PCRs for Mycoplasma hominis and Mycoplasma genitalium were negative. Culture for Ureaplasma spp. was carried out in pleuro-pneumonia-like organism (PPLO) broth containing urea (a) and PCR was based on amplification of the urease gene (b) . The isolate of Ureaplasma was further biotyped in a second PCR targeting the multiple banded antigen (MBA) gene. Species identification is based on an amplicon size of 408 bp for U. parvum (biovar 1) and an amplicon size of 448 bp for U. urealyticum (biovar 2) . Ureaplasma was positive by culture and PCR in samples taken from the urethra and oropharynx, but negative in the rectal sample.
Histopathology of the warty lesion confirmed the diagnosis of AGWs. The patient was diagnosed to have oropharyngeal and urethral U. urealyticum infection, co-infected with HIV, T. pallidum and HPV. Contact tracing was attempted, but the patient refused to share any information about his partners.
The patient was treated with doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily for 7 days, and a weekly dose of 2.4 million IU benzathine penicillin for 3 weeks, for Ureaplasma infection and syphilis, respectively, as per Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines for STI, 2015 . Azithromycin and doxycycline have been recommended for non-gonococcal urethritis; however, considering the better response to doxycycline for extragenital Chlamydia, this was given. Penicillin remains the drug of choice for syphilis, with no resistance reported to date. The AGWs were treated with 10–20 % podophyllin resin, applied once a week for 8 weeks, and the patient was referred to an anti-retroviral therapy (ART) centre for management of the HIV infection. On evaluation at 6 weeks, he reported a cessation of the urethral discharge with healing of the warty lesions. A post-treatment, oropharyngeal swab and first-void urine sample of the patient were negative for Ureaplasma spp. both by culture and PCR. The patient was counselled for safe sex practices and advised to have regular follow-ups.