A 22-year-old African gentleman presented with left nasal obstruction and epistaxis for 2 years. Examination revealed a nasopharyngeal mass which upon biopsy revealed an undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma stage III. He had radiotherapy but in view of persistent symptoms and poor response to radiotherapy, endoscopic tumour excision was planned. Prior to that, he underwent embolotherapy of the maxillary branch of the left ECA under sedation and local anaesthesia. The indication for embolization was intractable epistaxis and to reduce intraoperative bleeding during tumour excision. Intermittent Embozene® Microspheres 250 μm injection under fluoroscopy guidance was done before deployment of a 2 mm × 5 mm coil. He was not given heparin or anticoagulant during or after the procedure.
Approximately 2 h after the procedure, the patient complained of sudden painless profound visual loss in the left eye (LE). Visual acuity in the LE was no light perception with a dense afferent pupillary defect. Funduscopy examination showed a pale retina without cherry red spot; and generalized arterial attenuation . The other eye was completely normal. He did not have neurological deficit.
A diagnosis of left central retinal artery occlusion was made but the absence of a cherry red spot further suggests the absence of choroidal circulation indicating a possible occlusion of the ophthalmic artery as well. Ocular massage and immediate lowering of intraocular pressure with intravenous acetazolamide 500 mg stat and topical antiglaucomas failed to restore the retinal circulation, with visual acuity remaining no light perception after 24 h. We did not do AC paracentesis as the patient was drowsy from the sedation. MRI of the brain and orbit showed high signal intensity foci on diffusion weighted image (DWI) involving the left caudate nucleus and basal ganglia , suggestive of small infarctions. The patent however did not show any clinically apparent neuro-deficits from these infarcts. Cerebral angiogram revealed collaterals between branches of the ECA and lacrimal artery (a branch of the internal carotid artery (ICA) . The patient however declined fundus fluoresecence angiography and other ocular investigations. His vision remained no light perception on the last follow-up three months later.