A 26-year-old right-hand dominant Caucasian male without significant medical history landed on his outstretched left hand when crashing his all-terrain vehicle, resulting in immediate pain and swelling. An outside urgent care center found no fractures or dislocations on plain radiographs and subsequently splinted the left wrist due to pain. He presented to an orthopedic hand surgery outpatient office 4 weeks after the injury with persistent pain and decreased range of motion. No obvious deformity was noted, but the patient was tender to palpation over the dorsal carpus as well as the carpal tunnel. The patient was neurovascularly intact at the time of presentation. New plain radiographs were obtained, demonstrating an isolated dorsal hamate dislocation in the absence of any fracture, as noted in Figs. and . Given the chronicity of the injury, closed reduction was not attempted due to the high likelihood of failure. The patient underwent an open reduction with internal fixation of the isolated hamate dislocation.
A standard longitudinal dorsal approach to the wrist was performed. The diastasis between the capitate and triquetrum was easily visualized. The hamate, which had dislocated dorsal and ulnar, was found dorsal to the triquetrum in a bed of fibrinous debris. The interposed blocking fibrinous debris from the resultant void between the capitate and triquetrum was removed and the hamate bone carefully dissected and reduced to its anatomic position. Two Kirschner wires were used for provisional fixation. Under direct visualization, it could be seen that the ring and small finger carpometacarpal ligaments had avulsed off the carpus, creating dynamic carpometacarpal instability. The metacarpals were subsequently reduced and held in place using Kirschner wires to the distal hamate. This was verified both visually and on intraoperative fluoroscopy.
Definitive fixation was achieved by utilizing multiple suture tape bridges and fixation with bone anchors to reinforce the failed dorsal carpal and carpometacarpal ligaments in an internal bracing method. This is an augmentation method that uses high-strength non-absorbable suture tape to overlay the ruptured ligaments and provide support during ligamentous healing and scar formation. The first bone anchor (3.5-mm DX SwiveLock SL; Arthrex, Naples, FL) was placed in the hamate. This was attached to a suture tape (FiberTape; Arthrex, Naples, FL) that was subsequently anchored into the capitate with one limb and a second limb anchored to the triquetrum, as shown in . This completed the internal bracing of the hamate to the capitate and lunate. Another anchor was then placed distally on the hamate, in conjunction with two more suture tape and anchor constructs into the ring finger and small finger, respectively. This stabilized the failed carpometacarpal ligaments and maintained reduction of the carpometacarpal joints. is an intraoperative photograph demonstrating the final, stable construct. Figs. and show the final intraoperative fluoroscopy images after removal of the provisional fixation. The patient was placed in a post-operative splint and was kept with the wrist immobilized and fingers free for 6 weeks, followed by aggressive hand therapy to treat any subsequent stiffness and weakness. The rehabilitation protocol followed in this case consisted of 6 weeks of immobilization followed by 3 weeks of range of motion stretching. This was followed by light strengthening with progression to full release of all activities at 3 months post-operatively.
<H1>Results
The patient was followed at various time intervals up to 14 months post-operatively. On his final return to clinic, range of motion ( and ) was painless and nearly equal to contralateral wrist with 52° of flexion, 67° of extension, 15° of radial deviation, 26° of ulnar deviation, 83° of supination and pronation, and the ability to make a strong composite fist. Grip strength was 62.5 kg on the right and 47.6 kg on the affected left side. Key pinch was 12.7kg on the right and 11.7 kg on the left. Tip pinch was 8.1 kg on the right and 7.2 kg on the left. This disparity in strength is within normal limits for variance between hands when taking handedness into account. The quick DASH score was 4.5% and DASH score was 5/100. The Michigan Hand score was 65.2. The patient returned to work as a truck driver with no limitations. Figs. and are final outpatient post-operative radiographs demonstrating a well-positioned and well-vascularized hamate with no change in alignment and no collapse compared to prior films.