A 42-year-old previously healthy man was admitted to the emergency department with sudden-onset right upper limb swelling, pain, and weakness associated with dysphagia, reduced urine output, red-colored urine, and melena. He had consumed three pints of alcohol 3 days prior to this presentation but had no history of travel, trauma, or illicit drug abuse. He had acidotic breathing on examination.
A full blood count showed severe anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutrophil leukocytosis. The inflammatory markers, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein levels were well above the normal range, which was suggestive of an inflammatory process. The full urine report confirmed myoglobulinuria. Creatine kinase levels exceded 50,000 U/L, and serum myoglobin levels were more than 60,000 ng/mL, which was suggestive of rhabdomyolysis. Clinical and biochemical parameters confirmed acute kidney injury (AKI). Aspartate transaminase levels (4,795 U/L, normal range 8–48 U/L) exceeded alanine transaminase (ALT) levels, and were 100 times the normal level, which explained the leakage from muscle damage. ALT levels were also 40 times the normal level (2,268 U/l, normal range 7–55 U/L), with associated high activated partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin time indicating simultaneous liver injury. D-dimer levels were within normal limits and disseminated intravascular coagulation was excluded. Arterial and venous Doppler scans of the upper limbs excluded thrombosis as the cause of severe edema and revealed marked subcutaneous and soft tissue edema. Initial diagnosis suggested an acute metabolic, toxic, or infective insult causing myositis and rhabdomyolysis leading to AKI.
Toxicology screening of the blood was negative for cocaine, morphine, cannabinoids, amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and tricyclic antidepressants. The blood alcohol estimation was negative and no electrolyte imbalance was detected. Screenings for the antibodies of infective illnesses with similar clinical presentations, such as leptospirosis, dengue, and hepatitis, were negative. Based on the clinical suspicion of an unnoticed snake bite, the patient was treated with poly anti-snake venom, which is active against the bites of cobra, common krait, Sri Lankan krait, and saw-scaled viper. However, no clinical improvement occurred. Septic screening was repeatedly negative despite an ongoing low-grade fever. In the absence of another etiology, the above findings were supportive of an autoimmune origin for the presentation. Electromyography confirmed generalized polymyositis with predominant lower limb involvement. However, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-Jo antibody, and extractable nuclear antigen profiles were negative. Muscle biopsy and histology revealed myositis with probable immune pathogenicity.
The patient was started on a daily dose of 0.75 mg/kg (45 mg) oral prednisolone with 2 mg/kg (120 mg) azathioprine, and regular renal replacement therapy was carried out together with medical management to support his renal functions. This was followed by a rapid clinical response with significant improvement of muscle weakness. However, he continued to have intermittent diarrhea with blood and mucous that was initially considered part of his acute illness, but later raised the suspicion of an infective or inflammatory etiology. Based on his prolonged stay at the intensive care unit and treatment with broad spectrum antibiotics, a healthcare-associated infection or pseudomembranous colitis was suspected. However, infective screening and Clostridium difficile toxins were negative. Ileocolonoscopy revealed extensive ileocolonic aphthous ulceration , and the histology of the ileum and colon was suggestive of Crohn’s ileocolitis based on the European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation guidelines. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed mild antral gastritis, and no radiological contract studies were performed because of the presence of AKI. Amoebiasis and intestinal tuberculosis were excluded by parasitic and microbiological evaluation of mucosal samples. No other extraintestinal manifestations were found, with the exception of sensory motor axonal peripheral neuropathy, which was confirmed by nerve conduction studies. Serological studies evaluating perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic and anti-saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies were negative.
Once the diagnosis of inflammatory polymyositis and CD was established, prednisolone and azathioprine doses were increased to 1 mg/kg (60 mg) daily and 2.5 mg/kg (150 mg), respectively, as the bowel symptoms of the patient continued while on therapy for myositis. Mesacol® (mesalamine), 400 mg daily, and the probiotic Florastor, 250 mg twice daily, were added to the treatment regimen at the same time. Metronidazole was not added in the presence of neuropathy and in the absence of septic complications. The patient achieved clinical remission in both conditions, which was evidenced by the settling of diarrhea and fever, improvement of muscle strength, and significant weight gain by the third week of treatment. Corticosteroid treatment was reduced by 10 mg twice weekly once the endoscopic remission of CD was confirmed. Mesalamine (mesalazine) and Florastor were discontinued and the patient was kept on an azathioprine maintenance dose of 150 mg daily one month after starting treatment. Special attention was given to the patient’s nutrition as his muscles were affected by both the disease process and poor nutrition. A gradual improvement of renal function was followed by an improvement of myositis, which was attributed to the recovery of acute tubular necrosis, secondary to heavy myoglobinuria.