A 25-year-old female was referred to our center with the chief complaint of severe abdominal pain and diarrhea for 2 years that had worsened from 2 months prior to admission. She had significant weight loss during this period; weighing 36.5 kg with a height of 160 cm, her body mass index (BMI) was 14.3 kg/m2 at the time of admission. Her past medical and surgical history was only significant for one undocumented episode of seizure at the age of three and appendectomy 3 years before. On interview, she denied fear of weight gain, laxative abuse, and self-induced vomiting. Her parents were consanguineous. There was no history of sibling loss or any similar symptoms in other family members.
Clinical examination revealed a cachectic lady with external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, right lower quadrant scar of the McBurney (oblique) incision for appendectomy, decreased muscle power in the upper (4/5 MRC muscle scale) and lower (3/5 MRC muscle scale) extremities, and absent deep tendon reflexes. Abdominopelvic sonography revealed mild free fluid in the abdominal cavity and increased thickness in the bowel wall (4.8 mm) and a 16 × 11-mm cortical cyst in the upper pole of the left kidney with thin septation. A diagnostic esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy showed diffuse severe erythema and congestion in the body, fundus, and antrum of the stomach with moderate chronic gastritis in pathologic examination and deformity of the duodenal bulb with decreased folds in D2 part of the duodenum. On colonoscopy, the ileocecal valve was stenotic; biopsy revealed submucosal fibrosis with lymphoid proliferation and focal ulceration. Echocardiography was normal except for mild pericardial effusion.
Her complete blood count indicated the presence of microcytic hypochromic anemia. Biochemistry revealed low total protein level (4.1 g/dl; reference range: 6.6–8.8 g/dl) and albumin (2.2 g/dl; reference range: 3.5–5.2 g/dl). Serum lactate level (35.3 mg/dl; reference range: 4.5–19.8 mg/dl) was elevated. Fecal occult blood test was positive with moderately elevated fecal calprotectin level (58.5 μg/g; reference range: < 15 μg/g) suggestive for the inflammatory process. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed marked elevation of protein level (122 mg/dl; reference range: 15–45 mg/dl). Serology tests for HIV, HBV, and HCV were negative. Serum anti-tissue trans-glutaminase antibodies, anti-phospholipid antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, lupus anti-coagulants, β2 microglobulin, anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA), C-ANCA, and P-ANCA were also within the normal limits. Serum levels of complement factors were also found to be altered: C3 level (65 mg/dl; reference range: 90–180 mg/dl) was decreased; C4 level (11.4 mg/dl; reference range: 10–40 mg/dl) was within the lower limit of the normal range. Blood TP activity was not measured for lack of laboratory resources.
The electrodiagnostic evaluation showed a neurogenic pattern on needle electromyography (EMG), conduction block in sensory nerves, and decreased compound muscle action potential (CMAP) in motor nerves with decreased conduction velocity and prolonged F-wave latency. Brain MRI with contrast showed leukoencephalopathy with diffusely increased T2 signal intensity in both cerebral hemispheres white matter. Hypersignal intensity in splenium of corpus callosum was also observed .
After obtaining informed consent, a blood sample was obtained from the patient. The whole blood sample was collected in EDTA tube. Genomic DNA was then extracted from peripheral leukocytes using the QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany).
Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was performed on Illumina NextSeq500 instrument to a sequence close to 100 million reads. WES result was then analyzed using different bioinformatics tools and databases such as BWA aligner, GATK and ANNOVAR [–]. WES uncovered a novel, private, homozygous stopgain mutation in TYMP gene (NM_001113756: exon7: c. 1013C > A: p.S338X, Chr: 50526392).
Subsequently in order to confirm this novel mutation using Sanger sequencing, the region of interest was amplified using PCR on the DNA of the proband using following primers: F–TYMP-E7: 5′-ACTTAAGGGACCTGGTCACCAC-3′ and R–TYMP-E7: 5′-AGCCTCTGACCCACGTCGA-3′ (PCR product: 594 bp). Then, the amplicon was sequenced with both forward and reverse primers using ABI BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems®, USA). Sanger sequencing result was analyzed by NCBI BLAST and CodonCode Aligner . Sanger sequencing confirmed this mutation as homozygous in the proband .
This mutation has not been reported yet in main variant databases and our public database (Bayangene). The mutation occurred in domains described as Glycos_transf_3 in Pfam database or Nucleoside phosphorylase/phosphoribosyltransferase catalytic domain in Gene3D database which affects this domain and other domains such as PYNP_C, Pyrimidine nucleoside phosphorylase C-terminal domain, TIGR02644, THYMIDINE PHOSPHORYLASE and TP_PyNP which are described by a different database.
To reveal the conservation of amino acid sequence of TYMP protein across various species, multiple sequence alignment analysis by BLAST available on ExPASy was also performed. Multiple sequence alignment showed high conservation of amino acids of this protein across different species, mainly in the mutated region and after this position. .