The patient, a 53-year-old male, was urgently admitted, due to confusion and abnormal behaviour for 10 h. Ten hours earlier, the patient was found sitting on the stairs by neighbours, exhibiting confusion and incoherent speech, but no limb movement impairment, vomiting, or convulsions. He was taken to the local hospital for a thorough examination, which included a head CT, CTA, and CTP, which revealed no significant abnormalities. With the exclusion of a history of cerebrovascular disease, suspicion arose regarding encephalitis, and symptomatic treatment, including anti-infection and fluid replacement to maintain internal homeostasis, was initiated. However, the patient did not improve, prompting family members to request that the patient be transferred to tertiary hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient's history revealed that he had a fever about two months ago, while working in Tanzania, and received three days of intravenous treatment. He returned to China after his fever had subsided. He developed intermittent fever and chills after one week, prompting a comprehensive examination in the local hospital, which confirmed the presence of malaria parasites (mixed infection of P. vivax and P. falciparum). He was admitted and started on regular medication (artemisinin-based combination therapy with artemether-lumefantrine and primaquine), which resulted in symptom relief. He was discharged because no malaria parasites were found in his blood. He took oral artemether-lumefantrine for three weeks, weekly blood smear revealed no evidence of malaria parasites, prompting him to discontinue anti-malarial medication.
When the patient was admitted, his body temperature was 38.1 °C, pulse was 90 times per minute, breathing rate was 19 times per minute, and blood pressure was 148/90 mmHg. He was disoriented with delayed reactions, bilaterally dilated pupils approximately 3 mm in diameter, responsive to light reflex, normal limb muscle tone. He was uncooperative with examination for bilateral anterior sensation, vibration sense, proprioception, and kinesthesia. Deep and superficial reflexes were normal, the Babinski sign was negative, and meningeal irritation sign was also negative. Blood malaria parasite testing was negative. White blood cell count was 11.03*10^9/L, the neutrophil percentage 81.7%, and the eosinophil percentage was 0.0%. Coagulation function, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, and procalcitonin levels were all normal. Lumbar puncture revealed an intracranial pressure of 150 mmH2O, and no significant abnormalities were found in cerebrospinal fluid examination (routine, biochemical, smear). Metagenomic next-generation sequencing of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed the DNA sequence of P. falciparum. The patient was diagnosed with cerebral malaria. Treatment included intravenous artemisinin 120 mg at 0, 12, and 24 h, followed by daily doses. The patient remains unconscious and incapable of communicating.
The results of brain MRI revealed no significant abnormalities . The video EEG monitoring indicated more than 30 min continuous rhythmic waves with frequency of approximately 4–5 Hz (theta rhythm) in each one hour recording . The patient was suspected to have NCSE. The patient received a slow intravenous bolus of 10 mg diazepam. His consciousness was improved, and he could answer some simple questions. On the EEG, the frequency of θ rhythm in the frontal lobe becomes faster while the amplitude decreased . The patient was treated with levetiracetam 500 mg bid. His condition had gradually improved after one week, with progressive recovery of consciousness. Repeat video EEG revealed no nonconvulsive seizures . Malaria parasite was not detected in blood metagenomic next-generation sequencing. The patient was discharged after 2 weeks with a full recovery.