A 24-year-old Asian Male patient was admitted to the clinical oncology ward of Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center—JPMC, (Karachi, Pakistan) on 23rd August 2021. The patient had a history of intractable vomiting, hematemesis, generalized weakness, weight loss, epigastric pain and melena that had lasted more than a month.
Upon physical examination, the patient seemed underweight and anaemic, a palpable mass in the epigastric region was noted with hepatosplenomegaly felt during abdominal palpation and profound jaundice.
Notably, the patient's medical history did not reveal any recognized risk factors or underlying health issues that would have contributed to the plasmablastic lymphoma's duodenal presentation. There was no prior history of HIV infection or any other impaired conditions.
The initial laboratory workup revealed severe anaemia with low haemoglobin and haematocrit and elevated bilirubin, GGT and ALP. The differential white blood cell and platelet counts, and renal function tests were normal. Serology results for HIV, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C and H. Pylori IgG were negative.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy identified irregular circumferential ulcerated growth in the first part of the duodenum (D1) extending up to the junction of the first and second parts of the duodenum (D2). A large clean-based ulcer with an overlying clot was also noted, consistent with Class II-B of the Forrest Classification for peptic ulcers. Biopsy of the ulcerated mass was taken during esophagogastroduodenoscopy for histopathology.
Computed tomography of the abdomen (triphasic) showed thickness at the 2nd part of the duodenum measuring 2.6 cm in width and 16 cm in length. Thickening infiltrating into the medial head of the pancreas resulting in obstruction and dilatation of the pancreatic and common bile duct was also significant. Ill-defined soft tissue density with necrosis at the pelvis and the upper lobe of the right kidney with enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes was noted, which was suggestive of aggressive primary neoplastic lesions.
The pathological analysis was congruent with haematolymphoid neoplasm with plasmacytoid features. Microscopic description of the specimen revealed sheets of atypical cells of medium to large size that exhibit plasmacytoid features with a high proliferation index (Ki-67 raised) and brisk mitotic activity. Tumour cells were positive for LCA, CD79a, Pax-5, Mum-1, and CD138 and negative for CD20, Pan T (CD3) and CD30. The diagnosis of PBL was made by the physicians at JPMC, Karachi. Supportive treatment was started, including 3 pint packed red blood cell (PRBC) blood transfusions to correct anaemia, injection of tranexamic acid 500 mg TDS, omeprazole (40 mg IV OD) and octreotide continuous IV infusion of 25 mcg/hr to control GI bleeding and ondansetron (8 mg IV BD) for vomiting. In addition, palliative radiotherapy (RTP) at the site of the lesion was planned.
The patient was lost to follow-up despite these efforts, which made it difficult to further assess the therapeutic response and long-term results.