A 47-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital for suspected endometrial pyometra. This patient, with a medical history of caesarean section 20 years ago, had a 7-day history of genital bleeding and 3-day history of a fever over 38 °C. The initial evaluation at our hospital revealed a body temperature of 38.2 ℃ and no other symptoms suggestive of sepsis, while physical examination revealed lower abdominal pain. The laboratory results were as follows: white blood cell count of 8,670/µL (neutrophils, 88.6%) and C-reactive protein level of 6.02 mg/dL. Transvaginal echocardiography showed an enlarged uterus with accumulation of fluid in the uterine cavity, suggesting pyometra. Drainage of the uterine cavity was performed and purulent fluid was collected, which were submitted for culture. Two sets of blood cultures were also submitted upon admission, and cefmetazole treatment (1 g every 8 h) was empirically started.
Gram-staining of the pus sample showed a polymicrobial pattern. The pus sample was cultured as previously described . Anaerobic conditions were established using an AnaeroPack System anaerobic jar (Mitsubishi Gas Chemical Co., Inc., Tokyo, Japan) equipped with an AnaeroPack (Mitsubishi Gas Chemical Co., Inc.). Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus, Peptostreptococcus anaerobius, Aerococcus murdochii, Peptoniphilus lacrimalis, E. clostridioformis (formerly known as Clostridium clostridioforme), and E. lenta, were identified in the pus sample.
Two anaerobic bottles of two sets of blood cultures were evaluated using the BACT/ALERT® VIRTUO® (bioMérieux, Inc., Marcy l’Étoile, France) blood culture detection system with BACT/ALERT® FA Plus and FN Plus bottles (bioMérieux, Inc.), which turned positive after 24 h 36 min and 37 h 54 min . The two anerobic bottles were subcultured, as well as the pus sample, as previously described. The isolates were identified by using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) as previously described . On the third day of incubation, tiny colonies of small gram-negative bacillus were observed on Brucella blood agar supplemented with hemin and vitamin K1 plates cultured under anaerobic conditions. D. micraerophilus was identified based on a score of 2.13 from one anaerobic bottle with an incubation period of 24 h 36 min. From the other anaerobic bottle with an incubation period of 37 h 54 min, E. clostridioformis and E. lenta were isolated and identified based on a high score ≥ 2.00. The subculture plates were incubated until day 5; however, no other species grew. Then, 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed to identify D. micraerophilus isolates, as previously described . This strain showed 100% (1440/1440 bp) similarity to D. micraerophilus DSM 19965 (accession number: AF473837). In addition, DNA was extracted from the pus sample using a MORA-EXTRACT DNA extraction kit (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). D. micraerophilus was detected in the pus sample by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using D. micraerophilus-specific primers, dial micra_72F (5’-GGACATGAAAAGCTTGCTTT-3’) and dial micra_222R (5’-AGCGATAGCTTCTTCGATA-3’), and PCR conditions (20 s annealing at 57 ℃ and 20 s extension at 72 ℃) as previously described .
The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of various antimicrobial agents were determined via the broth microdilution method using IA40 MIC-i with Dry Plates Eiken (Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) based on the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) standards . The MICs were recorded after 48 h of incubation under anaerobic conditions as previously described at 35 ℃ .
After diagnosing the patient with D. micraerophilus bacteremia, an intra-oral examination by a dentist revealed no sign of periodontal diseases or abscess. The infection resolved after drainage and empirical 7-day antimicrobial therapy with cefmetazole, followed by another 7-day oral amoxicillin-clavulanate treatment. The patient was discharged from the hospital on day 10. At the 1-week outpatient follow-up, the patient was well and without any complications.