A 48-year-old right-handed female with no history of trauma or neck manipulation presented with debilitating pain in her right arm and hand for 2 months. Cervical spine MRI suggested foraminal stenosis of the C6 nerve but not secondary to a herniated disk or osteophyte. Bony remodeling was noticed through thinning of the right transverse process . A computed tomography angiography (CTA) was then performed which showed a fusiform aneurysm within the right transverse foramen, 8 mm in maximum diameter and 22–23 mm in craniocaudal dimension .
Our endovascular colleagues felt that a pipeline device may be limited due to the tortuosity and irregular appearance of the VA proximal to the aneurysm. After discussions with the patient, she expressed interest in preserving her VA and agreed to a surgical option which included a distal bypass and aneurysm trapping.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was positioned in a Mayfield head holder with pins and head turned to the left for a far lateral position. Somatosensory evoked potentials and motor evoked potentials were used throughout. A curved incision was made behind the ear extending into the anterior neck crease. The skin flap was, then, reflected anteriorly in the subplatysmal plane. The sternocleidomastoid muscle was identified, and anteriorly, the ECA was dissected out and a piece of background was placed. At the right suboccipital area the splenius capitis, the semispinalis capitis and the longissimus capitis were reflected inferiorly. The superior oblique and inferior oblique muscles were identified and dissected off their attachment to the transverse process of C1. The lateral mass and transverse process of C1 was exposed further and the V3 segment of the VA was identified superior to the C1 arch. The C1 right VA canal was opened using a drill and a Kerrison rongeur. The VA was, further, exposed and circumferentially dissected with all muscular branches ligated off and hemostasis obtained.
A harvested 12 cm radial artery (RA) graft was anastomosed to the V3 segment in a side-to-end fashion using 8-0 prolene with single interrupted sutures . The graft was, then, tunneled under the sternocleidomastoid into the anterior triangle of the neck and anastomosed to the ECA in the same fashion [ and ]. All temporary clips were removed, and patency from the right ECA into the right VA was confirmed with Doppler and intraoperative indocyanine green angiography.
The patient was, then, positioned prone for the posterior cervical fusion. After exposure, the left C5, C6, and C7 lateral mass screws were placed using anatomical landmarks. On the right, the C5–6 and C6–7 facet joints were removed and the C6 transverse foramen was opened exposing the C6 nerve root and underlying aneurysm. The proximal end of the aneurysm was visualized and then clipped. Doppler confirmed no flow within the aneurysm. C5 and C7 lateral mass screws were, then, placed followed by bilateral rods. After irrigation, decortication, and placement of the bone graft, the wound was closed in multiple layers in a standard fashion. There were no operative complications.
At 12 months follow-up, the patient was doing well with no residual arm pain and resumed normal physical activity.