A 72-year-old Caucasian male, no relevant medical history or medication use, was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with respiratory failure, shock, and multi-organ failure (Creatinine > 250 µmol/L, GFR < 20 mL/min) from a critical SARS-CoV-2 infection for which he received mechanical ventilation, inotropes, antibiotics, and continuous veno-venous haemofiltration (5000 IU heparin/L 0.9% saline). Upon admission, the physical examination did not show abnormalities of the extremities and coagulation parameters were normal (aPTT 24–34 s, INR 1.05). Three weeks later the patient was extubated and free of inotropes and dialysis, however, due to progressive respiratory insufficiency, a re-intubation was required two days later. Electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm with signs of ischaemia but not acute myocardial infarction, Aspirin was therefore started. Supplementary diagnostic CT thorax angiography showed a severe COVID-19 related bilateral ground-glass pattern of the lungs without signs of pulmonary embolism (D-dimer was not determined because of a high acute phase response (e.g. CRP 172 mg/L) and adequate imaging for detection of pulmonary embolism). Moreover, CT angiography revealed a mural thrombus (4 mm × 6 mm) in the arch of the ascending aorta (, left panel) and a free-floating thrombus (3.5 mm × 25 mm) in the distal thoracic aorta (, right panel). Besides, minor age-compatible atherosclerotic plaques were seen, mostly in the descending aorta and not at the site of the aortic thrombi. Treatment with unfractionated heparin was started with a therapeutic target range (aPTT 48–68 s, 1.5–2.5 × patient baseline). Physical examination the following day revealed a blue toe syndrome, more profound on the right foot when compared to the left. Additional CT angiography of the peripheral vasculature of the legs revealed an occlusion of the right posterior tibial artery without signs of significant atherosclerosis . Computed tomography brain did not show signs of cerebrovascular ischaemia . Computed tomography angiography of the abdomen revealed intact renal and mesenteric perfusion . Follow-up CT aorta 1 week later showed stabilization of the mural thrombus (4 mm × 5 mm) and resolution of the free-floating thrombus .
Despite reduction of thrombus load in the aorta and prevention of new thrombi by heparin treatment for a week, the digits 1–3 of the right foot became necrotic , while the left lower limb recovered. Presumably, this compromised blood supply to the right foot was caused by a distal embolization of a large part of the free-floating thrombus in the thoracic aorta. During the course of these events, the patient persistently tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 (direct PCR on nasopharyngeal swab). Two weeks after admission the kidney function improved (Creatinine 157 µmol/L, GFR 38 mL/min) and eventually returned to normal for age (Creatinine 102 µmol/L, GFR 61 mL/min). Moreover, one blood culture was positive for an Enterococcus faecium that was sensitive to Vancomycin treatment. Blood cultures taken one day later showed no growth of microbes. Additional echocardiography showed no signs of endocarditis.
After second time weaning from mechanical ventilation 5 days later, and during rehabilitation, the patient switched to anticoagulant treatment with coumarins (acenocoumarol) (target INR 2.0–3.0) for a scheduled duration of at least 3 months and until follow-up CT aorta was scheduled. Upon arrival at the COVID unit, the patient was still suffering from an ICU acquired weakness and a delirium. In the weeks after, the patient’s cognitive functions improved and he was subsequently transferred to a rehabilitation facility expected to make a full cognitive and substantial physical recovery. Amputation of the necrotic digits 1–3 of the right foot was performed 3 months after discharge.