Abdominal wall swelling and pain for a week.
A 35-year-old man presented to the outpatient department with painful swelling and mass formation over the right lower quadrant abdominal wall for one week. No fever or gastrointestinal symptoms were reported. Oral intake and defecation were normal. The patient was hospitalized with a suspected diagnosis of cellulitis.
The patient was diagnosed with acute appendicitis and underwent an appendectomy 15 years ago in 2006. No history of underlying abdominal malignancy, inﬂammatory bowel disease, abdominal trauma, or other gastrointestinal diseases was reported.
There was no family history of abdominal neoplasms, inflammatory bowel disease, or ECF. The patient exhibited normal social functioning and self-care.
The vital signs, including body temperature, were within the normal ranges. Abdominal palpation revealed a mass over the right lower abdominal wall without visible opening and suspected abscess formation. Local abdominal tenderness and redness over purulence were noted. No nausea, diarrhea, muscle guarding, or bloating was observed, which led to the initial diagnosis of cellulitis.
In outpatient department, we performed a minimal incision of the lesion to collect discharge for bacterial culture and blood analysis was also performed. Lab reports revealed a white blood cell count of 20.17 × 103/μL, 79.9% neutrophils and 12.4% lymphocytes, and a serum C-reactive protein concentration of 19.60 mg/dL. The bacterial culture of the lesion pus revealed the presence of Enterococcus sp. Based on these results, ECF was suspected.
We performed a colonoscopy and observed inflammation in the ileocecal valve region . CT of the abdomen in the axial view suggested that the colon was in close contact with the abdominal wall , highly suggestive of ECF. We conducted CT fistulography by injecting contrast dye into the carbuncle for a more detailed radiographic view and a definitive diagnosis. Images after contrast administration showed the presence of contrast dye in both the abdominal wall and the colon . Coronal images showed contrast dye retention in the subcutaneous area with penetration through the abdominal wall into the colon .