A 71 year-old female of Swiss origin was admitted at the University Hospital of Lausanne (Switzerland) for a diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia. She underwent induction chemotherapy (cytarabine 200 mg/m2 days 1–7 and daunorubicin 60 mg/m2 days 1,2 and 3, followed by imatinib and then dasatinib 140 mg qd from day 3) and triple intrathecal chemotherapy (cytarabine, methotrexate, hydrocortisone). Chemotherapy-induced neutropenia (i.e. neutrophil count < 500/mm3) occurred 8 days later and antifungal prophylaxis with fluconazole (400 mg qd) was started. On the same day, the patient developed febrile neutropenia due to Streptococcus mitis bacteremia and was treated with piperacillin-tazobactam. The patient had persistent neutropenic fever despite broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Meanwhile, the monitoring of 1,3-d-beta-glucan (BDG) in serum (Fungitell™, Associates of Cape Cod, MA) performed twice weekly was positive on two consecutive values (213 and 104 pg/ml on day 5 and 8 of neutropenia, respectively). The galactomannan testing in serum was negative. Fluconazole was then switched to caspofungin (70 mg on day 1, followed by 50 mg qd). A chest and abdominal computerized tomography (CT) performed on day 9 of neutropenia revealed two well-circumscribed opacities in the right superior lobe and another smaller nodule in the right inferior lobe . Caspofungin was switched to liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg/kg qd). The BDG test turned negative 3 days after the start of amphotericin B therapy. The patient recovered from neutropenia after 11 days and a bronchoscopy with broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was performed on the same day. Cultures and galactomannan testing were negative in BAL fluid. Aspergillus fumigatus-specific PCR and 18S rDNA panfungal PCR, as previously described , were also negative on this sample. Because of worsening dyspnea, another CT was repeated 4 days after the initial imaging, which showed an increase in size of the lung lesions with appearance of ground-glass opacity . Liposomal amphotericin B was switched to oral isavuconazole (200 mg tid on day 1 and 2, followed by 200 mg qd) because of renal failure potentially attributed to amphotericin B, and a bronchoscopy with radial ultrasound assisted transbronchial biopsies was performed, as previously described . Histologic examination of the lung biopsy showed bronchopulmonary parenchyma with necrosis and presence of large and tortuous mycelia with occasional septa at Grocott and periodic-acid-Schiff (PAS) staining . Cultures and A. fumigatus-specific PCR performed on the native lung tissue biopsy were negative, but the 18S rDNA panfungal PCR was positive at 1582 copies/ml for a Conidiobolus spp. with the highest score for C. nanodes/lamprauges . In order to confirm this result, DNA was extracted from the histopathologic paraffin-embedded tissue showing the mycelial elements. The 18S rDNA PCR was positive for a mold belonging to the order Entomophthorales, but discrimination at genus/species level was not possible. PCR targeting the 28S rDNA, which has demonstrated good discrimination for identification of Conidiobolus spp. at species level , was performed on this sample and provided an optimal score with 100% identity for Conidiobolus pachyzygosporus .
Further patient history revealed no particular exposition within the last 2 years, except a travel in Madeira 3 months earlier. Abdominal and cranial CT did not show evidence of dissemination to other organs. Isavuconazole therapy was continued with trough plasma concentrations within the expected therapeutic range (3.8 mg/l at day 7 of therapy). Serial chest CTs performed on day 10 and 25 of antifungal therapy showed a significant regression of the size of the lung lesions . The patient was in oncological remission following induction chemotherapy and tyrosine kinase inhibitors (ponatinib, then nilotinib) were maintained awaiting an allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Considering the high immunosuppressive risk associated with this procedure, it was decided to surgically remove the residual lung lesions. Wedge resections of the three nodules were performed. Isavuconazole was interrupted 1 week later after a total of 2 months of antifungal therapy, because of the development of hepatic test disturbances of probable toxic origin. A chest CT performed 2 months after interruption of antifungal therapy did not show any sign of recurrent disease.