A 23-year-old male was referred to the surgical department from another hospital for further investigation and management of a high-output enterocutaneous fistula and possible short bowel syndrome. The patient’s medical history included several operations in the abdominal cavity due to recurrent incidents of intestinal perforations. His surgical problems had begun two years earlier, when he was admitted to the emergency department with acute epigastric pain, migrating within the next few hours to the right iliac fossa. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis (white blood cells (WBC) count 15.32 k/μL, neutrophils 87%) and increased C-Reactive Protein (CRP) at 1.9 mg/dL (normal range: <0.5 mg/dL). An abdominal Computed Tomography scan (CT scan) revealed free intra-abdominal air and pneumatosis of the descending and sigmoid colon . Thus, an exploratory laparotomy was performed, revealing generalized fecal peritonitis and a rupture on the antimesenteric wall of the sigmoid colon and confirming the diagnosis of gastrointestinal (GI) tract perforation. The hole was primarily sutured and the patient was discharged from the hospital on the 9th postoperative day, experiencing an uncomplicated postoperative period.
Six months later, the patient presented again to the emergency unit with similar symptoms. His physical examination was indicative of acute abdomen pain. He had leukocytosis (WBC count: 14.8 k/μL, neutrophils: 89.4%). Again, the patient underwent an explanatory laparotomy which identified an extended area of inflammation of the ileum (20 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve). The mesentery appeared very fragile, and extensive bleeding occurred from the vessels of the affected area. Based on the intraoperative findings, the surgeons decided to perform a 35 cm long enterectomy of the terminal ileus and complementary appendectomy. The patient was discharged on the 10th postoperative day. Τhe pathology result reported lesions of acute serous enteritis of the small intestine, without other abnormal findings or evidence of malignancy.
However, four months later, the patient was presented to the emergency department of another tertiary hospital with acute abdominal pain. A new CT scan showed once again free intra-abdominal air, indicative of small bowel perforation. A third explanatory laparotomy took place. Intraoperatively, perforation of the ileus was observed and, therefore, a 30 cm long enterectomy of the small intestine was performed.
Once again, the biopsy of the resected specimen was not diagnostic. It identified dense inflammatory infiltrations of polymorphonuclear neutrophils mainly in the peripheral adipose tissue and serosa and to a lesser extent in the muscularis propria, submucosa, and mucosa. Findings were confirmed with immunohistochemical staining for SMA and desmin. In addition, mild inflammatory infiltrations of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophilic polymorphonuclear cells were identified in the mucous membrane; periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) and silver stains were negative for fungi, as was Congo’s stain. There was no evidence of idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease or malignancy.
The postoperative period was, this time, complicated. On the 9th postoperative day, the patient suffered from wound dehiscence. He was transferred to the operating room and, during the procedure, a new small bowel perforation was accidentally discovered and primarily sutured. For the closure of the abdomen, a dual-sided mesh was used. The patient remained hospitalized in order to receive nutritional support and undergo further follow-up. However, on the 34th postoperative day, he presented signs of mesh infection and underwent surgical mesh removal. During the operation, a small leak from the cecum was identified in the area of the appendectomy, which was considered to be the cause of the infection. Due to the site of the perforation being very close to the original anastomosis, cecectomy and an additional 30 cm long enterectomy of the terminal ileus were performed. Again, a new mesh was placed during the abdominal wall closure. For the first time, the pathology examination of the excised specimen identified multiple abnormal segments with a thinning wall and segmental absence of musculature. This was also confirmed by immunohistochemical stains of SMA (Smooth Muscle Actin) and desmin. Other sections of the bowel showed gradual mucosal ulceration, accompanied by edema of the intestinal wall, dilation and hyperemia of the vessels, and infiltrations by inflammatory cells, plasma cells, and polymorphonuclear cells.
Approximately one month later (65 days after his first admission), he developed a new surgical mesh infection and underwent an additional laparotomy. Intraoperatively, he was diagnosed with two new sites of small bowel perforation, which were primarily repaired. The infected mesh was removed and the abdomen was closed only by suturing the skin. Nine days postoperatively, he developed a high-output enterocutaneous fistula, which was treated conservatively with total parenteral nutrition, antibiotics, and octreotide.
Three months later, the patient was discharged from the hospital, with low output (about 10–25 cc/day) from the enterocutaneous fistula. One month post-discharge, he was re-admitted due to increase in the output (more than 500 cc per day). He underwent CT imaging, which showed a new small bowel rupture, so he underwent laparotomy for the 7th time. Intraoperatively, a longitudinal perforation of the small intestine and three more perforations of the small bowel were also identified. Therefore, a small-intestine enterectomy was performed and the sites of perforations were primarily restored.
The pathology report revealed epithelial ulceration and swelling of the mucosa, hemorrhagic seepage, and varying degrees of inflammatory infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and polymorphonuclear neutrophils throughout the wall; focally, severe thinning of the myelin sheath was observed, while no evidence of malignancy was documented. Approximately one week after the last surgery, the enterocutaneous fistula reappeared. The patient’s physical examination was normal and the fistula was treated conservatively.
Six months postoperatively, the patient was referred to our department for further diagnostic management and treatment of the remaining enterocutaneous fistula . A variety of diagnostic tests (hematological, endocrinological, gastrointestinal) and multiple imaging examinations were performed. There were no abnormal findings, except for vitamin Κ deficiency, as expected in the context of chronic non-intestinal feeding. The Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) enterography confirmed the presence of a fistula between the jejunum and the skin, with the internal stoma of the fistula at a distance of about 65–70 cm from the Treitz . Therefore, given that the patient has a functional bowel slightly more than half a meter in length, the diagnosis of short bowel syndrome with the accompanying problems of malnutrition was established.
During his hospitalization, an attempted central venous catheter change was made (from right to left internal jugular vein) to continue his total parenteral nutrition. However, the X-ray performed after the placement of the catheter showed it was vertically placed in the middle of the left hemithorax and there was presence of fluid, which was indicative of hemothorax. The catheter was removed and the patient was transferred to the radiology department for a CT angiography. There was no active blood exsanguination at that time, and a chest tube for drainage was placed.
Based on the overall clinical presentation and the latest pathology report, which identified segmental loss of the bowel muscular layer, the suspicion of vEDS was raised and gene panel testing was performed. The latter identified a pathogenic variant c. 1662+1G>A in the COL3A1 gene, which is associated with vEDS. This sequence change affects a donor site in intron 23 of the COL3A1 gene and is expected to disrupt RNA splicing. Variants that disrupt the donor or acceptor splice site typically lead to a loss of protein function. The variant has been submitted multiple times to ClinVar and has been classified as pathogenic . It has also been reported in affected individuals in the literature and has been shown to cause exon 23 skipping [,,,]. Parental testing was normal, confirming that the variant had likely arisen de novo in the patient. He subsequently underwent all appropriate investigations for individuals with vEDS and received genetic counseling .
The patient’s hospitalization in our department lasted for a total of 82 days, during which he remained hemodynamically stable, experiencing an almost uncomplicated stay. The main aim was to enhance his nutrition due to the short bowel syndrome. He received a venous port catheter in order to continue the parenteral nutrition at home due to the persisting high-output enterocutaneous fistula (about 1300–2100 cc/day). In addition, the patient began to receive intestinal nutrition after contacting specialists on similar types of vEDS cases in the Saint Mark’s Hospital, UK, who provided input on how to improve the patient’s quality of life. Eventually, the patient was discharged from the hospital, receiving enteral nutrition and high-calorie parenteral nutrition at home, through the port catheter. At his last assessment, 2 months after discharge, the patient gained 6 kg, weighing 52.5 kg (body mass index: 16.4 kg/m2).
On the occasion of the case described above, a thorough review of the literature and an electronic literature search of PubMed databases was performed to detect all the published case reports pertinent to the presentation of any vEDS case. For literature search purposes, the subject heading “vascular Ehlers-Danlos”, “perforation”, and “bowel complications” combined with the MESH terms “case reports” with “and” as Boolean term were applied to retrieve data related to the objectives of this review. The literature search was focused on human studies and full-length articles (no abstracts) with no language restriction.
The titles and abstracts of all the studies identified were screened and assessed. Those that were obviously irrelevant were discarded. If eligibility could not be ascertained from the title or the abstract, the full text of the study was retrieved and the papers deemed suitable were reviewed for eligibility according to their clinical relevance. References in the selected papers were scrutinized for additional articles in a further effort to ensure that relevant publications were not missed. An ultimate check of databases was carried out on 28 January 2022.