A 72-year-old male patient presented to our emergency department with the history of domestic fall, right hip pain, and inability to bear weight on the right lower limb. The patient was a known case of ischemic heart disease with unstable angina, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and end-stage renal disease. Initial clinical evaluation revealed tenderness at the right hip, unable to do active straight leg raise test on the right side, and restricted range of movements of the right hip in all planes. There was no external wound, sinus or discharge from any skin sites. Plain radiograph of pelvis with both hips and the right hip lateral view showed fracture neck of femur, AO type 31 B3, in the transcervical region . Laboratory tests showed hemoglobin -14.9g/dl, total leukocyte count - 15460/cumm, neutrophils - 65%, lymphocytes - 30%, blood urea - 73, serum creatinine - 2.3, and fasting blood glucose level - 220mg/dl. According to K-DOQI criterion, our patient had glomerular filtration rate<30ml/min/1.73m2, our patient was identified as having end-stage renal disease . However, for unstable angina, there are no laid down guidelines. The patient was scheduled for cemented bipolar hemiarthroplasty next day. However, the patient suffered chest pain and investigations revealed myocardial infarction. Hence, surgery was postponed. Angiography revealed lumen blockade in major vessels. The left anterior descending showed 85% stenosis, middle and distal right coronary artery 95% stenosis. In view of triple vessel disease, early CABG was planned. Due to pre-operative deranged renal function parameters and urinary tract infection, CABG was further postponed. Following normalization of renal parameters and treatment of urinary tract infection, the patient underwent CABG, 3 weeks after trauma. Postoperatively, the patient was shifted to cardiac care unit for monitoring. 1 week following CABG, the patient underwent cemented bipolar hemiarthroplasty for fracture neck of femur . Surgery was performed under general anesthesia. Preoperatively, blood was arranged to replenish excessive blood loss and bipolar electrocautery was used intraoperatively to achieve hemostasis. As the bone was grossly osteoporotic, cemented hemiarthroplasty was done. The procedure was uneventful. The patient was mobilized on day 2 with walker assistance. Sutures were removed on day 14 and ambulation with stick was started after 3 months. Initial follow-up at 2 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months post-operative and plain radiography of the right hip in anteroposterior and lateral view showed well-fixed prosthesis in acceptable central position without any evidence of loosening or subsidence. We advised our patient not to squat or sit crossed leg to prevent implant dislocation. The patient was community ambulator following surgery. He died due to cardiorespiratory arrest, 2 years after surgery.