An 82-year-old man experienced abdominal pain and fever with chills 1 d before his presentation.
The severity of these symptoms increased gradually. Nausea and vomiting were also subsequently noted.
The patient had a history of hypertension. The patient underwent surgical repair due to bowel perforation and laparoscopic cholecystectomy due to cholecystitis.
There was no significant personal or family history.
The patient’s temperature was 38.6 °C, his heart rate was 101 bpm, his respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute, and his blood pressure was 112/84 mmHg. Yellow skin discoloration and tenderness over the upper abdominal region were noted.
The patient’s leukocyte count was 14300/μL with 85.9% neutrophils, 7.4% lymphocytes, and 6.2% monocytes. Other blood tests revealed impaired liver function, reporting aspartate aminotransferase: 181 U/L, alanine aminotransferase: 131 U/L, total bilirubin: 2.3 mg/dL, and C-reactive protein: 12.48 mg/dL. The bile culture yielded Enterococcus faecium, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Bacteroides fragilis.
Computed tomography of the abdomen demonstrated dilatation of the common bile duct measuring approximately 2.2 cm. Gas retention was present in the intrahepatic ducts . Cholangitis with pneumobilia was suggested.
The patient underwent percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography and drainage and collection of bile for culture. We also performed esophagogastroduodenoscopy and ERCP, which disclosed a gastric ulcer over the antrum and pylorus stenosis with partial gastric outlet obstruction. However, the ampulla of Vater was not located in the second portion of the duodenum. Moreover, a capsule-like foreign body (pharmaceutical desiccant) measuring approximately 1 cm × 2 cm was present at the gastric antrum and the peri-pylorus region . We removed the foreign body and found one orifice over the pyloric ring in the stomach, suggesting ectopic ampulla of Vater . A catheter was inserted through the endoscope to the ectopic orifice at the pyloric ring. Sludge was noted in the common bile duct. Balloon dilatation was therefore performed. Cholangiography demonstrated a dilated common bile duct . Magnetic resonance images demonstrated a dilated common bile duct drained into the pylorus .