A 61-year-old female patient complaining of low back pain and lower extremities pain with paraesthesia was referred to our institution. She had a paroxysmal sharp low back pain, with pain and numbness in both lower extremities. Physical examination revealed tenderness and percussion pain of the L1-L3 spinous process, accompanied by deep percussion pain. Bilateral superficial sensation was reduced in the cutaneous area corresponding to nerves below L1. Perineal sensation was abnormal. Lumbar mobility was limited. Power in knee extension and ankle dorsiflexion were 4/5 bilaterally while tone was decreased in lower limbs. Bilateral knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were reduced while both ankle clonus test and Babinski sign were negative and straight leg raising was normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) outside our institution suggested multiple abnormal signals of the cervical vertebrae, thoracic vertebrae, lumbar vertebrae, pelvic bone, as well as bilateral femur, and enhanced mass at L2 spinal canal level whose distinction with adjacent bone marrow and meninges was unclear. Subsequent abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans showed nodular changes in bilateral adrenal glands and multiple irregular hyperdense shadows in the thoracic vertebrae, lumbar vertebrae, iliac bone, and femur .
The patient had a prolonged and complicated clinical history. Twenty-six years ago, she underwent cerumen adenoma resection in the right EAC. Biopsy indicated low-grade malignancy, and more details were not available. Six years later, the tumour recurred and radiotherapy was performed in other institution. Three years ago, the patient developed low back pain without pain and numbness in the lower limbs. MRI showed multiple metastases of the lumbar spine. Further examination revealed multiple bone metastases throughout the body while biopsy of sacral and iliac bones revealed metastatic adenocarcinoma. She was subjected to chemoradiation in this institution and symptoms were relieved. One year ago, she suffered from an exacerbation of low back pain, radiating to the left lower extremity with numbness. Radiotherapy was performed in combination with Zoledronic acid administration to prevent bone adverse events and oral analgesic, however, the efficacy was poor. Three months ago, the patient was admitted into the oncology department of our institution for further treatment. Chest CT scans revealed multiple nodules in both lungs. Given osteogenic changes of bone metastases, bilateral internal iliac arteries chemoembolization under guidance of Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) was performed. The symptoms in both lower extremities of the patient were significantly alleviated after operation.
The patient underwent posterior L2 vertebrae tumour resection and biopsy with spinal canal decompression, autogenous iliac bone graft fusion and internal fixation . During the procedure, we found intradural and extradural tumours at the L2 vertebral plane. After surgery, there was an immediate improvement in symptoms in both lumbar and lower extremities. Haematoxylin eosin staining of the sample indicated a histological type of adenoid cystic carcinoma while immunostaining revealed P63 (+), S-100 (−), CD117 (−), SMMHA (+), Calponin (+), EMA (+), and CK7(+) . Based on these findings and her clinical history, metastatic adenoid cystic carcinoma of ceruminous gland was diagnosed. Then, the patient was discharged and followed up as an outpatient. She died 2 years after operation because of pulmonary metastases.