A 41-year-old woman, gravida 2 and para 1, presented with a ten days history of abdominal pain which was not responsive to medication. The patient had regular menstrual periods without significant dysmenorrhoea. Bilateral ovarian cysts were detected during a routine physical examination approximately one year prior. However, ten days before admission to a local hospital, she had persistent lower abdominal pain without any apparent reason. Notably, some serum tumour markers showed remarkable elevation: carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) of 1229 U/ml (normal range, 0–35), carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199) of 7107 U/ml (normal range, 0–35) and carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) 44.1 U/ml (normal range, 0–11). Conversely, carbohydrate antigen 153 and human epididymis protein 4 showed no significant increase. Abdominal computed tomography revealed a 15*10 cm cystic-solid tumour. Given the elevated white blood cell count of 19.35*10^9/l (with a neutrophil count of 93.2%), the local hospital initiated a one-week course of anti-infective treatment, which partially alleviated her symptoms. Her serum tumour marker levels decreased slightly, as follows: CA125 710 U/ml, CA199 2998 U/ml, and CEA 25.98 U/ml. Besides, she had no other medical conditions and she denied a family history of endometriosis or cancer. Subsequently, the patient sought further treatment at our hospital.
Physical examination showed that her body mass index was 21.3 kg/m2 (height: 165 cm, weight: 58 kg), with no significant recent changes. Abdominal assessment revealed slight pressure pain without obvious rebound pain in the lower abdomen. Gynaecological examination indicated a normally sized uterus with limited mobility. A tender, solid-cystic mass measuring 12 cm in diameter was noted posterior to the uterus. No palpable nodules were found on palpation of the anus. Her white blood cell count was within the normal range in our laboratory analysis. CA125 levels decreased to 417 U/ml, and CA199 levels decreased to 1772 U/ml. Gastroenteroscopy yielded normal results. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed a 12*11*4.6 cm cystic-solid mass in the posterior uterus displaying a nonhomogeneous echo. The magnetic resonance imaging suggested potential malignancy due to multiple cystic-solid masses originating from the adnexal region accompanied by intracyst bleeding .
Robotic surgery was performed to explore the abdominal pelvic lesions. Chocolate-like discoloured deposits were distributed in the abdominal cavity, primarily within the greater omentum and peritoneal mesentery. The bilateral adnexa were adherent to the pelvic wall. The left ovary showed a mass of approximately 10*10 cm and the right ovary a mass of approximately 6*5 cm, both containing chocolate-like fluid and several papillary solid protrusions. Frozen pathology analysis of the left ovarian cyst suggested a well-differentiated carcinoma. Subsequently, a comprehensive surgical intervention, including total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy and lymphadenectomy, was performed. The final diagnosis was International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics stage IC1, with a grade 2 endometrioid adenocarcinoma in the left ovary and a FIGO stage IC1 clear cell carcinoma in the right ovary (elaborated pathology description provided below). The patient underwent a course of six chemotherapy cycles with paclitaxel-albumin and carboplatin, which resulted in complete relief. Postsurgery, her serum CA125 level decreased to 96.3 U/ml and the CA199 level to 239.7 U/ml. All serum biomarkers returned to normal levels after the second cycle of chemotherapy.
The final paraffin pathology report confirmed malignancy in the bilateral ovaries, without infiltration of the uterus, fallopian tube, omentum, or lymph nodes. Lymphatic vascular involvement was negative. The left ovarian mass was consistent with ovarian endometrioid carcinoma that was moderately differentiated with large areas of necrosis, and the surrounding glands showed atypical endometriotic lesions and endometriotic lesions . Ectopic endometrial glands and mesenchymal components were observed within the localized wall of the left fallopian tube tissue, consistent with endometriosis with focal ectopic glands with atypia . The right ovarian mass was consistent with ovarian clear cell carcinoma and was surrounded by endometriotic cysts and corpus luteum cysts with haemorrhage . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was conducted to provide confirmation of the diagnosis. The tumour cells in the left EOC showed positive monoclonal expression of estrogen receptor (ER) (+60%) and progesterone receptor (PR) (+60%), along with patchy expression of monoclonal p16 and p53. However, the expression of ER and PR were negative in the right CCOC. While, the expression of p16, and p53 was absent consistent with left EOC. The Ki-67 labelling index was approximately 50% in the left ovary and 40% in the right ovary. In particular, hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta (HNF-1β) showed strong positive expression in the CCOC, positive expression in the atypical endometriotic lesions of the left ovary, and patchy expression in the endometriotic lesions of both ovaries .
To explore potential aetiologies and therapeutic targets, whole-exome sequencing with next-generation sequencing was performed on eutopic endometrium (EU), bilateral tumours, and plasma samples. DNA sequencing results revealed somatic mutations in 29 genes for the EU, 66 genes for the CCOC, and 82 genes for the EOC . The shared mutated genes between the CCOC and EOC included ARIDIA, CCDC137, KHDRBS1, KRAS, PCDHB12, PIK3CA, SLC28A3 and ING1. ING1 was the sole gene mutated across all three samples . Furthermore, NGS data analysis revealed microsatellite-stable status across all samples, with a low tumour mutational burden. Notably, only the EOC sample had a remarkably high homologous recombination deficiency score (50). Pathway enrichment analysis revealed different gene pathways for the three samples . Twenty-nine gene pathways involving oestrogen metabolism, age, angiogenesis, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis, among others, were identified as enriched in both the EOC and CCOC samples . The TGF-β signalling pathway and lysine degradation pathway were uniquely enriched in the EOC and CCOC, respectively . Pearson correlation coefficients for signature features between the EU and CCOC were 0.9364 (P<0.0001), between the EU and EOC were 0.816 (P<0.0001), and between the EOC and CCOC were 0.8852 (P<0.0001) .