In 2013, an 11-year-old Japanese boy was referred to our department for painless bone expansion in the right maxillary alveolus, delayed eruption of the permanent second molar teeth, and altered occlusion. He had no significant medical or family history. A panoramic X-ray showed a unilocular cystic lesion in the right maxilla containing a calcified large mass associated with an impacted tooth . Computed tomography showed a cystic lesion of size 3.6×3.1×2.7 cm that included calcified structures . A horizontal view showed right maxillary bone expansion .
In 2013, the patient underwent tumor extirpation combined with impacted tooth extraction. The incisional line was started from the labial mucosa in the right maxillary central and lateral incisor area. It extended to the gingiva in the right maxillary lateral incisor and canine area by arch-like incision, and to the gingiva of the right maxillary second molar by crestal incision with distal releasing incision. The goal of this procedure was to make a mucoperiosteal flap from the lower border of the pyriform aperture, vertically to the infraorbital foramen and surrounding areas, and horizontally to the lower border of the zygomatic bone. The infraorbital neurovascular bundles were preserved. Upon opening of the sinus from a thin plate of bone in the canine fossa and surrounding areas in the anterior wall of the right maxilla (the same level as the lower border of the pyriform aperture), bone-like hard tissues that were strongly adhered to the maxilla were found. When these tissues were separated from the surrounding areas and removed using a fissure bar, a solid, bone-like, hard odontogenic tumor (similar to a complex odontoma) was found to have occupied almost the whole sinus. The mass was too large to remove from the opening.
For complete removal of the mass including the tumor capsule, which was adhered to the surrounding bone, the tumor was divided into several pieces using a fissure bar . There was an unerupted permanent tooth in the posterior part of the maxillary sinus anterior wall directly above the tumor resection site. This tooth appeared to have been pushed up by the tumor. It deviated from the dental arch and was included in the tumor body. This made preservation difficult, and the tooth was extracted . A part of the root apex of the right maxillary first molar protruded through the tumor resection site, and conservative treatment was applied because of the patient’s age. There was no tooth germ of the unerupted second molar in the tumor resection cavity. There was access between the sinus and the tumor resection cavity, but there were no signs of maxillary sinusitis, which allowed use of conservative treatment. After hemostasis was confirmed, the incision was stitched closed. After the tumor extirpation, the wound was sutured with VICRYL absorbable stitches (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). Examination of the surgical specimen showed that the lesion consisted of various hard tissues, including a tooth-like structure . A histological examination indicated the presence of a mixture of dentin and enamel with a radial structure . Fibrous tissues were observed between the hard tissues, which suggested mild mononuclear cell infiltration. Furthermore, the hard tissues were covered by fibrous tissues, and odontogenic epithelial-like cell structures were externally elongated from the inside to the outer boundary of the hard tissues. A palisade arrangement of cylindrical cells was seen in the margin of the odontogenic epithelial-like cell structures, and stellate cells had proliferated in the alveolar structures . Cellular atypism was unremarkable, and there were few Ki-67-positive cells. These features confirmed the diagnosis of an OA. The histopathological diagnosis was OA.
No recurrence was noted at 27 months after the operation. The patient has undergone postoperative occlusal guidance and functional orthodontic treatment, and his postoperative condition is excellent.