A 27 year-old man with no past medical history presented in the fall of 2017 with urinary hesitancy and dysuria to his primary care provider, and was found to be positive for gonorrhea on Hologic Altima Combo 2® NAAT assay. He had HIV testing done with ADVIA Centaur® at the same time, which was negative. His only HIV risk factor was heterosexual contact with three female partners in the 6 months prior to this visit. He had been tested and found to be negative for HIV with the same platform in 2014, 2016, and earlier in 2017.
Repeat HIV testing was performed in January 2018, which was indeterminate by ADVIA Centaur®. Confirmatory Geenius™ testing was negative at that time. Patient returned for repeat testing in February of 2018, and the ADVIA Centaur® screen became reactive. When the sample was subsequently run on Geenius™, gp140, p31, and gp41 bands were present, confirming HIV-1 infection. He was then referred to our tertiary clinic and seen 15 days after his positive test results. Upon physical examination, no abnormal findings were identified, and his history did not suggest recent acute HIV seroconversion.
The patient wished to begin antiretroviral therapy (ART) immediately, motivated primarily by his desire to decrease the risk of transmission to his HIV-negative female partner. Elvitegravir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide was started the same day he was seen in clinic, after initial laboratory investigations including his HIV viral load were drawn. His baseline results showed a CD4 count was 835 (46%) cells/cubic millimeter and an undetectable HIV viral load. His HIV viral load was repeated 22 days later with the same result, although by this time he had been taking ART for over 3 weeks. Repeat HIV testing in March and April of 2018 once again returned reactive on ADVIA Centaur® and was confirmed by Geenius™. HIV viral load testing was performed again in May 2018, and returned undetectable.
Based on the unusual constellation of laboratory findings and an otherwise low perceived risk of acquiring HIV infection, further questioning and investigations were pursued. The patient revealed that he had been using a variety of oral and injectable supplements for bodybuilding beginning in July of 2017 under the supervision of his trainer, including testosterone, exemestane, and trenbolone enanthate. All of these supplements were purchased from various locations accessed on the Internet as suggested by his trainer and fellow bodybuilders. The patient clarified that he always used sterile equipment and technique for injections, and never shared injection paraphernalia with others at any time.
Further investigations were performed in collaboration with colleagues from the National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. Heterophilic antibody interference is a phenomenon that has previously been reported with both Centaur® and ARCHITECT® HIV assays by the NML . Our patient’s samples were treated with a blocking agent to reduce the likelihood of incorrect results due to heterophilic interference, but despite this remained positive on both Centaur® and ARCHITECT® platforms. Samples were then run on Genscreen™ HIV-1 Ag assay and Fujirebio Inno-LIA™ HIV-1/2 score, and both were negative. Proviral HIV DNA testing performed on a dedicated whole blood sample drawn from the patient in July 2018 was negative, confirming that initial results were falsely positive. One day after proviral HIV DNA testing was complete, the patient was informed of his HIV-negative status and ART was discontinued. The patient received a total of 133 days of ART, and did not experience any adverse effects or tolerability-related concerns due to the medication. He remained with the same female partner he had at the time he initiated ART after being told his results were incorrect.