In June 2014, a 59 years old male with multinodular thyroid goiter was observed in our centre. Due to the presence of thyroidal disease, a hormonal evaluation was performed, showing a slight elevation of FT3 (5.19 pg/mL, normal value 3.5–4.5 pg/mL) and of Thyroglobulin (TG) (> 300 ng/mL, normal value < 50 ng/mL), with FT4, TSH, Ab anti TPO, Ab anti TG and Calcitonin (5.21 pg/ml, normal value < 18.2 pg/ml) resulted in the normal range. Neck ultrasound (US) showed the presence of a large hypoechoic inhomogeneous nodule of 47 mm in the left lobe of thyroid gland, with a retrosternal extension. In the right lobe it was possible to identify only two small nodules, the largest being of 11 mm, with mixed echogenicity. A fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the left nodule and of the biggest one on the right lobe was performed, both concluding for Thyr 2, negative for malignant cells, according to SIAPEC-IAP classification .
After 12 months, due to the worsening of the compressive symptomatology, the patient underwent a total thyroidectomy for a presumed retrosternal goiter at the General and Oncological Surgery Division of University of Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli” of Naples. After 2 days, according to the patient good clinical conditions, the patient was discharged. Despite the good performance status and the presence of no symptoms, definitive pathology showed the presence of a medullary carcinoma of 1.0 × 0.8 cm in the right lobe, while in the left lobe, a follicular adenoma of 6.0 × 4.0 cm, was detected. The right lobe of the thyroid revealed a poorly circumscribed, whitish nodule, measuring 1 cm in its largest diameter. The tumour showed a complex arrangement, which included solid, cord-like and insular areas set in a fibrous struma with relatively few amyloid deposits . The neoplastic cells were medium-sized plasmacytoid, round and spindle shaped cells, with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and nuclei with clumped chromatin and small nucleoli . Scattered mitoses were present. The neoplastic cells expressed cytokeratin 19 and calcitonin ; a weak reactivity for CD56 and negativity for thyroglobulin were also detected. A diagnosis of medullary thyroid carcinoma was made. Therefore, the patient was introduced to the standard follow up for medullary carcinoma with several and strict evaluations of calcitonin and CEA levels, and neck ultrasound without showing any sign of recurrence. The patient underwent genomic investigations without showing RET proto-oncogene mutation. Moreover,, the patient underwent a total body 99Tc scintigraphy in February 2016, in the attempt of precociously identifying a possible recurrence, without showing any areas of abnormal accumulation. In September 2016, during a routine follow-up performed by neck ultrasound, a nodule of 0.8 cm, suspicious for lymph node recurrence, was identified in the right thyroidal space without any elevation of calcitonin (< 2.00 pg/ml) and CEA levels (1.49 ng/ml, normal value < 10). The patient underwent a FNAC of the suspicious lesion, that showed at the morphological examination, on a haematic background, a dispersed neoplastic population, rarely arranged in loosely cohesive groups. The tumour cells were middle-sized cells, with an extremely variable aspect: spindle-shaped elements, epithelioid cells with round nuclei and scanty cytoplasms, sometimes with eccentric nuclei and a “plasmacytoid” appearance, or some voluminous cells with ample granular cytoplasms and pleomorphic and irregular nuclei. The chromatin was finely dispersed with inconspicuous nucleoli. The same morphology was evident on cell-block sections, but unfortunately, the immunocytochemistry investigations were negative for Calcitonin, thyroglobulin and PTH. Nevertheless, the morphological pattern was suggestive for a lymph-nodal recurrence of MTC.
Due to the uncertain diagnosis, the patient underwent a total body 18-FDG positron emitting tomography (PET), without showing any metabolic activity. Despite the unconfirmed diagnosis, in February 2017, the patient underwent a central compartment neck dissection. Gross findings of the surgical specimen displayed in a single lymph node of 0.6 cm, the presence of metastasis of medullary thyroid carcinoma . Similarly, the immunochemistry showed positivity for calcitonin and TTF-1, while thyroglobulin resulted negative.
The patient, did not experience any further biochemical or imaging sign of suspicious recurrence at a 20 months follow-up.