An 84-year-old female with underlying hypertension, asthma, and cured breast cancer presented with low back pain and had no neurological deficit. She underwent percutaneous VP using polymethylmethacrylate under the diagnosis of L1 osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture at a local hospital. Bone mineral density showed osteoporosis, where total lumbar and femur neck were − 3.1 and − 2.0 in T-score, respectively. Immediately after the procedure, she complained of weakness, numbness, and pain in both legs. Even after the conservative treatment, she continued to suffer from persistent back pain and could not ambulate although cane ambulation was possible before VP.
She was transferred to our hospital three weeks later after VP. Neurologic examination revealed hypesthesia of the left leg and paraplegia below L2 level. The muscle power was grade 2 for the right leg and grade 4 for the left leg. Preoperative laboratory investigations revealed mildly elevated levels of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 27 mm/hr, normal range: 0–20) with a normal limit of C-reactive protein (CRP, 1.84 mg/L, normal range: 0.1-5.0). Anemia with decreased hemoglobin (Hb, 11.0 g/dℓ, normal range: 12.0–16.0) and elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT, 43 IU/L, normal range: 5–40) were also observed.
Plain radiography of the thoracolumbar spine showed a compression fracture of the L1 with cement filling . Extravasation of cement into the spinal canal was also found. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed intradural cement leakage from T10 to L2 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed an intradural mass lesion that was hypointense on both T1-weighted and T2- weighted images . Compression and displacement of the spinal cord to the right side secondary to the intradural mass lesion were observed.
Under the diagnosis of intradural cement leakage, emergent surgical decompression and cement removal was recommended to prevent the progress of neurological deficits. Surgical techniques and operative findings were as follows. First, stabilization by a posterior fixation from T10 to L3 was done. After that, the patient underwent total laminectomy and durotomy through a posterior approach from T12 to L2. Intradural cement was seen on the left-ventral side, compressing the cord to the right side . Severe adhesion was also found between the spinal cord and the cement. We used a high-speed burr to prevent additional cord damage by breaking the cement with Kerrison punch or pituitary rongeur. The cement was removed piece by piece without additional cord injury. The durotomy was closed tightly after extensive irrigation. Pedicle screws were connected with rods and two cross-links.
On postoperative 1 day, plain radiography showed successful removal of the intradural cement . The leg and back pain were improved immediately after the surgery. Postoperatively, ESR and CRP were elevated up to 63 mm/hr (normal range: 0–20) and 49.67 mg/L (normal range: 0.1-5.0), respectively. Anemia and elevated ALT were also observed (Hb 9.4 g/dL and ALT 225 IU/L, respectively). The patient was referred to the department of rehabilitation medicine and discharged after 8 weeks. All laboratory values were within normal limits at discharge. Medications included a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (celecoxib), an opioid (tramadol) for pain control, and an antispasmodic agent (solifenacin) for neurogenic bladder. In addition, bisphosphonate (ibandronic acid) was injected for the osteoporosis postoperatively at 6 months. However, despite active rehabilitation for one year after the surgery, her muscle strength was minimally improved compared to preoperative muscle strength. The muscle power was grade 3 for the right leg and grade 4 for the left leg at the last follow-up. The patient has provided informed consent for the publication of this case report and accompanying images.