A 36-year-old man was admitted to Antonio Pedro University Hospital (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) in November 2004 with bilateral diffuse pulmonary infiltrates on the chest radiograph and dyspnea on exertion. He had been working as a laminator of glass-wool fibers and coating materials for 7 years, without respiratory protection, suggesting excessive occupational exposures to MMVFs and coating materials. His past medical history was unremarkable, and he was a lifetime nonsmoker.
On admission, he was in good clinical condition, and his physical examination was normal. Chest radiograph and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed small nodular opacities spread throughout the lung fields . Routine laboratory data showed normal hematologic, hepatic, and renal function. Results of sputum analyses for acid-fast organisms and neoplasia were negative. Pulmonary function studies were normal.
The patient underwent bronchoalveolar lavage, and the sample was used for cell count, cytologic examination, and specific staining for fungi and acid-fast bacilli. Cellular bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) observed by light microscopy revealed an increased total cell count, predominantly macrophages (differential cell count: macrophages, 90%; lymphocytes, 9%; neutrophils, 1%; eosinophils, 0%). Numerous particles of different sizes were observed within the cytoplasm of alveolar macrophages by differential interferential contrast microscopy . Some of these particles were anisotropic. Stains were negative for fungi and acid-fast bacilli.
An open lung biopsy was performed because of an uncommon radiologic pattern rarely observed in patients with an occupational history of glass fiber exposure. Light microscopy showed peribronchiolar infiltration of lymphoid cells and many foreign-body–type granulomas throughout the examined tissue . Alveolar macrophages observed by light microscopy had numerous round and elongated particles inside their cytoplasm, and platelike material when examined by TEM (length, > 1 to 12 μm) .
Glass wool fiber and the resin used in lamination were brought in by the patient and studied. These materials were deposited on a carbon (C)-conductive tape covering SEM stubs and analyzed by EDXA (Noran-Voyager analytical system; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled in a Jeol 1200 EX scanning-transmission electron microscope (Jeol, Tokyo, Japan). The fibers contained the elements oxygen (O), magnesium (Mg), aluminum (Al), silicon (Si), and calcium (Ca), matching with glass wool fibers . The resin had C, O, phosphorus (P), potassium (K), Ca, and high chlorine (Cl) X-ray counts . The analyses performed on the platelike material within macrophages detected C, O, Mg, Al, and Si, compatible with the mineral kaolinite , and also Cl , suggesting a resin residue. Some amorphous materials in the macrophages contained C, O, Mg, and Si, indicating a talc-like material . Analysis performed in an empty area of the cytoplasm detected C and O only (data not shown). Four years after the patient stopped working with fiberglass, his overall condition was the same, and a follow-up computed tomographic (CT) scan of the chest showed the same initial pattern (data not shown).