A 25-year-old woman presented to our hospital with “severe dysmenorrhea for more than 1 year” as the main complaint. She had a regular menstrual cycle of 28 days. During her menstrual period, she experienced lower abdominal pain and occasional back pain. In the past year, her dysmenorrhea had gradually deteriorated. Routine blood tests were normal, and serum tumor markers were not tested. She denied having a history of malignancy, endometriosis, genetic and psychosocial diseases, or prior surgeries.
Physical examination showed that the uterus was enlarged and slightly hard on palpation, and the posterior wall protruded outward locally. Transabdominal ultrasound in another hospital suggested a mass, not otherwise specified, in the uterine wall; therefore, a transvaginal ultrasound examination was scheduled. Transvaginal ultrasound showed that the uterus was enlarged, and a cystic mass, well-circumscribed and ellipsoid, ~5.0 × 3.6 × 3.6 cm in size was identified in the posterior uterine myometrium . Dense echo spots were observed in the liquid. Color Doppler flow detected weak blood flow in the cystic wall, but no blood flow within the cyst. The myometrium around the mass was compressed and thinned. The shape of the uterine cavity was normal, and the cystic mass was well separated from the uterine cavity. Bilateral ovaries were normal without space-occupying lesions. We considered the uterine cystic mass to be the result of prior hemorrhage. We, therefore, proceeded with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to further clarify the nature of the mass. MRI showed that the oval-like cystic mass was located in the posterior wall of the uterus, with a regular shape and smooth and clear boundaries . The cystic part showed a hyperintense signal on both T1-weighted and T-2 weighted images, with a few flocculent equal signals. There was no obvious enhancement in the mass on enhanced scanning. MRI also indicated hemorrhages within the cystic mass, suggesting the possibility of uterine cystic adenomyosis. Combined with the patient's history of severe dysmenorrhea, the characteristics of transvaginal ultrasound and MRI, a diagnosis of uterine cystic adenomyosis was established.
The patient was started on continuous oral contraceptive (OC) pills for 6 months, without, however, improvement of her lower abdominal pain and severe dysmenorrhea. Six months later, ultrasound examination showed that the mass had increased to 7.5 × 5.4 × 4.8 cm. At that point surgical treatment was recommended. Considering that the patient was a young woman who might wish to become pregnant in the future, several uterine-preserving treatment methods were discussed with her in detail, among whom she opted for the method of ultrasound-guided transvaginal aspiration and sclerotherapy and provided informed consent. The research protocol was approved by the medical ethics committee of our hospital and participants gave written informed consent, according to CARE guidelines and in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki principles. Transvaginal sclerotherapy was performed for uterine cystic adenomyosis under ultrasound guidance on the 10th day of the menstrual cycle. The patient was placed in the lithotomy position, and 2% lidocaine was administered locally. A percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) needle (18G) was inserted into the cystic mass, and the position of the needle tip was verified by ultrasound. Approximately 90 mL of chocolate-colored fluid was aspirated from the mass, and part of the fluid was sent for pathological examination. The cyst cavity was repeatedly flushed with normal saline until the color of the aspiration fluid was clear, and all the fluid from the cyst was drained. While flushing the cyst cavity, we observed that there was no leakage of normal saline in the uterus, thus indicating lack of communication between the cyst and the uterine cavity. Lauromacrogol injection (10 ml, 0.1 g) was used for sclerotherapy treatment. Two branches of Lauromacrogol injections (20 ml) were injected into the cyst through a PTC needle and finally retained. The procedure lasted 45 min and the patient was observed for about 4 hours after the operation. During and after the injection, the patient had no discomfort and no adverse events.
Cytological examination of the aspirate revealed hemosiderin-laden macrophages, without tumor cells, epithelial or mesenchymal components. The chocolate-like appearance and cytological characteristics of the aspirated contents confirmed the diagnosis of uterine cystic adenomyosis.
Three months after the procedure, ultrasound examination showed that the mass had decreased to 3.4 × 2.2 × 2.0 cm, corresponding to a volume reduction rate of 92.01%. A small fluid collection was still visible. One year after the operation, the mass had decreased to 1.4 × 1.2 × 1.0 cm, corresponding to a volume reduction rate of 99.10%, and it was moderately echogenic, with no fluid present, appearing similar to a scar-like structure . The thickness and echo of the myometrium around the mass were normal, and the thickness of the endometrium was within the normal range. After the operation, the patient had regular menstruation and no symptoms of dysmenorrhea or abdominal pain. Based on the improvement of the patient's clinical symptoms and imaging manifestations, the operator believed that the effect of this treatment was very significant. One and half year after the operation, the patient became pregnant and successfully delivered a healthy baby through vagina at 40 weeks of pregnancy in our hospital. We recommended that the patient undergo MRI of the uterus before and after delivery, but she refused. Ultrasonography showed no cyst formation in the uterine wall. The patient never experienced delivery complications and any sclerotherapy-related adverse events, she was very satisfied with the treatment.