A 50-year-old woman was referred to our hospital on September 14, 2020 with the complaint of an intensely pruritic erythematous patch on her right hip.
The patient’s symptom of an intensely pruritic erythematous patch started 1 year before presentation.
One year prior, the patient had received subcutaneous injections of vitamin K1 40 mg before thyroid nodule surgery to prevent bleeding. Five days after the injections, she developed the abovementioned symptoms at the injection site that caused discomfort without any obvious burning, pain, or other problems. She had not been treated with phytonadione, cyclosporine, or other medications containing polyoxyethylated castor oil (PEO-CO). She was diagnosed with urticaria, for which topical chloramphenicol betamethasone liniment, dexamethasone sodium phosphate, and chlorpheniramine maleate injections were prescribed. However, her condition did not improve substantially. Despite intermittent treatment for one year, her condition was not well controlled.
The patient denied any family history of any hereditary disease.
A physical examination revealed an erythematous itchy-infiltrated area of approximately 10 cm × 10 cm on the right hip at the injection sites. The patient had a dry mouth, no sweat, and normal urine and bowel movements. Her tongue was red and covered with a thin and greasy coating, and her pulse was fine and rapid. Since the onset of the disease, she had no fever, chills, joint pain, swollen lymph nodes, weight loss, trauma, foreign body contact, or suspicious drug use. Her clinical symptoms of intense pruritus and weeping, erythematous, eczematous, and indurated plaques are shown in Figure and .
Liver ultrasonography findings and aspartate aminotransferase (serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase), alkaline phosphatase, and serum bilirubin levels were normal.
A clear diagnosis of the disease could not be made based on the clinical manifestations of the erythematous and eczematous plaques. The patient’s skin lesions were nonspecific and could be easily confused with mycosis fungoides (MF). To ensure diagnostic accuracy, we performed a biopsy of the skin from the right hip during the examination, the results of which were available within a week. Considering the characteristics of the skin lesions, we temporarily suspected an adverse cutaneous reaction to vitamin K1 (eczematous type), and the CM diagnosis was “wet sores.” The tongue coating, pulse, and skin lesion characteristics were consistent with those of blood-heat syndrome. We considered blood heat and Yang floating as the main pathogeneses according to the CM theory.
The erythema area was reduced, the degree of itching was alleviated, and the patient’s condition gradually stabilized by November 12, 2020. The patient’s tongue was reddish with a white and greasy coating and her pulse was slippery. A skin biopsy was performed , and a histological examination showed an intense perivascular infiltrate composed of lymphocytes and histiocytic cells with rare plasma cells and eosinophils. Prominent endothelial cell swelling was also observed. The infiltrate extended through the reticular dermis into the subcutaneous fat and focally surrounded the eccrine and neural structures. The lower half of the dermis was markedly sclerotic with thickened eosinophilic collagen bundles. These findings were consistent with our diagnosis.
A microscopic examination revealed a normal epidermis and more lymphocytes infiltrating the blood vessels in the dermis, several of which mimicked Pautrier microabscesses . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed that T cells were positive for CD3, CD5, and CD4 and partially positive for CD8 . B cells were positive for CD20 and CD79a . Histocytes were positive for CD68, natural killer cells were positive for CD56, and mastocytes were negative for CD117 . B cells tested positive for common acute lymphoblastic leukemia antigen (CD10), negative for platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 was negative for (CD31), and negative for syndecan-1 (CD138) . We ruled out MF because the IHC results suggested that the cells in this case were multi-lineage and polyclonal.