A 5-year-old female child, with a history of recurrent admissions due to non-specific abdominal pain, referred to the pediatric emergency department of Besat Hospital Hamadan, Iran in December 2018. She had complaints of vague generalized abdominal pain, which began gradually few days before admission. Associated symptoms included nausea, loss of appetite and abdominal swelling in the past recent days. At the physical examination, we found a noticable abdominal distention, and generalized palpatory tenderness. At the time, the patient was febrile as well.
Initial laboratory testing showed leukocytosis of 13.1 × 103/μL. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were tested for any potential inflammation, and reported about 92 mm and positive, respectively. Urinalysis (U/A) was normal and no bacterial growth was found after 24 hours in urine culture. The abdominal ultrasound scan (US) showed a number of cystic lesions with an approximate dimension of 74×100 mm and 43×87 mm in the abdomen and pelvis, respectively. In addition, a picture of a heterozygous lesion, measuring 23×27 mm was seen within one of the cystic lesions, suggesting hematoma. Furthermore, a mild pelvic free fluid was reported.
For further examination, a computed tomography (CT) scan was recommended. In the abdominopelvic CT scan performed with an intravenous contrast, a huge cystic mass with approximately 150×140×50 mm in diameter on the right side of the abdomen was observed (, ). Its upper border extended to the lower margin of the liver and the lower extension to the pelvis and adjacent to the bladder. The mass displaced the small intestine and colon to the left side of the abdominal cavity, and it seems to be an intraperitoneal mass. However, due to the mass size, it was impossible to distinguish precisely the retroperitoneal or intraperitoneal masses. The mass contains fine and tiny septa. The suggested differential diagnosis included lymphangiomas, cystic teratomas, and cystic lesions, originated from the adnexa and cystic lesions from the source of peritoneum, as well as infectious cysts (hydatid cyst).
The patient underwent surgery and the huge mass was excised entirely . In order to identify the main identity of the mass, it was sent to the pathology department for further assessments. The patient had a favorable postsurgical evolution, without presenting any complications or recurrences in the past year. The histopathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of the mesenteric cyst.