J.R. was a 3210 gram child born to a 21-year-old gravida 1, para 1 mother by vaginal delivery at 36 weeks of gestation. The mother received appropriate prenatal care and the pregnancy was uncomplicated. There was no gestational history of tobacco, alcohol, illicit substance or medication use. A cardiac echogenic focus and possible anatomic heart defect was noted on routine prenatal ultrasound examination and the child was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit for management at birth. A thoracic echocardiogram showed mitral stenosis, aortic stenosis and coarctation of the aorta. Surgical repair of the coarctation was conducted. A right diaphragmatic eventration was simultaneously repaired. During this initial hospitalization no cardiac arrhythmias were monitored on telemetry. Due to the structural heart defects a chromosome analysis including fluorescence in situ hybridization for both DiGeorge loci was performed and revealed no abnormalities. A diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome was made by two independent geneticists based on phenotypic features. Clinical features in this child consistent with the diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome included arched eyebrows with sparse hair laterally, eversion of the lateral lower eyelid, a cleft palate, bifid uvula, broad nasal root with depressed nasal tip, and persistent fetal finger tip pads with otherwise normal dermatoglyphics. Neuroimaging revealed severe corpus callosum hypoplasia and ophthalmologic examination showed optic nerve atrophy bilaterally. Congenital hypothyroidism was also detected. Further cytogenetic analysis using telomere probes was conducted without detection of abnormalities.
The subsequent hospital course was complicated by numerous infections secondary to hypogammaglobulinemia and he was finally discharged to home at 3 months of age. After one week at home, he was noted to be cyanotic and non-responsive and was re-admitted to the hospital where the patient was considered to be septic and placed on broad spectrum antibiotics.
At 6.5 months of age, he was admitted to the hospital with a urinary tract infection. Sinus bradyarrythmia was recorded associated with hypoxemia with prolonged pauses progressing to asystole. Resuscitation with epinephrine was successful. Bronchoscopy was performed and showed normal airways. A cardiac echocardiogram showed diastolic dysfunction. He was started on supplemental O2 at 1/8 L by nasal canula and received furosemide, aldactazide and verapamil. No other episodes of cardiac rhythm disturbance were noted on telemetry during the remaining hospital stay.
At 9 months of age, he was admitted to the hospital in respiratory distress. He was ventilated mechanically and monitored in the ICU. While on cardiac monitoring he developed a tachyarrhythmia without 1:1 conduction then prolongation of the QT interval followed by an idioventricular rhythm which slowed to asystole. External pacing failed. After alternate doses of epinephrine and atropine the patient returned to sinus rhythm. Thoracic echocardiogram showed normal ventricular function with normal velocities across inlet and outlet valves. Troponin levels remained less than 1 and there was no other evidence of ischemia. Because of the previous episodes of bradyarrythmia, a dual chamber epicardial pacemaker was placed without complications. His ventricular and diastolic function normalized and diuretics were discontinued. He remained hemodynamically stable but continued hospitalization was required for various nosocomial infections. The family elected to make an advance directive to prevent further resuscitative efforts. Approximately one month later during hospitalization for respiratory bronchiolitis, he had another episode of bradyarrythmia which progressed to asystole and death. The pacemaker was queried and found to have functioned within normal parameters. The family consented for a limited autopsy.
The heart weighed twice the normal expected weight and there was biventricular hypertrophy, with the right ventricular wall thickness being about four times the normal thickness and the left ventricular wall thickness about twice normal . The right atrium and the coronary sinus were dilated and the left atrium was small with endocardial fibroelastosis . The mitral valve was stenotic, the circumference being about 3/4ths the normal circumference. The valve leaflets were thick and myxoid, and the chordae tendinae were shortened. The posterior leaflet of the mitral valve was directly inserted into the papillary muscle. There was mild aortic stenosis and the aortic valve leaflets were thick and dysplastic. The pulmonary valve circumference was about one-third greater than normal. The membranous portion of the interventricular septum was about three times the normal length and mapping of the junctional tissue revealed that the atrioventricular node was displaced caudally and the bifurcation of the Bundle of His was likewise displaced caudally . The valve leaflet was made up of primarily mucopolysaccharide material (blue stain). The placement of the pacemaker was verified to be appropriate and dense adhesions were present between the pacer wires and the abdominal wall and bowel loops.
Postmortem pulmonary angiogram revealed severe pruning of the pulmonary vascular tree and absence of the background 'blush' produced by filling of intracinar arteries. Microscopic examination revealed marked luminal narrowing or fibrous occlusion of intra-acinar arteries . In addition there was marked dilatation of lymphatics within pulmonary septa.
The patient exhibited recurrent infections requiring numerous hospitalizations. These included Klebsiella pneumonia, RSV pneumonia, Enterococcus sepsis, Candida albicans urinary tract infection, Enterobacter urosepsis, sinusitis and otitis media.
Immune evaluation revealed persistent lymphopenia; however, the percentages of T-, B-, and NK-cell subpopulations were normal . Furthermore, lymphoproliferative responses to mitogens PHA, PWM and alloantigens were normal. However, lymphoproliferative response to Concavalin A stimulation was absent. Serum IgG and IgA levels were markedly decreased, and antibody responses to tetanus toxoid and Hemophilus influenzae type B (HiB) were decreased. Following immunization with conjugated pneumococcal vaccine (Prevnar), antibody responses were decreased to 4 of 7 serotypes. Serum albumin levels were normal, and there was no evidence of protein loss through the gastrointestinal or urinary systems, and there was no evidence of chylous thorax. Thus, IVIG therapy was initiated. However, the patient shortly succumbed from cardiac arrhythmia. Autopsy revealed severe thymic involution (the thymus weighed 1 g.) and lymphoid depletion in the spleen.
Other findings included nesidioblastosis, vacuolation of the adrenal cortex, undescended testes, contraction band necrosis of the muscularis propria of the gastro-intestinal tract and growth retardation with growth parameters being < 3rd percentile.