A 78-year-old man with hematochezia was diagnosed with two synchronous rectal cancers 7 years prior to presentation. One tumor was located at the rectosigmoid junction (stage T3N1M0, well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma), and the second was in the distal rectum, (stage T3N1M0, well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma). The patient had a 10-year history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension treated with medication. No family history of CRC was noted. Physical examination was unremarkable. Preoperative CRT followed by a very low anterior resection with diverting ileostomy was performed. Preoperative CRT included 5 days of 5-FU/leucovorin infusion followed by radiation therapy delivered using the four-field technique with photon radiation administered five times per week with a daily fraction of 1.8 Gy, for a total of 40 Gy. The final pathological diagnosis revealed that the rectosigmoid cancer was ypT3N1M0, and the lower rectal cancer was ypT0N0M0 (no residual cancer, pathological complete response). The postoperative course was uneventful and the ileostomy was reversed 8 months later, after completion of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy, which included 6 months of oral 5-FU/leucovorin.
During follow-up, multiple lymph node metastases in the para-aortic and supraclavicular regions were found 20 months after resection and chemotherapy was given, including 14 days of oral capecitabine, 1 day of oxizaliplatin (CAPOX), and bevacizumab. Bevacizumab (7.5 mg/kg) was administered intravenously on day 1 for 1 cycle. CAPOX+bevacizumab was continued for 3 years for a total of 33 cycles of CAPOX (combined with 23 cycles of bevacizumab). Progression of lymph node metastases was noted and the chemotherapy regimen was changed. Second-line chemotherapy included 14 days of oral capecitabine, 1 day of irinotecan (XELIRI), and bevacizumab. Three cycles of XELIRI+bevacizumab (7.5 mg/kg) were continued over 3 months. One month after the last course of chemotherapy (5 years after resection), the patient presented with pneumaturia and fecaluria and described three previous episodes of hematochezia. The patient had no other symptoms associated with altered bowel habits. Laboratory tests demonstrated signs of mild inflammation (white blood cell count 11,200 μL, C-reactive protein 2.2 mg/dL). A small amount of extraluminal air between the prostate and rectum, adjacent to the anastomotic site, was observed on computed tomography (CT) scan , which was not noted on the previous CT scans. Routine surveillance colonoscopy was not performed after the initial surgery as care was focused on management of multiple lymph node metastases. The latest colonoscopy revealed ulceration and fistula formation at the anastomotic site . Contrast radiography was consistent with a fistula at the anastomotic site . Only granulation tissue, including inflammatory changes, was seen in biopsies taken from the anastomotic site. Colonoscopy, contrast radiography, and cystoscopy demonstrated no recurrent tumor or obvious anastomotic-urethral fistula at the anastomosis, but an anastomotic-urethral fistula was suspected based on symptoms including pneumaturia and fecaluria. Transverse colostomy was performed and has not been reversed because of the continued need for chemotherapy. At this time, the patient has no symptoms associated with a leak and CT scan shows no air around the anastomotic site.