A 46-year-old African-American woman presented to the University Emergency Department complaining of severe abdominal pain. On presentation, she reported experiencing dysuria, urinary frequency and urgency, as well as incontinence and abdominal fullness for several weeks. Her medical history was unremarkable with no history of sexually transmitted diseases and no current medications. Her heart rate was 98, blood pressure 124/59mmHg, and her temperature was 37.6°C. Physical examination revealed increased tenderness in her right and left lower quadrants. Urine analysis revealed proteinuria, hematuria, pyuria (>50 white blood cells per high-power field), and positive urinary leukocyte esterase. A culture of the patient’s urine, which was turbid, yielded pure growth of S. agalactiae at 108 colony forming units per liter. The patient had a hematocrit of 17%, a white blood cell count of 15.4 × 109/L, glucose of 816mg/100mL, serum creatinine of 1.2mg/100mL, and HbA1C of 10.6.
A transvaginal ultrasound revealed a fibroid uterus and a heterogeneous fluid collection in the patient’s pelvis. Examination by computed tomography (CT) showed a massive peripherally enhancing, low-attenuating fluid collection measuring approximately 17.4cm by 10.4cm within her pelvis extending to the right adnexa . A second smaller collection was noted within the pouch of Douglas; the two fluid collections did not appear to communicate. There were several reactive inguinal, mesenteric, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes as well as subtle areas of right renal cortical non-enhancement suggestive of pyelonephritis. The bladder wall was markedly thickened with surrounding soft tissue stranding. The patient was given one dose of ceftriaxone empirically. Her antibiotic regimen was then changed to vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam for broad empiric coverage and she was admitted for management of her abdominopelvic abscess and UTI. She was also newly diagnosed with diabetes and placed on sliding scale insulin to manage her hyperglycemia. Her anemia was attributed to iron deficiency due to uterine leiomyomas.
A pigtail drainage catheter was placed using ultrasound and fluoroscopic guidance in order to drain the patient’s abdominopelvic abscess and this yielded a septic aspirate that was culture positive for abundant S. agalactiae. Antibiotic-susceptibility testing showed the isolate was resistant to tetracycline, intermediate to clindamycin and erythromycin, and sensitive to penicillin and vancomycin. A day after abscess drainage, a CT scan showed near complete interval resolution of the large pelvic fluid collection . The patient subsequently developed acute kidney insufficiency (creatinine 5.0mg/100mL), leucocytosis, and fever. Bacteremia was suspected, however, blood cultures taken at this time were negative. Urine analysis revealed persistent cystitis with pyuria and leukocyte esterase. Her renal failure was attributed to multifactorial acute tubular necrosis due to sepsis and vancomycin toxicity. After 4 days of vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam, the patient was switched to intravenous ceftriaxone (2g intravenous/24 hours) and 2 days later her fever and abdominal pain were resolved. The results of a repeat urine test were culture-negative. The patient was discharged on outpatient intravenous ceftriaxone and the pelvic drain was removed 2 weeks later. Metformin and insulin glargine treatment was commenced for diabetes management. She remained afebrile and was well on subsequent outpatient visits. Her acute kidney insufficiency resolved within 7 days of discharge (creatinine 1.5mg/100mL). An outpatient hysterectomy was planned for management of the patient’s anemia due to uterine leiomyomas.