A 41-year-old female was referred to the Michigan State University (MSU) endocrinology clinic in 2008 for elevated 24-h urinary free cortisol which was presumably obtained to evaluate hirsutism and irregular menstrual cycles. She had increased facial hair for more than 20 years, which she had managed cosmetically with intermittent waxing. She attained menarche around age 13, and had regular menstrual cycles till her early 20s, at which time she started to have irregular periods and was told she had polycystic ovarian syndrome. She has two children. The first child was conceived spontaneously and the second pregnancy required clomiphene therapy. Other medical history included hypothyroidism following radioactive iodine treatment for a toxic thyroid nodule and depression.
On physical examination, her blood pressure was (122/80 mmHg) and body mass index (BMI) was 22.6 Kg/m2, both normal. She had mildly increased facial hair on her chin and a palpable thyroid nodule in the right lobe. The remainder of the physical exam was normal, and she did not have any clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome.
On laboratory evaluation, 24-h urinary cortisol levels were 317 mcg (normal 3.5–45 mcg /day). Even though she didn’t have any signs or symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome elevated urinary cortisol levels required further evaluation. Repeated overnight and 48 h dexamethasone suppression tests (DST) failed to suppress cortisol levels and 24-h urine cortisol levels were persistently elevated at multiple times. .
ACTH levels were inappropriately normal, “too high” for elevated cortisol levels suggesting ACTH dependent hypercortisolism. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary was obtained, which did not show any abnormalities. (See Fig. a and b).
Total testosterone levels were elevated with a level of 136 ng/dl (< 20–80) dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) levels were 278 mcg/dL (normal range 35.0–430.0). She was started on metformin with some improvement in hirsutism. Spironolactone was not given due to prior history of allergy. Pelvic ultrasound showed a simple cyst measuring 1.1 cm in the left ovary likely representing a follicle.
During the subsequent years she continued to have elevated cortisol levels with some nonspecific weight gain. Her blood pressure remained normal. Her hemoglobin A1C levels were normal and no clinical signs of Cushing’s syndrome developed over the next 10 years. She met with another endocrinologist for a second opinion who referred her for an Inferior petrosal sinus sampling. The sampling suggested pituitary source of ACTH. However, she was told that no further workup was needed till she developed clinical signs of Cushing’s. MRI of the abdomen was obtained that did not show adrenal mass or enlargement. A Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) obtained in May 2013, revealed osteopenia. A repeat bone mineral density (BMD) in December 2016 did not show any significant deterioration.
To determine if she had glucocorticoid resistance syndrome, genetic testing was performed (courtesy of Dr. Ameilia Sertedaki, Ph.D., Division of Endocrinology, First Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece 1152).
The coding regions of the human glucocorticoid receptor gene (hGR, NR3C1) were sequenced and showed no mutation. Her mother and daughters were tested for plasma cortisol levels, which were normal.
In order to determine if higher doses of dexamethasone will result in cortisol suppression, increasing doses of dexamethasone were administered (2, 4 and 8 mg) at night and plasma cortisol was measured the following morning. Plasma levels of dexamethasone were also obtained to confirm the patient had taken the prescribed doses of dexamethasone. The results are shown in Table .
To date (March 2018), she continues to have hypercortisolism without clinical stigmata of Cushing’s syndrome.