An 84-year-old female was admitted to our institution with a complaint of nausea and vomiting. Her medical history included cataract surgery, hypertension, and multiple lacunar infarctions. The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol intake. On admission, her blood pressure was 150/74 mmHg, heart rate was 86 beats/min, body temperature was 36.5°C, and oxygen saturation level was 98% in room air. On initial clinical examination, her weight was 44.5 kg, height was 142 cm and body mass index (BMI) was 22.1 kg/m2. Inspection of her palpebral conjunctiva revealed no evidence of anemia. Chest auscultation revealed no evidence of abnormal heart murmurs and no rales or other abnormal respiratory sounds. The abdomen was slightly distended, but normal peristalsis was evident. Mild tenderness was detected in her upper abdomen. No masses were palpable, and no signs of peritoneal irritation were detected. A physical examination revealed no edema or cyanosis. Although the chest radiography revealed a normal cardiothoracic ratio of 59.5%, the abdomen was markedly dilated and bloated, which was subsequently identified to be caused by the gastric antrum and duodenum incarcerated behind the heart. Abdominal computed tomography revealed an esophageal hiatal hernia with incarceration of the gastric antrum and duodenal bulb . Blood chemistry analysis revealed an elevated white blood cell count (12,000/μL), normal C-reactive protein levels (0.1 mg/dL), an elevated glucose level (206 mg/dL), mild hypoproteinemia (6.5 g/dl), mild hypoalbuminemia (3.6 g/dl), and evidence of coagulation dysfunction (prothrombin time, 75%; international normalized ratio, 1.19). Upper gastroendoscopy revealed severe deformation of the stomach and the presence of massive contents within. Stenosis was evident in the region prior to the descending portion of the duodenum. Therefore, gastrofluorography under gastroendoscopic guidance was performed. Gastrofluorography confirmed the prolapse of the antrum and duodenal bulb into the esophageal hernial sac . Although repositioning of the prolapse was successfully performed under gastroendoscopic guidance, reprolapse occurred immediately. Therefore, the following surgical treatment was performed on Day 11 of hospitalization.
The upper median laparotomic approach was used to expose the peritoneal cavity. The triangular ligament of the liver was incised to facilitate mobilization and rightward displacement of the left lobe of the liver. The gastric antrum and duodenal bulb involved in the paraesophageal hernia were noted on the right side of the esophagus . First, the gastric antrum was relocated to its normal position. Then the median arcuate ligament was exposed anterior to the right and left crura of the diaphragm and above the celiac artery. After exfoliating the tissue around the esophagus, the position of vagus nerve was confirmed. The median arcuate ligament was fixed to the anterior and posterior walls of the lesser curvature of the upper body of the stomach without damage to the vagus nerve. Finally, the right and left crura of the diaphragm were sutured using absorbable sutures, and the hiatal hernia was successfully corrected. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. On postoperative Day 7, plain abdominal computed tomography and gastrofluorography revealed a normal stomach, which was not dilated. The patient was ambulatory at discharge.