A 65-year-old woman was admitted with a history of yellowish pigmentation of the skin or whites of the eyes for 10 d on March 4, 2022.
On recording history, the patient reported a 17-d history of consecutive use of PM (30 g/day) owing to insomnia and dreaminess from February 11, 2022. She had fatigue, loss of appetite, and jaundice; however, she had no nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, or fever. There was no history of trauma, surgery, drug and alcohol abuse, or blood transfusions, without recent travel history or family history of liver or blood system disorders.
Nine years ago, the patient suffered drug-induced liver injury caused by taking traditional Chinese medicine. After 3 wk of treatment, her liver function returned to normal and was maintained until this episode (the last liver function test was on October 12, 2021).
The patient had no history of trauma, surgery, drug and alcohol abuse, or blood transfusions, without recent travel history or family history of liver or blood system disorders.
The patient’s vital signs were stable. Skin and scleral jaundice were evident. Auscultation of both lungs and heart was clear, with regular heart rate and rhythm. No abdominal tenderness or rebound tenderness was noted, with a negative Murphy’s sign and mild percussion in the liver area. No flapping tremor was detected.
Liver function tests revealed severe acute liver injury. Complete blood count revealed agranulocytosis (erythrocytes 4.07 × 109 cells/L, platelets 159 × 109 cells/L, leukocytes 1.17 × 109 cells/L, and absolute neutrophil count 0.02 × 109 cells/L). Other possible causes of liver damage were ruled out by checking hepatitis B virus surface antigen, hepatitis A, C, D, and E virus antibodies, Epstein-Barr virus antibodies, cytomegalovirus antibodies, autoimmune liver disease antibodies, immunoglobulins, thyroid function, ceruloplasmin, etc. The results are summarized in Table .
The patient’s liver ultrasound showed normal echotexture and liver outline and non-dilated intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts.
Cytological evaluation of bone marrow puncture revealed a myeloid/erythroid ratio of 0.16, and the erythrocyte and myeloid series cells were 47% and 7.5% of all nucleated cells, indicating severe agranulocytosis .