An 81-year-old man presented to the emergency department with acute onset of fevers, rigors and vomiting. In the preceding week, he had a non-specific prodromal malaise. The patient’s past medical history was significant for diabetes mellitus, ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, benign prostatic hypertrophy, type 1 hypersensitivity reaction to penicillin and surgical resection of a colorectal carcinoma 5 years previously.
Significant findings of initial examination included fever and generalised abdominal tenderness. Initial laboratory findings were indicative of acute kidney injury, with urea measured at 15.8 mmol l−1, creatinine at 193 µmol l−1, bicarbonate at 17 mmol l−1 and eGFR at 30 ml min−1. The patient’s haematology profile revealed iron deficiency anaemia, with haemoglobin measurement of 7.3 g/dl and mean corpuscular volume of 79.2 fl. His total white cell count was 8.6×109 l−1, with neutrophils of 8.0×109 l−1 and lymphocyte count of 0.5×109 l−1.
Blood cultures sent from the emergency department were flagged for growth at 12 h, with identification of E. coli. Antibiotic susceptibility testing showed resistance to ampicillin, amoxicillin, co-amoxiclav, cefuroxime, cefalotin, ciprofloxacin and gentamicin . E. coli, with a corresponding antibiogram, was recovered from a mid-stream urinalysis.
The patient underwent a renal ultrasound, which revealed a hypoechoic cystic area, with dimensions of 7×3.2 cm. This was confirmed by a computed tomography on the kidney, which showed a cystic structure with an enhancing rim and associated perinephric stranding. There were no internal septations or nodules within the cyst.
The patient was diagnosed with community-acquired pyelonephritis, with infected cyst, and secondary bacteraemia due to E. coli. Taking into account the patient’s type 1 hypersensitivity to penicillin, initial empiric treatment in the emergency department consisted of ciprofloxacin and gentamicin. This was escalated to Meropenem in light of the associated antibiogram. Further testing did not find evidence of either ESBL or AmpC production and confirmed susceptibility to Aztreonam. This enabled de-escalation to IV Aztreonam.
Drainage of the cyst was performed under ultrasound and fluoroscopic guidance within the interventional radiology department. Fluid from this cyst had microscopic findings of many pus cells and moderate amounts of Gram-negative bacilli seen by Gram stain. This fluid culture was positive for E. coli with an identical antibiogram to the blood culture isolate.