The patient provided informed consent for this case report. It was approved by the Ethics Committee of The People's Hospital of Yan’an.
A 77-year-old man was admitted to the hospital on April 3, 2016, and complained of obvious pain on the right side of the scrotum with 2 tough tumor masses and clear perimeters. The larger one was 11.0 cm × 9.3 cm × 8.1 cm, and the smaller one was 3.1 cm × 2.0 cm × 2.0 cm. Six months prior, the patient inadvertently found the right scrotum swollen. In the past nearly 2 months, the tumors increased in size rapidly with obvious pain, but no other symptoms were found. Physical examination revealed that 2 tough tumor masses touched the right side of the scrotum, with clear perimeters and normal tumorous activity. The penis and testicles were normal in appearance, except the penis was compressed to the left side. An ultrasound examination found that there were 2 hyporesponsive areas with clear contours, full form, and the real echo was nonuniform at the right scrotum. In addition, color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) showed a rich blood flow signal. After that, this patient received surgical resection to treat the 2 tumor nodules.
After surgery, the resected tumors were fixed in 10% neutral formalin solution, after which they underwent conventional dehydration and paraffin embedding. They were then sliced with a thickness of 4 μm and then prepared for hematoxylin–eosin and immunohistochemical staining. The details of antibodies for immunohistochemistry are listed in Table . The primary antibodies included signal transduction and STAT6, cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), cluster of differentiation 99 (CD99), vimentin, mesothelial cell (MC), calretinin (CR), cluster of differentiation 10 (CD10), Bcl-2 protein, smooth muscle actin (SMA), actin, desmin, cluster of differentiation 117 (CD117), S-100 protein, Melanoma Marker Antibody (HMB45), cluster of differentiation 68 (CD68), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cluster of differentiation 21 (CD21), cluster of differentiation 35 (CD35), and Ki-67 protein (Ki-67). All reagents were purchased from the company as shown in Table . Of those, STAT6 was polyclonal rabbit antihuman antibody with concentrated reagent, and dilution ratio of 1:400.