A 66-year-old African American man with relapsed refractory MM and peripheral neuropathy presented to our neurosurgery clinic with a 1-day history of sharp, nonradiating midthoracic back pain and associated numbness and weakness in both legs. He had difficulty ambulating. He had been diagnosed with MM about 3.5 years ago, when he presented with bony pain and imaging revealed lytic bone lesions. His bone marrow biopsy at the time was notable for 70% involvement with MM. Gene expression profiling revealed a high-risk CD-1 subtype, and the result of fluorescence in situ hybridization was notable for t(11;14). He was diagnosed with kappa light chain, International Staging System stage 1, Durie-Salmon stage IIIA MM. Over the past 3.5 years, he had received five prior lines of therapy, including bortezomib, lenalidomide, pomalidomide, carfilzomib, daratumumab, high-dose melphalan, autologous stem cell transplant, and venetoclax. In one of his prior progressive disease events, he was noted to have extramedullary disease with subcutaneous plasmacytomas.
The patient’s motor examination revealed 4/5 strength in hip flexion and knee extension bilaterally. His patellar and Achilles deep tendons reflexes were 1+ bilaterally. His sensation to light touch was intact but subjectively decreased in a patchy distribution below the T5–T6 dermatome. On the basis of these findings, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine was performed, which revealed two contrast-enhancing intramedullary lesions, with the largest at the T2–T3 level and a smaller lesion at T6–T7 . The result of MRI of the brain with and without contrast was unremarkable.
A working diagnosis of a neoplastic process was made. Given the rarity of MM with CNS metastasis, a biopsy for pathologic analysis was recommended. The patient underwent a thoracic T2–T3 laminectomy and intradural exploration. The spinal cord appeared mildly expanded. Ultrasound was used to localize the intramedullary tumor. Using standard microsurgical technique, a midline myelotomy was performed and immediately revealed a tan, well-circumscribed mass. The tumor was circumferentially mobilized, and complete tumor resection was performed .
The histological diagnosis yielded metastatic MM with high cellularity, amphophilic cytoplasm, rounded cell borders, and irregular pleomorphic nuclei. The myeloid component was demarcated from CNS tissue consistent with spinal cord. Numerous mitotic figures were observed, up to seven per high-power field. The neoplastic cells were immunoreactive for CD138 with only scattered overexpression of p53 interpreted as physiological upregulation. The patient’s Ki67 index was 75%. In situ hybridization revealed strong positive expression of kappa light chain with minimal lambda staining.
Postoperatively, the patient’s motor function improved from his preoperative baseline with mild worsening of proprioception. His neurologic examination result remained stable at 3 months. He completed fractionated stereotactic radiosurgery with 2 Gy in eight fractions.