A 29-year-old woman presented to our clinic with progressive fatigue following treatment with ipilimumab and nivolumab for metastatic melanoma. Three years prior, she had undergone superficial excision of a posterior-auricular atypical melanocytic neoplasm, and was subsequently followed through observation alone. One month prior to her initial referral to our clinic, she developed diffuse pruritus with liver function tests demonstrating an ALT of 1166 U/L (range: 0–32 U/L), AST of 281 U/L (range: 0–32 U/L), alkaline phosphatase of 281 U/L (range: 35–104 U/L) and otherwise normal routine laboratory parameters. She underwent upper endoscopy that showed a 2.2 cm, hyperpigmented mass causing a biliary obstruction at the major papilla. Biliary stenting and a biopsy of the mass were completed. The results were consistent with malignant melanoma; a BRAF V600E mutation was also detected. Baseline cross-sectional imaging was completed for staging and no additional sites of disease were identified beyond the mass detected by endoscopy. After referral to our clinic, she was started on combination nivolumab (1 mg/kg) and ipilimumab (3 mg/kg) every 3 weeks for four cycles. She developed immune-related primary hypothyroidism after cycle two, for which she began levothyroxine.
She then reported having gradually worsening fatigue and dyspnoea on exertion 3 weeks after completing her fourth dose of nivolumab and ipilimumab. On examination, she was pale appearing and exhibited a regular tachycardic rhythm. She had normal pulmonary and abdominal exams. The heart rate was 117 bpm and blood pressure was 115/79 mm Hg. Haematological parameters revealed a haemoglobin of 61g/Lg/L, decreased from 124 g/L 3 weeks prior ; the white cell count and platelet counts were normal. The mean corpuscular volume was 85 (range 81–99 fL) and the ferritin was elevated to 457 ng/mL (range 10–220 ng/mL). Haemolysis labs demonstrated an undetectable haptoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase of 492 U/L (range 116–245 U/L) and a strongly positive direct antiglobulin test (Coombs) with elution of broadly specific warm autoantibodies. A presumptive diagnosis of autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (AIHA) was made, and the patient was admitted to the hospital for transfusion support and intravenous corticosteroids. She received two units of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) and 1 g of methylprednisolone every 12 hours over 2 days. Once symptoms improved and her haemoglobin had stabilised at 79 g/L, she was discharged home on 1 mg/kg oral prednisone without a scheduled taper.
One week following discharge, she reported worsening fatigue and dyspnoea on exertion. The haemoglobin was found to be 76 g/d with continued evidence of haemolysis, and paradoxically, the reticulocyte count was found to be inappropriately low for the degree of anaemia—the absolute reticulocyte count was 5.9×103 with a Reticulocyte Production Index (RPI) of 0.0. Steroids were discontinued given their apparent poor control of anaemia. She started mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg twice per day; the following week her haemoglobin was found to be 64 g/L and she was again transfused two units of PRBC, and mycophenolate mofetil was increased to 1500 mg twice per days. Subsequent laboratory testing completed a week later again showed severe anaemia with a haemoglobin of 45 g/L and ongoing reticulocytopenia. At this point, she was readmitted to the hospital, intravenous corticosteroids were reinitiated, and a bone marrow biopsy and aspirate were performed. The marrow core biopsy sections were hypercellular with an atypical lymphoid infiltrate and a paucity of early red cell precursors present . Twenty-five per cent of all cells stained as CD8+, and the CD4:CD8 ratio was abnormally shifted to 1:3, showing predominance of CD8+ T cells . Perforin was also increased suggesting a cytotoxic T cell phenotype. T cell receptor gene rearrangement was assessed on the bone marrow aspirate by PCR and showed a polyclonal T cell population. The OncoPlus universal cancer mutation panel at University of Chicago, a next-generation sequencing assay of 147 genes designed for both solid and haematological malignancies, was performed on the bone marrow aspirate. This did not identify any pathogenic mutations.
These observations were consistent with CD8+ T cell-mediated PRCA. Given the lack of reticulocyte response to corticosteroids and the short trial of mycophenolate mofetil, T cell-directed immunosuppression was initiated with cyclosporine A (5 mg/kg/day in divided doses) along with continued 1 mg/kg prednisone administration for AIHA. Within 1 week, the absolute reticulocyte count had increased, and by 3 weeks the absolute reticulocyte count had increased from 2.4×103 to 226×103 with an RPI of 2.1, reflecting an appropriate bone marrow response to the degree of anaemia. Within 1 month, her haemoglobin had normalised at 120 g/L . The direct antiglobulin test (Coombs) turned negative thereafter. A steroid taper was completed, and all immunosuppression was ceased within 3 months. No further immunotherapy was given after the initial anaemia diagnosis or after resolution of the heme-irAEs. On repeat imaging, the patient experienced a complete response to ipilimumab/nivolumab and remains in observation alone with continued response.