A 65-year-old female with a past medical history significant for heart failure with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, stage III chronic kidney disease and substance abuse disorder presented with altered mental status. On presentation, she had notable bilateral conjunctival hemorrhages, splinter hemorrhages, and signs of hypervolemia to include jugular venous distension and pitting edema of both lower extremities. “Track marks” were evident in the cubital fossa along with scattered hyperpigmented ovaloid lesions consistent with “skin popping” injuries. Admission laboratory results showed elevated blood urea nitrogen 65 mg/dL, hyperkalemia of 6 mmol/L, acute kidney injury (creatinine of 4.93 mg/dL from baseline 1.57 mg/dL) and a urinalysis consistent with urinary tract infection, white blood cell count showed no leukocytosis (WBC 5.6 k/uL), hemoglobin showed anemia (Hgb 10.8 gm/dL), platelets were 172 k/uL, a coagulopathy with prothrombin 16.7 s, international normalized ratio 1.9, liver function showed aspartate aminotransferase of 48 units/L, alanine transaminase 21 units/L, and elevated high sensitivity troponin I 838 ng/L which decreased over the following hospital days. Further, the patient was COVID-19 positive. Dexamethasone, remdesivir, and aztreonam were given at initial presentation. Her urine cultured positive for Proteus mirabilis (10,000 to 100,000 cfu) and antibiotics were narrowed to reported sensitivity on hospital day 2. Nonetheless, she persistently reported chills and demonstrated continued alteration of mental status. Blood cultures were negative.
A transthoracic echocardiogram completed on hospital day 3 for her volume overload and acute decompensated heart failure highlighted interval worsening of her moderate-severe aortic regurgitation and new small mobile echo densities on the ventricular side of the aortic valve, suspicious for vegetation . Computed tomography of the head on hospital day 3 revealed several foci of hypodensity in the frontal and parietal lobes, confirmed by immediate follow-up MRI to indicate acute infarcts . Concern for other embolic phenomena prompted CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis which returned positive for new nodular density in the left lower lung lobe and scattered hypoattenuating nodules in the liver . An abnormal signal in the pancreatic head not amenable to characterization beyond mass versus embolic sequalae was also noted. Heparin infusion was initiated given a concern for diffuse emboli. A week after admission, blood culture resulted positive for cryptococcus. Anti-fungal coverage with micafungin and flucytosine was initiated immediately. On hospital day 11 the patient developed thrombocytopenia (platelet count 30 k/uL) and heparin infusion was ceased for possible heparin induced thrombocytopenia.
Positive Duke’s criteria in the patient included (1) evidence of endocardial involvement on echocardiogram, (2) predisposing risk factor (IVD’s), (3) presence of vascular phenomenon (conjunctival and splinter hemorrhages, septic pulmonary infarct, cerebral emboli) and (4) blood culture positivity. Serum cryptococcal antigen titers returned 1:256 on hospital day 12. After positive antigen titers, Amphotericin was added to flucytosine. On hospital day 13, lumbar puncture revealed an opening pressure of 26 mmHg, glucose 71 mg/dL, protein 32 mg/dL, and lymphocytes 79 microL. Cerebrospinal fluid culture was completed and negative as were Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and immunoglobulin panels. Transesophageal echocardiogram was planned for hospital day 17 but the patients worsening mixed septic and cardiogenic shock resulted in respiratory and hemodynamic failure causing death.