A 45-year-old man, weighing 70 kg and 170 cm in height, presented with complaints of mouth and neck pain and difficulty in swallowing for 3 days, and had been spitting out saliva. He also reported progressive swelling in the neck and inability to open the mouth. An infected third molar had been extracted 3 days previously. He gave no history of difficulty in breathing at rest. He was nil by mouth for more than 8 hours.
On physical examination, he had no respiratory distress, but was uncomfortable because of pain and intra-oral drainage of pus. He was febrile (38.8°C) with a pulse rate of 106 beats per minute, blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg and a respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute. On airway examination mouth-opening was restricted, with an interincisor gap of 1 cm. There was a diffuse tender neck swelling, particularly in the sub-mandibular space. Neck extension was painful and limited. Both the nares were patent and the trachea was palpable in the lower part of neck .
A diagnosis of Ludwig's angina was made and he was scheduled for emergency drainage of the abscess. Awake fiberoptic intubation was planned, with tracheostomy as a backup. The procedure and need for awake nasal intubation was explained to the patient and written informed consent was obtained for awake intubation and tracheostomy. The patient was premedicated with intramuscular glycopyrrolate 0.4 mg. No acid aspiration prophylaxis was administered. Nasal decongestion was accomplished using oxymetazoline 0.05% nasal drops, one drop in each nostril, and lignocaine 4% topical, two drops in each nostril, was used to anesthetize the nasal mucosa. The base of the tongue and pharyngeal walls were anesthetized with lignocaine 2% viscous gargle 5 ml which was spat out, and 10% lignocaine two puffs, which was sprayed onto the posterior pharyngeal wall.
In the operating theater, electrocardiography, noninvasive blood pressure, and pulse oximetry were monitored. Intravenous access was obtained and an infusion of normal saline started. The fiberoptic bronchoscope was checked and loaded with a 6.5 mm ID cuffed endotracheal tube. We were ready to perform an emergency tracheostomy if required and the surgeon was scrubbed and ready. The fiberscope was inserted into the right nostril. We sprayed 4% lignocaine total 3 ml (spray-as-you-go) during fiberscopy, thus making the total dose of lignocaine administered 250 mg. Some difficulty was encountered as pus was draining intra-orally and periglottic edema was present. An orally placed suction catheter, however, made the fiberscopy easier. The trachea was entered and a tube was passed into the trachea. Oxygen was not administered during fiberscopy. After confirmation of tracheal intubation by fiberoptic viewing of tube tip inside the trachea, tube fogging, inability to vocalize and end-tidal carbon dioxide, anesthesia was induced with fentanyl 100 mcg and propofol 100 mg. Vecuronium 5 mg and dexamethasone 8 mg were also given. Anesthesia was continued with nitrous oxide in oxygen and halothane with closed circuit and intermittent positive pressure ventilation. Intra-operatively the vitals were stable. Incision and drainage were performed by the sub-mandibular route and a drain left behind.
At the end of the procedure residual neuromuscular blockade was antagonized using neostigmine 3 mg and glycopyrrolate 0.6 mg. In view of the periglottic edema, the trachea was not extubated, and the patient was moved to a postanesthesia care unit with the endotracheal tube in situ and placed on a T-piece with oxygen at a flow rate of 5 liters per minute. Sedation was attained using midazolam and fentanyl titrated to effect.
The following morning the patient was comfortable, with a pulse rate of 68 beats per minute, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg and oxyhemoglobin saturation of 97%. The neck swelling had subsided. A thorough oral suction was performed and the trachea was extubated. The fiberscope was kept handy; however, no elaborate preparations for tracheostomy or similar procedures were made in view of the edema having subsided and as there was no significant anticipation of airway difficulty. Postextubation recovery was uneventful. The patient was discharged 4 days later.