A 39-year-old man presented to the emergency department with an 8-hour history of an acutely painful enlarged right hemi-scrotum and obstipation. His medical history includes a previous left inguinal hernia repaired laparoscopically at another institution nine years prior. He had noticed an enlarging but easily reducible right groin mass for the past 2 to 3 years, for which he had not sought care. During this current presentation, he appeared in significant discomfort, and diaphoretic. Heart rate was 110 beats per minute but he remained afebrile with normal blood pressure. There was a mass present in the right groin which extended into the right hemi-scrotum measuring approximately 15 cm in size. The mass was firm, tender, and non-reducible. His scrotum had overlying skin erythema. His abdomen was diffusely tender with mild distension but no peritoneal signs.
A diagnosis of an incarcerated right inguinal hernia with concern for strangulation was established immediately after a physical exam. Further imaging or laboratory evidence was deemed unnecessary based upon his clinical findings and concern for strangulation. Intravenous fluid resuscitation and antibiotics were initiated, and the patient was brought immediately to the operating room for open inguinal hernia repair. A large indirect hernia sac was identified and dissected from the cord structures. The hernia sac was then opened revealing markedly dilated necrotic bowel. A gentle retraction did not result in adequate mobilization of the necrotic bowel to the operative field as the bowel appeared to be fixed in the right groin. Therefore, a lower midline laparotomy was made. The bowel was reduced through the hernia defect and examined through the midline incision. A 20 cm segment of necrotic bowel was identified, including a large Meckel’s diverticulum measuring approximately 15 cm in length . There was no perforation. A wound protector was inserted (not shown), and a bowel resection of the necrotic segment and a primary stapled side-to-side anastomosis was performed. The hernia was repaired using a Bassini technique, reinforced with an overlying absorbable Vicryl mesh (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, New Jersey, United States). The midline laparotomy was closed primarily. The patient had a rapid return of bowel function and was discharged from the hospital on post-operative day 2. The patient was seen in follow-up at 6 weeks and remained well. The pathology report confirmed the presence of a large Meckel’s diverticulum containing pancreatic tissue.