A 12 year old Sri Lankan girl presented with crooked legs and progressive difficulty in walking for 1 year duration. She did not complain of any leg pain, joint pain or proximal muscle weakness. There was no history of trauma, fractures, abdominal pain, vomiting constipation, neck swelling or renal calculi. She had been relatively healthy up to now taking part in athletic events in school until the development of these symptoms. Her menses were regular following attaining menarche at the age of 11 years. She was a product of a non consanguineous marriage and both her siblings were healthy. Family history was nil of note for any renal disease or multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). Her diet was deficient in milk and meat products. Bilateral stapling of knees done 6 months back did not lead to any symptomatic resolution. On examination she had bilateral valgus deformities of the knees without any other clinical features of Rickets or dysmorphism. No other joint deformities were noted. Height and weight were age appropriate and she was in Tanner 2 in pubertal development. The rest of the systemic examination was normal.
X ray imaging of the lower limbs revealed bilateral slipped upper femoral epiphysis (SUFE) and bilateral genu valgus deformity of the knees. As SUFE is associated with a wide range of endocrine and metabolic disorders she was screened for these diseases. Ionized calcium levels were 1.5 mmol/l (1–1.3 mmol/l) which was repeated and confirmed. Serum phosphate levels were low at 2.3 mg/dl (2.5–4.5 mg/dl). Serum Alkaline phosphate levels (ALP) were elevated at 3210 U/L (age matched reference range 182–587 U/L). Serum intact Parathyroid Hormone (PTH) levels were 796 pg/ml (8–76 pg/ml) indicating hyperparathyroidism. Calcium creatinine ratio was 0.06 (>0.02 suggestive if primary hyperparathyroidism). Vitamin D levels were 25 nmol/l (<30 nmol/l suggestive of deficiency). Anterior pituitary hormones inclusive of Thyroid function tests, 9 am Cortisol, Follicular Stimulating Hormone, Luteinizing Hormone, Prolactin and baseline hematological indices, serum electrolytes, renal and liver profile were all normal. A skeletal survey revealed evidence of epiphyseal displacement of bilateral humeral heads, rugger jersey spine and subperiosteal bone resorptions involving lateral aspects of 2nd and 3rd phalanges. There were no radiological features of rickets such as widening, cupping or fraying of the metaphysis. An ultrasound scan performed to detect a possible parathyroid adenoma failed to detect any masses. Ultrasound scan of abdomen did not show any evidence of nephrocalcinosis or renal calculi. Bone densitometry of spine revealed low bone mineral density with a Z score of −3.4. At this stage a differential diagnosis of Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) with vitamin D deficiency or Tertiary hyperparathyroidism due to vitamin D deficiency was considered. It was decided to reassess her following adequate supplementation with vitamin D. She was treated with 50,000 IU of vitamin D2 weekly for 8 weeks followed by maintenance therapy of vitamin D3 1000 IU daily Table .
As adequate vitamin D supplementation failed to reduce the PTH levels a diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism was made. A Tc99 Sestamibi parathyroid scan revealed focal abnormal and persistent tracer retention in right inferior thyroid pole. As the diagnosis of PHPT was most likely due to parathyroid adenoma she underwent surgery where a large 2 × 3 cm parathyroid gland was removed from the right inferior pole of the thyroid gland. Ipsilateral parathyroid gland was atrophied. Histology favoured a parathyroid adenoma. Post operatively she developed perioral numbness and paresthesia in fingers. Serum ionized calcium levels were 0.8 mmol/l, serum intake PTH levels were 61 pg/ml with normal levels of magnesium 0.82 mmol/l (0.75–0.95 mmol/l) and phosphate 1.0 mmol/l (0.8–1.5 mmol/l). A probable diagnosis of hungry bone disease was made and she was treated with a single dose of intravenous calcium followed by oral calcium carbonate 3 g/day and calcitriol 2 μg/day with monitoring of serum calcium levels. She required calcium supplementation for 3 months following surgery. Bilateral osteotomy was performed for SUFE even prior to completion of metabolic evaluation as delay in treatment can have detrimental effects such as progression of the slippage and avascular necrosis. Series of surgeries for correction of limb deformities were planned following the improvement of quality of bone after treatment of PHPT .