A 27-year-old homosexual male was admitted for fever, cough and nausea lasting for 2 weeks. He had no history of underlying disease. He had unprotected homosexual contact with multiple partners several weeks prior to presentation. Initial physical examination revealed a temperature of 37.5°C, otherwise stable. His total white blood cell count was 1800 cells/mm3, with hemoglobin level and platelet count of 15.7 g/dl and 380,000/mm3. Serum aspartate transaminase and alanine aminotransferase was 199 IU/mL and 191 IU/mL. Chest x-ray showed no active lung lesions.
On the fifth day of admission, the patient developed fever with a body temperature of 40.0°C, whole body skin rash and cough. A fourth-generation screening HIV test for the detection of p24 antigen and HIV 1/2 antibodies (Abbott Molecular inc., Chicago, Illinois) was positive, although it had been negative when he was checked 6 months prior to presentation. Chest Computed Tomography scan showed hematogenous spreading pulmonary nodules. We performed a skin punch biopsy of the rash on the patient’s left shoulder. AFB staining of the skin specimen showed multiple positive bacilli, which was suggestive of mycobacterial infection on the skin . Additional tests of the skin tissue were positive for M. tuberculosis by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Furthermore, TB-PCR was also positive in sputum. On hospital day 14, we started the patient on anti-TB medication including isoniazide, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide. During that period of time, Western Blot results for HIV were positive in the gp160 and p24 bands. Measurements of HIV-1 RNA plasma levels by quantitative real-time PCR (COBAS TaqMan® HIV-1 Test, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) were greater than 10,000,000 copies/ml. CD4 T-cell counts at the same time were 55 cells/μL. The CD4 cells accounted for 33.5% of lymphocytes. The ratio of CD4/CD8 was 0.55.
Despite anti-TB treatment, the patient’s condition deteriorated, with ongoing fever and confused mental state. On hospital day 18, after four days of anti-TB treatment, he presented with lethargic state and cardiopulmonary instability with systolic blood pressure of 78 mmHg, and oxygen saturation level of 87% on reservoir mask. He was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Follow-up chest CT showed aggravated hematogenous spreading nodules. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was sterile. The growth of bacteria including M. tuberculosis was not observed in blood, sputum and urine cultures. Serologic tests for toxoplasma, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus and Epstein-Barr virus were all negative.
On the 21st day after admission, we started ART with efavirenz, lamivudine, and abacavir within 2 weeks of anti-TB therapy, because he had CD4 T-cell counts around 50 cells/μL and severe organ dysfunction .
The HIV-1 RNA viral load at this time was decreased to 724 copies/mL, but CD4+ T cell counts remained low, 45 cells/μL. Growth of M. tuberculosis in sputum was observed. Rapid molecular testing to detect drug-resistant tuberculosis (Genotype® MTBDRplus, Hain Lifescience GmbH, Nehren, Germany) revealed isoniazid-resistance and rifampin-susceptibility. Levofloxacin and amikacin were added to the first line anti-TB medication. After 20 days of ICU care, the patient was transferred to the general ward.
On the 50th day of admission, the patient’s body temperature increased to 39.7°C. Lumbar puncture was performed due to newly developed severe headache and vomiting. CSF analysis showed that leukocytes were 1,258/mm3 with 94% poly-dominant cells. An M. tuberculosis PCR test of the CSF fluid was positive. Due to concerns regarding treatment failure of the anti-TB medication and the development of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), the anti-TB regimen was modified to include cycloserin, prothionamide, levofloxacin, rifabutin and amikacin and dexamethasone was added for the management of IRIS.
After 80 days of admission, drug susceptibility testing of sputum TB indicated MDR-TB that showed resistance to isoniazid, rifampicin and quinolone and sensitivity to rifabutin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, amikacin, cycloserin, prothionamide and kanamycin. Drug susceptibility test (DST) was performed using the conventional absolute concentration method with Löwenstein-Jensen medium at the Korean Institute of Tuberculosis, the supranational reference laboratory for mycobacterial culture and DSTs . Antimicrobial susceptibility tests were performed by the recommendations of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute . The results of susceptibility tests in sputum led us to re-modify the patient’s anti-TB medication regimen to rifabutin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, PAS, cycloserin, prothionamide and kanamycin. After 30 days of anti-TB treatment with re-modified regimens, the additional resistance to ethambutol and pyrazinamide for TB was reported in the result of tuberuclosis DST in CSF, compared to that in sputum. We subsequently added amoxicillin-clavulanate and excluded ethambutol and pyrazinamide after DST result of CSF was identified.
Finally, 120 days after admission, 40 days since the re-modified TB medication was started according to DST results in sputum, the patient had recovered and exhibited no fever. Chest X-ray revealed near complete regression of infiltration, and follow-up sputum AFB culture was negative. CSF analysis showed sterile findings. The patient was subsequently discharged from the hospital. Five months after having started ART medication, his HIV RNA load was declined to 22 copies/mL and his CD4 count had increased to 510 cells/μL. At the time of writing, the patient was maintaining his anti-TB medications with prothionamide, cycloserine, amoxicillin-clavulanate, PAS and kanamycin and ART medication with lamivudine, abacavir, and efavirenz.