A 30-year-old female presented with a two week history of dyspnoea, productive cough and fatigue. Other complaints included loss of appetite and weight. She had been diagnosed with pulmonary TB and HIV infection two months prior to this presentation. Her CD4 count was 363 cells/mm3 and the viral load was 1737 copies/ml. She was not on anti-retroviral therapy. The TB diagnosis was initially based on clinical features as the Xpert MTB/RIF (Cepheid GeneXpert, Sunnyvale, Ca, USA) sputum results were negative. She was then started empirically on the standard first line TB treatment (rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol). However sputum culture (MGIT 960 system, BACTEC MGIT Becton Dickinson, USA) later confirmed drug susceptible Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). There was no history of smoking or alcohol consumption.
Physical examination revealed that she was apyrexial with a temperature of 36.5 °C. She was in respiratory distress with pleural effusion involving the entire left lung which was confirmed on the chest X-ray. On examination of the cardiovascular system, she was pale, had a sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 160 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 112/65 mmHg. There were no abnormal heart sounds or murmurs. Examination of the abdomen and the central nervous system was unremarkable.
Laboratory investigations showed severe anaemia with a haemoglobin of 5.4 g dL−1, a raised white cell count of 15.7×109 L−1 and thrombocytosis of 958×106 L−1. Urea and electrolytes were normal while liver function test results were as follows: total protein 90 g L−1, albumin 20 g L−1, total bilirubin 10 umol L−1, alanine transaminase 40 U L−1, aspartate transaminase 65 U L−1, alkaline phosphatise 228 U L−1 and gamma glutamyl transferase 88 U L−1. The blood cultures taken on the day of admission were negative after five days of incubation using the BacT/ALERT® automated system (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France). The C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were high at 217 mg L−1 and 105 mm h−1, respectively.
An intercostal drain was inserted into the left lung which initially drained 500 ml of pus, some of which was sent for laboratory analysis while the patient was treated empirically using ceftriaxone. First line antiretroviral treatment (tenofovir, lamivudine and efavirenz) was also initiated. No MTB was detected from the pleural fluid using Xpert MTB/RIF, unfortunately, mycobacterium culture of the fluid was not performed.
Laboratory analysis of the pleural fluid showed glucose of 0.1 mmol L−1, protein of 62 g L−1, while the lactate dehydrogenase was 20 799 U L−1. The Gram stain revealed many leukocytes with numerous Gram-positive cocci in pairs and short chains. The pus was cultured onto chocolate agar, 5 % horse blood agar, Mac-Conkey agar and colistin nalidixic acid agar (Diagnostic Media Products, National Health Laboratory Services, Sandringham South Africa). A pure heavy growth of small pin-point size, non-haemolytic colonies was observed on the blood plate after 48 h of incubation in CO2 with no growth on any of the other plates. The catalase and oxidase tests were negative.
The Satellite test was performed on both chocolate and 5 % horse blood agar using a streak of Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 25923. The organism demonstrated satellism on chocolate agar plate but normal growth was observed with no satellism on the blood plate. The VITEK 2 Gram-Positive Identification Card (bioMérieux SA, France) identified the organism as G elegans with 97 % probability identification index. This identification was later confirmed by the matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization – time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; VITEK® MS, bioMérieux)
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed according to Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines for Streptococcus species, Viridans group, however testing was done on horse blood as isolate failed to grow on sheep blood. The penicillin Etest was susceptible at 0.023 µg mL−1. Repeated attempts on broth microdilution (Sensititre®, TREK Diagnostic Systems, USA) with cation adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth supplemented with 5 % lysed horse blood yielded no growth. The treatment was then changed to penicillin and the patient improved and was subsequently discharged after three weeks in hospital.