On June 1st 2019, a 51-year-old male patient was referred from a private hospital to Dr. Soetomo General Academic Hospital, a tertiary referral hospital in Surabaya, Indonesia, with blisters on almost all of his body that worsened in the previous three days. He complained about fever and sore muscles one week before. Three days after that, blisters appeared on his head and then spread to his back, chest, and upper arms. This was accompanied by an itchy sensation. The patient had a contact history of feeding a monkey that belonged to the patient’s neighbour, but the owner of the monkey did not have any symptoms or abnormalities. A history of travelling prior to these complaints was denied. A history of chickenpox or vaccination before was also denied. Two weeks before, the patient’s son was diagnosed with chickenpox.
From a physical examination, his general condition appeared to be sick. The temperature was 36.6°C. There was no lymph node enlargement on the cervical, axillar, or inguinal regions. From the dermatological status , on the facial region, there were multiple pleiomorphic vesicles (multiple stages of development) and multiple crusts. On the trunk, extremities (superior and inferior regions), there were multiple pleiomorphic vesicles (multiple stages of development), some of them with umbilication and centripetal distribution. A Laboratory examination revealed a hemoglobin level at 12.5 g/dL, a leucocytes level at 6,870/uL, with a neutrophils level at 65.4%. Vesicle fluid was collected for PCR amplification with specific primers for VZV. Patient sample DNA was extracted using Qiagen. The extracted DNA was used as a template for the amplification of the respective Open Reading Frame (ORF) 14.
PCRs were performed with the PCR master mix (Promega, GoTaq Green Master Mix), 200 μL primers for VZV detection (10 picomoles/microliter) and 20 μL positive control (Herpesvirus genome 45 ng/mL). The thermocycling condition included a 5-min denaturation step of 94ºC, followed by 40 cycles of 30 sec at 94ºC, 30 sec at 53ºC, and 45 sec at 72ºC. ORF 14 was amplified using primers VZV R2 Fw (5’-CGGTAAATCTGGCATGCG-3’) and VZV R2 Rv (5’- AAGGG GAGCGTGGATGTGTC– 3’). Nucleotide sequences of the amplified fragments were determined using the BigDye Deoxy Terminator cycle sequencing kit with an AB 3500XL Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The result was positive and matching with positive control in the range of 810 bp . It is confirmed at more than 98% sequence homology to several published VZVs from the GenBank. The patient treated with acyclovir. After 10 days of treatment, all the skin lesions became crusted and the patient was discharged. A written informed consent was obtained.