A 66-year-old man was referred with a diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism, mild renal failure, peptic ulcer and large suspicious cervico-mediastinal goitre. The patient had fatigue, anaemia, anorexia and bone pain for several months. The fine needle aspiration of the neck mass, performed before the admission showed the presence of malignant cells. Preoperative laboratory findings are reported in table .
Ultrasonography of the neck showed an enlarged thyroid gland with substernal extension; many solid nodules and some calcifications were present. The computerised tomographic (CT) scan showed a large solid mass in left neck, with extension to the mediastinum, and displacement of the trachea, oesophagus and great vessels . Tracheobronchoscopy demonstrated substenosis of the proximal trachea due to extrinsic compression.
Tc-99m sestamibi scintigraphy demonstrated diffuse radiopharmaceutical uptake within the thyroid region and the lower portion of the neck. This tracer accumulation corresponded to the mass and it was persistent during the different phases of the scintigraphy without significant changes . The lack of a spot area of increased MIBI uptake ruled out the diagnosis of adenoma. The scintigraphic pattern was classified as due to a multinodular goitre.
The patient was vigorously hydrated and bisphosphonates were given preoperatively to control hypercalcemia. Eight days later the serum calcium level decreased to 10.4 mg/dl. With the above clinical findings, the patient underwent surgical neck exploration.
At surgery a voluminous cervicomediastinal firm mass was found that could not be removed via the superior thoracic strait; therefore a complete sternotomy was performed. The surgical findings revealed an ovoid, grayish-yellow, hard mass, measuring 12 × 9 × 8 cm, adherent to the base of the left lobe of the thyroid, extending to the anterior upper mediastinum; the recurrent laryngeal nerve was laterally displaced but not invaded. Therefore en bloc resection of the mass along with the total thyroid gland and the connective tissue apparently involved in the tumour was performed. All the lymphoid tissue from the ipsilateral tracheoesophageal groove to the upper mediastinum was removed
The histological report described a parenchymatous thyroid gland, with a subcapsular gelatinous nodule (1 cm diameter). The voluminous tumour adherent to the base of left lobe was multinodular, greyish-yellow. Histologically many fibrous bands of acellular collagenous tissue extending from the thickened capsule, subdivided the neoplasm into irregular compartments. The tumour cells, arranged in trabecular and solid sheets, were homogeneous; they showed round – ovoid nuclei, with evident nucleoli, and clear cytoplasm; occasionally cytoplasm was abundant, eosinophilic and granular; nuclei were pleomorphic; mitoses were present (3 per 10 HPF). Rare multinucleated osteoclastic-like giant cells were found around foci of haemorrhage; necrosis and coarse calcifications were observed. Both capsular and vascular invasion were present at the periphery of neoplasm. In the infiltrated adjacent adipose tissue, well-circumscribed, encapsulated nodules of tumour, with a peripheral rim of lymphoid tissue were found; they were considered to be metastatic lymph nodes. Final diagnosis was a parathyroid carcinoma . The postoperative course was complicated by transient oligouria, with worsening the chronic renal failure.
The patient also had severe postoperative hypocalcaemia, necessitating calcium and vitamin D therapy. The postoperative laboratory values at hospital discharge are shown in table . Figure shows the change of serum Calcium and PTH levels during patient's hospitalization
At follow-up, three, six, nine and 12 months after surgery, the patient was disease-free with normal levels of PTH and calcaemia and improvement of the bone disease symptoms. Whole body positron emission tomography (PET) performed one year after surgery was negative.