A 55-year-old male underwent an AV repair procedure for stenotic bicuspid AV and remodeling of dilated sinotubular junction and ascending aorta. Preoperative two-dimensional (2D) transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed severe AR through bicuspid AV and dilated sinus valsalva, sinotubular junction and ascending aorta. High-taking off coronary arteries were also noted on the TTE. However, preoperative coronary angiogram was not successful due to sudden drop of blood pressure and symptoms suggesting his allergic reaction to the iodide-containing contrast medium at the beginning of coronary angiography. Without performing any further preoperative evaluation for the coronary artery, the surgical plan for BAV repair was established. Other surgical plans regarding the coronary pathology were supposed to be modified upon the results of intraoperative pre-procedural TEE examination.
Intraoperative 2D and 3D TEE (iE33™ and X7-2 t™, Philips Healthcare, Bothell, WA, USA) confirmed the thickened and calcified BAV and dilated and ellipsoidal aortic root. 2D midesophageal (ME) AV short- and long-axis (SAX and LAX) images delineated the thickened bicuspid AV with the annular diameters of 19 mm. Sinus valsalva, sinotubular junction and ascending aorta were all dilated with diameters of 29 mm, 26 mm and 32 mm, respectively. Their 2D TEE with color Doppler images demonstrated severe AR through the entire valvular coaption. The right coronary artery (RCA) taking-off from sinus adjacent to sinotubular junction was noted in ME AV LAX image. A live 3D-zoom volume image of the AV, which was acquired and rotated to generate an “en face” AV image seen from the ascending aortic perspective, showed a stenotic bicuspid AV with both commissural fusions at the 5 and 11 o’clock positions . Additional 3D “en face” images derived from 3D-zoom images focused on aortic annulus and both coronary ostia showed much greater annular diameter (21 mm vs. 19 mm in 2D TEE) and the left main (LM) and highly taking-off right coronary (RCA) ostia arising at the 1 and 6 o’clock positions of the enlarged sinus valsalva (diameter 32-33 mm), respectively (Video 1). Applying built-in 3D-grids (dot-to-dot distance was 2 or 5 mm) on the “en face” images also provided a rough estimation of the distances between the coronary ostia, the sinotubular junction and AV cuspal attachment . A multi-planar 2D-cut image rendered from the 3D volume dataset also enabled precise measurements of the distances from the coronary ostia to the sinotubular junction, which were all <3 mm .
Extensive AV repair surgery was performed through a sternotomy under moderate hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) with cold cardioplegia administered antegrade and retrograde [, ]. Horizontal aortotomy was made at the position 10 mm higher than usual, considering highly taking-off coronary ostia. The AV cuspal structures were excised entirely through the aortotomy, and one of the 2 commissures in the bicuspid AV became a base for creating 3 new commissures that had the same intercommissural distances. Then, three ready-to-use templates of bovine pericardium patches were sutured to the cuspal suture lines which had been placed so as not to injure the coronary ostia. The sinotubular junction was remodeled to match its diameter to annular diameter by making penetrating interrupted sutures through the non-expandable inner-and outer-rings (fabric strips) at the new sinotubular junction. The lowest margin of the inner ring was placed carefully so as not to occlude the coronary ostia. Then, the aortotomy was closed, and the ascending aorta was externally wrapped with a synthetic graft for reducing the diameter of the new sinotubular junction to match that of aortic annulus and further external reinforcement .
Immediately after CPB-weaning, post-repair TEE revealed a successful AV tricuspidization with sufficient valve opening (>3.6 cm2), which resembled a normal tricuspid AV . No residual AR was noted. Additional multi-planar tomographic images, rendered from the 3D volume dataset, revealed intact coronary ostia .
2D color Doppler and pulsed-wave Doppler tracing of the LM and the proximal RCA revealed intact systolic and diastolic coronary arterial flow patterns, confirming the absence of any compromise due to the extensive repair procedure .
Institutional research board of Konkuk University Medical Center approved and written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the present case report.