The 52-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital due to complaints of chest tightness and shortness of breath. Subsequent diagnosis revealed the presence of a mediastinal tumor. The patient weighed 76 kg, was 170 cm tall, had no history of obstructive sleep apnea, previous anesthesia, or drug use. The airway assessment revealed regular characteristics, with a modified Mallampati classification of II. Transthoracic echocardiography indicated no abnormalities in cardiac structure and function. The electron bronchoscopy report revealed compression of the trachea by a mediastinal mass, resulting in the narrowing of the airway.
From the incisors to the trachea’s narrowest point was measured 22 cm, roughly four cartilaginous rings away beyond the glottis. The narrowest point measured at 4 mm, permitting passage only for the fibrobronchoscope (4.9 mm).
Intraoperatively, electrocardiogram, pulse oxygen saturation, invasive blood pressure (BP), bispectral index (BIS), nasopharyngeal temperature, and urine output were monitored. We performed a right radial artery puncture and cannulation to monitor arterial blood pressure and blood gas, we also established femoral vein access. Concurrently we prepared rescue medications including atropine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, and sugammadex sodium. A flexible guidewire(1 mm) was inserted into the bronchial occluder(3 mm), and its end was connected to the standby anesthesia machine. This modification allowed us to convert a conventional bronchial occluder into one that could be ventilated and adjusted in direction.
We opted for tracheal intubation using a bronchial occluder placed outside the tracheal tube to facilitate airway management. The patient’s position was tilted 30 degrees to the right, and oxygen was delivered via a face mask. Anesthesia was induced intravenously with dexamethasone (5 mg), oxycodone (3 mg), 1% propofol (20 mg·kg-1), sufentanil (0.4 µg·kg-1), and rocuronium (0.6 mg·kg-1). Once the patient’s muscles were relaxed enough for intubation, a visual laryngoscope was used to expose the glottis, and a self-made plastic bronchial occluder connected to the standby anesthesia machine was inserted, connected to the standby anesthesia machine was inserted. The bronchial occluder was gradually adjusted, guided by a fibrobronchoscope, to navigate through the tracheal stenosis area.
We rotated and inserted the bronchial occluder into the right bronchus, inflated the cuff of the bronchial occluder, and confirmed the proper position using a stethoscope and fibrobronchoscope. An ID 6.0 mm tracheal tube was inserted under the guidance of a video laryngoscope and fibrobronchoscope, positioned 3 cm away from the tracheal carina. The position of the bronchial blocker cuff was reconfirmed. The parameters applied during two-lung ventilation were: tidal volume of 8 ml·kg− 1 (predicted body weight); PEEP 5 cmH2O; FiO2 0.5–0.8; inspiratory to expiratory ratio 1:2; and respiratory rate adjusted to maintain ETCO2 between 35 and 45 mmHg. During one-lung ventilation, the parameters were adjusted to a tidal volume of 6 ml·kg−¹ (predicted body weight); PEEP 5 cmH2O; FiO2 0.4–0.5; inspiratory to expiratory ratio 1:2; and respiratory rate adjusted to maintain ETCO2 between 35 and 45 mmHg. Anaesthesia was maintained through infusions of propofol(0.05 mg·kg− 1·min− 1), remifentanil(0.2 µg·kg− 1·min− 1), rocuronium(0.01 mg·kg− 1·min− 1) and dexmedetomidine(16 µg·h− 1). Ephedrine or phenylephrine was administered when systolic blood pressure decreased below 90 mmHg. During the surgery, we used a forced-air warming device to maintain the nasopharyngeal temperature above 36ºC.
The operation lasted for 205 min. The mediastinal mass, measuring 10 cm*6 cm *6 cm, was successfully resected, and the patient’s circulation was stable during the operation. Upon completion of the surgical procedure, the bronchial blocker was removed, and the recruitment maneuver was subsequently performed(The anesthesia machine was set to CPAP mode, adjusting PEEP to 30 cmH2O, maintained for 30 s). Meanwhile, a fibrobronchoscope was used to ensure the absence of tracheal malacia and collapse. Pain control in the postoperative period was managed through Patient-Controlled Intravenous Analgesia (PCIA) with a drug formula consisting of sufentanil (150 ug) and tropisetron (8 mg) diluted in physiological saline to 100 ml. The continuous infusion rate was set at 1.5 ml·h-1for 48 h.
The patient was successfully extubated in the ICU on the second postoperative day and discharged from the hospital on the fifth postoperative day. A follow-up conducted three months later via telephone revealed no adverse events. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient to publish this case report.