A 59-year-old man (height, 167 cm; weight, 71 kg) underwent a medical check-up that revealed an abnormal radiopacity on a chest radiograph. Consequently, he underwent computed tomography (CT), which led to the diagnosis of IDPA. He visited our institution for surgical treatment. CT showed a dilated pulmonary artery measuring 64 mm . It also revealed a right aortic arch, featuring an aberrant left subclavian artery with an aneurysm measuring 3 cm (Kommerell’s diverticulum) . Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal wall motion and no significant valvular disease. Cardiac catheterization demonstrated normal pulmonary artery pressure and no stenosis in the coronary arteries. Pulmonary artery replacement was planned to prevent rupture of the dilated pulmonary artery aneurysm.
After placement of the radial artery catheter, anesthesia was induced with fentanyl (0.5 mg), propofol (150 mg), and rocuronium (100 mg). The trachea was intubated with an 8.0-mm tracheal tube using a video laryngoscope (McGRATHTM, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) without difficulty. The mechanical ventilation settings were fraction of inspired oxygen of 60%, frequency of 12 breaths per minute, tidal volume of 6 mL/kg, and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 3 cm H2O. The target range for end-tidal CO2 was set at 30–35 mmHg. A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) probe was inserted carefully while confirming that there was no resistance. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (1%) and remifentanil (0.3 μg/kg/min). A pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) was inserted into the right internal jugular vein and carefully advanced under TEE monitoring in the mid-esophageal bicaval view and right ventricular inflow-outflow view. Finally, in the ascending aorta short-axis view, it was confirmed that the catheter tip was in the main pulmonary artery and that there was no malposition or flexion. After PAC insertion, the mean pulmonary arterial pressure was 24 mmHg.
The approach of the surgery was a median sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was instituted through aortic and bicaval cannulation. Main pulmonary artery replacement was performed on a beating heart. The dilated part of the main pulmonary artery was resected. The right and left pulmonary arteries were anastomosed to the edges of a 24-mm graft, and the remaining main pulmonary artery was anastomosed to the side of the graft. The patient was easily weaned from CPB with administration of dobutamine (2 μg/kg/min) and milrinone (1 μg/kg/min). The intraoperative mean pulmonary arterial pressure was consistently maintained at around 20 mmHg. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) under mechanical ventilation. The patient was extubated on the day of ICU admission, with a subsequent uneventful course. Mean pulmonary arterial pressure was consistently maintained at 19–24 mmHg during the ICU stay. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 16.