A 61-year-old Chinese woman was hospitalized due to elevated serum creatinine (Scr). Four months previously, without any predisposing factors, she had suffered from sudden dryness, burning, and paroxysmal pinprick-like pains in her right eye, accompanied by a headache in the right hemisphere. Her discomfort was obvious in the morning, while it was slightly relieved in the afternoon without any treatment. Computed tomography (CT) did not reveal any abnormality in the brain. Iritis and scleritis were considered by an ophthalmologist, but the symptoms were not alleviated after dexamethasone eyedrops. One day previously, laboratory tests had shown elevated Scr of 324 μmol/l.
At physical examination, her body temperature was 36.6°C, her pulse rate 100 beats per minute, and her blood pressure 125/68 mm Hg. She had no skin lesions or swollen lymph nodes. There were no rales on bilateral lungs and no murmurs in the heart. Her abdomen was soft, and there were no signs of swollen liver, spleen, or edema.
Lab test results were as follows: white blood cells 7.3 × 109/l, red blood cells 2.89 × 1012/l, hemoglobin 76 g/l, and platelets 183 × 109/l; urinary red blood cells 140/μl, urinary occult blood (++), urinary white blood cells 6/μl, and urinary protein 1.93 g/24 h. Blood biochemistry analysis provided the following results: total protein 66 g/l, albumin 31 g/l, alanine aminotransferase 32 U/l, total bilirubin 9 μmol/l, serum iron 7 μmol/l, blood nitrogen urea 13.1 mmol/l, Scr 324 μmol/l, uric acid 385 μmol/l, sodium 129 mmol/l, potassium 3.8 mmol/l, chloride 93 mmol/l, and CO2 18.3 mmol/l. Clinical immunology tests revealed the following: anti-nuclear antibody (−), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (−), IgG 16.8 g/l, IgG4 3.21 g/l, C3 0.84 g/l, C4 0.24 g/l, C-reactive protein 46 mg/l, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 58 mm/h. Serum immune electrophoresis was normal. Hepatitis virus screening was as follows: hepatitis B surface antigen (−), anti-hepatitis B surface antibody (+), and anti-hepatitis C antibody (−). Blood levels of lipid series, glucose, thyroid function, and tumor markers were all normal.
Renal ultrasonography showed that the size of the right kidney was 98 × 34 mm, while the left one was 95 × 40 mm. The renal cortical echo was slightly enhanced, and no renal calculus was found. An enhanced CT scan indicated multiple low-density lesions under both of the renal capsules . Emission CT revealed chronic sialadenitis in the bilateral parotid glands.
Then, the patient underwent a renal biopsy. The immunofluorescence report found negative IgG, IgA, IgM, and C3. The pathological findings were as follows: there were 19 glomeruli in total, global sclerosis in 7 glomeruli, crescents forming in 10 glomeruli, and middle to severe mesangial cellular hyperplasia along with increased mesangial matrix in 2 glomeruli as well. There were diffuse tubular atrophy and extensively dense mononuclear cells among the tubulointerstitial tissues. Protein casts were also observed in some tubules. No obvious vascular lesions were found. Immunohistochemistry showed IgG4-positive plasma cells >10/high-power field (HPF), and the ratio of IgG4+ cells to IgG+ cells was >40% . A pathological diagnosis of acute crescent glomerulonephritis with severe renal TIN damage was achieved.
Based on the physical examination, lab tests, and renal biopsy, the patient was diagnosed as IgG4-RKD combined with acute crescent glomerulonephritis after excluding vasculitis, Sjögren's syndrome, and plasmacytoma. The patient was treated with methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg every day) and cyclophosphamide (1.0 g per month). In addition, tablets of calcium, iron, and proton pump inhibitors were used at the same time. Four weeks later, the Scr dropped from 324 to 213 μmol/l, and symptoms were relieved. Furthermore, the Scr dropped to 130 μmol/l at the 16-week follow-up . At the same time, the serum IgG4 concentrations dropped to 1.21 g/l.