A 57-year-old woman with no remarkable medical history was admitted to a hospital with symptoms of pyrexia, dry cough, and a weight loss of 5 kg over the last 2 months. CT revealed a left renal tumor, and the patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment. Contrast-enhanced CT confirmed the left renal tumor (70 mm in diameter) with a tumor thrombus extending into the inferior vena cava. Similarly, contrast-enhanced CT revealed the presence of multiple pulmonary metastases. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography showed abnormal uptake: standardized uptake value 16.0 in the primary tumor, 8.3 in the tumor thrombus, and 18.1 in the pulmonary lesions but detected no other distant metastases. Laboratory tests revealed anemia (8.4 g/dL), high neutrophil (8320/μL) and platelet count (54.7 × 104/μL), NLR (9.86), elevation in the sIL-2R (1360 U/mL, normal range 135–483 U/mL), and a marked elevation in the serum CRP level (33.75 mg/dL; normal range <0.14 mg/dL). Although the patient’s Karnofsky performance status was 80%, she was classified as poor risk based on the International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium risk score.
Two weeks after diagnosis, the patient underwent CN with thrombectomy at the left renal vein and vena cava. Pathological diagnosis showed clear-cell RCC, Grade 3, pT3b. The immune microenvironment of this primary tumor was evaluated by IHC analyses for CD8+ T cell and PD-L1 . In HE staining, infiltration of TILs was observed at the tumor margin. These infiltrating cells were confirmed, at least partly, to be CD8+ T cells by IHC. In contrast, the expression of immunosuppressive checkpoint PD-L1 by tumor cells was extremely weak, suggesting that the primary tumor was recognized and targeted by the host immune system.
The patient’s overall well-being improved after CN, and the serum CRP and sIL-2R levels after 1 week of surgery decreased to 50% of the presurgical level, which led to us closely monitoring the patient instead of employing immediate systemic therapy. The serum CRP and sIL-2R levels continued to decrease and reached a normal level at 3 months after CN. In addition, anemia and thrombocytosis gradually improved within 6 months, and NLR immediately decreased after CN .
Follow-up CT scans revealed spontaneously shrinking pulmonary lesions that ultimately disappeared. No development of new lesions was observed, and the patient has been recurrence free for 3 years without requiring any systemic therapies .