A 60-year-old white female presented with acute loss of vision in both eyes. She had experienced fever over the preceding few days, along with malaise and myalgias. Previous ocular and medical history was unremarkable. At presentation, visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/200 in the right eye, 20/160 in the left eye. The slit-lamp examination revealed quiet anterior chambers. Intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. At fundus examination, multiple, yellow-white placoid lesions were evident at the posterior pole of both eyes. Fluorescein Angiography (FA) showed characteristic early hypofluorescence and late hyperfluorescence of the lesions and Autofluorescence (AF) revealed patchy hypoautofluorescence in these areas . Spectral-Domain Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) scans across the lesions showed disruption of the RPE, external limiting membrane, ellipsoid layer and interdigitation zone; the placoid lesions appeared as focal deposits of hyperreflective material at the level of the outer retinal layers . On ICG-A, numerous round patchy areas of focal hypofluorescence were observed at the posterior pole and hypofluorescent satellite lesions could be seen close to the edge of the optic disc and near the vascular arcades . Both eyes exhibited similar features.
Notably, all the focal lesions detected by FA, AF and OCT corresponded to areas of patchy hypofluorescence seen on ICG-A, whereas ICG-A also detected several additional hypofluorescent areas not associated with FA, AF or OCT abnormalities .
As shown in Fig. , ICG-A also detected several placoid lesions anterior to the equator that appeared much more diffuse and numerous, when compared with those visualized with FA.
EDI-OCT was performed for quantitative and morphologic analysis of the choroid. The subfoveal choroidal thickness, measured vertically from the outer border of the RPE to the inner border of the sclera, was 238 μm . As previously reported in literature , focal areas of choriocapillaris thickening and hyporeflectivity were clearly visible on EDI-OCT beneath the placoid lesions during the active stage of the disease .
Besides a slightly raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level, routine blood tests were normal. As were immunological exams and serology tests for infectious disease. Based on imaging and clinical features, the patient was diagnosed with APMPPE. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain and neurological examination excluded neurologic involvement. The patient was treated with prednisone 100 mg, which was tapered gradually over 2 weeks.
Notably, in follow-up examinations, the restoration of visual acuity and of outer retinal abnormalities, noted on SD-OCT from 10 days after the acute presentation, preceded the recovery of choroidal perfusion abnormalities detected with ICG-A. In fact, during the ongoing process of remission, while OCT scans showed the progressive regression of the hyperreflective placoid lesions and restoration of outer retinal abnormalities, ICG-A detected persisting patchy hypofluorescence in the corresponding locations . This long-standing choroidal perfusion defect could not be detected by OCT.
Two months later, BCVA improved to 20/25 in both eyes and the patient was in good health. CPR level and ESR were normalized.
In the inactive stage of disease, EDI-OCT scans revealed a reduced full choroidal thickness compared with the acute phase of the disease . The subfoveal choroidal thickness was reduced to 156 μm. EDI-OCT also showed the regression the focal areas of choriocapillaris thickening and hyporeflectivity beneath the placoid lesions . On ICG-A, isofluorescence in the areas corresponding to previous placoid lesions could be detected as a sign of normal reperfusion of the choriocapillaris . Fundus examination showed areas of retinal pigment changes, but no active placoid lesions.