A 12-year-old girl with severe pulmonary valvar stenosis (PVS), atretic left main coronary artery ostium (ALCAO) and a wide fistula between the hypertensive right ventricle (RV) and the left coronary artery received surgical follow-up consultation.
The child had NYHA class II–III, episodic abdominal pain and exertional dyspnea. Physical examination showed good general condition, regular heart rate of 70 beats/min, loud systolic murmur of 4–5/6 on Levine scale with a thrill over the chest and jugular notch. Blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, respiratory rate 14 breaths/min and SaO2 96% on room air.
The heart defect was identified at birth: Transthoracic echocardiogram and heart catheterization revealed severe pulmonary stenosis, left coronary ostium atresia and a wide fistula connecting a hypertensive right ventricle with the left coronary artery.
Neonatal balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty decreased the severity of stenosis although the persistent suprasystemic RV pressure still provided sufficient coronary flow.
Corrective surgery was postponed due its complexity. Heart transplant remained a viable option due to high operative risk. The patient attended echocardiography for 12-year follow-up prior to admission to a high-level cardiac surgery center.
Normal sinus rhythm with right axis deviation and severe right ventricular hypertrophy were found on ECG. Roentgenogram showed cardiomegaly, pulmonary trunk dilatation and right atrium enlargement. TTE visualized 2nd degree tricuspid valve regurgitation with a pressure gradient of 138 mmHg, and PVS pressure gradient of 148 mmHg. Hemodynamic studies recorded increased central venous (12 mmHg), LV end-diastolic (15 mmHg) and suprasystemic RV pressures (127/15 mmHg).
Angiographic studies illustrated wide RCA (5 mm) and atretic ostium of the LMCA . Right ventriculography outlined severe pulmonary valvar stenosis with dome-shaped valve leaflets and post-stenotic pulmonary trunk dilatation. Furthermore, selective fistula angiography and 3D rendered Computed Tomography depicted ALCAO and a wide coronary fistula emerging from the hypertrophic RV . The fistula orifice sat superficially in the anterior interventricular groove. Multiple proximal and distal converging collateral anastomoses were present between the LMCA and RCA. The LMCA divided into the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the circumflex artery (CX).
The patient was qualified for LMCA ostium reconstruction and simultaneous interventional fistula embolization. A sternotomy was performed with cross-clamped aorta and cannulated superior and inferior cava veins under 24 °C hypothermia on cardiopulmonary bypass which supported the patient. An infusion of cardioplegic solution to the RCA sustained electromechanical quiescence to asystole. Epicardial fat meant the fistula was not visible. The ascending aorta, bulb and proximal LMCA segment were precisely dissected. The ostium was atretic due to a fibrous diaphragm which was excised, and the coronary artery ostium reconstructed with a Biointegral patch. Next, a RVOT infundibulectomy was undertaken with pulmonary commissurotomy and partial resection of the dysplastic leaflets. The now reconstructed and patent LMCA ostium provided a conduit for a multipurpose 5-F catheter over a 0.025-inch hydrophilic steerable guidewire. The fistula branches were implanted with two 6 mm diameter Amplatzer Vascular Plugs II (St. Jude Medical, St Paul, MN). Intraoperative epicardial ECHO confirmed antegrade LMCA flow, normal myocardial contractility, and minor fistula leak. The cross-clamp was released and normal sinus rhythm without ischemic ECG changes emerged upon myocardial reperfusion. Post-operative hemodynamic catheterization revealed high RV systolic and diastolic pressures (60/25 mmHg), LVEDP (90/26 mmHg), central venous pressure (25 mmHg), pulmonary venous hypertension (mean 30 mmHg) with increased pulmonary flow. Residual fistula leaks required interventional endovascular embolization using multiple occluding devices which were redelivered via LMCA without sequalae .
At 2-year follow-up the girl was asymptomatic on pharmacotherapy (metoprolol and aspirin) with good exercise tolerance (NYHA II). A resting ECG showed normal sinus rhythm without symptoms of ischemia while 2DE revealed good EF (50%) and a sealed fistula.