A 75-year-old woman presented a 4 cm × 4 cm protruding ulcerative skin lesion on the right temporoparietal scalp . She had a history of lobectomy for lung adenocarcinoma 10 years ago and was in stable condition. After a biopsy, the lesion was proven to be SCC. Physical examination and computed tomography (CT) scan showed no lymphadenopathy in the preauricular, postauricular, or cervical regions, but the tumor invaded deeply, which just abutted the pericranium. Wide excision with a 1.5 cm margin was performed and the dissection plane was deep and directly under the pericranium layer, which left a 7 cm × 7 cm defect with bare bone exposure . The defect was reconstructed using a cephalically-based transposition flap that was harvested from the occipital area. The flap donor site, with an intact pericranium, was resurfaced with meshed STSG and fixed with a tie over bolster dressing . The final pathology report revealed moderately differentiated, pT3 SCC without lymphovascular or perineural invasion, and both the peripheral and deep margins were free from tumor invasion.
During the follow-up period, a partial loss of the STSG occurred on the center of flap donor site. After conservative wound care for 45 days, the wound was revealed to be a skin and soft tissue defect with bare bone exposure . After discussions with the patient and her family, a decision was made to rotate the previous flap back with the galea and a layer a soft tissue left in situ and then the skin graft was performed on the original tumor location, so called as the “crane principle”.
During the surgery, we injected 1:200,000 epinephrine into the subcutaneous layer and the flap was elevated with a sharp dissection between the subcutis and galea. After debridement of the occipital wound, the flap was rotated to cover the wound. A thick layer of well-vascularized soft tissue was left in the temporoparietal region, and the wound was covered by STSG harvested from the adjacent scalp .
The flap and skin graft healed well at postoperative 2 weeks. There was no tumor recurrence at both the 3-month and 6-month follow-up.