A 27-year-old healthy female was admitted to the medical ward for sudden onset of shortness of breath and reduced responsiveness immediately after undergoing an HA filler injection to her right breast by a non-medical practitioner. The estimated volume of injection was around 500 millilitres. She was diagnosed with acute respiratory distress syndrome. Initial laboratory investigations upon admission showed leukocytosis at 13.7 × 103/µL with otherwise normal haemoglobin and platelet counts. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 18 mm/hour. Other blood investigations including renal profile, liver function, coagulation profile, serology for syphilis, hepatitis B & C and HIV, and autoimmune panel were all unremarkable.
The contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) thorax showed multiple imperceptible tiny nodular-like lesions in both breasts, diffuse bilateral ground-glass opacification, and consolidative changes in both lungs predominantly at the upper lobes and at the periphery. Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage confirmed features of diffuse alveolar haemorrhage. An echocardiography was attempted but there was limited visualisation due to poor penetration. She was also noted to have altered sensorium and CECT brain showed a left corona radiata infarct with no radiographic evidence of intracranial haemorrhage. There were intermittent generalised rhythmic delta waves suggestive of diffuse cerebral encephalopathy on the electroencephalography suggestive of toxic encephalopathy. The patient did not consent to a lumbar puncture. She was managed with intravenous ceftriaxone and hydrocortisone by the physicians after which her condition stabilised, and she was discharged well after two weeks with a tapering dose of oral corticosteroids.
Although she had also experienced sudden bilateral painless visual loss within 24 h after the procedure, she was only referred to the Ophthalmologist two weeks later upon discharge from the medical ward. She denied eye redness, discomfort, seeing floaters or flashes. Upon presentation to the Ophthalmologist, the visual acuity was counting fingers in both eyes. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect. She could not perceive any numbers on Ishihara’s colour vision plates. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable. Dilated fundus examination of the right eye showed a pink optic disc and multiple small to large cotton wool spots distributed mainly at the posterior pole. The superotemporal and inferotemporal veins appeared tortuous with few flame-shaped haemorrhages seen. A concentric rim of retinal whitening was seen around the macula, extending temporally and inferiorly, giving rise to a pseudo-cherry-red spot. A few patches of polygonal-shaped retinal whitening were noted. The left fundus showed a hyperaemic optic disc and had similar findings as the right fundus .
Spectral domain-optical coherent tomography (SD-OCT) revealed hyper-reflective bands mainly at the level of the inner nuclear layer (INL). At the maculopapular region of the right OCT, these bands extended up to the nerve fibre layer. The outer retinal layers and ellipsoid layers were intact . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) showed a delay in the arm-to-retina time (31 s), delayed arterial filling (8 s) and prolonged arteriovenous transit time (1:42 min). There was staining of the optic discs and blood vessels at the posterior pole, enlarged foveal avascular zone and capillary non-perfusion perifoveally in both eyes .
She was diagnosed with bilateral Purtscher-like retinopathy and PAMM secondary to HA breast filler injection. The oral corticosteroids prescribed by the physician were increased to an anti-inflammatory dose and gradually tapered over 8 weeks. Oral acetylsalicyclic acid 150 mg daily was also prescribed.
Three weeks later, the visual acuity improved from counting fingers to 6/18 in both eyes. At 8 weeks, the best corrected visual acuities further improved to 6/12. Serial fundus photography thereafter showed the resolution of the cotton wool spots and patchy areas of retinal whitening. OCT macula showed thinning of the INL and disorganisation of the inner retinal layers .