A 72 year-old woman underwent a superoexternal quadrantectomy with axillary lymph-node dissection for an infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the right breast (not otherwise specified variant, G1, pT1c, pN0, estrogen receptor-positive, progesterone receptor-positive), and was treated with radiotherapy and tamoxifen for 5 years. There were no signs of recurrence for almost 12 years, at which point gait disturbances appeared.
Total body computed tomography showed numerous hyperdense lesions in many vertebral bodies and costal arches. A bone scan was performed, but the lesions were not confirmed as metastases. Despite the negative results for bone scan and tumor markers, a bone biopsy was taken, and the results of this examination led to a diagnosis of metastatic disease. The patient was started on treatment with letrozole.
Around 4 months later, the patient began experiencing visual disturbances. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary region showed a sellar mass, approximately 11 mm in diameter, compressing the optic chiasm. The Lesion was compatible with pituitary adenoma, which was confirmed by endocrinologica findings documenting the presence of hypopituitarism. Laboratory test results showed that the patients thyroid function, gonadotropin and serum prolactin levels were normal, but there was hyponatremia and hyperkalemia and reduced levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol. The patient was started on steroid therapy.
Three months later, owing to progressive deterioration of the visual disturbances (bi-temporal hemianopsia), gadolinium-enhanced MRI of the brain was carried out, which showed a large heterogeneous mass, which appeared intensely opaque after contrast. Moreover, the mass had a supra-sellar extension and was infiltrating the optic chiasm . Despite the probable metastatic nature of the lesion, the patient underwent a trans-sphenoidal surgery of the tumor and a subtotal resection was achieved. The histological findings identified the mass as a malignant neoplasm compatible with metastatic breast cancer and specifically a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . The immunohistochemistry results showed that the cells were positive for estrogen and progestin receptor and negative for ErbB-2, Unfortunately, the surgery did not improve the patient’s visual disturbances, and no other treatments were performed because of the rapid deterioration in her clinical condition.