A 29-year-old man presented with a 2-week history of progressive abdominal distension and pain. On clinical examination, it was found that he had no signs of liver disease or lymphadenopathy, but marked, tense ascites. Although he had had a pansystolic murmur, an echocardiogram revealed only moderate tricuspid regurgitation. A full liver screen was unremarkable, which included a normal ultrasound of the abdomen, with good perihepatic blood flow. Paracentesis demonstrated an exudative nature to the ascites. Reactive mesothelial cells were noted, but not malignant cells. Abdominal and chest computed tomography scans were unremarkable, other than confirming ascites. A diagnostic laparoscopy was initially performed revealing an abnormally thickened and shortened greater omentum and mesentery. This was later converted to a laparotomy as his tumour was buried close to the mesentery of the small bowel, and it was not possible to perform a laparoscopic biopsy safely. Biopsies were taken from the greater omentum and peritoneal nodules.
Histopathological analysis revealed a malignant tumour composed of sheets and cords of small, round cells set in abundant collagenous stroma . The cells had scanty or slightly more eosinophilic cytoplasm, and some of them showed vacuolation of cytoplasm. Nuclei were small and showed inconspicuous nucleoli and either dispersed or clear chromatin. Close to the periphery, the cells appeared more spindle-like in shape and exhibited fascicular arrangement. Mitoses were infrequent.
The immunohistochemical analyses showed positivity for MNF116 and CAM5.2 (dot-like) and equivocal positivity (occasional cells) for EMA. MiC2, B2 microglobulin and Fli-1 also showed positive reactions. Further immunohistochemical analyses showed negative reaction for LCA, CD43, S100 protein, CD34, CD31, chromogranin, synaptophysin, SMA and CD56.
Initially, the overall immunochemical profile supported the diagnosis of a primitive neuroectodermal tumour (PNET); however, the morphology was rather unusual. Differential diagnosis included SEF, intra-abdominal desmoplastic round cell tumour and epithelioid synovial sarcoma.
After further molecular investigation at the Mayo Clinic, USA, the diagnosis of a high-grade SEF was confirmed and the differential diagnoses of previously listed tumours were excluded by molecular methods: fluorescence in situ hybridisation for Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) locus rearrangement and reverse transcriptase, polymerase chain reaction for EWS-Fli-1 and EWS-ERG (Ewing/PNET), SYT-SSX1 and EWS-WTI (for desmoplastic small round cell tumour).
After two courses of palliative chemotherapy, treatment was discontinued at the patient's own request. Subsequently, the patient was admitted to hospital with a large pleural effusion, thought to be metastatic in nature. He remained alive 12 months post-diagnosis.