In April 2016, a previously healthy 20-month-old boy presented with first-time unprovoked seizure and abnormal movements. Figure shows the timeline of the patient’s subsequent treatment and brain imaging. His initial neurological exam was notable for irritability, dysautonomia, choreoathetosis, and severe oro-facial dyskinesias. Brain MRI at presentation was normal but CSF showed an inflammatory pleocytosis and positive anti-NMDAR antibodies. Paraneoplastic workup including whole-body MRI, PET-CT, and two scrotal ultrasounds, was negative for malignancy. The patient did not improve after standard first-line therapy for NMDAR encephalitis (30 mg/kg IV methylprednisolone for 5 days, followed by IVIG 2 g/kg) prompting further treatment with second-line immunotherapies: First, 4 cycles of IV rituximab (375 mg/m2/week) and, when recovery plateaued, IV cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2).
A second MRI obtained in mid-July 2016, 3-months after initial presentation, showed extensive cortical volume loss. At that time, worsening seizure burden, disorganized background EEG, and persistently abnormal CSF inflammatory markers prompted a repeat course of steroids (20 mg/kg IV methylprednisolone, qd x 4d) and cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2). The patient was finally discharged in late July 2016, and over the next several months motor control, developmental milestones, and seizures all improved.
An MRI in January 2017, 9-months after initial presentation, showed marked recovery of cortical volume. Shortly after this scan, however, the patient experienced clinical decline with neurodevelopmental regression and increased frequency of multiple seizure types unresponsive to anti-epileptic medications. A fourth brain MRI in March 2017 showed new cortical volume loss compared to January. This presumed progression of autoimmune epileptic encephalopathy was again treated with high-dose steroids and a course of rituximab with dramatic improvement in inter-ictal EEG and resolution of seizures. Over subsequent months, the patient made neurodevelopmental progress in speech, ambulation, and manual dexterity. Despite this clinical improvement, a fifth and final brain MRI performed in June 2017, showed minimal interval change compared to the March 2017 study.
Between successive time points, we found significant regionally-specific changes in cortical volume. These included reversible volume losses and gains that were greatest in the frontal and occipital lobes and smallest in the temporal lobes . Over a period of several months, these changes tracked the patient’s clinical status and treatment , with periods of clinical decline (Apr 16 to Jul 16 and Jan 17 to Mar 17) preceding volume loss and periods of clinical improvement (Jul 16 to Jan 17) preceding volume gain. Ultimately, these fluctuations converged on a pattern of stable net cortical volume loss, again most prominent in the frontal and occipital lobes .