A 56-year-old white male, former pipefitter, 68 kg /169 cm, with no particular personal or familiar medical-surgical history, presented with a lesion of oral cavity of recent apparition. The cancer risk factors included unweaned smoking, valued at about 40 pack-years, and alcohol consumption (weaned for 3 years). Physical examination revealed an ulcerative lesion on the right anterolateral floor of oral cavity, which was adherent to the gingival fibro mucosa. Several leukoplakias were also observed on the gingival mucosa. The rest of the otorhinolaryngology examination was unremarkable.
A biopsy confirmed the lesion as an invasive well- / moderately-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. A contrasted computer tomography (CT) scan showed a tumoral process involving the muscles of the anterolateral floor of oral cavity, which extended about 3 cm in the long axis and remained lateralized to the right . The lesion was in contact with the mandible and furthermore developed a suspicious bone notch. No cervical lymph nodes of significant size and no other suspicious lesions on the cervical-thoracic level were present in this CT scan. A 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography / computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) scan found a lesion of intense hypermetabolism next to the right genio-glosse triangular muscles and lips, which seemed to repel the omohyoid muscle without infiltrating it . A lytic aspect of the cortical bones of the mandible body suggested a bone extension. 18F-FDG uptakes were perceptible in lymph nodes of right groups Ib and II. The patient received a panendoscopy under general anesthesia. The upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and the bronchoscopy did not find any abnormalities.
The TNM staging was classified as T4N2M0 (according to American Joint Committee on Cancer 2009) and noninterruptive pelvimandibulectomy was validated as the primary treatment by a multidisciplinary meeting. The surgery was performed in a satisfactory manner 2 months after the first consultation. The post-operative care was performed by standard procedures without abnormalities. The pathological analysis of excised specimens confirmed the squamous cell carcinoma histology as well as the lymph node metastases , suggesting the definitive TNM stage as pT4aN2cM0. In addition, the margins were negative but multiple tumor nodules were found in the muscle. Immunohistochemical analysis for HPV showed the staining of p40 but no expression of p16.
At the end of 6 weeks postoperative follow-up, the patient complained of a painful cervical edema as well as a trismus. A CT scan was ordered, which found regional multiple recurrences . A multidisciplinary meeting updated the treatment strategy including a surgical retake, followed by radiochemotherapy. However, the patient died 2 weeks later due to cancer related complications.
The patient was recruited into a clinical research program (VADS - EudraCT N°: 2010-A00586-33, approved by the regional ethic committee “Comité de Protection des Personnes Est III”), which aimed to evaluate the prognostic value of CTC in HNSCC. Venous blood samples were collected at three time points (preoperative day-1, intraoperative, and postoperative day 7) for the detection of CTC. The manipulations were performed by using the CellSearch® system (Veridex LLC, Raritan, NJ) according to a standard protocol . The commercially available CellSearch® Tumor Phenotyping Reagent Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) kit (Veridex LLC, Raritan, NJ, USA) was used on the fourth channel of fluorescence of the CellSearch® system following the manufacturer’s instructions. The pre-, intra-, and post-operative enumerations of CTC are shown in Fig. . A high count of CTC was already detected at baseline (400 CTC), decreasing by 67.5 % at the intra-operative time point (150 CTC), after which it increased significantly (1400 CTC). In particular, all CTC were EGFR negative. Typical images of CTC are shown in Fig. .