A 49-year-old male presented with aphasia and right limb weakness for four hours. He had a past medical history of stroke, and Caw had been identified on CTA and carotid ultrasound during previous hospitalization. He denied a past medical history of hypertension, diabetes or coronary arterial disease. Since the first ischemic stroke, the patient had been taking anti-platelet drugs and statins continuously to prevent recurrence of stroke .
On physical examination, he was unconscious, somnolence, aphasia. He had right-sided central facio-lingual palsy, and right limb muscle strength was grade 4 (Lovett scale). The National Institute of Health stroke scale (NIHSS) score was 8, and Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 4/2/6. Blood cell and coagulation tests were done in Accident and Emergency Department and the results were unremarkable. Head CT scan showed no significant abnormalities. Acute cerebral infarction was diagnosed based on the symptoms and intravenous thrombolytic therapy with rt-PA (0.9 mg/Kg) was given. The patient recovered well after thrombolysis, and the NIHSS score was improved to 1. About 30 min after thrombolysis, urgent CTA of head and neck was done and linear filling defect was identified at the origin of left internal carotid artery (ICA) . The distal M1 segment of left middle cerebral artery (MCA) was close to complete occlusion. Cerebral CT perfusion (CTP) showed the perfusion was delayed in the left cerebral hemisphere: mean transit time (MTT) and time to peak (TTP) were prolonged, cerebral blood flow (CBF) and cerebral blood volume (CBV) were slightly raised. About 75 min after thrombolysis, emergency cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed. During intraoperative angiography, we found the occluded segment of MCA was successfully recanalized, so cerebral artery thrombectomy was not performed. CaW was observed at the origin of the left internal carotid artery, contrast retention without filling defect was observed at the carotid bulb . After 24 h of thrombolysis, repeated CTP showed that the abnormal perfusion area was significantly reduced and was limited to the left basal ganglia. The patient was treated with aspirin, and his condition was stable. During this period, the patient’s blood pressure was maintained at about 100/70mmHg for a long time without any antihypertensive drugs.
After 60 h of thrombolysis, carotid ultrasound found CaW in the posterior aspect of the left internal carotid bulb. Surprisingly, a slightly hyperecho mass of 6.1 × 3.9 mm was detected between web and posterior wall of the bulb, obvious eddy currents were detected around it. The CaW is a double layer of strong echo membranous structure protruding into the lumen, about 6.2 mm in length and 1.2 mm in thickness, consistent with the direction of blood flow. The angle between the web and the posterior wall was 35°. Left CaW with acute thrombosis in situ was highly suspected . Emergent carotid endarterectomy (CEA) was performed under general anesthesia. During operation, blood clot was identified between the carotid intima and posterior arterial wall . The thrombus was removed and endarterectomy was performed. Pathology revealed mixed thrombus, a small amount of fibrinoid nets, red blood cells and inflammatory cells. Pathology showed that the thickness of the wall was uneven, some of the wall tissues were hyalinized, and some of the wall tissues were mucoid. The patient recovered well and discharged on postoperative Day 10. The patient was followed up at 2 months, he was asymptomatic without evidence of recurrent cerebral infarction on carotid ultrasonography.