A 57-year-old man presented to the hospital with a two-month history of vague “on-and-off” abdominal discomfort. No associated symptoms such radiating pain, weight loss, hematuria, or change in bowel habits were reported by the patient. The patient's medical, surgical, and family history were irrelevant. He also had no history of smoking. Physical examination revealed a soft lax abdomen with unremarkable systemic examination. The results of laboratory investigations, including a complete blood count, blood chemistry, serum urea, and urine analysis, were normal. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a well-defined heterogeneous enhancing lesion measuring 2 × 1.5 cm located at the posterolateral upper pole of the left kidney. The lesion was in close proximity to the spleen. There was no evidence of hydronephrosis or kidney stones. The renal vein was patent. These findings suggested renal cell carcinoma . Two weeks later, the patient underwent left partial nephrectomy. The resected specimen was sent for histopathological analysis. Gross examination revealed a well-circumscribed but uncapsulated white-tan soft mass with homogenous cut surface measuring 2 × 1.5 × 1 cm located at the upper pole of the left kidney. The mass abutted but did not invade the renal capsule. No areas of necrosis were seen. No gross abnormality was observed in the rest of the renal parenchyma. Microscopic examination reveals a well-demarcated lesion composed of sheets of cells that were admixed with large, gaping, dilated cavernous-like spaces filled with blood . These cells are monotonous, small, and round to oval, each containing a moderate amount of eosinophilic to amphophilic cytoplasm . No pleomorphism was present. There was no evidence of necrosis or increased mitotic activity of more than 2/50 high-power field (HPF) . No atypical mitosis was seen. High-power examination showed small nuclei with fine chromatin and smooth nuclear membrane embedded in a myxoid stroma ; other adjacent areas revealed hyalinized stromal reaction . Capsular and lymphovascular invasion were not observed. Tumor cells showed diffuse and strong positivity for smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) , vimentin, and pericellular net-like positivity for collagen type IV . The tumor was negative for cytokeratins 7 and 20, RCC antigen, cluster of differentiation (CD10), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), desmin, CD34, CD117, CD 99, synaptophysin, chromogranin, S100, renin, Melan A, and human melanoma black-45 (HMB-45). Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain failed to reveal any cytoplasmic granules in any of the examined cells. CD31 and CD34 highlighted the vascular spaces and capillary network only. Ki67 index was less than 2%. Altogether, histopathology and immunohistochemical revealed findings consistent with primary glomangioma (glomus tumor) of the kidney. One year after surgery, a follow-up examination revealed that the patient was doing well and no tumor recurrence and/or metastasis was detected.