A 58-year-old male with SIT was diagnosed with early gastric cancer by an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) performed at an outside hospital, and was subsequently referred to our hospital for further evaluation and surgical treatment. He was diagnosed with SIT 5 years previously. He had been healthy until this diagnosis with no other underlying disease or any family history of SIT or gastric cancer. History and physical examination revealed right orchidoptosis. Laboratory examination, including tumor markers, showed no abnormal findings. Electrocardiogram (ECG) examination revealed right bundle branch block. Chest x-ray suggested dextrocardia . Upper gastrointestinal imaging (UGI) and repeat EGD identified a superficial lesion with slight depression (0-IIc) measuring 20 × 25 mm in size on the posterior side of the lesser curvature of the upper gastric body . The lesion was 3 cm distal to the esophagogastric junction (EGJ). Biopsy revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed that all intraabdominal organs were inversely positioned . Prior to surgery, abdominal angiographic CT with 3D reconstruction was performed to reveal any other anatomic variations and to verify the locations of the major vasculature. There were no arterial variations . Chest and abdominal CT did not reveal any metastases, including none to the liver or lung. Based on findings of the biopsy, UGI, EGD and CT, a 0-IIc lesion of the upper gastric body, clinical stage cT1b, cN0cH0cP0cM0, stage IB according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma was diagnosed . We decided to perform LATG with standard lymph node dissection (D1 + No. 7, 8a, 9) in accordance with the Japanese Gastric Cancer Treatment Guidelines .
After general anesthesia was induced, the patient was placed in a supine position. The position of trocars is showed in Fig. . First, a 12-mm trocar was placed in the umbilical site, and carbon dioxide was injected into the peritoneal cavity at 10 mmHg. A laparoscope was inserted into the abdomen through the 12-mm trocar. An additional 4 ports were placed in the left and right subcostal positions and lateral abdominal regions. The surgeon was positioned on the right side of the patient for dissection of lymph node basins 5, 6, 7, 8a, and 9 and was positioned on the left side for the dissection of lymph node basins 1, 2, 3, 4sa, 4sb, 4d, and 11p. At the beginning of the operation, the surgeon was positioned on the left side of the patient and the greater omentum was dissected. The location of the spleen was confirmed, and the 4sa node basin (along the short gastric vessels) and 4sb node basin (along the left gastroepiploic vessels) were dissected. The left gastroepiploic vessels were clipped and divided. Next, the surgeon was positioned on the right side of the patient, and the node basin 6 (infrapyloric lymph nodes) was dissected and the duodenum was transected with a linear stapling device intraperitoneally. Next, the node basins 5 (suprapyloric lymph nodes), 8a [lymph node along the common hepatic artery (CHA)], 9 [lymph node around the celiac artery (CA)], and 7 [lymph node along the left gastric artery (LGA)] were dissected safely . Next, the surgeon was positioned on the left side of the patient again, and the node basins 11p [along the proximal splenic artery (SA)], 1 (right pericardial lymph node), 2 (left pericardial lymph node), and 3 (along the lesser curvature) were dissected completely in accord with Gastric Cancer Treatment Guidelines . We exposed the abdominal esophagus and transected it at an appropriate resection line using an endoscopic linear stapler. The resected stomach and surrounding fatty tissue including harvested lymph nodes were placed in a plastic specimen bag. The specimen in the bag was retrieved through an extended umbilical port incision. At last, we performed an esophagojejunostomy using the overlap method intraperitoneally . Operating time was 359 min, and blood loss was 90 mL. The final pathology showed a poorly differentiated 0-IIc lesion with invasion limited to the mucosa. There was no metastasis in any of the retrieved lymph nodes. The final stage was pT1aN0M0, Stage 1A according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma . There were no immediate postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged 7 days after the operation. The patient is still alive without recurrence or symptoms 4 years after surgery.