A previously healthy 19-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with the complaint of fever and shaking of hands for a period of approximately 1 month. He was diagnosed with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) after admission. He had moved to Beijing (north China) 10 years earlier from Yunnan (South China) and had last visited Yunnan 1 year before presentation.
Laboratory examination revealed a white blood cell count of 0.81× 109/L, a haemoglobin content of 71 g/L, and a platelet count of 35× 109/L. CD4+ T-cell counts are 2/µL. Blood culture, bone marrow culture and sputum culture all grew Talaromyces marneffei.Coronal T2-weighted MRI showed a high-signal-density mass in the left parietal lobe . Chest CT examinations showed a hollow plaque in the lower left lung . PET/CT scan revealed abnormal uptake in the lesions of the lung (SUVmax = 2.0), bones (SUVmax = 5.1), lymph node (SUVmax = 5.7) and brain (SUVmax = 5.2).
The patient was started on anti-Talaromyces marneffei therapy with intravenous voriconazole (200 mg) twice a day for 1 month (Neither liposomal amphotericin B nor itraconazole were available in the hospital). One month after treatment, the size of the pulmonary hollow plaques had decreased on CT chest examinations. However, he still presented with recurrent neutropenia, and coronal T2-weighted MRI showed that the brain mass in the left parietal lobe had further enlarged.
Surgical incision of the brain mass showed a compact mass . Subsequently, microscopic morphology of Giemsa stain lectophenol cotton blue stain and culture in SDA of the brain mass showed the presence of Talaromyces marneffei. Furthermore, metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) of the brain mass was conducted, and Talaromyces marneffei (sequence number: 9) and EBV (sequence number: 6054) were identified. Besides the Talaromyces marneffei infection, histopathologic examination of the brain mass revealed B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma!Thus, the patient continued antifungal therapy with voriconazole (200 mg bid po). After the pathology results revealed lymphoma, the patient started chemotherapy with a high-dose methotrexate (5.4 g once ivgtt, 3.5g/m2) regimen. The neurological function of the patient remained stable after surgery. Furthermore, his fever, neutropenia and lymphadenopathy improved after receiving antifungal therapy and chemotherapy.