A 54-year-old, obese, Caucasian female, a current smoker, presented to the clinic with complaints of intermittent vaginal bleeding for approximately one week and that she “felt something” in her vaginal area. Her past medical history includes diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and an abdominal hysterectomy 30 years ago due to heavy menstrual bleeding of benign etiology. Upon examination, a pedunculated mass was found on the vaginal wall at approximately 7 o'clock. The mass, measuring 2.0 × 1.5 × 1.3 cm, was subsequently excised.
Histologic examination revealed a clear cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemical stains were positive for CD10, PAX-8, and carbonic anhydrase 9/IX (CA-IX) and negative for CK7. A diagnosis of metastatic CCRCC was made . Radiological studies then revealed a left renal mass, bilateral adrenal masses, and enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes. A subsequent left radical nephrectomy and adrenalectomy was performed. On gross examination, a unifocal tumor that measured 14.7 cm in its greatest dimension was identified. Pathologic examination confirmed the renal origin of the vaginal carcinoma. The nephrectomy diagnosis was established as CCRCC with rhabdoid differentiation and multinucleated giant tumor cells. The World Health Organization (WHO)/International Society of Urologic Pathologists (ISUP) grade was 4. The tumor invaded into the perinephric fat tissue, renal sinus, and major branches of the renal vein. Tumor necrosis and lymphovascular invasion were identified. All margins, including Gerota's fascia, ureteral and vascular, were free of malignancy. The left adrenal gland was involved with metastatic CCRCC. The final pathological stage was pT3a pNx pM1.
Multiple pulmonary nodules, measuring up to 4 mm, and a right adrenal nodule were observed on imaging. The patient is now receiving adjuvant targeted therapy (Sunitinib 50 mg). The lung nodules are no longer seen, and the right adrenal nodule had decreased more than 30% in size. Interestingly, her vaginal mass recurred, increased in size, and changed in shape since her last resection. She, thus, underwent a partial excision of the new lesion on the vaginal wall. The pathologic examination revealed a CCRCC, with extensive rhabdoid differentiation this time .