A 62-year-old female underwent living-related donor renal transplant in 1983 due to end stage kidney disease with primary renal hypertension. She was maintained on azathrothiozine and steroids. No episodes of rejection were reported post-transplant, and the transplant kidney functioned well. In 2017, the patient presented with a urinary tract infection. Medical evaluation revealed acute renal failure and hydronephrosis of the transplanted kidney. She was treated with Cefapime and urine cytology was positive for malignant cells. An anterograde nephrostogram showed a large filling defect in the lower pole of the transplant kidney as well as a filling defect in the proximal 3–4 cm of the ureter. At time of ureteroscopy, multiple biopsies from the renal pelvic mass demonstrated high grade urothelial carcinoma. Later on, the patient was found to have extensive bladder tumors; she underwent hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, nephrectomy of native kidneys and transplant kidney, cystectomy and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissections. Post operation follow-up, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a large liver mass which was confirmed by biopsy to be metastatic urothelial carcinoma. Immunotherapy was initiated and the liver metastasis responded well to the immunotherapy with dramatic reduction in size of liver mass. At last follow-up, the patient was well 44 months after her surgical resection.
The Fig. a showed left native kidney, two native ureters, and one donor kidney connected to the native urinary bladder via a donor ureter. Upon sectioning, a 4.5 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm well-circumscribed flesh-colored mass was found in the renal pelvis of the graft kidney, a 1.2 × 1.4 × 2.5 cm flesh-colored mass encompassing the entire lumen of the proximal donor ureter, and over fifty tan discrete polypoid nodules, up to 1.5 cm, carpeting the wall of native bladder . The native kidneys were small (5.0 × 3.5 × 1.5 cm and 6.0 × 4.0 × 2.0 cm, respectively), with a thin cortex, poorly delineated corticomedullary junctions, and renal pelvises largely replaced by fatty tissue. No mass was identified in the native kidneys or ureters. Histology demonstrated high grade papillary UC involving the graft kidney, graft ureter and the native bladder. The carcinoma was predominantly non-invasive, however, focal invasion into subepithelial connective tissue was identified in the renal pelvis. Metastatic tumor was identified in one of thirteen obturator lymph nodes. The two native kidneys and ureters were negative for carcinoma , demonstrating extensive thyroidization with tubular casts, calcium oxalate deposition, global and segmental glomerular sclerosis, interstitial fibrosis and chronic inflammationand arteriosclerosis. Subsequent to her surgical excision, a cystic lesion in the liver was biopsied, and confirmed to be metastatic urothelial carcinoma. The final pathological stage was therefore T1, N1, M1.
Since microsatellite instability (MSI) is commonly seen in upper urinary tract UC , we performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) and found that MLH1, MLH2, PMS2and MSH6 expression were retained in the UC of renal pelvis, donor ureter, and urinary bladder (not shown). BK polyomavirus has been shown as risk factors in post-transplant UC. However, both donor and recipient kidneys were negative for BK viral infection by SV40 IHC . In order to determine whether the UC arose from native or donor tissue, STR analysis was performed on extracted DNA from the tumor as well as uninvolved native uterus as the control for recipient and representative apparent normal donor kidney as the control for donor. Of the 15 autosomal STRs, nine were informative. Review of these informative loci in the DNA extracted from the donor kidney tumor, ureter tumor, and bladder tumor indicated that 83, 84, and 80%, respectively, were of donor origin. These data would suggest that the tumor had drop metastasized to the bladder through the donor ureter. DNA extracted from the lymph node with evidence of metastasis showed only 8% donor origin, possibly due to low tumor cellularity in the lymph node sampled.
DNA extracted from the donor kidney tumor and the lymph node metastasis were submitted for mutation profiling of 147 genes. The results are provided in Table . The donor kidney tumor showed amplification of TERT and loss of CDKN2A/CDKN2B, which are genomic alterations found in approximately 7 and 25% of bladder cancers respectively . These were not detected in the lymph node metastasis. The renal pelvic tumor also showed a missense variant (p.N596S) in MSH2 at a low VAF (3.5%). This same variant was detected in the lymph node metastasis, but at a VAF of 37%. The lymph node metastasis also showed two other missense variants in MSH6 and FANCA with VAFs of 34 and 41% respectively. Interpretation of these variants would suggest these are of uncertain significance (VUS), potentially of germline origin. Given the low donor contribution in this lymph node specimen from the STR analyses (8%), it is suggested that these may be of recipient (native) germline origin. The low VAF MSH2 detected in the donor kidney tumor confirms the 7% recipient (native) contribution detected in this specimen. Thus, for the lymph node, no apparent somatic alterations were detected, possibly due to the overall low tumor cellularity of the specimen.