A 22-year-old South Indian man with a previous history of Fontan surgery at the age of 13 for double outlet right ventricle with severe pulmonary stenosis and straddling tricuspid valve presented with a spiking high-grade fever of 25-day duration. He had no history of cough, ear discharge, respiratory infection, dysuria, diarrhea, gastrointestinal distress or vomiting.
His past history included surgery for a brain abscess at the age of 13, Fontan surgery at the age of 13, ocular surgery for retinal detachment at the age of 16, and multiple small skin abscesses chiefly on his left foot, which recurred after treatment and led to an excision of an abscess on his foot. At the age of 20, he was diagnosed with protein-losing enteropathy.
The last echocardiography performed before his hospitalization showed a right to left flow in the Fontan circuit, signifying a flow of de-oxygenated blood from the intended pulmonic to the systemic circulation.
On physical examination, he was found to be febrile with a temperature of 39°C on admission, a pulse rate of 88 per minute, a respiratory rate of 26 per minute, blood pressure of 98/60 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 89 percent in room air. A head to toe examination identified clubbing of his nails, a median sternotomy scar, mild abdominal distension and pedal edema. His teeth and oral cavity were found to be normal. He was 174 cm tall and weighed 51 kg.
His laboratory data on admission showed the following: white blood cells (WBCs) 14,000/mm3, neutrophils 84.5 percent, lymphocytes 8.3 percent, eosinophils 0.2 percent, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 45 mm/hour, hemoglobin 10.1 g/dL, urea 19 mg/dL, serum creatinine 0.6 mg/dL, sodium 122 mmol/L, potassium 3.7 mmol/L, total protein 3.7 g/dL, serum albumin 1.3 g/dL and serum globulin 2.4 g/dL. He tested negative for hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C virus and human immunodeficiency virus. A further work-up for immune deficiency could not be performed for logistical reasons. A urine analysis showed 20-25 red blood cells and 10-12 WBCs per high-power field.
A 2 D echocardiography revealed no vegetations. An ultrasound scan revealed a mass in his left kidney measuring 7.2 × 4 cm. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a hypodense area in the lower pole of his left kidney measuring 5.28 × 6.22 cm, consistent with a renal abscess, which was percutaneously aspirated and grew highly sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. Special staining for acid-fast bacilli was negative. Figure shows the CT images. His blood cultures were repeatedly negative. One of the urine cultures grew Escherichia coli and Enterococcus species. The E. coli was sensitive to amikacin, cefoperazone and/or sulbactam, gentamicin, imipenem, meropenem, natamycin, nitrofurantoin, and piperacillin and/or tazobactam. The Enterococcus species was sensitive to amoxicillin and clavulanic acid, gentamicin, imipenem, linezolid, meropenem and nitrofurantoin.
On the basis of the sensitivity of the S. aureus isolated from the abscess, he was treated with intravenous gentamicin, 80 mg at eight-hourly intervals, and with intravenous teicoplanin, 400 mg once per day.
He continued experiencing spikes of high-grade fever, and a repeat ultrasound after 12 days of appropriate therapy showed only minimal resolution of the lesion. Surgery was anticipated. A technetium-99 m renogram was performed to see the split function of the kidney with the abscess and to determine whether or not a partial nephrectomy could be performed. The renogram revealed a total glomerular filtration rate of 94 mL/min, with the left kidney contributing 36 mL/min and the right kidney 58 mL/min, and no evidence of obstruction. Figure shows the results of the technetium-99 m renogram.
In view of the persistence of the abscess, he underwent a surgical exploration of the renal bed. An attempt was made to carry out a partial nephrectomy of the affected region. However, this failed and so a left nephrectomy was performed. Figure shows the nephrectomy specimen. Figures and show the histopathological picture.
Post-operatively, his fever subsided and the antibiotic coverage was continued for one week with teicoplanin and gentamicin. At the time of his discharge, his serum creatinine level was 1.1 mg/dL.
A histopathological examination of the diseased kidney revealed infiltrates of lymphocytes, plasma cells and histiocytes. The replacement of renal parenchymal tissue by sheets of foamy histiocytes admixed with neutrophils was observed and this was consistent with xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis. A special stain for acid-fast bacilli was negative. Clinical, radiological and histopathological examinations failed to provide any evidence of an obstructive lesion in his urinary tract or of renal calculi.
Two weeks after his discharge from hospital, he complained of fever. A CT scan of his abdomen was performed and a residual renal bed abscess was found. A pigtail catheter was inserted and daily aspiration and antibiotic instillation were performed. A week later he was discharged again, with oral antibiotics.
About seven months after the surgery, he remained in a perfect state of health without reports of further infection. This also signified the absence of inherent immune deficiency.