A 60 y/o female presented with Gorham’s disease in the ulna. The disease first started in the ulna and later involved the lower end of the radius and the lower humerus. The patient had referred to her doctor 9 years earlier with pain in the ulnar side of her forearm after getting hit by a heavy object. Clinical and radiographic examinations had failed to reveal any particular pathology and the patient was then referred to a physiotherapist. One year later, the patient returned to her physician with severe pain in the forearm. Plain X-rays were apparently normal, however MR imaging revealed nonspecific lesions in the ulnar bone marrow. These lesions were suspected to be chronic osteomyelitis. Radionuclide and CT scans revealed low density areas in the ulna. Laboratory, microbiological, immunological, hormonal and biochemical tests, including parathyroid tests were all within normal limits. The patient had a biopsy taken by her orthopedic surgeon. The biopsy was apparently consistent with the diagnosis of osteomyelitis, but the culture returned negative. After a while, the patient sustained a fracture in the same bone while asleep which was treated with a cast and healed without surgery. The patient has been complaining of pain and weakness in the left forearm for the past 5 years. Radiographs revealed bone absorption in parts of the ulna . Five months ago, while attempting to lift a glass, the patient twisted her forearm and broke her radius. Her radiographs showed complete resorption of the ulna ; her arm was subsequently immobilized in a long arm cast. She came to our center and radiographs of her arm revealed non-union of her latest fracture. They also showed bony absorption of the lower end of the radius ( A,B and C). The patient's elbow ROM was nearly normal, so was the wrist ROM except for the final degression of flexion and extension. MTPs and finger motion were normal and the patient's fingers were spared.The neurovascular status had been normal from the onset of the disease and the nerves and vessels were spared. The skin was normal and no soft tissue involvement was seen. All laboratory tests including serum complement levels, vasculitis tests, parathyroid, 24-hour urinary proteins and electrophoresis of plasma proteins were normal. Based on test results and the histopathology report of dead, edematous bony tissue and an abundance of inflammatory cells with a great number of thick-walled blood vessels and no evidence of malignancy, we considered the criteria proposed by Heffez et al. in 1983 and Gorham’s disease was diagnosed.