A 64-year old woman was presented to the emergency department with acute abdominal pain and breathlessness of which she was suffering few hours before her presentation to the emergency room. Her medical history revealed recurrent upper abdominal discomfort over the last 4 months, and did not suggest any major disease except hypertension, that she has been treating since seven years. Besides, she had no prior history of abdominal surgery or trauma.
The physical examination revealed a conscious woman with discolored conjunctives and severe cutaneous paleness, shortness of breath, tachycardia with a weak and rapid pulse rate of 126 beat per minute, and hypotension with a systolic blood pressure of 80 mmHg. At the abdominal examination, there was a general abdominal tenderness.
Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 7 900/mm3, a hematocrit of 18%, and serum hemoglobin concentration of 6,1 g/dl, with a normal blood platelet level (390 000/mm3), a blood urea of 0,25 g/L, and a creatinine level of 10 mg/L. Hemostasis laboratory data, chemistry and Serum lipase were within normal limits.
The patient was shift to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a swift assessment of her airway, breathing and circulation. The initial resuscitation was begun by physiological serum and conventional crystalloid solutions; then she was transfused by 8 units of red blood cells. After hemodynamic stability, an abdominal computerized tomography (CT) was performed and revealed the presence of an important hemoperituneum with two fluid densities around the spleen and the liver [Figure ], it also revealed a large density around the duodenum which represented a hematoma [Figure , ]. There was no free air and all solid organs had a normal appearance.
It was impossible to obtain the opinion of either a vascular surgeon or an interventional radiologist for this acute intraabdominal hemorrhage, and it was indispensible to shift the patient to the operating room for an emergency surgery to control the source of bleeding. An emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed under general anesthesia. This Surgical exploration showed an important hemoperituneum and a large periduodenal hematoma which was extending into the retroperitoneal space. Two liters of blood were evacuated from the free peritoneal cavity. Besides, we noted a significant bleeding from the right gastroepiploic artery, with no obvious aneurysm, that was successfully ligated. Further exploration identified no additional bleeding, and the retroperitoneal hematoma was respected. The patient recovered well without postoperative complications and she was discharged 5 days after the surgery.