A 16-year-old black African girl was admitted to the emergency room of the Parakou University Hospital Center for altered consciousness and tumor of the left breast. The tumor had been progressing for approximately 6 months before admission, according to her parents. Our patient did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol. Her medical, surgical, and psychosocial history was unremarkable. She had normal pubertal development. Her parents are of low socio-economic status. The onset of symptoms was marked by the appearance of a small nodule in her left breast, and an evolution marked by a rapid increase in the volume of the tumor, which motivated traditional herbal treatments of unknown nature. No notion of radiotherapy or previous chemotherapy was reported.
Our patient was admitted in a state of apparent death. She had no blood pressure or pulse. Her temperature was 35 °C. She had an estimated Glasgow Coma Scale of 3. She was pronounced dead on clinical examination 10 minutes after admission. Blood samples for laboratory tests of hepatic and renal function and serological tests could not be taken before she died. The parents claimed to have no knowledge of breast cancer in their family. The parents claimed to have consulted two traditional healers and an herbal treatment of unknown nature was administered to the girl, but without improving her health.
A postmortem examination of the body showed cachexia and a bulky, multinodular, exulcerated, blackish red hemorrhagic mass of the left breast, 35 cm in circumference, partially overflowing on the right hemithorax . A biopsy sample of the tumor mass was carried out postmortem. Histopathological examination after staining with hematoxylin and eosin showed tumor proliferation made up of anastomosed vascular networks. The tumor cells were spindle shaped, oval, or rounded in places and were not very cohesive. There was a marked anisokaryosis and numerous foci of tumor necrosis .
The result of a immunohistochemical analysis was positive for CD31 and factor VIII . The proliferation index (Ki-67) was estimated at 30%. The expression of the tumor cells was negative for smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin, melanin A, and S-100. A diagnosis of grade 3 angiosarcoma according to The National Federation of Centers of Cancer Control (FNCLCC) was confirmed.