A 67-year-old woman received a medical checkup and found a positive fecal occult blood result. Her past medical history was appendicitis and mild pneumonitis. She was referred to a local hospital for further investigation, where colonoscopy revealed a cancer lesion in the transverse colon. Consequently, she was admitted to our institution for surgical treatment.
Physical examination showed no significant findings. Furthermore, the blood test showed no abnormal findings except for mild anemia (Hb 12.9 g/dl). The values of tumor markers were within normal limits (CEA 0.6 ng/ml, CA19-9 31 U/ml).
Colonoscopy was preoperatively performed for the marking neat of the tumor using an ink injection method. The tumor revealed a type 2 lesion of 13 mm in diameter at the hepatic flexure of the transverse colon . The histological diagnosis of the biopsy was a poorly differentiated carcinoma with a signet-ring cell carcinoma component . Barium enema of the colon revealed a trapezoid-shaped lesion at the same location of the transverse colon , leading to the prediction of the wall invasion to MP or deeper. The enhanced computed tomography (CT) could not recognize a tumor in the transverse colon, but an enlarged node was detected in the intermediate lymph node region . There was no evidence of distant metastasis.The 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed an abnormal accumulation of SUVmax 3.8 only on the intermediate lymph node . No abnormal accumulation was detected in the transverse colon. Based on these preoperative examination results, she was diagnosed of an advanced transverse colon cancer with lymph node metastasis (T2, N1a, M0, cStageIIIA according to the UICC-TNM classification, 8th edition).
Laparoscopic right hemicolectomy with D3 lymph node dissection was performed 3 months later after the initial colonoscopy without any treatment, including folk medicine and medication for boost immunity. The enlarged lymph node was located nearby the left branch of the middle colic artery. Macroscopically, the tumor was not observed in the resected specimens . A scar-like lesion around the preoperative inking was seen in the colonic mucosa . Pathological findings revealed inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrosis between the submucosa (SM) and the muscularis propria (MP) . No malignant cells were identified at the scar lesion, although poorly differentiated carcinoma with mucinous component was pathologically observed in the harvested enlarged lymph node .
She was discharged from our institution 9 days after the operation without any complication and was given adjuvant chemotherapy due to regional lymph node metastasis. At 5 years after surgery, there is no evidence of local recurrence and distant metastasis.