A 10-month-old boy was referred to the urology department for the management of non-palpable testis. There was no significant familial or past history. A clinical examination demonstrated a left, well-positioned testis, 16 × 11 × 11 mm in size, and an empty right scrotum. No abnormality of the external genitalia was found. Physical examination could not confirm the presence of the right testis.
Ultrasonography could not identify the right testis in the abdomen or inguinal region. We employed not only conventional MRI, but also DWI, to improve the diagnostic accuracy of non-palpable testes by MRI examination. The T2-weighted image showed a high-intensity mass-like structure, which was difficult to distinguish from the surrounding fat tissue, below the right kidney. Furthermore, DWI showed a mass, at that position, of markedly high signal intensity. The T2-weighted image was fused with the DWI image, using medical image viewer software (EV Insite R, PSP Co., Tokyo, Japan), to identify the anatomical location. The high-intensity mass-like structure on the T2-weighted image and the markedly high signal intensity mass on the DWI image completely matched , which suggested that the mass below the kidney was the right testis.
The patient underwent diagnostic and therapeutic laparoscopy. The 5-mm 0-degree camera, introduced through the umbilicus, showed an opened right inguinal ring, with vas deferens. Two more trocars were introduced and a testis was found under the ascending colon, 1 cm below the right kidney. We decided to perform 2-stage Fowler-Stephens orchiopexy. The spermatic vessels were ligated with nonabsorbable 2–0 sutures with the expectation that this would allow collateral blood supply to develop more fully. Ten months after the first surgery, the second stage of the 2-stage laparoscopic Fowler-Stephens procedure was performed. Because the vessel derived from the inferior epigastric artery had developed enough, as a feeding vessel, to provide blood supply to the right testis, retroperitoneal dissection was carried down from the level of the testis to the internal ring to create a wide peritoneal pedicle. The 15 × 10 × 6 mm testis could be delivered to the scrotum without any tension from the radially dilating system. After delivery of the testis, we performed testicular biopsy to compare pathological findings between the present patient and inguinal undescended testis, because we routinely do testicular biopsy during orchiopexy to predict future testicular function. For biopsy, the tunica albuginea was exposed and iris scissors were used to remove a small piece of the testicular parenchyma. Pathological findings in the biopsies taken at stage 2 of the operation showed that median seminiferous tubule diameter and median number of spermatogonia per tubular cross section were comparable to those in inguinal undescended testes of boys his age (n = 5; Fig. ). We also examined expression patterns of the stem cell marker, undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1) [–], and demonstrated that the UTF1-positive Ad spermatogonia / UTF1-negative Ad spermatogonia ratio was lower in this patient than in boys of his age with descended testes (n = 5) and in inguinal undescended testes (the same biopsy samples used in the pathological study) . This was part of a study examining the histopathological findings and stem cell activity of undescended testes, which was approved by the ethics committee of Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine. Informed consent was obtained from the patients before the study, after explaining its purpose and methods.
Ten months after the second surgery, the right testis, 13 × 8 × 7 mm in size, was located in the scrotum, and good vascularization was detected on echo color Doppler ultrasound.