A 16-year-old man presented to the department of thoracic surgery of the hospital with a 2-day history of chest pain and chest tightness. He was previously healthy and did not take any medications. The man’s physical examination was normal; a huge mass in the left anterior mediastinum with a maximum measurement of approximately 58 mm x 46 mm was found on the chest CT examination; and he was hospitalized. In the laboratory analysis results after admission, in addition to uric acid (UA) 528 µmol/l (normal 208–428 µmol/l), urine glucose (UGLU) positive (3+), human chorionic gonadotropin-beta subunit (HCG-β) 313.08 mIU/mL (normal 0–5 mIU/mL), the remaining liver and kidney function, AFP, blood lipids, serum glucose, and systemic inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein) were normal. Due to the abnormal HCG-β value, the man underwent a color ultrasound and CT examination of the reproductive system to exclude other diseases, but the results showed that there was no abnormality. To clarify the nature of the mediastinal mass, a needle biopsy was performed on the mass, and the diagnosis was mediastinal seminoma based on the pathological examination combined with immunohistochemistry. Considering that seminoma is a malignant tumor, the possibility of distant metastasis could not be ruled out, so a whole-body PET-CT examination was completed. The results showed that the 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose metabolism of the left anterior mediastinal mass was increased, and there were no abnormalities in the examination of other organs and tissues . To determine the next treatment plan, the hospital organized multidisciplinary treatment (MDT) meetings with the departments of thoracic surgery, urology, oncology, imaging, radiotherapy, and pathology. There are two treatment options that were discussed in the MDT meetings: chemoradiotherapy before surgery or chemoradiotherapy after surgery. Because of the young age of the patient, considering that chemoradiotherapy can affect fertility, it was recommended that the man undergo sperm freezing before treatment. Surprisingly, after rigorous testing by the human sperm bank institution, the man was finally diagnosed with azoospermia. The patient said that he had never had this test before, and the man also told that he had ejaculated spontaneously in the past, but no sperm loss occurred. Because no reproductive disorders were detected on imaging, gonadotropins and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were examined. His estradiol (E2) 100.0 pg/ml (normal 11.3–43.2 pg/ml), prolactin (PRL) 15.30 pg/ml (normal 4.04–15.2 pg/ml), follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) < 0.30 mIU/mL (normal 1.5–12.4 mIU/mL), luteinizing hormone (LH) < 0.30 IU/mL (normal 1.7-8.6 mIU/mL), progesterone (PROG), testosterone (T), and LDH levels were normal. Based on the condition, the patient eventually requested a hospital transfer.
A week later, the man, accompanied by his parents, came to our hospital for treatment. He told us about the previous diagnosis and treatment, and he decided to undergo surgery and then chemoradiotherapy. After admission, we evaluated and prepared the patient before surgery and found the following: HCG-β 403.47 IU/L, UA 586 µmol/l (normal 155-428 µmol/l), and UGLU positive (2+). A chest X-ray and a chest CT showed a large left anterior mediastinal mass; the maximum measurement was approximately 72 mm x 49 mm, and the remaining preoperative examination results were normal . After all the preoperative preparations were complete, we opted for thoracoscopic mediastinal mass resection. During the operation, we observed that the mass was huge and closely adhered to the upper left lung lobe, which did not rule out the possibility that the tumor had invaded the lung lobe . Finally, under the premise of resecting part of the upper left lung lobe, we successfully and completely removed this large tumor. The tumor was actually measured to be approximately 110 mm x 60 mm x 45 mm in size, resembling a kidney, dark red and grayish yellow, hard in texture, and with solid gray-white tissue inside . The man remained stable after surgery, and we also compared changes in the laboratory analyses before and after surgery. We found that HCG-β decreased significantly to 111.11 mIU/mL on postoperative day 1 and to 11.2 mIU/mL on postoperative day 6 . In addition, LH 0.22 IU/mL (normal 1.24–8.62 mIU/mL), PROG 0.22 nmol/L (normal 0.30–2.60 nmol/L), T 1.75 nmol/L (normal 6.07–27.10 nmol/L), E2, FSH, PRL, and UGLU results are normal. The final pathological diagnosis was mediastinal seminoma involving the lungs . Immunocytochemistry (IHC) showed the following: CD117 (+), LCA (-), CK-pan (-), CD99 (-), AFP (low+), PLAP (+), and ki-67 (80%+) . A week after the operation, the man recovered well and was discharged from the hospital. During the 3rd week after surgery, the patient had a repeat semen analysis, and the result was still azoospermia. The fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method showed t(12p12.1) (KRAS gene locus was abnormal, with KRAS (12p) gene polybody). At 4 weeks postoperatively, the patient started chemotherapy with the EP regimen, specifically etoposide 200 mg + cisplatin 40 mg (d1-d5, 21 days/cycle). At present, the patient has completed 4 cycles of chemotherapy, and no evidence of tumor recurrence has been found thus far.