A 24-year-old HIV positive homosexual Danish male with no other chronic diseases was admitted to the hospital with four days of febrile episodes and thoracic pain with intermittent stabbing pain in both arms. He had also had bilateral leg pain worst at night time. He denied having had any kind of rash or genital ulcers. There had been no traumas in connection to the onset of pain.
Two weeks before admission, the patient contacted the Department of Infectious Diseases due to a sore throat. At this point physical examination was normal including a normal examination of the oral cavity. A throat culture was negative, and the patient did not have fever. The patient had been tested positive for HIV in 2002, and antiretroviral treatment with tenofovir/emtricitabine , atazanavir and ritonavir was initiated seven months prior to admission. Prior to treatment initiation the CD4 nadir was 330 cells/μl, and the HIV-1 RNA was 44549 copies/ml. Syphilis testing was performed at treatment initiation and 7 months before admission to the hospital, both serology tests were found negative.
On the admission day physical examination disclosed nothing abnormal except from severe tenderness of the processus spinosus of the second thoracic vertebrae (T2). The overlying skin was without any signs of infection and no rash or genital ulcers were found. Laboratory test demonstrated a normal white blood cell count 4.8 × 109/l and C-reactive protein level of 109 mg/l. The CD4 count was 360 cells/μl, and HIV-1 RNA was 158 copies/ml. A QuantiFERON-TB gold test was negative. Eight blood cultures were done, all negative for bacterial and fungal growth. Osteitis was suspected and a bone scintigraphy was performed which revealed bilateral tibial activity as well as abnormal activity in the right side of the cranium but no spine activity was observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine revealed destructive lesions in C2 (the dens of axis) and T2 consistent with osteitis .
A surgical biopsy from T2 was performed, and culture from the biopsy was negative for bacterial growth. Acid-fast and Gram stain did not reveal any microorganisms. The biopsy was then analyzed for bacterial DNA. PCR for part of the 16S rRNA gene resulted in a 528 basepair fragment which by DNA sequencing and subsequent comparison to sequences deposited in the NCBI database showed sequence homology with Treponema pallidum (505 out of 507 identical bases). The bacterial identification was confirmed by PCR specific for the organism . The pathological examination revealed an inflammatory infiltrate dominated by lymphocytes and plasmacells. Immunohistochemical analysis using polyclonal antibody against T. pallidum demonstrated several spirochetes . Furthermore, a reactive quantitative rapid plasma reagin (RPR) syphilis serology was found to be positive with a 1:128 titer. As soon as the biopsy was obtained treatment was initiated with cefuroxime 1.5 g × 3 daily. Following the diagnosis of syphilitic osteitis, treatment was changed to Ceftriaxone 2 g × 1 daily for five weeks according to the local guidelines. The thoracic pain disappeared within the first week of treatment. A follow-up MRI of the spine performed after two weeks of treatment revealed unaltered lesions.