A 21-year-old Asian Indian male, non-smoker, presented to the retina clinic with sudden onset blurring of vision and superior visual field loss in the right eye since waking up that morning. The patient did not give history of similar episodes in the past. He had no other significant medical history other than alopecia. Family history was not significant for similar ocular or hair problems. He was treated for androgenic alopecia with topical 5% minoxidil spray (Am-Exidil 5 topical solution) twice a day for the last 3 years. Every application involved two puffs of spray directly applied to 40–45% of the scalp surface area. Examination of the scalp showed no signs of irritation, inflammation, or dermatitis at the time of initial presentation. On examination, his corrected distance visual acuity was 6/6, N6 in both eyes. Anterior segment examination and intraocular pressure in both eyes were within normal limits. The right eye fundus showed retinal opacification originating from the disc and spreading along the inferior arcade and involving the inferior macula with a normal foveal reflex. The left eye fundus was normal. A clinical diagnosis of inferior hemicentral retinal artery occlusion was made in the right eye. Humphrey 30-2 visual field testing showed a superior field defect . Optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT, Spectralis HRA, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) of the right eye showed thickening and increased hyperreflectivity of inner retinal layers with hyporeflective outer retinal layers due to shadowing at the inferior macula . Fundus fluorescein angiography of the right eye (Spectralis HRA, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) revealed delayed filling of the inferior branch of the central retinal artery with corresponding blocked choroidal fluorescence due to retinal opacification . A detailed systemic evaluation and investigations (blood pressure, random blood sugar, hematological and coagulation profile, serum homocysteine level, Mantoux test, chest x-ray, thyroid function test, and immunological profile) did not detect any abnormalities. The values of the hematological and coagulation profile were as follows: red blood cell count 5.73 million/mm3, packed cell volume level 46.2%, mean corpuscular volume 80.6 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin 28.4 pg, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration 35.3 g/dL, red blood cell distribution width 12%, platelet count 2.00 lakhs/mm3, bleeding time 2 minutes 30 seconds, clotting time 5 minutes 30 seconds, and serum homocysteine level 8.65 µmol/L. Cardiac evaluation with two-dimensional (2D) echography was also found to be normal. No treatment was provided to the patient. The condition of the eye and its visual prognosis was explained to the patient, and he was asked to review after 1 week. After 1 week, his visual acuity was 6/6, N6 in both eyes. There was reduction in the retinal opacification. At 4 weeks, there was complete resolution of the inferior retinal opacification and thinning and atrophy of the inner retinal layers while the complaint of superior field defect still remained . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for including his clinical data and images in this report.