An eleven-month-old female infant was referred to her local hospital for a 2-week history of intermittent fever, cough, dyspnea, night sweats and poor feeding. She was initially treated with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid for presumed upper respiratory tract infection without improvement.
On examination, she was underweight for age, had a temperature of 37.5°C, pulse was regular with a rate of 130 beats per minute, blood pressure was normal, transcutaneous oxygen saturation was 96% on room air, and respiration rate was 40 breaths per minute. A few crackles were heard bilaterally and a mild systolic murmur was noted. She had soft, mobile, non tender, small volume cervical lymph nodes with normal overlying skin and no evidence of discharge. The rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable. A complete blood count at presentation revealed a hemoglobin of 10.4 mg/dL, white cell count of 18 × 103 cell/μL with neutrophilia, and a platelet count of 660 × 103cell/μL. Both biochemistry profile and C reactive protein levels were normal. HIV-1 serology was nonreactive. Chest X-Ray (CXR) revealed diffuse, bilateral, small lung nodules which could suggest acute pulmonary miliary TB . The tuberculin skin test (TST) and the QuantiFERON-TB Gold test were negative. Results of acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smears on three early morning gastric aspirates were negative. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex and colture on gastric aspirates were pending. Family members were investigated for TB, but both parents had negative CXR and TST and the source of infection was not identified.
On day 3 after admission due to the presence of a mild systolic murmur and the persistence of intermittent dyspnea, echocardiography (ECHO) was performed and revealed a voluminous left atrial intracavitary pedunculated mass prolapsing during the diastole from the right lower pulmonary vein into the left ventricle through the mitral valve . No mitral stenosis and only trivial mitral regurgitation were noted. The patient was immediately transferred to the cardio-surgical unit and complete excision of an homogeneous and yellowish in color mass was performed through median sternotomy, under cardiopulmonary bypass. Histopathological examination of the removed mass revealed fibrotic tissue with mixed inflammatory cells and necrotic debris with a vaguely granulomatous appearance and AFBs were found. PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was positive on the removed mass and on previous gastric aspirates.
Three days after surgery, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed widespread miliary nodules, compatible with acute pulmonary miliary TB and showed a right upper lobe consolidation . The cranial contrast-enhanced CT scan and the abdominal ultrasound were normal.
Antituberculous therapy with streptomycin (20 mg/kg intramuscularly once daily), isoniazid (10 mg/kg orally once daily), rifampicin (15 mg/kg orally once daily), ethambutol (20 mg/kg orally once daily), pyrazinamide (30 mg/kg orally once daily) and corticosteroids were started immediately with remarkable improvement in her symptoms in two weeks. Streptomycin was suspended once the drug susceptibility results showed no resistance to the first-line antituberculous drugs. Coltures of gastric aspirates and tissue specimens of the removed mass confirmed Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Further investigations on possible source case found a Romanian grandmother with active pulmonary TB.
Echocardiograms were performed at regular postoperative intervals and no residual lesions were noted. The infant completed 1 year of antituberculous therapy, recovered completely, and did well during the whole follow-up.