A 54-year-old woman underwent surgery for acute aortic dissection, Stanford type A, 4 years previously. She also underwent stent graft insertion for a dissecting abdominal aortic aneurysm 3 years previously. At the current admission, she had developed another aortic dissection in the descending aorta and underwent graft replacement on X date. She had multiple aortic dissections at a young age, but had no findings or family history of Marfan syndrome or Ehlers–Danlos syndrome. Because of severe intraoperative bleeding, she was transfused with 10 units of red blood cells, 4 units of fresh-frozen plasma, and 10 units of platelets. She remained in the intensive care unit for 6 days postoperatively, and her creatinine concentration was approximately 1 mg/dl. However, on postoperative day 9, her creatinine concentration increased to 5.78 mg/dl. Urinalysis showed occult blood and proteinuria ; therefore, we considered performing a renal biopsy.
However, because there was no evidence of azotemia or hyperkalemia, pseudohypercreatininemia was considered as a differential diagnosis. She had no uremic symptoms, such as general malaise or decreased appetite, and her urinary status was good. Her cystatin C concentration measured with creatinine was 1.56 mg/l (normal range, 0.56–0.8 mg/l), which supported the presence of pseudohypercreatininemia. Creatinine was measured by a different enzymatic method and the result was 0.84 mg/dl. Inulin clearance was 41 ml/min, which was consistent with pseudohypercreatininemia .
The patient had an abnormal total protein/albumin ratio, suggesting the presence of abnormal proteins. Electrophoresis did not reveal any distinct M-proteins; however, IgG was markedly elevated, concurrent with the elevated creatinine concentration, and the IgG concentration fluctuated over time in parallel with the creatinine concentration. Therefore, paraproteins were considered a factor influencing the creatinine reagents. We measured IgG4 and found a very high concentration at 844 mg/dl, suggesting IgG4-related disease. However, computed tomography and gallium scintigraphy showed no obvious mass lesions other than pancreatic cysts. Histopathology of the resected aorta showed lymphatic follicles and plasma cell infiltration from the aortic adventitia to the adipose tissue, and IgG4-positive cell infiltration was observed in some areas. However, the IgG4/IgG ratio was approximately 15%, which did not fulfill the diagnostic criteria for IgG4-related inflammatory abdominal aneurysm or IgG4-related periarteritis . IgG4 and creatinine concentrations changed in tandem and were considered to be the cause of the pseudohypercreatininemia Therefore, after obtaining informed consent from the patient, we started oral administration of steroids at a dose of 20 mg, every 24 h. Thereafter, IgG and IgG4 concentrations decreased rapidly, and the creatinine concentration measured by the enzymatic method, which is routinely performed in our hospital, also improved. The patient’s clinical course is shown in Fig. . We are now searching for the cause of the rapid postoperative increase in IgG4, while reducing the steroid dosage.