A 61-year-old female patient was referred to our department for laparoscopic excision of GIST in the stomach. Prior to our treatment she underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy due to epigastric pain and occasional vomiting. Endoscopy showed erosive gastritis, a hiatal hernia, and a submucosal tumour located along the lesser curvature on the posterior wall of the antrum . The tumour had a central eroded depression but otherwise appeared to be covered with normal mucosa. Several biopsies of the tumour were taken using the bite-on-bite technique. Unfortunately, only scant samples of the submucosa were obtained, which precluded a histological diagnosis of the tumour.
Endoscopic ultrasonography confirmed a 22 × 13 mm submucosal well-defined solid tumour arising from the fourth, muscular, layer of the stomach . The tumour appeared to be nodular, with slightly heterogeneous echogenicity. Endoscopic ultrasonography did not demonstrate a significant ulceration or ductal structures. In the diagnostic work-up of abdominal pain and vomiting the patient had undergone transabdominal ultrasonography, which showed no focal lesions in the liver. Before surgery, we performed another endoscopy where the lesion was tattooed proximally and distally.
Laparoscopy was performed, and on initial exploration of the abdominal cavity, we discovered a tattooed submucosal tumour on the greater curvature of the stomach. Laparoscopic excision was performed and the specimen was recovered in a retrieval bag. The abdominal cavity was irrigated with saline and the fluid aspirated. An abdominal drain was inserted beneath the stomach. The fascia and skin wounds were sutured. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day.
Resection samples were sent for histopathological analysis. The histopathologic analysis report about 6.6 × 3.5 cm excision gastric wall. The mucosa and serosa have normal appearance, muscularis propria and submucosa include a gray yellowish node 15 mm in diameter. The tumour did not involve the resection margins. Histopathological analysis confirmed an ectopic pancreas, 15 mm in diameter .