An 18-month-old girl with no significant medical or family history was brought to our hospital. Her parents reported that they had noticed abdominal distention 3 weeks prior to the presentation without any other complaint. On initial evaluation, she weighed 11 kg, with generally good condition and normal vital signs. On physical examination, the abdomen was distended, soft, nontender. A palpable, painless, solid, immobile mass occupying the whole abdomen was identified.
Her laboratory tests showed leukocytosis [white blood cell count (WBC)=15 100, neutrophils (N)=44%, lymphocytes (L)=47%], urinalysis showed 8–10 RBC (red blood cell count)/HPF (high power field), and other laboratory tests, including PT (prothrombin time), PTT (partial thromboplastin time), and BT (bleeding time), were within the normal.
Performing an abdominal ultrasound, we found a well-marginated multicystic mass .
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large multilocular cystic mass arising from the lower pole of the left kidney; it consisted of cystic structures with multiple thick septations between them. No solid components were noticed .
CPDN, cystic standard nephroblastoma (CWT), cystic mesoblastic nephroma (fetal renal hamartoma), and cystic renal cell carcinoma were considered as possible diagnoses. To confirm the diagnosis, we did a left total nephrectomy; the resected mass weighed 800 g and measured 15×11×9 cm (including the kidney and the perirenal fat) .
Histopathological examination revealed multiple cysts lined by a single layer of flattened to cuboidal low columnar cells with clear cytoplasm, separated by a fibroblastic stroma containing smooth muscle and stratified skeletal muscle fibers with immature blastematous element. No malignant cells were observed. These findings guide us to the diagnosis of CPDN.
The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was discharged from the hospital 4 days after the surgery. Two months after the surgery, the patient was in a generally good condition. Four months later, no recurrence was identified on the CT scan.