An 8 year old male Cameroonian presented at the Grace Community Health and Development Association outreach unit with progressive muscle contractures and weakness of the lower limbs, upper limbs and trunk muscles for 4 months. The onset was marked by weakness and contractures of the lower limb, progressing within a month to involve the upper limbs and trunk muscles. This was characterized by flexural deformity of the elbow and ankle . These complaints were associated progressively with inability to walk or stand without support, poor head and waist control, and dysphagia. There were no seizures, cognitive impairment, visual or auditory impairment, and no bladder or bowel dysfunction. He was consulted at a district hospital where a provisional diagnosis of poliomyelitis was made. However, stool samples sent to a reference laboratory were negative for polio.
His birth history was uneventful. He stood without support at 7 months, and walked at 12 months. Assessment of other developmental mile stones was unremarkable. He had normal motor and mental functions before the onset of illness. There was no previous history of measles, HIV, trauma or hospitalization. He is fully vaccinated for age according to the national guidelines on the expanded program on immunization. There was no family history of paralytic disease or mental impairment. Both parents are alive and well.
On physical examination, the patient was conscious, afebrile, with no facial dimorphic features. Pupillary size and reflexes were normal. There was no ptosis or facial weakness. There was wasting of the upper limb, scapular, and spinal muscles and contractures of the elbows and ankles . There was no calf hypertrophy/pseudohypertrophy. Muscle power was 4/5 on both upper and lower limbs. There was weakness of the cervical, lumbar and pelvic muscles, evident by poor head control and swaying movements of the waist respectively. Hypertonia was evident on the muscles of the arm and calf, with the upper limbs placed in semi flexed position. Sensitivity to touch, pain, temperature, vibration and proprioception were preserved. Tendon and cutaneous reflexes were normal. He was unable to stand or walk without support. Gowers sign was absent. Cardiorespiratory exam was remarkable for the presence of an irregularly irregular tachycardia (heart rate was 122 beats/min). There was no palpable abdominal mass or hepatosplenomegaly. The rest of the physical examinations were unremarkable. Our differential diagnosis included Duchenne muscular dystrophy, EDMD, Fascio-scapula-humeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD), congenital myopathies, Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD), poliomyelitis, and trichinellosis.
Laboratory investigations showed serum creatine kinase (CK) level of 350 IU/l, hemoglobin count of 13 g/dl, white blood cell count (8700 cells/µl), and a normal metabolic profile . Hemoxylin–eosin stain muscle biopsy analysis revealed non-specific variation of muscle fibres diameter . Atrial tachycardia was evident on electrocardiography (ECG) . Immuno-histological and genetic studies, and electromyography were not done due to lack of finances and diagnostic tools.
A diagnosis of EDMD was made based on the early development and progression of muscle contractures, weakness and wasting with scapulohumeroperoneal pattern and cardiac arrhythmia, with atrophic changes on muscle biopsy. Expert cardiology and orthopaedic referral was done. Physiotherapy and a wheel chair were requested. Follow-up one month after referral revealed no changes in clinical outcome. Referral for expert management, physiotherapy, and purchase of wheel chair were not done because of financial constraints.