A 22-year-old male, resident of Karachi, and university student, with no known co-morbid illnesses, presented with a short history of self-resolving painless hematuria that lasted for 2 days. The urinary frequency was normal (three to four times per day). There was no associated history of nocturia, urgency, or dysuria. He denied a history of any medical condition or surgical intervention. There was no history of allergies and addiction. Family history was pertinent for renal cancer in his paternal uncle.
His physical and systemic examination was unremarkable. Laboratory investigations including complete blood count, liver function test, and biochemistry were within normal limits. Urinalysis revealed protein+30 with numerous red blood cells and bacteria which prompted further workup with abdominal ultrasound that showed an irregular cystic lesion, with internal echoes and thin septations, at the lower pole of the left kidney, measuring 7.9 × 7.7 cm. This was followed by a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen that highlighted a well-defined rounded lesion, emerging from the lower pole of the left kidney with enhancing cystic components measuring 87 × 82 mm. The lesion was abutting the tail of the pancreas with loss of fat plane superiolaterally, and abutting the left psoas muscle with loss of fat plane posteromedially, and the left lateral abdominal wall laterally. Multiple hypodense lesions were identified in L1-L4 vertebrae, ischium, and roof of left acetabulum suggestive of metastatic deposits. .
Bone scintigraphy revealed donut-shaped mild tracer uptake involving the L4 vertebrae, correlating with a large osteolytic lesion seen in recent CT. He underwent a left radical nephrectomy. Intra-operatively, a well-circumscribed mass, localized at the lower pole of the left kidney was appreciated, which was not involving the adrenal gland. Histology of the resected lesion showed a high-grade tumor limited to the kidney with prominent tubular, tubulocystic, and tubulopapillary patterns without any sarcomatoid or rhabdoid features. There was no tumor necrosis or lymphovascular invasion. Pathologically, it was staged as pT2aN0 i.e. stage II-A. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed cytokeratin 7 negative, AMACR positive, CD10 positive, and WT-1 negative. Given the gross, histological, and IHC findings, a diagnosis of FH-dRCC was suspected.
Post-operatively, he was started on a combination of intravenous Pembrolizumab, at 200 mg once three weekly, with per-oral Axitinib, at 5 mg twice a day and intravenous Zoledronic acid, every three monthly. Meanwhile, in view of his early age at diagnosis and positive family history, a genetic test was performed which came out to be a pathogenic variant in FH [c.698G>T (p.Arg233Leu)].
After completion of eight cycles of the above regimen, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) of the whole body was carried out, which demonstrated osteolytic metastases with interval regression in fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity over left ischium, acetabulum, L1 and L4 vertebrae; significant interval progression in FDG avidity over the left 6th rib anteriorly; and interval appearance of hypermetabolic marrow deposits involving the left scapular bone, the right 7th rib, T5, and T11 vertebrae. .
Keeping in view this metabolically progressive disease and after a thorough review of the literature, the patient was switched to a combination of intravenous Bevacizumab, at 10 mg/kg given three weekly and per-oral Erlotinib at 150 mg once daily. After completing 6 cycles of the above regimen, PET-CT was repeated which demonstrated mild FDG avid focus over left Gerota's fascia inferiorly without any significant interval change and demonstration of FDG avid osteolytic metastasis with significant interval reduction in metabolic activity. On account of the stable disease process, he is currently advised to continue the same regimen and is scheduled to get a repeat PET-CT in three months.