A 28 years old lady in her 2nd pregnancy presented to the emergency department in her 26th week of gestation with dizziness and palpitation for 2 weeks. She had no prior illness and her last pregnancy was complicated by severe preeclampsia and she was delivered by caesarian section. She was found to have severe anemia with a hemoglobin of 7.2 g/dl (11–16), WBC 57.74 × 109/l (3.9–11), platelets 362 × 109/l (155–435) with 73% circulating blasts on blood film. Renal function, liver function, echocardiogram (ECHO), and electrocardiogram (ECG) were normal. Flow cytometry on bone marrow biopsy showed 42% of total leukocytes expressed CD13, CD33, CD117, CD38, HLA-DR, MPO, CD11C partial, & CD15 partial (27%). Morphologically, the marrow showed 60% blasts thus confirming AML.
Cytogenetics and molecular tests confirmed the presence of Nucleophospmin 1 (NPM1) and FMS like Tyrosine Kinase 3 with Internal Tandem Duplication 3 (FLT3 ITD) (ratio of 0.22) mutation. Her fetal ultrasound has shown normal morphology, placentation and amniotic fluid but the fetal size was below the 5th percentile with normal umbilical artery dopplers, normal middle cerebral artery dopplers and ductus venosus doppler. Uterine artery dopplers were not done. She did not have prior ultrasound for comparison but was sure about her dates with regular periods. Thus, daily cardiotocography (CTG) and fetal ultrasound every 2–3 weeks to ensure proper growth were planned during her hospitalization.
Patient showed no signs of preeclampsia and was normotensive at 110/70 mmHg and urine was negative for protein. She received induction chemotherapy with daunorubicin and cytarabine and achieved morphological remission on day 28 marrow (residual blasts 4%). However, her induction was complicated by myopericarditis likely picture due to anthracyclines. She had chest pain, ST-T changes on ECG and ECHO was showing drop in the ejection fraction (EF) from 60 to 35% with regional wall motion abnormalities. Myopericarditis was managed with analgesia, beta blockers, steroids, and aspirin (aspirin was stopped later due to low platelets correlated to chemotherapy). She had an episode of febrile neutropenia during induction required admission to critical care unit, and was managed with appropriate antibiotics as per local protocol. She was frequently monitored by the maternal and fetal medicine team with fetal ultrasound every 2 weeks and CTG once daily. The fetus showed normal growth and wellbeing between scans. Post induction, she was given 5-azacytidine 75 mg/m2 for 7 days in order to reduce morbidity due to further intensive chemotherapy such as high dose Cytarabine and secondly as a bridge to delivery. This drug was deemed by the team to be the safest option at this stage. She was given 5-azacytidine with no hematological or toxicity issues.
Three weeks post 5-azacytidine, decision was made to deliver the baby on 35 weeks of gestation to prevent disease relapse since patient was on hematological remission. She was given dexamethasone 6 mg Intramuscularly every 12 h for 4 doses for lung maturity 1 week before delivery, then taken for elective lower segment caesarian section after counseling about the mode of delivery and she opted for elective cesarean section. The operation was uncomplicated and she delivered baby girl at 35 weeks of gestation weighing 1670 g with apgars 9 and 9 at 1 and 5 min and arterial cord PH 7.32. Hemoglobin level was 19 g/dL The baby was taken to the NICU and stayed 2 weeks due to small weight for observation. ECHO was done for the baby and showed tiny PDA left to right shunt, normal left atrium and ventricle with EF of 68% and Fractional shortening (FS) of 34%. Scheduled follow up for development was planned after 6 and 12 months. Once the patient recovered, she was given high dose cytarabine consolidation of 3 g/m2 (planned for 3 cycles of high dose cytarabine with midostaurin).