A 34-month-old Japanese girl presented with a history of 7 days of remittent fever and 1 month of pain in her right lower leg. She was born to non-consanguineous, healthy parents and had no remarkable previous medical history, family history, medication, allergy, recent vaccination, or antecedent infection. A physical examination revealed no abnormality except for tender erythematous nodules in her right lower extremity. Initial laboratory studies indicated intense inflammation evidenced by a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 121 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of >140 mm/hour, with a white blood cell count of 13,500/mm3. An extensive evaluation of serum markers for infectious, autoimmune, or malignant disease failed to determine the etiology. Despite negative culture results, we empirically administered antibiotics; however, they appeared unsuccessful. Five weeks after the first visit, her right sole became severely swollen with an expanding eruption, and laboratory studies revealed a remarkably augmented inflammatory pattern (CRP 177 mg/L, ESR >160 mm/hour) with aggravated leukocytosis (20,530/mm3). Further investigation which included bone marrow aspiration, whole body gallium scintigraphy, and ophthalmological examination revealed no abnormality. However, magnetic resonance imaging revealed inflammatory changes in the soft tissue from her ankle to her sole, suggesting panniculitis . Biopsy of the eruption demonstrated dermal perivascular neutrophilic infiltration with no evidence of vasculitis . The clinical features met the criteria for Sweet’s syndrome and a diagnosis was made. Following diagnosis, she was started on orally administered prednisolone (PSL 2 mg/kg per day) which was a first-line treatment for Sweet’s syndrome. Her fever and leg tenderness subsided promptly, so the dose of PSL was reduced to 1 mg/kg per day. While on PSL, she developed upper, then lower, urinary tract infections (UTIs). Therefore, we administered antibiotics for 3 weeks, however, neither clinical symptoms nor laboratory results improved. We increased the PSL dosage to 2 mg/kg per day, and tried to determine the presence of any underlying condition; however, all investigations showed normal results. To avoid long-term use of systemic corticosteroids, we tried other first-line treatments. Orally administered potassium iodide (30 mg/kg per day) was initiated, but this was unsuccessful; however, orally administered colchicine (0.03 mg/kg per day) combined with PSL (2 mg/kg per day) effectively ameliorated her symptoms, and her CRP levels almost normalized. Tapering of PSL dose was being attempted at the time of writing this report.
Cytokine analysis of the remaining frozen serum specimens demonstrated that interleukin (IL)-6 levels, that were elevated prior to therapy, gradually decreased to near-normal levels. In contrast, levels of IL-1β, IL-18, neopterin, and soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors (sTNF-R) I and II were not elevated before treatment. Of these cytokines, IL-1β and IL-18 stayed within their normal ranges throughout the treatment, while neopterin became marginally elevated after the start of treatment. Both sTNF-RI and sTNF-RII levels became elevated shortly after the onset of UTI .