A 65-year-old Caucasian male was referred from his general practitioner after complaining of fatigue and shortness of breath at moderate exertion for 3–5 weeks. He had no prior medical history and did not use any prescribed medication. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum and retro peritoneum. A large infiltrating tumour was found in the left ventricle along with a small pericardial effusion and sub-segmental pulmonary atelectasis.
At physical examination, heart and lung auscultations were unremarkable and no signs of ascites or peripheral oedema were present. No cutaneous lesions were found though multiple hard subcutaneous masses were felt on palpation of the chest and abdomen. Saturation was 96% while breathing ambient air. Blood pressure was 123/85 mmHg and heart rate 100 b.p.m. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with low voltage and T-wave inversion in the inferior leads suggestive of myocardial involvement . Echocardiogram revealed masses in the right ventricle and ventricular septum , with normal left ventricular ejection fraction >60% and preserved diastolic function. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed multiple fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positive masses in the heart , right lung, and lymph nodes in the thorax and groin. Consistent with the FDG-PET scan multiple cardiac metastases were found on contrast echocardiography and extensive myocardial infiltration was present on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, Figure ). No involvement of the cardiac valves was found on echocardiography, cardiac MRI, or FDG-PET.
Biopsies taken from FDG positive lymph nodes showed malignant melanoma and subsequent analysis did not reveal BRAF mutation or PD-L1 expression. Shortly after, the patient developed blurred vision and a cerebral MRI revealed metastasis in the left occipital and temporal lobe. To manage symptoms, the patient commenced treatment with prednisolone 50 mg once daily and was subsequently reduced to 12.5 mg daily during the following weeks. Due to the patient’s metastatic disease with cerebral involvement, he was referred for combination therapy with ipilimumab 78 mg (anti-CTLA 4 antibody) and nivolumab 235 mg (anti-PD-1 antibody) every third week while on steroid treatment. Cardiac evaluation before ipilimumab and nivolumab treatment showed progression of metastasis in the right ventricle . Strain analysis revealed reduced global longitudinal strain (GLS) to −15.4% on average and apical sparing consistent with infiltrative disease . Laboratory studies showed elevated N-terminal pro-B-type brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) 1391 ng/L (<300 ng/L) and troponin T, 21 ng/L (<14 ng/L). At the time of second treatment, NT-pro-BNP and troponin T increased to 3774 ng/L and 62 ng/L, respectively, suggestive of myocardial injury secondary to immunotherapy. After completing the third treatment, the patient felt a complete relief of his initial symptoms of dyspnoea and fatigue. Clinical evaluation showed reduction in subcutaneous metastasis and the ECG revealed sinus rhythm with normalization of T waves in the inferior leads. Subsequent echocardiography confirmed reduction in the size of cardiac metastasis however GLS score did not improve (−12.9%) on average . Laboratory studies showed reduced NT-pro-BNP 1074 ng/L and TnT 20 ng/L. Following cardiac evaluation, the patient developed severe colitis for which immunotherapy was discontinued and his gastrointestinal symptoms managed by one treatment of TNF-alpha antibody (infliximab 5 mg/kg) and methylprednisolone 80 mg daily for 1 week. The patient subsequently resumed oral steroid treatment initially with prednisolone 75 mg once daily and was gradually reduced during the following weeks to 25 mg daily.
A routine MRI scan performed 3 months after treatment initiation revealed progression of cerebral metastasis and CT scan of the thorax and abdomen showed increase in extra-cardiac metastasis, a small peripheral pulmonary embolus, and no pleural effusions. Clinical evaluation revealed unremarkable ECG , persistent reduction in cardiac metastasis on echocardiography and a notable improvement in GLS score to −14.9% on average with normalization of contraction pattern and Troponin I < 10 ng/L. No signs of increased pulmonary pressure was observed. Pulmonary embolism was treated with weight-adjusted low-molecular heparin daily. Due to deteriorating cognitive function and progression of extra-cardiac metastasis prednisolone dose was increased to 75 mg daily and the patient was referred to palliative care.