A 27-years-old female patient presenting with recurrent coughing and hemoptysis for more than 10 years first came to our hospital in January 2019. According to the medical history information provided, the patient was previously diagnosed as pneumonia and treated symptomatically in local clinical institution. The symptoms of patient were once relieved after the treatment, but recurred frequently. The patient has no family history of primary lung malignancy and genetic disease, 155 cm in height and 42 kg in weight with a lean body shape, symmetrical thorax without deformity. The trachea of the patient deviated to the right slightly, no obvious rhonchi and moist rale as well as wheezing rale were heard. The heart rhythm was regular, the auscultation area of heart sound apparently deviated to the right thorax, and no obvious abnormality was found in abdominal physical examination.
A chest radiograph and computed tomography were performed for the patient showed a giant abnormal space-occupying lesion in the hilum of right lung. The tumor was closely related to the right pulmonary artery and bronchus . The right lung was atelectasis and some of the left lung as well as heart were obviously deviated to the right thoracic cavity. A Chest MRI showed a mass abnormal signal tumor in the region of right hilum about 10.0 × 4.5 cm in size. The T1WI was isointense, while T2WI and DWI were both hyperintense. A 3D reconstruction of the hilar structures have shown a complete anatomical disorganization of right pulmonary artery and vein . A neoplasm with smooth surface was observed in the right main bronchus by bronchoscopy examination. However, a biopsy was not performed concerning that existing hemoptysis might be aggravated . Pulmonary function showed a severe obstructive mixed ventilation dysfunction. The forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was 1.36 L, accounting for 45% of the predicted value, Maximal voluntary ventilation (MVV) was 27.63L, accounting for 43% of the predicted value. The renal function, electrolyte, coagulation function, arterial blood gas analysis were all normal. Due to long-term persistent hemoptysis, the patient’s blood routine examination showed moderate anemia with hemoglobin 69 g/L. Biochemical examination showed moderate malnutrition, with prealbumin only 85 g/L, albumin 31 g/L. The patient’s tumor markers showed CA125 434.77 µ/ml, CEA 12.43 ng/ml, CA724 233.3 μ/ml, while CA242, CA199, AFP, SCCA, NSE were all normal. No sign of abnormality or metastasis was found in enhanced MRI of brain and bone scan. No abnormal or enlarged lymph nodes were observed in neck and supraclavicular region by ultrasound examination.
We diagnosed the patient with a large tumor in the right lung and firstly considered a special type of malignancy. Because of concerning about a high potential bleeding risk due to the rich supply of tumor and in view of personal willingness of the patient, a preoperative CT-guided percutaneous aspiration biopsy of the tumor was not performed preoperatively. After discussion with a multidisciplinary team which included thoracic surgeons, radiologists, and respiratory physicians, we decided to perform a surgical treatment for the patient.
A thoracotomy was performed under general anesthesia with left lung ventilation. The patient was in left 90°lateral position, a 20 cm long posterolateral incision at the 5th intercostal space was made overlying the right chest wall. Surgical exploration revealed a complete atelectasis of the right lung with obvious consolidation in lung tissue. The lingual segment and anterior segment of left upper lobe herniated into right upper thoracic cavity while the heart of patient also apparently deviated into right lower thoracic cavity. The lymph nodes of each group in mediastinum were checked in the operation and no significantly enlarged lymph nodes were observed. Because of the large size and invasion of the tumor, a right pneumonectomy with mediastinal lymph nodes dissection was initially considered before surgery. The right main bronchus was significantly thicker than normal and the outer diameter of the right main bronchus was 2.4 cm. The bronchial arteries around the bronchus were extremely twisted and dilated. The upper lobe of the right lung was completely consolidated into a mass, the middle and lower lobes of the right lung were atelectatic. Subsequently, we performed a right pneumonectomy for this patient. After confirming the malignacy of the tumor in the right lung and a negative surgical margin by intraoperative frozen section examination, a systematic hilar and mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed.
We checked the surgical specimens and found that the tumor originated from the right main bronchus, about 1 cm away from the tracheal carina, grew distally along the lumen of the bronchus and completely blocked the lumen . The tumor was about 8.6 × 4.5 × 4.4 cm in size and pathological diagnosis showed a malignant tumor orignated from right main bronchus. The cellular morphology of tumor under optical microscope demonstrated that the tumor cells were diffusely arranged and showed large polygonal cells with eosinophilic, granular cytoplasm as well as round, eccentric nuclei. No metastasis of mediastinal lymph node was found. Immunohistochemistry of the tumor showed AE1/AE3 (+), Ki-67 (2% +),α1-ACT (+), AB-PAS (+), CK7 (+), Calponin (±), Vimentin (+), CK19 (+). While CD56, S-100, P63, TTF-1, CDX2, CK5/6, SYN, Dog-1, SOX-10 were all negative . Combining the microscopic morphology of the tumor cells and the results of immunohistochemical staining, we concluded that this was a case of primary lung AciCC.
The patient recovered well through the operation, only a slight chest tightness appeared in the first few days after the operation, which was quickly relieved after adjustment of drainage. We removed the drainage on the 8th day after surgery and the patient discharged on the 10th day postoperatively. The patient was examined every 3 months during the first year after surgery. Enhanced CT of the chest and abdomen, ultrasound of the superficial lymph nodes, as well as routine blood test, liver function, kidney function, and tumor markers were performed each time. Examinations began semiannually in the second year after surgery, and the contents of the examinations were the same as in the previous year.
At present, the patient has been followed up for 24 months with no evidence of recurrence and metastasis.