A 67-year-old man, former smoker (20 pack-year), complained of cough with white mucous sputum for over 2 weeks and developed fever for 3 days. The medical history included hypertension, which was well-controlled with nifedipine.
Blood investigations at a local hospital revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 19.17 × 109/L, and markedly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (242.26 mg/L). Initial chest computed tomography (CT) on March 22 showed bilateral scattered consolidation areas . Empirical therapy was provided for community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) with piperacillin-sulbactam, moxifloxacin and ceftriaxone. However, he showed no signs of improvement. Laboratory investigations revealed a positive serum galactomannan (GM) antigen test (1.76), and Aspergillus was isolated from the sputum culture. The patient was treated with fluconazole, but the treatment was ineffective. Chest radiography on March 27 revealed obviously increased bilateral parenchymal opacities . As the patient’s condition further deteriorated, he was transferred to the Department of Respiratory and Critical Medicine at Jinling Hospital.
On admission, his vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 38.6 °C; pulse rate, 84 beats/min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 129/74 mmHg and; oxygen saturation on room air, 95%. Chest auscultation revealed increased breath sounds with fine crackles and wheezing in the upper right lung zones, with no other remarkable findings. The abnormal laboratory test results were as follows: WBC count, 14.25 × 109/L; neutrophils%, 81.8; CRP, 69.6 mg/L; albumin, 25.0 g/L; alanine aminotransferase, 109 U/L; procalcitonin, 0.105 μg/L; and interleukin-6, 224.60 ng/L. The autoimmune antibody profile, CD4 lymphocyte count, IgM, IgG, IgE and tumor biomarkers were within the normal limits. Other laboratory investigations, including rapid antigen tests for influenza A and B, the Mantoux test, and the T-spot test, were all negative. However, he had poorly controlled blood sugar during hospitalization. He received a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus (DM) type 2 from endocrinologist.
Based on the sputum culture, blood GM test, and CT at the local hospital, we initially diagnosed the patient with “probable” invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) and treated him with voriconazole. However, the patient’s clinical status worsened, with persistent fever. The serum GM test result at our hospital was negative. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed the following day. On admission day 4, the patient developed exertional dyspnea and hemoptysis. We suspected drug-resistant pneumonia and treated the patient empirically with anti-bacterial (biapenem, linezolid), anti-fungal (caspofungin), and anti-viral (oseltamivir, acyclovir) drugs in succession.
Despite these treatments and supportive care, his respiratory status continued to deteriorate, with persistent hyperthermia. Arterial blood gases analysis showed hypoxemia (partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2)/fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 235 mmHg). The blood culture, staining for acid-fast bacillus in sputum and BAL fluid, and GM test results in BAL fluid were negative. Smear and culture of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum and BAL fluid were also negative. Emergency contrast-enhanced chest CT on day 10 revealed bilateral diffuse patchy opacities, multi-focal dense consolidations and bronchial shadows in some lesions . As the antimicrobial drugs were ineffective and organizing pneumonia was considered, the patient was administered with methylprednisolone 40 mg daily; fever subsided, but dyspnea, cough, and hemoptysis underwent progressive worsening. To confirm the diagnosis, we performed a CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy on day 10. Histologically, the predominant findings were as follows: alveolar spaces filled with fibrin and organizing loose connective tissues involving 70% of the observed region, pulmonary interstitial fibrosis, and small abscesses and epithelioid cell granuloma in the focal area . Result of periodic acid-silver methenamine (PAM) stain was positive . The pathological diagnosis was AFOP combined with fungal infection. Methylprednisolone at an increased dose of 40 mg twice daily and voriconazole were continued. However, his condition steadily deteriorated, with continued hypoxemia (the lowest PaO2/FiO2: 173 mmHg), chest discomfort and exercise intolerance. CT on day 15 showed worsening of the bilateral patchy opacities .
On day 16, a 3-day course of intravenous methylprednisolone was started at 500 mg/d and subsequently, methylprednisolone was continued at 40 mg twice daily. Simultaneously, an antifungal therapy with amphotericin B (dose gradually increased from 10 mg to 40 mg daily) and voriconazole was administered. On day 25, the dose of methylprednisolone was gradually reduced to 30 mg twice daily. Chest CT revealed reduction in the size of the opacity. On day 30, the dose of methylprednisolone was reduced to 40 mg daily. Because of progressive anemia and thrombocytopenia, amphotericin B was discontinued on day 36. On day 37, the patient was switched to oral prednisone (40 mg daily) and voriconazole, with a reduced prednisone dose of 5 mg weekly after discharge from the hospital. Steroid tapering was well-tolerated, with no obvious adverse reactions. Four months after the discharge, chest CT showed complete resolution of the lesions.
The fungal pathogen from the sputum culture was identified as P. citrinum. The phialides were ampulliform, bearing well-defined chains of spherical to subspherical conidia, with smooth or finely roughened walls . The fungal pathogen was sent to a reference laboratory (Shanghai Majorbio Bio-pharm Technology Co., Ltd) for identification, and was confirmed as P. citrinum with a polymerase chain reaction sequencing analysis. Antifungal sensitivity testing using the Sensititre™ YeastOne™ YO10 Susceptibility Plate (Trek Diagnostics Systems, West Sussex, UK) revealed that the P.citrinum isolate demonstrated marked in vitro sensitive to amphotericin B with minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 2 μg/ml and resistance to voriconazole with MIC of > 8 μg/ml.