A 30-year old male patient weighing 60 kg, a victim of road traffic accident who sustained a head injury (depressed skull fracture) and loss of consciousness, had associated hoarseness of voice and difficulty in breathing. He was posted for emergent tracheostomy under local anaesthesia with monitored anaesthesia care. On examination, the patient was conscious (GCS of 15), in respiratory distress and there was a bruise extending from the left shoulder to right across the neck in the front. On examination of the neck, crepitus and tenderness were present on the anterior part of the neck. Computed tomography (CT) scan of neck revealed a tear on the anterior tracheal wall extending from C6 to T1 vertebrae level with loss of anterior tracheal wall and surgical emphysema into the surroundings . Routine investigations and surveys of other body parts were grossly normal.
In the operating room, baseline values in the form of a heart rate of 112 bpm, blood pressure of 160/90 mmHg and a respiratory rate of 36–38/min with use of accessory muscles. Significantly the oxygen saturation was only 86–88% on oxygen supplementation by polymask. After administration of the local anaesthetic agent (lignocaine 2%), surgical tracheostomy was commenced with oxygen supplementation (100% oxygen by Bain's circuit). Dissection revealed a tracheal rent on the anterior tracheal wall, measuring 2 × 1 cm was observed at the site where the stoma should have been made . Initially attempts were made to pass the tracheostomy tube through this tracheal rent. Further, failure of such attempts and an impending cardiorespiratory arrest situation prompted the passage of an endotracheal tube after direct laryngoscopy. Post intubation, the oxygenation of the patient improved, ventilation was partially effective due to leak of air from the tracheal rent. Subsequently, another attempt to negotiate tracheostomy tube through the rent also resulted in the failure in passing the tracheostomy tube into the tracheal lumen. Repeated failures and concomitant brainstorming between the anaesthesia and surgical team led to the exploring of the possibility of introducing the stylet of MINITRAC set (PORTEX) into the tracheal opening carefully . The tracheostomy tube was then successfully negotiated over the stylet and subsequent intubation was confirmed by capnography tracing and bilateral air entry on auscultation following which the tracheostomy tube was secured. The subsequent stay in hospital was uneventful, and the patient was later discharged and referred to a higher institute for surgical repair of the laryngotracheal injury.