A 75-year-old female patient presented to the hospital as a result of right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Meanwhile, she also complained of anorexia and progressive generalized weakness.
Patient’s symptoms started two months ago with recurrent episodes of bloating.
The patient had a past history of hypertension and cerebral infarction that caused mild instability in walking.
On the first admission, her temperature was 36.4 °C, blood pressure was 100/63 mmHg, pulse rate was 82 beats/min, and respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min. Physical examination revealed tenderness in her right upper abdomen, with no evidence of any abdominal mass.
Laboratory examination showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 43790/μL, with 87.1% of neutrophils, hemoglobin of 12.7 g/dL, platelets of 36200/mm3, total bilirubin of 0.12 mg/dL, direct bilirubin of 0.05 mg/dL, albumin of 3.7 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase of 18 U/L, and alanine aminotransferase of 22 U/L. In addition, tests for serum tumor markers revealed no abnormalities in the levels of α-fetoprotein (AFP; 3.4 ng/mL) and carcinoembryonic antigen (1.80 ng/mL) but elevated levels of carbohydrate antigenic determinant (CA19-9; 72.6 U/mL). In addition, the coagulation profile was within normal limits, and the results of the hepatitis panel and human immunodeficiency virus antibody tests were negative. In view of the elevated WBC levels, the patient was discharged to the Hematology Clinic for bone marrow biopsy and other tests to rule out the possibility of blood diseases. Two weeks later, the patient was admitted again, and routine blood examination showed a WBC count of 77050/μL. Subsequently, the patient developed a fever of 38.6 °C, which did not subside after antibiotic infusion, and her blood WBC levels were not significantly lowered. The results of the bone marrow examination showed that the proportion of granulocyte-neutrophil nucleated cells was increased by 40%, and toxic granules could be observed . In addition, a peripheral smear revealed neutrophilia with band forms but no blasts. Subsequently, procalcitonin test was performed, and the result was 0.31 ng/mL, indicating a lower risk of infection. Moreover, repeat blood cultures were negative, but the WBC count was elevated continuously.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 9.3-cm focal hepatic mass in the left lobe of the liver, along with dilatation of the intrahepatic bile duct . A chest radiograph suggested no abnormality.