A 22-year-old African American female who presented to her primary care provider in the United States rural south, an area with limited access to specialist care. The patient first presented complaining of malaise and fatigue. One month later, she presented complaining of the same symptoms and laboratory monitoring was performed. Abnormal laboratory findings included elevated alkaline phosphatase at 147 IU/L (normal range: 39-117), AST (SGOT) 58 IU/L (normal range: 0-40), and ALT (SGPT) of 75 IU/L (normal range 0-32). Bilirubin (0.5mg/dL) was normal (normal range: 0.0-1.2). At this time, the patient was thought to have acute hepatitis and a urinary tract infection. After about five months, the patient presented back to her primary care provider complaining of abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, dark urine, decreased appetite, light colored stool, ascites, and jaundiced eyes. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the patient received initial testing for SARS-COV-2, but her polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was negative. Additional laboratory testing was performed, and bilirubin was now elevated at 8.3, Alkaline Phosphatase was 117, and AST was 67 (ALT was not reported). Her gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) was elevated at 182 IU/L (normal: 0-60) suggesting liver damage but not the exact cause of the injury. She was tested for acute hepatitis, but was negative for A, B, and C. The patient underwent an abdominal ultrasound one week later revealing her liver size in the upper limits of normal with a small hemangioma. Reverse hepatoportal flow was noted within the portal vein with minimal flow in the mid-hepatic vein. Early signs of cirrhosis were noted. Repeat labs showed decreased albumin at 3.5 g/dL (normal: 3.9-5.0), severely elevated bilirubin (10.4), alkaline phosphatase (139), AST (80), and ALT (52). The patient was suspected to have Budd-Chiari Syndrome and was transferred to a large teaching hospital in a nearby city. The patient was further evaluated for portal vein thrombosis. A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a nonocclusive thrombus in the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and extensive portal vein thrombosis. She was given a definitive diagnosis of Budd-Chiari Syndrome with acute on chronic clot burden. The patient was started on a heparin drip and scheduled for paracentesis to relieve the ascites. Her hypercoagulability work-up revealed she was Coombs positive, indicating an immune mediated destruction of red blood cells and had a Janus Kinase-2 (JAK-2) V617F mutation in 5% of cells.
The patient was scheduled for a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure to reroute blood flow and decompress the congested liver, but this procedure failed. She was discharged from the hospital on the Direct Factor Xa Inhibitor apixaban 5mg twice daily for anticoagulation and ondansetron ODT 8mg three times daily for nausea. The patient was to return to the hospital for follow-up with hematology/oncology two weeks after discharge for further evaluation. However, the patient presented back to her primary care physician five days post-discharge complaining of nausea, vomiting, decreased appetite, abdominal pain, and right upper quadrant pain rated as 10/10 on a numeric pain scale. She reported a score of 10 on the numeric pain scale, and her pain was rated by the provider as moderate to severe because she was able to communicate and ambulate, and no wincing or grimacing were noted outside of when the abdominal area was palpated. Ascites, and jaundiced skin and sclerae were also noted by the provider. The patient was scored as having moderate single episode depression with a score of 10 on the Patient health Questionnaire (PHQ-9). The patient’s abdomen was distended with diminished bowel sounds accompanied by liver tenderness and hepatomegaly. She was counseled on her new diagnosis of BCS and treatment guidelines were searched to provide assistance in choosing short-term pain management options, yet no such guidelines exist.
The nurse practitioner consulted the collaborating clinical pharmacist for recommendations in treating pain associated with Budd-Chiari syndrome, but there were few options available to treat moderate to severe pain in this young woman with a new presentation of depression and a clotting disorder. Concerns for the clinical care team with available analgesics included providing adequate pain management without inducing dependence by using opioids, inflicting more liver damage with acetaminophen, or exacerbating her increased bleeding risk by initiating nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. After consulting with pharmacy, several primary care physicians, and the hematology specialist from the discharging hospital, tramadol 25mg every eight hours as needed for seven days was prescribed.