Informed consent for this case report was provided by the patient’s parents.
The patient was a 10-year-old girl, 20.9 kg (−2.9 SD) by weight and 123 cm (− 3.2 SD) in height. Standard deviations of body weight and height were calculated using the growth curve presented by the National Center for Child Health and Development in Japan. In the neonatal period, she showed impaired consciousness due to hyperammonemia and underwent continuous plasmapheresis. She was diagnosed with CPS1D when she was 7 years old. Intake of sodium benzoate, arginine, and protein was restricted to prevent elevation of serum hyperammonemia. Decreasing her serum ammonia only by medicine and meal limitation was difficult, and LDLT was performed when she was 9 years old.
No remarkable abnormality or family history was found for this patient on preoperative examination. Although her liver function was preserved at Child-Pugh A, her serum ammonia level was 45 mmol/L (normal range 7.0–38.8 mcmol/L). The intake of sodium benzoate, l-arginine, l-carnitine, citrulline, lactulose, multivitamins plus zinc, dextrose, and carbamazepine 20 mg/kg/day was continued until the day of surgery. Protein intake was also restricted to 0.7–1.0 g/day. Her physical status according to the American Society of Anesthesiologists was class 4 due to uncontrolled hyperammonemia.
General anesthesia was performed with fentanyl 100 μg, propofol 50 mg, and rocuronium 20 mg for induction, and with isoflurane 2%, fentanyl 33.3 μg/kg, remifentanil 0.2 μg/kg/min, and rocuronium 5.6 mg/kg for maintenance. Arterial and central venous pressures were monitored in addition to standard physical monitors, such as electrocardiograms, percutaneous oxygen saturation, capnography, and end-tidal concentration of isoflurane. Dextrose 50% with l-arginine 200 mg/kg/day and l-carnitine 30 mg/kg/day was continuously administered, equivalent to an appropriate dose of 60 kcal/kg/day.
Blood laboratory tests, including serum ammonia tests, were performed every 2 h. Serum ammonia level was 29 mcmol/L at anesthesia induction and 31 mmol/L 2 h after the start of the operation . Serum ammonia transiently increased up to 61 mmol/L during the anhepatic phase, decreased to 44 mcmol/L an hour after reperfusion of the transplanted liver, and further increased to 50 mcmol/L at the end of the operation. The glucose level was 102 g/dL at anesthesia induction. When the glucose level reached 256 g/dL in the pre-anhepatic phase, 0.6 unit/h of insulin was initiated for the patient, and glucose was controlled within the normal range using insulin. The serum lactate level increased to 32 mg/dL in the anhepatic phase and it decreased to 22 mg/dL after reperfusion.
The operation time was 625 min, and the anesthesia time was 717 min without any complications. The total output was 865 g of blood loss and 1100 mL of urine. The total intake was 2878 mL of crystalloids and 280 mL of blood cells. Freshly frozen plasma and platelets were not used in this study. Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the ICU under midazolam and fentanyl anesthesia. The infusion of l-carnitine and dextrose was continued subsequently . Serum ammonia levels decreased to 54 mcmol/L on POD 1 and 44 mcmol/L on POD 2, and they finally decreased to the normal range on POD 3. The postoperative condition was good, and the patient was transferred to the general ward on POD 3 and discharged on POD 27.