A 32-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of ESRD characterized by severe hypertension and elevated serum creatinine (SCr) for 9 years and he had received renal dialysis for 4 years.
Nine years ago, the patient was admitted to a hospital because of syncope and was diagnosed with uraemia. After diagnosis, he was treated with traditional Chinese medicine. He started renal dialysis 4 years ago because of gradually deteriorating kidney function with a SCr level of 900 μmol/L. A kidney biopsy was not performed during the course of the kidney disease.
The patient was born with multiple congenital abnormalities, including limb malformation (bilateral overlapping toes) and unilateral dysplastic external ears . A unilateral moderate degree of sensorineural hearing loss was noted when he was 10 years old.
The family pedigree for the patient (proband, III.3) is shown in Figure . The patient’s grandmother (I.2) died at an early age without a clear diagnosis due to the poor level of medical care. However, she presented with a sixth finger malformation, unilateral dysplastic external ears, and hearing loss. The patient’s father (II.5) had unilateral dysplastic external ears, hearing loss, and bilateral overlapping toes. At the age of 53 years, he began dialysis therapy. The patient’s aunt (II.4) was born with unilateral dysplastic external ears, hearing loss, and limb malformation (unilateral preaxial polydactyly of one hand). At the age of 53 years, she also began haemodialysis due to unexplained ESRD. The patient’s daughter (IV.1) was born with bilateral dysplastic external ears, without limb malformation, and was found to have unilateral hearing dysfunction misdiagnosed as otitis media.
Vital signs were in the normal ranges: Body temperature, 36.7 °C; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min; pulse rate, 80 bpm; and blood pressure (under antihypertensive treatment), 134/85 mmHg. Limb malformation (bilateral overlapping toes) and unilateral dysplastic external ears existed. His ophthalmic examination results were normal, and no anorectal abnormalities were found.
Laboratory analysis revealed an increased SCr level (941.9 μmol/L), high potassium level (6.87 mmol/L), high phosphate level (2.73 mmol/L), normal haemoglobin level (145 g/L), and high parathyroid hormone level (663.6 pg/mL). The patient was anuria.
Ultrasound examination revealed bilaterally small kidneys (left kidney, 52 mm × 34 mm; right kidney, 50 mm × 25 mm) with multiple 5-7 mm medullary cysts. The urinary tract was normal, and no additional abnormalities of the liver, spleen, or pancreas were detected in the imaging studies.