A 30-year-old woman (gravida 4, para 0) who conceived by in vitro fertilization presented with a fetus with a cystic abdominal mass detected on fetal nuchal translucency examination at 11 4/7 weeks of gestation. She was referred to our hospital for a fetal ultrasound consultation at 20 3/7 weeks of gestation. The findings of the ultrasound examination are shown in Table and Fig. . The cystic mass enlarged with gestational age. During the last prenatal examination at 33 3/7 weeks of gestation, emptying of the stomach was observed. Fluid passed through the pylorus into the cystic mass; the fluid content in the mass was thick, allowing clear visualization of the fluid flow from the stomach into the cystic mass (Additional file 1). Based on this finding, duodenal dilation was suspected. Amniocentesis was performed, and the karyotype was found to be normal. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) -array revealed microdeletions on chromosome 16 [del (16) (p12.2) chr16: g. 22000000_22440000 del] and microduplications on chromosome 9 [dup (9) (p24.1) chr9: g. 6320000_7420000 dup]. Public databases of DGV, DECIPHER, OMIM, ClinGen, UCSC, gnomAD, and PubMed were checked. The microdeletions on chromosome 16 were at high risk of pathogenic variations that could manifest as growth restriction, language delay, mild to moderate mental deficiency, mental and behavioral abnormalities, congenital heart disease, and bone malformations; however, their associations with megaduodenum have not been reported. Microduplications on chromosome 9 were regarded as variants of unknown significance. Because the abnormalities on chromosome 16 were inherited from the father who presented with a normal phenotype, the woman decided to continue the pregnancy.
Spontaneous preterm labor occurred at 33 3/7 weeks of gestation. Because of the breech position of the fetus, cesarean delivery of a female neonate (birth weight, 2240 g) was performed at 34 1/7 weeks of gestation. The child was kept on fasting, and transabdominal ultrasonography was performed 10 h after birth. The ultrasound findings are presented in Fig. . Upper gastrointestinal contrast showed that the gastric antrum had moved upward, the descending part of the duodenum was slightly compressed, the duodenum had expanded, and the contrast agent passed through the duodenum smoothly .
The child underwent surgery 2 days after birth. Exploratory laparotomy revealed a giant duodenal loop with a diameter of approximately 6 cm and intestinal malrotation . The proximal jejunum had a diameter of approximately 0.5 cm, and no obvious obstruction was observed. The large duodenal loop was surgically removed, and duodenojejunostomy was performed. Most of the intermuscular plexus was not visible and ganglion cells were not observed on histopathological examination .
The child was in a good condition and was discharged from the hospital on day 13 after surgery. During the follow-up examination at 3 months after surgery, the child was found to be in good health.