A 73-year-old Japanese female was being treated by a local physician for hypertension, depression, dementia and insomnia. She developed flu-like symptoms in December 2013, and was diagnosed with influenza/cold by her physician. Clarithromycin (CAM) was prescribed. The next day, her level of consciousness decreased, so she was transported to an urgent care facility. Marked hypoxemia and hypercapnia were then identified, and she was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
She had an axillary temperature of 37.2°C, a heart rate of 82 beats/min and regular, a respiratory rate of 14 breaths/min (tachypneic), a blood pressure of 156/86mmHg, and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 79% (with nasal oxygen at 2L/min). Her level of consciousness was decreased (Glasgow Coma Scale: eye opening 4, verbal response 3, motor response 5, total 12), but no pallor or icterus was evident.
Her radiography revealed cardiomegaly and increased transparency of the upper lung fields bilaterally, indicating emphysema. Her echocardiography revealed a mild decrease in left ventricular ejection fraction (56%), right atrial and ventricular enlargement, and an estimated pulmonary systolic blood pressure of 57mmHg, indicating moderate pulmonary hypertension.
Respiratory management for type II respiratory failure was started with NPPV (ST mode; inspiratory positive airway pressure 10cmH2O; expiratory positive airway pressure 4cmH2O; ventilation rate 18 breaths/min; FiO2 30%). For right-sided heart failure with pulmonary hypertension (clinical scenario, CS5), diuretics and a nitrite were started. Hypercapnia gradually improved, but as her level of consciousness improved, she became more agitated and delirious due to dementia, and management by mask became impossible. She was therefore switched to a NHFOTS (oxygen, 5L/min; continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), 8cmH2O).
No recurrence of CO2 narcosis was seen subsequently, and hypoxemia improved (SpO2, 94-96%). Using the NHFOTS with a high flow rate, respiratory management was able to be continued without any further agitation. Her arterial blood gases (ABGs) were: pH 7.47, PaO2 57mmHg, PaCO2 62mmHg, and HCO3- 41.5mmol/L.
Investigation of SRH by polysomnography (PSG) showed an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) of 12.1 events/h, and SRH was therefore diagnosed. When a repeat PSG was performed while using the NHFOTS, her AHI was 3.7 events/h, her mean SpO2 had increased from 89 to 93%, the percentage time with SpO2 ≤90% had decreased dramatically from 30.8 to 2.5%, and sleep stage 4 (deep sleep), which previously had not been observed, was now detected for 38.5 minutes. These results indicated marked improvements in SRH .
Pulmonary function testing revealed severe obstructive ventilatory impairment and decreased pulmonary diffusion capacity. Based on the above test results, her classification as grade 3 on the modified Medical Research Council scale for exertional dyspnea, and her decreased percentage-predicted forced expiratory volume in one second, she was diagnosed with category D COPD, based on the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines, and also with SRH. She was discharged, and NHFOTS was started at home. As of the time of writing, she is continuing treatment with the NHFOTS at home, has shown no increases in PaCO2 (her ABGs as of: pH 7.46, PaO2 85mmHg, PaCO2 41mmHg, HCO3- 29.2mmol/L), and is being followed up on.