A 71-year-old Asian woman presented for the evaluation of persistent nasal congestion, cough and fever. She was born in India but lived most of her life in the United States. Her past medical history was significant for seasonal allergic rhinosinusitis that was most severe in early summer. During the last recurrence, the symptoms of nasal congestion were unresponsive to antihistamines. Subsequently, she developed cough and low-grade fever and received two courses of oral prednisone and antibiotics for 6 weeks, without symptom resolution. A computer tomography (CT) scan revealed mucosal thickening in the maxillary sinuses, bilaterally. Two months after the initial onset of symptoms, functional endoscopic sinus surgery was performed and a polypoid nasal mass was removed. Upon histopathological evaluation at an outside institution, a diagnosis of ENKTCL-NT was rendered. Serological studies for EBV IgM were within normal limits, while EBV capsid IgG was elevated. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for EBV DNA performed on the patient’s serum yielded results below the limit of detection for the assay. The patient subsequently transferred her care to our institution, and by then she had been completely asymptomatic for several weeks. A follow-up CT scan showed persistent mucosal thickening, and a repeat nasal biopsy was performed at our institution.
The repeat nasal biopsy contained fragments of fibrotic sinonasal mucosa with a diffuse infiltrate composed of atypical small to medium-sized lymphoid cells with hyperchromatic, irregularly folded nuclei . The overlying sinonasal mucosa showed focal ulceration and although there was focal angiocentricity, no necrosis was observed. Immunohistochemical evaluation demonstrated that the atypical lymphoid cells were positive for cytoplasmic CD3 , CD2 , CD5 , granzyme B , perforin and EBER . The Ki-67 proliferative rate was low (< 1% overall) . The atypical cells were negative for CD56 , CD20 , CD4, CD7, CD8, TIA-1, CD30 and CD57.
Flow cytometric studies performed on tissue fragments from the nasal biopsy demonstrated a subset of lymphoid cells, comprising 6% of total events, with the following immunophenotype: CD2+, surface CD3-, CD4-, CD8-, CD5(dim)+, CD7(dim)+, CD16-, CD25-, CD56- and CD57- . Also present were CD3+ T cells without significant loss of pan T-cell antigens and a CD4:CD8 ratio of 4:1 (53% of total events) as well as few unremarkable CD3- CD7+ NK cells and polyclonal B-cells.
T-cell receptor gamma gene rearrangement studies by PCR revealed a prominent 239 base pair peak in one reaction, and 192 and 193 base pair peaks in an irregular polyclonal distribution in a second reaction .
Next-generation sequencing studies performed at the University of Pennsylvania using a custom, targeted sequencing amplicon panel for 68 hematologic malignancy-associated genes [, ] revealed a missense variant in exon 3 of the KIT gene at amino acid 167, converting the wild type residue lysine to methionine (p.K167 M, c.500A > T), with an allele frequency of 23%.