A 53-year-old man, with no medical history, was diagnosed with influenzae virus infection and was administered oseltamivir phosphate 2 weeks before developing ischemic stroke. There was no prior bronchial asthma or allergic rhinitis. There were no symptoms such as weight loss, polyneuropathy, myalgia, arthralgia, or gastrointestinal bleeding. There were no abnormalities in blood collection as a result of the physical examination. He was found by a neighbor at home in a left lateral decubitus position and was taken to our hospital. He presented with abulia and left upper limb paralysis. He was in a state of collapse for several days, and there were decubituses in the left upper and lower limbs. In addition, he showed disseminated intravascular coagulation and was in a septic state. Vital signs showed mild fever (body temperature: 37.7 °C), but blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, and arterial oxygen saturation by pulse oxymetry were within normal ranges. Chest X-ray and computed tomographic imaging of the chest showed no abnormality. An electrocardiogram showed ST depression in chest leads indicating either ischemic change along the entire circumference of the heart or cardiomyopathy. Laboratory findings showed no leukocytosis (8900 /μl; normal range, 4000–8000 /μl), but hypereosinophilia (1020 /μl; normal range, 0–400 /μl) and an elevated IgE (9372 IU/ml; normal range, 18–501 IU/ml). Elevated CRP (6.4 mg/dl; normal range, 0–0.3 mg/dl) was observed. Prothrombin time international normalized ratio was 1.37, activated partial thromboplastin time was 30.5 s, D-dimer was 37.8 μg/dl (normal range, 0–1 μg/dl), fibrinogen degradation products was 79.9 μg/dl (normal range, 0–5 μg/dl), fibrinogen was 261 mg/dl (normal range, 150–400 mg/dl), and soluble fibrin was 114.4 μg/dl (normal range, 0–7 μg/dl). Protein S total level was 57% (normal range, 60–150%) and activity was 28% (normal range, 73.7–146.3%). Protein C was within normal range. Myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and cytoplasmic ANCA were negative. Viruses and fungi that cause myocarditis, such as human immunodeficiency virus, adenoviruses, group A and B coxsackieviruses, Cytomegalovirus, echovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, influenza A and B viruses, Candida antigens, and Aspergillus antigens were all negative by blood tests. A bone marrow biopsy was also performed at autopsy. There was no clonality on flow cytometry. The FIP1L1–PDGFRA fusion gene (4q12) was not detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Bone marrow findings showed no hematologic malignancies causing hypereosinophilia.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed ischemic infarcts in the left caudate nuclei, bilateral cortex, subcortical region, bilateral watershed area, brain stem, and cerebellum . No obvious blood vessel obstruction or stenosis was observed by magnetic resonance angiography. Transthoracic echocardiography showed intramural thrombus with left ventricle and right ventricle involvement. Ejection fraction and wall motion were within normal ranges, and there were no valvular disease. In carotid ultrasonography, hypertrophy of the intima-media thickness and blood flow abnormality were not observed.
The patient was diagnosed as reactive hypereosinophilic syndrome (HESR). He was administered 200 mg/day aspirin for acute cerebral infarction. Consciousness disturbance began to improve. Since we confirmed intracardiac thrombus by cardiac ultrasound on hospital day 5 , he was administered 14,800 units of unfractionated heparin for 24 h. On hospital day 6, his consciousness level worsened to coma caused by cerebral hemorrhage. We performed a burr-hole evacuation, but, on hospital day 16, he died.
Autopsy was conducted with the family’s consent. Autopsy findings revealed the following: 1) granulomas with epithelial cells and eosinophil infiltration; and 2) vasculitis accompanied by fibrinoid necrosis in the kidney, lung, colon, gallbladder, stomach, liver, spleen, heart, and pancreas. In the left ventricle of the heart, thickening of the wall, narrowing of the lumen, and thrombosis was observed around the circumference . Thrombus was also observed in the right ventricle . Granuloma formation was present in the blood vessels of the right coronary artery and, in the left ventricular myocardium, myocardial cell shedding, inflammatory cell infiltration such as macrophages and lymphocytes, and partial fibrosis were observed. The brain was severely damaged by infarction with hemorrhage . In addition to thromboembolic infarction, we observed vasculitis accompanied by eosinophil infiltration in the parenchymal small arteries. The autopsy findings indicated that the patient had systemic eosinophilic polyangiitis that included the brain . Pathological study revealed that the cause of the cerebral infarction was the coexistence of cardiogenic cerebral embolism and cerebral vasculitis with eosinophilic infiltration by EGPA.