A 51-year-old previously well Chinese gentleman presented with 1 day of progressive upper limb swelling and tightness. He did not report any personal history or family history of venous thromboembolic events. He worked as a flight steward who had flown from France to Singapore about 2 weeks prior to presentation. The day before symptom onset, he was working out in the gymnasium, where he completed his usual weight training and experienced no acute pain during the session. He had not sustained any trauma or underwent any surgical intervention to his arm prior to presentation. He is a non-smoker with no personal or family history of blood dyscrasias or malignancy.
On presentation, he did not complain of any chest pain, breathlessness, or pleurisy. He was afebrile, with a blood pressure of 138/67 mmHg, heart rate 91 beats per minute, respiratory rate 19 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. On examination, he had a swollen, hyperaemic, and slightly oedematous right upper limb but without any tenderness or increased warmth . Distal brachial and radial pulses remained strong. His left upper limb and both lower limbs were unremarkable.
POCUS of the right upper limb was performed by the emergency physician with the patient in the supine position, and the brachial, axillary, and subclavian veins were carefully examined. The brachial vein was examined in the medial bicipital groove, the axillary vein as it courses in the apex of the axilla, and the subclavian vein in the infraclavicular fossa (beneath the outer and medial thirds of the clavicle) and the supraclavicular fossa . This revealed a significant hypoechoic filling defect in the right subclavian vein that was highly suspicious for a large thrombus . This finding was confirmed by abnormal single-point augmentation by arm squeeze manoeuvre to achieve venous compression distal to the site of examination with the ultrasound probe, where Fig. demonstrates the Subclavian vein prior to the manoeuvre, and performing the manoeuvre did not result in a prompt increase in the volume of the venous signal as would be expected if the upper limb venous system was patent .
Following discussion with vascular surgery, a computed tomography venogram was performed which confirmed the presence of a non-enhancing filling defect in the right subclavian vein as it passed between the clavicle and first rib, suggestive of extensive thrombi. Anticoagulation with enoxaparin was commenced and thrombectomy was scheduled for whilst the patient was in the emergency department. Interventional radiology subsequently performed a venography—which demonstrated acute thrombosis in the axillary and subclavian veins extending to the brachiocephalic junction—followed by retro-grade pulse spray thrombolysis with alteplase with mechanical thrombectomy. Magnetic resonance imaging studies revealed that the aetiology of his thoracic outlet syndrome was occlusion of the subclavian vein at the interval between the clavicle and first rib provoked by arm abduction. The patient eventually underwent excision of his right first rib to reduce the likelihood of recurrence of UEDVT.