A 2-year-old intact female Central Asian Shepherd dog in moderate condition, body weight (BW) 42 kg, was presented with obvious masses in the anus and vulva . A large regularly shaped mass protruded through the vulvar commissure. The owner explained that the mass had developed gradually during the last 2 months. The mass in the anus had been observed 6 days before the physical examination and had also enlarged gradually. No local or systemic medication had been administered. Straining, dysuria and tenesmus were the main reasons for presentation at the clinic. The owner reported that the dog also showed lethargy and moderately decreased appetite.
During the examination, the dog was not particular sensitive to palpation and manipulation of the prolapsed masses. The temperature, peripheral pulse, and respiratory rate were within normal ranges. Hematology including complete blood count and serum biochemistry profiles. All parameters were within normal range.
The protruding vaginal and rectal masses showed extensive congestion, hemorrhages, edema and superficial necrosis . On transabdominal ultrasonography, the urinary bladder was not detected in its normal anatomic position, but ultrasonography of the prolapsed vagina revealed a nonechogenic, fluid-filled and bladder-like body inside the prolapse. Needle aspiration of urine from the mass and ultrasonography confirmed retroflexion of the bladder. Consequently, the external urethral orifice could not be catheterized.
The dog was administered cefazolin preoperatively (22 mg/kg BW intravenously; Cefazolin, Sandoz GMBH, Austria). General anesthesia was induced with propofol (4 mg/kg BW; Braun, Melsungen, Germany) and maintained with isoflurane (Forane; Abbott, Romania) delivered in 100 % oxygen. Lumbosacral analgesia was carried out with morphine (0.1 mg/kg BW; Morfină, Sicomed S.A., Bucharest, Romania). Lactated Ringer’s solution was administered during surgery (20 ml/kg BW per hour; Soluție Ringer Lactat, Braun Medical, Timiș, Romania).
The abdominal, vulvar and anal regions were prepared for surgery. The dog was placed on a padded rectal stand and the vulvar region was draped for surgery. Because of significant mucosal injury, resection of the vaginal edematous tissue using electrocautery was performed. The middle and cranial parts of urinary bladder were locally extensively congested and edematous. A well-defined line of demarcation between the normal and affected tissue was visible . The urine was evacuated from the bladder with a 21G needle and bladder was gently pushed into the pelvic canal through the vulva. The dog was placed in dorsal recumbency, a midline laparotomy was performed and the urinary bladder was carefully repositioned to its normal anatomic position. Opposing areas of the bladder’s serosa and the right abdominal wall peritoneum were abraded by a scalpel and five interrupted sutures of 3–0 polypropylene (Polypropylene; Assut sutures, Switzerland) were placed between the bladder and abdominal wall to hold the urinary bladder and prevent recurrence. The urethral opening was then catheterised without any problem. An ovariohysterectomy was performed after cystopexy.
The rectal mucosa was cleaned with warm isotonic NaCl solution and repositioning was attempted, but unsuccessful despite multiple attempts to gently reduce the prolapse. The tissue viability was questionable because of oedema and necrosis, so rectal resection and anastomosis was judged necessary. The dog was again placed on the padded rectal stand, and the perineal region was prepped and draped for surgery. A test tube was introduced into the rectum to aid in suture placement and prevent fecal contamination during surgery. The prolapsed tissue was resected 2 cm from the anus. The two ends were full thickness anastomosed with a single layer of simple interrupted, synthetic, absorbable monofilament PDS sutures.
Amoxicillin–clavulanic acid (25 mg/kg BW bid; Synulox; Zoetis, UK) and carprofen (2 mg/kg BW bid; Ricarfa, KRKA, București, Romania) were administered after surgery for 6 days.
The dog recovered completely after the surgery. No recurrence of the prolapsed vagina or rectum and no retroflexion of the urinary bladder occurred during 2 months follow-up.