A 36-year-old married Malaysian woman with three breast-fed children presented to our outpatient clinic with a three-year history of a gradually increasing left-sided breast mass. The mass was not associated with any pain or nipple discharge. She denied any weight loss or loss of appetite and had no history of trauma.
She had no past medical history or family history of note and had never smoked or drunk alcohol.
Before the presentation to the clinic, she went to six different traditional healers, who prescribed her topical oils, massaged her breast, and performed prayers for her. These traditional methods did not alleviate her symptoms, and finally she consulted us for further management, as she could no longer hide the huge size of her left breast.
Examination revealed a huge, globular, lobulated mass measuring 40 cm × 35 cm with an inferomedially deviated and retracted nipple with peau d'orange skin changes . A mammogram was not possible because of the size of the lesion, and a core biopsy revealed a phyllodes tumor. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed no evidence of local or distant metastasis.
The options for treatment were discussed with the patient regarding the removal of the tumor and the reconstruction, and taking in to account the size of the lesion, a mastectomy was the method of choice. As she had reduced abdominal subcutaneous tissue for a transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous (TRAM) flap, she elected a latissimus dorsi pedicled myocutaneous flap . In addition to the mastectomy, our patient also underwent a level II axillary clearance because of the high suspicion of malignancy.
The resected breast weighed 8.27 kg, and the nipple-areolar complex was sacrificed in view of a possible malignant phyllodes tumor of the breast. As the patient had strong religious beliefs, she refused the offer of an expander/implant to provide additional breast volume.
Microscopically, the mass was composed of compressed ducts lined by two-tiered epithelium arranged in clefts and surrounded by an overgrowth of stroma arranged in a leaf-like structure . A borderline giant phyllodes tumor was diagnosed after the identification of five mitoses per 10 high power fields (hpfs) at the most mitotically active area, and a predominantly expanding border with no overt malignant features . The tumor had a minimum of 4 cm clear surgical margin, and no removed nodes exhibited any evidence of malignancy. Our patient did not receive any adjuvant therapy (post-operative radiotherapy or chemotherapy) because of the absence of malignant features.