A 68-year-old Japanese woman presented to our emergency room with disturbed consciousness. She had a history of subclinical hypothyroidism and was not receiving any medication. Her family history was unremarkable. At admission, her temperature, blood pressure, and pulse rate were 37.8 °C, 126/88 mmHg, and 123 beat per minutes, respectively. She showed low levels of arterial oxygen saturation (84%), and a chest x-ray showed diffuse pulmonary edema. A blood gas analysis showed hypoxia (PO2: 56.2 mmHg). Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm with subtle and nonspecific ST-segment elevation in all leads . Importantly, neither ST-segment depression nor QTc prolongation (340 ms) was observed in her ECG. At this time, her InterTAK Diagnostic Score was 37 (Female Sex [25 points], No ST-segment depression [12 points]). The blood tests showed mildly elevated levels of creatine kinase-MB isoenzyme (85 U/L; normal: < 25 U/L), and troponin T (0.030 ng/mL; normal: < 0.014 ng/mL), as well as elevated level of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP: 764.9 pg/mL; normal: < 18.4 pg/mL), suggesting a possible diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome and acute heart failure. Transthoracic echocardiography showed left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction [EF], 28%), akinesis in the middle section of the left ventricle, and preserved contractility of the apical and basal sections of the left ventricle. On emergent cardiac catheterization, coronary arteriography showed no significant stenosis, and the ergonovine provocation test yielded negative results. Left ventriculography showed akinesia in the middle part of the left ventricle and hyperkinesia in the apical and basal parts of the left ventricle, resulting in a midventricular Takotsubo syndrome . We initiated respiratory care with noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV), intravenous furosemide, and carperitide for the treatment of acute heart failure with pulmonary edema. Four days after the onset, her disturbed consciousness and cardiac symptoms rapidly improved, and NPPV was discontinued. Accordingly, we started an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (imidapril 5 mg/day). She showed almost normal levels of BNP (19.5 pg/ml). The clinical course was consistent with the diagnosis of midventricular Takotsubo syndrome.
Three days after the improvement of the disturbed consciousness and Takotsubo syndrome symptoms (i.e., 1 week after admission), her mental status was apparently normal. However, her brother noticed something wrong with her behavior during his visit to the hospital. Subsequently, we consulted the neurology department 1 week after admission. Her brother revealed a history of abnormal behavior by the patient (such as mistaken entry into the wrong apartment in her building or into another person’s car) a few days prior to the onset of disturbed consciousness, suggesting disorientation of place. Neurological examination showed immediate memory loss with better long-term memory retention. She scored 1 on the Rivermead behavioral memory test, which was suggestive of severe memory loss. On the revised Hasegawa’s dementia scale (HDS-R: the general cognitive test frequently used in Japan; cutoff: 20/30), she scored 9/30 with severe short-term memory loss and preserved working memory. There were no motor or sensory symptoms. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an increased signal in the medial aspect of the temporal lobes, which was most clearly observed on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence . An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed slow-wave abnormalities (2–6 Hz polymorphic delta and theta activity) with no epileptic activity . 123-iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomography (IMP-SPECT) showed abnormal hyperperfusion in bilateral temporal regions . A three-dimensional stereotactic surface projections (3D-SSP) analysis of the IMP-SPECT data, in which the regional cerebral blood flow of the patient was compared with that of the normal control database using the z -test, clearly showed hypoperfusion in bilateral parietal lobes and abnormal hyperperfusion in bilateral medial temporal lobes . She had high levels of antithyroid peroxidase antibody (192.0 IU/mL; normal: < 16.0 IU/mL) with almost normal levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (0.485 μIU/mL; normal range: 0.5000–5.000 μIU/mL), free triiodothyronine (1.19 ng/mL; normal range: 2.30–4.00 ng/mL), and free thyroxine (1.6 pg/mL; normal range: 0.90–1.70 pg/mL). A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed mild lymphocytic pleocytosis (7 cells/mm3; normal: < 5 cells/mm3) and elevated protein level (50 mg/dL; normal range: 10–40 mg/dL) with no oligoclonal bands. IgG index was normal (0.47: normal < 0.60). A polymerase chain reaction for herpes simplex virus deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was negative for the cerebrospinal fluid. The results of the following tests of serum sample were all negative: anti-nuclear antibody, anti-ds-DNA, SS-A, SS-B, anti N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibody, voltage-gated potassium channel-complex antibodies (leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 antibody, contactin associated protein-2 antibody), and paraneoplastic antibodies, including anti-Amphiphysin, anti-CV2, anti-Ma2/Ta, anti-Ri, anti-Yo, anti-Hu, anti-revoverin, anti-SOX1, anti-titin, anti-zic4, anti-GAD65, and anti-Tr antibodies. We diagnosed the patient with autoimmune limbic encephalitis and administered intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g/day) for 5 days.
Subsequently, there was gradual alleviation of memory loss (HDS-R: 21/30). Follow-up echocardiogram performed 20 days after admission showed normalization of the left ventricular EF (69%) and resolution of regional wall-motion abnormalities. Moreover, there was a resolution of the abnormal findings of MRI (2 months after admission, Fig. b), EEG (1 months after admission, Fig. b), and IMP-SPECT (2 months after admission, Fig. d-f). She was discharged 3 months after admission. No recurrence of cardiac or neurological symptoms has occurred in 12 months. Based on these clinical features, we finally diagnosed her with midventricular Takotsubo syndrome associated with autoimmune limbic encephalitis.