A 26-year-old male patient presented with sudden-onset chest pains, each lasting for several hours, that remained untreated for a half month. Nine hours after the pain intensified, he was referred to the local hospital for treatment. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment elevation in the AVR lead and moderate ST-segment depression in other leads. Emergency coronary angiography (CAG) showed coronary heart disease (CHD), acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and spontaneous left main dissection . Based on the existing inspection results, the patient was diagnosed with AMI and spontaneous dissection of the LMCA. Given the critical condition, the patient was transferred to the department of cardiology at our institution for further diagnosis and treatment.
On admission, the blood pressure of the patient was 83/49 mmHg, with no significant difference between the arms, and heart rate was 65 beats per minute. Peripheral arteries were equally palpable, and there were no vascular bruits or heart murmurs. The patient was healthy and had no history of smoking. The ECG showed sinus tachycardia with abnormal Q waves . The laboratory examination showed that the white blood cell count was 20.49*10^9/L, the neutrophil ratio was 94.5%, the creatinine kinase isoenzyme and cardiac troponin I were 189 ng/ml and 1.7 ng/ml, respectively. There was no abnormality in the blood lipid profile. The echocardiography revealed segmental left ventricular wall motion abnormalities, a low ejection fraction of 39%, and a modest amount of pericardial effusion. During hospitalization, myocardial necrosis biomarkers elevated to 28.56 ng/ml for cardiac troponin I and 2010 pg/ml for NT-proBNP. Re-examination of the ECG after two days of admission showed an elevated right ventricular voltage and an abnormal ST-T segment . Coronary CT angiography showed aneurysms in LMCA (diameter, 8 mm) and RCA (diameter, 9 mm) . CAG indicated complete occlusion in the proximal branch of the LAD . Based on the features of the symptoms, the patient was diagnosed CHD, AMI, spontaneous left main dissection, and right coronary dilatation. The involved location was LMCA, which led to AMI. Since being admitted to our hospital, the patient had had repeated chest tightness and pain, and the situation was very serious. Upon a week of symptomatic treatment, such as aspirin anti-aggregation, heparin sodium anticoagulation, coronary vasodilation, lipid management, and diuresis, the patient’s condition improved. After that, the patient underwent off-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgery (OPCABG). The necessity of following up the patients with SCAD for life was fully informed to patient before discharge. The patient has been symptom-free for one year.