A 67-year-old man with advanced heart failure due to cardiac sarcoidosis was referred
to our centre. A two-chamber primary prevention ICD was implanted in the left
pectoral position in 2005 in the referring hospital. In the following years, the
patient developed a chronic pacing indication and an attempt to upgrade to a CRT-D
system was not successful due to a venous occlusion of the left subclavian vein in
2015. The leads were capped and a new CRT-D system was implanted through the right
cephalic and subclavian veins. The patient received ICD therapy for recurrent
ventricular tachycardias (VTs) in 2015–16 and developed progressive heart
failure [New York Heart Association (NYHA) III] despite optimal medical therapy and
adequate CRT. He was deemed ineligible for a heart transplantation due to
irreversible pulmonary hypertension.
In 2016, an LVAD (HeartWare, Medtronic) as destination therapy was implanted in our
tertiary referral centre and concomitant restrictive tricuspid valve annuloplasty,
left atrial appendage amputation and VT cryoablation was performed. The initial
recovery was uncomplicated and the patient’s functional class improved to
NYHA II, despite frequent episodes of VTs for which he received adequate ICD therapy
and underwent two partially successful radio-frequency VT re-ablations. In 2016, he
experienced a Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia and chronic
antibiotic suppressive therapy (flucloxacillin) was initiated. In 2018–19,
the patient had an intracranial haemorrhage under therapeutic anticoagulation and
seven episodes of pump thrombosis, all treated conservatively with thrombolysis. An
LVAD pump exchange was considered to be of too high risk given the frailty and
comorbidity of the patient.
In 2019, the patient was scheduled to undergo an elective pulse generator replacement
of the CRT-D device due to low battery voltage and implantation of a new RV shock
lead due to impending lead failure with high capture thresholds (4 V/1.5 ms) and
gradually decreasing impedance (<300 Ω). The pulse generator exchange
was planned under an international normalized rati (INR) of 2.5–3.5 and
clopidogrel as any discontinuation of the anticoagulation would put the patient at
risk of a recurrent pump thrombosis. The patient was fully pacing dependent and had
no escape rhythm >30 beats/min. He required CRT as the previous trial of RV
only pacing after LVAD implantation resulted in congestion and RV failure. shows
a chest X-ray of the patient and the implanted leads and hardware and an
electrocardiogram (ECG before the procedure. Note a total of five transvenous leads
(a right atrial pacing, RV single-coil shock and a quadripolar left ventricular
pacing lead through the right brachiocephalic vein and an abandoned right atrial
pacing and a RV dual coil shock lead through the left brachiocephalic vein).
Extensive thoracic collaterals were noted at the inspection . Contrast
venography revealed an occlusion of the right subclavian vein with an extensive
collateral system .
Considering the necessity for therapeutic anticoagulation and the pronounced venous
collaterals, the risk of subcutaneous tunnelling of the left ventricular lead to the
left-sided pocket was deemed too high. The team was reluctant to attempt a
right-sided venoplasty of the subclavian system. Therefore, an alternative technical
solution was sought. A new CRT-D pulse generator was implanted on the left side with
a functional right atrial pacing and RV ICD lead (from 2005). This would ensure
stable RV pacing and tachytherapy options in case of recurrent VT. The LV port was
capped to keep the option of LV lead tunnelling open for the future. The right-sided
pulse generator was reprogrammed to LV trigger pacing/functionally LV only pacing
mode. The right atrial and ventricular outputs were programmed to sub-threshold
values to ensure no capture and extend battery life. The patient hereby had fusion
CRT delivered from the two devices. The lead and device connections and the ECG are
shown in . The
QRS-duration and configuration were comparable to the initial conventional
biventricular capture and patient had no heart failure-related
hospitalizations during the follow-up so far (March 2021).
In addition to regular outpatient clinic visits at our hospital, the patient and his
next of kin were referred to a dedicated team for advanced care planning given the
frailty and limited therapeutic options.