A 41 years old Egyptian male with an unremarkable past medical or surgical history presented to the King Saud medical city emergency department, with two days history of abdominal pain, associated with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal distention. The pain was colicky and started gradually without any bowel motion or flatus for two days. The drug and family history was unremarkable. Patient had tachycardia, with normal blood pressure and oxygen saturation of 100 % in room air. The abdomen was found to be distended and tender all over with an empty rectum by digital rectal examination (DRE). Upright chest and abdominal X-ray showed multiple air fluid levels with no air under the diaphragm . CT abdomen showed a dilated proximal small bowel loop and a picture of SBO at distal ileal loops . The patient resuscitated with intravenous (IV) fluids and kept nil per os (NPO). A nasogastric tube was inserted, and the patient was shifted to the operating room. Laparoscopic exploration showed dilated small bowel loops with collapsed distal ileum and an inflammatory band was found 20 cm from ileocecal junction originating from a small bowel diverticulum with no palpable intraluminal masses . The inflammatory band was present at the distal part of the diverticulum and was adhered to a small bowel segment leading to obstruction. The band was released, and wedge resection of the diverticulum was performed at its base by gastrointestinal anastomosis (GIA) on healthy tissue, about 2 cm from the inflamed segment, which is a standard surgical approach for MD. The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was initially kept at regular surgical floor bed and then discharged on the second postoperative day, when he passed good bowel motion. The histopathology result on follow up visit showed MD with Schistosoma infection, most likely by Schistosoma mansoni. The patient was referred afterwards to the infectious disease department for initiation of praziquantel, which is the drug of choice for schistosomiasis and is effective against all Schistosoma species. This is an extremely rare case of acute SBO. It demonstrates the importance of diagnostic laparoscopy in all patients with virgin abdomen who present with acute bowel obstruction.