A 58-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital by ambulance because of a 1-week history of malaise, lumbago, and fever of unknown origin. She had no relevant medical history and no family history. She was a nonsmoker, but she had drunk about 60 to 80 g of alcohol per day for 30 years. Liver dysfunction had been noted for the past 10 years.
On admission, her height was 158 cm, weight 56.2 kg, and body temperature 39.5 °C. Her blood pressure was 101/60 mmHg. Her heart rate was 106 beats per minute. A physical examination showed no major abnormalities. She was alert but short of breath on exertion, with an arterial blood oxygen saturation of 94%, partial oxygen pressure of 72.0 mmHg, and partial carbon dioxide pressure of 27.2 mmHg. A chest radiograph showed no obvious signs suggesting pneumonia or pulmonary congestion. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia and no other abnormalities. Plain computed tomography of the neck, chest, and abdomen and ultrasound of the abdomen revealed no significant abnormalities except for fatty change of the liver. Laboratory tests showed an elevated white blood cell count; elevated levels of serum liver enzymes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, uric acid, C-reactive protein (CRP), and serum brain natriuretic peptide; hypoproteinemia; and hypokalemia . Serum rheumatoid factor was negative. Urinalysis was positive for ketone bodies, but the urinary sediment showed no abnormalities. Cultures of blood, urine, and sputum were carried out on admission. Intravenous administration of sulbactam/ampicillin (SBT/ABPC) (9 g/day) was begun from the day of hospitalization.
On day 2, the patient remained febrile. The sputum culture showed no significant growth of pathogenic bacteria, and the urine culture was sterile. However, gram-negative rods were detected in the blood culture. Subsequent echocardiography revealed two vegetations, one of which was attached to the anterior leaflet of the MV and was approximately 4 × 1 mm in size . The other was attached to the chorda tendinea adjacent to the posterior papillary muscle, and its size was larger (10 × 2 mm) than that of the MV vegetation . Based on these findings, combined antibiotics including SBT/ABPC (9 g/day) and gentamycin (GM) (80 mg/day) were administered on day 2. Repeated blood cultures were also performed on days 2 and 3, and all culture sets were positive for gram-negative rods, which were proven to be pansensitive E. coli on day 6. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with IE due to E. coli in accordance with the modified Duke criteria . An ophthalmologist and dermatologist also examined her on day 6, but they observed no remarkable findings associated with IE. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the chest and abdomen on day 7 showed no remarkable findings; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography of the brain on day 8 also showed no abnormalities.
After antibiotic medication including SBT/ABPC and GM, the patient’s general condition improved. Her body temperature normalized on day 5, and her white blood cell count returned to a normal level (8600/mm3); her CRP level significantly decreased (5.09 mg/dL) on day 6. Blood culture analysis on day 7 and thereafter revealed no bacterial growth, but her CRP level remained mildly elevated (about 2.0 mg/dL). Echocardiography on day 14 showed a decrease in the size of the vegetations; those attached to the MV and chorda tendinea were 2 × 1 and 5 × 1 mm, respectively. However, the patient developed severe lumbago on day 20. Her white blood cell count was normal (5900/mm3), but her CRP level had increased to 3.1 mg/dL. MRI of the lumbar spine on day 21 revealed purulent spondylitis lesions in the L1 and L2 lumbar vertebrae. Intravenous meropenem (6 g/day) was substituted for SBT/ABPC and GM on day 21 despite the sterile blood culture. The patient’s clinical course was good thereafter; her lumbago improved. Transthoracic echocardiography on day 35 revealed complete resolution of the vegetations. On day 54, her CRP level decreased to 0.34 mg/dL. Administration of meropenem was terminated, and she was discharged from our hospital on day 56. After discharge, oral levofloxacin (500 mg/day) was administered for 2 months in accordance with the suggestions of orthopedic surgeons. Her CRP level normalized after 2 months. Both upper endoscopy and colonoscopy performed 3 months after discharge showed no abnormalities. MRI findings of the lumbar spine normalized after 7 months. She also stopped drinking alcohol for 12 months and remained well during that time.