An 82-year-old man with an extensive medical history including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, type 2 diabetes, coronary artery disease, history of melanoma, and previously treated bladder cancer presented with 1 month of rapid onset visual loss in the left eye. It manifested initially as a blurry vision, which progressed to severe loss of vision in the left eye. Neuro-ophthalmological examination showed a left relative afferent pupillary defect, which was suggestive of either an optic neuropathy or diffuse retinal pathology. Formal visual field testing demonstrated severe generalized depression in the left eye and a superotemporal quadrantic defect in the right eye indicating pathology affecting the left optic nerve and chiasm. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain confirmed a contrast enhancing mass in the region of the left-side of the optic chiasm extending from the suprasellar cistern into the left optic nerve .
The differential diagnosis for tumors affecting the anterior visual pathway is myriad because a vast majority (84%) of patients present with visual impairment and no other ophthalmologic or neurologic symptoms. Considerations should include demyelinating optic neuritis and non-demyelinating inflammatory optic neuropathy (e.g., sarcoid), vascular lesions (e.g., cavernoma), compressive lesions of the optic apparatus, metastatic infiltration particularly in the setting of prior known systemic malignancy as in our case with a history of metastatic melanoma, and primary tumors of the anterior optic pathway.
Given the patient's visual loss and the uncertain etiology of the lesion, a left pterional craniotomy for biopsy and resection of the optic chiasmal mass was performed.
On gross pathology, the tumor was a light-tan, irregularly-shaped soft tissue fragment measuring 0.8 × 0.3 × 0.2 cm in aggregate. On histological evaluation, the tumor was composed of glial cells with pleomorphic nuclei and areas of vascular proliferation and necrosis. Immunohistochemistry was positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and p53 and showed a Ki 67 proliferation index of ~10% . At the same time, the cells were negative for keratin. These results supported the diagnosis of GBM, WHO grade IV, based on the four diagnostic criteria for malignant optic nerve glioma, namely, (1) necrosis, (2) vascular proliferation, (3) nuclear pleomorphism, and (4) mitoses (3).
Postoperatively, the patient felt fine and did not show any neurological impairment. No postoperative radiation or chemotherapy was administered, however, 6 days post-discharge he started to show confusion, lethargy, and unsteady gait, and was readmitted to the hospital. A lumbar puncture (LP) was performed to rule out any infectious etiology. The patient's condition and treatment options were discussed and decision on transferring him to inpatient hospice was made. The patient deceased within 2 months after surgery.