A 61-year-old woman was referred to Affiliated Zhejiang Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine due to sudden vertigo with nausea and vomiting for 10 d.
Ten day prior to referral to our hospital, the patient suffered from vertigo. The vertigo was persistent, preventing her from opening her eyes. She felt dizzy when she opened her eyes, which was accompanied by nausea and vomiting. The vertigo became worse when her posture changed, and her symptoms were relieved when lying on her left side, while the symptoms were worse when she turned her head to the right. The patient had no palpitations, tinnitus, hearing loss, headache, limb weakness, numbness, limb convulsions, vague speech, or consciousness loss. She went to a nearby hospital and underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain, which showed no obvious abnormalities. She was treated with Betahistine, but her vertigo did not relieve.
She had a history of hypertension. She underwent "pancreatic tumor resection" more than 20 years ago and recovered well after surgery.
There was no history of dizziness, headache, or tumor in the family.
The patient's neurological examination showed spontaneous downbeat nystagmus, gaze in all directions showed torsion with downbeat nystagmus, and nystagmus was stronger when she gazed to the right. The patient had clear speech and normal hearing. Her right finger-to-nose and heel-to-shin tests were unstable, her limb muscle strength was grade 5, her limb tendon reflex was (+), Romberg's sign could not be completed, and the bedside head impulse test was negative.
Laboratory investigation revealed hemoglobin 147 g/L, white blood cell count (WBC) 9.3 × 109/L (N 70.8, L 21.8, M 7%), platelet count 119 × 109/L, sodium 139.79 mmol/L, potassium 3.72 mmol/L, chloride 103.1 mmol/L, glucose 4.3 mmol/L, TSH 1.487 μU/mL, FT 41.41 ng/dL, FT3 2.79 pg/mL, anti-thyroglobulin < 15, anti-thyroid peroxidase < 28 IU/mL, C3 1.25 and C4 3.8 g/L, folic acid 12.39 nmol/L, and vitamin B12 284 pmol/L. However, the level of the tumor marker carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) was significantly increased; her CA125 level was 332.50 U/mL (the normal level of CA125 is < 35 U/mL); and the level of the tumor marker carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199) was 21.63 U/mL (the normal level of CA199 is < 39 U/mL), which was normal. Next, we performed a lumbar puncture on this patient, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed a colourless fluid with CSF pressure 100 mmH2O, WBC 0 cells/mm3, protein 0.31 g/L, and glucose 5.0 mmol/L. Serum and CSF analysis of paratumor antibodies and autoimmune cerebellitis antibodies showed that the patient was positive for anti-Yo antibody, through the immunospot assay. The video head pulse test (vHIT) results suggested that the left semicircular canal gain, which was used to evaluate vestibulo-ocular reflex function, was slightly lower than the right gain .
Because the patient had a history of hypertension, which is a risk factor for cerebrovascular disease, and signs of ataxia, although there was no obvious abnormality on her skull CT, central vertigo was still considered, and cerebral infarction was considered first. Therefore, the patient underwent a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination that showed no obvious abnormalities . Then she underwent a brainstem magnetic resonance scan that also showed no obvious abnormalities.
Based on the results of the serum and CSF paratumor antibodies tests, we looked for the primary tumor. Abdominal para-aortic lymph node B-ultrasound indicated multiple sites of peritoneal lymphadenopathy. Subsequently, positron emission tomography-CT examination was performed, which revealed that the patient had increased fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism in the porta hepatis region, mesenteric roots, and back of the pancreas and multiple retroperitoneal soft tissue nodules and enlarged lymph nodes that were considered malignant. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT examination revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the retroperitoneum and porta hepatis region, which might be a metastatic tumor . Because of severe nausea and vomiting, the patient and her family members worried that the patient could not tolerate endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) examination, then refused to take ERCP and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) examinations. Therefore, the patient did not receive endoscopic ultrasound, MRCP, and ERCP examinations.
Then, we performed an ultrasound-guided lymph node puncture on this patient and biopsied the posterior peritoneal and cervical lymph nodes. Pathological results suggested metastatic cancer, and pancreaticobiliary duct origin was considered. The immunohistochemical findings were as follows: Cytokeratin (CK) 7 (+), CK19 (+), CK20 (-), caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) (-), Ki67 (+; 40%), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (-) (left cervical lymph node pathology); and CK7 (+), CK19 (+), CK20 (-), CDX2 (-), Ki67 (+; 40%), and CEA (partial +) (retroperitoneal lymph node pathology) .We reviewed the pathology of the "pancreatic tumor" resected from the patient more than 20 years ago. The pathological examination result was a grade II duodenal ampulla bile duct adenocarcinoma.