A 59-year-old man presenting with acute urinary retention was admitted to a local hospital in August 2014.
The patient had been diagnosed with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) for the preceding three years, with a chief symptom of progressive obstructive voiding.
The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable.
The patient denied any family history of related conditions.
Physical examination showed that the patient’s prostate was enlarged to more than twice the normal size, and was slightly hard without any palpable nodule on a digital rectal examination.
Microscopic haematuria was evident, but the patient’s serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) level was within normal limits (1.412 ng/mL).
Ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) revealed an enlarged prostate (7.0 cm × 6.5 cm × 5.5 cm) involving the bladder neck .
Due to the progression of the patient’s urinary symptoms despite medical treatment and lack of necessary equipment for transurethral resection of the prostate at the local hospital, the patient was initially submitted to traditional suprapubic prostatectomy. During the operation, it was confirmed that the lesion was more than just BPH, with a neoplasm that involved the prostate capsule, seminal vesicles, and bladder neck as well. Subsequently, the patient underwent prostatectomy, excision of the seminal vesicles, and rectal surgical repair (due to intraoperative rectal injury).
Histopathology revealed seminoma of the prostate, invading the bladder neck and bilateral seminal vesicles with a positive margin, but no involvement of the rectal wall. Postoperatively, careful examination of the scrotum, mediastinum, and retroperitoneum by ultrasound, and CT/magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning revealed no neoplastic lesion. Serum GCT markers including alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG), and lactose dehydrogenase (LDH) had no abnormality.
All prostatectomy specimens were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and routinely processed. After referral to a tertiary hospital, histology sections were cut at 4 μm intervals and stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Immunohistochemical stains were prepared using the MaxVisionTM method (MaxVision TM HRP-Polymer anti-Mouse IHC Kit, Maixin Biotech. Co. Ltd, Fuzhou, China). Immunostains were performed for the following antibodies: AFP (polyclonal, Abnova, Taipei, Taiwan), β-hCG (clone ZSH17), pan-cytokeratin (clone AE1/AE3), high molecular weight cytokeratin (clone 34βE12), CD45RB/leukocyte common antigen (LCA) (clone PD7/26+2B11), vimentin (clone V9), S100 protein (clone 4c4.9), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (clone E29), Bcl-2 (clone 8C8), PSA (clone ER-PR8), prostatic serum acid phosphatase (PSAP) (clone PASE/4LJ), placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) (clone 8A9), CD117, and c-Kit (clone YR145) (β-hCG-CD117, c-Kit, all provided by Maixin Biotech. Co. Ltd., Fuzhou, China). Periodic acid-Schiff staining (ab-150680, Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom) was also performed. Microscopically, the prostatectomy specimen revealed a poorly circumscribed infiltrative tumour with poorly-defined margins invading the prostate capsule, bladder neck, and bilateral seminal vesicles. The neoplastic cells were arranged in ill-defined solid nests, had no glandular structure, abundant clear cytoplasm, distinct cell membranes, and large hyperchromatic and prominent nucleoli. Many lymphocytes and plasma cells infiltrated into the interstitial tissue . Compared to common prostate adenocarcinomas, the atypical nests of the patient’s poorly-differentiated tumour cells were more prominent, with various abnormal areas of necrosis. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that the tumour cells were diffuse and showed strong expression of PLAP and CD117 as well as positive periodic acid-Schiff staining, but were negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, 34βE12, PSA, PSAP, AFP, LCA, Bcl-2, vimentin, S100 protein, and EMA.
In addition, clustered data were also identified from other patients with seminoma involving the prostate through PubMed and ISI Web of Knowledge with a cutoff date of August 2022, using the terms seminoma and prostate (or “extragonadal”) (limitations “primary” and “English”). In addition to the current case, another 13 cases of PSP previously reported in the literature are summarized in Table for comparative purposes. Of these, only four cases were initially confirmed by prostate biopsy (28.6%), and ten were initially misdiagnosed (71.4%) as carcinoma/tumour, sarcoma, BPH, or abscess. The common clinical manifestations were dysuria (10/14), haematuria (6/14), frequent urination (3/14), and lumbago (3/14). Imaging examinations showed an enlarged prostate (range 6-11 cm) involving the bladder neck (13/14, 92.8%). Of these, 11 (78.6%) presented with pure PSP, with a median age at diagnosis of 51 (range 27-59) years. Immunohistochemical examination showed that the typical seminoma cell components were all strongly positive for PLAP, CD117, OCT4, and negative for epithelial markers. All 11 patients had complete remission. Among the eight who received chemotherapy, three were treated just by chemotherapy, three by chemotherapy combined with surgery, and two with chemotherapy followed by further radiotherapy for the iliac lymph node. Of the remaining three, one received surgery and radiotherapy, one received just radiotherapy, and the third lacked detailed treatment information. The available follow-up for the 11 patients with pure PSP indicated a good prognosis with a median progression free survival of 48 (range 6-156) mo . The remaining three all had mixed endodermal sinus tumours with focal seminoma of the prostate. Their ages at diagnosis were 24, 47, and 47 years, and their chief clinical findings were severe low urinary tract symptoms (dysuria, haematuria, and lumbago) and signs of prostatic enlargement, with elevated serum AFP, β-hCG, and LDH. Cisplatin-based chemotherapy was the main chemotherapy used for treatment. One patient died after 8 mo of chemotherapy, whereas the other two were still living after 16 and 12 mo, respectively.