In October 2008, a 30-year-old female patient was admitted to the nutrology services of a university hospital complaining of apathy, irritability, pronounced reduction in walking ability and cutaneous lesions. Seven months prior to admittance, she had undergone laparoscopic bariatric surgery. At the time of the surgical procedure, she had a body mass index (BMI) of 44.5 kg/m2. For the bariatric surgery, two surgical techniques were combined, namely sleeve gastrectomy or vertical banded gastroplasty and jejunoileal bypass, as described by Souza. The latter is considered to be a modification of the Payne surgical procedure and involves reversible side-to-side anastomosis between the jejunum and ileum and placement of a silicone ring in the jejunum, in a segment located after the bypass.
During the first six postoperative months, the patient presented several complications, such as enterocutaneous fistula, surgical wound infection, subphrenic abscess and pulmonary thromboembolism. Even after resolution of the postsurgical complications, she still suffered from hyporexia, nausea and vomiting, which implied large restriction of food intake and weight loss of 58 kg (49% of the patient’s preoperative weight).
About seven months postoperatively, she experienced cutaneous lesions characterized by erythema, fine desquamation, xerosis and diffuse pruritus, which manifested after exposure to sunlight. She was initially treated with oral anti-allergic drugs, without any improvement. According to the patient’s account, a cutaneous biopsy prior to hospital admission had shown an “allergic process and vitamin deficiency”. On that occasion, vitamin B12 and thiamine supplementation were started, with relative improvement in the patient’s general health status and appetite, but no changes in the cutaneous picture.
Although the patient had had diarrhea during the postoperative months, she was evacuating twice a day (pasty or semiliquid stool) at the time of admittance to our service. A 24-hour diet questionnaire was applied, and nutrient intake analysis was conducted by means of specific software (NutWin Profissional® 1.5 software, Universidade Federal de São Paulo [Unifesp], São Paulo, Brazil). Low daily calorie intake (1,164 kcal) and adequate proteins, vitamins, and mineral ingestion were documented. Zinc consumption (8.8 mg/day) on the days prior to evaluation was in accordance with the estimated average requirement (EAR) for this mineral (6.8 mg/day for women). The patient was using multivitamin preparations that did not contain minerals, and antidepressants without any potential pharmacological interaction with zinc absorption, metabolism or excretion.
Upon admittance, the patient had a BMI of 21.9 kg/m2, discolored hair and alopecia, brittle nails, hypotrophy of papillae lingual, tongue hyperemia and sacral and lower-limb edema. There was a symmetrical decrease in the sensitivity, motor and reflex functions of the lower limbs. She presented generalized erythematous desquamative plaque lesions with fine scales, interspersed with xerosis, without affecting the dorsum and palms of the hands .
Biochemical evaluation made it possible to rule out endocrine, renal or hepatic disorders that might interfere in zinc absorption or excretion. Analysis of stool fat by means of fat-soluble dye Sudam III was positive on two different occasions, thus characterizing an intestinal malabsorptive condition. Except for hypocalcemia (total Ca = 7.9 mg/dl; reference range (RR) = 8.4 to 10.5 mg/dl) and slight hypokalemia (K = 3.3 mmol/l; RR = 3.5 to 5.0 mmol/l), the other electrolytes (Na, P and Mg) were normal. Normocytic normochromic anemia (red blood cell = 9.8 g/dl) was detected, with iron serum levels close to the lower normal limit (iron = 40 mg/dl; RR = 35 to 150 mg/dl). Laboratory tests revealed protein undernutrition, with hypoproteinemia (total proteins = 5.2 g/dl; RR = 6.4 to 8.2 mg/dl), hypoalbuminemia (albumin = 2.3 g/dl; RR = 3.5 to 5.0 mg/dl), and reduced transferrin serum levels (61.8 mg/dl; RR = 195-313 mg/dl). A 34% decrease in body muscle mass was estimated with respect to normal values, as calculated from 24-hour urine creatinine levels. Neither folic acid (7.7 ng/dl; RR = 3 to 17 ng/ml) nor vitamin B12 (> 1,000 pg/ml; RR = 174-879 pg/ml) deficiencies were identified. Reduced copper (31 mg%, RR = 70 to 140 mg%) and ceruloplasmin (0.12 g/dl, RR = 0.2 to 0.55 g/dl) plasma levels were found, which characterized hypocupremia. Low zinc plasma levels were observed (34.4 mg%; RR = 50 to 120 mg%), as measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy conducted on Perkin-Elmer 290B equipment.
Since the first day of hospital stay, the patient had been receiving an antihistaminic agent (dexchlorpheniramine), corticosteroids (hydrocortisone 1%) and an antifungal drug (ketoconazole 2%). Because of the patient’s low acceptance of an oral diet and her malabsorptive condition, a semi-hydrolyzed enteral diet via a nasoenteral tube was prescribed, in order to ensure adequate nutritional supply. The patient received thiamine and copper sulfate supplementation. Despite the improvements to her nutritional and neurological status, the cutaneous lesions persisted.
On the 25th day after hospital admission, the patient was re-evaluated by a dermatological team. Thereafter, a daily dose of 1,000 mg of zinc sulfate was administered through a nasoenteral tube because of absence of viable venous accesses and the patient’s refusal to swallow the zinc tablets. One week later, it was seen that there had been a remarkable recovery of the dermatological picture. The patient was discharged from the hospital two months after admission, for follow-up at the outpatient clinic with oral diet.