An 84-year-old female with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, severe renal failure (Glomerular filtration rate - GFR - 44 ml/min) was referred to our hospital for fever and dyspnea. Medical history reported gastric ulcer disease with hematemesis and angioplasty for diabetic peripheral artery disease in pharmacological treatment with regular anti-platelet therapy (Cardioaspirin - Bayer, 100 mg/day). No coronary artery disease or cardiac arrhythmias were reported.
At admission, her physical examination revealed a sinusal heart rate of 90 bpm, blood pressure of 105/70 mmHg, fever (37.5 °C), respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 89%, abdomen's soft and non-tender in the absence of pain.
The pulmonary CT scan showed the typical finding of COVID 19 infection and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) with the typical interstitial pneumonia infection . The rhino-laryngeal swab confirmed the COVID-19 infection, and the patient was transferred to the COVID ward. At 48 h from admission, the patient reported acute onset of abdominal pain and signs of acute abdomen and AMI. At physical examination, abdomen became tense and distened without peristalsis and empty rectum on digital exam. Laboratory data were as follows: increase of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 38 U/l (n = 0–37), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 216 U/l (n = 0–41), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) - 431 U/l (n = 50–250) levels with D-dimer 6937 ng/ml (n = 0–700), C-reactive protein (CPR) 32.47 mg/dl (n ≤ 5) and White blood cell (WBC) 18.000/μl (neutrophils: 80.5%) (n = 4–11 neutrophils: 40–74%). Renal function impairment was evident with a reported GFR of 30 ml/min (n ≥ 90).
Abdominal CT-angiography showed superior mesenteric artery (SMA) origin stenosis and occlusion after 2 cm from the origin ; CT findings of AMI at an early stage were reported including the absence of bowel mural enhancement in the proximal part of the ileum. No intestinal necrosis findings were reported .
A surgical attempt with SMA thrombectomy was excluded due to the high surgical risk mainly related to respiratory impairment and on this basis, an endovascular approach was chosen .
The treatment consisted of percutaneous trans-brachial access simultaneous mechanical thrombectomy using a 6F catheter Export AP Aspiration Catheter (Medtronic Minneapolis, MN) and proximal SMA balloon-expandable uncovered stenting (6 × 20 mm Isthmus, CID SpA, IT) with SMA patency restoration .
In brief, the SMA was cannulated using a reverse-curve catheter and a hydrophilic 0·035-inch guidewire, which is placed into the ileocolic branch of the SMA. The wire is then replaced with a stiffer, Amplatz (Boston Scientific - Natick, Massachusetts) or Rosen (Cook Inc. - Bloomington, IN) to achieve stability and a 6-Fr/45 cm Destination (Terumo Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) introducer placed proximal to the embolus in the SMA. Inside the long introducer, a 6-Fr guiding catheter is positioned into the clot, which is aspirated with a 20-ml syringe while the introducer is withdrawn. In presence of thrombus, usually, stenting is contraindicated but it can be used in presence of calcification or to preserve primary patency.
At 24 h from the index operation, the CT-angiography confirmed SMA patency with a non-significant residual thrombus on the artery wall and maintenance of SMA distal flow.
Clinical and laboratory findings were suggestive for AMI regression due to abdominal pain resolution, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 20 U/l (n = 0–37), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 45 U/l (n = 0–41), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) - 355 U/l (n = 50–250), levels with D-dimer 2976 ng/ml (n = 0–700), C-reactive protein (CPR) 35.31 mg/dl (n ≤5) and White blood cell (WBC) 15.000/μl (neutrophils: 71.5%) (n = 4–11 neutrophils: 40–74%).
Postoperative medical management consisted of dual antiplatelet therapy (Cardioaspirin 100 mg plus Clopidogrel 75 mg) and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) from day one. Echocardiogram was negative for cardiac thrombus.
On the 7th postoperative day, the patient presented right leg rest pain and foot cyanosis. These typical findings of acute limb ischemia (ALI) were confirmed on duplex ultrasound (DUS) showing a right femoropopliteal artery thrombosis.
The right ALI was managed under local anesthesia by hybrid surgical transfemoral thrombectomy and distal superficial femoral artery stenting due to a residual dissection.
At 24 h from the second procedure the leg appeared normothermic with a good popliteal pulse, the DUS confirmed patent femoropopliteal arteries. At the same time, the patient showed a significant decline of respiratory function requiring intensive care management and death on the 5th postoperative day from the second intervention due to respiratory acute failure.