A 67-year-old Chinese man presented with a 1-week history of fever and cough. He visited the family physician and was prescribed a week of co-amoxiclav 500 mg/125 mg t.i.d. He had no significant travel or contact history. He is an ex-smoker and has hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and gout. He also has stable ischaemic heart disease (IHD), for which he presented with angina last year and underwent elective percutaneous coronary intervention at another hospital. His chronic medications included clopidogrel 75 mg o.m., rosuvastatin 20 mg o.n., bisoprolol 2.5 mg o.m., omeprazole 40 mg o.m., and cozaar (amlodipine 5 mg/losartan 50 mg) 1 tablet o.m. He has no family history of cardiac disease or arrhythmias.
As his fever persisted, he revisited the clinic and was referred for COVID-19 testing. Test results were positive, and he returned to the hospital for further assessment and admission. Clinical examination was unremarkable. His vitals were normal except for a temperature of 38°C. Initial investigations revealed mild thrombocytopenia and lymphopenia. Chest radiograph did not show evidence of pneumonia . Baseline ECG was normal sinus rhythm with first-degree atrioventricular block .
On the third day, he had mild haemoptysis with saturations of 93–95% on room air. Repeat chest radiograph showed interval development of scattered bilateral consolidations . Inflammatory markers increased from a C-reactive protein of 16–54 mg/mL (normal <10 mg/mL) and ferritin of 410–1289 μg/L (normal <300 μg/L). Because of worsening clinical findings, hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin were considered but were deemed unsuitable as he had a prolonged QTc interval of 496 ms . The next day, he had temperatures up to 40°C and had intermittent blood-streaked sputum. He had no anaemia or coagulopathy. His oxygen saturations decreased to 91% and required 2 L of supplemental oxygen. He also developed bilateral lower zone crepitations. The infectious disease team was consulted, and he was started on lopinavir–ritonavir 400 mg/100 mg twice daily. He was brought to the intensive care unit (ICU) for closer monitoring and initiation of awake prone therapy. During the first day in the ICU, he had escalating oxygen requirements and respiratory distress which required intubation. He was concurrently started on intravenous piperacillin–tazobactam 4 g/0.5 g every 8 h for empirical coverage of bacterial superinfection.
In the ICU, continuous ECG monitoring detected intermittent sinus pauses and junctional escape rhythm, but he remained normotensive ( and ). Importantly, his bisoprolol dose of 2.5 mg o.m. was stopped before the ICU admission. He also was not on ticagrelor, which may worsen bradyarrhythmias and interact with lopinavir–ritonavir. Electrolytes and thyroid function were normal. Despite optimization, he still had intermittent sinus arrests up to 3.2 s . The ICU team were worried about the possibility of COVID-19-related myocarditis. However, subsequent investigations suggested otherwise—there were no ST-segment evolving changes, and serial highly sensitive troponins were marginally elevated up to 33.6 ng/L (99th percentile upper reference limit 17.5 ng/L). Transthoracic echocardiogram showed preserved cardiac function and no regional wall motion abnormalities or significant pericardial effusion. After several days of supportive measures, he developed transient junctional escape rhythm of 35 b.p.m. with hypotension. He required emergency transcutaneous pacing with transition to intravenous dopamine infusion of 5 μg/kg/min. No obvious reversible causes of sick sinus syndrome were found. A multidisciplinary discussion, involving the intensivist, cardiologist, and infectious disease physicians, concluded that lopinavir–ritonavir was the likely cause of the bradyarrhythmia and was stopped. Although an uncommon side effect, lopinavir–ritonavir is associated with atrioventricular block in 0.1% of patients. It has a Food and Drug Administration warning for patients with IHD or conduction disease. Within 48 h, the bradycardic episodes resolved and he was extubated. After a day of observation, he was discharged from the ICU. Since then, he has recovered from COVID-19. He was last seen in the infectious disease outpatient clinic and reported no symptoms suggestive of bradycardia.