A ten-year-old Caucasian girl, a permanent resident of rural Crete, Greece, was admitted to hospital reporting fever, anorexia and fatigue that had been present for the previous four days. Her vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 37.8°C; blood pressure, 120/60 mm Hg; heart rate, 95 beats/min; and respiratory rate, 12 breaths/min. The oxygen saturation was 96% while she was breathing ambient air. Pulmonary examination revealed decreased breath sounds and dullness to percussion over the right costophrenic angle. The rest of the physical examination results were normal. Laboratory investigations included a complete blood count, liver function tests and urine analysis; all results were within normal ranges except for 3% eosinophils on the white blood cell differential.
On chest radiography, a 9.0 × 8.2 cm circular lesion was visualized in the right lower lobe . A computed tomography (CT) thoracic scan revealed a cystic fluid-filled mass, 9.0 cm in diameter, on the inferior lobe of the right lung . The girl's history of living in proximity to dogs and farm animals was suggestive of infection with E. granulosus. The eventuality of liver involvement was investigated; a CT abdominal scan examination revealed the presence of a hypodense cystic lesion of 7.9 × 7.2 cm in the left lobe of the liver . Serologic test results for echinococcus by means of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and an indirect haemagglutination test were positive.
A single-stage surgical approach was considered. Surgical excision of the pulmonary cyst was performed through a right posterolateral thoracotomy. After identification of the cyst, the lung was surrounded by sterile gauze sponges to minimize the risk of spillage of daughter vesicles into the thoracic cavity. A needle connected to the suction tip was carefully inserted into the cystic cavity to aspirate the cystic fluid. After the evacuation of the cystic contents, the most superficial part of the cyst was opened (cystotomy), and the laminated membrane was removed with ring forceps. The remaining pulmonary cavity was irrigated with saline solution and cleaned with sterile gauze sponges. Then the bronchial openings were sutured, and the residual cavity was obliterated by absorbable pursestring sutures starting from the deepest level to the surface. After surgery of the pulmonary cyst, the diaphragm was incised radially over the palpable liver cyst. Aspiration of the cystic contents was performed by a large-bore needle followed by cystotomy and careful removal of germinative membrane. Because there was no bile leak on the inner surface of the cyst, the residual cavity and the remnant pericystic hepatic tissue were inverted with sutures of Vicryl. A catheter was positioned in the residual cavity below the diaphragm. Histopathologic examination of the cysts confirmed the diagnosis of hydatid disease. The girl's postoperative period was uneventful. The subdiaphragmatic and chest drains were removed on the fourth and sixth postoperative day, respectively. The girl was discharged on the eighth day after surgery. Adjunctive chemotherapy with oral albendazole (400 mg twice daily) was administrated for two months to prevent recurrence. During the 12-month follow-up with four-month intervals of ultrasonography and chest radiography, there was no evidence of recurrence.