A 36 year old male was referred by his general practitioner to the accident and emergency department with what was thought to be an abscess on his chin . The lesion had been present for eight weeks and had not improved despite a six week course of antibiotics from his general practitioner. The lesion had increased in size over the last two weeks and at one point the patient noticed it had bled slightly whilst he was shaving. There had been no other discharge.
During the two weeks before presentation the patient had been feeling generally unwell with fatigue and lethargy. He also reported weight loss of about 5 kg over the last month.
On further questioning he described some left sided dull, 'dragging' abdominal pain and associated back pain. He denied any change in his bowel habit and had no haematuria or other urinary symptoms. He had no past medical history and was not on any medications. He was a non-smoker.
On examination the patient was lethargic with a prominent lesion on his chin 2 cm in diameter. The lesion was erythematous, tender, tense and was similar to the appearance of an abscess. He was afebrile.
On examination of the abdomen he was found to have a number of purpuric spots over the upper torso and hepatosplenomegaly.
Investigations showed normal full blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function tests and chest X-ray. His C-reactive protein was elevated at 155.
In view of his weight loss and hepatosplenomegaly he was admitted under the medical team for further investigation with a suspicion of lymphoreticular malignancy.
The surgical team were asked to review regarding the "abscess" on the patient's chin. However, due to the pending investigations a decision was made to wait for the results before contemplating incision and drainage.
The patient had a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis which diagnosed a left renal carcinoma 12 cm in diameter arising from the anterior cortex, but no thrombus or tumour was identified in the left renal vein. The patient was then referred to the urology team.
The urology team arranged a chest CT scan and a bone scan which were normal and subsequently performed left radical nephrectomy and biopsy of his chin lesion.
The histology of his left kidney showed clear cell renal carcinoma, Stage 3, with tumour invading the left renal vein at the kidney hilum (G3 pT3b N0 M1).
Malignant cells were found in the chin biopsy histology, which were consistent with metastatic carcinoma.
The patient was referred to the oncologists for further treatment. He underwent subcutaneous interferon injections at a dose of 5 mega units three times per week for a total of 4 months. He also underwent radiotherapy to the site of the lesion on his chin, followed by resection of the lump. One year later the patient developed some pain in his iliac crest and right posterior ribs for which he underwent palliative radiotherapy although bone scan and X-rays did not show any evidence of metastasis.
It is now two and a half years since diagnosis and the patient remains disease free, having had a recent follow up CT scan which showed no evidence of recurrence.