A 65-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a 2-day history of acute abdominal pain and fever, anorexia, and lower limb numbness. The pain was localized in the central area of the upper abdomen and was dull in nature, with a pain score of 4 out of 10. There was no radiation of pain to the other part of the body. The patient denied any associated symptoms, such as bloating, nausea, and vomiting. Her temperature, pulse, and respiratory rate were 37.2 degrees Celsius, 74 beats per minute, 19 beats per minute, and her blood pressure was 158/85 mmHg. A physical examination showed mild icteric sclera. However, hepatomegaly, right hypochondrial tenderness, features of hepatic encephalopathy, and Murphy’s sign were all negative. Sensory tests for light touch, pinprick, and vibration were performed that showed no prominent altered sensations. Differential diagnosis at this point included acute hepatitis, acute pancreatitis, peptic ulcer disease and heavy metal intoxication. Laboratory data revealed leukocytosis (WBC: 12,060/UL), elevated liver transaminases (AST: 237 U/L; ALT: 519 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP: 97 U/L), gamma glutamyl-transferase (γ-GT: 213 U/L), and hyperbilirubinemia (direct bilirubin: 0.7 mg/dL, total bilirubin: 3.8 mg/dL). Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), D-DIMER, urea and creatinine levels, amylase and lipase were within normal limits. She was negative for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and Anti-HCV antibody titer. Taken into account of her clinical course, acute cholangitis was highly suspected. Empirical antibiotics treatment with intravenous cefoxitin was begun at 2 g every 8 h. The patient did not disclose taking any new drugs or traditional herbal medications on the first day of her hospitalization. Contrast computed tomography of the abdomen performed at the emergency department showed no evidence of common bile duct stones. Magnetic Resonance Cholangio-Pancreatography (MRCP) of the abdomen done on the hospital day 2 showed no choledocholithiasis, and therefore the tentative diagnosis of acute cholangitis was excluded. To further investigate her abdominal pain, gastroduodenoscopy was done that revealed two active and sharp edge gastric ulcers. On further probing her history, she reported drinking juice extract of Catharanthus roseus by boiling it as a soup, about 14 g a day for 8 consecutive days (a total consumption of 112gram, Figs. and ) before her admission for treating her neck pain caused by a cervical spinal bone spur. Serum levels of heavy metals, including copper, zinc, and mercury, were all negative. The fever subsided on the fifth day of her hospitalization with discontinuation of the use cefoxitin, and her blood culture yielded no growth of bacteria. The patient was discharged on the 8th day of hospitalization and recovered smoothly thereafter with normalized liver function and bilirubin level one week after discharge. Our hypothesis was further supported by the fact that the Naranjo ADR probability scale score for the association was “probable” (score 6; Table ).