A 54-year-old Saudi female with hypertension presented with shortness of breath for the past 1 month and abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting for 3 days. The patient is taking oral amlodipine 5 mg daily for her hypertension, which is well controlled. The abdominal pain was mild and associated with abdominal distension, particularly in the upper right quadrant. There was no constipation. The patient had a history of gallstones, treated conservatively. Apart from history of hypertension and a symptomatic gallstones, other past medical, social, environmental, and family histories were unremarkable. The patient is a housewife, living with her family, and does not smoke or consume alcohol. Physical examination revealed a moderately distressed patient with a temperature of 36.3 °C, pulse of 94 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 158/98 mmHg, body mass index of 28 kg/m2, and oxygen saturation of 95%. Chest auscultation revealed reduced air entry over the anterior lung field toward the bottom and laterally to the right side. The abdomen was distended and nontender with no guarding. Bowel sounds were audible. There were no other findings on physical and neurological examinations. Chest radiography revealed an air-containing viscus with a wide mediastinum . Computed tomography (CT) without contrast showed an anterior midline diaphragmatic defect measuring approximately 6.5 cm with herniation of the omentum, middle part of the transverse colon, and upper part of the left lobe of the liver into the thoracic cavity, anterior to the heart, and great vessels . On the basis of the clinical and radiological findings, the patient was planned for surgery. Prior to surgery, hemoglobin was 13% with a hematocrit of 42%. Liver enzymes and renal function tests were within normal limits. The patient used the usual dose of amlodipine 8 hours before the surgery and then continued on intravenous amlodipine titrated according to her weight during and after the surgery, then resumed the usual oral dose. The operating room staff monitored the patient, and the laparoscopic procedures have been performed under general anesthesia (GA).
The hernial defect was treated using an abdominal laparoscopic surgical approach. The adhesions were released, and a defect in the diaphragm was identified. The contents of the hernia were successfully reduced, including the omentum, middle part of the transverse colon, and upper part of the left lobe of the liver . Cholecystectomy was performed, and the defect was closed successfully by primary repair with stitches using Silk 2.0, and strengthened with propylene (using an Endo Close suture device) and an 11 × 11 cm mesh .
The oxygen saturation dropped to 88% in the first 2 hours after the operation. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Chest radiography revealed white spot infiltration (pneumonia) and atelectasis . Infusion of cefuroxime 750 mg was commenced and continued every 8 hours for 3 days. The patient’s oxygen saturation significantly improved (96% on 3 L of oxygen), and the lungs reflated adequately. The patient was transferred to the general ward on oral cefuroxime 500 mg two times per day and physiotherapy. The patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day in a good condition. On first follow-up after 2 months, the patient had no complaints and was satisfied and pleased. Chest radiography revealed normal findings .