A 31-year-old male smoker presented to the emergency department with episodes of atypical chest pain radiating to the left arm for 5 days. There was no history of fever, cough, or contact with the coronavirus disease (COVID)-infected patient. On clinical examination, he was vitally stable with a pulse rate of 74 beats/min and blood pressure of 125/74 mm/Hg. He was afebrile and oxygen saturation at room air was 95%. Cardiac examination revealed the normal character of first and second heart sound without additional sounds. A review of his past medical history revealed decreased vision in the left eye, starting at the age of 10 years which progressed to blindness. He was diagnosed to have IGFBP7 mutation which causes eye manifestations in the form of FRAM. His younger brother was also diagnosed to have FRAM and IGFBP7 mutation at the age of 23. The rest of his siblings and parent are asymptomatic.
His electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with T-wave inversions in lateral leads . Blood investigations showed a mildly raised white blood cell count of 13.08 × 109/L (normal 3.9–11 × 109/L). The troponin was raised at 637 ng/L (normal = 34 ng/L) and the repeated level showed 1938 ng/L and it peaked up to 5484 ng/L the next day. Echocardiography showed normal biventricular systolic function with normal valves. There were no regional wall motion abnormalities. Chest X-rays did not show any significant findings. Considering the COVID pandemic, inflammatory markers, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for COVID were requested. His c-reactive proteins were high but PCR for COVID was negative. Considering his past ophthalmological history fundoscopy was performed which showed bleeding retinal artery macroaneurysms in the right retina and sub-retinal gliosis suggesting laser treatment for prior retinal arterial aneurysm .
Coronary angiogram was performed which showed a large aneurysm in the proximal segment of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery (, Videos 1 and 2). There was no evidence of plaque rupture or thrombus in aneurysm. The rise in cardiac biomarkers can possibly be explained by type 2 myocardial infarction (supply-demand mismatch). Cardiac computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast was done which showed a 2.28 × 1.64 cm coronary aneurysm at the proximal segment of the LAD artery with peripheral calcification with a narrow neck of about 0.6 cm ( and ). Myocardial bridging was also noted in the mid-segment of LAD. There were non-obstructive calcified plaques in the right coronary artery. As part of the work-up, his CT scan of the brain with contrast was done to assess associated intracerebral aneurysms which did not show any significant abnormality.
After the heart team discussion, he was referred for cardiac surgery. Medical therapy was not preferred as he was symptomatic and presented with the acute coronary syndrome, moreover; there was the risk of thrombosis or rupture due to the large (giant) size of the aneurysm. The percutaneous intervention was not chosen due to the size of the aneurysm and the risk of occlusion of a large size diagonal branch originating from the lumen of the aneurysm. He underwent surgical ligation of the LAD and coronary aneurysm with implantation of the saphenous venous graft to distal LAD as the left internal mammary artery was smaller and underdeveloped. On follow-up after 1 year, he is asymptomatic.