A 30-year-old Greek man presented to our emergency department with a history of fever up to 38.3 °C, sore throat, swollen ankle joints, and bilateral lower limb weakness. His illness began 20 days prior with multiple episodes of diarrhea for which he was prescribed ciprofloxacin and metronidazole for 5 days by his doctor. After cessation of the diarrhea, he developed arthralgias and progressive lower extremity weakness with persistent low-grade fever.
On physical examination, he was febrile with a body temperature of 38.3 °C, heart rate of 120 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 130/90 mmHg; pulse oximetry showed an oxygen saturation rate of 98% in room air. A physical examination of the respiratory tract, the cardiovascular system, and the abdomen was unremarkable.
Examination of his skin and nails was normal. An eye examination was also normal.
Cranial nerve examination was normal; however, a neurological examination revealed asymmetric proximal muscle weakness of his right upper limb and both lower limbs but no distal muscle weakness. Pain, light touch sensation, and joint position sense were intact. Deep-tendon reflexes of his left biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis were brisker than normal. Deep-tendon reflexes of his right upper limb and both lower limbs were normal. Palmar tendon reflexes were normal. He had difficulty standing due to his proximal muscle weakness, but he was able to walk. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his brain was performed with unremarkable findings, followed by lumbar puncture to exclude CNS infection. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed pleocytosis with 15 polymorphonuclear cells per field, glucose 56 mg/dl, lactate dehydrogenase 25 U/l, and albumin 19 mg/l. Electromyography showed the presence of many automatic polyphasic motor units in all the examined muscles (right biceps, right quadriceps, right anterior tibialis), especially in the right quadriceps, favoring a myopathic process related to his current Mycoplasma infection. His creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was 42 U/l.
A laboratory investigation showed mild normocytic normochromic anemia with hematocrit (Hct) 39.6% and hemoglobin (Hgb) 13.1 g/dl, polymorphonuclear leukocytosis (10,700/mm3), an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (125 mm/hour), and increased levels of C-reactive protein (22.4 mg/l), ferritin (586 ng/ml), and fibrinogen. Blood, urine and fecal cultures were all negative.
During the first days of hospitalization, he remained febrile with deteriorating extremity weakness. A chest and abdominal X-ray as well as a heart ultrasound were performed to investigate his fever, with unremarkable findings. An abdominal ultrasound revealed an enlarged spleen (dimensions, 150 mm × 145.5 mm × 78 mm). A tuberculin skin test was negative. A colonoscopy was performed, and inflammatory bowel disease was excluded.
During the first week of his hospital stay, his asymmetric oligoarthritis became more apparent clinically, particularly involving the second metacarpophalangeal joint of his right hand, his left knee joint, and both ankle joints, further limiting our patient’s mobility.
Cervical, thoracic, and lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were performed to exclude myelopathy, and MRI of his sacroiliac joints revealed sacroiliitis bilaterally. A more thorough investigation of bacterial infection led to the detection of M. pneumoniae DNA in his CSF and blood serum samples by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
M. pneumoniae-related reactive arthritis and axial spondyloarthropathy were provisionally diagnosed.
Doxycycline 200 mg daily and a brief course of naproxen 500 mg three times a day were initiated, followed by methylprednisolone 32 mg daily. Our patient’s mobility rapidly improved, inflammation of the affected joints subsided, and inflammatory markers declined. Further blood tests were negative for rheumatoid factor and anti-citrullinated peptide antibody and positive for the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B27 antigen. He was discharged after 14 days of hospitalization.