Left shoulder pain and activity restriction for 3 h.
A 60-year-old man was admitted for further workup of left shoulder pain. X-ray demonstrated a left distal clavicle and shoulder blade fracture. He was assessed by the orthopaedics team and booked for internal fixation of the left clavicle. General anaesthesia with a nerve block was administered. Pre-operative vitals included a blood pressure (BP) of 120/63 mmHg, heart rate (HR) of 65 bpm, and SpO2 of 95% in room air. After induction, BP and HR decreased to 90/52 mmHg and 50 bpm, respectively. A 6 mg dose of ephedrine was given intravenously. A total of 24 mg ephedrine was given over the whole operation. No further muscle relaxants were required. The surgery was uneventful and lasted for 1 h. Total blood loss was 100 mL and a total of 1000 mL of crystalloid was given. After surgery, he was transferred to the post-anaesthesia care unit to continue machine ventilation. The patient began spontaneously breathing at 40 min postoperatively, at which point the laryngeal mask was removed and an oxygen mask provided. However, SpO2 remained below 92% without the use of the oxygen mask. The patient was subsequently admitted to the orthopaedics ward. Vitals at that time were BP 115/76 mmHg, HR 72 bpm, SPO2 99%, and temperature (T) 37.2°C.
Unfortunately, his BP continued to decrease over the next 6 hours, to 80/50 mmHg. The next morning, the patient appeared confused and was not cognisant to person, place, or time. Arterial blood gas indicated respiratory acidosis without any evidence of electrolyte imbalance. Due to increasing respiratory distress, emergent intubation was performed and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for machine-assisted ventilation and vasopressor medications. Over the next 2 d, there was minimal improvement in the patient’s condition despite ongoing treatment.
Careful review of the patient’s history, as provided by his family, revealed that over the last year, he began demonstrating signs of progressive indifference, lack of communication, and lethargy. Further physical examination revealed a diffuse loss of body hair and dry skin. This new information, combined with the current episode of hypotension and respiratory distress, strongly suggested a possible aetiology of hormonal dysfunction. As such, endocrine tests were performed, with the results supporting a diagnosis of hypopituitarism with hypocortisolism and hypothyroidism. Then, he underwent brain MRI.
He denied any other medical conditions.
He worked as a manual labourer. He neither smokes nor drinks.
The left shoulder joint is tender, the snoring pain is positive, and the activity is limited.
Haemoglobin concentration was 108 g/dL. The results of endocrine tests are listed in Table .
X-ray of the shoulder demonstrated a left distal clavicle. Brain computed tomography revealed a low density shadow in the saddle region of the brain. Brain MRI demonstrated that the sella was enlarged and filled with CSF.