A 41-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with focal splenic lesions discovered during routine abdominal ultrasonography as a part of health checkup.
The patient was in good health and did not report any discomfort.
One year ago, the patient was admitted to the tuberculosis (TB) medical unit due to recurrent fever and cough, and was diagnosed with pulmonary TB. Subsequently, 2HRZE/7HRE (strengthening period: Isoniazid 300 mg, rifampicin 450 mg, pyrazinamide 0.75 g, ethambutol 0.75 g, once a day, given for 2 months; consolidation period: Isoniazid 300 mg, rifampicin 450 mg, ethambutol 0.75 g, once a day, given for 7 months) therapy was administered. The patient discontinued anti-TB medication 3 months ago following a reexamination at the TB clinic.
Patient and family histories were negative.
The patient did not complain of any abdominal pain or distension.
Carbohydrate antigen 125 was mildly elevated, and other tumor markers including alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 199 were within the normal range. Other biochemical results were unremarkable.
Grayscale US demonstrated splenomegaly with numerous well-defined hypoechoic masses . Color Doppler imaging indicated no significant blood flow signals within these lesions . Contrast-enhanced US (CEUS) showed peripheral heterogeneous slight hyper-enhancement in the arterial phase and hypo-enhancement in the venous phase , while no enhancement was observed in the central area during the CEUS procedure. CEUS findings suggested an infectious disease. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed which showed an enlarged spleen with multiple irregular nodular and patchy low density shadows, the largest measuring approximately 1.7 cm × 1.7 cm, with a suspicion of chronic infection . A great many abnormal hyperglycemia foci detected by positron emission CT indicated an infectious disease, but the possibility of neoplastic lesions could not be definitively excluded.
The differential diagnoses based on clinical and radiological results included splenic tuberculosis, fungal infection, metastasis, lymphoma and hemangioma. For further diagnostic analyses, the US-guided coaxial CNB for histological diagnosis was performed by a doctor with over 5 years of experience in interventional US. Platelet count and prothrombin time were within normal limits at the time of the procedure. The procedure was conducted with the patient in the right lateral decubitus position, ensuring optimal visualization and access to the target area. First, conventional US was performed to determine the optimal puncture route. Subsequently, 5 mL of 2% lidocaine was infiltrated into the subcutaneous tissues. A 18G coaxial needle was introduced through the coaxial system under real-time US guidance. Three cores were obtained with the 18G biopsy needle via the access established by the sheath of the aforementioned coaxial needle . The biopsy specimens were fixed in 95% ethanol and sent to the Pathology Department for histological and immunohistochemical evaluation. In order to reduce the risk of bleeding, a muddy mixture of gelfoam and saline was injected into the coaxial needle sheath to block the needle path immediately after the sampling procedure .