A 68-year-old woman presented with a 2-year history of shortness of breath and easy fatigability without any clinical evidence of right ventricular dysfunction. She underwent LPA stenting 23 years ago, for severe LPA origin stenosis with absent RPA. She had a Palmaz iliac stent, mounted on an 18 mm × 4 cm balloon and passed through a 14-Fr Mullin’s sheath (Cook Inc., Bloomington, IN, USA), deployed in the LPA. The internal diameter of the LPA post stenting measured 15 mm. She was discharged on Aspirin 150 mg/day for a period of 1 year.
On examination, her vitals were normal. Her cardiovascular evaluation revealed no evidence of systemic venous congestion, normal apex beat, normal first heart sound but a loud P2 without any murmur. Her lung fields were clear on auscultation. Her transthoracic echocardiography revealed suboptimal images but septae were found to be intact, valves were functioning normally with right ventricular hypertrophy, and normal ventricular systolic function (tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion 2.1 cm). There was some suggestion of turbulence across the LPA but spectral Doppler signals were non-diagnostic due to poor windows. It was, therefore, decided to perform a coronary angiogram and right heart catheter study with a view to assess her pulmonary haemodynamics.
Her cardiac catheterization revealed a right ventricular systolic pressure of 70 mmHg (systemic pressure of 130 mmHg). The LPA was crossed using a 6-Fr JR catheter, and pressures were taken across the stented LPA. There was a gradient of 5 mmHg across the stented LPA. The distal LPA pressures were 65/22 mmHg. The mean pulmonary artery pressure and mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure were 37 mmHg and 10 mmHg, respectively. The main pulmonary angiogram done in the left anterior oblique view with a cranial angulation revealed unobstructed flow across the LPA . The stent was well positioned without any evidence of fractures or in-stent narrowing. The diameter of proximal and hilar LPA were 14 mm and 17.6 mm, respectively . Coronary angiogram revealed normal coronaries. In view of elevated PA pressures in the absence of left sided heart disease, she was diagnosed with pulmonary arterial hypertension (Group 5) and was started on pulmonary vasodilators (Sildenafil + Ambrisentan). At 3-month follow-up, the patient was symptomatically better. She is yet to undergo a repeat haemodynamic study.