A 4 year-old, previously healthy Caucasian male, was evaluated in the emergency department for an acute onset of bilateral leg pain. Work up included a normal complete blood count, femur and tibia/fibula x-rays, and hip ultrasound. His creatine kinase (CK) was found to be elevated (854 Units/L), and he was discharged home with supportive care for presumed viral myositis. Over the next week, he developed a new-onset rash on his face and neck, persistent fatigue, and low-grade fevers (100.6 F). He was subsequently admitted to the hospital with persistent muscle pain, increased weakness, and an increasing CK (11,000 Units/L). On admission, labs showed a hemoglobin (Hgb) of 12.6 g/dL, platelets 98,000, BUN 21 mg/dL, creatinine 0.3 mg/dL, albumin 3.1 g/dL, and urinalysis showed >300 mg/dL protein with moderate blood. Rheumatology was consulted, and he empirically received intravenous immunoglobulin.
On day 2 of hospitalization, he developed anemia (Hgb 9.9 g/dL) with schistocytes, worsened thrombocytopenia (platelets 28,000), increased creatinine (0.6 mg/dL), and elevated blood pressures, consistent with hemolytic uremic syndrome. There was no history of diarrhea, thus Shiga toxin testing was not performed. ADAMTS13 activity was normal. He was given a weight-based induction dose of eculizumab 600 mg on hospital day 4. Given this, he also received initial pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines and was started on penicillin prophylaxis. Kidney function continued to decline, and on hospital day 5, renal and muscle biopsies were performed at the same time as placement of hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis catheters. He was initiated on hemodialysis post-operatively with a BUN of 142 mg/dL and creatinine 3.1 mg/dL. The renal biopsy revealed TMA with severe acute tubular necrosis . The muscle biopsy also demonstrated TMA in a skeletal muscle vessel .
After his initial induction dose of eculizumab, the patient's platelets peaked at 126,000. However, 6 days after his first dose, his platelets trended down to 58,000. He received a second dose of eculizumab 300 mg per standard weight-based dosing given that his weight was 18 kg. Platelets increased to 146,000 but dropped to 88,000 just 3 days after his second eculizumab dose. He received a supplemental dose of 300 mg and then was maintained on weekly infusions of 600 mg. Despite additional supplemental and larger doses of eculizumab, as detailed in , his course waxed and waned with two worsening episodes of rhabdomyolysis.
On hospital day 24, he transferred institutions for further management of his myopathy and aHUS that appeared to be refractory to standard eculizumab dosing. The patient underwent an extensive work up, with genetics studies negative for the 10 most commonly associated aHUS genes (C3, CFB, CFH, CFHR1 full sequence and deletions/duplications, CFHR3 full sequence and deletions/duplications, CFHR5, CFI, DGKE, MCP, THBD). Homocysteine and methylmalonic acid levels were normal, ruling out cobalamin C-associated aHUS. Additional work up for rheumatological, infectious, metabolic, and neuromuscular disease were all negative. Specifically, this included a normal complement profile (except for a mildly elevated C5, C6, and C1 inhibitor consistent with an acute phase reaction) and included a normal properdin, Bb, Factor B, Factor H, Factor I, and negative Factor H autoantibody. His muscle biopsy was reviewed by multiple pathologists, with findings consistent with ischemic muscle injury and TMA and no signs of primary muscle pathology or metabolic disorder, juvenile dermatomyositis, or another autoimmune myopathy. Additional rheumatologic/immunologic work up also included: ANA titer 1:80 with repeat ANA negative, ANCA negative, and negative lupus panel. X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy testing (very long chain fatty acids, phytanic acid, pristanic acid) was normal.
The patient required intermittent hemodialysis over a 3 week period. Subsequently, his platelets normalized, anemia remained stable, and creatinine trended down to 0.4 mg/dL. Guided by his laboratory values, he was weaned to the standard weight-based maintenance dosing frequency of eculizumab 600 mg every 2 weeks with eculizumab trough levels maintained >100 mcg/mL, soluble membrane attack complex (sC5b-9) below the normal limit of 250 ng/mL, and suppressed CH50 below limits of detection. He completed his pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccination series (including PPSV23, MenACY, and MenB) due to the need for long-term eculizumab treatment. Given our institution's experience with eculizumab dosing in hematopoietic stem cell transplant associated TMA using Bayesian pharmacokinetic modeling , we applied the same personalized dosing strategy to this patient. Bayesian estimators, based on pharmacokinetic parameters with the incorporation of a patient's individual data, have been developed to estimate therapeutic dosing. As shown in , the patient's pharmacokinetic modeling suggested he could be safely maintained on every 3 week dosing schedule. After extensive discussions with the family, he was transitioned to this regimen with labs initially drawn prior to each infusion then spaced to every 3–4 months. Follow up over the last 3 years of monitoring has shown levels of sC5b-9 below the upper limits of normal (250 ng/mL), suppressed CH50 below the limit of detection, and eculizumab levels ranging from 120 to 280 mcg/mL, with no clinical relapses of his aHUS. Standard maintenance dosing on a 2 week regimen for this patient is estimated to cost $312,000 per year, while increasing the dosing interval to every 3 weeks costs $208,000, a savings of $104,000 per year.