A 79-year-old man presented with limited range of motion (ROM) of his left shoulder.
His left shoulder ROM was 40°, 30°, 30°, and to L5 for elevation, abduction, external rotation,
and internal rotation, respectively . Plain
radiography showed an acromio-humeral interval of 2 mm, with glenohumeral joint narrowing
. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a concaved
deformity on the undersurface of the acromion .
Magnetic resonance imaging showed a partial subscapularis tendon tear and global supraspinatus
and infraspinatus tendon tears .
Three-dimensional CT imagery revealed that the transverse length of the glenoid was 25 mm,
with no glenoid deformity . The patient was
diagnosed with cuff tear arthropathy that was classified as grade 4 using the Hamada
classification, type E0 using the Favard
classification, and type A1 using the Walch
classification. The preoperative Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) score was 44.5 out of 80
points due to the poor XP findings and joint stability.
In accordance with the JOA guidelines, we decided to perform RSA . The Aequalis Ascend shoulder system (Wright Medical
Japan, Tokyo, Japan) was used, with a baseplate size of 25 mm; one compression screw and
two locking screws were inserted to fix the baseplate. A lateralized sphere was placed on the
baseplate, and the size 3B humeral stem was inserted at 20° retroversion. Finally, the
subscapularis tendon was restored. A shoulder brace was used postoperatively.
Postoperative radiography and CT showed that the position of the glenoid component
was more superior than preoperatively planned .
Three weeks later, the shoulder brace was removed and shoulder ROM exercises were started.
Five weeks postoperatively, the patient reported feeling pain during motion and an
inability to actively move the shoulder joint. We found baseplate loosening, and a glenoid bone
defect that had been created by the baseplate loosening . This defect had changed the glenoid shape from type E0 to E2 using the Favard
classification. Six weeks postoperatively,
we removed all the implants, and grafted allogenic bone from the femoral head into the bone
defect with two cannulated screws (3.0 mm diameter) (Meira, Nagoya, Japan). To maintain the
length of the humeral bone, a cement spacer shaped like the humeral head was inserted into the
humerus .
Six months after the second operation, CT revealed bone union in the glenoid. We
inserted a new glenoid component, a baseplate with a long post (25 mm diameter), one
compression screw and two locking screws, and a centered sphere. A size 2B humeral stem was
inserted at 20° retroversion with cement . A
shoulder brace was used for 3 weeks postoperatively. At 3 weeks postoperatively, a
rehabilitation program was started; rehabilitation comprised passive ROM exercise for 2 weeks,
and then active assistive and active exercises were added. Two months after the last operation,
the left shoulder active ROM was 150°, 150°, 40°, and to L5 for elevation, abduction, external
rotation, and internal rotation, respectively .
The JOA score was 70.5 out of 80 points.
At the final follow-up performed 1 year after the last operation, the patient had no
disability of the left shoulder.