On August 14, 2020, an 11-year-old female patient was admitted with symptoms of anemia and leukopenia eight months after a renal transplant. A cadaveric donor renal transplant was performed on July 6, 2020. The donor was a two-year-old male who suffered brain death. The pre-implantation biopsy of the donor graft showed focal microthrombi in the glomerulus . Induction with anti-thymocyte globulin, methylprednisolone, and triple maintenance immunotherapy including tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and methylprednisolone were applied. Postoperatively, the transplanted kidney functioned well. She was discharged on July 30, 2020, with creatinine 90.7 umol/L, hemoglobin 87 g/L, white blood cell 6.34 × 109/L, and platelet 132 × 109/L.
Past medical history: the patient was diagnosed with uremia due to LN at age ten. Laboratory tests showed: creatinine 708 umol/L, ANA 1:640 (+), and dsDNA (+). However, no renal biopsy was performed.
The patient presented a three-stage clinical course following admission as below.
Stage 1 (Anemia): On August 14, the patient was admitted with fatigue and laboratory data showed anemia (hemoglobin: 72 g/L) . MMF decreased from 0.75 g/d to 0.5 g/d, recombinant human granulocyte stimulating factor and erythropoietin were infused. From August 22 to September 7, she received infusions of leukocyte-free erythrocyte suspension at 1.0–1.5u/per time for four times and immunoglobulin 5 g/d for ten days, but she still suffered from further pancytopenia without any significant improvement .
Stage 2 (Fever). On the morning of August 26, she had a sudden onset pain of bilateral knee and sacroiliac joint, which was completely relieved by bucinnazine. On the next day, she started to develop remittent fever, fluctuating between 36.0℃ and 39.3℃ without chills or cough . The relevant serological indicators of bacteria and fungi were negative, and the condition did not improve with antibiotic treatment. The histology of bone marrow aspiration revealed the normal hematopoietic elements, and no evidence of phagocytosis. Computed tomography showed mild splenomegaly. According to the systemic lupus erythematosus disease activity index (SLEDAI), the total score in this patient was three and was considered as basically inactive lupus. However, according to the HLH-2004 guidelines , the patient met four of the eight indicators for the diagnosis of HLH: (i) fever > 38.5℃; ii) splenomegaly; iii) hemocytopenia; and iv) elevated serum ferritin. She was tentatively diagnosed with HLH, based on a HScore score of 182 . Soluble CD25 and NK cell activity were later reported to be fit for the criterion. Hence, HLH was confirmed. Genetic tests showed no pathogenic mutation. Several viruses were active including EBV, B19 virus, and CMV. EBV sorting was tested to guide treatment . After establishing the initial diagnosis of HLH on September 4, we stopped MMF, converting tacrolimus to cyclosporine (C0: 50–100ng/mL, C2: 400–500ng/mL), and prescribed hydroxychloroquine 75 mg, Q12h (5 mg/kg/d) to treat the underlying disease of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Immunoglobulin 0.4 g/kg/d was given for 3 days then 0.15 g/kg/d for 15 days; methylprednisolone 40 mg/d for 5 days, thereafter tapered to methylprednisolone at a dose of 8 mg/d for four weeks. After treatment, patient’s condition improved, MMF restarted with 0.25 g daily.
Stage 3 (Hematuria). On October 1, the patient developed gross hematuria with no fever, no lumbar pain, and no urinary irritation. The urine bacterial culture was suggestive of proteus mirabilis, and no improvement was observed after anti-infective treatment according to the bacterial susceptibility testing. On October 12, a transplant kidney biopsy was performed, and the pathological diagnosis was LN (NIH classification: type IIIa, NIH lupus nephritis (LN) score AI 6, CI 0, Fig. ). Oral hydroxychloroquine was continued at 75 mg every 12 h; methylprednisolone was increased to 16 mg per day; cyclosporine was increased to guarantee C0 > 200ng/mL, and MMF was added to sufficient dosage, keeping the MPA-AUC 0–12 h at 50–60ug·h/mL. Her condition improved and she was discharged on November 9.
After discharge, the patient was admitted four times for the asymptomatic urinary infections, which were relieved after anti-infection treatment. Currently, she has been followed up for over two years with stable condition .