A 12-year-old Chinese male was admitted to Children’s Hospital of Chongqing Medical University with an 8-day history of vomiting and a 3-day history of dizziness, blurred vision, and gait disturbance. No fever, seizure, sleep disorders, speech or abnormal behavior was observed. Initial neurological examinations showed unstable standing, positive finger-to-nose and heel-to-knee-to-shin tests and stage 5 of bilateral limbs muscle power. There was no recent history of infections such as herpes simplex virus, Japanese encephalitis virus or SARS-CoV2. There was no any family history of similar condition or other types of autoimmune diseases. The patient did not take any medications prior to the development of symptoms and did not have any unusual environmental exposures.
Routine blood and urine tests , genetic metabolism screening, C-reactive protein, and autoantibody tests, including anti-nuclear antibody and anti-dsDNA, were normal. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cell count was 310 (WBC cells: 230;90% mononuclear and 10% multinuclear cells), whereas CSF total protein (0.64 g/L), glucose (3.18 mmol/L), and chloride (120 mmol/L) levels were normal. PCR for herpes simplex virus, coxsackievirus, measles virus, varicella zoster virus and enterovirus in the serum and CSF were all negative. Diffuse delta waves were found by electroencephalography in awake stage . An initial brain MRI revealed T2 Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) hyperintense signals within the left cerebellar vermis and hemisphere . The initial diagnosis was cerebellar encephalitis. Intravenous immunoglobulin was administered at 400 mg /kg/day for five days, and dexamethasone was administered at 0.3 mg/kg/day for six days.
Four days after admission, the patient developed delirium and urinary incontinence with aggravated dystonia and strong resting tremors on both limbs. Eight days after admission, the patient had a high-grade fever up to 39.2 °C and became unconscious. Repeat serological testing nine days after admission showed a creatine kinase (CK) of 15,153U/L, a creatine kinase myocardial band of 8.07 U/L, a myoglobin of > 1,000 μg/L, and an aspartate aminotransferase of 192 U/L, and urinalysis showed occult blood “ + + + ”; moreover, the CK value gradually increased to 98,076 U/L.
Due to the new onset symptom of delirium and dystonia, the diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis was suspected, antibodies against cell surface or synaptic proteins were assessed in the serum and CSF obtained using transfected HEK-293 cell by the cell-based assay and indirect immunofluorescence method (KingMed Diagnostics, Guangzhou, China). The results showed high levels of CSF (1:100) antibodies against the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR) GluR1 but no antibodies in the serum . Antibodies against AMPAR GluR2, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, GABA B type receptor, leucine-rich glioma inactivated protein 1 (LGI1) and Casper were negative both in serum and CSF . Paraneoplastic syndrome antibody (including GAD65, Zic, Tr (DNER), SOX1,Ma2,Ma1,Amphiphysin,CV2,Yo,Hu and Ri) test was negative in the serum. Tumor markers (including CEA, AFP, Ferritin and NSE), bone marrow puncture test, Chest and abdomen computed tomography (CT) were normal.
The CK value and urinalysis resolved following alkaline urine and plasma exchange, which was applied twice on the 12th and 14th days after admission. Intravenous methylprednisolone was initiated at 15 mg/kg/day for three days and then 8 mg/kg/day for three days, followed by oral prednisone at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day. The patient gradually recovered consciousness. A modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score of 4 and severe neurological deficits was observed, and the patient was transferred to the rehabilitation department 28 days after admission. Follow-up brain MRI FLAIR, one month after disease onset, showed that the cerebellar vermis lesions have partially absorbed but revealed new lesion in the right cerebellar hemisphere. Moreover, lesion evolved to cortical atrophy at 1 month but recovery at 4 months after onset . Four-month later, mRS was 1, with ataxia and mild cognitive disorder.