The patient was a 35-year-old Chinese woman, gravida 5, para 2, who was admitted to our hospital in August 2019 with postcoital vaginal bleeding that had been present for the last 3 months. Gynecologic examination revealed that the whole cervix was enlarged and exhibited a 1.5 cm reddish exophytic mass, and colposcopy depicted an atypical blood vessel image suggestive of adenocarcinoma . The vaginal mucosa was intact, the size of the uterus body was normal, and a large pelvic mass was present. Cervical pathology was obtained in August 2019, revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with a signet-ring cell pattern .
The results of bilateral breast examination and plain computed tomography of the thorax were within normal limits. Upper gastrointestinal system endoscopy and colonoscopy were performed, but no primary tumor site was detected. Plain and enhanced computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen depicted an adnexal mass on the right side and a cervical mass . Laboratory tests revealed high carcinoembryonic antigen (83.37 ng/mL) and Ca19-9 (816.7 U/mL) levels. DNA extracted from selected cervical tissues revealed the presence of type 18 HPV.
The patient was managed for the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics 2018 classification stage IB2 cervical cancer. She underwent radical surgery in August 2019 with extensive total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, appendectomy and pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomies. Intraoperative abdominal examination revealed bilateral masses in the ovaries approximately 12 cm × 10 cm × 5 cm on the right side and 4 cm × 3 cm × 3 cm on the left side . Histopathology revealed lymphovascular space involvement, no tumor involvement space, parametrium, fallopian tube, and the para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes. The ovarian masses were brittle, ulcerated, filled with light-yellow-colored mucus, and exhibited clear boundaries and mobility. An invasive growth of approximately 3.0 cm × 2.5 cm × 1.0 c m was evident approximately 2.5 cm outside the cervical mouth . The histopathological and immunohistochemical patterns of the glandular lesions of the cervix and the ovary were identical , with immunohistochemical positivity for CK7, p16, carcinoembryonic antigen, Ki-67 and D2-40 and immunohistochemical negativity for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor (ER/PR) , alpha-fetoprotein, p53. Polymerase chain reaction analysis of ovarian tissue detected HPV18 gene fragments .In September 2019, positron emission tomography/computed tomography conducted approximately depicted no increase in fluorodeoxyglucose uptake. The patient received four cycles of platinum plus paclitaxel and whole pelvic radiotherapy with DT46Gy/23FX from September 2019 to January 2020 and achieved a stable response (SD). No tumor site was detected in plain and enhanced computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen in January 2021.
The patient whose case is described in this report has provided written informed consent for its publication. Institutional approval for publication is not applicable to the report.