We present the case of a 54-year-old male, who underwent RIRS and ESWL several times for ureteral stones.
In July 2019, a staghorn calculus was detected on a CT scan. ECIRS was performed for the staghorn calculus. A ureteral stent was also inserted after the surgery. One month later, we decided to perform RIRS for the residual stones.
An imaging study including KUB and CT revealed a residual stone in the lower pole, measuring 0.8 × 0.7 cm, beside the ureteral stent without hydronephrosis . The preoperative imaging did not show that stones had formed on the stent .
The patient was administered prophylactic antibiotics before the operation, and was oriented in the lithotomy position under general anesthesia.
We noticed the distal end of the encrusted ureteral stent when we inserted a cystoscope into the bladder .
We could not pull out to outside external urethral meatus the encrusted stent by using forceps.
Therefore, we inserted a 0.035-inch guidewire with a hydrophilic coating beside the retained ureteral stent and confirmed that the proximal side of the guidewire had been placed in the collecting system, under fluoroscopic guidance.
Then, we crushed the encrusted part of the distal end of the ureteral stent in the bladder using a laser, before creating a space beside the ureteral ostium, and inserted a 4.5/6.5-Fr semi-rigid URS.
4.5/6.5-Fr semi-rigid URS could be inserted up to U2 (L5 level), due to the resistance for ureteral stricture, and the stent was cut in the middle portion by using a laser on the 1.0 × 5 Hz setting .
However, the URS could not advance into the ureter due to the resistance for ureteral stricture .
Subsequently, we switched from a semi-rigid URS to a flexible URS (Flex-X2; Karl Storz, Culver City, CA, USA) after inserting a 10/12-Fr 35 cm ureteral access sheath (Proxis™ Ureteral Access Sheath; BARD Medical, West Sussex,UK) into the ureter in front of the stricture portion.
Then, the flexible URS was advanced into the ureter through the ureteral access sheath.
After cutting the stent, the remaining encrusted upper curl was pushed back into the renal pelvis. We were able to remove all of the stent using basket forceps (N-Circle Stone Extractor; Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) .
Surgical findings indicated that diffuse encrustations completely encasing both of the pigtail and ureteral portions .
After that, the remaining stones were subjected to RIRS as usual and lithotripsy. The operation was completed without a postoperative drainage stent after confirming that there were no remaining stones. We avoided placement of a postoperative drainage stent to worsen the patient's quality of life. The operative time was 70 min, and the stones were composed of 97% calcium phosphate and 3% calcium oxalate.
The patient did not have any postoperative complications and was discharged on postoperative day 1.