We report on a 30-year-old gravida 1, para 0 (G1P0) Caucasian/White female with no past history of known thyroid abnormalities or cervical compressive symptomatology who was found to have abnormal thyroid function testing results and multinodular goiter during her second trimester of pregnancy. Her past medical history is only significant for unspecified anxiety prior to her most recent pregnancy. She has been on no new medications and has no known drug allergies. Her family history is significant for a mother with hypothyroidism and an aunt with thyrotoxicosis. Social history is significant for a three cigarettes/day smoking history and past infrequent methamphetamine use. Physical examination demonstrated a soft, multinodular goiter without any additional physical signs of thyrotoxicosis such as proptosis, lid lag, tremor, tachycardia, or acropachy. Body mass index at presentation was 21.47, and blood pressure was 133/82 mmHg. Thyroid testing revealed elevated TSH of 5.89 mIU/L with elevated total T4 of 24.6 nmol/L. Follow-up confirmed persistent elevation of TSH with elevation in total T4. She delivered a healthy, normal-weight male at 40 weeks gestation without complications. Postpartum, she was identified as having persistent abnormalities in thyroid hormone function testing and her TSH remained non-suppressed with unequivocally elevated T4 and T3 . Thyroid uptake by I-123 was elevated at 43% (normal range 7–33% at 24 h). Evaluation for the rare possibility of pituitary thyrotoxicosis disclosed pituitary macroadenoma. Pituitary MRI demonstrated a 17 × 17 × 20 mm macroadenoma of the pituitary with suprasellar extension and optic chiasm compression. Methimazole was commenced at 16 weeks postpartum to render euthyroid for surgery, and improvements in free T3 and free T4 were observed . Methimazole therapy was discontinued immediately preoperatively. She underwent pituitary resection at 32 weeks postpartum, and the surgical specimen demonstrated findings consistent with thyrotrope adenoma . Hematoxylin- and eosin-stained slides show a pituitary adenoma characterized by a diffuse and solid proliferation of generally monomorphic cells with round nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. A few mitoses are present. There is no fibrosis, calcifications, or necrosis. By immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells are immunopositive for synaptophysin, chromogranin, and thyroid-stimulating hormone. Prolactin, human growth hormone, ACTH, LH, FSH, and beta-chorionic gonadotropin are negative in the tumor cells. She has done very well following her surgery and denied visual changes and headaches. She has continued nursing. She has maintained euthyroidism postoperatively and has had no additional pituitary hormone deficits.