We present the case of a 38-year-old man with resistant hypertension who presented to the emergency department (ED) after transient right-arm monoparesis that lasted 25–30 min. On admission, his blood pressure was 180/115 mmHg, and the neurological examination was normal. Head computed tomography (CT) was ordered to exclude the possibility of a stroke; brain parenchyma showed no abnormalities, but a fusiform dilation of the M1 segment of the left middle cerebral artery with increased density was observed . CT angiography of the cerebral arteries showed tortuosity of the internal carotid arteries (,). Cerebral angiography confirmed an extensive dilation of both internal carotids and the vertebrobasilar system with no lesions requiring endovascular treatment and suggestive of a systemic etiology (–). Abdominal CT angiography showed no vascular abnormalities. Transesophageal echocardiogram showed no alterations, and all metabolic, autoimmune, and infectious tests were normal. The patient was discharged with a diagnosis of a transient ischemic attack and instructions for secondary prevention and outpatient follow-up.
Four months later, he presented again to the ED for a syncope due to a hypertensive crisis without focal neurologic symptoms. The images from the brain CT and CT angiography showed no discrepancies compared to the previous images. A Doppler ultrasound of renal arteries reported no stenosis. Oral antihypertensives were adjusted, and he was discharged. Given the diffuse involvement of the cerebral vasculature, the patient was referred to medical genetics. The patient had no relevant family health history or familial hypertension history. The parents of the proband were not available; his father died in a traffic accident at the age of 61, and his mother had been living in another city for several years. Physical examination revealed thin lips, abnormal atrophic scarring, thin skin with venous visibility in some areas, alopecia of the scalp, horizontal stretch marks under the arms, and acrogeric appearance of the skin of the hands and feet . The Beighton score was 4 points. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
Proband-only exome sequencing was performed and reported a heterozygous variant in COL3A1 (NM_000090.4):c.3058G>T p.(Gly1020Cys) at genomic coordinates GRCh38 chr2:189006224, which was later confirmed by Sanger sequencing. This variant has not been annotated in the gnomAD, the ExAC, 1,000 Genomes, ClinVar, or HGMD databases. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) guidelines, we classified this variant as likely pathogenic, and a diagnosis of vEDS was made (, ). shows the patient’s pedigree, a schema of the COL3A1 gene and protein, and the site of the variant.