A thirteen-year-old boy presented to the emergency department with pain and bleeding from the perineal region along with the penetrating construction iron rod in situ in the perineal region for 15 h after sustaining a fall injury from the rooftop. He was stuck at the top of the iron bar after injury and his relatives cut the bar from its base supporting him from the adjoining house to prevent any possible movements and rushed him to the nearby hospital, and was referred to our center for further management.
On arrival to our Emergency Department, the patient was conscious, tachycardic (HR-140bpm), tachypneic, blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, and other vitals stable. The patient did not any have relevant past history. However, he was bleeding from the perianal region, and a broken metal rod of about 2 cm diameter in situ with entry and exit wound in perineal and left loin region respectively was present . Emergency management was done according to advanced trauma life support (ATLS) guidelines. Urinary catheterization and rectal examination couldn’t be performed due to the injury and presence of the rod. On local examination, the rod of 2cm × 2cm thickness entered the perineal region 2 cm above the anal opening along with an exit wound of 2cm × 2cm in the left loin region . Tetanus vaccination and broad-spectrum antibiotics with aerobic and anaerobic coverage were administered.
Considering hemodynamic stability, radiographic investigations were performed. X-ray of the cervical and dorsal spine revealed no spinal injury and chest X-ray was normal. Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a metallic foreign body (iron rod) of the approximate diameter of 18 mm penetrating through the perineal region and coursing posterosuperior to the left, posteriorly to the urinary bladder, anterior to left ala of sacrum, left anterolateral aspect of the rectum, close to the left transverse process of L4-L5 vertebrae, along the left paraspinal region and then exiting outside of the left posterior upper abdominal wall at T10 vertebrae level with no obvious injury of the urinary bladder, rectum and other visceral organs and major large arteries (, ).
Considering the possibility of rectosigmoid/retroperitoneal injury, an exploratory laparotomy was done with lower midline access and after meticulous observation, no injuries to vital organs by the rod were found. Perioperatively, 2 cm × 2 cm thickness iron rod was passing through the perineal body with penetration of urogenital diagram passing through the iliopsoas muscle till the lower border of the kidney with exit wound of 2 cm × 2 cm in the left lumbar region . No pathological findings other than about 100 ml of clotted blood in the peritoneal cavity along with a small perforation in the transverse colon was detected. Surprisingly, there was no injury to the rectum, urinary bladder, small bowel, kidney, spleen, major vessels, urethra, external genitalia, and external anal sphincter. The rod was removed slowly and steadily under direct vision ensuring no more damage . The perforation of the transverse colon and the defect in the urogenital diaphragm were repaired. The perineal wound was cleaned and allowed to heal secondarily and a long Penrose drain was placed into the entry hole. The lumbar exit hole was closed. The procedure was performed by experienced pediatric surgeons’ team of Tribhuvan University, Teaching Hospital encountering no any other complications and was well tolerable by the patient.
The patient recovered well and was discharged on the 9th postoperative day, having remained in the pediatric intensive care unit for four days, without any complications related to walking, urination, and defecation. On follow up after 3 weeks, wounds were healthy and the perineal wound had healed.