A 21-year-old sexually virgin female, from a middle-class family, was referred to Surgical Oncology outpatient in June 2020 with a provisional diagnosis of epithelial ovarian malignancy on the basis of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings and raised cancer antigen 125 (CA125) level of 129.8 U/ml (normal 0–35). On enquiring, she had irregular menstruation for the last 6 months, abdominal distension for 2 months, and pain in the lower abdomen for the last 1 month. There was no history of fever or night sweats. She had a past history of cervical lymph node tuberculosis in 2017, for which she completed antitubercular therapy for 18 months with a standard regimen of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. Other than this, there was no significant medical and surgical history. Personal and family history was noncontributory. On clinical examination, the general condition was fair and vitals were stable, neurological, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems, and were within normal limits. On per abdomen examination, the patient had mild tenderness in the lower abdomen with no signs of guarding, rigidity, or free fluid in the abdomen. No definite mass or lump was palpable.
Her previous MRI scan was reviewed which showed extensive smooth peritoneal thickening with moderate ascites, multiloculated cystic lesion in bilateral adnexa, variably hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI, and variably hyperintense to hypointense on T1-weighted images, and the lesions were in close relation with ovaries but bilateral ovaries were normally visualized . This suggested a possibility of tubo-ovarian origin of the mass. Her routine biochemical blood investigations (complete blood count, renal and liver function test, chest X-ray, HIV, HBsAg, HCV) were within the normal limit except for raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 32mm/h (normal 0–20). Other tumor markers were also within the normal limit: serum lactate dehydrogenase 216 U/L (normal 135–225), serum alpha fetoprotein 1.6 ng/ml (normal 0.89–8.78), serum carcinoembryonic antigen < 0.5 ng/ml (normal 0–5), and serum beta human chorionic gonadotropin < 2 mIU/ml (normal 0–5). Seeing her past history of tuberculosis, interferon gamma release assay was done which was negative. After this, a primary diagnosis of tubo-ovarian abscess was made.
A transabdominal ultrasound (USG)-guided aspiration of the fluid was done and sent for geneXpert®, cell cytology, cell block, and culture (bacterial/fungal/tubercular). GeneXpert® was negative for tuberculosis. The fluid cytology was negative for malignant cells and the cell block showed reactive mesothelial cells and neutrophils. The microbiological reports revealed a sterile bacterial culture. On fungal culture, fungal elements were seen, which were grown on Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) (Bruker Daltonics, Germany), which showed them to be Curvularia lunata.
She was started on oral standard itraconazole 200mg once daily and was followed up every week. During the second week of follow-up, an abdominal contrast-enhanced CECT was repeated that showed bilateral adnexal masses with dilated tubular structures with thickened enhancing walls, moderate fluid collection was still seen in the pelvis along with peritoneal thickening, and the lesion also showed calcifications and cystic components of various compositions suggesting a diagnosis of a tubo-ovarian abscess . So, another therapeutic USG-guided aspiration was done and 80 ml fluid was aspirated.
After 6 weeks of itraconazole treatment, she was symptomatically improved. A repeat pelvis MRI was done that showed near-total resolution of mass, and bulk of bilateral ovaries was seen normally . Again, transabdominal ultrasound-guided fluid aspiration was done from the remaining cyst and sent for repeat fungal culture which was negative for any fungal elements. Itraconazole was stopped and she was kept on regular follow-up. Two months later, the patient presented with a chest wall swelling and weight loss. A CT scan was done that showed miliary tuberculosis and cold abscess in the chest wall . An aspiration was done and sent for geneXpert® that confirmed MDR tuberculosis; 3 months after the start of antitubercular treatment, the cold abscess was regressed and the patient had reported 3 kg of weight gain.