A 64-year-old man presented to the emergency room with melena. He was undergoing dialysis three times a week and was taking aspirin 100 mg, digoxin 0.125 mg, losartan 100 mg, atorvastatin 10 mg qd for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, atrial fibrillation, and coronary artery stenosis. The patient reported symptoms of nausea and dizziness during the medical history assessment. On physical examination, the blood pressure was measured at 161/81 mm Hg, heart rate was 107 beats/min, respiratory rate was 22 breaths/min, and body temperature was 36.3°C. The patient was drowsy and showed signs of acute illness, including pale conjunctiva and dry mouth. Two years ago, he had a GI endoscopy which showed no abnormalities.
The blood test results were as follows: white blood cell count 4,730/μL, hemoglobin 6.7 g/dL, hematocrit 20.3%, platelet count 133,000/μL, aspartate aminotransferase 8 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase 19 IU/L, total bilirubin 0.33 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 254 IU/L, blood urea nitrogen 36.0 mg/dL, creatinine 3.69 mg/dL, C-reactive protein 0.1 mg/dL, sodium 139 mmol/L, potassium (K) 3.65 mmol/L, chloride 99 mmol/L, and bicarbonate (HCO3) 28.8 mmol/L at the time of admission.
During the upper GI endoscopy to evaluate GI bleeding, multiple active gastric ulcers were observed in the antrum . While attempting a tissue biopsy, the endoscope was not cooperating and insufflation was performed for a prolonged period of time. During the scope retrieval, bleeding was observed, and a mucosal laceration and a hole suspected to be a perforation were found on the lesser curvature of the gastric body (the gastroesophageal junction was intact). Hemostasis was achieved by applying hemoclips to the exposed blood vessels . No active bleeding was observed afterward, and the endoscopy was terminated to prevent further insufflation. In the abdominal computed tomography scan, pneumoperitoneum was observed within the abdominal cavity, and it was noted that free air was escaping into the abdominal cavity from around the high body area (a, b).
The patient was transferred to the surgical department for close observation to determine the need for surgical intervention and underwent medical treatment including fasting, fluid support, antibiotic coverage, intravenous proton pump inhibitors, and blood transfusions. No leakage was observed on the follow-up computed tomography scan taken during the examination with gastrografin injection through a nasogastric tube, and spontaneous closure was expected. The patient’s condition improved after starting a diet the next day, and he was discharged 8 days after admission. During the endoscopy performed 2 months later, the perforation site was completely healed , and the patient has been under further observation without additional bleeding.