A 28-year-old Japanese woman first presented 13 years ago after experiencing acute, painful vision loss in her left eye with the appearance of a central scotoma as shown by Goldmann perimeter (GP); she was diagnosed as having retrobulbar optic neuritis, and treated with intravenous high-dose methylprednisolone (HDMP; 1000mg) followed by a tapering dose of oral prednisolone (PSL). Her visual loss slowly and incompletely recovered. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis performed on her brain, orbit, and spine revealed a mild enhancement of her left optic nerve, cervical spinal cord, and thoracic spinal cord, with no other abnormalities. As a follow-up dose, low-dose PSL (5 to 10mg/day) was administered orally.
For 12 years after her initial visual problem, our patient’s best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) has been 1.2 in her right eye and 0.15 in her left eye, and a left relative afferent pupillary defect has been shown. Three years ago, serum anti-aquaporin 4 antibody was observed. As our patient had optic neuritis, myelitis, MRI evidence of a contiguous spinal cord lesion of five segments in length and NMO-IgG seropositivity, she was diagnosed as having anti-aquaporin 4 antibody-positive NMO according to the diagnostic criteria for NMO . Our patient experienced relapses of left retrobulbar optic neuritis 10 times during the 12 years after the initial episode. Every recurrence of left retrobulbar optic neuritis was treated with intravenous HDMP followed by a tapering dose of oral PSL. As a follow-up dose, low-dose PSL was always administered orally.
Last year, our patient presented with progressive vision loss in her right eye that had begun two days earlier. She also had mild pain with eye movement. Her right BCVA was 0.2 accompanied by reduced color perception, her GP test showed a central scotoma , and both pupils exhibited poor responses to light stimulation. On funduscopic examination, her right optic disk appeared normal. An MRI analysis performed on her brain, orbit, and spine revealed no significant enhancement.
Our patient’s right intra-ocular pressure (IOP) had been 30 to 40mmHg, and she was also diagnosed as having corticosteroid-induced glaucoma in her right eye. She was treated with intravenous d-mannitol and acetazolamide followed by oral acetazolamide, oral potassium l-aspartate, topical dorzolamide hydrochloride, topical carteolol hydrochloride, and topical latanoprost. After these treatments, our patient’s right IOP was transiently reduced to 20 to 30mmHg.
Because we considered anti-aquaporin 4 antibody-positive NMO to be the primary cause of our patient’s visual disturbance, we treated her with two courses of intravenous HDMP followed by a tapering dose of oral PSL. However, her right visual acuity declined to no light perception, and then we added double-filtration plasmapheresis (DFPP). After five consecutive days of DFPP, her visual acuity slowly improved. Because the increased IOP was undesirable for her right eye, we performed a trabeculotomy to reduce her right IOP; the post-operative IOP maintained under 15mmHg. After the trabeculotomy, we performed the remaining DFPP for two consecutive days. Two weeks later, our patient’s right BCVA recovered to 1.2, and this BCVA has now persisted for more than seven months. Final GP demonstrated no central scotoma . The Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue color vision test performed on her right eye after improvement over the last episode demonstrated a mild but non-specific pattern of consequent abnormality . She was unable to complete the test with her left eye because of the existing visual disturbance (data not shown). Changes in our patient’s right BCVA and IOP in the context of the performed treatments are summarized in Figure .