A six-month-old white girl was admitted to our service with a previous history of respiratory distress and inability to feed at birth, reported from another institution. Her condition prompted tracheostomy and gastrostomy. The mother’s prenatal course had been unremarkable, with no previous history of trauma, infection during pregnancy or other abnormalities.
Neonatal CT and MRI showed an extensive heterogenous mass on the left side of the skull base, without intracranial connection. The mass extended to the ipsilateral parapharyngeal space and downward to the submandibular triangle and anterior cervical region. It dislodged the left mandibular ramus anteriorly and crossed the midline at the level of the nasopharyngeal and retromaxillary space .
At admission, the child presented deteriorated general status, moderate to severe malnourishment and bilateral bronchopneumonia. Because of her clinical condition, surgical treatment was postponed to allow the clinical data to become more favorable through improvements in nutritional status, respiratory assistance and clinical vital signs, in the hospital. Over this period, the mass did not show any enlargement, and there were no abnormalities in the patient’s neurological development. After three months, surgical treatment was indicated. Because there were no suitable facilities for surgical treatment at the locality where the patient lived, she was transferred to our center to be operated. After three months of enteral nutrition therapy, her nutritional status allowed the intervention.
Complete surgical excision was achieved using a transcervical-transparotid approach with extension to the infratemporal fossa, by means of a lateral transzygomatic incision. This enabled early identification of the facial nerve and preservation of all of the vital neurovascular structures and as much as possible of the naso-oropharyngeal mucosa. The neuroglial heterotopia presented strong adherence to the adjacent soft tissue, with areas of solid and cystic components. The dura remained intact and there were no intraoperative complications. The postoperative period was uneventful, with normal function of the vagus, hypoglossal, glossopharyngeal and accessory nerves. The tracheostomy remained necessary during the first month, until nasofibroscopy showed complete healing of the mucosa. The child received speech therapy for two months. Feeding was accomplished through the gastrostomy for two months, which was then closed after development of secure oral intake. The child left the hospital after the second month without any complications and has remained free from recurrences for one and a half year of follow-up with MRI investigations.
The pathological evaluation on the neuroglial heterotopia showed that macroscopically, it consisted of a solid, brownish, avascular mass that adhered to surrounding tissues, with some cystic areas inside it . Microscopy showed nests of neural tissue with some neurons embedded within poorly encapsulated fibrovascular stroma, without any mitotic areas, and with the presence of functioning choroid plexus in the immunohistochemistry assay . The entire specimen was composed only of ectodermal elements.