A 30-year-old female was referred to our hospital in 2020 with a main complaint of intermittent dyspnea for five years, aggravated with syncope and exertional dyspnea for 6 months and exhibited a World Health Organization functional class (WHO-FC) III status. She was diagnosed with primary PAH at age 25 in 2016 in another hospital by right heart catheterization with a mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) of 43 mmHg and a PVR of 12.5 Wood units. The patient has no family history of pulmonary or cardiac vascular disease, and no orthopedic problem. Her BMI was 19.04 kg/m2. A physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 109/77 mmHg, a pulse rate of 77 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, a pulse oximetry of 94% on room air and a body temperature of 36.1 ℃. Cardiopulmonary examination revealed clear lung fields and an accentuated pulmonic second heart sound.
Chest radiography showed prominent hilar pulmonary arteries, with a cardiothoracic ratio of 0.66 . Notably, the enlarged heart was compressed in a narrow anteroposterior thoracic space due to the straightening of the dorsal spine in the lateral view . Computed tomography confirmed an enlargement of the right heart with a dilated main pulmonary artery of 30 mm in diameter. The ratio of the anteroposterior to the transverse chest diameter is 0.25, which is much smaller than normal.
An electrocardiogram disclosed signs of right axis deviation, right atrial and right ventricular enlargement . Transthoracic echocardiography showed that the right heart was dilated and the left ventricle was compressed . The tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) was measured at only 12 mm and the right ventricular fractional area change (RV-FAC) was 26%, reflecting a reduced right heart systolic function. Right heart catheterization revealed severe precapillary pulmonary hypertension, with an elevated mPAP of 50 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PAWP) of 8 mmHg, and PVR of 14.29 Wood units. An acute vasoreactivity testing was performed to show a negative response. Pulmonary artery angiogram indicated no evidence of pulmonary embolism or arteriovenous malformations. Blood tests revealed elevated levels of total bilirubin (38.9 µmol/l), direct bilirubin (11.4 µmol/l), and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP, 3020 pg/ml). Laboratory tests for autoimmune diseases and human immunodeficiency virus were all negative. The patient had no detectable associated medical agents known to cause PAH. Therefore, a genetic analysis by whole exome sequencing on a next generation sequencing approach was performed. A novel heterozygous frameshift germline variant in the exon 12 of the BMPR2 gene (c.2423_2424delGT, p.G808Gfs*4, NM_001204) was identified and subsequently validated by Sanger sequencing. The variant was absent in the Exome Sequencing Project, 1000 Genomes Project, or Exome Aggregation Consortium. This is a previously unreported variant, predicted to result in deleterious functional consequences. The deletion of two bases causes a frameshift alteration, which is defined as a null variant by the ACMG Standards and Guidelines , predicted premature protein truncation through nonsense-mediated decay. Hence, the patient was diagnosed with HPAH and straight back syndrome.
The patient was administrated sildenafil (25 mg three times daily) and bosentan (125 mg twice daily) therapy since 2016. As her symptoms worsened, the level of NT-proBNP was 3020 pg/ml with the dyspnea evaluated to be a WHO-FC III status on admission. Disease severity was evaluated as intermediate–high risk during this visit. The subsequent targeted therapy was escalated to a combination of sildenafil (25 mg three times daily), macitentan (10 mg once daily), and treprostinil injection (a gradual up-titration to 20 ng/kg/min). After six months, her heart function was improved to WHO-FC II with an NT-proBNP level reduced to 352 pg/ml. Given her clinical improvement, a plan was made to transition from treprostinil injection to oral Selexipag up-titrated to 1.0 mg twice daily. No follow-up hemodynamic evaluation has been performed to date. The TAPSE was increased to 15 mm and the RV-FAC was of 29% by echocardiogram during the last follow-up on March 2023 . Her heart function remained to be WHO-FC II. The patient is currently comfortable with normal activities with no signs of symptomatically worsening, showing her benefits from triple combination therapy.