A 60-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital with hematemesis. She had no history of GI hemorrhage, peptic ulcer disease, use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, excessive alcohol ingestion, or chronic liver disease. She had no other medical problems and was taking no medications.
On presentation, her abdomen was soft, nontender, and nondistended with normal bowel sounds. Her hemoglobin level was 8.5g/dL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple lesions in her stomach. Hematologic tests revealed a total peripheral white cell count of 14,400/mm3. Biochemical tests yielded elevated serum blood nitrogen (30.7mg/dL), decreased total protein (3.8g/dL), and decreased serum albumin (2.0mg/dL).
Endoscopy revealed multiple gastric polyps and fresh blood in her stomach. One of the gastric polyps, which was associated with oozing bleeding, was found near the anterior wall of the lower gastric body. Hemostatic forceps (Coagrasper, FD-410LR; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) were initially applied over the tumor surface, but because the bleeding persisted, argon plasma coagulation (APC) was performed around the bleeding site. Mucosal oozing continued after failed APC and the application of the hemostatic forceps .
Bleeding of this polyp lesion persisted, and we did not determine whether it was a benign or a malignant tumor (in particular, hyperplastic poly or early gastric cancer). We considered that the bleeding point was not only on the surface of this polyp, but also within the deep mucosal layer.
We decided to perform EMR to detect the deep vessels. Immediately after injecting a 0.4% sodium hyaluronate solution, EMR was performed . After EMR, exposed vessels were detected at the base of the mucosal resection site, with spurting bleeding . Coagulation of the bleeding vessels using an ERBE VIO® 200 generator (ERBE Elektromedizin, Tübingen, Germany) and hemostatic forceps allowed us to successfully complete the hemostatic procedure . The bleeding stopped within two days. Our patient’s hemoglobin level subsequently stabilized at 10.2g/dL without further transfusion. The following day, upper GI endoscopy showed multiple gastric cancer lesions . There was no further bleeding. Subsequent examination of specimens from EMR revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. The lesion was removed en bloc. The resected tumor was 30mm × 25mm, and histological examination revealed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma limited to the submucosal layer. Biopsy specimens that were obtained from other lesions revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet-ring cell carcinoma. There was no evidence of hepatic metastasis, lung metastasis, or peritoneal metastasis based on the CT and positron emission tomography findings. Total gastrectomy with a radical lymph node dissection was performed with a preoperative diagnosis of multiple gastric cancers. This patient had eight synchronous gastric cancer lesions . Histological examination showed various types of cancer : well-differentiated, moderately-differentiated, and poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet-ring cell carcinoma that had developed independently in the mucosal and submucosal layers of the resected specimen. Our patient’s symptoms resolved after surgery, and she remained asymptomatic at the follow-up one-and-a-half years later.