A 70-year-old male with a history of myasthenia gravis, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and coronary artery disease presented to one of our EDs in March 2020 with shortness of breath and cough. While he did not routinely use supplemental oxygen at home, he had started using it recently as he felt he was having a myasthenic crisis. The patient denied chest pain or fevers but did report some subjective chills and a non-productive cough. Overall, he described that he felt as though his chest was “not moving well and it’s weak” and that he was “belly breathing.” The patient reported that he was strictly adhering to social distancing and the stay-at-home recommendations because of his health history and had no known sick contacts, no recent travel, no new medications, and was not on any antibiotic therapy.
The patient’s vital signs in triage were as follows: heart rate 68 beats per minute; blood pressure 99/51 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), respiration rate 18 breaths per minute; temperature: 36.3° Celsius; and with an oxygen saturation 96% on two liters nasal cannula as he could not tolerate room air alone. His physical exam revealed a respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute. He was only able to speak in two-word sentences and had labored breathing with diminished breath sounds throughout. After taking a deep breath, he was only able to get to the letter “D” when reciting the alphabet. Evaluation by respiratory therapy showed a negative inspiratory force of −10 mm Hg (reference (ref) range: >−60 mm Hg) and a vital capacity of 960 milliliters (mL) (ref range: >30mL/kilogram ideal body weight). There were no other significant findings on physical exam.
Initial venous blood gas on two liters nasal cannula showed partial pressure of oxygen of 37 mm Hg (30–40 mm Hg), and partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 53 mm Hg (ref range: 35–45 mm Hg) with a pH of 7.4 (ref range: 7.35–7.45). Other laboratory work-up included the following: complete blood count; comprehensive metabolic panel; B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), lactic acid; two blood cultures; procalcitonin; serum cortisol level; thyroid stimulating hormone; and free thyroxine levels. The patient had a mild leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 12.5 × 109/liter (L) (ref range: 4.5 to 11.0 × 109/L). His procalcitonin was negative at 0.02 nanograms (ng)/mL (<0.15 ng/mL), and brain-type natriuretic peptide only mildly elevated at 147 picograms (pg)/mL (ref range: <100 pg/mL). His initial troponin was 0.07 ng/mL (ref range: <0.1 ng/mL). Renal function was normal with a creatinine of 0.74 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (ref range: 0.6–1.2 mg/dL).
His admission chest radiograph (CXR) showed no acute cardiopulmonary abnormality. His other laboratory values were unremarkable. A SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was sent to the health department as per hospital protocol. At that time, our hospital policy was to add routine testing for all patients admitted for any respiratory complaints to help guide personal protective equipment use and transfer positive patients to designated COVID-19 hospitals within our system. The result of this testing was pending at this time of initial admission.
Due to impending respiratory compromise, and following discussion with the patient and his wife, it was decided to proceed with intubation in the ED. The initial diagnosis was acute myasthenia gravis crisis. The patient’s myasthenia gravis had been diagnosed in November 2019 when he presented with stroke-like symptoms of diplopia and dysphagia. He was found to have acetycholine receptor antibody positive/Musk-receptor antibody negative myasthenia gravis. Since his initial diagnosis in 2019, he had been well controlled on prednisone 30 mg daily, methotrexate, and pyrostigmine 60 mg four times daily. He had no hospitalizations between discharge in December 2019 and this case presentation in March 2020.
Due to persistent hypotension during this encounter, stress-dose steroids (100 mg of hydrocortisone sodium succinate) were started in the ED. Neurology recommended immediately starting plasma exchange, and the patient underwent five sessions in the ensuing five days. The SARS-CoV-2 PCR resulted as positive on day three, and infectious disease was consulted. The risks of medication interactions with hydroxychloroquine was thought to outweigh the benefits and thus was not initiated. The patient was not a candidate for remdesivir as part of an initial medication trial as he never developed any infiltrates on CXR throughout his hospital course. Current data is evolving but early reports show only a 68% sensitivity for CXR in diagnosing COVID-19 at time of admission. Thus, in total no specific COVID-19 treatments were pursued. Interestingly, with plasma exchange and stress-dose steroid therapy alone, the patient was able to be extubated on day five and had no other complications during his hospital course through discharge.