A 43-year-old latin female patient was seen at the gastrointestinal surgery service of Fundación Cardioinfantil—Instituto de Cardiología in Bogotá, with a 2-year history of chronic anemia requiring transfusion of 7 units of packed red blood cells throughout that time span. During the diagnosis work-up for anemia, the patient reported significant genital bleeding during her menstrual period, despite having undergone hysterectomy. Hemoglobin (Hb) and Hematocrit (Htc) count remained low, and thus studies were conducted to explore possible bleeding sources as well as other causes of anemia, such as occult gastrointestinal bleeding.
Laboratory test results at admission to our institution were consistent with microcytic hypochromic anemia (Hb 6,2 gr/dL, Htc 16 %), with negative direct Coombs test and a peripheral blood smear showing no schistocytes. Conditions such as autoimmune hemolytic anemia and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria were ruled out as well.
Upper GI endoscopy showed chronic corpus and antrum gastritis and a biopsy confirmed the diagnosis; no evidence of bleeding sites or scars of bleeding foci were found.
Colonoscopy showed scars of previous bleeding in the colon lumen, but no lesions suggesting colonic lesions as the source of anemia. Capsule endoscopy was performed next in order to study hidden causes of intestinal bleeding. Findings showed lymphangiectasia with bleeding stigmas in duodenum 4th portion and jejunum first portion .
After this procedure, enteroscopy was carried out, reporting a 35 mm lesion taking up 50 % of the circumference in the distal duodenum, with raised whitish edges secondary to confluent lymphangiectasia, a center with a vascular appearance, and active bleeding spots. Biopsy samples dyed with India ink confirmed the diagnosis of hemangiolymphangioma .
The patient underwent surgical resection of the distal duodenum lesion (fourth portion) plus anastomosis to the first jejunal limb with a side to end technique. Surgery was well tolerated by patient, who received liquid diet 36 h in the postoperative period, patient had a regular evolution and no complications until discharge . The surgical piece showed a whitish, spongy 4 × 2 × 1 cm lesion, with past bleeding scars .