A 55-year-old woman with Ollier disease and congenital limb deformities presented to our clinic in October 2013. She was originally diagnosed in April 2011 with progressive right hemiparesis and language and memory problems. Imaging studies demonstrated a large left-sided hemispheric mass . She underwent a craniotomy and subtotal resection of the lesion that was diagnosed as an anaplastic astrocytoma. The postoperative course was complicated by postoperative hemorrhage, extended mechanical ventilation, a tracheostomy, and a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. The patient had a very gradual and slow recovery but remained densely hemiparetic in the right leg, with facial droop and cognitive dysfunction. She did not receive any postoperative adjuvant treatment such as radiation or chemotherapy; treatment for the brain tumor was offered to the patient but was declined by her and her family. In 2012, she developed a pulmonary embolism and was anticoagulated with fragmin. In 2013, she had an episode of acute pain in the left forearm, and recommendations for more diagnostic tests to rule out a potential malignant transformation of her bony tumors were declined by the patient who also refused any further diagnostic or therapeutic measures.
She was recently seen in the clinic in September 2014 and was remarkably stable despite the lack of any postoperative adjuvant therapy. On examination, she continues to have right facial droop and right hemiparesis but with intact cranial nerves II–XII. Left arm was immobile due to pain but the left leg had full strength. The patient had moderate expressive aphasia but followed requests and answered simple questions easily. There were no spasticity or contractures present. Psychiatric evaluation showed a pleasant, cooperative individual, with poor short-term memory and psychomotor slowing. The husband described typical hypothalamic gelastic seizures episodes, 2–3 brief episodes per month despite the fact that she was on seizure prophylaxis medication. She had an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in August 2014 that showed stable disease without any interval . In addition, we performed an IDH-1 mutation analysis using immunohistochemistry technique that yielded a positive result for the presence of the mutation in the specimen obtained in surgery at 2011 .