A 34-year-old Caucasian woman presented with menstrual irregularity, severe weakness of the proximal muscles in both upper and lower extremities, and 10–15 kg weight gain within a year. She had a history of hypertension which was under control by indapamide sustained-release 1.5 mg/day treatment for the past 2 years. She was single and had been working at a hospital’s management services. She had no history of smoking tobacco or alcohol consumption. She also denied exposure to any chemicals or radiation. She reported no family history of any endocrinopathies. Her mother had history of essential hypertension for the past 15 years. On examination, she was awake and oriented in time and space with no cranial nerve deficit. The proximal muscle strength of both upper and lower extremities was 3–4/5; the distal muscle strength of both upper and lower extremities was 5/5. No pathological finding was reported during an examination of upper and lower limbs’ reflexes. Her pulse was 80 beats/minute and blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg; however, she had truncal obesity even if body mass index was 28 kg/m2, moon face with plethora, thin skin, and hirsutism on her chest and abdomen. She had no striae or ecchymosis on any limb. Her chest and cardiovascular examinations revealed no abnormality. Her bone mineral density had decreased to − 3.0 SD of Z-score.
Initial laboratory tests revealed serum thyroid-stimulating hormone level of 2.94 μIU/mL (range 0.38–5.33), free T4 level of 0.68 ng/dL (range 0.6–1.2), and free T3 level of 4.04 pg/mL (range 2.6–4.4). Follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, and estradiol levels were within normal range. Basal plasma cortisol and adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) levels were 17.7 mg/dL and 58 pg/mL, respectively. Her 24-hour urine free cortisol was 874 nmol/24-hour (range < 403). Her diurnal cortisol rhythm was impaired (plasma cortisol at 23:00, 18.2 mg/dL) and after a 48-hour, 2-mg dexamethasone suppression test, plasma cortisol level was 13.6 mg/dL. The results were consistent with a diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome. We then performed a nocturnal 8-mg dexamethasone suppression test and the suppression of cortisol was not greater than 50% (21.4 to 19.3). The following night, an 8-mg dexamethasone suppression test was repeated, and the suppression of cortisol was still less than 50% (21.4 to 12.5). A pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a solid mass with well-defined margin in the anterior part of the gland, which measured approximately 12 × 7.5 mm maximum diameter, and suggested a tuberculum sellae meningioma arising from within the sellar region . A visual field test was performed due to the close relationship between the lesion and optic chiasm, but the results were normal. At admission, her potassium level was 2.9 mmol/L and intravenously administered potassium supplementation (60 mEq/day) was required daily to keep potassium levels normal. Her indapamide treatment was replaced by ramipril 5 mg once a day.
High-resolution computed tomography (CT) of her lungs, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT, 68Ga-DOTATATE PET/CT, and upper endoscopy/colonoscopy were performed to rule out any ectopic ACTH-secreting tumor and there was no pathological finding reported. A corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) test and inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS) were not performed despite the absence of any displayed pituitary tumor, because it was decided to operate on the meningioma because of its size and localization. An operation was also chosen in order to examine whether the tumor was an ACTH/CRH-secreting lesion or if there were any microadenomas that could be observed during the operation. In addition, CRH ampul is not available in our country and it may often be challenging to provide it. Finally, via an extended endoscopic endonasal approach the meningioma was resected successfully. Unexpectedly, our patient complained of nausea and vomiting postoperatively. Her plasma cortisol and ACTH levels were 2.6 mg/dL and 39 pg/mL, respectively and oral hydrocortisone treatment (20 mg/day) was initiated immediately. A histopathological examination revealed an unexpected appearance. The tumor generally consisted of a pituitary adenoma including uniform cell proliferation which was infiltrated by meningioma in small groups and storiform patterns. On immunohistochemical examination, the pituitary adenoma was strongly and diffusely stained with ACTH. Growth hormone (GH) and p53 staining was not detected; Ki67 index was approximately 2%. The meningioma cells were stained strongly with epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and progesterone receptor (PR). This staining pattern was in the form of a mirror. A biopsy was reported as a collision tumor composed of pituitary corticotroph adenoma according to the 2017 World Health Organization classification of pituitary adenoma and meningioma . Our patient maintained hydrocortisone treatment (20 mg/day) for 8 months and treatment was tapered to a stop over the final 3 months. At the latest visit, she had lost 12 kg of weight, and her hypertension, menstrual irregularity, and weakness of the proximal muscles had disappeared. A laboratory evaluation had no pathological finding including plasma ACTH level which was 30 pg/mL. Her mental and physical wellbeing were restored.