A 24-year-old primigravida was referred to the medicine department of the hospital with complaints of intermittent high-grade fever associated with chills and generalized body pain for the past 45 days. There was no other significant medical history. The patient was a home maker living in a coastal city in southern India. She had been evaluated as an inpatient for the current illness in two other healthcare facilities, with no conclusive diagnosis, before the present hospital admission.
Physical examination revealed the patient to be febrile with appreciable pallor. Per abdomen uterus size corresponded to 22 weeks of gestation. Examinations of other systems were unremarkable. Laboratory investigations revealed anaemia (haemoglobin: 7.3 g dl−1, total white blood cell count: 9290 cells mm−3, platelet count: 3.17×105 mm−3). Biochemical markers demonstrated a raised triglyceride level (3.1751 mmol l−1) and serum ferritin levels (1619 µg l−1) and normal liver function. Bone marrow biopsy showed reduced normoblastic maturation of all lineages, presence of haemophagocytes, normal granulopoiesis and normal megakaryocytes with absent iron stores.
Screening tests for autoimmune markers (rheumatoid arthritis factor, antinuclear/cytoplasmic antibodies) were negative. 2D echo showed no signs of infective endocarditis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thorax was normal study. MRI of the abdomen revealed hepatosplenomegaly and a single live intrauterine gestation. The patient was diagnosed to have HLH, as she had five of the eight criteria needed for diagnosis, which included presence of fever, splenomegaly, haemophagocytes in bone marrow, raised serum ferritin and raised triglyceride levels. Detection of soluble IL-2 receptor levels and natural killer cell activity could not be done in the patient as these tests are not performed routinely in the laboratory.
Blood culture showed growth of non-fermenting Gram-negative bacilli which were presumptively identified as species according to conventional biochemical tests but were found to be resistant to polymyxin B discs (300 units).
Blood and bone marrow samples were sent again for bacterial culture after 1 week. Colonies of non-fermenting Gram-negative bacilli grew on 5 % sheep blood agar and MacConkey agar . Even though the bacteria did not ferment lactose, the colonies on MacConkey agar appeared pink after a few days due to uptake of the dye from the medium. It was found to be delayed oxidase-positive and was identified as with 30 % probability by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight MS (MALDI-TOF MS) (VITEK MS; bioMérieux). We further found that was not present in the database of the VITEK MS system. Further identification to the species level was done by PCR-based DNA sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene (GenBank accession number OP764052) and growth of was reported. It was found to be susceptible to ceftazidime, imipenem, meropenem, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and tetracycline. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was done using the automated Vitek 2 COMPACT system (bioMérieux) with AST-N406 panel for Gram-negative bacilli, and the break points (MICs) were interpreted according to M45 CLSI (Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute) Guidelines 2018. Currently there are disc diffusion guidelines in EUCAST for interpreting susceptibility of to antimicrobial agents.
The patient was initially started on intravenous piperacillin tazobactam, as per the blood culture susceptibility report of species, which was then changed to intravenous ceftazidime 1 g 6-hourly for 2 weeks. In view of HLH, she was given intravenous dexamethasone 8 mg twice daily for 2 weeks, followed by oral dexamethasone 4 mg twice daily which was tapered and stopped over a period of 6 weeks. She received three units of packed cell transfusion as well as parenteral supplementation of iron for correction of anaemia.
The patient was counselled for termination of her pregnancy as there was severe intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) of the fetus. Following stabilization of the patient’s condition, medical termination of the pregnancy was done. The patient was symptomatically better and her fever resolved within 72 h of initiation of therapy . Considerable improvements in the clinical and laboratory parameters were observed in the first week of treatment. Hence, the intensive therapy was followed by maintenance therapy of oral trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 240 mg/1200 mg twice a day over a period of 3 months. Repeat haemoglobin testing 2 weeks later showed a raised haemoglobin level of 11.9 g dl−1.