A 76-year-old man with previous history of smoking, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, high blood pressure and alkaptonuria with ochronotic arthropathy, was referred to our hospital by edema in lower extremities and renal dysfunction. Image studies showed a papillary proliferation in the distal portion of the right ureter. The biopsy of this lesion revealed a high grade urothelial carcinoma , and the patient was treated with a right nephroureterectomy. One year later, the tumor relapsed and the patient underwent a transurethral resection (TUR) of a lesion located in the right wall of the bladder. This sample was diagnosed as a high grade urothelial carcinoma with extensive glandular differentiation. During the subsequent year, a positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) showed areas of intense uptake in the urinary bladder, in multiple pelvic lymph nodes and in a mass located in the right thoracic wall, where a surgical trocar was placed during the previous nephroureterectomy. The patient was submitted to radical cystectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy and excision of the thoracic mass.
The specimen of cystectomy showed a polypoid tumor of 10 cm diameter filling the lumen of the bladder. The tumor was implanted on the right wall, involved the right ureteral meatus and grossly extended into the paravesical adipose tissue. Macroscopically, the lesion was heterogeneous, with extensive necrotic and hemorrhagic areas. Solid areas with white-tan color were also identified . Microscopically, the tumor exhibited several components and patterns. First, an epithelial component, organized in papillary and glandular structures with tall columnar cells. These cells had clear cytoplasm and showed infra and supranuclear vacuoles, resembling endometrium or primitive intestinal epithelium. Second, an epithelial component organized in trabecular and solid patterns composed of polygonal cells with wide eosinophilic cytoplasm, central nuclei and nucleoli, similar to hepatocytes. Third, an undifferentiated stromal component with densely cellular areas composed of round, blue and small cells, intermingled with less cellular areas with myxoid stroma and nodules of chondroid tissue with atypical features. Fourth, an epithelial component with reticular and microcystic patterns, composed of atypical cells exhibiting intra and extracellular hyaline globules . All these components were admixed. Only a focal component of conventional urothelial carcinoma was identified in the neighboring area of the right ureteral meatus.
Immunohistochemistry results are listed in Table and illustrated in Fig. . Dual color fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed to explore structural or numeric alterations in the chromosome 12. We used the probes 12p13.33 Chr12pTel for the short arm of chromosome 12 (12p), and SureFISH Chr12CEP for the centromere (CEP12) (acquired from Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). According to published methods , we calculated the ratio between 12p/CEP12 signals. A ratio above 1.5 was considered indicative of an isochromosome 12 (i12p), while the presence of 3 to 7 pairs of 12p/CEP12 signals in a single nucleus, in 15% or more of the 50 tumor cells evaluated, was considered a polysomic pattern of chromosome 12. In this case, the FISH study showed a polysomic pattern of chromosome 12, but an i12p was not identified.
The thoracic mass showed a pure glandular proliferation with morphological and immunohistochemical features similar to those observed in the bladder tumor, so it was considered as a tumoral seeding along the surgical trocar path. After surgery, the patient received chemotherapy cycles with poor response, and several systemic complications. Pulmonary and brain metastasis were identified nine months after cystectomy. The patient died eleven months after diagnosis, and an autopsy was not performed.