A 20-year-old previously well female presented with progressive, severe lower backache for four years, with recent radiation to the left lower limb. The pain was relieved by rest and analgesics, aggravated on exertion, and standing long. She did not have urinary or fecal incontinence. The patient's family history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, the ankle reflex was hypoactive on the left side, and the straight leg raise test was positive. The patient had hyperalgesia in S1 dermatomal distribution. The anal tone was normal, with no perianal numbness. The rest of her examination was unremarkable. Her routine laboratory investigations were normal, including complete blood count, inflammatory markers, electrolytes, renal function, and liver function tests.
A provisional diagnosis of spinal nerve compression was made. An urgent contrast-enhanced lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was ordered. The MRI report revealed diffuse disc bulge at the L5-S1 level, causing indentation on the thecal sac. A large 32 × 15 × 14 mm heterogeneous enhancing focal lesion was found on the posterior side of L5 and S1 vertebrae in the left lateral recess with impingement of the left S1 traversing nerve root (a) with severe central canal stenosis. The underlying cause was a nerve sheath tumor (b).
A multi-disciplinary team meeting was done, and surgery was planned to preserve nerve root and sympathectomy as a permanent relief solution. The surgery was done under general anesthesia. The patient was placed in the prone position; after prepping and draping with povidone-iodine, an 8 cm skin incision was made in the Lumbosacral area (a). We reached the L5-S1 level by dissecting subcutaneous tissue and paraspinal muscle, maintaining the hemostasis with bipolar. Bilateral total laminectomy at L5-S1 was performed. A large mass was removed, preserving the nerve roots shown in b. The area was fixed with four titanium screws and titanium rods placed at L5 and S1 vertebrae . The tissue was repaired plane by plane. After surgery patient was transferred to the neurosurgery intensive care unit for the continuation of care. The recovery was uneventful.
We achieved total resection of the nerve sheath tumor without any postoperative neurological deficit. After surgery, the patient was hospitalized for a week. The backache resolved completely. The patient is following up in the neurosurgery clinic. Postoperative histopathology of the mass revealed schwannoma. 6-week follow-up showed no radiologic evidence of disease recurrence.