A 73-year-old man was admitted to our hospital due to effort dyspnoea. Since he was suffering from diabetes, dyslipidaemia, and hypertension, he was taking Irbesartan, Amlodipine, Aspirin, Rosuvastatin, Tamsulosin, Sitagliptin, and Ipragliflozin at the time of admission. Upon admission, the patient was alert and conscious, with a blood pressure of 151/53 mmHg, heart rate 39 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. No murmur and no crepitations on auscultation, and no peripheral oedema. A 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed complete atrioventricular block , and chest X-ray was almost normal. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed basal thinning of the interventricular septum, dilatation of left atrium (43 mm), and preserved LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 59% with normal LV diastolic diameter (LVDd) of 50 mm . Laboratory analysis showed normal level of angiotensin-converting enzyme activity (15.0 U/L), normal cardiac troponin I (<0.006 ng/ml), and slightly elevated brain natriuretic peptide level [89.7 pg/mL (normal reference range ≤18.4 pg/mL)]. After excluding coronary artery disease by invasive coronary angiography, endomyocardial biopsy was performed: non-caseating granuloma was not identified. Three-tesla cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed diffuse patchy late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the basal interventricular septum . Furthermore, FDG-PET/CT was performed after taking a low-carbohydrate, fat-rich, and protein-permitted diet, followed by an 18 h fast and administration of heparin: no uptake in the whole-body including myocardium. Extra-cardiac involvement was not identified either by ophthalmologic, skin, or any other examinations . A permanent pacemaker had been implanted in the patient. He was not definitely diagnosed with CS because of a lack of evidence of extracardiac sarcoidosis and meeting only the following three major criteria for cardiac involvement: high-grade atrioventricular block, basal thinning of the ventricular septum, and LGE positivity. So after discussion corticosteroid was not initiated.
One year later, he became conscious of epigastric discomfort, with upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealing stomach adenocarcinoma. Before the surgery for it, re-evaluation for cardiac risk was performed. Repeated echocardiography demonstrated enlargement LV (63 mm of LVDd) and diffuse systolic dysfunction of LV wall motion (31% of LVEF) (Video 1B). After excluding the development of coronary artery disease by coronary CT angiography, FDG-PET/CT was repeated and showed abnormal focal uptake at the lateral walls of LV and hilar lymph nodes . After repeated systemic examinations, extra-cardiac involvement was not identified again. Regardless, he was clinically diagnosed to have CS because he fulfilled five major criteria including LV contractile dysfunction (<50% LVEF) and abnormally high tracer accumulation in the heart on 18F-FDG PET.
After the surgery for gastric cancer, prednisolone was orally initiated at a dose of 30 mg/day, then tapered by 5 mg/day at intervals of 4 weeks, and maintained at 5 mg/day. One year after corticosteroid initiation, echocardiography showed recovery of systolic function (Video 1C), and FDG-PET/CT showed no uptake in either the myocardium or hilar lymph nodes . The patient was asymptomatic from CS both before and after corticosteroid initiation and the clinical course remained stable throughout.