We present a 22-month-old boy with transposition of the great arteries (TGA) who underwent the arterial switch operation (ASO) in our paediatric cardiology department at the age of 3 days with excellent surgical result. Cardiac catheterization performed at the age of 13 months showed normal coronary arteries and good biventricular function.
The patient presented to our partner hospital with persistent high fever in association with skin rash, conjunctivitis, red and cracked lips, and inflammation of hands and feet. An episode of vomiting and diarrhoea was also reported. The patient appeared weary, but no focal neurological deficit was detected. He and his first-degree relatives had an episode of high fever together with a cough three months before admission. A SARS-CoV2 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay in nasopharyngeal secretions of the patient at the time of admission showed negative results, whereas a serological assay detected specific SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies. Brain natriuretic peptide and troponin levels were elevated (N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide: 9450 ng/L, normal range <320 ng/L; troponin T: 6252 ng/L, normal range <14 ng/L).
The overall initial clinical presentation was consistent with the diagnosis of KD. According to the statement from the American Heart Association, intravenous immunoglobulins, acetylsalicylic acid in therapeutic doses and prednisolone were initially administered.
Echocardiography was performed shortly after admission and did not demonstrate coronary artery changes. A follow-up echocardiography performed 11 days after the onset of symptoms showed dilatation of both coronary arteries. Ventricular function was preserved. Due to clinical deterioration and coronary dilatation, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and was treated with infliximab and steroids. This was followed by a clinical improvement. The patient was scheduled for further investigations in our paediatric cardiology department.
An electrocardiogram at the time of admission in our department was normal. Detailed assessment of the coronary arteries by echocardiography was difficult and therefore cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. This showed ectasia of both coronary arteries after its origin . The right coronary artery (RCA) had a maximum diameter of 8 × 9 mm but its origin could not be adequately displayed. All branches of the left coronary artery (LCA) were significantly dilated with a maximum diameter of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) of 4 × 7 mm. Perfusion MRI at rest showed a perfusion defect in the RCA territory . Stress perfusion was not performed due to safety reasons because rest perfusion already suggested significant ischaemia. Biventricular systolic function was normal (left ventricular ejection fraction 63% and right ventricular ejection fraction 61%). Late enhancement imaging did not demonstrate any myocardial fibrosis and there was no evidence of myocardial inflammation on T2-weighted images.
After multidisciplinary team discussion, the indication for cardiac catheterization was made, considering both, the difficulty to visualize the RCA origin and the perfusion defect. Cardiac catheterization confirmed the likely diagnosis of a proximal RCA stenosis .
Anticoagulation therapy with dicoumarol in addition to acetylsalicylic acid was started and a betablocker therapy was initiated. The patient was discharged in stable conditions. In retrospect MIS-C associated with COVID-19 was thought to be the most likely diagnosis for the overall clinical presentation.
Due to the difficulty to assess the coronary arteries on echocardiography, follow-up MRI scans were performed 7 and 13 weeks after disease onset. These investigations demonstrated a further dilatation of the coronary arteries compared to the first cardiac MRI (maximal RCA diameter 11 mm and LAD diameter 8 mm) with a stable perfusion defect, preserved biventricular systolic function and no evidence of myocardial fibrosis. No further dilatation of the coronary arteries between the two follow-up MRI scans was seen. Two brain MRIs performed in conjunction with cardiac MRI demonstrated stable mild periventricular leukoencephalopathy, enlarged perivascular spaces and some cerebral microbleeds compatible with residuals from heart surgery with heart–lung machine . No acute or recent inflammatory changes were detected.
The follow-up plan includes frequent cardiac examinations every 3 months either in our outpatient department or by a local paediatric cardiologist. Furthermore, the patient continues with long-term thromboprophylaxis as suggested in the AHA Scientific statement including both low-dose aspirin and oral anticoagulation with dicoumarol. In addition, assessment for inducible myocardial ischaemia will be performed every 6–12 months or if the patient has symptoms.