A 77-year-old male with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, reduced cardiac output (35% cardiac ejection fraction), moderate renal failure was referred for abdominal pain. At admission, his physical examination revealed regular heart rate of 80 beats/min, blood pressure of 140/70 mmHg and temperature of 36.8 °C. At history, he referred a previous EVAS procedure using the Nellix system (Endologix Inc.) carried at another hospital 17 months before.
The angio-CT scan confirmed the previous EVAS procedure and showed a type Is2 endoleak below the right renal artery resulting in a 2.5 cm aortic blister and contrast medium filling the space between the aortic wall and the endobags . In addition, a 26 mm maximal diameter left internal iliac artery and an occluded left renal artery were evident .
The patient was considered unfit for conventional open surgery and an endovascular approach was chosen. Different endovascular options have been employed to address such complication, but considering the narrow type 1A endoleak entry a coil embolization was chosen.
Under local anesthesia, a right radial access was gained and a 6Fx90cm Destination sheath (Terumo Europe, Leuven, Belgium) placed. The sheath tip was placed a few centimeters below the top of the endograft. Anteroposterior and lateral aortograms were performed using a flush catheter paced above the proximal end of the endografts to identify the type 1A endoleak origin .
The type 1A endoleak entrance was catheterized using a 5F Ber catheter (Cordis, Miami, FL) and a 0.018 microcatheter (Rebar18; Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, US) was advanced coaxially under fluoroscopic visualization into the type 1A endoleak cavity. Subsequently through the 0.018 microcatheter, two (16 mm 40 cm first and 14 mm 30 cm second) Concerto Helix Detachable Coil System (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, US) were released inside the aneurysm sac to fill the type 1A endoleak . The control angiography confirmed the type 1A endoleak sealing after coil embolization . At 6 h from the intervention the patient was asymptomatic for abdominal pain and stable laboratory tests; the patient was discharged on the 3rd postoperative day.
The 12 months CT-angiography showed complete type 1A endoleak sealing and Nellix system (Endologix Inc.) stability .