A 61-year-old male was found unresponsive at home by police. He reportedly texted his
friend stating that he was going to “hurt himself,” which prompted
his friend to call the police. His past medical history was significant for human
immunodeficiency virus infection with history of Kaposi sarcoma (recent viral load
undetectable), autism spectrum disorder, depression, and post-traumatic stress
disorder. Home medications included atorvastatin 10 milligrams (mg) daily and
Genvoya (elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, tenofovir alafenamide)
150/150/200/10 mg daily. He lived alone, smoked one-quarter pack of cigarettes a
day, and had a history of heavy alcohol use in the past. Family history was
noncontributory.
On presentation, he was afebrile, heart rate was 60 beats per minute, blood pressure
was 134/71 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), respiratory rate was 16 breaths per
minute, and oxygen saturation was 100% on room air. However, he was
unresponsive with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of three. The rest of the physical
exams was unrevealing. Laboratory testing showed acute kidney injury with a high
anion gap metabolic acidosis. We also observed a large discrepancy in lactate
measurements between the whole blood and serum samples .
His liver function test and complete blood count with differential were unremarkable.
Blood salicylate and ethanol levels were not detected, and urine drug screen was
negative. Electrocardiogram, head computed tomography and chest radiograph were
unremarkable. He was oliguric at the time and was intubated for airway
protection.
Based on his clinical presentation and the discrepancy between his whole blood and
serum lactate measurements, an EG ingestion was suspected. Urine sediment showed
calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals . Serum osmolality was measured subsequently and showed an osmolar
gap of 56. Fomepizole was started with an initial loading dose of 15 mg/kilogram
(kg) followed by an urgent four-hour hemodialysis (HD) session 3.5 hours later.
Subsequent fomepizole dosing frequency at the standard 10 milligrams (mg) per kg
(mg/kg) dose were adjusted according to his dialysis schedule. His blood EG level
after the initial HD session was 127 mg per deciliter (mg/dL).
Considering the clearance of EG via standard HD is about 150 milliliters per
minute, a three-hour session
in a 100-kg person will clear 45% of EG. Thus, an extra three-hour HD
session brought the patient’s EG level down to 71 mg/dL as predicted. He
received another four-hour HD session the next day, and his EG level went down to 31
mg/dL. His whole blood lactate level was also normalized soon after. He subsequently
recovered his kidney function, was extubated, and discharged to the in-patient
psychiatric service.