A 51-year-old female of Han Chinese ethnicity from Nanjing, Jiangsu province of China, presented at the Emergency Department of our institution (Jiangsu Second Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine) with an acute pain in the right upper quadrant of her abdomen on August 2, 2017.
The pain was colic and radiated to the back. Concomitant symptoms included nausea, vomiting and diarrhea but no fever or chills. Neither weight loss nor anorexia was observed. She was prescribed omeprazole once a day for 2 d and sent home. Although the medication gave her temporary relief from the pain, she continued to experience severe abdominal spasms.
There was no previous medical history of hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, hepatitis, tuberculosis, typhoid fever and other infectious diseases. There was also no history of trauma, surgery, blood transfusion or recent vaccination.
Physical examination revealed no abdominal lumps, jaundice or itchy skin. Tenderness was observed in the right upper quadrant with a positive Murphy’s sign. There was no rebound tenderness.
Results of routine blood and urine tests were normal. Liver function test results showed higher than normal values (alanine transaminase: 164 U/L, aspartate transaminase: 179 U/L, gamma-glutamyltransferase: 371 U/L). Levels of CA19-9 were found to be elevated at 184.1 U/mL. Levels of other tumor markers were as follows: alpha-fetoprotein: 7.53 ng/mL, carcinoembryonic antigen: 1.87 ng/mL, CA125: 12.56 U/mL, CA153: 18.54 U/mL and CA724: 1.18 U/mL.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed pathological conditions corresponding to a large cauliflower-like mass in the gallbladder. CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, Figure ) scans performed on August 4, 2017 revealed an irregularly shaped cauliflower-like lump in the gallbladder measuring 38 mm × 32 mm corresponding to malignant tumor (GBC) and multiple stones in the gallbladder. T1-weighted imaging and T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) were equisignal with low diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) signal. There was no detectable extension through the gallbladder wall or invasion of adjacent structures. The biliary system was normal with no associated hepatic lesions and no apparent liver damage or abnormalities in the cystic duct, common hepatic duct or intrahepatic ducts.