A healthy 34-year-old woman with a history of bilateral keratoconus underwent PKP in her left eye because of advanced ectasia in 1999 followed by UZS after surgery. The patient was treated with topical β–blocker and carbonic anhydrase inhibitor drops. Seven years later in 2006, trabeculectomy was performed in the left eye to control post-PKP glaucoma. In 2007, she underwent uneventful phacoemulsification with foldable hydrophilic acrylic IOL implantation (Akreos Adapt Advanced Optics [AO], Bausch and Lomb Inc., Berlin, Germany). Intraocular pressure (IOP) of the same eye became uncontrolled again, requiring Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (AGV) implantation twice within a 9-month interval after cataract surgery.
The original corneal graft was failed in 2009, requiring re-PKP, which also failed in 2013. Subsequently, she was subjected to an uncomplicated DSAEK in the left eye. In order to completely appose the lenticule to the recipient's stroma and control postoperative hypotony secondary to the AGV (considering no risk of pupillary block in an eye with aniridia), the anterior chamber was filled with air at the end of DSAEK. The patient was treated with topical betamethasone eye drops 4 times per day for 3 months which was tapered off monthly and maintained at a dose of once daily. No sign of postoperative anterior chamber inflammation was noted. Best corrected distance visual acuity (BCDVA) of the left eye was 20/600 (1.47 LogMAR) before DSAEK, which improved to 20/100 (0.699 LogMAR) and 20/50 (0.398 LogMAR) at months 2 and 4 after DSAEK, respectively.
Ten months following DSAEK, the corneal graft was clear. No sign of anterior chamber inflammation was noted, and IOP was controlled. BCDVA remained at 20/50 (0.398 LogMAR) and the patient was asymptomatic. However, slit lamp examination revealed a double semi-circular pattern of white opacification on the anterior surface of the IOL. The semi-circles consisted of white granular opacities on the lens surface. The semi-circles were attached superiorly and there was a tapering tail inferiorly .