A 63-year-old man was admitted to the Emergency Department with a 1-month history of worsening jaundice and perianal discomfort. The patient had an unremarkable medical history. He denied any medication, alcohol consumption, drug administration or unprotected sexual intercourse.
Physical examination revealed icteric skin and mucosae and a maculopapular rash on the palms, inguinal region, legs and soles . Genital lesions, such as chancre, were discarded. Proctological examination revealed a perianal gray/white area and painless nodular lesions on the superior anal canal and distal rectum. Anoscopy confirmed millimetric pale granules along the anal canal.
Liver function tests on admission showed a mixed pattern − total/direct bilirubin of 8.3/6.9 mg/dL (normal: 0.3–1 mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase of 105 IU/L (normal: <34 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase of 188 IU/L (normal: <44 IU/L) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 670 IU/L (normal: <120 IU/L). Further investigations including hepatitis A, B and C, HIV, cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr serology, ceruloplasmin, α1-antitrypsin, iron studies, smooth muscle, antinuclear and antimitochondrial antibodies were unremarkable.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed a normal liver parenchyma and biliary tree. Colonoscopy showed an indurated nodular mucosa around the rectal lumen . Histology of the biopsied rectal mucosa revealed an unspecific inflammatory cell infiltrate.
ALP levels increased to 1,355 IU/L, and the maculopapular lesions remained unresolved. Suspecting a dermatological disease with perianal manifestations, consultation by Dermatology was requested, along with serological tests for syphilis. Results showed a Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) titer of 1/256, a T. pallidum hemagglutination assay (TPHA) of 1/5,120 and a positive IgM fluorescent treponemal antibody absorbance (IgM FTA-abs). At this point, the patient mentioned one unprotected heterosexual intercourse with a shared object, 2 months before the onset of symptoms.
The patient was treated with a single dose of penicillin G benzathine (2.4 million units intramuscularly). Jaundice and the rash lesions progressively subsided. Cytolysis resolved and cholestasis gradually disappeared. IgM FTA-abs results became negative, whereas VDRL and TPHA titers decreased over time.
Response to the standard regimen for early syphilis allowed the authors to confirm the diagnosis of SH.