A 6-year-old girl with typical mucocutaneous hyperpigmentation of PJS was visited in our hospital (Amir-al-Momenin hospital, Tehran, Iran) enduring fever, loss of appetite, and abdominal pain. Her symptoms had begun one day before showing up at the clinic asking for treatment from a physician. The physical examination showed generalized abdominal tenderness without rigidity. The oral temperature was 38.2°C. There were no additional findings on physical examination and past medical history of the patient. The patient was evaluated with ultrasonography and a sausage-shape mass was found in the imaging. Accordingly, she underwent emergency laparotomy and the segment was resected. The etiologic cause of intussusception was determined to be a solitary polyp with the size of 2 × 1 cm which showed a hamartomatous feature in histopathological evaluation . Regarding the typical facial pigmentation of the patient and coexistence of intussusception due to a hamartomatous polyp, we definitely diagnosed her as a PJS case. Consequently, we found out that her only sister (an 8-year-old girl) and her father (a 35-year-old man) also had typical perioral pigmentation without any other symptoms. The father told us about the presence of similar mucocutaneous pigmentation in his father, grandfather, and two uncles. But they had no other presentations and his grandfather and one uncle died a natural death.
We decided to trace these 3 patients for probable malignancies, especially in the gastrointestinal tract. However, both the elder daughter and her father borne diffuse gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps (from the esophagus throughout the rectum) but there was no evidence of malignancy in endoscopical and histopathological evaluations .
All patients underwent annual upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, thyroid and abdominal ultrasonography (US) and abdominal computed tomography (CT). Breast US for female and testicular US for male patients were done too. Tumor markers, including CEA, a-FP, CA 19 - 9, CA 15 - 3, and CA 125 were detected. Besides, complete blood cell count (CBC) and ESR were performed every 6 months. There were no complications and evidence of malignancies during a period of 8 years. However, 9 years later, when the junior daughter was 15, she was readmitted for intussusception. One year later the elder daughter, who was 18 by then and had no symptom up to that time, was admitted for intussusception. Thereafter, the junior daughter was observed for the third time with intussusception. All those admissions were lead to emergency laparotomies, but the excised small bowel segments and coexistent hamartomatous polyps were negative for malignancies .
So far, the father and both daughters were visited in our hospital annually for probable complications and malignancies. Despite the existence of several polyps in gastrointestinal tract of these patients, the findings of US, CT studies, and laboratory tests for neoplasm of gallbladder, biliary tract, pancreas, breast and male sex cords were negative during these 14 years.