In February 2015, a 78-year-old white male was referred to us for the occurrence of a solitary rapidly growing nodule on the scalp. The nodule measured 3 cm in diameter. Clinical examination revealed a subcutaneous, bright red, ulcerated, dome-shaped lesion with irregular margins. The patient underwent an intervention of surgical excision, covering the substance loss with a skin graft from the left inguinal region. Subsequently, accurate haemostasis and suture were performed, and a compressive medication was applied. The histopathology described an ulcerated undifferentiated malignant neoplasm consisting of cells of different dimension and high mitotic index. The immunohistochemistry showed a weak positivity for S-100 and HMB45, negativity for CK, and moderate positivity for CD68. The surgical margins were clear and the diagnosis was atypical fibroxanthoma.
After a month from the surgery, in May 2015, a new nodule appeared in correspondence of the graft, suggesting a recurrence . Considering disease relapse and the rarity of atypical fibroxanthoma, a histopathological revision of the case was requested. The second pathology report described a subcutaneous malignant neoplasm with spindle cells and pleomorphic epithelioid cells, with necrosis and atypical mitosis. De novo immunohistochemistry showed positivity for S-100 and ML actine, focal for HMB45 and MART-1, negativity for P63. Immunohistochemistry revision revealed negativity for CD68 and focal positivity for pan-CK and HMB45. This analysis suggested a diagnosis of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, but it has not excluded an acromial melanoma with aberrant ML actine expression.
A local treatment with ECT has been performed in the region of the cutaneous relapse using a Cliniporator® EPS-02 produced by IGEA®. The procedure is reported following the guidelines by Campana et al. . Electroporation was performed after 8 minutes from the end of slow bleomycin intravenous infusion (Bleomycin TEVA, 28500 IU-15000 IU/m2 of body surface area, diluted in 100 cc of physiologic solution in 15 minutes). The patient underwent a general anesthesia (deep sedation with Propofol—Diprivan®) before an adjustable linear needle electrode by IGEA® was introduced into the tumor mass at a depth of 15 mm; also, a safety margin of 1 cm was treated around it. A series of 8 pulses of 1000 V/cm was delivered at a frequency of 5 kHz and duration of 100 microseconds, as recommended by ESOPE guidelines . In order to guarantee that the tumor received a sufficient amount of bleomycin, the treatment was completed within 15 minutes after the end of the infusion. A sterile plate medication was finally applied on the treatment site. The patient did not report residual pain and did not have any kind of complication. Four weeks after ECT treatment, the mass diminished in diameter and appeared completely necrotized . Eight weeks after treatment, all that remained was an eschar that detached, leaving an erythematous zone of reepithelialization . This area disappeared within three months, with a complete restitutio ad integrum .