A 45-year-old man with an unremarkable past medical history was transported to our hospital complaining of acute onset of dyspnea and fever during the COVID-19 pandemic. The patient had been healthy until going to bed. Several hours later, the patient awoke with a feeling of breathlessness; an ambulance was called when there was no sign of improvement.
The patient was an ex-smoker, and had been taking no medications. On examination, the patient was alert and fully oriented; his temperature was 38.1 °C, blood pressure was 146/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 117 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 30 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 90% with 15 L oxygen via a mask with a non-rebreathing reservoir. The patient could not lie on his back, and was breathing in a sitting position and diaphorating. There was no jugular vein dilatation or peripheral edema.
Due to concerns about COVID-19 transmission, the patient was examined with full PPE under negative pressure from the beginning of his treatment, where auscultation was avoided because of facility rule based on concern of contact infection. The laboratory data showed no significant changes except for mild elevation of lactate and high-sensitivity troponin I . Portable chest X-ray showed no typical pulmonary edema, but indicated decreased permeability predominantly in the right lung . Point of care ultrasound (POCUS) revealed bilateral multiple B-lines and hyperdynamic contractions, which showed a visual ejection fraction (EF) of 50% and no regional wall motion abnormality. On the echocardiogram (ECG), no ST changes, negative T waves, or arrhythmias were noted. Computed tomography of the chest showed ground glass opacity with diffuse lobular septal wall thickening .
Based on the history of acute onset respiratory failure without respiratory symptoms, the patient was suspected to have acute hypertensive heart failure. However, because of the pandemic, COVID-19 could not be ruled out as the cause of respiratory failure.
The patient was treated with blood pressure lowering medication and was admitted to the depressurized room in the intensive care unit; however, when the patient was placed in the supine position for central venous catheter insertion, his oxygenation worsened and he could not maintain his blood pressure. After tracheal intubation, the cause of the shock was investigated. When an echocardiogram with Doppler was performed, a severe mitral valve regurgitation (MR) was revealed . In addition, based on transesophageal echocardiography, the cause of acute MR and respiratory failure was determined to be mitral valve tendon rupture . The first polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was negative.
The patient was referred to cardiovascular surgery, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was administered to maintain his hemodynamics. Due to high suspicion of COVID-19, two negative PCR are required. On the third day after admission, mitral valvuloplasty was performed. Surgical findings showed no evidence of endocarditis in the mitral valve, and no bacteria were cultured from blood or tissue cultures. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic mitral chordae tendineae rupture. He was discharged from the hospital 14 days after surgery, without complications.