He was born by Cesarean section at 38 weeks of gestation, following an uncomplicated pregnancy, to a 21 year old mother and a 26 year-old father. The birth weight (3.02 kg, 25-50 centile) and head circumference (34.9 cm, 50-75 centile) were both normal, but the birth length of 44.4 cm was below the fifth centile. Dysmorphic features and microphthalmia of the right eye were noted at birth. An ocular prosthetic was placed at ~3 months of age.
He has a history of developmental delay beginning at 4 months of age when failed to achieve milestones (he did not roll over). At this time, vocalization was normal and object tracking was mildly impaired. He had a weak grip, significant central hypotonia, decreased muscle bulk, and head lagging. At the time of exam (1 year) he uses only one, non-specific word (‘dada’). He cannot sit up independently or crawl, but can “scoot”.
Weight 6.24 kg (<3rd centile); length 67 cm (<3rd centile); head circumference 44.1 cm (5th centile); anterior fontanelle not fused (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm).
Wight microphthalmia, micrognathia, wide nasal bridge, thick hair, low anterior hairline, two posterior hair whorls, long and prominent eyelashes, sacral hypertrichosis, small palpebral fissures which are down-slanted with telecanthus, tapered fingers, 3–4 partial left-hand syndactyly, mild pectus excavatum, and small feet and hands .
Normal karyotype (46, XY), SNP-CMA. Normal spinal canal ultrasound at 4 months of age, ruling out neural tube defects, and an abdominal ultrasound which ruled out gross malformations of the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, and kidneys. No brain MRI has been performed.
The family history is unremarkable except for a paternal half-brother who was born with a unilateral dysplastic kidney. Two other paternal half-siblings and one full sibling are healthy, as are the parents. Consanguinity is denied.
He receives weekly physical and occupational therapies (started at 5 months). Substantial gains have been made in the domains of motor functioning and expressive language.
Exome Sequencing was performed in the UCLA Molecular Diagnostics Laboratories using clinically validated protocols. The proband and both parents were sequenced in each case (trio analysis). All genes harboring de novo, homozygous or compound heterozygous variants with allele frequencies <1% in the general population were evaluated by a Genomics Data Board consisting of physicians, pathologists, clinical geneticists, laboratory directors, genetic counselors, and informatics specialists. See Additional file for a detailed description of the bioinformatic methods used for exome sequencing analysis. Variant Annotator X (VAX) was used for rich annotation of DNA variants as previously described .
Criteria for high confidence for de novo variants was: quality score >=Q500 in each individual ; variant observed in <2 reads in any individual parent; variant not observed in the general population. Clinically significant variants were confirmed using PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing of the proband and both parents (Additional file ).