A 6-year-old girl diagnosed with NF1 presented at our hospital with gradual visual loss in the right eye. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 OD and 20/20 OS. Iris Lisch nodules were found in both eyes. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 12 mmHg in the right eye and 13 mmHg in the left eye. In addition, no iris rubeosis, inflammation or relative afferent pupillary defect was observed in either eye. Severe retinal vascular abnormalities with tortuous-vessel form and optic disc pallor were observed in the right fundus . Ultra-widefield fluorescein angiography revealed multiple sites of neovascularization and a large non-perfusion area in the peripheral retina . Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) showed vascular abnormalities with changed blood flow signal in the superficial and deep retinal layers in the right eye . Laser speckle flowgraphy (LSFG) showed that the averaged mean blur rate (MBR) of the right optic nerve head region was 28.7% lower than that of the left eye (MBR values; R = 18.6, L = 26.1), and that the chorioretinal blood flow was substantially decreased in the right eye . No abnormal findings were observed in the left eye .
Cerebral angiography revealed the right ophthalmic artery was significantly narrowed throughout . In addition, Magnetic resonance (MR) angiography revealed that the right internal carotid artery was significantly narrowed in the ophthalmic segment . In addition, the patient’s right ophthalmic arteries originated from the middle meningeal artery, not from the internal carotid artery, as they normally do . We diagnosed ocular ischemic syndrome with retinal vascular abnormalities resulting from a unilateral ocular artery and internal carotid artery stenosis in NF1.
We examined the treatment while observing for a time. We also examined the possibility of surgical intervention by a neurosurgeon, but concluded that direct intervention on the ophthalmic artery was impossible. After a while, iris rubeosis appeared in the right eye. Since IOP subsequently increased to 35 mmHg and neovascular glaucoma with slight vitreous hemorrhage developed, treatment with panretinal photocoagulation (160–180 mW, total 3241 shots; NIDEK GYC1000, NIDEK CO., LTD., Aichi, Japan) was performed, after intravitreal bevacizumab injection (0.5 mg), twice within 6 months. After 2 treatments, IOP normalized to 10 mmHg, but BCVA decreased to 20/100 OD. A significant portion of the vascular abnormalities disappeared, but some remained in the fundus photograph and OCTA en-face images . OCTA B-scan image showed a decrease in blood flow signals in the superficial and deep retinal layers . In addition, retinal neovascularization disappeared . In LSFG after treatment, the average MBR in the optic nerve head region decreased by 62.7% compared with the left eye (MBR values; R = 9.4, L = 28.7). A marked decrease in chorioretinal blood flow was also confirmed on the LSFG image .
Although stenosis of the internal carotid artery was observed, there was no left-right difference or abnormality in cerebral blood flow on arterial spin labeling . Therefore, careful follow-up, while taking antiplatelet medication (50 mg of aspirin daily), is currently being conducted with neurosurgeons.