A 10-year-old girl of cypriot origin was referred to hospital because of fever and ulcers in the genital area. Three days before admission she started having fever, sore throat, and mild dry cough. A quick pharyngeal test for group A streptococcal antigen was found negative. On day 3 after the onset of fever, she developed intense pain and burning in her genital area for which she was admitted to our hospital.
On admission, she had fever and cough but no diarrhea or abdominal pain. On examination, painful ulcers of variable depth and diameter with elevated violaceous borders located inside the labia majora were noted . No oral ulcers or swollen lymph nodes were detected. She was not sexually active and had no previous history of similar ulcers. She was initially treated with intravenously administered antibiotics and local wound care with antiseptics.
Cultures from the lesions were negative for bacteria. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the tissue for HSV was also negative. Antibodies against HSV1 and HSV2, antinuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (dsDNA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)-proteinase (PR3), and ANCA-myeloperoxidase (MPO) were all negative. Four days after admission the lesions significantly improved with local treatment, but her fever and cough persisted. A chest X-ray revealed a right-sided pneumonia . Orally administered azithromycin was added as a treatment agent and 2 days later she became afebrile. Mycoplasma immunoglobulin M (IgM), as measured by a semi-quantitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method on day 11 after onset of symptoms, was found to be highly positive. Three weeks later, Mycoplasma IgM titer was also found positive but at a lower titer. Real-time PCR for M. pneumoniae in nasopharyngeal secretions was positive and strongly positive in two consecutive sputum specimens. However, PCR for Mycoplasma in the tissue specimen from the genital lesions was found negative.
For the detection of the bacteria, a duplex real-time PCR assay was employed targeting the Community Acquired Respiratory Distress Syndrome (CARDS) toxin gene of M. pneumoniae and the major outer membrane protein gene of Chlamydia pneumoniae. In addition, the respiratory samples were tested for a panel of respiratory viruses without yielding a positive result: influenza A and B, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), rhinovirus, parainfluenza viruses 1 to 4, adenovirus, human metapneumovirus, human bocavirus, enterovirus, and human coronaviruses 229E, OC43, and NL63. During a 2-year follow-up after hospital discharge, she had no recurrence of the ulcers.