A 16-year-old previously healthy Caucasian female presented with fatigue, nausea and weight loss of 10 kg over a three month period. She had no fever, night sweats, myalgia, arthralgia, rash or pulmonary symptoms. There was no history of sick contacts or recent travel. Apart from visible fatigue and clinically apparent weight loss, her physical examination revealed normal cardiopulmonary exams, and no hepatosplenomegaly, arthritis or skin findings. Initial laboratory studies revealed a white blood count of 7.2 K/cumm, hemoglobin of 12.1 g/dl, hematocrit of 36.4 %, platelets of 315 K/cumm with normal absolute numbers of neutrophils and lymphocytes. Chemistries were notable for total serum calcium of 13.1 mg/dl (reference 8.6-10.3 mg/dl), ionized calcium of 6.16 mg/dl (reference 3.9-5.2 mg/dl), and creatinine of 1.2 mg/dl. Her phosphorus and magnesium were within normal limits. The urine calcium to creatinine ratio was elevated with a ratio of 0.85. These results were followed with additional testing showing an intact parathyroid hormone of 5 pg/mL (reference 14–72 pg/ml), elevated 1–25 Vitamin D level of 168 ng/ml (reference 24–86 pg/ml) and an elevated angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level of 268 Units/L (reference 10–55 Units/L). These findings raised concern for granulomatous disease. A broad infectious evaluation for tuberculosis (by PPD and Quantiferon), histoplasmosis, blastomyces, syphilis, and trichinella were negative. Stool calprotectin was negative. A chest radiograph was negative for lymphadenopathy or parenchymal changes. A contrasted CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis also showed no lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly. A bone marrow biopsy showed hypocellular marrow with erythroid hyperplasia, but absence of malignancy or granulomas. Other serologies showed antinuclear antibody (ANA) positive titer of 1:320 in speckled pattern and negative anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). She was given intravenous hydration up to 3 L/m2 of body surface area to maintain a normal calcium level.
During her evaluation, the patient continued to be symptomatic from hypercalcemia with fatigue, nausea and vomiting and had progressive normocytic anemia to a nadir of hemoglobin 9.1 g/dl with elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 31 mm/h (reference < 20 mm/h). A repeat physical examination revealed soft tissue enlargement with a firm consistency bilaterally in the lower extremities distal to the knees . There were no overlying skin changes or tenderness to palpation. Strength and deep tendon reflexes of the extremities were preserved. Plain radiographs and ultrasound showed soft tissue enlargement and muscular hypertrophy respectively without focal changes or calcifications. Laboratory testing for myositis showed creatine kinase of 23 Units/L (reference < 300 Units/L), aldolase 5.7 Units/L (reference < 14.7 Units/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 177 Units/L (reference 100–200 Units/L) and normal serum transaminases. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the bilateral lower extremities revealed extensive myositis involving every muscle in both legs . There was a mass-like area in the lateral head of the left gastrocnemius muscle . Needle electromyography (EMG) showed fibrillations and positive sharp waves in the right medial gastrocnemius and myopathic polyphasic potentials with mild early recruitment compatible with myopathy. Nerve conduction studies were normal. A biopsy was obtained with gross tissue intraoperatively described as pale and edematous. Microscopy showed a destructive macrophage-rich process with well-formed non-necrotizing granulomas, numerous giant cells and sparse residual muscle. Some giant cells contained polarizable crystalline material most compatible with calcium oxalate . Special studies were employed to exclude Langerhans cell histiocytosis and infection with fungal or acid fast organisms. A slip lamp and dilated eye exam did not demonstrate uveitis. Spirometry including lung volume and diffuse lung capacity were normal. Echocardiogram showed no abnormalities. Based on her clinical symptoms, pathology findings, and the exclusion of other causes, the diagnosis of sarcoidosis was made. She was initiated on a prednisone taper and weekly subcutaneous methotrexate at 15 mg/m2, with improvement in her symptoms of fatigue and nausea and normalization of her calcium and ACE levels. However, due to difficulty weaning off steroids, adalimumab 40 mg every 2 weeks was added three months after diagnosis with sustained improvement.