A 39-year-old South Asian man presented in July 2020 with a 1-month history of back pain radiating to both thighs. Physical examination revealed lower thoracic spine tenderness and grade 3/5 lower limb weakness. Upon further evaluation, magnetic resonance imaging of the spine revealed evidence of lower thoracic spinal cord compression, so he underwent urgent posterior stabilization from T6 to L1 and decompression from T8 to T10, and he had a good neurological outcome. Further investigations, including serum protein electrophoresis and BM examination, revealed IgA MM. Unfortunately, cytogenetic analysis was not performed at diagnosis, and the patient was treated with daratumumab plus lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone for six cycles. The treatment regimen was well tolerated, and he achieved complete remission. He then underwent ASCT as consolidation therapy for MM. The conditioning regimen was a melphalan-based regimen. He tolerated ASCT well and thereafter continued maintenance therapy with lenalidomide 10 mg daily for 21 days every 28 days. However, in August 2023 (almost 3 years after the MM diagnosis), during a routine physical examination, the patient reported a painless swelling of the left scrotum that had persisted for 2 months. A physical examination revealed an enlarged left testis measuring approximately 7 × 4 cm. Laboratory tests , including complete blood count and renal function tests, were within normal limits. Serum protein electrophoresis showed a faint monoclonal band of free light-chain lambda (FLCL), while 24-h urine electrophoresis revealed an elevated FLCL level of 100 mg/24 h, serum free light-chain kappa of 16 mg/L, and FLCL of 191 mg/L with a kappa/lambda ratio of 0.08. Alpha-fetoprotein and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin were within normal limits.
An ultrasound examination of the testis showed an enlarged left testis with a maximum size of 7.2 × 3.9 cm. The testis had a heterogeneous tissue matrix, was predominantly hypoechoic, and had markedly increased vascularity . In view of the concerned ultrasound findings, a whole-body FDG positron emission tomography/computed tomography was performed. The results revealed heterogenous increased metabolic activity in the left testis, which was enlarged . Histopathological examination of the testicular tissue showed infiltration of the testis with sheets of PCs (with plasmablastic morphology), which was positive for CD138 with aberrant expression of CD56 and showed lambda light-chain restriction.
The concurrent BM examination was negative for PC neoplasms with less than 1% polyclonal PCs. Based on the above findings, an MM relapse with testicular EMD was concluded. The patient received four cycles of the combination protocol: carfilzomib, daratumumab, and dexamethasone. Unfortunately, his myeloma was refractory, and he progressed with cutaneous nodules involving the scalp, trunk, and lower limbs. A new positron emission tomography scan revealed cutaneous infiltration, pathological retroperitoneal lymph nodes, and multiple new bony lesions, confirming disease progression.