A 12-year-old boy of Arabic ethnicity, with good school performance, previously medically free and not on any medical treatment, and belonging to a middle class family with no known medical or inherited diseases in family history, presented to our emergency room accompanied by his parents complaining of moderate-to-severe abdominal pain in the epigastric region of the abdomen for 1 day prior to presentation to the emergency room.
According to the patient and his mother, on the morning of presentation to our emergency room, the pain migrated and became more prominent in the lower right abdomen. He also developed recurrent vomiting and diarrhea episodes from the start of his illness episode, 1 day prior to his presentation to our emergency room, along with anorexia and feeling of fatigue; no fever was documented, but he had episodes of chills. On inquiring from mother, the patient had no recent history of upper respiratory tract infection and had no previous medical conditions or surgical interventions.
On physical examination, the patient was conscious, alert, and oriented, with no neurological deficit; he seemed ill and slightly dehydrated (with dry eyes and skin), and he was in pain. His vital signs showed a low-grade fever of 37.2 °C, pulse rate of 95 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg. His weight was 43 kg, and height was 152 cm.
On throat examination, he had no throat congestion nor enlarged tonsils. On chest examination, he had resonant chest, equal air entry at both lungs, and no wheezes or crackles. On abdominal physical examination, he was found to have generalized abdominal guarding and lower abdominal tenderness, with the most prominent tenderness in the lower right abdomen, and positive rebound tenderness in right iliac fossa. Other signs of appendicitis, such as Rovsing’s, psoas, and obturator signs, were not elicited, as the patient was in severe pain and withdrawing from any physical examination. A digital rectal examination was not performed, as the patient did not have constipation or blood in his stool, hence, in view of the clinical scenario, a digital rectal examination was thought to not add additional value in diagnosis.
Keeping in mind possible differential diagnosis of patient presentation in this case, gastroenteritis, mesenteric lymphadenitis, Meckel’s diverticulum, pyelonephritis or nephrolithiasis, typhilitis, testicular torsion, and acute appendicitis remain on the top of the list to prove or rule out, hence, further investigations were done accordingly .
The laboratory results were significant for leukocytosis (12.14 × 109 cells/L) with neutrophilia (80.4%). His hemoglobin was 12.4 g/dL, and CRP was only 3.0 mg/dL; his blood urea nitrogen/creatinine and electrolytes were normal.
An abdominal ultrasound revealed enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes, but the appendix could not be visualized due to bowel gases.
A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis was performed, which showed an inflamed and thickened appendix measuring 1.1 cm in diameter, with mild free fluid in the pouch of Douglas. The findings were suggestive of acute appendicitis changes. The appendix was localized retrocecal, but the cecum was at the midline, and the tip of the appendix was seen at the left side of the urinary bladder.
Enlarged reactive mesenteric lymph nodes .
The patient was admitted to the hospital and was started on intravenous (IV) fluids and intravenous antibiotics; he received ceftriaxone 1 g IV every 12 h, metronidazole 500 mg IV every 8 h, and was prepared for surgery.
The patient underwent a laparoscopic exploration, and the surgical findings showed free pus collections at the pelvis, the right paracolic gutter, around the liver, and in between bowel loops/generalized peritonitis. The cecum and ascending colon were found to be pushed to left abdomen, adjacent to the descending and sigmoid colon, and the appendix tip was found to be in the left side of the pelvis to the left of the bladder and was inflamed, especially distally at the tip, measuring up to 1.2 cm in diameter, approximately, with a healthy-looking base arising from the cecum. .
The trocars were placed as follows: a infraumbilical 10 mm trocar for camera port and a 5 mm trocar inserted through the incision at suprapubic area and another 10 mm trocar inserted through the incision at the right iliac fossa (in a regular right-sided appendix, this port is usually placed at the left iliac fossa); the monitor was placed on the left side of the patient and the surgeon and assistant on the right side.
The appendix was dissected and ligated at the base using an endoloop and then removed in an endobag. A pus swab culture was taken, and suctioning of the pus and abdominal lavage was performed, leaving a drain at the pelvis and another drain at the subhepatic and right paracolic area, where pus collections were found.
Postsurgery, the patient recovered well; he passed flatus on the second postoperative day and tolerated an oral soft diet. The drains were removed on the third postoperative day, and the patient was discharged home in good condition on the fourth postoperative day.
The histopathological result of the removed appendix revealed acute suppurative appendicitis and periappendicitis, which was negative for malignancy, and the pus culture had no growth.
Postdischarge from the hospital, the patient returned to the clinic accompanied by his parents after 1 week and was doing well clinically with no complaint. No wound infection developed. No further visits to the hospital or clinic related to his surgical condition were required since that date.