A 59-year-old Vietnamese woman presented to the emergency department (ED) following a motor vehicle accident (MVA) post-syncopal episode in the setting of recent gastrointestinal illness. She had no preceding pre-syncope, palpitations, chest pain, or dyspnoea. No urinary incontinence or tongue biting was evident. There was vomiting and abdominal pain for 2 days prior, without fevers or diarrhoea. She received her first COVID-19 (Pfizer) vaccine 2 weeks prior to the MVA. At ED triage, her heart rate was 114 beats per min, oxygen saturation was 98% on room air, her respiratory rate was 16, her blood pressure was 120/77, and she was afebrile. She was alert, oriented, euvolaemic, and had no murmurs on examination.
Her medical history was significant for thalassaemia. Otherwise, she had no known cardiovascular risk factors and no prior history of seizures or significant family history.
Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) (as seen in ) in ED showed Q waves, fixed ST elevation anteriorly, and low QRS voltages. Cardiac troponin I was 24 000 (normal range <12). Inflammatory markers were mildly elevated—c-reactive protein 10 and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 12. Her chest x-ray was unremarkable, apart from a calcified granuloma in the right apex.
Her first TTE at 20 h (seen in , ) demonstrated normal left ventricle (LV) size; moderate-severe global systolic dysfunction; and ejection fraction (EF) ∼30% by visual estimation. There was mild concentric increase in wall thickness and severely reduced tissue Doppler velocities. There was normal right ventricle (RV) size and function. Mild-mod aortic regurgitation and a moderate pericardial effusion were observed. The patient deteriorated overnight with symptomatic hypotension and bradycardia to 30 beats per minute. The ECG as seen in revealed high grade atrioventricular block and a left bundle branch block. The initial TTE findings, in addition to worsening AV block, led to the patient being commenced on an isoprenaline infusion and transfer to the coronary care unit. The patient had an expedited Cardiologist review the next morning (initial TTE performed at midnight) which resulted in expedited permanent pacemaker insertion.
The next day, the patient was persistently hypotensive to a systolic blood pressure of 60 mmHg, became oliguric and was commenced on a dopamine infusion. She had conscious, symptomatic episodes of brief accelerated idioventricular rhythm noted on telemetry. She was transferred to the intensive care unit for management of persistent hypotensive shock.
TTE on day 4 (as seen in , ) revealed severe LV dysfunction, an EF of 10% with global hypokinesis, severely impaired RV systolic function, and a dilated inferior vena cava. Right heart function was limited to visual assessment only on subsequent TTEs due to limited imaging windows available and significant difficulties in obtaining on axis imaging. Based on the clinical course and TTE findings, a decision was made to proceed to endomyocardial biopsy (EMB).
On day 4, an EMB revealed florid infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes, fewer plasma cells, and scattered eosinophils, which was associated with marked oedema and cardiomyocyte necrosis. There were occasional poorly formed granulomas consisting of loose aggregates of epithelioid histiocytes and a few multinucleated macrophages with foamy appearing cytoplasm. In summary, these features were consistent with giant cell myocarditis.
Notably, no coronary angiogram was performed due to the patient’s history, clinical assessment, and imaging investigations being more supportive of a myocarditis or infiltrative pathology rather than an acute coronary syndrome (ACS). The patient had minimal risk factors for coronary artery disease and the presentation was atypical for ACS—no chest pain, with syncope and arrhythmia as the presenting complaint. The global hypokinesis of the LV on the TTE could not be accounted for by a single coronary artery occlusion. The TTE also demonstrated increased LV wall thickness and markedly reduced tissue Doppler velocities—which again were more consistent with infiltration. The patient’s clinical instability also dictated that the treating team perform only those procedures that will give the most benefit to the patient for the highest diagnostic yield. A coronary angiogram was not felt to give any benefit at the time for the reasons outlined above.
The patient’s case was reviewed by the Immunology, Intensive Care, and Cardiology team and was subsequently commenced on intravenous 1 g methylprednisone daily and 100 mg cyclosporin twice daily. Despite these measures, the patient developed progressively worsening lactic acidosis and was intubated. The patient was transferred to a cardiac transplant centre.
A biventricular assist device was inserted, complicated by haemorrhage and coagulopathy requiring massive transfusion and a thoracic washout. Whilst there was some recovery of biventricular function with immunosuppression, the patient’s overall progress was complicated by progressive multiorgan failure with hepatic encephalopathy, anuric renal failure requiring dialysis, distal ischaemia of all limbs with digital gangrene, and presumed bowel ischaemia. Immune thrombocytopaenia developed which was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin and plasma exchange. Polymicrobial sepsis with Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteraemia and Candidaemia was treated with meropenem, vancomycin, and caspofungin.
On day 18, the LV assist device was explanted during a redo-sternotomy and a tissue aortic valve replacement was performed due to severe aortic valve insufficiency. The RV assist device was explanted percutaneously on day 25. A cerebral infarction in the anterior and right middle cerebral artery territory was seen on a computed tomography scan on day 25, and the patient was unresponsive off sedation. The prognosis of functional recovery in the setting of severe multi-organ dysfunction was poor. After a family meeting on day 27, the decision was made to palliate, and the patient passed away on the same day.