A 14-year-old Chinese girl presented to our A&E department with a clear slowdown of body functions. Vital parameters showed bradycardia with a heart rate (HR) of 50 beats/minute and hypotension with a systolic blood pressure (BP) of 80 mmHg and a diastolic BP of 60 mmHg. At presentation weight was 62.5 kg and she had a final height of 158 cm, within her family range. Body mass Index was 25 kg/m2, compatible with overweight. At physical examination we noticed muscle pseudo-hypertrophy of the lower limbs. No goitre was detected by palpation. The patient referred menarche at age 12 years, irregular menstrual cycles during the previous 6 months followed by amenorrhea in the last 3 months, fatigue over the last 4 months, episodes of intermittent diplopia, cold intolerance, constipation, myalgia and poor school performance.
Biochemical and endocrine examinations on admission and after starting replacement therapy are reported in .
HT was confirmed biochemically: severe hypothyroidism was detected associated with positive antithyroid-peroxidase and antithyroglobulin antibodies. Anemia, high levels of total cholesterol (237 mg/dl, NL: 130-200 mg/dl), triglycerides (254 mg/dl, NL: 30 - 180 mg/dl), ALT, AST, CPK LDH and serum creatinine were found. Progressive normalisation of these data was observed on treatment with Levo-thyroxine . Vitamin D deficiency was also present. Screening for other autoimmune diseases, such as coeliac disease and Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus was performed and was negative, as well as anti-nucleus antibodies, anti-liver, anti-kidney, anti-muscle, anti-neutrophil cytoplasm and anti Saccaromyces Cerevisiae antibodies. Insulin basal levels were high (23 μU/ml, NL:3-20) with a fasting glucose/insulin ratio of 4.2 and a HOMA-IR index of 5.51 (NL: 0.23-2.5) compatible with insulin resistance . Basal PRL levels were within the normal range (16 ng/ml, NL:3-30 ng/ml).
On admission, the thyroid ultrasound showed a normal size of the gland (right lobe 16 x 14 mm and left lobe 11 x 15 mm) and a dyshomogeneous aspect compatible with chronic autoimmune thyroiditis.
The electrocardiogram showed low voltage sinus bradycardia (HR:50 beats/minute), aspecific changes in ventricular repolarization with a right cardiac conduction delay.
On transthoracic echocardiography, pericardial effusion of moderate entity with minor signs of hemodynamic impairment were observed .
The MRI scan of the pituitary gland and hypothalamus showed a normal morphology, with no signs of pathological enhancement. The ventricular system was normal with the description of a 26 mm cyst in the temporal-mesial left lobe.
A complete ultrasound of the abdomen was performed ruling out the presence of NAFLD.
A pelvic ultrasound showed bilateral ovarian cysts, compatible with polycystic ovarian morphology (PCOM). A subsequent pelvic US, performed after thyroid hormones had normalised and menses had turned to be regular, showed normal ovarian features.
Electromyography (EMG) and Electroneurography (ENoG) were performed after thyroid function had normalised on L-thyroxine replacement therapy. EMG was normal, but ENoG showed chronic sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy of the lower limbs compatible with longstanding hypothyroidism. MRI of the lumbar spine was performed to exclude other causes of neuropathy and was negative.
During hospitalization, the patient was started on L-thyroxine replacement therapy, initially at a dose of 25 µg, that was gradually increased to 75 µg/day. During the 10 days of admission, the patient showed a gradual global improvement in cognitive functions, muscular strength and reduction of fatigue. After five days on replacement therapy, pericardial effusion improved as well as BP and HR (mean BP: 95/60 mmHg; HR: 70 beats/minute).
After 14-days on replacement therapy, TSH levels had more than halved with thyroid hormones at the lower limit of normal . CPK, LDH, ALT/AST normalized within 2 months.