A 45-year-old obese Japanese woman presented with abdominal pain of 3 days’ duration. The pain started 3 h after eating sausages and eggs. Her medical history was only notable for uterine fibroids. She was taking no medications, supplements, or herbal remedies and no recent history of sick contacts or overseas travel. She was an occasionally drinker and had quit smoking over 20 years ago. She denied food or drug allergies.
Upon presentation, the patient was in moderate distress. Her vital signs included body temperature of 37.1 degrees, blood pressure of 112/74 mmHg, heart rate of 92 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 18 times per minute. Rebound tenderness in the right upper quadrant and Murphy’s sign were noted on physical examination. Laboratory results were significant for a white blood cell count of 19,500/mm3 (reference range: 2900–7800/mm3) and C-reactive protein of 28.9 mg/dL (reference range: < 0.30 mg/dL). Bilirubin and hepatobiliary enzymes were within their normal ranges. Computed tomography led to the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis.
Antibiotics were started and percutaneous transhepatic gallbladder drainage (PTGBD) was performed the next day, with some symptomatic relief. However, the patient complained of severe abdominal pain 2 days after admission. Her body temperature increased to 38.8 degrees Celsius. Repeated laboratory testing revealed total bilirubin of 5.3 mg/dL (reference range: 0.2–1.2 mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase of 159 U/L (reference range: 9–32 U/L), alanine aminotransferase of 205 U/L (reference range: 3–38 U/L), and alkaline phosphatase of 1118 U/L (reference range: 103–289 U/L).
Several anatomical variations were noted on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). The cystic duct joined the distal third of bile duct, suggesting low insertion of the cystic duct (LICD). A long cystic duct ran parallel to the bile duct. Furthermore, the right posterior sectoral bile duct flowed directly into the common bile duct . A 3 mm stone was impacted in the lower common bile duct (4 mm diameter) immediately below the insertion of the cystic duct . The patient was diagnosed with acute cholangitis due to an impacted common bile duct stone. The gastroenterology department was consulted.
Emergency ERCP was performed using the JF-260V duodenoscope (Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) (Additional file ). Bile duct cannulation was achieved with some difficulty, due to LICD and the parallel cystic duct. Fluoroscopy revealed a 5 mm stone in a non-dilated bile duct with LICD. Contrast was also injected from the PTGBD tube, confirming that the cystic duct ran parallel to the bile duct and overlapped with it on fluoroscopy, even when the C-arm was rotated .
After endoscopic sphincterotomy, an eight-wire stone extraction basket (MB-35-2X4-8; Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, Indiana, USA) was selected for stone extraction. After several unsuccessful attempts, we switched to a stone extraction balloon (Multi-3V Plus; Olympus), but the catheter could not be advanced beyond the impacted stone. We therefore used a biliary balloon dilator with a sharp catheter tip (Eliminator PET Biliary Balloon Dilator (8 mm × 3 cm); CONMED Corporation, Utica, New York, USA). As we feared that dilating the balloon in the narrow lower bile duct (where the stone is) could lead to bile duct perforation, we decided to inflate the balloon above the stone, to use it as a stone extraction balloon. The balloon dilator was successfully advanced into the proximal bile duct. When the balloon was inflated above the stone and pulled, the impacted stone did not budge from its initial position. The balloon was then deflated, but still could not be withdrawn from the bile duct .
The duodenoscope fell back into the stomach while trying to retract the balloon dilator, causing the shaft of the dilator to break near the ampulla . We pulled the broken tip with a snare, which caused the balloon sheath to separate from the shaft and remain in the bile duct . We finally retrieved the stone-and-balloon complex by grasping the sheath with rat-tooth forceps . A 6-French, 100 mm double-pigtail plastic stent (Hanaco Medical Co., Ltd., Saitama, Japan) was inserted at the end of the procedure.
No signs of perforation were observed in a follow-up CT taken immediately after the procedure. Analysis of extracted stone revealed that it was composed of pure cholesterol. Laboratory markers showed marked improvement the next day and the post-treatment course was uneventful. The patient underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy 3 months later, with no complications. During surgery, the long cystic duct running parallel to the common bile duct could be confirmed . MRCP taken after discharge revealed that 4 cm of the cystic duct remained after surgery. No stones were observed in the bile duct or cystic duct.