A 29-year-old male with no relevant medical history was transported to our hospital twice for tonic–clonic seizures. Although he had no history of head/spinal trauma or surgery, he reported a 1-week history of generalized dull headache that was not orthostatic. On arrival at the hospital, his consciousness level was E4V5M6 on the Glasgow Coma Scale, with no abnormal neurological findings. Laboratory test results were negative for autoantibodies, coagulation disorders, infectious diseases, and tumor markers, and the possibility of a hypercoagulable state was excluded.
A head computed tomography scan performed after arrival at the hospital showed a low-density area in the left frontal lobe . Although no fresh infarction was detected , subsequent head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a left frontal lesion and a small subdural hematoma , without diffuse dural thickening, cerebellar tonsillar herniation, or enlargement of the pituitary gland [-]. Furthermore, gadolinium-enhanced MRI showed the contrast effect of the pia mater along the superior frontal sulcus [-]. Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) showed that the main cerebral venous sinuses were patent . A lumbar puncture performed on the admission day could not yield an opening pressure because we experienced “dry tap,” although we used X-ray fluoroscopic guidance.
The patient underwent open biopsy on the 5th day of admission because the imaging findings were suggestive of malignant brain tumors. After craniotomy, we had to change his head position from 15 to 20 cm above the heart to 0 cm and perform a tack-up suture in a hurry because we noticed that the dura mater separated away from the skull spontaneously and steadily because of low intracranial pressure [ and ]. A dural incision led to the recognition of regional cortical vein thrombosis [ and ]. No peculiar infection or malignant findings were noted in the pathological specimen. Based on these surgical findings, the patient was diagnosed with CVT following SIH.
Hydration and bed rest gradually improved his headache. A lumbar puncture performed 20 days after admission demonstrated an opening pressure of 170 mmH2O, and he was discharged on the 33rd day of hospitalization with no neurological deficits.