A 31-year-old male proband presented with back pain accompanied by weakness and numbness in both lower limbs. The proband’s parents were not consanguineous, and the mother was not exposed to radiation or toxic chemicals during pregnancy. There were no similar symptoms or signs in the proband’s family. The patient had been delivered at term and was within the normal ranges for height and weight at birth. Signs of his illness first appeared at age 5 years, with obviously enlarged finger and toe joints. At the age of 10, he had bilateral knee pain and was unable to walk normally. At that time, he was shorter than his peers, and he received no more schooling. At the age of 12, he was admitted to a local hospital. The diagnosis of JIA was considered, and he received anti-rheumatic drug treatment for a long period, developing limited mobility of the limbs. Five years prior to the current visit, after a minor trauma, the patient’s femoral shaft was fractured, and after 2 years of internal fixation of the lower extremity, he was able to walk without assistance. Two years ago, he developed numbness and weakness in both lower limbs, and over the past 6 months. He experienced progressive aggravation of muscle rigidity, necessitating the use of crutches when walking. Physical examination indicated that he was 132 cm tall, weighed 46 kg, had an arm span of 130 cm, and was 66 cm tall in the seated position. In appearance, he had a short stature, a barrel chest deformity, forward flexion of the spine and a posterior hump, and atrophy of several important muscle groups . His facial features and intellectual development were normal. The patient’s shoulder, wrist, knee, and ankle joints were symmetrically limited, and significant swelling in the interphalangeal joints of his hands and feet was observed . He exhibited thoracic scoliosis and limited mobility of the cervical and lumbar spine. Neurological examination revealed spastic paralysis, hypoesthesia below the T10 plane, decreased hip flexion and knee extensor strength, hyperactive bilateral knee reflexes, ankle contractures, undetectable Achilles tendon reflexes, and a positive Babinski sign. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (12 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (2 mg/h) were within the normal range, and rheumatoid factor was negative. Dual-energy x-ray examination showed a minimum Z-score of − 3.8 for bone mineral density. The visual analog scale (VAS) score was 8, and the Oswestry disability index (ODI) score was 66.
Radiographic examination of the patient’s hands revealed an enlarged and widened epiphysis and narrowing of the joint space . Pelvic radiographs showed an enlarged proximal femoral epiphysis on both sides, an irregular femoral head contour, and diffuse osteoporosis . Plain radiographs of the lower extremities showed that the femur was fixed in place and the bone had healed well . Spinal radiographs showed flat vertebral bodies, prominent dorsal humps, irregular endplates, and short pedicles . Three-dimensional CT and MRI of the spine showed that T9–10 giant hernia accounted for 70% of the medullary canal area , different degrees of herniation in L1-S1, and multi-segment “vacuum phenomenon” manifestations . The patient did not have lower-extremity radiating pain or intermittent claudication. Excluding Intracranial and cervical spine diseases, the symptoms of lower extremity spastic paralysis were considered to be mainly caused by thoracic spinal cord compression. T9–10 total laminectomy through the posterolateral approach was used to enter the intervertebral space, and bilateral dural hernias were isolated under the direct microscope. After the anterior compression of the thoracic cord was relieved, the fluctuation of dural congestion was satisfactory. Due to the destruction of the posterior bone structure and the removal of the intervertebral disc tissue, internal fixation with T8–11 screws and fusion with a T9–10 cage (Kangsheng, DFII, Chinese Inc.) were performed. Intraoperative evidence of premature degenerative changes in spinal attachment and intervertebral discs, while the development of small pedicles, severe degeneration led to aggravation of the adhesion of the anterior side of the dural sheath to the hernia. Postoperative lower limb sensation and muscle stiffness were significantly improved compared with preoperative values, but there was no significant improvement in muscle strength. Before discharge, we recommend long-term anti-osteoporosis therapy with bisphosphonates due to poor bone quality. The patient’s muscle strength was recovered 6 months after the operation, and walking assistance was not needed . At the one-year follow-up after the operation, three-dimensional CT scan showed satisfactory spinal canal decompression and osseous fusion . The one-year follow-up VAS score was 3 points, and the ODI score was 42 points.