A 24-year-old white male (proband) presented to the Neurology department of Zakarpattia Regional Hospital, Uzhhorod, Ukraine with progressive gait disturbance, lower extremities spasticity and pain (5/10 points, where a score of 0 means no pain, and 10 means the worst pain one has ever experienced), and urinary incontinence. The leg pain had been slowly progressing over 6 months before the visit, the patient described it as resembling muscle pain during flu infection. He had a history of primary adrenal insufficiency since the age of 4. Proband’s older brother (31 years old) also experienced primary adrenal insufficiency starting at the age of 8. Both are of Ukrainian ethnicity from Ukraine. Genetic testing and VLCFA analysis were not performed due to unavailability in Ukraine at that time. Both patients have been receiving hydrocortisone (35 mg/d) and fludrocortisone (0.05 mg/d) replacement therapy following their diagnoses. The older brother developed a methamphetamine addiction at the age of 25, and at 28, he exhibited gait and speech disturbances that were initially attributed to drug abuse. At the age of 23, the proband experienced lower extremity pain, leading to the suspicion of AMN and establishing a connection between his symptoms and those of his brother. Both patients had also thin scalp hair.
Next generation sequencing (NGS) sequencing of the ABCD1 gene in the proband unveiled a previously unreported splice site mutation in exon 3 (c.1224G > A, Glu408 =), leading to the disruption of the consensus splice site. The same mutation was identified in the older brother, with hemizygous inheritance, while the mother and sister carried the mutation in a heterozygous state. Comprehensive testing was conducted on all maternal extended family members, revealing an additional carrier of the mutation (grandmother's sister). The family pedigree is depicted in Fig. .
There is no information on this variant in the population databases (no entry in Gnomad), the frequency in the Ukrainian sample of 247 healthy individuals is 0.
Clinvar database contains the entry for this variant from Invitae without the supporting evidence of affected status (variation ID: 1455540).
VLCFA assay was positive and revealed significantly elevated C26:0 (hexacosanoic acid) in both brothers and slightly elevated levels in carrier sister .
The severity of ALD white matter lesions is rated by MRI imaging-based Loes score (rages from 0 to 34). Usually the score over 7 is an cut-off for HSCT consideration . The proband (24 years o) exhibited symmetric white matter hyperintensities in the periventricular parietooccipital white matter, (non specific), in the projection of medial and lateral geniculate bodies, and also in the corticospinal tract at various levels including the posterior limb of the internal capsule, midbrain, pons, and medulla . The Loes score for the 24-year-old proband was 4, while the 31-year-old brother scored 11.
Lower extremities NCS in the proband found non-inflammatory axonal damage, especially left deep peroneal nerve at the level of plantar joint. All available family members underwent electrodiagnostic study. Each NCS included sensory and motor studies, and needle electromyography (EMG) assessed spontaneous activity.
24 years o (Proband, affected)NCS: distal latencies, amplitudes, and conduction velocities were normal. High amplitude and size of F-waves—1371 uV EMG: segmental positive sharp waves detected and motor unit potential configuration (MUAPs) were short in duration (7.74 ms) and had low amplitude (199–2438 uV) with early recruitment pattern.
31 years o (Proband’s brother, affected)NCS included sensory and motor studies (normal distal latencies and amplitudes, slow conduction velocities 25.5 m/s). High amplitude and size of F-waves-1707 uV, long latencies—63.9 ms EMG: segmental fibrillations detected and motor unit potential configuration (MUAPs) we normal in duration 10 ms and low/high amplitude 205–3935 uV with early recruitment pattern.
56 years o (Proband’s mother, carrier)NCS: normal distal latencies and amplitudes, slow conduction velocities (43.7 m/s). Normal amplitude and size of F-waves—830 uV EMG: segmental fibrillations detected and motor unit potential configuration (MUAPs) were normal in duration (17 ms) and had low/high amplitude 290–520 uV with early recruitment pattern.
26 years o (Proband’s sister, carrier)NCS: normal distal latencies and amplitudes, slow conduction velocities (43.1 m/s). Normal amplitude and size of F-waves—955 uV EMG: No spontaneous activity detected, motor unit potential configuration (MUAPs) (normal in duration (14–18 ms) and normal/high amplitude 245–1670 uV with early recruitment pattern. The electrodiagnostic study results in the family are summarized in the Table .
Based on all the test and clinical examination the diagnosis of AMN with cerebral involvement was established.
Given the nature of the disease, the progression of adrenomyelopolyneuropathy with cerebral involvement, the patient underwent allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) from match unrelated donor (10/10 MUD). The source of the graft was peripheral blood stem cells (PBCS). A comprehensive pre-transplantation examination of the patient was carried out before HSCT. Before HSCT was conducted laboratory-instrumental pre-transplantation examination of the patient. Absolute contraindications to the transplantation procedure were not found.
A reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) was performed according to the following scheme: Treosulfan 36 g/m2, Fludarabine 150 mg/m2, Thiotepa 10 mg/kg. Due to the high risk of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) associated with allo-HSCT from MUD, antithymocyte globulin [Thymoglobulin (anti-thymocyte globulin rabbit 7.5 mg/kg)] was added.
Cyclosporin A (CsA) and Methotrexate (Mtx) were chosen as classical prophylaxis of GVHD. CsA at a dose of 3 mg/kg/day, starting on day-1, while maintaining serum levels between 100 and 150 ng/ml. From day + 120, taking into account the absence of manifestations of GVHD, infectious complications after HSCT in the form of tuberculosis of the mediastinal lymph node, a decision was made to gradually withdraw CsA within two months.
All three engrafts were achieved at the estimated time, without delays. Specific complications after HSCT of immune genesis (engraftment syndrome, GVHD) were not observed. The dynamics of immune cell reconstitution after HSCT is shown in the Table .
MRI on the day 90 post HSCT reveled no changes comparatively to the pre HSCT MRI results .
The 31-year-old proband’s brother was not considered for HSCT due to the advanced symptoms of adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) and the corresponding MRI findings, including a high Loes score of 11.