An 81-year-old Caucasian man, who was a former bricklayer, was referred to the emergency department of Hospital São João, a central university hospital, in Porto, Portugal, presenting coughing, purulent sputum, dyspnea and stridor that had lasted for one week. He had a medical history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with a restrictive and obstructive pattern on functional respiratory tests using spirometry, presenting forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) of 60% and Tiffeneau index of 54%. He was a former smoker (about 25 pack-years), presented silicosis and had been hospitalized due to respiratory infection and insufficiency several times previously over the last six months. He did not have any relevant family history.
On physical examination, he presented central cyanosis, tachypnea and dispersed crackles. The blood arterial gas analysis showed hypoxia (pH = 7.43, pO2 = 56 mmHg, pCO2 = 30.9 mmHg, HCO3
- = 20 mmol/l, SaO2 = 90.5%). The other blood analyses revealed leukocytosis of 19.75 x 109/l (normal range: 4.0-11.0 x 109/l), plasma urea of 96 mg/dl (reference value: 10-50) and plasma creatinine of 2.5 mg/dl (reference value: 0.6-1.0). He was started on oxygen and empirical antibiotic therapy: eight days of piperacillin/tazobactam were completed. In order to rule out pulmonary thromboembolism, chest computed tomography was performed. This revealed a marked collapse of the trachea in its middle third, without any intraluminal or extrinsic mass .
The patient was kept in hospital, and noninvasive ventilation with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) was introduced. In order to assess the airway collapse, bronchoscopy was performed. This showed a trachea presenting marked expiratory collapse, with contact between the anterior and posterior walls over a length of 2 cm, at the transition from the upper third to the middle third, and extending into both main bronchi. These characteristics were compatible with TBM. The patient was kept on CPAP until a Dumon Y stent was inserted by means of rigid bronchoscopy .
In order to study the TBM etiology, an immunological evaluation was performed, consisting of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) directed to proteinase 3 (PR3), ANCA myeloperoxidase (MPO), antibody anti-basal membrane, anti-centromere, anti-Jo, anti-RNP (ribonucleoprotein), anti-scleroderma (anti-Slc70), anti-Smith (Anti-Sm), Anti-SSa, Anti-SSb and anti-nuclear antibody. This did not show any abnormalities. The patient did not present any gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) or any post-traumatic event. On discharge, he did not present any stridor or dyspnea. His clinical status was good and there was no need for noninvasive ventilation. Although the patient did not undergo any quality-of-life questionnaire or any post-stenting respiratory test reassessment, he mentioned, during the postoperative follow-up, that he felt subjectively that his quality of life was better than it had been at the beginning of this treatment.