A 49-year-old woman consulted our hospital because of sudden onset of headache and vomiting. Physical examination found the World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies grade II with systolic blood pressure of 152 mm Hg. No morphological features were identified suggesting congenital structural vascular disease such as Ehlers–Danlos syndrome or Marfan's syndrome. Her past history and family history were unremarkable, and systemic evaluation demonstrated no abnormality. Most laboratory data on admission were unremarkable including white blood cell count of 11.3 × 103/mm3, C-reactive protein level of 0.3 mg/dL, and negative findings for human immunodeficiency virus and syphilis. She smoked 10 cigarettes per day and occasionally consumed alcohol. Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed SAH and cerebral angiography showed a saccular aneurysm at the C1 portion of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) .
The patient underwent emergent clipping of the typical saccular aneurysm which had no features of dissection . Norepinephrine was continuously administered intravenously between 1.8 to 4.8 μg/min during the operation under general anesthesia to prevent any decrease in blood pressure caused by increased remifentanil hydrochloride dose. The postoperative course was uneventful without neurological deficits. Postoperative natural hypertension was permitted and systolic blood pressure was controlled between 130 to 160 mm Hg without continuous intravenous administration of norepinephrine. However, 4 days after the SAH, the patient suddenly developed shock after severe abdominal pain. CT of the abdomen revealed massive hematoma in the abdominal cavity around a splenic artery aneurysm, suggestive of the origin of bleeding . In addition to this lesion, three-dimensional CT angiography of the abdomen showed multiple aneurysms involving the gastroduodenal artery, common hepatic artery, and superior mesenteric artery . Blood transfusion for shock and coil embolization of the splenic artery to prevent bleeding were performed immediately. Extensive laboratory analysis was performed with negative myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, proteinase 3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and anti-nuclear antibody. The diagnosis of abdominal lesions was compatible with SAM based on the combination of clinical and imaging findings and absence of laboratory findings indicating infection or inflammatory etiology.
Treatment for cerebral vasospasm following SAH was performed with prevention of hypertension, which might be contraindicated in the presence of abdominal lesions. She was given oral and continuous intravenous administration of calcium antagonist to maintain a systolic blood pressure of 100–140 mm Hg. Left temporal lobe infarction was detected, but the patient was discharged after 1 month hospitalization with mild aphasia which recovered completely afterward. The patient remained asymptomatic for 34 months after SAH and CT angiography of the head and abdomen demonstrated no recurrence of the aneurysms in both visceral and intracranial arteries.