A 64-year-old white French man had stable monoclonal gammopathy of the immune globulin G (IgG) lambda type (IgG = 1 g/L) with normal bone X-rays. He had no other significant comorbidities, except for diabetes and hypertension. Two years after the diagnosis of monoclonal gammopathy, he developed cholestasis 10N (10 x normal level) and cytolysis 4N (4 x normal value). Ultrasounds revealed a 4-cm subcapsular nodule involving segment VI of his liver. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple signal anomalies, with hemangiomas and benign cysts and a slightly hyperintense nodule on the T2-weighted image and T1-weighted image, with arterial phase enhancement . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) with 18fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) revealed an unusual hypermetabolic nodule, with maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) at 16. An ultrasound-guided biopsy showed numerous plasma cells with a strong CD138 staining and low lambda light chain intensity . A full blood count revealed: hemoglobin 140 g/L, platelets 160 G/L, and leukocytes 5 G/L. All other laboratory parameters including renal function, albumin, beta-2-microglobulin, and calcium were within the normal range. A bone marrow examination and skeletal assessment were normal and a diagnosis of hepatic EMP was made. Surgery was deemed too difficult to perform because of the proximity of the kidney, and standard conformal irradiation was also contraindicated for the same reason and because the lesion was highly mobile due to breathing movements. However, our multidisciplinary team suggested the use of fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy in synchrony mode using implanted fiducials to limit liver toxicity in this patient with a single lesion without bone marrow involvement.
In February 2015, our patient received 30 Gy in five consecutive fractions of 6 Gy, a dose that may be considered biologically equivalent to 40 Gy delivered in 2 Gy per fraction. The tolerance was excellent without acute toxicity. At month 3, 18FDG PET-CT revealed a stable disease, and subsequent assessments showed a partial response of 50% and 75% at month 12 and month 18, respectively . SUVmax also decreased to 8.2 at month 12 and 4.8 at month 18. Twenty months after irradiation, he is still asymptomatic with a normal biological liver function and IgG lambda M component has completely disappeared . No significant toxicity was observed during and after radiosurgery.