A 55-year-old male Caucasian patient affected by LPAC syndrome with Child–Pugh type C liver cirrhosis presented to our hospital to perform a preoperative work-up for liver transplant.
A period of 6 months before, the patient underwent a T7–T9 posterior fixation and decompression at another hospital for a T8 osteoporotic fracture classified as OF5 according to the classification proposed by the German Society for Orthopedics and Trauma . The operation was complicated by a cement leakage in T8 epidural space. Surprisingly, after surgery the patient presented with tetraparesis that was more severe on the left side and associated with an ipsilateral sensitive deficit. Notably, the patient was neurologically intact before the intervention and the cement leakage did not explain the postoperative neurological deficit of the upper limbs. For this reason, he was admitted to a neuro-reeducation clinic for 5 months and thereafter, he was transferred to our hospital to undergo a liver transplantation. At admission, he was still tetraparetic and due to the persistence of neurological deficit, our colleagues sought an expert neurosurgical consultation.
On physical examination, the patient was tetraparetic and stable compared with the immediate postoperative neurological status described in the clinical documentation. He also showed clinical signs of cervical myelopathy (bilaterally positive Hoffman’s sign, four limbs with symmetrical hyperreflexia, and bilateral ankle clonus). Moreover, he suffered a limitation of cervical motion range in all directions and showed a short neck and low posterior hairline, namely the classical clinical triad of KFS.
Imaging performed at our hospital, showed the fusion of multiple cervical and thoracic vertebral bodies, namely in C2–C4, C5–C6, and C7–T2 [Fig. ], without congenital cervical spine stenosis spinal cord occupation ratio (SCOR) index of 43% . T2 sequences underlined a spinal cord hypersignal potentially due to prior injury at the level of the C3 body; however, it was impossible to clearly determine its origin due to the lack of comparative imaging . At the level of T7–T9 thoracic fixation, no stenotic consequences on the spinal cord due to the cement leakage were found . According to radiological presentation, a diagnosis of type 3 KFS was made . Even though a T2 hypersignal was detected at C3 level, there was no cervical stenosis at this segment, and it was considered as an ischemic sequalae. Based on these assumptions, an acute spinal cord compression at stenotic levels was unlikely. Since no compression of the spinal cord at T8 was identified and the tetraparesis is not compatible with a spinal cord lesion at T8, our hypothesis was that surgical installation and/or intubation before surgery for T8 fracture might have produced a cervical spinal cord injury (SCI) and consequently produced the neurological deficit.
Based on these considerations, the absence of instability, and stability of neurological findings over the last few months, no surgical treatment was undertaken. Instead, we proposed a radiological follow-up concerning the C6–C7 discopathy and cervical canal stenosis.