A 68-year-old female patient visited our hospital with abdominal pain and diarrhea.
The patient had experienced persistent abdominal pain and diarrhea over the past month, compelling her to visit a local clinic. After undergoing a colonoscopy and abdominal computed tomography (CT), infectious colitis was suspected. Accordingly, the patient was treated with antibiotics. However, the symptoms did not improve, and she was subsequently referred to our hospital.
The patient had hypertension and type 2 diabetes. Three years ago, she underwent extended cholecystectomy for gallbladder cancer and laparoscopic left hemicolectomy with low ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) (IMA preservation and left colic artery ligation) and inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) ligation for transverse colon cancer. Postsurgical follow-up included an annual colonoscopy and abdominal CT at a local clinic. However, progressive erythema and edema were observed below the anastomosis site in the sigmoid colon 1 year postoperatively.
The patient had no family history of gastrointestinal disease or tumors.
Abdominal examination revealed tenderness around the umbilicus and lower abdomen.
Peripheral blood tests showed a white blood cell count of 1.06 × 109/L (neutrophils, 83%), hemoglobin level of 12.3 g/dL, and platelet count of 3.24 × 109/L. Serum biochemistry tests indicated normal levels of total bilirubin (0.7 mg/dL), aspartate transaminase (14 IU/L), and alanine transaminase (9 IU/L) and an elevated C-reactive protein level (4.49 mg/dL). Stool culture, fecal Clostridium difficile toxin, and glutamate dehydrogenase tests were also negative.
Abdominal CT revealed thickening of the sigmoid colon walls, abnormal attenuation of pericolic fat, and a small amount of ascites . During the colonoscopy, an anastomosis site was observed 45 cm from the anus, while erythema and mucosal swelling were observed approximately 20–35 cm from the anus. Multiple ulcerations and erosions were also observed . CT angiography showed diffuse wall thickening and fat infiltration in the sigmoid colon, extending from the anastomosis site to the distal portion of the sigmoid colon. Engorgement of the sigmoid vasa recta was also observed . However, vascular abnormalities were not observed, and blood flow in the inferior mesenteric, sigmoid colic, and superior rectal arteries was preserved .