A 53-year-old previously healthy man presented to a local hospital with 2 months of progressive dyspnoea, cough, and fevers. He had been previously treated for presumed bronchitis. Symptoms progressed with development of anorexia, nausea, night sweats, and pervasive fatigue. Past medical history was unremarkable except for history of prior smoking (accrued over 30 pack years) and occasional alcohol use. He was on no regular medications. He had immigrated from Iran to Los Angeles years prior. Per available documentation, physical examination at that time revealed a patient in moderate respiratory distress on Bilevel Positive Airway Pressure (BiPAP) but with clear lungs, normal heart sounds, no jugular venous distention or pedal oedema, and no murmurs. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia with normal axis and non-specific ST-T changes . Chest X-ray showed mildly pulmonary oedema, and he was treated with ceftriaxone 1 g IV and azithromycin 500 mg IV daily for 5 days. Laboratory evaluation revealed a normal white blood cell count (6300 cells/L), haemoglobin 13.3 g/dL, and platelet count of 226 000 per microliter. Serum creatinine was normal (1.2 mg/dL) and arterial blood gas (ABG) revealed a pH of 7.44, pCO2 30, and PaO2 145.
Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular systolic function, mild right ventricular (RV) enlargement and severely elevated pulmonary artery (PA) systolic pressure (65 mmHg) with mild-to-moderate tricuspid regurgitation. With failure to improve and progressive hypoxia and development of encephalopathy, antibiotic therapy was broadened to include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 800 mg/160 mg twice daily and fluconazole 400 mg IV daily. He underwent contrast computed tomography (CT) and CT pulmonary angiogram (CTA) , which revealed multifocal patchy and nodular areas of alveolar consolidation in both upper and lower lung fields suspicious for pneumonia, with sub-centimetre mediastinal lymph nodes and bilateral pleural effusions. There was no peribronchial thickening or interstitial fibrosis noted. There was no evidence of pulmonary embolism and the PA was normal in size measuring 25 mm.
The patient developed progressive liver injury, with aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 450 U/L (nl <46 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 302 U/L (nl <66 U/L) and elevated total and direct bilirubin which peaked at 20 (nl <1.3) and 19 (nl <0.3) mg/dL, respectively. He had progressive encephalopathy and despite normal coagulation parameters, was treated for presumed acute liver failure with N-acetylcysteine 1200 mg twice daily, lactulose 30 g three times daily, rifaximin 550 mg twice daily, and methylprednisolone 40 mg IV every 6 h. There were no identifiable reversible causes of liver injury. He developed oliguric renal insufficiency with creatinine increasing to 1.9 mg/dL (nl 0.8–1.3), microcytic anaemia with haemoglobin 9.7 g/dL (nl 13–17), and thrombocytopenia with 101 000 platelets per microliter (nl 150–450 000). Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was elevated at 756 U/L (nl <260 U/L). Given his rapidly deteriorating clinical status, he was transferred to our institution for consideration of liver transplantation.
On arrival to our intensive care unit, he was noted to be afebrile with a heart rate of 124 b.p.m., blood pressure 124/79, and O2 saturation of 85% on 5 L nasal cannula. On exam, he was ill-appearing with temporal wasting and notably jaundiced with scleral icterus. He was confused. He had coarse rales anteriorly, was tachypnoeic using his accessory chest wall muscles. Cardiac exam revealed elevated jugular venous pressure of 10 cm of water, a regular tachycardia with a prominent P2 component of the second heart sound and soft holosystolic murmur at the right sternal border. He had hepatomegaly without ascites or splenic enlargement. He had no rashes and no oedema.
His ECG showed rightward axis with incomplete right bundle branch block . A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a dilated (5.3 cm annulus, nl <4.2 cm) and severely hypokinetic right ventricle that, despite normal tricuspid annular motion (TAPSE 1.7 cm, nl >1.6 cm), had severely reducted systolic function with an akinetic apex and free wall. The left ventricle was underfilled, with ejection fraction of 75% and mild diastolic dysfunction. There was flattening of the septum in both systole and diastole, consistent with pressure overload, and estimated RV systolic pressure of 60 mmHg with a systolic blood pressure at the time of 104 mmHg . There was moderate, central tricuspid regurgitation, and mild mitral regurgitation, as well a small pericardial effusion adjacent to the RV apex. Within few hours of arrival to the intensive care unit, he developed refractory shock. Cardiology was consulted for guidance in the management of RV failure in the setting of severe PH. He was started on dobutamine 3 μg/kg/min and epinephrine 10 μg/min, inhaled nitric oxide at 20 ppm, and inhaled epoprostenol 0.03 μg/kg/min. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was initiated for severe metabolic acidosis with ABG showing pH 6.99, PaCO2 42 and PaO2 of 63, and anuric renal failure with creatinine peaking at 2.6 mg/dL. He was urgently intubated, however, despite aggressive efforts his condition worsened and he passed away from refractory cardiogenic shock due to RV failure.
A post-mortem examination was notable for the demonstration of intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (IVLBCL) with extensive involvement of the brain, heart, lungs and pulmonary arteries, as well as the spleen, both kidneys, thyroid, gastrointestinal tract, prostate, and both testes. Specifically, noted was the invasion of lymphoma cells into the small coronary vessels as well as the myocardial interstitium, as well as into the large and small pulmonary arteries and veins .