A 45-year-old male was referred to our center for changes in his facial appearance with ocular asymmetry started 3 months before. No previous records of trauma or surgical procedures were reported in paranasal sinuses. The patient never complained of symptoms of acute or chronic rhinosinusitis. The clinical and ophthalmological examination revealed a 3 mm left enophthalmous and hypoglobus with neither visual deficits nor diplopia.
The patient underwent a computed tomography (CT) of paranasal sinuses which showed opacification and hypoplasia of left maxillary sinus, lateralization of the uncinate process, and depression of homolateral orbital floor. A bilateral concha bullosa of the middle turbinate was also present (,:-). Moreover, left SSS was diagnosed, and the patient underwent functional endoscopic sinus surgery. Antrostomy was performed with retrograde uncinectomy together with the aspiration of mucoid secretion in the left maxillary sinus followed by the removal of the lateral lamella of the concha bullosa of the middle turbinate on both sides. The patient showed the regression of the aesthetic defect and improvement of the left enophthalmos and hypoglobus six months after surgery. A post-operation CT scan was performed 10 months after surgery and allowed to find a complete re-ventilation of the left maxillary sinus with normalization of the maxillary sinus walls which appeared thin and demineralized before the intervention. On the right side instead, an initial and mild lateralization of the uncinate process could be identified with a still well-ventilated maxillary sinus (,: -).
After 24 months post-surgery, the patient underwent a CT scan for other reasons, and a complete right maxillary sinus opacification was observed with lateral displacement of the uncinate process and a thinning of the maxillary sinus bone walls, especially the posterior and superior ones. A lowering of the orbital floor was also present, compared to the contralateral side; therefore, diagnosis of right SSS was made (,:-).
Right endoscopic uncinectomy and middle meatotomy were performed, and marked implosion of the sinus walls was found with the presence of dense mucoid secretions. A CT scan performed after 5 years showed well-ventilated maxillary sinuses, bone reposition in the orbital floors and maxillary sinus walls, partial re-expansion of the sinuses, and repositioning of the eyeballs at the same level (,;-).