A 33 year old South-Asian male presented with coryzal lower respiratory tract symptoms, which was treated as atypical pneumonia in the context of initial unremarkable laboratory studies. Despite treatment the patient remained persistently symptomatic with a prominent and troublesome cough. Repeated laboratory investigations including chest X-rays were unremarkable. Symptoms persisted despite repeated courses of treatment as for sinusitis and allergic rhinitis complicated by a postnasal drip. He progressed to develop a unilateral facial swelling involving the left temporal, orbital and maxillary territories with trismus. Examination revealed facial asymmetry, with non-tender prominence of the left maxillary and ophthalmic territories of the face. General examination and systems examinations were otherwise normal with notable absence of lymphadenopathy or chest signs.
Laboratory studies revealed persistently elevated inflammatory markers with the lowest documented C - reactive protein level of 96 mg/dL and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 132 mm in the first hour. Whole blood analysis demonstrated normal red cell indices (haemoglobin of 11.2 g/dL) with mildly elevated white cell count of 13.48 × 109/L [-] which was predominantly neutrophilic - 67.8%. Blood film did not yield any additional information. Liver and renal biochemistry were normal. Antibody studies for C anti- neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, P anti- neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and anti-nuclear antibodies were negative. Quantiferon tuberculosis gold test was negative as were 3 serial samples of sputum for acid fast bacilli. Mycoplasma antibody titres were non-significantly elevated with a stable titre of 1/80.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and face revealed abnormal thickening of left sided temporalis, pterygoid and masseter muscles. Asymmetry and loss of normal facial planes was seen with invasion into the left infra temporal fossa and left para-pharyngeal space with encirclement of the carotid artery. Inflammatory changes were seen in the left maxillary sinus with muco-periosteal thickening and with non-uniform thickening and sclerosis of sinus wall with erosion postero-laterally. Inflammatory changes were seen in the ethmoid sinus as well. The left orbit showed invasion antero-laterally with lacrimal gland involvement . The right side of the face was completely spared. Contrast enhanced computer tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis ruled out concomitant or metastatic lesions.
Biopsy of the left orbital wall region mass demonstrated spindle cells, collagen and inflammatory cells. The spindle cells and collagen were arranged in an admixture of both a scar like pattern and a vague storiform pattern. There was a moderate to heavy diffuse polymorphic infiltrate consisting of plasma cells, histiocytes, eosinophils and lymphocytes. Mitotic activity was sparse. Significant atypia or necrosis were notably absent. Immuno-histochemistry was positive for both smooth muscle actin (SMA) and vimentin antibodies in the spindle cells. Leuckocyte common antigen (LCA) positivity was seen only in the surrounding lymphoid cells. Immunohistochemistry studies were negative for Melan A, Cluster of differentiation(CD)34, anaplastic lymphoma kinase 1 (ALK), CD 30, CD 20 and CD 1a( Figure ). Biopsy of the left temporal region showed fibro fatty tissue with scattered infiltrates of lymphocytes with a population of plump spindle cells. No mitotic activity or cellular atypia were present. Histology and the immunohistochemistry results favoured a diagnosis of inflammatory myelofibroblastic tumour. Biopsy studies for tuberculosis and fungal filaments were negative.
The patient was initially commenced on a high dose of oral prednisolone which resulted in symptomatic improvement with follow-up MRI evidence of overall reduction of tumor mass . The paucity of literature guidance or formal guidelines for treatment resulted in premature taper and withdrawal of steroids over 6 months. Despite the initial remission, the patient developed features of recurrence characterized by worsening symptoms similar to that of the initial presentation symptoms with multiple episodes of left sided epistaxis. Fibre-optic endoscopic assessment of the nasal cavity revealed a pale, friable polypoidal mass with contact bleeding originating from the left maxillary sinus. MRI Imaging confirmed the recurrence of the tumour in the left temporal region and infra temporal fossa with involvement of the surrounding sinuses and the left maxillary antrum projecting into the middle meatus of the nose with involvement of medial, lateral and inferior recti in the left orbit with definite enhancement of the dura overlying the left middle cranial fossa . A prompt diagnosis of tumor recurrence was made and treatment was re commenced with both high dose prednisolone and once weekly low dose methotrexate with very slow taper of prednisolone after sustained remission and continuation of methotrexate. After dual agent treatment for 6 months an MRI was repeated which showed virtually total regression of tumour in the temporal region and orbit , and minimal residual tumour within the left maxillary antrum ( Figure ). The patient is currently on the same treatment with the intent to slowly taper the prednisolone to a low maintenance dose along whilst continuing methotrexate until satisfactory and sustained disease control is achieved guided by radiological and clinical response on periodic reassessment.