A 20-year-old Brazilian male patient reported low back pain that had evolved for 8 months, with no related trauma. He sought emergency care and performed spinal radiographs on this occasion (03/2019). Due to the several alterations observed in the images, he was referred to the Orthopedics Service of the Hospital of Federal University of Juiz de Fora, which prescribed orthopedic braces, indicated physical therapy and was referred again to the Osteometabolic Diseases outpatient clinic of the Endocrinology and Rheumatology Services of the Hospital of Federal University of Juiz de Fora on 10/2019.
The radiographs showed a marked reduction in the density of bone structures, scoliotic deviation with convexity toward the left and reduction in the height of the lumbar vertebrae, with partial collapses of the vertebral bodies at the level of T12, L1, L2, L3 and L5, with recent collapses in T12 and L1, suggesting bone fragility fractures. The same can be seen in posterior magnetic resonance imaging .
Bone scintigraphy on 08/2019 did not reveal hyper flow or anomalous hyperemia in the topography of the thoracolumbar spine, and in the later images of the exam, there was a greater relative uptake of the tracer in the lumbar spine (vertebrae T10–T12, L2–L4), of nonspecific aspect, questioning the presence of osteoarticular processes or ankylosing spondylitis.
It was also observed in the bone densitometry requested in October 2019, performed by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), low bone mineral density (BMD) in the lumbar spine, femoral neck and total femur, when comparing the results to evaluating the Z Score .
Thus, the diagnosis of osteoporosis was established, and treatment with vitamin D 7000 IU per week was started due to vitamin D3 insufficiency associated with the bisphosphonate alendronate 70 mg, also weekly. The patient had a past pathological history of fully treated syphilis (2018) and perianal condyloma with a surgical resection on 09/2017 and 02/2018. In the family history, it was reported that a maternal uncle died of systemic sclerosis. In the social context, the young person denied drinking alcohol and previous or current smoking.
On physical examination, there were no lentiginous skin areas or blue nevi; however, wide violet streaks were observed on the upper limbs and abdomen, with plethora and increased fat in the temporal facial region and hump , limb ecchymosis, hypotrophy of the arms and thighs, central obesity and kyphoscoliosis. Systemic blood pressure (sitting) was 150 × 90 mmHg, BMI was 26.09 kg/m2, and waist circumference was 99 cm, with no reported reduction in height, maintained at 1.55 m.
An investigation of secondary causes for osteoporosis was initiated, with the following laboratory test results .
Computed tomography of the abdomen with adrenal protocol performed on 08/13/2020 characterized isodense nodular formation in the body of the left adrenal and in the lateral portion of the right adrenal, measuring 1.5 cm and 0.6 cm, respectively. The lesions had attenuation of approximately 30 HU, showing enhancement by intravenous contrast, with an indeterminate washout pattern in the late phase after contrast (< 60%) .
After contact with the interventional radiology of the Hospital of Federal University of Juiz de Fora, catheterization of adrenal veins was performed on 10/2020; however, it was not possible to perform adequate lesion characterization due to obtaining serum cortisol levels that extrapolated the dilutional upper limit of the method .
The calculation of the selectivity index was 6.63 (Reference Value (RV) > 3), confirming the good positioning of the catheter within the vessels during the procedure. The calculated lateralization index was 1.1296 (VR < 3), denoting bilateral hormone production. However, as aldosterone was not collected from a peripheral vein, it was not possible to obtain the contralateral rate and define whether there was contralateral suppression of aldosterone production .
Due to pending diagnoses for a better therapeutic decision and Cushing’s syndrome in clear evolution and causing organic damage, it was decided, after catheterization, to make changes in the patient’s drug prescription. Ketoconazole 400 mg per day was started, the dose of vitamin D was increased to 14,000 IU per week, and ramipril 5 mg per day was prescribed due to secondary hypertension. In addition, given the severity of osteoporosis, it was decided to replace previously prescribed alendronate with zoledronic acid.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the upper abdomen was performed on 06/19/2021, which demonstrated lobulated nodular thickening in the left adrenal gland with areas of decreased signal intensity in the T1 out-phase sequence, denoting the presence of fat, and homogeneous enhancement using contrast, measuring approximately 1.7 × 1.5 × 1.3 cm, suggestive of an adenoma. There was also a small nodular thickening in the lateral arm of the right adrenal, measuring approximately 0.8 × 0.6 cm, which was difficult to characterize due to its small dimensions and nonspecific appearance.
PPNAD or carcinoma became an important etiological hypothesis for the case described when comparing the epidemiology in a young man and the clinical-laboratory-imaging findings of the differential diagnoses. According to a dialog with the patient and family, the group of experts opted for unilateral glandular surgical resection on the left side (11/11/2021), where more significant changes were visualized, as there was a possibility of malignancy in a young patient and to avoid a definitive adrenal insufficiency condition because of bilateral adrenalectomy. This would first allow the analysis of the material and follow-up of the evolution of the condition with the permanence of the contralateral gland.
In the macroscopic analysis of the adrenalectomy specimen, adrenal tissue weighing 20 g and measuring 9.3 × 5.5 × 2.0 cm was described, completely surrounded by adipose tissue. The gland has a multinodular surface and varies between 0.2 and 1.6 cm in thickness, showing a cortex of 0.1 cm in thickness and a medulla of 1.5 cm in thickness .
The microscopic analysis described the expansion of the zona fasciculate, with the formation of multiple nonencapsulated nodules composed of polygonal cells with ample and eosinophilic cytoplasm and frequent depletion of intracytoplasmic lipid content. No areas of necrosis or mitotic activity were observed. The histopathological picture is suggestive of cortical pigmented micronodular hyperplasia of the adrenal gland.
For the final etiological definition and an indication of contralateral adrenalectomy, which could be unnecessary and would avoid chronic corticosteroid therapy, or else, it would be necessary to protect the patient from future complications with the maintenance of the disease in the right adrenal gland, it would be essential to search for mutations in the PRKAR1A, PDE11A, PDE8B and PRKACA genes ; however, such genetic analysis is not yet widely available, and the impossibility of carrying it out at the local level did not allow a complete conclusion of the case.