We report a critically ill patient, a 5-year-old Albanian male, presenting with features of MIS-C in January 2021, in the pediatric intensive care unit of the University Clinical Center of Kosovo. The initial symptoms appeared 3 weeks prior to admission, consisting of fatigue, occasional headache, and loss of appetite. Meanwhile, 1 week before hospitalization, fever appeared up to 40 °C, recurring every 4–6 hours. He had previously been treated for a nasopharyngeal inflammation with antipyretics and antibiotics. However, the fever continued, and the illness progressed with vomiting and abdominal pain, fatigue, and refusal to eat. The day before admission at the intensive care unit, his family became concerned by a new onset of bilateral eye redness, swelling, redness of hands and feet, rash, irritability, and photophobia. At admission, he had fever of up to 40 °C, arterial hypotension with blood pressure (BP) of 70/40 mmHg, tachycardia with a heart rate (HR) of 130/min, tachypnea with a respiratory rate (RR) of 45/minute, oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 93%, paleness, and dehydration, with a chest capillary refill time (CRT) of 5 seconds. Signs of hyperinflammatory syndrome were also present, with mucocutaneous inflammation signs such as swollen and red eyelids, bilateral nonpurulent conjunctivitis, oral mucosal lesions, dry lips, strawberry-red tongue, and oropharyngeal hyperemia. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy. Redness and swelling were also present on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet .
The child’s mental status and level of consciousness were also altered. He was lethargic and irritable, with photophobia during the examination. His lungs were clear and had no murmurs or cardiac friction rub. The abdomen was soft without hepatosplenomegaly, but was painful during palpation. Based on a height of 120 cm and a weight of 34 kg, he had obesity with a body mass index (BMI) of 23.6, placing his BMI for age at greater than the 99th percentile.
There was a history of positive COVID-19 contact 3 weeks ago when his uncle had a brief febrile upper respiratory infection and was tested and confirmed positive for SARS-CoV-2 with a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. Meanwhile, his asymptomatic father had a negative PCR test for SARS COV-2 but positive serology with a high immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody to SARS COV-2 on the day of the child’s admission. The child remained at home with his immediate family during this period but was not tested for SARS COV-2 infection. There was no personal or family history of allergic reactions, vasculitis, autoimmune disorders, cardiac disease, diabetes, or hereditary disease. This was the third hospitalization of the child; the first one at the age of 2 due to gastroenteritis; and the second one, at the age of 4, due to a urinary tract infection.
Initial laboratory results revealed a high level of inflammatory markers, including a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 156.8 mg/l, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 100 mm/hour, procalcitonin (PCT) of 13.84 , leukocytosis with neutrophilia, and lymphopenia . Liver and renal functions were also altered, manifested by hypoalbuminemia (30.6 g/L), hypoproteinemia (60.3 g/L), hyperuricemia (602.77 umol/L), uremia (15.81 mmol/L), and an increased level of serum creatinine (114 umol/L) as a consequence of renal dysfunction (acute kidney injury), which resolved with hydration . There was a mild elevation of cholesterol and significant elevation of triglycerides (5.29 mmol/L) and gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT, 79 U/L) with normal alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), and creatine kinase (CK) levels . The capillary blood electrolytes (Na, K, Ca) were also altered, with hyponatremia (129 mmol/L), a low level of bicarbonates (19.7 mmol/L), a base excess (BE) of 4 mmol/L, and hypoxemia with capillary blood gas of pO2 of 63 mmHg and pCO2 of 29 mmHg . A lumbar puncture was performed owing to fever, irritability, altered level of consciousness, and photophobia.The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was slightly turbid, with a white blood cell (WBC) count of 128/mm3 (80% mononuclear cells and 20% polymorphonuclear), CSF protein of 1.14 g/L (normal range 0.10–0.45 g/L) and CSF glucose of 3.84 mmol/L (simultaneous blood glucose level of 5.45 mmol/L). The bacterial culture of CSF was negative. The findings from the CSF examination were consistent with aseptic meningitis. Normal fundus findings were found on ophthalmoscopy examination . Nasopharyngeal SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing was negative, while SARS-CoV-2 IgG testing was positive. D-dimer was high, at 464 ng/mL and 833 ng/ml by two measurements (reference range ˂ 200), while the coagulation tests were within the normal range . The urinalysis revealed proteinuria (30–100 mg/dl), which was confirmed by 24-hour urine collection. Leukocyturia and occasionally bacteriuria were also present, but the urine culture was negative. Moreover, no other obvious microbial cause of inflammation was found, including two blood cultures for bacterial sepsis, three urine cultures, and nasopharyngeal and CSF cultures.
The chest radiography showed bilateral minimal peripheral patchy opacities but no focal consolidation, effusion, or pneumothorax .
The electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia with no other pathologic findings. Furthermore, echocardiography and abdominal ultrasonography examinations were normal at admission as well as during the follow-up examination. At the moment of admission, the child was put on oxygen therapy through a nasal cannula with an O2 flow of 2–3 L/min. Owing to hypotension and dehydration, rehydration with intravenous fluids, fresh plasma, and packed red blood cells was administered. Treatment also involved antibiotics, including ceftriaxone (80 mg/kg/day) and vancomycin (40 mg/kg/day), methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day), and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)(1 g/kg), as well as anticoagulation therapy with enoxaparin.
The fever resolved on the third day of hospitalization, 24 hours after immunoglobulin administration. On the second day of hospitalization, CSF analysis revealed a decreased WBC count of 21/mm3 (90% mononuclear cells and 10% polymorphonuclear), 1.05 g/L CSF protein (normal range: 0.10–0.45 g/L) and 4.76 mmol/L CSF glucose (simultaneous blood glucose level: 4.87 mmol/L). In the meantime, the second bacterial culture of CSF was also negative. On the seventh day of hospitalization, the level of albuminemia was 35.1 g/L, CRP 19.8 mg/L, ESR 75 mm/hour, PCT 0.578 ng/ml, D-dimer 653 , and white blood cell count of 16.1 (26.7% lymphocytes and 65% granulocytes) . The mucocutaneous inflammation signs such as redness of eyelids and conjunctival hyperemia, and the palmar and plantar erythema, significantly faded on the fifth day of hospitalization, but were easily visible until the end of hospitalization. However, the general condition of the child continued to be stable and follow-up examinations such as the electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiography, lung, and abdominal ultrasound were normal. At the same time, almost all the performed laboratory analyzes were within the normal range , and the child was discharged 2 weeks after admission. During a follow-up outpatient visit, blood tests had normalized, while the nCOV-2 IgG was elevated to 100 (reference range: 1.0). Abdominal, pulmonary, and cardiac ultrasound were normal. Follow-up outpatient visits were carried out every 3 months for 1 year, including echocardiography, urine analysis, and evaluation of his general condition.
Apart from proteinuria which declined week by week but persisted for 2 months, other findings were normal.