A 19 years old Caucasian male (soccer player) presented with an anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) rupture of his right knee two months ago. He was admitted in our Department for an arthroscopic ACL reconstruction. His medical history was unremarkable (young athlete) and he reported no medication intake. Preoperative examination did not reveal any disorders and the values of PT (Prothrombin time), aPTT (activated Partial Thromboplastin time), INR and platelet count were normal. An epidural catheter was inserted prior to the operation to provide analgesia postoperatively. Its insertion was quick and easy without any complications as described by the anesthesiologists in charge. The operation was completed uneventfully (75 minutes), regarding both intraoperative anesthesia and the surgery (hamstrings autografts, Endobutton CL, Smith & Nephew, Memphis, Tennessee, USA) and the patient was transferred to the recovery room . During his staying in the recovery room (approximately one hour), he remained hemodynamically stable without any complaints, regaining gradually his muscle strength and sensitivity, and then was transferred to the ward. Anticoagulative treatment started six hour after the end of the operation as in all patients with reconstructive knee surgery and consisted of administration of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) (Tinzaparine Sodium 4500- anti-Factor Xa IU once daily). Blood loss was not significant and the drain was removed the first postoperative day. Analgesia was provided through the epidural catheter for 48 hours and mobilization started the second postoperative day. The epidural catheter was removed the second postoperative day, 12 hours after the administration of the anticoagulative injection and 12 hours before the next dose, and the patient was placed on oral analgesics when it was needed. The day of surgery and the first postoperative day he reported a minor loss of sensitivity and numbness in both lower extremities which improved till the second postoperative day. At this point, neurological status was normal and mobilization (walking with canes with the knee in an extension brace) continued without any adverse events. The third postoperative day, after the regular morning visit, the patient was discharged being able to ambulate independently without any aid. On the afternoon, he reported moderate loss of sensitivity, perianal and perigenital numbness and muscle weakness in his lower extremities, and low back pain, which improved after the administration of one dose of 500 mg of paracetamol. The fourth postoperative day the patient reported muscle weakness in all muscles of his lower extremities and deteriorating loss of sensitivity (from level L1 to S5) which made his mobilization difficult. He was admitted again in our department; neurologic evaluation revealed at this point muscle weakness in all muscle groups of the lower extremities. According to British Medical Research Council (MRC) scale (Medical Research Council) muscle strength was rated as 3 for iliopsoas, 3 for quadriceps, 3 for hamstrings, 3 for anterior and 3 for the posterior tibial muscles. The patient remained hospitalized, his neurological status worsened rather than improving and the fifth postoperative day, a dose of IV cortisone was administered (30 mg/kg MPS). An epidural hematoma was suspected and the administration of low molecular weight heparin ceased; an urgent MRI scan was ordered which revealed an epidural hematoma from the level of L3 to L4 . Prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromoblastin time (aPTT) and INR continued to be normal. Immediately, the patient was prepared emergently for the operating room (fifth postoperative day). It is worth mentioning that during patient's preparation in the operating room, just prior to the administration of anaesthesia, a new clinical evaluation showed again worsening of the muscle weakness. In more details, muscle strength was rated as 2 according to MRC scale in all muscle groups: 2 (iliopsoas, quadriceps, hamstrings) or 2 (anterior and posterior tibial muscles). The patient had also lost control of the sphincters, was almost paraplegic, unable even to move legs in bed with significant loss of sensation all over his lower extremities and in perianal and genitary region (cauda equine establishment).
Consequently, an emergent decompression through right fenestration at the level of the hematoma was performed (L3 and L4 vertebrae) without disturbing the facets and the vertebral canal was explored. An extensive clot, which was compressing the dura and its contents had been formed. The hematoma was meticulously evacuated. No bleeding vessels were identified. The wound was closed without fusion of the spine. A bolus dose of methylo-prednizolone (1000 mgr of Solumedrol in one hour) was administered to the patient in the recovery room.
In the ward, the patient presented significant improvement; he could mobilize his legs without pain and his loss of sensation and numbness were improving continuously. He remained in bed for two days and he was regularly evaluated neurologically. The first day after decompression the patient showed significant neurological improvement with increased muscle strength. Improvement continued and at day 2 post-decompression the patient could move his legs freely in bed and consequently was mobilized. At day 3 postoperatively he could stand alone and make a few steps with a walker without any complaints; his recovery was complete. It is worth mentioning that genitary loss of sensation was the last to disappear. According to MRC scale at day 3 muscle strength was rated as normal for all muscle groups of both lower extremities. The patient was discharged from hospital at day 5 post-fenestration and was re-evaluated 1 week later (day 12 after fenestration). He presented without any neurologic deficit at all and range of motion at the operated right knee ranged from complete extension to 100 degrees of flexion. At 2 months after ACL reconstruction the patient presented with complete muscle strength, and his knee motion ranged from complete extension to 120 degrees of flexion. MRI scan two months post-op demonstrated complete absorption of the haematoma .