A 56-year-old Asian male patient from northeast, Thailand with an unremarkable past-medical history was referred from a primary care center with painless obstructive jaundice for two weeks. He was previously admitted to a private hospital, and abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed. He underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and trans-ampullary biopsy and brush cytology. A plastic biliary stent was inserted across the obstruction point. At the time of the initial visit to the out-patient clinic, physical examination revealed a mildly obese patient, generally co-operative, with marked icteric sclera and pruritus. No acute distress was noted. There were no clinical signs of an abdominal mass or palpable supraclavicular lymph node.
At the time of referral, laboratory analysis showed the following liver function test results: total bilirubin 16.0 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 11.7 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 319 U/L (normal 50–136 U/L), gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) 33 U/L (normal 15–85 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 59 U/L (normal 15–37 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 55 U/L (normal 30–65 U/L), white blood cell count 12,040/cumm, platelet count 464,000/cumm, hemoglobin 11.5 g/L, CEA 1.9 ng/ml (0–4.6 ng/mL), CA 19–9 19.8 U/mL (normal 0–39 U/mL), normal serum electrolytes, normal renal function. HBsAg, anti-HCV and anti-HAV were all negative.
Transabdominal ultrasonography was performed at a private hospital and showed dilatation of both intrahepatic bile ducts. The common bile duct was not dilated. No gallstone was found. Abdominal CT showed a focal short segment, sheet-like, symmetric thickening of the common hepatic duct causing nearly complete obstruction just below the bifurcation of the right and left intrahepatic bile ducts and dilatation of the left intrahepatic duct . At private hospital, he underwent ERCP which revealed a common hepatic duct stricture of approximately 1–2 cm just below the biliary confluence and dilatation of both the right and left intrahepatic bile ducts . Brush cytology and trans-ampullary biopsy were performed. The cytological reports and trans-ampullary biopsy pathological reports were benign bile duct epitheliums without cellular atypia.
At the time of referral, chest and mediastinum CT were performed, and the results showed no pulmonary metastasis or new lesions, along with a decreased degree of intrahepatic bile duct dilatation. Magnatic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography was not done in this patient. Ultimately, surgical resection was planned after adequate biliary drainage due to high suspicion of CCA.
At surgery, the abdomen was opened by inverted J skin incision. There was no metastatic disease. There was a hard palpable lesion at the common bile duct along the common hepatic duct . Extended right hepatic lobectomy with en-bloc excision of the gallbladder and extrahepatic bile duct with lymphadenectomy was performed, followed by reconstruction using Roux-en-Y hepatico-jejunostomy anastomosis to the left intrahepatic bile duct. Intraoperative frozen sections of the resection margins of the distal common bile duct were negative for malignancy.
The pathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed severe acute and chronic inflammation with dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, storiform fibrosis and obliterative phlebitis of the common hepatic duct and right and left hepatic ducts, with all margins inflamed (proximal bile duct margin, distal bile duct margin and hepatic parenchymal margin) as shown in Fig. . All lymph nodes including the celiac, common hepatic, retropancreatic and hepatoduodenal lymph node groups were negative for malignancy. After review of the pathological specimens by a pathologist, we requested further immunohistochemical analysis for IgG4-related disease, and the results showed IgG4-positive plasma cells at 80 cells/HPF for the bile duct wall, with the lymph node showing mixed follicular and paracortical lymphoid hyperplasia with markedly increased polytypic plasma and an IgG4/IgG ratio above 40%.
Postoperatively, the patient suffered from intra-abdominal infection from hepatico-jejunostomy anastomosis leakage that required re-laparotomy and repair of the anastomosis and abdominal toilet. After the re-laparotomy, he recovered uneventfully. The serum IgG4 level obtained after surgery was above 7230 mg/dL. At 6 months follow-up, he had recovered well and maintained normal activity with no recurrence of the disease. His laboratory analysis results were normal, and abdominal CT showed no other biliary stricture. There is no further treatment after discussing with gastroenterologist.