The patient was a 45-year-old woman who was referred to a nearby clinic for fever of 38 °C, cough, and nasal discharge. Although she was treated with antibiotics, her signs were not improved. Chest X-ray and computed tomography showed a 61 × 45-mm anterior mediastinal tumor . Positron emission tomography scan showed 1.8-fold greater uptake than the maximal standardized uptake value in the tumor. A blood test revealed a serum immunoglobulin G level of 239 mg/dL (normal range 870–1700 mg/dL), serum immunoglobulin A level of 24 mg/dL (normal range 110–410 mg/dL), and a serum immunoglobulin M level of 26 mg/dL (normal range 46–260 mg/dL). She was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment for the anterior mediastinal tumor and hypogammaglobulinemia. The histopathological diagnosis of a CT-guided biopsy specimen was type AB thymoma based on the World Health Organization classification, leading to the diagnosis of Good syndrome.
While undergoing diagnostic workup, the patient developed sudden deafness that was treated by corticosteroids. She then became febrile with worsening liver function, showing a serum aspartate aminotransferase level of 127 U/L and a serum alanine aminotransferase level of 132 U/L. She developed serum cytomegalovirus antigenemia, and altogether, the findings were diagnosed as cytomegalovirus hepatitis due to hypogammaglobulinemia. She received 15 g of immunoglobulin and ganciclovir with subsequent improvement in her liver function, with normal serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase. Her serum cytomegalovirus antigenemia was undetectable 2 weeks after initiation of antiviral therapy.
After her cytomegalovirus hepatitis improved, the patient underwent surgical resection for thymoma. Because she was immunocompromised, we performed a video-assisted left anterior thoracotomy with an 8 cm skin incision instead of a median sternotomy to minimize the risk of a perioperative infection . We administered immunoglobulin twice before surgery, and thymectomy was performed 3 months after the diagnosis of cytomegalovirus hepatitis. The postoperative course was uneventful without signs of infection, and the patient was discharged 10 days after the surgery. Macroscopically, the tumor was encapsulated grayish-white mass with a size of 80x42x63mm . Pathological diagnosis showed type AB thymoma .
The patient remains alive without recurrence of thymoma for 26 months. Her hypogammaglobulinemia has persisted, and she has undergone regular administration of immunoglobulin therapy . She has not developed signs of infection since the immunoglobulin therapy was initiated. Sudden deafness was not improved by corticosteroids. Six months after thymectomy, the cochlear implant was performed for deafness.