The patient is an 86-year-old male who presented in 2004 with small nodules on both ears. There was no palpable lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly noted on physical examination. A biopsy of one of these nodules showed widespread infiltration of small, mature lymphoid cells with occasional proliferation centres. Immunohistochemistry revealed the majority of cells to be CD5, CD20 positive and CD 3 and cyclin D1 negative. The peripheral blood showed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 6.9 × 109/L (4–10.5), neutrophils 4.44 × 109/L (2.00-7.00), lymphocytes 1.89 × 109/L (1.50-4.0), haemoglobin 145 g/L (136–170) and platelets 307 × 109/L (150–400). The remainder of the leukocyte differential was unremarkable. A blood smear showed normal appearing lymphocytes with occasional reactive form but no smudge cells or plasmacytoid features. A bone marrow biopsy showed a subtle interstitial small lymphoid infiltration with mature chromatin and no plasmacytoid differentiation constituting less than 20 % of the marrow. Immunophenotyping by flow cytometry performed on the bone marrow confirmed a lambda monoclonal B-cell proliferation with dim surface immunoglobulin expression and CD5 and CD19 co-expression. CD20 expression was evident but CD10, CD23 and FMC7 staining was absent. Conventional karyotype analysis was not performed, but fluorescence in situ hybridization was negative for the CCND1-IGH fusion gene created by the t(11;14). The findings from the ear lobe biopsy, peripheral blood and bone marrow biopsy were thought to be most consistent with a diagnosis of SLL.
In 2007, the patient developed jaundice and abdominal pain due to choledocholithiasis and underwent a cholecystectomy. In addition to cholelithiasis, there was a background population of B-lymphocytes co-expressing CD5 and CD20 with no evidence of CD23, CD10 or cylcin D1 expression. A liver biopsy performed the same year to investigate abnormal liver function tests showed marked lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltration as well as reactive secondary follicles predominately involving the portal tracts, suggestive of autoimmune hepatitis but with an unusual degree of lymphocyte infiltration with the same phenotypic profile as the gallbladder. The patient was treated with azathioprine with a normalization of his liver function tests and symptoms. He was referred to the British Columbia Cancer Agency in July 2012 because of painful erythematous bulging of the periungual areas of all his fingers and toes. Physical examination revealed palpable lymphadenopathy in the left anterior cervical chain, the axillae and the left groin, with the largest lymph gland estimated to be one centimeter in greatest diameter. Splenomegaly was not detected. A biopsy of the affected skin from the right second finger showed a dense and relatively monomorphic infiltration of the superficial and deeper dermis, by small to intermediate sized lymphocytes with condensed chromatin, irregular nuclear contours and minimal cytoplasm . Immunohistochemistry confirmed the vast majority of the infiltrate to be of B-lymphoid lineage with these cells aberrantly co-expressing CD20 and CD5 (while being CD10-, 23-, 43-, and cyclin D1-negative) . These features were in keeping with a low-grade B-cell lymphoma, such as small lymphocytic lymphoma. The patient received radiation to the fingers and thumbs without any significant improvement. The right third, fourth and fifth fingers were re-irradiated in September 2012 but again with only a slight improvement. A serum protein electrophoresis showed a marked polyclonal IgG and IgA hypergammaglobulinemia, with a normal IgM level of 0.74 g/L (0.5-2.00). There was a significant increase in the serum viscosity but only a mild increase in the liver aminotransferase enzymes.
The patient was started on chlorambucil and rituximab in April 2013 and received a total of 6 cycles. The serum immunoglobulin levels decreased significantly with each treatment cycle, as did the swelling and pain in the fingers and toes. The serum viscosity level and the liver function tests returned to their normal ranges. A rise in the liver function tests in the fall of 2014 was not accompanied by any progression of the dermopathy or significant change in the serum immunoglobulins. It was treated successfully with a 3-month course of oral budesonide. The patient was last seen in February 2015, at which time there was no recurrence of the abnormalities of the digits, no progression of the gammopathy, and his serum viscosity and liver enzymes were within the normal range.