In October 2020, a 24-year-old male patient with end-stage kidney disease secondary to hereditary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis treated with peritoneal dialysis underwent ABO-compatible living-related RT from his aunt. He had a history of hypertension and hyperuricaemia. However, he had no history of autoimmune or haematologic diseases or blood or blood product transfusions. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) tissue typing revealed antigen match at loci A*33, B*44, DRB1*13, and DQB1*06. Complement-dependent lymphocytotoxicity test results were negative. Furthermore, donor-specific anti-HLA antibodies were not detected before RT. The CMV immunoglobulin G (IgG) status of the transplant was donor-positive and recipient-negative.
The patient received basiliximab as induction therapy and was maintained on a triple immunosuppressive regimen of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), and methylprednisolone (mPSL) with a stable baseline serum creatinine level of 1.5–1.7 mg/dL. He took prophylactic oral valganciclovir (VGCV) for 6 months without thrombocytopenia (until April 2021). In July 2021, when he visited the outpatient department for routine follow-up, CMV antigenemia was detected in 27 cells/2 slides using the C10/11 method. Although he was diagnosed with a primary CMV infection, in addition to slight fever and fatigue, he had no other symptoms such as cough, gastrointestinal discomfort, diarrhoea, rash, or joint pain.
Laboratory tests revealed slight thrombocytopenia and leukopenia with a platelet count of 12.7 × 104/μL and a white blood cell count of 2,410/μL, respectively. However, a normal red blood cell count (505 × 104/μL) and haemoglobin level (14.4 g/dL) were also found. His renal function (serum creatinine, 1.68 mg/dL) was not worse than that during his outpatient visits. However, he had normal liver function marker and C-reactive protein (0.14 mg/dL) levels. A computed tomography scan revealed no evidence of pneumonia, intestinal oedema, hepatomegaly, or lymphadenopathy . The patient’s clinical course is shown in Fig. .
The patient was admitted to the hospital, his MMF dosage was decreased from 1,500 mg/day to 750 mg/day, and ganciclovir (GCV) was initiated at a dosage of 250 mg/day (5 mg/kg/day). However, CMV antigenemia severity increased (1,449 cells/2 slides). Therefore, the MMF was discontinued and intravenous immunoglobulin was administered at a dose of 5 g/day (100 mg/kg/day) for 3 days. Subsequently, CMV antigenemia showed a decreasing trend. The GCV was continued for 2 weeks and then switched to VGCV 900 mg/day, whereas the MMF was switched to everolimus (EVR). At discharge, laboratory studies revealed a normal platelet count of 18.6 × 104/μL and a white blood cell count of 5,500/μL. However, the patient developed progressive isolated thrombocytopenia after discharge. Therefore, once the CMV antigenemia tested negative, the VGCV was discontinued within 23 days. His platelet count decreased to 0.9 × 104/μL. The patient was then readmitted to our hospital. He had no fever, and a physical examination was unremarkable for petechiae. The laboratory data are presented in Table .
Other blood tests showed a normal white blood cell count (6,250/μL), red blood cell count (513 × 104/μL), and haemoglobin level (14.5 g/dL). No schistocytes were observed. However, a high proportion of immature platelets (immature platelet fraction (IPF); 19.5%) was observed. His serum tested positive for H. pylori IgG antibody. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was not detected in the blood via polymerase chain reaction. Although bone marrow punctures were performed twice, both smears were difficult to evaluate due to peripheral blood contamination. His renal function (serum creatinine, 1.50 mg/dL) did not deteriorate. A urinalysis revealed no proteinuria or haematuria. The CMV antigenemia level was slightly elevated (11 cells/2 slides). Because drug-induced thrombocytopenia due to EVR could not be initially ruled out, the EVR was switched to MMF 500 mg/day. However, his platelet count did not improve despite six platelet transfusions administered within 9 days. After a consultation with a haematologist, the patient was diagnosed with ITP. The patient was administered H. pylori eradication therapy, which included amoxicillin (750 mg twice daily), clarithromycin (400 mg twice daily), and rabeprazole (10 mg twice daily) for 14 days. In parallel, the mPSL (4 mg/day) was switched to prednisolone (PSL) 25 mg/day (0.5 mg/kg/day). Moreover, VGCV (900 mg/day) was administered again because of elevated CMV antigenemia levels. His platelet count increased to 5.9 × 104 /μL in response to treatment, and he was discharged.
The PSL was tapered down to 10 mg/day, but his platelet count was unstable and remained at 2.5–7.2 × 104 /μL. To taper off the PSL dose, eltrombopag (12.5 mg/day) was initiated and then increased to 25 mg/day. Eventually, his platelet count exceeded 10 × 104/μL and the PSL was decreased to 5 mg/day (the common maintenance dose after RT). Several cases of CMV reactivation were also observed. Unlike the severe thrombocytopenia observed after the primary CMV infection, no significant decrease in platelet count or bleeding symptoms were noted. Therefore, the PSL dose was not increased, and each reactivation was treated solely with VGCV (900 mg/day), which improved his condition.