A 48-year-old female admitted to the hospital complaining of 3 times generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The seizures occurred at sleep 2 days before admission and decreased level of consciousness lasted until admission. She was taking sodium valproate since two months ago, when her 1st seizures begun. Her attacks appeared as a series of seizures and the patient had decreased level of consciousness for 4 days following seizures. In her past medical history, she had no developmental problems; however, she had a history of bilateral sensory-neural hearing loss since the age of 35 , also migraine-type headaches and early fatigability in recent years. There was no family history of neurologic diseases. During the 1st physical examination, she obeyed only 1-step orders, had fluent speech with neither fever nor neck rigidity nor optic disc swelling. She had gaze preference to left side, but no weakness or Babinski sign was detected.
Laboratory evaluations demonstrated mild anemia (hemoglobin 11.6 g/dL), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (43 mm), and mild respiratory alkalosis on arterial blood gas analysis. Serum electrolytes, calcium, liver function tests, and creatinine phosphokinase were all normal. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluids (CSF) was also normal. Initial brain Computed Tomography (CT) scan showed no significant lesion.
At the second day of admission, the patient developed right hemiparesis with muscle force grade 4 of 5, and Wernicke aphasia. New brain CT scan showed mass effect on the left hemisphere. Diffusion-weighted brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed large t2-hyperintense lesion in the left parietooccipital lobes with falcine, subfalcine, and right tentorial herniations . Due to suspicion to cerebral vein thrombosis, brain MR-venography was performed, which was normal . Mannitol (20%, 300 mL bullous and 150 mL every 4 hours for 24 hours) and dexamethasone (24 mg daily in divided doses) were prescribed.
Additional laboratory tests indicated elevated arterial lactate (24 mg/dL, normal range: 4.5 to 14.5 mg/dL), normal thyroid function tests, antinuclear antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody, antiphospholipid antibody, rheumatoid factor, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody. No cardiac abnormality was observed on electrocardiogram, transthoracic echocardiography, and saline-infusion echocardiography. Results of transcranial ultrasonography and carotid Doppler were normal. Brain conventional angiography showed no arterial occlusion. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed diffuse slow activity with left side sharp waves.
Biopsy specimen was obtained from left deltoid muscle to rule out mitochondrial disorders. Fresh muscle sample was frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid nitrogen. It showed slight fiber-size variation with few internalized nuclei, and some fibers with slight cytoplasmic basophilic discoloration . Histochemical studies on frozen muscle sample showed multiple ragged red fibers (the modified Gomori trichrome stain, ). Abnormal peripheral proliferation of mitochondria (succinate dehydrogenase stain) was observed in multiple fibers. There was no COX (combined cyto-chrome C oxidase and succinic dehydrogenase stain) negative fiber . Finally, the diagnosis of mitochondrial myopathy with COX positive ragged red fibers was suggested, which was compatible with clinical diagnosis of MELAS syndrome.
Level of consciousness and aphasia were improved on the 4th and 12th days of admission, respectively. She was discharged on the 22nd day of admission with mild hemiparesis under treatment with coenzyme-Q 10, L-carnitine, and multivitamins. After 6 months of follow-up, she had neither paresis nor aphasia, and her seizures were controlled by levetiracetam.