A 60-year-old woman, who complained of “right visual blur for 2 years”, came to our clinics of Eye and ENT hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai on 4 Apr. 2020. The patient had undergone combined cataract extraction and intraocular lens (IOLs) implantation surgery in her left eye in local hospital in 2012, and the IOL was removed in 2015 due to IOL dislocation. She had a history of uterine fibroids surgery in 2012. At the age of 12, she had persistent right facial paralysis of unknown etiology and received facial neurotrophic drug injections (specifically unknown) in local hospital. Then the right side of her face showed progressive atrophy. She did not have history of ocular trauma, infection and local or systemic allergy. Neither did she have myopia, diabetes, hypertension or other diseases. The patient had no family history of genetic diseases.
The patient was examined comprehensively. She had an obvious right facial muscle atrophy with right facial paralysis. Her mouth and nose were deviated toward the right side of hemifacial atrophy . Her best corrected visual acuity was counting fingers in both eyes. The intraocular pressure was normal in her both eyes. She had pseudoptosis eyelid and enophthalmos in the right eye. No vertical and horizontal motility restriction were found in both eye. The pupils were dilated about 10 mm diameters with iris atrophy in both eyes. The right lens was opaque with Lens Opacity Classification System III grading cortical grade 3 nuclear grade 3 and postcapsular grade 4. The zonular fiber was loosened and elongated by nearly 220° (lens subluxation) in the right eye . The fundus examination was normal in the right eye. Her left eye was aphakic with obvious optic nerve atrophy (C/D 1.0) and disorganized macula area. Fundus OCT indicated that the macular structure was normal in the right eye . Her head MRI report showed several ischemic foci in the brain, empty sella and cerebral arteriosclerosis changes. Based on the above examination, the diagnosis was age-related cataract combined with lens subluxation in the right eye, aphakic eye and optic nerve atrophy in the left eye, and progressive hemifacial atrophy (Parry-Romberg syndrome).
After communication and the patient’s admission, the other cataract surgery relevant examinations were performed. We conducted a combined phacoemulsification, IOL and CTR implantation and pupilloplasty surgery for the patient under general anesthesia. The operation was very successful. The patient was satisfied with the UCVA 20/30 on the first day post-operation. The cornea was clear, anterior chamber was quiet, pupil diameter was about 5 mm . We followed her for 3 months, 6 months and 12 months, respectively. No complication was found and the UCVA and BCVA remained 20/30.