A 57-year-old male with a past medical history of controlled rheumatoid arthritis on adalimumab, urticarial vasculitis on prednisone and cetirizine, and testicular seminoma was referred to ocular oncology due to concern for bilateral choroidal metastases. He was diagnosed with testicular seminoma 3 years prior and treated with surgical resection followed by systemic chemotherapy due to retroperitoneal lymph node involvement. He had been in remission for 2 years. He presented with a 2 month history of bilateral blurry vision and photopsias. He had no ophthalmic history, and his only ocular medication was artificial tears. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. Slit lamp exam demonstrated diffuse conjunctival hyperemia bilaterally. There were no signs of inflammation in the anterior chamber or vitreous. Fundoscopic exam showed exudative retinal detachments associated with choroidal detachments in both eyes . There were no retinal or choroidal lesions or signs of vasculitis. B-scan ultrasonography revealed bilateral, 360-degree choroidal effusions with a maximal elevation of 6.7 mm in the right eye and 1.7 mm in the left eye . Ultrasound of the left eye also showed an exudative retinal detachment . The scleral thickness was 0.8 mm in the right eye and 0.9 mm in the left eye. The axial length was 22.7 mm in the right eye and 22 mm in the left eye. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) confirmed diffuse choroidal thickening and exudative retinal detachments bilaterally . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed hypofluoresence more prominent in the nasal than temporal periphery of both retinas . There was no evidence of choroidal metastasis on exam or imaging. Further history revealed that 2 months prior to presentation, the patient had begun taking 50 mg of dapsone daily for his urticarial vasculitis. The patient had previously tested negative for glucose-6-phosphatase dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Despite the negative G6PD deficiency test, it was thought that dapsone could be contributing to his symptoms given their temporal association with the drug. The patient stopped taking dapsone.
Two weeks after he stopped dapsone, his BCVA improved to 20/20 in both eyes and his exudative retinal detachments and choroidal detachments started to improve bilaterally . Eight months after stopping dapsone, his BCVA was 20/20 in both eyes. His exudative retinal detachments were completely resolved, and his choroidal detachments were almost completely resolved. There was mild choroidal thickening nasally and temporally as well as residual retinal pigment epithelium changes at the periphery in both eyes .