A 74-year-old man with a history of metastatic colorectal cancer was admitted with a four week history of progressive dyspnoea and haemoptysis. He had undergone a right hemicolectomy three and a half years previously for a Duke’s A colorectal cancer. Three years post resection, a large single liver metastasis was identified with no other evidence of metastatic disease on PET scanning. CT examination of the chest at the time demonstrated only mild emphysematous changes .
The patient was commenced on FOLFOX chemotherapy (oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin) and underwent six cycles from October to December 2008. A re-staging CT scan in January 2009 demonstrated progressive malignant disease with multiple new metastases within the liver. Chest imaging at this time revealed bilateral peripheral subpleural reticular changes and interlobular septal thickening without evidence of overt lung metastases . No changes to treatment occurred and the patient was planned for second line systemic chemotherapy.
The patient subsequently presented in early February 2009 with four weeks of worsening dyspnoea and haemoptysis. His Creactive protein level was moderately elevated although white cell count and differential were normal. Arterial blood gases demonstrated severe type I respiratory failure. CT pulmonary angiogram excluded pulmonary embolism but demonstrated new patchy infiltrates with interlobular septal thickening . Sputum samples were unable to be obtained and the patient was considered to be too high risk to undergo bronchoscopy.
He was commenced on empirical broad spectrum antibiotics and high dose intravenous corticosteroid therapy. His respiratory failure worsened and after discussion with both the patient and his family, mechanical ventilation was not administered. The patient died four days after admission from progressive respiratory failure.
Post-mortem examination did not demonstrate evidence of an infective aetiology on staining and culture of fresh specimens. There was also no evidence of emboli, thrombus or malignant infiltration within the lungs. Histological examination demonstrated widespread generalised changes within both lungs, with oedema, intra-alveolar haemorrhage and fibrin deposition along with interstitial and intraluminal fibroblastic proliferation without mature fibrosis. These findings were consistent with diffuse alveolar damage.