The patient is a 66-year-old man living in Wuhan, who reported that he had an initial symptom of fever, dry cough and myalgia on January 18, without chills, dyspnea, chest pain, or diarrhea . Two days later (January 20), he went to the clinic because of suspicious COVID-19 infection. The CT scan showed ground-glass opacities (GGO) in the basal segment of the right lower lobe Fig. . Subsequently, a throat swab was obtained, and the patient was confirmed of COVID-19 infection by the reverse real-time PCR assay on January 21.On day 5 of illness onset, he was admitted to the general isolation ward (GIW) in Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University. The patient did not have a history of any underlying pulmonary disease, which were important on the incidence of spontaneous pneumothorax, such as COPD, cystic pulmonary fibrosis, interstitial lung disease, CTD or asthma; Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 36.3 °C, the blood pressure of 126/75 mmHg, a pulse of 71 beats per minute, the respiratory rate of 17 breaths per minute. Laboratory results were summarized as follows:
The lymphocyte count and percentage continuedly decreased .
The neutrophils were initially normal but elevated on day 11 of illness onset .
The level of serum procalcitonin was normal .
The hepatic function measures were normal .
The follow-up CT scan (day 9 of illness) showed multiple patchy ground-glass shadows in the lower lobe of both lungs, which indicated the progression.
The treatment in GIW was basically supportive and empirical. He was given lopinavir plus ritonavir (500 mg twice daily, po.) and abidol hydrochloride (200 mg three times daily, po.) as antiviral therapy, and moxifloxacin (400 mg once daily, i.v.) to prevent secondary infection. To attenuate lung inflammation, low dose of methylprednisolone (40 mg once daily, i.v.) and intravenous immunoglobulin (20 g once daily for 5 days, i.v.) was administered.
The patient’s symptoms continued unabated. On the day 12 of illness, the patient suddenly developed dyspnea with a higher fever of 39.2 °C and a decreased oxygen saturation value of 80%. He was immediately transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and received discontinued non-invasive mechanical ventilation (NIMV) plus high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygen therapy. The initial FiO2 for HFNC was 100%, and maintained with a gas flow-rate of 50 L/min. A model of continuous positive airway pressure-pressure support ventilation (CPAP/PSV) for NIMV was intermittently conducted with an adjustable 5-12cmH2O positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP). The methylprednisolone dose was elevated to 80 mg every 12 h, and intravenous immunoglobulin was administered for five days. Given the increased neutrophils and the procalcitonin level as shown in Table , we started the treatment with cefoperazone sulbactam sodium (3 g every 8 h, i.v.). Besides, inhalation therapy (Budesonide Suspension 1 mg, Ipratropium Bromide Solution 500μg plus Salbutamol Sulfate 5 mg, every 6 h, inh.) was given to dilate bronchioles. After receiving medications, the patient’s oxygen saturation value increased to 94%. Laboratory results were listed in Table . On the day 17 of illness, the patient’s clinical condition improved and received HFNC therapy without NIMV. The methylprednisolone was gradually decreased to 20 mg twice daily, and the supplemental oxygen delivered by nasal cannula at 2 l per minute was started on day 25 of illness, which maintained the oxygen saturation value above 96%. On day 31 of illness, a throat swab was negative for COVID-19 PCR test. Chest X-ray showed diffuse patchy shadows in both lungs, but the shadows were improved. Hence, the patient was transferred to GIW.
In GIW, methylprednisolone was discontinued and prednisone (20 mg twice daily, orally) was administered for anti-inflammatory treatment. Supplemental oxygen was discontinued, and his oxygen saturation value maintained above 94% when he was breathing ambient air. On the hospital day 30, the patient presented with a sudden chest pain, with dyspnea and chest tightness. Emergent chest CT showed a 30–40% left-sided pneumothorax. Immediate thoracic closed drainage was performed and his dyspnea was rapidly improved. The supplemental oxygen was delivered by nasal cannula at 2 l per minute. Subsequent CT showed partially reexpansion of the left lung, with little free air in the left thorax. There were multiple patchy ground-glass density pulmonary infiltrates and fibrosis in both lungs. The chest tube was extracted on the hospital day 34 (day 38 of illness). The patient remained afebrile for more than twenty days, and all symptoms have resolved except myalgia, which was decreased in severity. With five more times negative PCR tests for SARS-CoV-2 virus, the patient was discharged and home quarantine.