The patient is a 45-years-old Chinese woman who visited Yunnan Cancer Hospital and complained of prolonged and increased menstruation. Her past medical history was unremarkable. After an EC diagnosis, the gynecologist performed a total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and pelvic lymph node dissection under general anesthesia. Histopathological examination of surgically obtained samples led to a meso-differentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma diagnosis. Pathological staging of surgery identified the disease as stage IA with no lymph-vascular space invasion. Four months after the operation, colonoscopy and computed tomography (CT) scan showed rectal occupancy. She underwent exploratory laparotomy and was diagnosed with vaginal stump metastasis of EC. As the patient refused to have an enterostomy, the radiation oncologist performed radiation therapy (125I radioactive seeds implantation), followed by six cycles of chemotherapy (paclitaxel combined with carboplatin). Re-examination of imaging data showed that the lesion was in complete remission. During the 5-year follow-up period, there were no reports of the recurrence of gynecological tumors.
Five years later, she visited our hospital with a pelvic mass during follow-up . shows hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining and IHC staining of pelvic mass tissues. IHC staining results: CK7(+), CK20 (-), CEA (+), Vim (-), ER (-), PR (+, 60%), P16(+), Ki67 (+, 50%), P53 (+, 40%), PMS2 (+), MLH1 (+), MSH6(-), MSH2 (-). The patient had two first-degree relatives with endometrial and colorectal cancer and two second-degree relatives with gallbladder and stomach cancer. We provided her with genetic counseling based on her cancer diagnosis and family history of multiple cancers. After obtaining consent, we carried out the genetic analysis of her peripheral blood. Results were as follows: deletions of exon 8 and 9 in EPCAM and deletions of exon 1 and 8 in MSH2 ; thus, we diagnosed the presence of LS. At the same time, the radiation oncologist of our hospital performed interstitial BT of presacral metastatic lymph node, and the prescription dose was 2700cGy. shows three-dimensional conformal dose assessment for interstitial BT.