A 14-year 3-month-old spayed female mixed-breed cat exhibited jaundice and anorexia.
Complete blood count revealed severe non-regenerative anaemia (haematocrit 18%,
reference interval [RI] 30.3–52.3) and thrombocytopenia (47,000/μl; RI
151,000–600,000). Serum chemistry tests revealed an increased bilirubin (4.6 mg/dl;
RI 0–0.9) and a mild elevation in alanine aminotransferase (171 U/l; RI 12–130) and
alkaline phosphatase (253 IU/L; RI 14–111I). On fine-needle aspiration of the spleen
and liver, a large population of pleomorphic lymphocytes of intermediate size
(10–15 μm diameter) was found . Their nuclei were round or indented with a stippled or fine,
evenly distributed chromatin. Nucleoli were multiple and of variable size. These
cells occasionally contain erythrocytes; mitotic figures were rare. In addition,
hepatocytes with green pigments, consistent with bile, were seen in the liver.
The cat was treated with prednisolone at a dose of 1.0 mg/kg/day and L-asparaginase
at a dose of 400 U/kg at days 2, 15, 36 and 58 of treatment. After 15 days, the
treatment induced clinical remission and improvement of the thrombocytopenia
(298,000/μl) and bilirubin (0.6 mg/dl). Administration of prednisolone was continued
and L-asparaginase was administered on days 15, 36 and 58 of follow-up.
Seventy-three days after the initial treatment, the cat showed loss of appetite and
thrombocytopenia (121,000/μl) and high bilirubin concentration (2.5 mg/dl). The cat
was subsequently treated with an intravenous administration of nimustine at a dose
of 20 mg/m2; administration of prednisolone was terminated gradually. The
treatment induced clinical remission again until 114 days after initial treatment,
and the cat was maintained with nimustine and prednisolone. However, the cat died
176 days after initial treatment owing to loss of appetite, severe anaemia
(haematocrit 12%) and liver dysfunction. A complete necropsy was performed on the
day by a clinician at the animal hospital.
At necropsy, the cat presented with severe jaundice, and mild hepatomegaly and
splenomegaly. No lymphadenopathy was confirmed at necropsy. On the cut surface, the
spleen was reddish-brown, and the serosal surface was rough. The liver was also
reddish-brown and bile ducts were enlarged and filled with greenish-brown bile. The
liver and spleen were collected and fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for
histopathological examination.
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues were sectioned at a thickness of 3 μm
and stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Serial sections were subjected to
immunohistochemistry using the primary antibodies listed in . After a reaction with the primary
antibodies, the sections were incubated with the Envision polymer (Dako), an
optiview DAB detection kit (Roche Diagnostics) or biotinylated rabbit anti-rat IgG
(Funakoshi) followed by peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin. Finally, the sections
were visualised with diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride and counter-stained with
haematoxylin. The antibodies were validated by a positive reaction in feline lymph
node and brain tissues, and negative reaction by omitting primary antibody. For
electron microscopy, small pieces of formalin-fixed liver were re-fixed in 1% osmium
tetroxide in 0.1 M phosphate buffer and then embedded in epoxy resin. Ultrathin
sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined using a
transmission electron microscope (JEM-1400Plus; JEOL).
In the spleen, extensive necrosis and haemorrhage with infiltration of neoplastic
lymphoid cells were observed . The neoplastic lymphoid cells diffusely infiltrated the
hepatic sinusoids and hepatic cords in the liver . Neoplastic lymphoid cells were
often observed in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. Necrosis of affected hepatocytes and
intracanalicular bile plugs were frequently observed. The neoplastic lymphoid cells
were of variable size and had scarce cytoplasm. The size of the nuclei was 2–2.5
times the diameter of an erythrocyte, and had coarse chromatin, prominent nucleoli
and an irregular nuclear membrane. Mitotic count was 4/10 high-power fields
(2.37 mm2 field of view); apoptotic bodies were frequently observed.
Neoplastic lymphoid cells often contained erythrocytes in both the liver and
spleen.
Ultra-structurally, the neoplastic cells were often located in the cytoplasm of
degenerated hepatocytes and they often contained one or more erythrocytes .
Immunohistochemically, the membrane of neoplastic cells was strongly positive for
CD3 . Granular
positivity for granzyme B and T-cell intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1/GMP-17) were
observed in the cytoplasm of neoplastic lymphoid cells ( and ). Neoplastic lymphoid cells were negative
for CD8, CD20, CD30, CD56, CD57, CD79a and Iba-1. The Ki-67 index of the neoplastic
lymphoid cells was 50.2% in the liver and 56.8% in the spleen.