A 35-year-old female presented with weakness in both legs and loss of coordination over the last year. She had some numbness and burning from her feet to her knees bilaterally and intermittent episodes of bladder incontinence.
On examination, she had no cranial nerve deficits and strength and sensation were normal in both upper extremities. She had bilateral lower extremity weakness, grade 3/5 in both dorsiflexors, and 4/5 in all other muscle groups. Her reflexes were 1+ at the knees and ankles with a very wide-based antalgic gait.
MRI of the spine was performed which showed a cystic dilation of her distal cord near T12-L1 that had a similar intensity to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and no contrast enhancement. The cord also appeared to be low lying and terminated at the level of L3 [Figures and ].
A laminectomy was performed from T11 to L1 and L5 to S1. Initial attention was focused at the L5-S1 level where an intradural dissection was performed and the filum terminale was indentified, cauterized, and sectioned. After release of the tethered cord, the dura was opened from T11 to L1 and the spinal cord was visualized with an intraoperative microscope. A midline myelotomy was performed and a firm capsule was encountered within the cord. The cyst capsule was incised to internally decompress the cyst and allow for resection while minimizing trauma to the normal surrounding spinal cord. A milky white fluid was expressed upon opening the cyst. Microsurgical resection of the cyst capsule was performed while closely monitoring motor evoked potentials (MEP) and somatosenory evoked potentials (SSEP). A large portion of the cyst wall was resected, but a complete resection was aborted after an 80% decrease in MEP.
The patient awoke with increased weakness, in comparison to her preoperative exam, with 2/5 hip flexors, 3/5 knee extensors, 1/5 knee flexors, and absent dorsiflexors, and plantar flexors. Her neurological function gradually improved over the next four weeks. With rehabilitation, her strength and coordination improved with the exception of her left dorsiflexors, which remained 3/5 strength.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed multiple irregular cystic spaces lined by epithelium . Most areas showed simple or stratified cuboidal cells, but some areas had a squamous appearance. Immunohistochemical stains were reactive for pankeratin, cytokeratin-7, epithelial membrane antigen, and carcinoembryonic antigen . The epithelium was nonreactive for cytokeratin-20, thyroid transcription factor-1, and glial fibrillary acidic protein . The surrounding neuroglial tissue shows strong reactivity for glial fibrillary acidic protein.