A 55-year-old woman with a recent diagnosis of myasthenia gravis (MG) was admitted for worsening neuromuscular weakness after abruptly self-discontinuing pyridostigmine. Review of her records was notable for a two-month history of generalized weakness. A limited workup had been done with a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showing a heterogenous mediastinal mass and pyridostigmine was initiated by her primary care physician. Her presenting symptoms and physical examination showed bilateral facial weakness, ptosis, dysconjugate eye movements, neck flexor weakness, dysphagia, shortness of breath, difficulty clearing secretions and bilateral upper and lower extremity weakness. She was admitted to our neuroscience intensive care unit for myasthenic crisis. She required non-invasive ventilation and was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin and steroids. During further workup, the patient tested positive for acetylcholine receptor-antibody (AChR-Ab) and tested negative for muscle-specific kinase (MuSK) antibodies. A contrast-enhanced chest CT-scan found a heterogenous mass with coarse peripheral calcifications measuring 40 × 33 × 28 mm, arising from or immediately adjacent to the inferior left thyroid lobe extending into the upper mediastinum with a resultant right-sided deviation of the trachea . It was initially confused for a mass of thyroid or parathyroid origins based on its’ location and misleading fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) results. FNA cytology showed follicular cells, macrophages, scattered lymphocytes and neutrophils, and calcifications. The cell block was negative for thyroglobulin and TTF-1; therefore, results were in favor of a parathyroid lesion rather than a thyroid mass. However, parathyroid hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels were normal.
The mass was trans-cervically resected during the same hospitalization. The excised specimen demonstrated a nodular encapsulated piece of tan to dark red-brown soft tissue with both solid and cystic components, and focally calcified. Microscopic examination revealed pancytokeratin and CK5/p63 positive oval-shaped tumor cells consistent with a type A thymoma based on the World Health Organization (WHO) classification . The presence of microscopic trans-capsular invasion classified the lesion as a Masaoka stage II thymoma corresponding to stage T1a based on the TNM staging system . The patient was discharged on prednisone 30 mg daily, pyridostigmine 60 mg four times a day, and methotrexate 10 mg per week with a plan to gradually increase to 20 mg per week.
After 3 months, she showed a remarkable improvement in myasthenic symptoms with residual ocular symptoms and mild dysphagia to solid foods that required diet modification to small bites with no weakness noted on strength testing of the arms and legs. Prednisone was decreased to 25 mg daily and pyridostigmine was continued at the same dose. A repeat CT-scan revealed no evidence of recurrence or metastatic disease. Methotrexate was discontinued in anticipation of radiation therapy and the patient subsequently underwent five weeks of intensity-modulated radiation therapy to the postoperative site to prevent recurrence. At 6 months, the patient showed significant improvement in myasthenic symptoms, with only very mild residual dysphagia; therefore, prednisone was further decreased to 10 mg daily and pyridostigmine to 45 mg BID. At 18 months, she was completely taken off prednisone. No additional immunotherapies were required, and no further hospitalizations occurred during the 18-month follow-up period.