We describe the case of a 46-year-old deaf woman with no other background of interest who suffers from a lesion on the upper lip of 3 months of evolution and progressive growth. No past history of tobacco or alcohol. She presented a 15mm hard consistency, poorly defined borders, erythematous lesion with central ulceration at the level of the philtrum and extension to nasal base .
The CT scan provided no information on local extension due to the presence of dental amalgams, with no evidence of cervical ganglionar disease. An incisal biopsy was done, with the result of microcystic adnexal carcinoma that affected the underlying muscular tissue.
She underwent on a resection surgery with 1cm margins, performing a subtotal resection of the upper lip. Reconstruction was performed with a local advancement flap. A nasogastric tube was placed to avoid infection and reduce lip mobility; which was taken off 7 days later. The patient had an adequate evolution and was discharged from hospital the following day. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid was prescribed for 7 days.
In the definitive anatomopathological study, the following was observed: Adnexal epithelial neoplasm with imprecise borders, poorly delimited, non-encapsulated, growing in plaque-like formation from the superficial dermis into the adipose tissue. Frequent images of perineural invasion consisting of well-defined solid nests and cords made up of cells with large, poorly defined cytoplasmic cytoplasms, poorly demarcated broad eosinophilic cytoplasm and oval nuclei of fine chromatin generally isomorphic without nucleolus with abrupt trichilemmal keratinisation. The epidermis shows no tumour infiltration or alterations in any of its layers. The surgical resection margins are respected, .
The case was presented in the tumour committee of our centre with de decision of no adjuvant therapy and strict follow-up.
There were no postoperative complications. The patient presented adequate aesthetic and functional results. No signs of recurrence 2 months after surgery. She will continue with biannual follow-up, .