A 77-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of a recent and noticeable skull deformity. The patient also had a small and unruptured middle cerebral artery aneurysm regularly examined by magnetic resonance imaging but no other intracranial lesions had since emerged. The patient had a history of well-controlled hypertension but no other significant medical history, including diabetes or head trauma. No relatives had skull deformities.
Physical examination on admission revealed a 6 × 10 cm depressed deformity on the right parietal region but the skin directly above was normal with no tenderness in the deformed area. Computed tomography (CT) showed that the skull of the right parietal bone was thin but no significant neoplastic lesions are shown in [ and ]. The patient underwent two CT scan examinations, one was 10 years ago and the other was 5 years ago, with a complaint of a slight headache, but was unaware of any skull deformity. Retrospective review showed no abnormalities on CT scan done 10 years earlier but slight thinning and deformation of the skull were visible on CT scan done 5 years earlier . This indicated gradual thinning and deformation over a period of years. Laboratory findings related to bone metabolism were normal: serum calcium (Ca) was 9.5 mg/dL (8.6~10.2 mg/dL), phosphorus (P) was 3.1 mg/dL (2.5~4.5 mg/dL), parathyroid hormone was 60 pg/mL (10~65 pg/mL), calcitonin was <0.5 pg/mL, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was 97 U/L (38~113 U/L), interleukin 6 (IL-6) was 3.2 pg/mL (0~0.7 pg/mL), activated Vitamin D was 86 pg/dL (20~60 pg/mL), and rheumatoid factor was 5 IU/mL (0~15 IU/mL).
The patient was cosmetically concerned about the skull deformity. Furthermore, from the viewpoint of the need for pathological examination and since there was not enough bone to protect the brain, a cranioplasty was performed after excising the thinning bone. When the skin over the depressed area was turned over, there was an area of 6 × 10 cm in the right parietal bone that was thinned out and was creating a small crater in the calvaria . Bone removal was performed in a grossly normal area along with the depression, since it could not be determined that the lesion was definitely benign before and during surgery. The outer layer of bone was slightly darkened and thinned but the inner layer and dura mater were normal [ and ]. A resinous compound was used for cranioplasty. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged without sequelae.
Pathological examination showed a significant reduction in cancellous bone in the thinned area. Cortical bone volume was slightly decreased in the outer plate but was almost normal in the inner plate. No lymphatic vessel proliferation, malformation, or lymphocyte proliferation was observed, nor was there any obvious tumor, inflammation, osteolysis, or necrosis . Thus, it was suggested that osteoporosis or bone atrophy had occurred idiopathically and locally, mainly in the outer platen.