A 74-year-old woman presented to a primary care physician with 10 days of mild, non-exertional pleuritic chest pain on deep inspiration and episodic low-grade subjective fever. She denied cough, shortness of breath, lower extremity symptoms, and urinary tract symptoms. She was haemodynamically stable, with normal vital signs as follows: blood pressure 110/69 mmHg, pulse 79 b.p.m., temperature 36.7°C, a normal respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. Her body mass index was 20 kg/m2. Her physical examination was unremarkable, including heart, lung, and extremity evaluations.
The patient had fallen off a ladder 9 weeks earlier and sustained a tibial plateau fracture, which was treated with open reduction and internal fixation. She had completed her course of thromboprophylaxis without complication. At the time of presentation, she was recovering at home with her niece. She had no chronic medical conditions except osteoporosis and had no history of cardiac, pulmonary, renal, or venous thromboembolic disease.
Blood tests and a urinalysis were completed that day. The urinalysis was normal and the complete blood count and estimated glomerular filtration rate were within normal limits. The D-dimer level was elevated at 1653 ng/mL (age-adjusted normal <740 ng/mL). The physician ordered a same-day CTPA at the on-campus radiology suite, but the patient preferred to go home to rest and wanted to defer the imaging for 3 days. The physician explained that the delay was not optimal but would suffice if the patient promised to go to the emergency department if she developed new or worsening symptoms. She agreed. She was not treated with pre-emptive anticoagulation.
The CTPA was performed as re-scheduled and identified a lobar embolus without signs of right ventricular dysfunction. The physician called the patient, explained the results, and advised her to report to the emergency department for evaluation and treatment. The patient, however, felt this was unnecessary because she was feeling better, and she requested comprehensive clinic-based care. The physician said he would call her back after evaluating her eligibility.
The on-call pulmonologist agreed that the patient met the criteria for outpatient care. Her vital signs were all normal. Her PE Severity Index (PESI) score and class of 74 points and class II, respectively, correlate with a low 30-day all-cause mortality., She also lacked evidence of right ventricular dysfunction on imaging, a criterion of the 2019 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) PE guidelines . Additionally, she owned a phone, had ready access to transportation, and had strong family support, all of which favoured outpatient management.
Her physician consulted the healthcare system’s pharmacy-led anticoagulation management service about medication options. On their advice, he prescribed a 5-day course of subcutaneous enoxaparin (60 mg every 12 h) followed by oral dabigatran (150 mg twice daily) for 3 months, which were the medical group’s formulary recommendations at the time. The physician communicated the treatment plan to the patient and her niece, along with basic education on anticoagulation, the expected disease course, and the indications to seek medical attention.
The anticoagulation pharmacist called the patient later that afternoon to continue patient and family education. The patient was seen in the clinic 2 days later and had a phone appointment with her primary care physician 1 week following that. She did not experience a recurrence or complications in the ensuing 3 months, after which the anticoagulation therapy was discontinued. Her D-dimer level shortly thereafter was within normal limits.