EG is a 62-year-old female who presented with right upper quadrant abdominal pain, intermittent in timing and dull in nature, not related to oral intake and not associated with nausea or vomiting. Her past medical history included hypertension, irritable bowel syndrome, osteoarthritis, and a history of recurrent bilateral lower extremity deep venous thrombosis on Warfarin. On physical exam there were no abdominal scars, normal bowel sounds on auscultation, minimal right upper quadrant tenderness to palpation, no rebound tenderness or guarding, no hepatomegaly and a negative Murphy's sign. Her laboratory studies were significant for a GGT of 162 U/L (normal 5–80 U/L), with otherwise normal liver function tests. Tumor markers were negative, with an AFP of 3.1 ng/ml.
Diagnostic imaging included an abdominal ultrasound which revealed a heterogeneous solid mass in the lateral segment of the left hepatic lobe measuring 6.3 × 5.3 × 5.0 cm. A CT scan with intravenous contrast was obtained which revealed a 4.9 × 4.9 cm enhancing, poorly marginated mass in segment II of the liver, with no other intra-abdominal masses or lymphadenopathy .
A CT-guided biopsy was performed which yielded scant tissue with poorly cohesive cells arranged in papillae. PAS-D stain showed focal, small mucin droplets in some cells. Immunohistochemistry was positive for CEA and CK-7 and negative for calretinin, CDX-2, CK-20, Muc-2 and Muc-6. The limited sample was diagnosed as papillary adenocarcinoma, favoring metastasis, on the basis of morphology, special stain results and immunoprofile. However, a second panel of immunohistochemical stains for synaptophysin, CD56 and chromogranin were performed on the biopsy specimen. The tumor cells were negative for chromogranin but expressed synaptophysin and CD56, consistent with the immunoprofile of a neuroendocrine tumor (NET).
Further workup for a primary tumor or other metastatic sites included a negative CT scan of the chest, upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, and a Technetium-99m bone scan. The decision was made to resect the hepatic tumor.
An uncomplicated left lateral segmentectomy (II & III) and cholecystectomy were performed. No peritoneal carcinomatosis was noted upon exploration. The postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged home on the fourth postoperative day.
Grossly, the tumor measured 5.2 × 5.0 × 5.0 cm and had a tan gray, soft, fish-fleshy cut surface . Although there was a focal infiltrative edge, it was well-circumscribed and located 5.9 cm away from the resection margin. The tumor consisted of approximately 40% solid areas and 60% hemorrhagic and cystic degenerative areas. There were no satellite nodules. Surgical margins were negative for malignancy, including the left hepatic artery, vein, duct, gallbladder and portal lymph nodes.
Microscopically, the tumor consisted predominantly of solid sheets and organoid nests of uniform, intermediate-sized, polyhedral cells in a vascular stroma. Other areas showed a trabecular arrangement of these cells with focal stromal hyalinization ; cystic areas were also present. Cytologically, the tumor cells had a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm with perinuclear eosinophilic inclusions and round to oval nuclei with vesicular to finely granular chromatin. There were no areas of necrosis, and mitoses were infrequent.
Immunohistochemistry was consistent with the immunoprofile of the biopsy specimen, i.e. positive staining for synaptophysin and CD56 and negative staining for chromogranin. Additionally, there was immunoreactivity for epithelial markers CK-7, CAM 5.2 and pancytokeratin AE1/AE3. There was negative staining for HEPT, CA19.9 and TTF-1, thus ruling out hepatocellular carcinoma, metastatic carcinoma from the gastrointestinal tract and metastatic lung carcinoma, respectively. The histomorphologic features coupled with the immunohistochemical results supported the diagnosis of a carcinoid tumor/low grade NET.
Follow-up over the subsequent three years included CT scans of the abdomen at six month intervals. To date, no recurrent or metastatic disease has been identified. She remains symptom free and in good health.