In October 2016, a 20-year-old female patient was referred to our outpatient clinic for persistent dry cough.
She reported that at the age of 16 months, because of the inhalation of food bolus, a bronchoscopy was unsuccessfully attempted and the episode resolved with a spontaneous expulsion of the foreign body. Thereafter, her medical history was characterized by recurrent bronchitis. At 11 y.o. she was diagnosed with allergic bronchial asthma (positive methacholine test and positive skin tests for both perennial and seasonal inhalation allergens such as dermatophagoides, cat, horse and pollens of grasses). The patient also reported a history of hypothyroidism and anorexia for which she had been admitted for a few months between 2013 and spring 2015 and fed by a naso-gastric tube.
At her first visit at our outpatients clinic, she complained of persistent irritating cough, which was accompanied by dysphonia in the last month. No dyspnea was reported. The pulmonary function tests showed: FEV1 of 2.88 L (85% of predicted), FVC 3.71 L (96% of predicted) with a FEV1/FVC ratio of 77% and an FEV1/PEF ratio > 8, as in cases of intrathoracic obstruction; furthermore, analysis of the flow/volume curve showed a flow plateau of the expiratory curve with an armpit at low pulmonary volumes. Chest x-ray showed no pathological signs. A cycle of inhalation therapy with LABA and inhaled steroid was started. After 1 month of therapy, the patient was still complaining dry cough. A new spirometry showed findings similar to the previous one , thus confirming an intrathoracic obstruction.
The diagnosis was made after performing a chest CT with contrast medium. The CT demonstrated the presence of a complete double aortic arch (DAA) imprinting both the esophagus and the trachea, causing a greater narrowing in the expiratory phase .
Then, the patient was referred to the cardiothoracic surgery unit for evaluation for a surgical DAA correction. During the hospitalization were performed: a contrast transthoracic echocardiography (showing a possible minimum pulmonary arterial-venous shunt), a fiberbronchoscopy (confirming ab extrinseco tracheal compression) and an esophageal radiography with contrast medium (showing a dilated upper esophagus followed by 30 mm of narrowed caliber). Given the important anatomical impairment and the poor quality of life due to the symptoms, a surgical correction of the DAA was performed, obtaining improvement of the symptoms.