A 54-year-old male with a history of probable neurosarcoidosis, lymphocytic leptomeningitis, seizures, cirrhosis, and possible ethanol use disorder presented with encephalopathy, hypoxia, and several weeks of reported intermittent fevers. For the treatment of neurosarcoidosis, he was taking mycophenolate 1000 mg orally twice a day and last received an infliximab infusion the month prior to presentation.
Approximately seventeen months prior to presentation, the patient underwent extensive investigation for ataxia, near syncope, and encephalopathy, during which he received empiric treatment for encephalitis with corticosteroids, although herpes simplex virus studies were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spine from the cervical spinal cord to the lumbar spinal cord found leptomeningeal enhancement. Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) found 24 white blood cells/mm3 (reference range 0–5 cells/mm3) with 83% lymphocytes (reference range 0–60%), 8 red blood cells/mm3 (reference range 0–0 cells/mm3), glucose of 35 mg/dL (reference range 40–70 mg/dL), protein of 247.6 mg/dL (reference range 15–45 mg/dL), and no oligoclonal bands. Biopsies of the brain and meninges found leptomeningeal fibrosis with prominent arachnoid cap cells. Chest imaging and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography found nonspecific pulmonary nodules and hilar lymphadenopathy. Additional unremarkable studies included bone marrow biopsies, lung biopsies, and sinus biopsies. No infectious pathogens, including Histoplasma, or neoplastic processes were identified.
Eleven months prior to presentation, the patient presented with encephalopathy. He was thought to have lymphocytic leptomeningitis. Serum and CSF angiotensin-converting enzymes (ACE) were normal. CSF studies found 21 white blood cells/mm3 (no reference range) with 91% lymphocytes (no reference range), 1 red blood cell/mm3 (no reference range), glucose of 39 mg/dL (50–70 mg/dL), and protein of 188 mg/dL (15–45 mg/dL). Investigations for infectious pathogens, including serum and CSF fungal studies such as for histoplasmosis, and neoplastic processes were negative. He received intravenous immunoglobulins and corticosteroids for an unclear autoimmune disease. A month later, his neurology providers thought his symptoms and studies were consistent with probable neurosarcoidosis and proceeded with treatment using mycophenolate and infliximab. Six months prior to presentation, he developed keratitis and uveitis.
Vital signs at presentation were temperature of 36.4°C, blood pressure of 80 mmHg/52 mmHg, heart rate of 93 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 91% on 10 liters per minute of supplemental oxygen. Conventional chest radiography found a diffuse miliary pattern, which was also identified on subsequent computed tomography of the chest. CSF studies found 1 white blood cell/mm3 (no reference range) with 95% lymphocytes (no reference range), 1 red blood cell/mm3 (no reference range), glucose of 28 mg/dL (50–70 mg/dL), and protein of 53 mg/dL (15–45 mg/dL).
The patient received empiric vancomycin, piperacillin/tazobactam, and amphotericin for possible bacterial and fungal infections. He underwent endotracheal intubation for acute hypoxic respiratory failure and was extubated approximately one week later. Urine, serum, and CSF antigen studies were positive for histoplasmosis and blastomycosis, but the positive studies for blastomycosis were thought to be secondary to cross-reactivity. Respiratory culture obtained via bronchoscopy grew Histoplasma capsulatum. Fungal blood culture grew Histoplasma capsulatum. Bone marrow biopsy, obtained after the administration of antibacterial and antifungal agents, found hemophagocytosis that was thought to be consistent with the diagnosis of disseminated histoplasmosis, although the bone marrow culture had no growth of pathogens. For treatment of disseminated histoplasmosis, he completed a course of amphotericin, was briefly on itraconazole, and was transitioned to voriconazole, on which he was eventually discharged after a month-long hospitalization. Pneumocystis jirovecii polymerase chain reaction study of the bronchoalveolar lavage was positive for which he received a complete course of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, although suspicion for pneumocystis pneumonia was low. The patient's hospital course was complicated by acute kidney injury, aspiration pneumonia, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia.