In June 2012, a 62-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the V.A. Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology complaining of a rapid increase in the size of her left parotid gland starting 1 month prior to admission. A slight increase in the left parotid gland had been observed since 2007, with no clear upward trend; however, the cause of this increase was not determined. The patient’s medical history was consistent with a 19-year course of RA. Since 2002, she had complained of dryness in the eyes and mouth. Ophthalmologic examination revealed keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and dental examination revealed reduction of salivation to 3.00 ml. SS was then diagnosed. The patient was treated with gold therapy from 1998 to 2002. From 2002 to 2006, she was treated with methotrexate (MTX) at a dose of 15 mg/week. From 2006 to 2012, she was treated with leflunomide (Arava; Aventis Pharmaceuticals, Strasbourg, France).
At the time of admission, the patient’s physical examination showed a marked increase of the left parotid gland, subluxations of the metacarpophalangeal joints, and ulnar deviation of fingers. No night sweats, weight loss, or fever were found. Her peripheral blood counts, electrolytes, renal and liver function, and C-reactive protein were within normal limits. Her serum lactate dehydrogenase and β2-microglobulin levels were elevated to 273 IU/L (normal < 220) and 8.6 mg/L (normal < 3.0), respectively. Her anti-SSA/Ro, anti-SSB/La, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, and antinuclear antibody levels were within normal ranges. Her rheumatoid factor level was 487 IU/ml (normal < 15), and her antibody titers against thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase were 183.3 U/ml (normal < 150) and 462.5 U/ml (normal < 75), respectively.
Histologic examination of the enlarged parotid salivary gland revealed acinar atrophy due to diffuse infiltration by two distinct cell populations . A portion of the salivary gland was effaced by small lymphocytes with round or irregular (centrocyte-like) nuclei with moderately dispersed chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli . The infiltrate contained large salivary gland ducts with epithelial proliferation and lymphoepithelial lesions. A few scattered medium-sized cells with light oval to round nuclei with nucleoli (resembling centroblasts) were observed in this area of the specimen. Neoplastic cells were positive for CD20, Bcl-2, and EBV-encoded small ribonucleic acids (EBERs) by in situ hybridization (ISH) and were negative for Bcl-6, MUM1, HGAL, CD10, cyclin D1, CD30, and latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1). Ki-67 labeling showed a low (approximately 7%) proliferation index in this portion of the specimen. CD23 staining detected a destroyed meshwork of follicular dendritic cells (FDCs). Moreover, the infiltrate contained an abundance of reactive CD3+ and CD5+ T cells. Overall, this portion of the specimen was most consistent with EBV-positive MALT lymphoma. In the same specimen, but distinctly separate from the above lesion, there was a population of large lymphocytes with oval to round and irregular nuclei and prominent nucleoli, with a moderate amount of cytoplasm . These neoplastic cells were positive for CD20, Bcl-2, Bcl-6, MuM1, and HGAL and negative for CD10, cyclin D1, CD30, LMP1, and EBERs by ISH . The Ki-67 staining in this portion of the specimen was approximately 80% and lacked FDCs and lymphoepithelial lesions. This portion of the specimen was consistent with EBV-negative DLBCL of the nongerminal center of the B-cell subtype (according to the Hans algorithm) .
To determine the clonal relationship between the large- and small-cell components, we microdissected the morphologically distinct tumor components. DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks in samples of the MALT lymphoma and DLBCL. The BIOMED primer set and standardized protocol were used to study rearrangements of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) gene . IGH frameworks 1, 2, and 3 assays (tube A, tube B, and tube C) were used to detect VH-JH rearrangements. The fragments were detected on an ABI PRISM 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), and the data were analyzed with GeneMapper software version 4.0 (Applied Biosystems). Fragment analysis showed different clonal pattern rearrangements of the IGH gene between the MALT lymphoma and DLBCL . We could not identify EBV DNA in the DLBCL-containing portion of the specimen by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and breaks in the MALT1/18q21 gene in the MALT lymphoma-containing portion by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography revealed multiple foci of increased FDG accumulation merging into conglomerates in the left parotid and left submandibular areas, with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of up to 50.1. Multiple separated foci of increased FDG accumulation were found in the left cervical, right parotid, right mandibular, and right clavicular areas, as well as in the axillary and groin areas bilaterally (SUVmax 12.3). In addition, we identified individual small (up to 12 mm in diameter) foci of increased FDG accumulation in the soft tissues of the inner surface of the upper limbs along the humeral bones .
Leflunomide (Arava) was canceled in July 2012, and R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) immunochemotherapy was subsequently started. After six cycles, complete metabolic response was achieved and has been maintained in a follow-up period of 72 months. Rheumatoid factor and antibodies to thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase returned to normal levels following immunochemotherapy and stayed within normal limits during the entire follow-up period.