A 40-year-old man without any prior medical history of chronic comorbidities arrived at the emergency department (ED) experiencing a sudden onset of acute spinning sensation of his surroundings, left-sided arm weakness, blurring of vision, and an unsteady gait at 7 am. He woke up at around 6 am, called his friend for help, and arrived at the ED after 55 minutes with a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score of 4. The patient’s friend mentioned that he was confused and had slurred speech. The patient has smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for 22 years and has alcohol consumption; both are risk factors for acute stroke and carotid dissection. An urgent Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the head, CT perfusion, and CT angiogram were performed that showed bilateral severe stenosis of the long segment (2 cm) of the distal cervical segment of Internal Carotid Arteries (ICAs), moderate right vertebral artery stenosis of a long segment (2.5 cm) at the V2 segment, and bilateral symmetrical increase time to drain (TTD) and maintained cerebral blood volume (CBV) in the perfusion study as shown in . He had been given an intravenous Tissue Plasminogen Activator (Alteplase) within the window. At 11 am, the patient’s Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) dropped from 15 to 10, and the NIHSS score increased from 4 to 24. The patient had witnessed a generalized tonic-clonic seizure, and he received lorazepam and levetiracetam. Urgent repeat CT head was requested to rule out intracranial hemorrhage (ICH), and there was no evidence of ICH. An Interventional Neuroradiologist was consulted, cerebral angiographic catheterization was performed and showed bilateral flame-shaped signs of occlusion implicating both cervical ICA typical for dissection. These long dissecting segments measure around 6-7 cm in length. There is a mild focal narrowing of the cervical right vertebral artery at the V2 segment, likely dissection, as shown in .
The patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit (MICU) for closed neuromonitoring. During the next 24 hours in MICU, the patient’s condition was stable without worsening neurological deficits. MRI brain, MRA brain, and neck vessels showed multiple variable-sized areas of acute ischemic strokes in the right frontal lobe, basal ganglia, corona radiata, and centrum semiovale along the MCA territory. Similar areas of acute ischemic stroke are seen in the left frontoparietal lobes—bilateral severe stenosis of the upper cervical and cranial segment of bilateral ICAs. The visualized parts of the right MCA and ACA are markedly attenuated. There was severe stenosis of the middle 1/3 segment of the right cervical (V2) vertebral artery, as depicted in .
On the second day of MICU admission, repeated stereotyped abnormal movements of the right arm rising in the air and bringing to face were witnessed, most likely hemichorea-ballism spectrum, and a portable video EEG showed frequent random generalized slow background suggestive of diffused cerebral cortical dysfunction. Routine laboratory blood workup for vasculitis was negative, as detailed in . The patient was started on Aspirin, Atorvastatin, Levetiracetam, and Escitalopram. On the fourth day, the patient was stepped down to the stroke unit, followed by a transfer to the rehabilitation center.
After the 6th-month follow-up, intracranial CT angiogram showed focal outpouching of the right ICA opposite to the C1 level, representing ICA pseudoaneurysm as shown in . The patient was discharged after five months from an adult daycare rehabilitation program with complete independence in eating, sphincter control, good comprehension, expression, and social cognition while modified independence in grooming, dressing, bathing, toilet, bed, and supervised climbing stairs with Functional Independence Measure (FIM) was 118 /126 (93.65%). Mini-mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 30/30.