A healthy 71-year-old African-American female was referred for evaluation of an incidentally noted right conjunctival lesion suspicious for melanoma. It had been discovered incidentally during a routine optometry assessment 3 months prior and had since shown no change in size or morphology. The patient denied any visual complaints, eye pain, redness, itching, tearing, or ocular discomfort. There was no history of discharge or bleeding from the lesion. Her past ocular history was notable for bilateral cataract surgeries 7 years ago, with no history of trauma, eye disease, chemotherapy use, occupational exposures, or use of industrial chemicals. Her past medical history was notable for endometrial cancer treated with hysterectomy 13 years ago, currently in remission. Her medical conditions included type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia, that were medically controlled, and her family history was unremarkable. Her social history was notable for tobacco use, active smoking of 1/4 packs per day for 20 years.
Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both the eyes. Intraocular pressures were 16 mm Hg and 13 mm Hg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Anterior segment examination of the right eye showed a superior palpebral and forniceal darkly pigmented thick conjunctival melanocytic lesion measuring 8 mm × 6 mm without feeder vessels, intrinsic cysts, or vessels. The lesion appeared to move freely over the underlying tarsus. An adjacent 2 mm × 1 mm caruncular pigmented elevated lesion with surrounding melanosis was also noted. In addition, there was additional pigmentation temporal to the main lesion over the palpebral conjunctiva (a, b). Additionally, both eyes showed diffuse pigmentation at the limbus and bulbar conjunctiva consistent with complexion-associated melanosis. Dilated fundus examination of both eyes was unremarkable.
Given the tumor’s unusual anatomical location and suspicious clinical features, an excisional biopsy was planned. The patient underwent excision of the lesion along with 3–4 mm margins and double freeze thaw cryotherapy to the margins along with amniotic membrane graft, as well as excision of the nasal bulbar conjunctival lesion with double freeze cryotherapy and direct closure. Histopathology of the lesion revealed proliferation of heavily pigmented melanocytes, mature nevus cells, and abundant melanin-laden macrophages in the underlying stroma with multiple cysts, consistent with a compound cystic nevus. No evidence of pagetoid spread or dysplasia was detected (c). Excisional biopsy of the nasal bulbar conjunctiva showed a normal density of unremarkable melanocytes confined to the basal layer of the epithelium, consistent with complexion-associated melanosis, or racial melanosis. The patient has had an uncomplicated postoperative course and will be continued to be monitored for recurrence (d).