A 56-year-old female suffered a sudden onset of consciousness disturbance. She was brought to our hospital by ambulance. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated SAH and ventricular enlargement . Three-dimensional CT angiography (3D-CTA) revealed a dissecting aneurysm of the right VA proximal to PICA . On an angiogram, the right VA was dominant and thicker than the left . We considered occlusion of the right VA to be a possibility because the left VA was not hypoplastic and slightly thickened. Therefore, endovascular embolization of the aneurysm including VA with preservation of PICA was planned.
Endovascular embolization of the dissecting aneurysm was performed under local anesthesia. A guiding catheter with balloon was advanced to the right VA. A microcatheter (Excelcior SL-10, Stryker, MI, USA) was advanced to the right VA on the distal side of the aneurysm with the aid of microguide-wire (Transend EX, Stryker) via the guiding catheter. The balloon of the guiding catheter was inflated for flow control of VA. A Guglielmi detachable coil (4 mm × 8 cm) was initially placed in the aneurysm and right VA proximal to PICA. Then, the aneurysm cavity was embolized roughly with larger coils. After partial embolization of the ruptured portion of VA, the micro-catheter was pulled and placed in the proximal VA, and the VA was tightly embolized. The dissecting aneurysm and VA were embolized with a total of 12 platinum coils. A postoperative angiogram showed complete occlusion of the right VA proximal to PICA including the dissecting aneurysm. Left vertebral angiography (VAG) revealed opacification of the distal right VA and right PICA . The aneurysm was not opacified.
Postoperatively, to prevent thrombosis, intravenous administration of heparin was begun after embolization and continued for 7 days. She was treated with fasudil hydrochloride hydrate (90 mg/day) for vasospasm, and was kept in a hypertensive state. Her systolic blood pressure was kept higher than 140 mmHg. The intravenous administration of 80 mg of sodium ozagrel was performed to prevent vasospasm and thrombosis. These treatments for vasospasm and thrombosis was started 2 days after the VA occlusion. Fifteen days after embolization, the patient vomited. CT demonstrated right cerebellar hemorrhage . Emergency angiography showed complete occlusion of the aneurysm and no recanalization of the right VA. The right PICA was patent and fed by retrograde blood flow from the contralateral VA . Therefore, conservative treatment with strict blood pressure control less than 130 mmHg was performed. Administration of fasudil hydrochloride hydrate and sodium ozagrel was stopped. Her symptoms of nausea and vertigo gradually improved. The patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation with mild cerebellar ataxia and bilateral abducens palsy on the 39thday.