A 46-year-old woman was admitted to hospital due to backache and foot pain for 1 d caused by a fall injury.
The patient accidentally fell from a height of 3 m due to mental abnormality. After the injury, she felt persistent pain in the lower back, pelvis, and calcaneus, accompanied by a sense of swelling, restricted movement of the lower back and feet, and no local skin rupture or bleeding. At that time, there was no fever, cough, chest tightness, or difficult breathing and no discomfort such as nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. She presented to hospital after 1 d due to severe pain.
She had a history of mental disorder 1 year ago and took medication intermittently. She had no history of cardiovascular disease, hypertension, or diabetes. Since December 2019, there had been no history of residence in Wuhan or Hubei Province, and no contact with diagnosed or suspected COVID-19 patients, but there was a confirmed case near her residence.
The vital signs were stable on admission. The patient’s temperature was 36.6 °C. Bruises were seen in the back and calcaneus without skin rupture. The lower posterior chest of both sides showed dullness on percussion and moist rales at the end of inspiration on auscultation.
The laboratory findings showed slightly elevated white blood cell count (10.88 × 109/L) and lowered lymphocyte count (1.04 × 109/L) on February 8, 2020. All other values including coagulation, albumin, alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate aminotransferase were within normal limits. However, on review of blood test on February 9, 2020, the white blood cell count and lymphocyte count were 8.39 × 109/ L and 1.29 × 109/ L, respectively.
On February 7, 2020, X-ray examination confirmed compressed fracture of the 12th thoracic vertebra and fracture of the spinous process of the 11th thoracic vertebra and the calcaneus of both sides. Chest CT performed on February 7, 2020 revealed patchy GGOs scattered in both lungs and discontinuity of the cortex in the 12th thoracic vertebrae and pubic bone on both sides, and CT of the head and abdomen showed no obvious signs of trauma. Although COVID-19 was highly suspected, no nucleic acid test was performed, as the white blood cell count and lymphocyte count showed an alleviated condition.