A 60-year-old man presented with severe sudden headache. The patient had no history of head injury and chronic headache, such as migraine or cluster headache. The patient received regular medications for hypertension and hyperlipidemia. No neurological deficits were observed on general physical examinations.
Head computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging showed the right subdural hematoma. Magnetic resonance angiography showed bilateral dilated frontal cortical vein .
Digital subtraction angiography showed dAVF in the bilateral frontal region supplied by the anterior and posterior ethmoidal branches of the bilateral ophthalmic arteries .
To prevent rebleeding, endovascular therapy was planned. The patient was informed of our therapeutic strategy. When it was difficult to perform safe endovascular therapy, surgery was considered. Under general anesthesia, a 7-Fr guiding sheath (Shuttle, Cook, Bloomington, Indiana, USA) was placed on the origin of the left cervical internal carotid artery. Scepter XC 4 mm/11 mm (MicroVention-Terumo, Tusin, CA, USA) was placed distal to the ophthalmic artery origin because selectively catheterizing DeFrictor (MEDICO’S Hirata, Osaka, Japan) and CHIKAI10 (Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan) were difficult. After DeFrictor was placed close to the fistula, control contrast injections were performed to confirm the safe position of DeFrictor distal to the origin of the central retinal arteries and no dangerous anastomosis. Then, 20% N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) diluted with oily contrast medium was infused into the fistula under road map guidance not to reflux and migrate the ophthalmic artery. Although complete occlusion from the left ophthalmic artery was achieved, feeders from the right ophthalmic artery remained. Embolization with 20% NBCA from the feeder of the right ophthalmic artery was performed using the same method used on the left side. Finally, the control contrast injection in both internal carotid arteries showed complete fistula occlusion . Subdural hematomas could be treated conservatively.
One day after the procedure, the patient complained of anosmia. To evaluate olfactory function in this patient, the Alinamin F test was performed and revealed that the patient had an impaired sense of smell.
On the 7th day after the procedure, angiography did not reveal recanalization of the fistula. The patient was discharged 1 month after with anosmia only.