A 47-year-old man without any remarkable cardiovascular risk was admitted with acute chest pain and ST segment elevation in precordial v2–v5 leads. His blood pressure at admission was 110/70 mmHg with a heart rate of 82 b.p.m., and he did not present any signs of heart failure. An urgent coronary angiogram was performed through right radial access, showing an abrupt occlusion of middle left anterior descending artery (LAD) (, arrow and Video 1), without distal flow, suggesting a Type 2 SCAD. The other coronary arteries appeared normal (Video 2). A BMW wire was advanced through the occlusion, without restore of distal flow . A Finecross microcatheter (Terumo, Japan) was then placed in distal LAD and pulled back with continuous contrast injection through the catheter ( and Video 3), restoring the flow with a residual spiroid intimal flap and with relief of the chest discomfort . High-sensitivity troponin T raised up to 907 ng/L (normal range > 14 ng/L), with a peak creatinine kinase of 871. Echocardiogram showed apical and distal-anterior akinesia, with mild systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction of 45%). Given the complete occlusion of the artery and the low-risk-bleeding of the patient, medical treatment with aspirin 100 mg/day, clopidogrel 75 mg/day, and 80 mg enoxaparin/12 h was maintained during admission performing a 320-sliced coronary computed tomography (CT) (Toshiba Medical Systems, Japan) 1 week after the procedure to control the evolution of the artery in order to avoid the risk of a second coronary angiogram. The CT showed complete resolution of the intimal flap with restore of the distal flow and a residual image at the SCAD entry point (, arrow). Fibromuscular dysplasia was also ruled out during admission with vascular study of iliofemoral, carotid, and intracranial arteries.
Following the recommendations of the European SCAD study that advocate dual antiplatelet therapy during the acute phase the patient was discharged under treatment with 75 mg of clopidogrel, 100 mg of aspirin 100 mg, 20 mg of pantoprazole, and 2.5 mg of bisoprolol with normal systolic function and remains asymptomatic at 4 months of follow-up. Echocardiogram performed 4 weeks after the admission showed no regional wall motion abnormalities with preserved left ventricular function.