A 63-year-old male presented with an abnormal well-defined mass along the right paratracheal side, detected by a chest x ray performed 2 weeks earlier, to exclude a diagnosis of pneumonia. We admitted the patient to our hospital to take the medical history, perform blood exams and contrast-enhanced CT scan, to better characterize the lesion. The CT scan of neck and chest confirmed the presence of a 6 × 8 cm heterogeneously enhanced mass in the right paratracheal area, characterized by some signs of necrosis inside. In particular, the mass was located behind the superior vena cava and left brachiocephalic artery, along the right side of the trachea, until reaching the azygos vein and the right bronchus, without any sign of compression regarding the organs around . Interestingly, the contrast-enhanced CT scan showed a thin strip of tissue that linked the left thyroid lobe to chest mass, consisting with the hypothesis of a right “mediastinal thyroid lobe” . No family history of thyroid disorder nor clinical signs of thyroid disease were detected. The results of his laboratory tests were all within normal limits and included a TSH level of 1.46 μUI/L (normal range, 0.40 to 4.00), free T3 of 1280 pmol/L (normal range, 600 to 1950), and free T4 of 12.3 pmol/L (normal range, 7.8 to 19.4). The serum levels of thyroid autoantibodies were also within normal ranges; Ab anti-TPO was < 25 U/mL (normal range, < 100) and Ab anti-TG was < 25 U/mL (normal range, < 100). As previously described, the differential diagnosis of anterior mediastinal mass is very important and includes some pathologies which need different management and treatment. We decided that the best treatment was to remove it surgically. We planned a double surgical approach consisting in a classical transverse cervicotomy to perform the left thyroidectomy followed by a longitudinal sternal splitting to remove the mediastinal mass and complete the thyroidectomy . We preferred to perform a mini invasive surgery for the chest, through an upper partial sternal split, extended to the 4th intercostal spaces. Briefly, the manubrium was completely divided and the sternotomy carried to the level of the fourth interspace. The subsequent divarication of the sternum cause a fracture which then was later stabilized with sternal stitches. This technique was able to provide an effective surgical field, minimizing the surgical complication related to the total sternotomy.
The histological exam confirmed that the chest mass was thyroid tissue, no neoplastic cells were found but only the typical features of the multinodular goiter. No post-operative complications were observed, neither hypocalcemia nor nerves injuries, thus the patient was discharged on the sixth post-operative day.