A 63 years old male patient came to our attention with persistent, severe pain and loss of ambulation. The patient undergone multiple surgical curettage and radical debridement of the left femur osteomyelitis in the past, he has no history of any systemic diseases or immune disorders. In the last 6 months, the patient complained of frequent intense pain, and having to take high dose pain-killer. This patient was frequently upset by the persistent dull thigh pain that causes a lot of difficulties in daily activity, he is unable to stand and walk upright. Upon further examination we found the patient were apyretic, the left leg was 11 cm shorter compared to the right, gluteus muscle atrophy. Range of motion was measured by standard universal goniometers, follow the neutral-zero measuring method and SFTR reporting system . Active and passive ROM of left hip: flexion 100, extension 00, abduction 00, adduction 00, internal-rotation 00, external rotation 00; Rom of left knee: flexion 100, internal rotation 00, external rotation 00.
Diagnostic imaging with X-ray, CT scanner and MRI revealed a Cierny-Mader Type IV Chronic Osteomyelitis of left femur with degeneration of the left knee and hip joints, Femoroacetabular impingement, communicated acetabular, avascular necrosis of left femoral head . White blood cell (WBC) 18,700 G/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 1 h: 76 mm; 2 h: 91 mm; C-reactive protein (CRP): 68.51 mg/L; Pro-calcitonin 1.35 pg/mL. Microbiological test result from bone biopsy confirmed the presence of the Staphylococcus aureus causative of the osteomyelitis. After thorough work-up, the definitive diagnosis for this patient was chronic persistent osteomyelitis of the left femur.
With the patient's condition gradually worsen, amputation would be required. Total femoral replacement was indicated as a salvage therapy to preserve anatomy and functionality. We made sure to openly discuss with the patient about all the aspects of the procedure before gaining his consent to proceed with the procedures.
The surgical procedure is performed at National E Hospital, Vietnam; the second largest hospital in Hanoi, Vietnam with modern operating theater which regularly perform over 10,000 surgery annually. The lead surgeon is DT Trung, MD., PhD, who is a leading orthopaedician in Vietnam with 20 years of experience and over 20 peer-reviewed papers in Orthopaedic.
A thorough and careful evaluation of the patient condition was carried out; the patient was scheduled for a two-stage procedure strategy. First stage of the procedure: Under general anesthesia, in supine position, with a lateral incision from 4 cm proximal great trochanter to the antero-lateral of tibia tuberosity, we performed radical surgical debridement of soft tissue and total left femur resection , antibiotic spacer with biological cement containing vancomycin and gentamycin shaped around a Kuntscher nail was fitted in place of the femur. After surgery, according the antibiotics assay, the antibiotic treatment of S. aureus with: intravenous vancomycin (after replacing with oral clindamycin), cephalosporin III, trimethoprim-cotrimoxazole (after replacing with quinolones III). Antibiotic treatment was continued for 07 weeks after the first operation. At the end of this period the hematological and biochemical test result of the patient was WBC 7000 G/L; ESR 1 h: 26 mm, 2 h: 38 mm; CRP: 27.7 mg/L; Pro-calcitonin: 0.7 pg/dL.
Second stage of the surgical procedure: Under general anesthesia, follow the incision of the first operation, we removed the spacer, samples were taken for microbial culturing. A femoral modular mega-prosthesis (Beijing Chunlizhengda Medical Instruments Co., Ltd.) joined to constraint acetabular 3D-printing (total hip replacement) and a tibial component via a rotating hinge mechanism (total knee replacement) was positioned and secured in place of the femur, after confirming the range of motion of the prosthesis, the surrounding muscle, tendon and soft tissue was sutured and reconstructed anatomically.
After the operation, lower limb discrepancy was reduced from 11 cm to 3 cm, the patient continued three intravenous antibiotics: Vancomycin, Clindamycin, Cephalosporin III. Microbial culture of the samples returned negative for S. aureus. Two weeks after operation the active ROM of hip was: 0–800/200–150/150–150; active ROM of knee: 0–400; we also evaluated the patient's satisfaction with the adapted version of the Short Assessment of Patient Satisfaction (SAPS) scale in which the score was 26/28 ; Visual analogue scale scoring (VAS) reduced to 1. Postoperative X-ray showed good structural integrity and anatomical closeness . Rehabilitation was initiated promptly after the procedure which focuses on pain management, maximizing active ROM, strengthening exercises and independent daily life activities. After a 2-month rehabilitation period, the patient recovered basic ambulation without any complaint of pain or detectable residual infection. The 1-year follow-up confirm no pain or any residual infection, the patient retain normal ambulation and daily function, normal imaging. The patient expressed gratitude and was highly satisfied with the result of the treatment and rehabilitation process.