An 8-year-old boy had admitted to our emergency department after falling on his left hand with outstretched upper extremity. The patient had admitted to our clinic 30 min after trauma. In the clinical examination of the patient, there was an open wound in the transverse antecubital region. Distal humerus and articular surface could be seen by looking through the wound . Although neurological examination showed us no pathology, distal pulses could not be palpated in vascular examination. In the conventional radiographies, a posterior elbow dislocation without accompanying fracture was detected . Because of the strong possibility of brachial artery injury, the patient had consulted to the vascular surgeon and an emergent surgical intervention had planned for this patient.
The patient received emergent surgery under general anesthesia. The transverse incision had lengthened 1 cm and the buttonhole dislocation had released. Following the exploration of the open wound in the elbow, open reduction was performed. Intra-articular debris was washed out. Brachial artery was identified in the open wound without continuity and distal pulses were still impalpable. The vascular surgeon had attended to the surgery and the brachial artery had repaired primarily. After the treatment of vascular pathology, the stability of the elbow was evaluated and the elbow was stable during 0–140° of flexion and extension. Varus and valgus stress tests were negative. Due to the stability of the elbow, we decided to follow this patient with splint instead of an external fixator. The wound was closed in a standard fashion with the approval of vascular surgeon; upper elbow splint was applied at 100°. We did not observe any postoperative vascular or wound complications in the follow-up. After 4 weeks follow-up with splint, using angle adjustable hinge elbow orthotics started controlled active assistive exercises. By the end of the 12th week, the orthotics was removed and movement was completely allowed.
Six months after the operation patient had no any complaints about his elbow. The patient's elbow range of motion, in supination–pronation arc, has been detected as 80–85° and in extension–flexion arc; range of motion has been detected as 0–140° . There was no varus–valgus instability. In conventional radiographies, Hastings class II heterotopic ossification was detected between the anterior capsule and the brachialis muscles .