A 68-year-old man was reported to our clinic with complaints of chronic pain in the sacrococcygeal and perianal regions. His pain was aggravated by sitting or during defecation. The pain would stop while changing his position, from sitting to standing, or when he was lying. Although there was no history of major trauma, the patient reported occasional slipping and falling. He was hypertensive and suffered from type 2 diabetes mellitus. He had L3-L4-L5 decompression and stabilization due to lumbar spinal stenosis. Imaging revealed osteopenic bone structure. Upon physical examination, the sacrococcygeal region particularly was sensitive to direct touch. His neurological examination was normal. In the imaging studies [lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and X-ray], a fracture in the fifth sacral and first coccygeal segments was observed as evidenced by a bony edema and coccyx angulation . The patient was first treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and donut pillows were recommended. During the follow-up period, two weeks later, pericoccygeal local anesthetic and steroid injections were administered to the patient, but it did not relieve the pain. The pain was severe enough to affect his daily life. As the conservative treatment did not control the pain, the patient was evaluated for invasive procedures. After informing the patient about the benefits and possible risks of the procedure, the decision was taken to perform coccygeoplasty using PMMA cement. The patient was placed on the operation table in the prone position, administered with spinal anesthesia, and sedated. His pelvis and abdomen were supported with rolls and pads. By placing C-arm fluoroscopy over the operation table, the entry point was determined at the midline using anteroposterior and lateral planes (which corresponded to the painful area of the sacrococcygeal junction) targeting to fill the first and second segments of the coccyx with an angle of about 45 degrees using an 18-gauge Chiba needle. Cannulas were placed at the entry points by checking on the lateral and anteroposterior projections. The projections were checked by fluoroscopy, and approximately 2.5-3 mL of PMMA cement injection was administered . After carrying out the final fluoroscopic controls in the lateral and anteroposterior projections, the operation was completed. No complication was encountered . Postoperatively, the patient was mobilized on the same day. On the first day after the operation, he was discharged from the hospital with complete pain relief. The patient confirmed having no pain on the third postoperative month and so did not need any analgesics.
The ethics committee of our hospital did not require written approval, as there was no use regarding patient identity.