A 53-year-old male patient was admitted to our Department due to syncopal episodes over the past few months. He was also suffering from fatigue and mild anorexia. Prior to referral he had consulted a cardiologist, who performed several diagnostic tests that failed to reveal a certain cause. Blood pressure was normal (systolic blood pressure, SBP: 103 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure, DBP: 73 mmHg). Unfortunately, a 24-h-ambulatory blood pressure test was not performed, but orthostatic hypotension was found (SBP: 95 mmHg, DBP: 66 mmHg).
At that time, he was not receiving any regular medication. Fourteen months earlier he was diagnosed with malignant melanoma with right axillary lymph node involvement. After radical lymph node dissection, he received treatment with nivolumab (about 21 cycles). Histology was consistent with a BRAF-Wild-Type Mutation. The last cycle of nivolumab treatment was given about 6 months before admission. Cancer tumor staging showed no metastasis or local invasion and the last magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal. A previous endocrine disorder was not known. The patient was not smoking or consuming alcohol on a regular basis. His level of consciousness was normal. Severe headache, diarrhoea or abdominal pains were not reported. Physical examination showed no skin pigmentation or vitiligo. The family history was negative for any endocrine disorders or cardiovascular disease, as far as the patient was concerned.
Laboratory tests revealed serum hyponatremia (125 mmol/l), which was rather persistent, according to the patient’s records. Almost 3 weeks prior to amission to our department, sodium levels of 123 and 125 mmol/l were documented from the cardiologists, who performed the initial examinations. The patient’s symptoms aggravated over the past month, therefore it is unlikely that hypophysitis has previously been overseen. Moreover, sodium levels after completing the treatment with nivolumab were found normal in the routine examination by the general practitioner. Oncologists did not document any hyponatriemia either. We found an asymptomatic hypoglycemia (58 mg/dl) at the time of admission. Blood glucose (BG) was further regularly controlled and found normal. Serum-free thyroxine levels (FT4), serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), as well as Anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPOAb) and anti-thyroglobulin (TgAb) antibodies were at normal range, suggesting a normal thyroid function. No goiter was observed. There was no indication of gonadal insufficiency or hyperprolactinemia. Serum und Urine Osmolality were normal; in the absence of polydipsia and polyuria a diabetes insipidus was excluded . Inflammatory markers such as CRP protein were normal and tuberculosis as well as sarcoidosis were excluded by the oncologists.
To further clarify the cause of the mild anaemia -without eosinophilia- we performed a routine control of the gastrointestinal tract. Endoscopy findings were consistent with chronic, Helicobacter Pylori-negative gastritis.
Because of suspected adrenal insufficiency we decided to perform stimulation tests, beginning with short ACTH-Test; 250 µg of synthetic ACTH were injected intravenously and blood samples were taken 0, 30 and 60 min after administration. The results were consistent with adrenal insufficiency , since cortisol prior to test was low and did not reach the cut-off of 18 µg/dl (< 500 nmol/l). An insulin-induced-hypoglycemia-test followed under strict monitoring-control. The patient fasted for more than 8 h and the test was performed early in the morning. No further hypoglycemia was documented before the test, as already mentioned. Insulin was injected intravenously at the recommended dose of 0.15 IU/kg. Hypoglycemia was documented after 45 Min, with BG levels by 50 mg/dl and the insulin infusion was stopped. As seen in Table , ACTH- and Cortisol levels were low (normal range for adults 6–76 pg/ml and 10–20 ug/dl respectively) and despite symptomatic induced-hypoglycemia, a stimulation was not observed. The moderate increase of growth hormone (GH) suggested a mild insufficiency and the diagnosis of a secondary adrenal insufficiency was made. Finally, we performed an MRI imaging, which revealed thickened pituitary stalk, consistent with hypophysitis . The patient’s condition gradually improved after administration of hydrocortisone, with normalisation of sodium levels. The patient was discharged from the hospital on 30 mg hydrocortisone daily. He was provided with all necessary information and instructions, as well as emergency hydrocortisone injection kit prior to discharge.