We present the case of a 55-year old male with a 30-year history of heart failure in the course of familial DCM and MEPPCs. The patient’s family phenotype was characterised in Table and Fig. .
His mother suffered from unrecognised heart disease with ‘heart palpitations’ and died suddenly at the age of 27; his daughter died of heart failure at age of 9, while waiting for a heart transplantation, and his son received a heart transplant at age of 23, while experiencing heart failure symptoms along with frequent complex arrhythmia since the age of 20. In our patient, the amiodarone treatment was ineffective and was discontinued after amiodarone induced hyperthyroidism. At 46 years of age the patient had a cardioverter-defibrillator (implantable cardioverter-defibrillator - ICD) implanted. At 49 years of age lead-dependent infective endocarditis (Metyciline resistant S. aureus - MSSA) was diagnosed. A cardiosurgical lead extraction, tricuspid valve annoloplasty and epicardial ICD implantation was performed. At 51 years of age, the patient was diagnosed with coronary artery disease (CAD) based on the coronary angiography, which showed permanent occlusion of the LAD distal section with a permanent lack of perfusion in the middle and apical segments of the anterior wall and septum as demonstrated by the SPECT Tc-99 m study. During the next few years the patient presented with NYHA class II symptoms and moderate left ventricle (LV) function impairment (left ventricle ejection fraction - LVEF 40%). At 53 years of age, an increasing number of MPVCs was found to be associated with the worsening of the myocardial function (LVEF 20%). His 12-lead surface electrocardiogram (ECG) showed single sinus (or similar to sinus) beats, with different RBBB pattern and multiple LBBB-like pattern ventricular extrabeats with variable axis . The 24-h Holter ECG revealed sinus bradycardia, junctional ectopies, very frequent MPVCs (~ 65,000/24 h) with multiple different quite narrow morphologies, mainly RBBB- and LBBB-like patterns, as well as about 3500 episodes of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (nsVT) - max. 30 beats, 170/min. and slow ventricular rhythms (4400 episodes) as a consequence of sinus dysfunction . The MPVCs comprised of > 80% of the whole-day rhythm.
Due to a lack of therapeutic options, the patient was enlisted for heart transplantation (HTx) in the planned mode. In the meantime, it was decided to perform whole-exome sequencing in the most severely affected living person in the family (the patient’s son). Based on the result of the identification of the known mutation in Nav1.5 in both affecteds (the patient and his son), we applied the known antiarrhythmic treatment that led to removing the patient from the waiting list for HTx. In addition, we tried to clarify the differences in the course of the disease between two living affecteds in the family. The clinical characteristics of the proband and his son were summarised in Table .
The DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood by means of a phenol extraction. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed in the proband’s son on HiSeq 1500 using SureSellect Kit (Agilent Technologies) as described previously . In WES, the mean coverage of the DNA sample was 75-fold with 98.6% of the targeted exons covered at least 10× and 94.6% covered at least 20×. The SCN5A variants identified with WES were followed-up in the proband’s family with Sanger sequencing using a 3500xL Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The results were analysed using the Variant Reporter 1.1 Software (Applied Biosystems).
The patient and his son carried a rare heterozygous SCN5A NM_198056.2:c.665G > A (p.R222Q) variant in the transmembrane helical segment S4, which is the voltage-sensor . In the patient’s son , the SCN5A NM_198056.2:c.1673A > G (p.H558R) variant was furthermore found, inherited from the unaffected mother .
The patient was treated according to the ESC/AHA guidelines for treatment of heart failure , with optimal dosage of ACEI (ramipril 10 mg/day), beta-blocker (bisoprolol 10 mg/day), diuretic (furosemide 80 mg/day) and spironolactone (25 mg/day) as well as oral anticoagulant (acenocoumarol). Recently, he was also treated with ASA and statin (atorvastatin 20 mg/day) for CAD. Based on the published data , quinidine (Quinidine sulphate in tablets a 200 mg) was administered. After the first quinidine dosage we observed a rapid antiarrhythmic effect , which was confirmed in the 24-h ECG monitoring (reduction of MPVCs from > 80%/day, including VT/nsVT to 3-5%/day, without VT/nsVT). The echocardiographic examinations repeated over 2 years revealed the sustained improvement of the LV contractile function (LVEF 20-25% → 30-34%). We have observed a significant reduction in heart failure symptoms and a significant improvement in physical efficiency .
After 12 months of treatment, the patient presented a mild manifestation of drug-induced diarrhoea and mucous membrane dryness, and had to stop taking quinidine. The lack of compliance resulted in an increasing number of ventricular arrhythmia (MPVCs > 80% in 24-h ECG registration). We have modified the daily quinidine dosage with positive antiarrhythmic response. After the 2 year follow-up we did not find an increasing number of MPVCs. In consequence, the number of MPVCs in the 24-h ECG monitoring was stable (~ 4000/day) and the patient’s myocardial performance remained stable (LVEF-35%).