A 66-year-old woman presented with a year-long history of exertional dyspnoea, peripheral oedema, and postural neck pulsations.
She had a history of hypertension, type II diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, previous excision of a benign left atrial myxoma, previous ablation for typical atrial flutter, and dual-chamber pacemaker implantation for sinus node dysfunction 14 years ago. This was a Medtronic™ Versa® dual-chamber pacemaker with active fixation Medtronic™ 5568 and 5076 leads to the RA appendage and RV apex, respectively. An echocardiogram performed prior to her initial pacemaker implant was normal apart for minor aortic valve sclerosis.
Pacemaker interrogation revealed that the patient was 100% atrially paced and had developed AV conduction disease with a 10% ventricular pacing requirement at a base rate of 60 b.p.m. despite the use of an algorithm to minimize ventricular pacing (AAI-DDD mode).
Clinical examination revealed peripheral oedema and an elevated jugular venous pressure with prominent V waves.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed severe TR due to apparent tethering of the septal leaflet of the TV by the RV lead (, Video 1A and B). The RV was non-dilated with preserved systolic function. Left ventricular systolic function was normal, and there were no other significant valvular abnormalities.
The patient’s case was discussed in our cardiology/cardiothoracic multi-disciplinary team meeting. Her estimated risk of inpatient surgical mortality for TV replacement or repair was 4.1% (EUROSCORE II). Transvenous RV lead extraction with leadless pacemaker implantation was chosen as the first-line strategy, with a view to subsequent TV surgery (either via sternotomy or minimally invasive surgery) if severe TR persisted despite extraction of the RV lead.
The patient was admitted electively for the procedure. This was performed under general anaesthesia with prophylactic antibiotic cover. A temporary pacing wire was placed through left femoral venous access. A left infra-clavicular horizontal incision was made through the old scar using a PlasmaBlade™ (Medtronic Plc, USA). Dissection was made to the pacemaker generator and it was liberated from the pre-pectoral pocket. The RV lead was extracted using a 9 Fr Evolution® RL sheath (Cook Medical, USA). The RA lead was tested then connected to an Accolade SR (Boston Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) device. The device was placed in a TYRX™ envelope (Medtronic Plc, USA) and the wound was closed in two layers. Right femoral venous access was obtained and a Micra AV™ (Medtronic Plc, USA) was implanted using the well-described implantation technique. A mid-septal location was chosen on this occasion. The atrial sensing setup feature was run determining an A4 threshold of 1.0 m/s2, A3 threshold of 3.7 m/s2, A3 window end of 860 ms, and a sensing vector of 1 + 3. Sequential AV pacing was successful .
Post-procedural checks including a chest X-ray were satisfactory . The patient was allowed home the same day.
The patient remained markedly breathless (New York Heart Association III) and described ongoing pedal oedema at her 2-week follow-up appointment. A repeat TTE was performed which confirmed severe residual eccentric TR. It showed RV dilatation with basal and mid-RV diameters of 4.5 cm and 3.7 cm, respectively, which may have developed secondary to persistent severe TR. The patient was referred to the cardiothoracic surgical team for TV surgery (repair or replacement). The operation is yet to be performed at the time of writing this manuscript, delayed by the current pandemic.
Interrogation of the Micra™ AV revealed satisfactory parameters with a sensed R wave of 19.7 mV, the impedance of 950 Ω, and threshold of 0.38 V @ 0.24 ms. Manual atrial mechanical testing revealed a small atrial mechanical marker (A4) signal, though this was well sensed . The device was in VVI+ mode 87% of the time, favouring intrinsic AV conduction. Ventricular pacing (VP) was delivered 9.9% of the time. This was divided into 4.4% AMVP and 5.5% VP . The projected battery longevity was 14 years. The interrogation of the AAI device was also satisfactory.