A 79-year-old woman with a history of hypertension and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation presented to our department complaining of fatigue, pleuritic chest pain (worsened with deep inspiration), dyspnoea at rest, non-productive cough, and low degree fever during the last few days. The patient had undergone an uncomplicated TAVI procedure (26 mm CoreValve Evolut Bioprosthesis) due to severe symptomatic aortic stenosis 6 months before. On physical examination we documented normal heart and lung sounds on auscultation, normal jugular venous pulse, oxygen saturation of 98% on room air, a breathing rate of 22/min, temperature of 38.0°C, heart rate of 112 beats/min, and blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg. An increase in white blood cell count of 14.4 × 109/L (3.6–10.5 × 109/L), sedimentation rate of 86 mm/h (<30 mm/h), procalcitonin of 0.05 ng/mL (<0.5 ng/mL), and an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) of 177 mg/L (0.0–5.0 mg/L) were observed. Electrocardiogram before TAVI showed a regular rhythm with normal QRS at the heart rate of 75 b.p.m. At the visit to our hospital, left bundle branch block and PR segment elevation in augmented voltage right arm (avr) were recorded . Cardiac enzymes were within the normal limits [CK 45 U/L (0–170 U/L), creatine kinase-muscle/brain (CK-MB) 13 U/L (0–24 U/L), Troponin-T 15 pg/mL (<14 pg/mL)]. A transoesophageal echocardiogram showed a Medtronic TAVI bioprosthesis in regular position and normal opening movement with the presence of a mild paravalvular regurgitation (Grade 1). There were no signs of endocarditis. The left ventricular systolic function was normal [ejection fraction (EF) 65%]. The patient was subjected to diagnostic imaging including abdominal ultrasound, X-ray, and computed tomography of the chest. Besides a minimal left pleural effusion these imaging studies did not reveal significant pathologic findings.
The case was presented at our weekly multidisciplinary meeting with cardiology doctors, respiratory doctors, and radiologists. Following team discussions, an empirical antibiotic treatment with clarithromycin and piperacillin/tazobactam together with an anti-inflammatory therapy with ibuprofen 400 mg twice daily to control chest pain were started on the presumption of an acute bronchitis. Despite 7 days of antibiotic therapy, the patient still reported no improvement of her initial symptoms. Furthermore, values of leucocytes (14.8 × 109/L) and CRP (249.5 mg/L) were increased, value of procalcitonin (0.05 ng/mL) remained normal. As a result, we changed the antibiotic therapy to meropenem and vancomycin. The patient’s blood cultures and other examinations in medical microbiology and virology such as bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic infections were normal.
After 11 days of antibiotic treatment, the patient developed high fever (38.5°C), increased pleuritic chest pain and malaise. The leucocytes count and CRP peaked at 19.9 × 109/L and 274.6 mg/L, respectively. We reconsidered antibiotic therapy and changed it to daptomycin, fosfomycin, and ceftazidime. A transthoracic echocardiographic examination showed a new small pericardial effusion (3 mm measured at end-diastole) extending to the right ventricular apex without signs of tamponade . A fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography with computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) showed diffused increased FDG-uptake of the pleura and the pericardium consistent with inflammatory changes .
In addition, a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study ( and ) was performed demonstrating an oedematous thickening of the pleura and pericardium with increased contrast enhancement corresponding to an aseptic pericarditis without a circumferential effusion. It showed a normal left ventricular function (EF 59%) with end-systolic volume of 41 mL and end-diastolic volume of 100 mL.
We excluded any infectious, metabolic, drug-induced, or neoplastic genesis and considered the diagnosis of late onset autoimmune-mediated pericarditis after TAVI (post-cardiac injury syndrome). Therefore, treatment was immediately initiated with colchicine 0.5 mg and prednisone 20 mg daily in addition to the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory therapy that had already been started.
The patient reported clinical improvement in the following days even though the white blood cell count remained high (likely due to prednisolone effect). The CRP value continuously decreased down to 16.8 mg/L on the day the patient was discharged . Repeated electrocardiography controls demonstrated a normalization of PR segment changes. A chest ultrasound showed resolution of the pleural effusion. The dose of prednisolone was then reduced to 5 mg daily, and the anti-inflammatory therapy was stopped. A 3-month combined therapy with prednisone and colchicine was recommended.
At 3 months after discharge, the patient had no dyspnoea, no fever, and no chest pain after having taken regularly steroids and colchicine. In a follow-up visit at the local cardiologist, the presence of a minimal, haemodynamically insignificant pericardial effusion was documented. The pleural effusions were completely resolved. Her CRP value had remained under 5 mg/L.