Our patient is a 76 year-old lady, who has been diagnosed with a loco-regionally advanced, stage IVb (T3N2cM0) squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue in September 2018. Surgical resection was offered to her early in the course of her disease, but she refused it. She was on a regular follow up with our medical and radiation oncology facilities, and since she was deemed unfit for systemic therapy, she was managed with radical loco-regional radiation therapy, 70 Gy/35 fractions, and she finished her course in December 2018, with a partial response, with an eventual development of pulmonary metastasis that was detected on follow up imaging in January 2019.
On the 22nd of March 2019, the patient presented to the emergency department with altered mental status, progressively increasing generalized abdominal pain over a period of 3 days associated with subjective fever. She also had worsening of her chronic constipation, however, this wasn’t associated with nausea, vomiting, or abdominal distention. On examination, she looked dehydrated, confused and in severe pain. Her initial vital signs were: blood pressure 109/56 mmHg, heart rate 110 beats per minute, oxygen saturation of 99% on 4 L nasal cannula, and she was afebrile at that time. Her abdomen looked slightly distended, with guarding and tenderness on palpation. Her initial laboratory findings were: white cell count 12 × 1012/L, haemoglobin 12 g/dl, lactate 3 mmol/L, PH 7.33, pCO2 43 mmHg, and bicarbonate 21.1 mmol/L. Her ECG showed sinus tachycardia, and acute abdominal series revealed the presence of free air under the diaphragm. Computed Tomography scan was obtained, and revealed moderate pneumo-peritoneum, that appeared to be likely from a perforated proximal transverse colon, with a moderate amount of peri-hepatic and pelvic free fluid . Computed Tomography images of the brain were unremarkable. On the premise of the diagnosis with a perforated viscus, the family was consented for exploratory laparotomy. Intra-operatively, a perforation at the distal ileum was found 30 cm away from the ileocecal valve, with no palpable masses in or near to the perforation site. The affected area was resected , anda primary side-to-side anastomosis was done. The rest of the bowel was not affected. The patient was shifted to the intensive care unit being intubated. Histopathological examination was consistent with poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma that stained positive for CK7, CK5/6, and P63, and negative for CK20, and CDX2 (A–D). The surgical margins were also positive for the disease.
During her stay, she was steeply deteriorating, with increasing doses of inotropic medications. On day 16 post operatively, she developed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates with thick tracheal secretions, and need of higher ventilator settings, and her drain output was increasing; picture that was worrisome of ventilator associated pneumonia and anastomotic leak. On day 16 post operatively, she arrested, the cause of death was attributed to multi-organ failure disorder.