A 65-year-old male being worked up for metastatic disease was found to have multiple exudative vitelliform lesions in both maculae . These lesions are found in patients with metastatic melanoma. Biopsy of an occipital lesion confirmed melanoma . A positron emission tomography (PET) scan also showed lesions in the lung, axilla and gallbladder . No choroidal masses were found. Through radiology, the gallbladder was felt to be the site of primary malignancy. The metastatic lesions, as well as the exudative macular lesions both improved with monoclonal antibody (ipilimumab) treatment . One year following treatment there was no sign of recurrence of disease. The patient has been followed up every 3 months since using PET scans.
The patient initially had symptoms of dizziness and the feeling that he was missing characters to the left of fixation for seconds at a time while reading. Following resection of his R occipital mass, and treatment with chemotherapy his symptoms slowly improved over a 6-month period. He denied ever having significant blurring, any types of photopsias, or trouble with light/dark adaptation. His vision was correctable to 20/25 in his right eye and 20/20 in his left eye. His color vision and pupils were normal. Visual fields by confrontation were normal while Humphrey Visual Field test (HVF) 24-2 revealed a small central L hemianopsia attributable to his occipital disease. His intraocular pressure was 13 mmHg in both eyes. Slit lamp examination was unremarkable. Funduscopic examination revealed crisscross pigmentary changes in both maculae with muting of the foveal reflex. Both optic nerves and peripheral retinas were normal. Motility examination was normal. Heidelberg optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed multiple shallow retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) detachments with significant disruption of the outer retinal layers with bright vitelliform lesions throughout the areas of detachment . The areas of detachment on OCT responded to treatment over a 4-month period without recurrence .
The patient presented with significant retinal RPE damage as seen in the fundus photographs . Use of the OCT helped delineate the numerous smaller shallow serous detachments in each eye, which is not typical of patients with Best’s Disease or central serous retinopathy (CSR). Patients with CSR and Best’s Disease typically have one central larger area of detachment making them more acutely symptomatic. In Best’s disease there is usually also lipofuscin accumulation centrally causing the “egg yolk” appearance. The crisscross and linear pattern RPE changes seen in our patient with EPVM are also atypical for Best's disease and CSR. The OCT helped monitor a response to the patients’ systemic treatment without the need of angiography. Fluorescein angiography revealed the expected area of RPE damage with minimal staining and no leakage . Fundus autofluorescence imaging delineates the linear yellowish lipofuscinoid deposits and areas of old detachment, and small areas of pigment epithelial atrophy .