A 57-year-old male was diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma (clear cell adenocarcinoma with sarcomatoid component) metastasized to lungs, adrenal gland, and sacrum. Treatment with combination immunotherapy nivolumab, an anti-programmed cell death-1 (3 mg/kg), and ipilimumab, an anti-CTLA-4, (1 mg/kg), was initiated. Twelve days after receiving first dose of ICI, the patient was admitted to the hospital with persisting headache and myalgia in the lower extremities. He reported palpitations without other cardiac symptoms. The physical examination represented normal findings with vital parameters SpO2 96%, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, blood pressure 109/75 mmHg, pulse 119 beats per minute, and normal temperature. Laboratory test revealed elevated troponin I (TnI) and creatine phosphokinase (CPK) (both normal at baseline): TnI 5760 ng/L (normal < 45), creatine kinase-myocardial band 147 ng/L (normal < 7), myoglobin 5230 µg/L (normal range 22–77), CPK 3510 U/L (normal range 40–280) along with transaminitis [alanine aminotransferase 158 U/L (normal range 10–70) and aspartate aminotransferase 287 U/L (normal range 15–45)]. Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated new-onset first-degree AV block and right bundle branch block . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed mild apical hypokinesia with slightly reduced left ventricular systolic function (ejection fraction 50%) (Videos ), whereas the values were normal at the baseline multigated acquisition scan. Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could not exclude hypophysitis.
As the patient had no cardiovascular risk factors, the initial work-up gave rise to suspicion of ICI-related myocarditis and myositis, assuming the elevated liver enzymes derived from affected inflammatory and cardiac markers. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for continuous cardiac monitoring (telemetry) and daily TTE. Cardiac MRI (CMR) failed due to arrhythmia (ventricular extra systoles). Subsequently, computed tomography (CT) coronary angiogram, or coronary angiography, was not performed to exclude acute coronary syndrome due to strong clinical suspicion of immune-related myocarditis. Considering the invasive character, endomyocardial biopsy was not carried out.
Within 48 h, the patient developed complete heart block requiring a temporary pacemaker. Despite immediate administration of high-dose glucocorticoids (initially intravenous methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg/day, increased to pulse therapy, i.e. 1000 mg intravenous methylprednisolone per day for 3 days), the TnI level increased to 16 400 ng/L , and ventricular tachycardia (VT) arose. Additionally, intermittent binocular diplopia, ptosis, and weakness in proximal muscles developed, and myalgia progressed. Supplementary diagnostic assessment demonstrated elevated myasthenia gravis-associated antibodies [anti-acetylcholine receptor (IgG) 2.7 nmol/L (normal < 0.4), anti-titin (IgG) 2.6 AU (normal < 1.0)]. Electromyography showed evidence of a myogenic disorder without dysfunction of the neuromuscular junction.
Clinical symptoms and paraclinical data were interpreted as ICI-related myocarditis and myositis with myasthenia gravis-like symptoms. Due to lack of improvement, intravenous abatacept (500 mg every 2 weeks, for a total of 5 doses) and oral MMF (1 g twice a day for 3 months) was introduced 18 days after ICI therapy. Intravenous methylprednisolone (2 mg/kg/day) was continued. Rapidly the TnI and CPK level decreased , and the patient reported instant musculoskeletal improvement. However, intermittent VT persisted, and clinical cardiac arrest caused by VT developed 21 days after ICI. External defibrillation was applied once, and paced rhythm was resumed. An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator was inserted.
Troponin I was normalized 6 weeks after initiation of ICI, VT decreased and tapering of steroid was initiated. Four days later the patient was discharged. Afterwards, TnI remained normal, while intermittent non-sustained VT (1–10 beats/min, heart rate 180 beats/min) continued for the next 2 months. Transthoracic echocardiography abnormalities persisted throughout life. Symptoms of myositis (myalgia, muscular weakness, ptosis, and diplopia) gradually decreased during the hospital stay, but gait support was still required at discharge. Ultimately, myositis almost remitted with marginal weakness of the upper limbs remaining.
Additional treatment with ICI was permanently discontinued. Positron emission tomography/CT executed 3 months after the introduction of ICI, showed progressive disease in lungs, adrenal gland, and bones. Targeted treatment with axitinib (a vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor) was introduced.
Eleven months after initiation of ICI the patient passed away due to cancer.