The work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .
In November 2017, A 36 years old Saudi male with known case of IDDM, presented to the emergency department complained of 1 month history of diarrhea and cough. Diarrhea was watery with productive cough, yellowish in color, associated with shortness of breath and weight loss, no history of hemoptysis or abdominal pain, no contact with sick patient or using drug. No past surgical history. No significant family neither psychological history.
On examination: Conscious oriented alert, not on respiratory distress, not pallor neither cyanosis, with lower limb edema grade 3, the patient was visibly underweight. Cardiovascular examination was unremarkable, Chest examination decrease air entry on left side with inspiratory crackle. Other systemic examinations were unremarkable.
His workup WBC 14.2 × 109/L,hgb7.1 g/dl, platelets 660 × 109/L, albumin 18 g/L, ESR 89 mm/h, CRP 74 mg/L and ECG was showing normal sinus rhythm. Chest x-ray revealed a cavity at the left side with pleural effusion . Patient was admitted for workup for his chronic diarrhea. His CT of chest and abdomen (, ) revealed left upper lobe air space consolidation associated with secretion with in left upper main bronchus as well as cavity lesion inside, measuring 3 × 4 × 3 cm, with bilateral plural effusion, abdominal wise there was left inferior subpleural cavity like abscess measuring about 11 × 10 × 12 cm invading pleural and splenic communicating with posterior fundus of the stomach, with upper pole splenic infarction. Bronchoscopy of the left bronchus was having thick mucus in which BAL and biopsy was taken, the BAL culture and sensitivity was negative, while the biopsy was positive for mucormycosis. Upper GI endoscopy showed gross spleen invading fundus of the stomach as shown in .
Surgical management was considered for him including: left thoracotomy with left upper lobectomy, exploratory laparotomy, splenectomy and wedge resection of the stomach .
He was covered pre- and post-surgery with amphotericin B and micafungin for 2week. Culture of specimens from lung and spleen showed Mucormycosis as shown in . After two weeks patient was discharged in good condition, for follow up at outpatient clinic.