An independent 85-year-old male taking aspirin and apixaban with a history of chronic atrial fibrillation, stroke, ventriculoperitoneal shunt, and two prior sternotomies for bioprosthetic AV and MV (31 mm Medtronic Mosaic bioprosthesis) replacements presented with decompensated congestive heart failure and pulmonary oedema resulting from severe mitral regurgitation from a flail bioprosthetic MV caused by chronic degeneration. His AV was functioning well (no aortic insufficiency, 8 mmHg mean AV gradient). Left-ventricular (LV) ejection fraction was 55% with a normal LV internal end-diastolic diameter of 4.7 cm. With a blood gas PaO2 of 57 mmHg on room air, he was profoundly dyspnoeic on high-flow nasal cannula with 2+ bilateral lower extremity pitting oedema. Coarse lung sounds were auscultated bilaterally, and jugular venous pressure was elevated. He had a loud holo-systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border radiating to his left axilla. The patient was severely deconditioned and had a calculated 30-day mortality of 20%. He was deemed a prohibitive surgical candidate by the heart team and was recommended ViV-TMVR.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) demonstrated flail of the bioprosthetic MV leaflets and a small neo-LVOT . Vegetation or peri-valvular regurgitation was not evident. His NT-proBNP was elevated at 8200 pg/mL. An electrocardiogram-gated chest computed tomography angiogram (CTA; 0.4 mm slice thickness) was taken during end-systole pressure, and a 1.89 cm2 neo-LVOT area was measured . This CTA was reconstructed to create a 360° VR (360VR) model using a VR surgical planner (SRP; Surgical Theater, Cleveland, OH, USA; , see , ). Using an Oculus Rift S headset (Meta, Irvine, CA, USA), the model was utilized for procedural planning. A 29 mm SAPIEN 3 valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA), selected based on the already implanted MV, was placed inside the bioprosthetic MV and analysed in VR at different angles . The neo-LVOT area was measured in VR by first selecting a polygon and placing it at exactly where the smallest neo-LVOT area would be. The polygon edges were moved in and out of the tissue and valve planes to ensure correct positioning for accurate neo-LVOT measurement. This was verified by viewing the plane from different angles. A 3.02 cm2 area was measured.
ViV-TMVR was performed via a transeptal approach from the right common femoral vein under general anaesthesia using fluoroscopic and TEE guidance (, ). The patient was intubated, diuresed with IV furosemide, and started on diltiazem. A transseptal puncture was performed using a standard BRK XS transseptal needle (St Jude Medical, St Paul, MN, USA) from the right femoral vein. A 145 cm pigtail catheter was advanced through the septum and into the LV where it was exchanged for a Confida guidewire (Medtronic, Fridley, MN, USA). A 16 French 36 cm E-sheath (Edwards Lifesciences) was advanced, and an Armada-35 12.0 × 40 mm balloon (Abbott) was used for septostomy. The balloon was withdrawn, and a 29 mm SAPIEN 3 was advanced across the septum and deployed inside the bioprosthetic valve under rapid pacing. Once the valve position was confirmed, the wires and sheath were removed, and excellent haemostasis was achieved using Perclose sutures. The patient tolerated the procedure well, was discharged the following day with furosemide, aspirin, apixaban, and diltiazem, and doing well at 18 months.