A 32-year old white man presented to our department with a 1 month history of eye redness (left eye). He had already been observed by a general practitioner who advised the patient to seek ophthalmological advice if the lesion would not resolve within 3 weeks. In the first ophthalmic evaluation, the patient presented with 2 ocular lesions. These were best observed in biomicroscopy. There was an enlarged violet-coloured mass on the right superior eyelid which had evolved over the course of 1 week . There was also a mobile bulbar conjunctival lesion with a bright red colour, approximately 5 mm × 5 mm, in the superior temporal quadrant of his left eye . The patient did not mention any pain or visual changes. The lesions looked like a chalazion and a subconjunctival haemorrhage, respectively . Best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes (Snellen chart) and subsequent fundoscopic exam was normal. Patient denied previous trauma history or drug abuse. Other systemic features included facial seborrheic dermatitis , a characteristic of HIV-AIDS. Past medical history was unremarkable with no serological evaluation for HIV. The main differential diagnosis at the time of presentation was blood dyscrasia, due to the duplicity of lesions. We also considered KS as part of an immunodeficiency syndrome unknown to the patient. Blood cell count and differential analysis were normal and coagulation disorders were excluded. However the HIV-1 test was found positive and the presumed diagnosis of ocular KS was established. The patient elected for an excisional biopsy of the conjunctival mass and for an incisional biopsy of the right superior eyelid. In addition, HIV-AIDS staging was performed. A CD4 cell count was determined to be 23/mm3 and the viral RNA load of 427,000/ml. Pathologic examination confirmed KS diagnosis of both lesions. Postoperative evaluations were uneventful and no signs of recurrence were noticed during the 6-month follow-up.
Further multiple disciplinary assessments showed a diffuse KS with skin and supraglottis involvement. The patient was offered treatment for both AIDS and diffused KS. In order to achieve disease control, patient initiated systemic antiretroviral therapy – HAART - and systemic chemotherapy under medical supervision with regression of the tumour.