A 13-year-old boy presented with a red progressive neoplasm that had been on his right eye for 9 months. The boy had slightly decreased visual acuity without bleeding or obvious irritation before the initial onset . Before the appearance of the ocular manifestation, he had undergone an allogeneic peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) transplantation and subsequent immunosuppressive therapy 17 months earlier as part of the treatment for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. An examination of the bone marrow biopsy showed a complete remission of the acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Furthermore, there were no significant findings in the ocular or social histories.
A telangiectatic, reddish, and slightly elevated lesion of 4 × 5 mm was first noted on the nasal sclera near the corneal limbus of the right eye 8 months after the PBSC transplantation. He was then treated for episcleritis in another hospital with 0.3% tobramycin /0.1% dexamethasone eye drops (TobraDex, Alcon Inc., Texas, USA) four times a day, TobraDex eye ointment every night, and pranoprofen eye drops (Pranopulin, Senju Pharmaceutical Co., LTD, Osaka, Japan) four times daily. When the patient initially came to our clinic, the visual acuity of his right eye became worse. The neoplasm presented as are dish elevated lesion that was 10 × 10 mm in size and had invaded into the cornea and extended close to the margo pupillaris . Three months after the patient’s parents refused a biopsy and surgical treatment, the reddish lesion progressed into two thirds of the cornea . After being administered a dose of 2.5 mg/0.1 ml subconjunctival bevacizumab (Avastin; Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA) per site at the 1 and 5 o’clock positions adjacent to the cornea, the nourishing vessels of the neoplasm became narrowed and the conjunctival congestion was slightly alleviated two weeks later . Three months later, the cornea was completely invaded with a red appearance and the lesion progressed slightly at the nasal scleral surface. His visual acuity had decreased to hand motions at a distance of 10 cm. The ultrasound bio-microscopy (UBM) images showed that the whole cornea was occupied by hypo echoic solid tumors and only a thin layer of posterior corneal stroma had normal reflectivity in the center . The thickness of the central cornea was more than 3000 μm. The anterior chamber and vitreous cavity of the eye, as well as the cranial bones, were not involved . The density of reflectivity of the neoplasm that invaded the cornea and conjunctiva was almost the same as that of muscular tissues in magnetic resonance images . No similar lesions were found in the other parts of the body. The analysis of whole blood cells and a bone marrow biopsy did not show any evidence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia recurrence, except that the percent of neutrophils decreased to 24.0%, and leukomonocytes and monocytes increased to 64.5% and 8.8%, respectively. Detection of a Treponema pallidum infection or viral infection, such as HIV or hepatitis viruses B and C, was also negative.
A biopsy of the neoplasm was done with the patient’s and parents’ permissions. Tissues from the involved conjunctiva, sclera, and limbus were excised for histopathological examinations. The hematoxylin-eosin (HE)–stained slides indicated the possibility of angiogenic tumors and a capillary or lymphatic hemangioma. There were a few proliferating spindle cells and other irregular cells both inside and outside the neovessels, which were characterized by deep-dyed large and distinct nucleoli, nuclear membrane coarsening, pleomorphism, and a few mitotic figures in the nuclei . Immunohistochemical staining with monoclonal antibodies showed positive staining of CD31(1:50 dilution; ab28364; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), CD34 (1:100 dilution; ab8536; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), anti-factor VIII antibody (1:50 dilution; ab139391; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), and anti-alpha smooth muscle actin antibody (1:50 dilution; ab5694; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) in the vessel walls . A few lymphocyte infiltrations were confirmed by positive staining of CD3 and CD20 . Some cells were positive for Ki67 (about 5%) (1:100 dilution; ab15580; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), LCA (Leber congenital amaurosis) (1:50 dilution; sc-83,224; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Guangzhou, China), and CD99 (1:50 dilution; sc-241,354; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Guangzhou, China) . Some cells were also positive for MPO (myeloperoxidase) (1:50 dilution; sc-59,600; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Guangzhou, China) . No staining ofHHV-8 (1:50 dilution; ab4103; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) was noted. The DNA amplification of HHV-8 in the excised tissues (conjunctiva, sclera, limbus and cornea) and peripheral blood was also negative. The amplification of HHV-8DNA was performed using the Expand High-Fidelity polymerase chain reaction (PCR) System (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) as previously described [, ].
Based on the pathological and clinical manifestations, a diagnosis of KS was established. Surgery was then recommended. During the operation, all of the involved nasal conjunctiva and about 1/2 the thickness of the involved sclera was removed. When the corneal lesions were dissected, only a small amount of posterior corneal stroma remained transparent under the surgical microscope. Before repair of the ocular surface defects, a pre-immersed cotton swab with 0.2 mg/ml MMC was placed onto the exposed residual sclera and medial rectus muscle for 5 min. Then, a full thickness limbo-corneal lamellar corneal graft without Descemet’s membrane and endothelium was transplanted onto the corneal surface. An alcohol-preserved full-thickness heterogeneous sclera was tailored and sutured to fit the scleral defect. Finally, the conjunctival defect was repaired with an amniotic membrane graft . One month after surgery, the lamellar graft was transparent and a great deal of corneal neovascularization presented in the peripheral corneal stroma with a normal anterior chamber depth and without corneal thickening . From 6 months after surgery to the subsequent observation 3 years later, the corneal graft became opaque and neovascularization occurred without corneal bugling . No recurrent KS was observed on the sclera or corneal graft. Neither the conjunctival surface nor the cornea have had hyperplasia or a malignant growth tumor over the last 3 years . However, in the past year, the UBM examination observed a slight thickening of the native corneal stroma under the lamellar cornea graft without a sclera or conjunctiva neoplasm .