We present the history of a 9-year-old girl who presented with headache of progressive severity with nausea and vomiting for 20 days, weeklong hemiparesis, and tonic-clonic seizures 24 h prior to presentation in the emergency room. She had an unremarkable medical history. On medical examination, she was found to have motor aphasia, dysnomia, right hemiparesis and right-side hemihypoesthesia, and right corticospinal signs. Complete blood count, serum biochemistry, and urine analysis were within normal limits.
A computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast was performed which revealed a supratentorial, multilobulated left frontoparietal lesion, relatively well demarcated, with a solid and cystic appearance, with mixed densities within the cysts. The solid portion of the tumor was hyperdense to white matter and minimal peritumoral edema was seen. There was midline shift observed and collapse of the ipsilateral ventricular system as well .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings revealed a neoplastic well-demarcated intra-axial lesion whose size was 6.1 × 5.6 cm. On T1-weighted images it was heterogeneous, but predominantly isointense to white matter . The T2-weighted images revealed a multicystic hyperintense lesion with a striking “bubbly” heterogeneous pattern inside the tumor . Fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences demonstrated isointensity within the lesion, but minimal peritumoral edema. Contrast images revealed a mixed solid and peripheral rim enhancement . Spectroscopy showed a high choline peak.
The tumor was surgically resected. A left frontoparietotemporal craniectomy was performed and the tumor excised with ultrasonic aspirator. A trans-sulcal approach through the left intraparietal sulcus was used. The intraoperative finding was a solid, soft, and white-pearly lesion with hemorrhagic areas and a visible arachnoid plane with cerebral edema. The lesion was resected completely. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. There was improvement of the hemiparesis and language disturbances by 1 month following surgery.
Pathologic examination of the tumor was consistent with astroblastoma. Light microscopy demonstrated a papillary neoplasm composed of mildly pleomorphic cells with evident nucleoli, pleomorphic nuclei, and atypical mitoses. A striking perivascular array of pseudorosettes was found . The nuclei were generally round to oval in shape. Prominent endothelial hyperplasia and hyalinized vessel walls were found in this hypervascularized tumor. The tumor cells exhibited weak and focal staining for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and diffuse staining for vimentin throughout the tissue section. Glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) was also diffusely positive in the epithelioid cells and was mostly marked in the perivascular areas. Analysis of Ki-67 immunoreactivity within the tumor showed a Ki-67 labeling index of approximately (or up to) 40%.