We present the case of a 72-year-old male patient, without significant personal pathological history, who, on the background of discrete abdominal painful complaints, undergoes an MRI examination (13 April 2023).
Voluminous tumoral mass measuring 95/56/91 mm (antero-posterior/transverse/cranio-caudal diameter) is noted in segment V, extending into segment IVb and VI with moderate T2 hyperintensity , T1 hypointensity compared to the liver parenchyma, also seen in In/OPPhase (not shown) with no significant changes between these sequences, highly restricted in DWI/ADC (not shown), including at high B values (B800). The tumor is well defined with a thin wall, best appreciated at the visceral surface and it has an inhomogenous inner structure with multiple round and serpiginous fluid areas with inner denser foci, interspaced with a solid component, generating an areolar pattern. Dynamic iv contrast images show gradual uptake of the solid component that correlates with diffusion restriction, while the fluid components display less diffusion restriction and no enhancement. The tumor does not invade the surrounding structures and it is associated with dilatations of peripheral biliary radicles distal to the tumor. Associated with the tumor, a nodular lesion was also seen in segment III, which iso/discreetly hyperintense in T2-FS and isointense in all the other unenhanced images and was mostly apparent due to the consecutive dilatations of the distal small biliary branches. .
On April 25th 2023, the first surgery was performed. Atypical resection of the segment III and right portal vein ligation was performed by open approach. The pathological an immunohistochemical staining confirmed that the hepatic tumor resected from segment III was a mucoepidermoid subtype of poorly differentiated (G3) cholangiocarcinoma metastasis.
The patient undergoes a follow-up MRI examination on May 31st 2023 which, to our surprise, showed a marked involuted tumoral mass, which appeared localized only in segment V. In addition, the expected hypertrophy of the left liver was not obtained .
Second surgery was performed on June 16th, 2023. Both clinical examination and ultrasound failed to identify with certainty the tumor in segment V. Under these conditions a limited resection was performed of segment V, in the area indicated by the radiologist as being the site of the tumor, together with and hepatic pedicle lymphadenectomy. The anatomopathological results showed only foci of low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia, without malignant lesions, and two lymph nodes without carcinomatous metastases.
Follow-up MRI examination on June 23rd, 2023 confirmed the absence of hepatic tumor lesions .
Slowly favorable postoperative evolution, with a small biliary fistula that closed spontaneously. The patient was discharged on the 15th postoperative day.
The patient underwent a follow up MRI in the 15th of November 2023 which did not show any recurrence both at the site of metastasectomy and also in the tumor bed.