A 63-year-old man was admitted to the hospital due to left upper abdominal pain and defecation unformed for more than 2 years. There was no history of acute pancreatitis or abdominal trauma. The patient had no prior surgeries. He was on no medications. The family history was noncontributory. The physical examination was normal.
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a mixed echo with a range of 105 × 82 mm (mainly a cystic echo with visible separation and a visible range 59 × 47 mm heterogeneous hyper echo) within an unclear contour of the head of the pancreas. CDFI indicated a high echo and visible blood flow within the separation. CT revealed a well-defined cystic mass in the head of the pancreas, with the formation of internal calcifications .
Laboratory tests showed that the complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, serum amylase and lipase, coagulation panel, fasting lipid profile, and serum CA 19–9 and CEA levels were normal. The detailed results were as follows: leukocyte count 6.89 × 109/L, neutrophilic granulocyte count 4.31 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage 62.5%, lymphocyte count 2.03 × 109/L, lymphocyte percentage 29.5%, RBC 4.6 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 146 g/L, platelet 163 × 109/L, alanine aminotransferase 15 μL, aspartate aminotransferase, albumin 37.5 g/L, total bilirubin 9.5 mol/L, direct bilirubin 2.7 μmol/L, alkaline phosphatase 68 U/L, glutamyl transpeptidase 15 U/L, HBsAg(−), HBeAg(−), HBeAb(−), HBcAb(−), HCV-Ab (−), and CEA 14.01 ng/mL. AFP and CA199 showed no abnormalities.
A pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed, and a pink-brown, multiloculated and approximately 10 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm cystic solid mass with a clear boundary and a firm texture was found at the head of the pancreas . No evidence of invasion of the portal vein or the superior mesenteric vein or other vessels was found. No bleeding occurred during or after the operation, and the patient had a smooth postoperative recovery.
The microscopic examination indicated a cystic structure extending into the interlobular septa of the pancreatic parenchyma that consisted of dilated vascular structures lined by endothelial cells. Some of the vessels with a membranous wall were filled with serous fluid rather than blood, indicating that those vessels do not participate in the circulation (HE 10×). Some of the vessels in the tumor were well-identifiable arteries with thick walls characterized by profusely proliferating multilayer endothelial cells; other vessels had thin, membranous walls with a single layer of flattened cells (HE 40×), with uniform nuclei and no atypical nuclei . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed that the lining was positive for CD31, CD34 and F8, focally positive for ERG, and negative for D2–40, ER and Ki-67, supporting the diagnosis of hemangioma . However, the cytokeratin markers, CAM5.2 and AE1/AE3, were also positive . All 12 lymph nodes had a normal histology. Postoperatively, the patient tolerated an oral intake of liquids on the third day, was discharged on the 7th postoperative day and remained symptom free 2 years after surgery.