A 61-year-old female patient complained of recurrent low back pain for more than 10 years and pain and numbness in both legs for approximately 8 months. We found that the patient's parents are married cousins, suggesting that the patient may have a genetic disorder. Physical examination revealed that the patient had significant kyphosis. Melanosis could be seen in both sclerae and both auricles. There were hypoesthesia and hypoalgesia below the T10 dermatome. The muscle strength for hip flexion, knee extension, and knee flexion was grade 3/5, while ankle dorsal extension and metatarsal flexion were grade 2/5. The patient exhibited hyperreflexia of both Achilles tendons and knees; furthermore, Babinski's sign, Gordon's sign, Oppenheim's sign, and the four-figure test were positive on both sides. This patient was classified into motor incomplete injury (ASIA C). On imaging examination, plain lumbar spine radiographs demonstrated that all the lumbar disc spaces were narrow with signs of osteoporosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed spinal stenoses of the T10/11, L1/2, and L2/3 segments. Laboratory examination depicted that the fresh urine was light yellow and gradually turned dark brown after a period of time. Pathological examination revealed melanin deposits in the intervertebral disc and ligament tissues.
The patient underwent adequate intraoperative spinal canal decompression and was fixed with pedicle screws. At operation, we found that the bone junctions of the supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, and ligamentum flavum were blackened. Severe T10/11 disc degeneration was noted, with no significant distinction between the nucleus pulposus and the adjacent tissue.
The patient experienced remarkable relief and was discharged 1 week after the operation. The patient's muscle strength returned to grade 4/5 after surgery, and she could stand and walk independently. A review is scheduled for 3 months after surgery and lumbosacral surgery at an optional date, depending on the patient's condition.