The patient was a 9-year-old boy with a history of recurrent episodes of local hair loss which was resolved within 1 to 2 months at the age of 5-6 years. The boy had never scratched his scalp or pulled his hair in front of his parents. Parents thought that the loss of the eyelashes was alopecia, and the boy was followed without receiving any treatment. No abnormalities had been detected in his hair or eyelashes at the age of 7-8 years after entering elementary school.
At the age of 9 years, his parents saw that the eyelashes of the boy were getting fewer but did not notice that he pulled out his eyelashes. His parents were concerned about their son's loss of his eyelashes and visited our hospital.
Our examination showed that there was a complete loss of eyelashes of the upper eyelid of both eyes . His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in both eyes, and his corneas were clear and did not stain with fluorescein. The anterior chamber, iris, and lens were normal. Funduscopy was within normal limits. The skin of the eyelids of both eyes were not swollen, scarred, or desquamated. The pull test of the eyelashes was negative along the edges where the eyelashes were absent and had a normal resistive response. Mycological examination of the eyelid skin was negative. These negative results of alopecia clearly confirmed the diagnosis of trichotillomania.
The mother reported that the boy had suffered from nightly nocturnal enuresis (bedwetting) all of his life, but the frequency was recently reduced to once or twice a month. However, the boy was scheduled to go on a school trip the following month, and the mother noticed that the boy had been depressed and had shown signs of avoiding school.
The boy told us that he had been concerned that his bed wetting might be revealed to his classmates during an overnight school trip. He stated that his stress was reduced by pulling out his eyelashes. We explained to the boy and his mother our diagnosis of trichotillomania and assured them that the condition could be resolved without medications. We suggested that a discussion be held among the parents, his school teacher, and school counselor about his bedwetting especially during the school trip.
One week after the school trip, the boy and mother visited our hospital and reported that no enuresis occurred during the school trip. The boy was followed without any special treatment. The mother reported that the child had not pulled out his eyelashes or hair after the consultation. With the parents' cooperation, the boy also developed control over his bladder during the night and have dry nights by age 10 years.