A 74-year-old Japanese female presented with lower abdominal pain, fever, and mental status changes that extended for 4 or 5 days. She complained of intermittent vomiting that began just before she arrived at the hospital. Her medical history included surgical clipping due to aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and VP shunting that was performed 3 years ago. Physical examination revealed mental disturbance (Glasgow Coma Scale: E3V4M6) and a body temperature of 39.5 °C. She also exhibited lower abdominal tenderness with distention and muscular defense. No signs of meningeal irritation, such as nuchal rigidity, were observed.
Laboratory examination revealed drastically elevated levels of inflammatory markers and anemia [white blood cell (WBC), 22,000/μl; Hbg, 10.6 g/dl; and C-reactive protein (CRP), 17.93 mg/dl], and CSF obtained via lumbar puncture demonstrated no notable abnormalities (WBC, 2/μl; protein, 40 mg/dl; and glucose, 50 mg/dl).
Head computed tomography (CT) revealed a low-density area in the right hemisphere of the brain, indicating impairment due to SAH. The proximal end of the VP shunt was inserted into the left ventricular part (a). Abdominal CT revealed a diverticular sigmoid colon surrounded by free air and isodense ascites (b). However, the distal end of the VP shunt was placed far from the sigmoid colon. The patient was diagnosed with generalized peritonitis due to perforated diverticulum and was suspected to have VP shunt-transmitted meningitis. Exploratory laparotomy, including sigmoidectomy and colostomy installation, was performed after laparoscopic examination. The peritoneal side of the VP shunt was resected at the subclavian level and temporarily externalized to determine central nervous system (CNS) infections and CSF output amount. A perforated diverticulum, which was far from the peritoneal side of the VP shunt, was intraoperatively detected in the sigmoid colon. Pathological findings revealed no evidence of malignancy.
For two days postoperatively, the patient was administered broad-spectrum antibiotics (meropenem hydrate, 4 g/day; vancomycin hydrochloride, 1.5 g/day) in addition to endotoxin absorption therapy using Toraymixin® (TORAY MEDICAL, Japan) as part of her postoperative course. Based on the results of two sets of blood cultures that detected Escherichia coli, antibiotics were de-escalated and ceftriaxone sodium hydrate (4 g/day) was initiated.
In terms of CNS infection, CSF was analyzed on the third, fifth, and tenth days postoperatively; the results were negative for culture and within normal range for glucose or cell counts. Her mental status had fairly improved postoperatively, implying that her mental disturbance was caused by sepsis rather than CNS infection.
On postoperative day 14, the mean output of drained CSF was approximately 300 ml/day, indicating that the patient was still shunt-dependent. CSF analysis revealed no evidence of infection; therefore, the externalized ventricular shunt was converted to a VA shunt. The catheter contained in the X-PORT™ isp implantable Port (C. R. Bard, USA) was used as an alternative for the VA shunt at the atrial side. The catheter inserted into the right atrium via the right jugular vein under C-arm fluoroscopy was connected to the reservoir of the original ventricular side of VP shunt via a subcutaneous tunnel .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on the 30th day postoperatively without major complications.