F.N. a 56-year-old Saudi male patient, retired histopathologist, complaining of progressive left shoulder pain and discomfort with limitation of range of motion for the about 5 years. The patient was not known to have any medical problems, he denies any previous trauma on the same shoulder and he was not involved in any overhead or sports activities. His first visit to our clinic was in January 2021 for a second opinion, as he was diagnosed clinically with subacromial impingement in another clinic. All non-operative modalities were tried such as (NSAIDs, activity modification, physical therapy, and a subacromial corticosteroid injection) for 6 months without any improvement.
X-rays showed an exostotic formation on the undersurface of the lateral third of the clavicle. Upon his clinical examination he had no muscle atrophy, no scapular dyskinesia or bony deformity. He had moderate tenderness over his acromioclavicular joint with pain provocation with shoulder internal rotation and abduction. ROM of his affected shoulder was restricted due to pain but full passive ROM. Special tests for impingement were positive both Neer and Hawkins. No other bone or joint pathology was noted. Plain radiographic images of his shoulder revealed a clear exostotic bony prominence projecting inferolateral and causing pressure effect on the rotator cuff . Magnetic resonance (MR) confirmed pressure over the supraspinatus caused by an osseous formation from lateral third of the clavicle. A thin layer of cartilage was noted capping the exostotic bone suggestive of osteochondroma from distal clavicle .
After failure of non-operative modalities an arthroscopic excisional biopsy was indicated and accomplished. Glenohumeral diagnostic arthroscopy done first with no intra-articular pathology noted. Then subacromial space showed inflamed bursa with abundant bursal tissue. After a complete bursectomy rotator cuff tendons were intact and the exostotic bone noted as seen on the images protruding from lateral third of the clavicle ( A). With a small osteotome the exostotic bone was removed as one piece measured (2cm in length) (B-D). A histopathology report confirmed the diagnosis of benign osteochondroma. Post-operative rehabilitation consists of arm sling for 7 days. Then mobilization was commenced under the supervision of a physiotherapist. At three months post-operative he had complete resolution of symptoms with full pain free range of motion. No recurrence was seen on radiographs 6 months after surgery .