An asymptomatic 71-year-old man presented with an abnormal lung nodule detected by computed tomography (CT) during a regular postoperative checkup for renal cancer. CT revealed a nodule in the right lower lobe and a PAPVC of the right superior pulmonary vein with the azygos vein . Transbronchial biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma. The echocardiogram and electrocardiogram showed normal cardiovascular activity without atrial septal defect. Although the patient was asymptomatic, cardiac catheterization revealed a pulmonary to systemic flow ratio (Qp/Qs) of 1.64, and his mean pulmonary arterial pressure (MPAP) was 16 mmHg (27/6 mmHg). Blood gas analysis revealed age-normal partial oxygen (79.7 mmHg) and carbon dioxide pressures (41.5 mmHg). Pulmonary function tests showed forced expiratory volume in the first second of 2.29 L (78% predicted) and forced vital capacity of 3.34 L (93% predicted). His lung cancer was considered to be resectable clinical T1c N0 M0 stage IA3 and right lower lobectomy was planned; however, it was considered that this could cause fatal right-sided heart failure unless the PAPVC was repaired. The possible surgical approaches of right lower lobectomy for the lung cancer and concurrent PAPVC repair were discussed preoperatively with a cardiovascular surgeon.
We were concerned that the patient might be at risk of fatal postoperative right-sided heart failure without PAPVC repair. However, he had no atrial septal defect and was asymptomatic, and we therefore concluded that it was not necessary to treat the PVPAC. Based on these considerations, we decided to only perform concomitant repair of the PAPVC if his circulatory dynamics could not be maintained during surgery or if his MPAP exceeded 25 mmHg.
The patient’s pulmonary artery pressure was carefully monitored during surgery using a Swan-Ganz catheter. His MPAP was 20 mmHg; therefore, we performed thoracoscopic right lower lobectomy, without repairing the PAPVC. The anomalous pulmonary vein was found on the anterior aspect of the right hilum. In accordance with the CT observations, we found a PAPVC of the right superior pulmonary vein with the azygos vein . The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. The lung cancer was confirmed as pathological stage IA3 (T1c N0 M0). Postoperative cardiac catheterization 6 months after surgery revealed a Qp/Qs of 1.19 and MPAP of 18 mmHg (31/7 mmHg). He remained well with no relapse of lung cancer at 18 months after surgery.