A 51-year-old female patient (BMI 20.6 kg/m2) with no history of hepatic cirrhosis or malignoma presented with chronic occlusion of the PV in the setting of essential thrombocythemia. Pre-interventional imaging presented an occlusion of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic PV as well as the splenic vein (SV). The PV, which could only be delineated in strands, was cavernously transformed. Dilated esophageal and gastric portosystemic collaterals, splenomegaly and ascites were evident signs of portal hypertension .
Recurring esophageal bleeding had been treated with band ligation and blood transfusions. An initial percutaneous trans-splenic approach attempted in an outside hospital was aborted as the central splenic vein occlusion could not be passed.
PVR-TIPS was performed under general anesthesia. An initially attempted percutaneous trans-hepatic approach was impossible due to chronic occlusion of the central SV. In a preceding ultrasound examination, a suitable central branch of the SMV had already been identified. Given the overall slender physique of the patient, the SMV and its central branches could be visualized only few centimeters below the abdominal wall. We selected a window (I) that was free of intestinal superimposition, (II) where the vein was large enough for the insertion of a sheath and (III) that was distant enough to avoid an obstruction of the origin of the PV by the sheath. The percutaneous puncture was performed under ultrasound-guided puncture of the branch using a 4-Fr micro-puncture set (4-F Custom Procedure Kit, Merit Medical). No intestine was punctured. Subsequently, a 4-Fr sheath ( Avanti®+ , Cordis) was introduced.
After initial imaging of the occluded PV/SV and the extensive cavernous transformation , passage of the PV occlusion and probing of the right portal vein branch was successful. Using a recently described balloon puncture technique, a balloon catheter (7 mmx40 mm, 135 cm, Sterling, Boston Scientific) was positioned in the main stem of the right PV to serve as target for the TIPS needle puncture [, ]. Afterwards, a TIPS needle (GORE TIPS Set, W.L.Gore & Associates) was advanced through a standard transjugular access into the right hepatic vein. Puncture of the balloon cover within the PV branch was hampered due to repeated slippage of the TIPS needle on the balloon surface but was finally successful . A 0.014-inch wire (V-14, Control Wire, Boston Scientific) was advanced through the needle and locked within the balloon cover by deflation of the balloon.
In order to establish through and through access (Archimedean access), the balloon catheter was pulled into the direction of the SMV sheath, but the wire could not be retrieved due to severe kinking within the balloon and eventually broke. The distal end of the wire was secured through the sheath. The 4-Fr sheath in the SMV was replaced by a 6-Fr sheath and a 6-Fr multi snare catheter (EN Snare® Endovascular Snare, Merit Medical) was inserted to snare the wire. Nonetheless, the proximal end of the wire could not be retrieved, and the wire had to be removed via the jugular access. Now with the 6F sheath in place the maneuver was repeated using another balloon catheter (10 mmx40 mm, 80 cm, Mustang, Boston Scientific) positioned in the right hepatic vein and inflated as fluoroscopic target. Direct TIPS needle-guided puncture of the balloon was performed without complications, and a 0.035 wire (Splash, Merit Medical) was used to successfully achieve through and through access.
Following this, sequential widening of the TIPS tract and portal vein was performed using 6 mm and 8 mm balloons (Mustang, 6/8mmx40mm, 75 cm, Boston Scientific). Subsequent implantation of a 7/2 VIATORR endoprosthesis, which needed to be extended to the caval vein by a second 7/2 VIATORR endoprosthesis as a stent-in-stent (GORE Viatorr TIPS Endoprosthesis with controlled Expansion, W.L.Gore&Associates) was performed. The final angiography showed a swift contrast outflow via the TIPS as well as a significant caliber reduction of the collaterals . The portosystemic gradient decreased from 23 to 3 mmHg. At the end of the procedure, the SMV sheath was removed, and manual compression was performed. No dedicated vascular closure was used.
Anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin was started immediately after the PVR-TIPS. For the pre- and post-interventional coagulation status see Table . The following day, CT showed a patent TIPS and no signs of intestinal damage or intraabdominal hemorrhage . Consecutive ultrasound exams on the subsequent days were also unremarkable. The patient spent one night in intensive care and was discharged four days after the procedure. At the first follow-up one month after the procedure, the TIPS was patent; moreover, no bleeding episode or signs of hepatic encephalopathy were observed.