A 71-year-old female with a history of hypertension and stage 1B endometrial adenocarcinoma status post-total abdominal hysterectomy and brachytherapy presented to the emergency department for 2 weeks of progressively worsening dyspnoea and orthopnoea. Significant findings on physical examination included mild tachypnoea, elevated jugular venous pressure (13 cm H2O), and bilateral lower extremity oedema. Chest X-ray revealed pulmonary oedema, and bedside echocardiography identified a dilated cardiomyopathy with an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction less than 30% and diffuse hypokinesis. Laboratory analysis was significant for an elevated N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide of 3800 pg/mL with undetectable troponin T. She was admitted for acute decompensated heart failure, and intravenous diuresis was initiated with furosemide for decongestion. She remained on scheduled intravenous furosemide (40 mg) for 4 days, and guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) was initiated with lisinopril (10 mg) and empagliflozin (10 mg) on hospital day 1 and spironolactone (12.5 mg) on hospital day 2. The decision was made to stop lisinopril on hospital day 3 in preparation for a transition to sacubitril/valsartan after the recommended washout period. After achieving euvolemia, left and right heart catheterization was performed, demonstrating diffuse non-obstructive coronary atherosclerosis with normal intracardiac pressures. Loop diuretics were discontinued at this time, and sacubitril/valsartan (24/26 mg) and metoprolol succinate (25 mg) were added to her GDMT regimen. She maintained serum sodium levels of 131–137 mmol/L (reference range 136–145 mmol/L) during active diuresis and initiation of GDMT. On hospital day 5, the day following initiation of sacubitril/valsartan, the patient experienced an acute worsening of her baseline hyponatraemia with sodium decreasing from 131 to 118 mmol/L. There was no associated worsening renal function as the serum creatinine remained at baseline of 0.7 mg/dL. She denied all symptoms potentially attributable to hyponatraemia and was found to have an elevated urine osmolality at 580 mOsm/kg with a urine sodium of 66 mmol/L. Due to the temporal relationship between initiation of sacubitril/valsartan and empagliflozin with development of acutely worsening hyponatraemia, both medications were held. Following infusion of hypertonic saline and nephrology consultation, the patient’s sodium improved significantly. Prior to discharge, losartan (50 mg) was added for renin–angiotensin system inhibition, and empagliflozin (10 mg) was subsequently resumed as an outpatient while maintaining serum sodium values between 137 and 140 mmol/L. Fortunately, with adherence to all components of GDMT, the patient’s ejection fraction improved to 46% on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging performed 3 months after achieving maximum-tolerated therapy, and placement of an implantable cardioverter–defibrillator was not indicated.