A 54-year-old man with no relevant previous medical or family history presented to our hospital complaining of headache, nausea, diplopia, and dizziness. Neurological examination revealed bilateral abducens nerve palsy and left facial nerve palsy and ataxia. Computed tomography (CT) showed a slightly high-density tumor that was seen in the fourth ventricle on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), along with obstructive hydrocephalus. The tumor extended into the foramen of Magendie and bilateral foramen of Luschka. The tumor was slightly hypointense on T1-weighted imaging and iso- to slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging . The tumor was uniformly hyperintense on diffusion-weighted imaging and iso- to slightly hyperintense on apparent diffusion coefficient. After injection of gadolinium-based contrast medium, the tumor showed uniform contrast enhancement [-]. We suspected malignant lymphoma accompanied by obstructive hydrocephalus, but could not exclude metastasis, ependymoma, or glioma. Tumor markers such as squamous cell carcinoma antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, CA19-9, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor were negative. Torso CT revealed no obvious malignant neoplasm.
Biopsy was performed by the transmedullary fissure approach. Histopathological examination revealed diffusely growing tumor cells with a high nucleocytoplasmic ratio and differently sized nuclei, some of which had mucus and multiple mitotic figures . The tumor was negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, Keratin7, and Keratin20 and was positive for CD20, CD79a, Bcl-2, Bcl-6, and MUM-1 [-]. The final pathological diagnosis was nongerminal center B-cell-like type diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with a Ki-67 proliferation index of 90%. Steroids administered after tumor biopsy were largely ineffective. With the definitive diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, chemotherapy with rituximab, methotrexate, procarbazine, and vincristine (R-MPV regimen) was administered. After 5 cycles of R-MPV regimen, the tumor decreased in size but the obstructive hydrocephalus remained [ and ]. Thus, repeated ventricular drainage was required. Finally, ventriculoperitoneal shunting was performed. The patient was then transferred to another hospital for additional chemotherapy. Autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation was performed after 2 cycles of high-dose cytarabine chemotherapy. Tumor was disappeared after chemotherapy with autologous blood stem cell transplantation. There was no sign of recurrence at 20 months after biopsy [ and ].