A twelve-year-old male patient was admitted to Beijing Children’s Hospital of Capital Medical University for chest tightness for 9 days and syncope in July 2018. There was a history of scarlet fever 2 months ago. There were denying history of trauma, transfusion, food or drug allergy and poisoning. The child had a history of carsickness. He experienced syncope during carsickness occurrence, vomiting and sweating before the syncope attack with lips pale. He was unconscious for approximately 1 min. When he recovered to consciousness, his limbs were weak and pale. The child did not have special birth history with normal growth and development. The mother of the child was healthy. While the father had a history of VVS. No protrusion in the precordial region, no diffuse heart beats, no tremor or pericardial friction, no cardiac boundaries were displayed in the physical examination. No heart murmur sound was heard in the auscultation area of each valve. 24-h dynamic electrocardiogram showed that P-P interval and RR interval had their own fixed rules, P wave and QRS wave had no fixed relationship, atrial rate had no fixed relationship with ventricular rate, by which third-degree AVB was diagnosed. Holter records showed ventricular arrest in the child during carsickness when he was attacked by syncope. The child was diagnosed as VVS according to the results of DC and head-up tilt test (head-up tilt test, HUTT). And ECG, echocardiography, MR scan and EEG were normal. A few mintues after the child standing on the tilt bed in HUTT, bradycardia was observed accompanied with syncope aura, such as pale, sweating and weakness. The child recovered after the tilt-bed returned to recumbent position. Laboratory examination: blood routine, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, myocardial enzymes and cTNI (cardiac Troponin I, cTNI) were all normal. Electrophysiological examination indicated that sinus node function was normal. Informed writeen consent was obtained from the guardians, which was obtained in the consent to publish section as detailed in our editorial policies.
A heterozygous mutation in the exon coding region of the SCN5A gene, C. 5851G > T (coding region 5551 nucleotide changed from G to T), was detected in the peripheral blood of the patient. The mutation resulted in the change of amino acid 1951 from leucine (Val) to isoleucine (Leu), which may affect the function of the protein. The child’s father carried the mutation (see Fig. ). The variation is not a polymorphism, and the frequency of occurrence is very low in the population. The pathogenicity of the mutation has been reported in previous literature, and was associated with Brugada syndrome. Sanger sequencing confirmed that the compound heterozygous mutation probably came from the father.
Combined with the clinical manifestations, test results, family history and gene mutation results, electrophysiological examination and modified vagal ganglion radiofrequency ablation were performed in the child. The ECG playback was normal on the second day after operation. Holter showed no abnormality and no chest tightness or syncope occurred after 3 months and one-year follow-up.