A 47-year-old male was admitted to the hospital due to abdominal pain for 1 wk, vomiting and black stool. Before admission, the patient had no symptoms, such as middle and upper abdominal distension, pain, fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. Three hours before admission, the patient suddenly defecated black stool twice, accompanied by vomiting dark red blood twice (approximately 500 mL), dizziness, and fatigue; thus, he made an emergency visit to our hospital. One year ago, the patient had been admitted to our hospital for vomiting dark blood. Painless gastroscopy suggested a focal mucosal ulcer on the posterior wall along the curvature of the gastric body, and blood clots could be seen. Dieulafoy's disease was considered. The wound was closed with a metal clip after high-frequency electrocoagulation . No rebleeding occurred, and the patient was discharged from the hospital.
The patient had no history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, diabetes, smoking or drinking, and denied a similar family history.
The examination on admission revealed the following: Body temperature, 36.7°C; pulse, 80 beats/min; respiration, 20 times/min; blood pressure, 93/64 mmHg; acute illness, an anemic appearance, a clear mind, conjunctiva, pale nail beds, normal heart and lung findings, a soft abdomen, upper abdominal tenderness, no muscle tension or rebound pain, negative mobility, and normal intestinal sounds.
The routine blood test results showed a hemoglobin level of 82 g/L, a positive result for fecal occult blood and normal findings regarding coagulation, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, and tumor markers.
Electrocardiography and chest radiography were performed. Abdominal color Doppler ultrasound suggested a left renal cyst. Painless gastroscopy suggested a focal mucosal ulcer on the posterior wall along the curvature of the gastric body, and blood clots could be seen . Endoscopic ultrasonography revealed that the ulcer on the posterior wall of the small curvature of the stomach was approximately 0.8 cm x 1.0 cm. The structure of the first four layers of the gastric wall was not clear. There were no obvious tubular structures, but blood flow signals could be seen, and pulse Doppler showed an arterial blood flow signal; the serosa was complete .