A 38-year-old female patient had chest tightness and shortness of breath after repeated activities for 3 mo, which then worsened for 7 d.
The patient’s symptoms started as chest tightness and shortness of breath for 3 mo after repeated activities that were then aggravated for 7 d.
More than 1 year ago, the patient went to another hospital due to a “left neck mass and abdominal discomfort” and underwent related examinations including esophagogastroduodenoscopy, which revealed “pseudoaneurysm and portal hypertensive gastropathy”, but the cause was not identified. A left carotid artery stent was implanted, and aspirin and clopidogrel were taken regularly after the operation. She went to another hospital for “lower limb thrombosis” 7 mo ago and underwent “right inguinal saphenous vein transplantation” (specificity unknown). Three months ago, due to hemorrhage of large blood vessels in the abdominal cavity, she underwent "exploratory laparotomy", and a balloon was inserted (specifically unknown). She denied a history of bad habits of smoking and alcohol consumption, hepatitis, or family genetic diseases.
The patient’s personal history and family history are nothing special.
The patient's vital signs were within the normal range, with clear mind, body check-up cooperation, and mild facial edema. The jugular vein was irritated. Double lung breathing sound was clear, unheard, and wet. The heart rhythm was homogeneous, the heart bound was normal, and the third and fourth ribs of the left edge of the sternum were heard. An about 10 cm surgical scar in the middle of the abdomen and an about 3 cm surgical scar in the bilateral groin were seen. The patient had a flat abdomen with slight compression pain, no obvious backbeat pain, no weakening or enhancement of intestinal sound (3 points per minute), and no liver touch. She had mild edema of both lower limbs.
Blood analysis revealed the following: Hemoglobin, 104 g/L; platelets, 57 × 109 g/L; D-dimer, 1.8 μg/mL; platelet antibody test, positive; and C-reactive protein, 92.5 mg/L. Hepatitis B and C virus tests and antinuclear antibody spectrum showed no abnormalities. The patient's liver function, kidney function, coagulation function, blood sugar, blood lipids, and other tests showed no obvious abnormalities.
Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia and incomplete right bundle branch block. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a small amount of pneumonia and fibrosis in the lower lobes of the lungs, as well as some atelectasis in the lower lobes of the lungs. Heart color Doppler ultrasound at rest demonstrated moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation; thickening and contracture of the anterior tricuspid valve; mild stenosis of the tricuspid valve; enlarged right ventricle and right atrium; thickened ventricular wall; and abnormal muscle bundles. Bilateral jugular artery and vein color Doppler ultrasound revealed postoperative left carotid artery stent occlusion; left common carotid artery near-mid subtotal occlusion; and right internal jugular vein near heart thrombosis and partial recanalization. Bilateral upper extremity artery and vein color Doppler ultrasound showed that the right subclavian vein, axillary vein, and axillary vein near the heart thrombosis were partially recanalized, and the remaining blood vessels were not abnormal. Arteriovenous color Doppler ultrasound of both lower extremities revealed thrombosis of the left common femoral artery, bilateral common femoral veins, and proximal femoral vein and proximal deep femoral vein thrombosis and partial recanalization. CT of the whole abdomen revealed splenomegaly, as well as a small amount of fluid in the abdominal cavity. The inferior vena cava filter was present. Abdominal angiography showed embolism of the portal vein, splenic vein, and superior mesenteric vein, formation of collateral circulation, and esophageal and gastric fundus varices. After the inferior vena cava filter was implanted, the lumen was significantly narrowed or occluded. Dual-source CT of the pulmonary artery showed that there was no obvious abnormality on pulmonary artery angiography. Limb angiography demonstrated that the aneurysm at the beginning of the left common iliac artery at the lower end of the abdominal aorta was enlarged, the left external iliac artery was narrowed and dilated to varying degrees, and emboli formed at the distal end of the left external iliac artery and the beginning of the femoral artery. The femoral artery of the right external iliac artery and the deep femoral artery were occluded.
After 4 d of hospitalization, the patient suddenly vomited blood with a volume of approximately 300 mL. She underwent emergency esophagogastroduodenoscopy to stop the bleeding from ruptured esophageal varices. Four severe esophageal varices were seen during the operation, and rupture was seen . The bleeding stopped after surgery. A large amount of fresh blood and blood clots were seen in the stomach, and the observation was unclear. There were no varicose veins or bleeding found in the fundus of the stomach near the cardia .
The history of the disease indicated that oral ulcers, a nodular red skin rash, ocular uveitis, and ulcers can be seen in the perineum during menstruation. The skin acupuncture reaction was positive, and combined with the external hospital examination and our hospital examination, the main diagnosis was BD.