A 66-year-old female was admitted to a tertiary hospital with a 24-h history of acute right knee pain and swelling with associated fever, chills, and rigors. She had a right TKR performed 7 years before this presentation and was on fenofibrate for hypercholesterolemia. She consumed raw fish (snakehead fish) porridge at the local market 3 days before the onset of her symptoms. There was no other history to suggest any primary hematogenous sources of infection.
On examination, she was toxic-looking, febrile but hemodynamically stable. Her right knee was hot, tender, and grossly swollen with a markedly limited range of motion secondary to pain. She was otherwise neurovascularly intact in her right lower limb. Cardiorespiratory and abdominal examinations were normal.
Investigations
Inflammatory markers were markedly raised with C-reactive protein (CRP) 333 mg/L, white cell count 16.26 X 109/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 84 mm/h. Other blood tests were within normal range. Her right knee X-ray showed no features of prosthesis loosening or periprosthetic fractures . Chest X-ray showed no evidence of consolidation in the lungs .
Treatment
Our patient was diagnosed with an infected prosthetic right knee, and the decision was made for an arthrotomy, washout, and change of polyliner. This was performed on the day of her presentation and empirical antibiotics were commenced. The choice of a combination of cefepime, vancomycin, and rifampicin was made in consultation with our infectious diseases physician.
Intraoperatively, she had large amounts of pus in her right knee joint. Her femoral and tibial metal implants were well-fixed. No sinus tracts were found. The GBS PJI of her right TKR was confirmed on both intraoperative fluid and tissue cultures. Blood cultures were also positive for GBS.
She was managed with intravenous (IV) benzylpenicillin thereafter based on antibiotic sensitivities. Her drain was removed on post-operative day 4.
During her admission, she had deranged liver function tests (LFTs). Initial ultrasound showed two 1 cm faint hypoechoic lesions in her right hepatic lobe suspicious of evolving hepatic abscesses given recent bacteremia. This was managed with antibiotics alone and subsequent computed tomography scan showed complete resolution of the suspected liver abscesses. Her LFTs normalized afterward.
Outcome and follow-up
She improved postoperatively but had intermittent low-grade fever despite downtrending inflammatory markers. She was able to mobilize independently with a walking stick on discharge and her right knee active range of motion was 0-120°.
She was given 6 weeks of high-dose IV benzylpenicillin and was followed up by both orthopedics and infectious disease teams. Her antibiotic regime was switched to oral clindamycin at 6 weeks postsurgery in view of its superior bioavailability profile over oral penicillin.
shows her inflammatory markers trend from the time of her presentation, postoperatively on day 4, on discharge at 4 weeks and subsequently on follow-up at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 10 months, 1.5 years, and 2 years, respectively. Her inflammatory markers showed a significant drop postoperatively and continued on a downward trend on subsequent follow-ups. Her CRP and WBC count normalized after 3 months.
At 6 weeks, she had complete resolution of her fever and was mobilizing independently without walking aids. She continued to do well thereafter.
Our patient was planned for long-term antibiotics suppression with oral clindamycin. However, after 1.5 years of clindamycin, she was keen for a trial of cessation of antibiotics suppression therapy. Clindamycin was stopped after discussion with her infectious disease physician.
She remained clinically well 6-month postcessation of antibiotics.