A 69-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a 5-day history of macroscopic hematuria and AKI. She was diagnosed with IgAN on renal biopsy 6 years prior. Following this diagnosis, she was administered prednisolone because she had persistent microscopic hematuria and proteinuria of approximately 1.0 g/day. Proteinuria remitted after treatment; however, microscopic hematuria persisted (over 100 RBCs per high power field). Prednisolone was discontinued 1 year ago. Five days prior to admission, she developed an upper respiratory tract infection, accompanied by gross hematuria. The gross hematuria persisted; however, the color became lighter after admission. Her past medical history included hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia. She was not receiving any antithrombotic medication. On admission, her body temperature, blood pressure, and heart rate were 36.6℃, 144/64 mmHg, and 65 beats/min, respectively. She had no abnormal findings on examination of her tonsils, pharynx, extremities, and skin. Laboratory data are presented in Table . Her serum creatinine level increased to 4.9 mg/dl from 1.1 mg/dl at the last visit. Urinalysis revealed that the urinary protein excretion level was 1.25 g/day; the sediments contained 30–49 RBCs and ≥ 100 white blood cells per high-power field. There were no signs of dehydration. Abdominal ultrasound showed that both kidneys were of normal size, excluding hydronephrosis.
A renal biopsy was performed 7 days after admission. Light microscopy showed that nine out of 29 (31 %) glomeruli were globally sclerotic, and five out of 29 (17 %) had cellular crescents. Most glomeruli showed moderate mesangial proliferation. The proximal tubule epithelial cells were edematous, showed detachment from the tubular basement membrane, and contained granules of various colors (ranging from yellow to brown). Some tubules showed dilation and loss of the brush border. There was no obvious hemorrhage or obstructive RBC casts in the tubules. There was interstitial fibrosis and inflammatory cells were present around the injured tubules . Immunofluorescence showed granular mesangial staining for IgA and C3 . Electron microscopy showed mesangial electron-dense deposits . Perls’ Prussian blue staining showed hemosiderin deposition in the renal proximal tubular cells, which was not observed 6 years ago when first renal biopsy was performed . Low vacuum scanning electron microscopy, a novel method for rapid three-dimensional pathological analysis [, ], showed the electron-dense particles in tubular epithelial cells. Furthermore, transmission electron microscopy revealed that these particles were located in lysosomes . Based on these findings, she was diagnosed with ATN with a concurrent IgAN flare-up. After confirming the results of the renal biopsy, she was treated with intravenous pulse methylprednisolone, followed by oral prednisolone. The gross hematuria gradually faded, and the serum creatinine levels decreased. After 3 months, the serum creatinine and urinary protein excretion levels were 1.8 mg/dl and 0.24 g/day, respectively.