A 44-year-old male patient with rapidly progressive gait difficulties, blurred vision, and tremor of 6 months’ duration has been studied. His past medical history was significant for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and intravenous heroin use 14 years prior to presentation. He also admitted that he occasionally used cannabis and amphetamines, but they were used prior to starting heroin. There was no history of head trauma. He was on highly active antiretroviral therapy (efavirenz, emtricitabine, and tenofovir) and methadone. Neurological examination revealed saccadic smooth pursuit, abnormal eye movements suggestive of PAN, dysarthria, head tremor as a “yes-yes” motion, and symmetric cerebellar tremor. There was mild dysmetria on finger-nose testing on the left side of the body. While resting or in action, he showed non-rhythmic myoclonic jerks involving arm muscles. Stance was broad-based without Romberg sign, and gait was ataxic. Pinprick sensation and vibration sense were mentioned as normal by the patient. Neither pyramidal nor parkinsonian signs were present. Videonystamographic recordings showed a short cycle PAN only apparent in the dark whose peak slow-phase velocity was approximately 6°/s in light and increased up to 30°/s in darkness .
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormalities, not even cerebellar atrophy. Comprehensive serum and blood laboratory investigations were normal and included vitamin E levels, thyroid function, antinuclear antibodies, and extensive serologies including those of hepatitis C and B virus and syphilis (all negative). He had a CD4+ count of 552 cells per cubic millimeter. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed lymphocytic predominant pleocytosis (37/μL), high protein concentration (115 mg/dl, normal <40 mg/dl), and absence of oligoclonal bands. Microbiological CSF studies were negative; they included HIV (fully suppressed HIV viral load with fewer than 20 copies/ml in the CSF) and John Cunningham (JC) virus polymerase chain reaction (PCR), the latter being negative in two measurements. A whole-body [18F]6FDG positron emission tomography (PET) scan did not reveal an occult neoplasm. Classic onconeuronal, anti-neuropil, and glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD Ab) 65 antibodies were negative on serum and CSF measured with immunohistochemistry as described in a recent practice guide . At the same time, GAD Ab 65 was also measured on sera with a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (ElisaRSR™ GADAb) and was not detected.
The patient was started on clonazepam (at a dose of 1 mg every 8 h). Tremor slightly improved but PAN remained unchanged . A trial with high-dose IVIg (Flebogamma® produced by Grifols), at a dose of 17.5 g per day during 4 days for a weight of 70 kg, resulted in a dramatic improvement of the abnormal eye movements as PAN completely resolved .
During his hospital admission, the patient developed biopsy proven cutaneous lymphocytic vasculitis, acute severe autoimmune thrombocytopenia, and type IA diabetes. At this point, antibodies against gliadin and gangliosides GM1, GM2, and GD1 were determined but were not detected. Only after diabetes mellitus was diagnosed, levels of GAD Ab 65 in serum measured by ELISA (ElisaRSR™ GADAb) were 81.70 U/mL (normal <5 U/mL).
PAN disappeared readily after being started on IVIg. Cerebellar ataxia and tremor improved gradually after IVIg was administered monthly. Thrombocytopenia responded to high-dose IVIg. However, diabetes went unmodified under IVIg treatment. The patient was discharged, with the intention to repeat the IVIg treatment every 3 months at the dose described above. Right before the next IVIg administration (two and a half months after the previous one), the patient was only on clonazepam, and oscillopsia was present with recordings showing the reappearance of PAN with similar characteristics . Treatment with monthly IVIg was then scheduled, and the PAN disappeared again. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic for oscillopsia.