A 19-year-old female presented 6 months of worsening, nocturnal, lumbosacral and left-sided L5/S1 pain, and weakness. The CT scan showed an extensive (i.e., 10 cm [AP] × 11 cm [Tr] × 12 cm [CC]) heterogeneous lytic lesion containing multiple cysts with fluid levels in the sacrum with attendant cortical destruction and invasion of the sacral canal. The lesion extended anteriorly to the sacrum into the pelvic cavity (i.e., with ill-defined borders), laterally into the iliac bones, superiorly into the L5 vertebral body, and inferiorly into S4 [-]. On MR imaging (MRI), the inhomogeneous cysts were filled with moderate/high signal intensities (i.e., fluid levels on T1/T2 images), separated by multiple septae .
Percutaneous biopsies performed at multiple lesion locations yielded the diagnosis of a primary SABC (i.e., typical histological pattern for ABC and with no precursor lesion identified).
Digital subtraction angiography of the infrarenal aorta identified feeders from the posterior rami of both internal iliac arteries, (i.e., mainly from the left) . The first endovascular embolization included; (1) arteriography of the left internal iliac artery with super-selective catheterization of 2 rami, (2) followed by infusion of 500 µm polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles. The patient’s axial/radicular pain dramatically improved enabling her to ambulate and undergo physiotherapy. Although the 6-week post-embolization contrast CT showed signs of healing (i.e., partial peripheral ossification without lesion growth), we elected to perform a 2nd endovascular embolization that included; (1) microcatheterization of feeders from the posterior rami of both internal iliac arteries and (2) followed by embolization with 355–500 µm PVA particles. Each treatment required 2 days of hospitalization. She sustained no complications from either procedure.
Postoperatively, although the left-sided L5/S1 motor deficit remained, the patient’s pain significantly improved. Multiple follow-up CT exams obtained up to 2 years later showed progressive healing, (i.e., bone formation within the ABC and peripheral sclerotic bony changes) .