A 68-year-old female presented to the Emergency Department with chief complaint of shortness of breath, wheezing, and cough for past 3 days. Prior to the hospital visit, she was seen by her primary care provider who prescribed her clarithromycin and Medrol dose pack but she had no significant benefit. She denied any episodes of chest pain or fever.
Her medical history was significant for asthma since childhood, hypertension, hypothyroidism, and left lower extremity deep venous thrombosis 15 years back. The patient reported an eight-pack-year smoking history. There was no personal history of coronary artery disease, prior myocardial infarction, or hyperlipidemia. She had no history of unusual emotional stress prior to admission.
On examination, patient was afebrile with temperature of 36.3 °C, heart rate of 116 beats/minute, blood pressure of 102/75 mm Hg, and respiratory rate of 22 breaths/minute. Bilateral wheezes were heard on chest auscultation. In the emergency room, patient was placed on bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) to maintain oxygen saturation. Appropriate management for asthma exacerbation was started and patient received methylprednisolone 125 mg IV one time along with repeated albuterol nebulizers, Ipratropium–albuterol inhalers, and magnesium sulfate. Initial Chest radiograph revealed mild flattening of diaphragm without any acute process, cardiomegaly or effusions. Electrocardiogram (EKG) on admission showed mild ST elevation in the inferior and anterolateral leads as well as a prolonged QT interval (0.486 s) . Initial troponins at the time of admission were normal (0.023 ng/ml). Her pro-BNP was 103 pg/ml. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 7 mm/h and her C-reactive protein was 1.34 mg/l.
Patient was transferred to critical care unit for further management, on BiPAP and was treated for acute asthma exacerbation. A repeat EKG obtained 1.5 hours later showed Left axis deviation but no significant changes from the initial EKG . Troponins were trended overnight and continued to rise but were moderately elevated (3.97 ng/ml and 4.65 ng/ml). An EKG the following morning 18 hours later showed a new onset Left bundle branch block (LBBB) . She came off the BiPAP and was transitioned to Nasal cannula, was feeling improved the morning of the Day 2. That evening, she started to deteriorate again requiring BiPAP. An echocardiogram (ECHO) was obtained at this time, which revealed an Ejection fraction (EF) of 24%, with severely depressed LV function but normal wall thickness and shape (Additional file : Fig. S1). A prior ECHO done eight months back showed an EF of 65%, without any regional wall motion abnormalities. Due to her worsening respiratory status, new EKG changes from that morning and increasing troponin, she was taken to the Cardiac Catherization lab urgently. Cardiac catheterization revealed normal coronary angiogram, an EF of 10%, and Left Ventricular End Diastolic Pressure of 35 mm Hg. A pro-BNP resulted that time was 20,242 pg/ml. Left ventriculogram showed akinetic apex, anterior and inferior walls with mild dilation of the left ventricle supporting the diagnosis of TCM . An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was placed for circulatory support, however vasopressors and inotropes were not required.
The patient was started on carvedilol and enalapril and she was monitored in the critical care unit until the IABP was removed. The rest of the hospital course was unremarkable on the medicine floors and she was discharged after being weaned off supplemental oxygen. She opted out of anticoagulation. Follow-up ECHO 9 weeks later revealed normal left ventricular function with EF of 59%.