A 67-year-old Chinese man, with long-standing high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes mellitus, presented with left waist and left buttock pain for 1 week. Blood cultures grew Brucella, and the CTA revealed multiple thoracic aortic ulcers and partial aneurysm formation. He was diagnosed with brucellosis. Five years ago, he suffered from an abdominal aorta pseudoaneurysm, and underwent surgery. During hospitalization, blood culture grew Brucella. After departure from the hospital, he was treated with a combination of rifampicin and doxycycline, but blood cultures grew Brucella many times. The patient described that he worked in a restaurant in Inner Mongolia five years ago, but he has no contact history with cattle or sheep since he was discharged from hospital. After this admission, the patient’s body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate and respiration were normal, and no other abnormalities were found in physical examination. Laboratory studies revealed the white blood cell count (WBC) was 5.15 × 109/L, the hemoglobin(Hb) was 122 g/L, the platelet count (PLT) was 152 × 109/L, the C-reactive protein (CRP) was 17.28 mg/L, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 20mm/h, the triglyceride was 2.33 mol/L, the low-density lipoprotein was 3.42 mol/L, normal electrolyte and coagulation indexes, normal electrocardiogram (ECG). The blood creatinine was 125.02 µmol/L. The renal artery imaging showed that the blood perfusion of both kidneys was fair, the uptake and removal of imaging agents in the cortical cortex of both kidneys were reduced, the function was mild to moderate impaired, and the upper urinary drainage of both kidneys was fair. The glomerular filtration rate was 54.1 mL/min (normal > 73.0 mL/min), 30.7 ml /min on the left side and 23.4 mL/min on the right side. Explain to the patient and family, extensive use of contrast agents may worsen kidney injury during the operation, but the patient may at any time for thoracic aortic ulcer aggravating life-threatening, or intimal plaque off cause distal arterial embolism, the patient and family said they understood the disease and the risks and agreed to the operation, we performed thoracic aortic stent implantation under general anesthesia. Seen through imaging by catheter angiography: the diameter of the distal aortic arch of the left common carotid artery was about 2.9 cm, the nearest ulcer was located on the opposite side of the left subclavian artery and the minor curvature of the aortic arch, the farthest thoracic aortic ulcer was located in the thoracic 9–10 intervertebral space. A 32–160 thoracic aortic stent (ANKURA, XJZDZ32160) was placed along the guide-wire at the level of the ascending aorta. The beginning of the coated end was located at the distal opening of the left common carotid artery. A 32-26-200 aortic stent (ANKURA, TAA3226B200) was placed along the guide-wire, and the distal position of the stent was about 2.5 cm beyond the ulcer at the lowest end of the thoracic aorta. A 9–39 mm stent (Micro Medical, ICLC9039L) was placed along the guide-wire with the proximal end beyond the coated skin frame of the thoracic aorta and the distal end within the left subclavian artery. After then, catheter angiography showed: ascending aorta, aortic arch, truncus brachiocephalicus, left common carotid artery, left subclavian artery blood flow were smooth, and the blood vessel wall is smooth. The operation was successful. The patient’s vital signs remained stable throughout the operation. The patients were followed up 6 weeks after the surgery and had no complaints of any special discomfort.