We present the case of a 68-year-old female patient without significant cardiovascular history admitted to the hospital due to dizziness, chest and back pain, and shortness of breath post-activities. 7 days ago, the patient underwent patellar fracture fixation without using heparin in the Dept. of acute trauma surgery of our hospital. Her medical background encompassed 18 years of hypertension, with a maximum blood pressure of 180/90mmHg, along with a 10-year history of diabetes and cerebral infarction, without any other medical or smoking history. Physical examination revealed no heart murmur, lung moist rale, or leg edema. Her blood pressure registered at 111/66 mmHg, pulse rate was 96 beats per minute, with peripheral artery oxygen saturation at 96% in room air. An arterial blood gas analysis uncovered hypoxemia (PaO2: 61.74mmHg). Transthoracic echocardiography depicted a thrombus straddling the PFO , further confirmed by esophageal echocardiography revealing the thrombus entering the ventricle during diastole . An electrocardiogram displayed sinus rhythm at 79 bpm and acute anterior septal ST-segment elevation . Troponin-T levels significantly rose to 6.860 ng/mL. The coronary angiography demonstrated a thrombus in the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and thrombolysis in myocardial infarction 3 . Echocardiography unveiled a decrease in the amplitude of motion of the patient’s middle segment of ventricular septum, and anterior wall and apical segment of left ventricular, resulting in a decreased ejection fraction (EF) of 48%. The serum D-dimer level was significantly increased (> 21.060 FEU). Computed tomography angiography (CTA) scan confirmed thrombi in the left & right pulmonary arteries, left atrium, and right atrium without cerebral infraction .
Thrombolytic therapy wasn’t initially administered due to concerns about potential thrombus fragmentation within the entrapped PFO. The patient underwent emergent cardiac surgery through a median sternotomy with the use of extracorporeal circulation in deep hypothermia (30–32℃) and short total circulatory arrest. Aortic cannulation was typical; 2 venous cannulas were inserted into the inferior and superior vena cava. CO2 was used to insufflate the surgical field to reduce the risk of gas embolism. A right atriotomy revealed a notably large fresh thrombus situated within the right atrium, spanning a PFO . Extraction of the thrombus followed . Upon exploration of the left atrium, no additional thrombus was found, and closure of the atrial septum, including the PFO, was accomplished via direct suturing. Subsequently, upon opening the main pulmonary artery, a substantial volume of coarse thrombus was aspirated from both the left and right pulmonary arteries . As no thrombus was detected in her lower limb veins via Doppler-ultrasonography of the lower extremities, an inferior vena cava filter was deemed unnecessary.
The patient received therapeutic doses of low molecular weight heparin for three days starting on the first day after the operation. In addition, Rivaroxaban (15 mg, twice daily) was prescribed to maintain anticoagulant therapy. On day 7 post-operation, CTA scan revealed the disappearance of the thrombus in the LAD with a small residual thrombus in the pulmonary artery. Meanwhile, an apex ventricular aneurysm (3 cm×2 cm), a small apical mural thrombus, and an improving EF (54%) were detected by transthoracic echocardiography.
Continuing anticoagulant treatment for another six days, the echocardiography showed the disappearance of the apical mural thrombus, and the patient was subsequently discharged.