A 40-year-old Japanese man, who had had sex with men, presented with pain, edema, and multiple skin nodules on both legs which had worsened over several months. Although he had been diagnosed with HIV infection 20 years previously, he had not sought medical treatment. On admission, he was afebrile. His legs had hardened with numerous black nodules on dark skin. Multiple lymph nodes were palpable, including cervical, submandibular, submental, supraclavicular, and axillary lymph nodes. Breath sounds in the left lung were decreased. A chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion. His CD4 T-lymphocyte count was 170 cells/μL and his HIV-1 RNA load was 68,000 copies/mL. His serum C-reactive protein level was 3.1 mg/dL and he had an HHV-8 DNA load of 6500 copies/106 leukocytes in whole blood samples.
A cytological analysis of pleural effusion revealed no atypical lymphocytes suggestive of primary effusion lymphoma. Biopsy specimens of the skin nodules and submental lymph node revealed KS, identified by the presence of whorls of spindle-shaped cells and positive immunostaining for HHV-8 and D2–40. There was no clinical or pathological evidence suggestive of multicentric Castleman disease. The patient was diagnosed with HIV-associated KS with a tumor Stage 1, immune system Stage 1, and systemic illness Stage 1, according to the AIDS Clinical Trials Group Oncology Committee staging criteria . He met the criteria for KS-associated herpesvirus inflammatory cytokine syndrome (KICS). Two weeks after starting ART (raltegravir and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine), chemotherapy with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin at a dose of 20 mg/m2 every 2 weeks was initiated for KS. His LVEF before initiation of chemotherapy was 60%. After 16 courses of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, the cumulative dose was 320 mg/m2. His pleural effusion had decreased, and leg edema and skin nodules had gradually improved. His LVEF was monitored and did not decrease during chemotherapy.
In order to avoid cardiac toxicity associated with long-term use of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, we switched his therapy to paclitaxel (100 mg/m2 every 2 weeks). However, his right pleural effusion increased rapidly after two courses of paclitaxel. Repeated cytology of pleural fluid revealed no atypical lymphocytes. As an echocardiogram indicated that his LVEF had not changed significantly from baseline (62% from 60%), we switched back to pegylated liposomal doxorubicin treatment. At this point, his right pleural effusion began to gradually decrease again. His skin nodules became less marked, but he developed recurrent blisters on his thighs and knees, which required application of topical antiseptics such as silver sulfadiazine cream. He did not experience any palmar-planter erythrodysthesia, thrombocytopenia, or severe neutropenia during the treatment. Cardiac scintigraphy using 123I-β-methyl-P-iodophenyl-pentadecanoic acid (BMIPP), performed after 42 courses of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, showed no myocardial metabolic defect .
He underwent a total of 49 courses of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, with a total cumulative dose of 980 mg/m2. After the 49 courses he developed septic osteoarthritis of his right hip, and pegylated liposomal doxorubicin was discontinued. He subsequently developed new skin nodules appeared on his neck, and his systemic edema progressively worsened. He developed recurrent sepsis caused by cellulitis of the lower extremities via non-intact skin, as a result of the reappearance of the KS lesions. Two months after discontinuation of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, he died as a result of wasting and cachexia caused by recurrent sepsis and advanced KS. At the time of his death, his CD4 T-lymphocyte count was 165 cells/μL and his HIV load was undetectable. An autopsy was performed, and it revealed systemic invasion of KS, particularly in the bilateral lung and pleura, soft tissue of the pelvis, and skin in the groin area. There were no pathological findings of other malignancies, including lymphoma or multicentric Castleman disease. The adipose tissue and skeletal muscle of the whole body were extremely atrophic, characteristic of cachexia. Histological examination of his heart showed preservation of myofibrils and myocytes, with little inflammatory cell infiltration, corresponding to 0.5 points on the Billingham scale; a widely used endomyocardial biopsy score for grading anthracycline-induced myocardial damage . This finding indicated that he had not experienced histological cardiotoxicity as a result of the 980 mg/m2 cumulative dose of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin that he had received.