A 70 year old lady was referred urgently to the colorectal clinic with a palpable abdominal mass. She presented to her General Practitioner (GP) with left sided abdominal pain, diarrhoea and weight loss. Her GP found a suspicious left sided abdominal mass on examination and referred her urgently under the two week colorectal cancer rule. Her past medical history included hypertension, chronic obstructive airways disease and appendicectomy. She also had a previous total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy for large uterine fibroids.
On examination in the outpatient clinic a 10 × 7 cm firm, fixed lump was found in the left iliac fossa area of the abdomen. Urgent colonoscopic examination revealed mild sigmoid diverticular disease with no evidence of colonic malignancy. Computer Tomography was preformed and showed the mass to be arising from the anterior abdominal wall muscles, in particular the internal oblique and transversus abdominis. There was no evidence of distant metastatic disease to the liver or lungs. The clinical suspicion was of a malignant abdominal wall sarcoma. Fine needle aspiration or percutaneous biopsy was not performed. En-bloc surgical resection of the tumour was performed via a left flank incision . At surgical resection the tumour mass involved the internal oblique, transversus abdominis and there was a small area of peritoneal ulceration. No distant disease was found at surgery. The tumour was excised en-bloc with a surrounding margin of healthy tissue . Part of the external oblique aponeurosis was preserved to allow adequate closure. The large abdominal wall defect was closed using a sheet of Permacol® mesh (Tissue Science Laboratories plc, Hampshire, England). The Permacol® mesh was sutured to the posterior leaf of the rectus sheath medially and the internal oblique laterally using a slow absorbing polydioxanone suture. The remaining external oblique muscle was closed over the mesh and the subcutaneous tissue and skin were closed in a standard fashion.
The surgical specimen measured 11 × 7 × 4 cm. In the centre of the specimen, there was a 4 cm whitish solid tumour. The tumour consisted of relatively large cells with granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and small pleomorphic nuclei with occasional nucleoli . No conspicuous mitotic activity was noted. The tumour was completely resected within generous margins of normal tissue. The tumour cells showed strong positive reaction with S100 and were negative with GFAP. The appearances were therefore consistent with a GCT.
This patient has been reviewed in the outpatient clinic and is currently alive and well five months after surgery.