A 58-year-old man with a history of type 2 diabetes and hypertension was admitted in June 2013 because of headache, loss of appetite, constipation, and wide fluctuations in both blood glucose levels (3.3–25.2 mmol/L) and blood pressure (147–180/70–120 mmHg) during the past three months, despite treatment with insulin, metformin, and amlodipine, furthermore, he had undergone subtotal gastrectomy for a stomach ulcer 28 years ago. The patient had no family history of diabetes, hypertension, malignancies, or other related diseases. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 119/83 mmHg with no physical signs of moon facies, buffalo hump, truncal obesity, or purple abdominal striae. The CT image revealed a circular, solid, soft tissue mass measuring 30 × 38 mm with a clear boundary in the right side of the adrenal gland. On contrast enhancement, the lesion appeared heterogeneous, with no calcification or necrosis. Enhancement and hypervascularization also were observed (arrow). The radiodensity was 35 hounsfield units (HU) on unenhanced CT and 80 HU on contrast-enhanced CT. Continuous glucose monitoring showed wide fluctuations in blood glucose levels , and 24-h urine VMA levels were slightly elevated . These clinical manifestations suggested the possibility of pheochromocytoma [, ]. Further workup revealed an abnormal circadian cortisol rhythm and cortisol levels that were not suppressed by dexamethasone (either 1 mg overnight or 2 mg every 6 h for 2 days), indicating the possibility of Cushing’s syndrome . Other laboratory findings, such as plasma aldosterone, were normal . The right adrenal lesion was resected laparoscopically after alpha-adrenergic receptor blockade. Postoperative immunohistochemical staining for SF-1 and CGA confirmed that the tumour was a corticomedullary mixed tumour. In order to analyse the tumorigenic mechanism of corticomedullary mixed tumour with distinct arrangement of the cortical and medullary layers, we stained the resected tissue for various tumour stem cell-specific markers, including ALDH1, CD44, CD133, Nestin, NGFR, and SOX9, and found short spindle-positive cells scattered within the tumour , suggesting the involvement of tumour stem cells. During 18 months of postoperative follow-up, the patient did not require hypoglycaemic or antihypertensive drugs and had stable blood glucose levels and blood pressure. Additionally, the cortisol rhythm and 24-h urine VMA level returned to normal . Abdominal CT confirmed complete resection of the tumour , and metaiodobenzylguanidine and positron emission tomography-CT scans revealed no extra-adrenal lesion. Family history screening indicated that this was an isolated case .