An 82 year old female with a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension and end stage renal disease presented with a 4 day history of generalized weakness, malaise and anorexia. Her symptoms were associated with low grade fever, nausea and vomiting. She denied abdominal pain, chest pain, cough, or shortness of breath. She had recently been diagnosed with Clostridium difficile colitis and had been treated with a 2 week course of metronidazole and probiotics containing lactobacilli. Her past surgical history was significant for a cholecystectomy which was complicated by bleeding in the gallbladder fossa and required laparoscopic surgery 4 months prior to this presentation.
On physical examination, she was febrile with a temperature of 100.6 °F (38.1 °C). Cardiopulmonary examination revealed decreased breath sounds in the base of right lung. Abdominal examination demonstrated mildly tender hepatomegaly 3 cm below the costal margin, active bowel sounds, no distension and no guarding or rebound tenderness. Extremities and skin examinations were unremarkable.
Laboratory studies revealed a leukocytosis of 18.6 k/mm3 (normal range: 4–10 k/mm3 ), microcytic hypochromic anemia with a hemoglobin of 9.8 g/dl (12–16 g/dl), elevated alkaline phosphatase of 435 IU/L (44–147 IU/L), mild elevation of AST and ALT (97 and 85 IU/L respectively; normal ranges: 5–40 IU/L) and normal bilirubin. Plain chest X-ray (CXR) showed an elevated right hemidiaphragm with a right lower lobe infiltration and pleural effusion . A CT scan of the chest and abdomen showed a 6.6 × 4.7 cm hypodense, multiloculated mass in posterior aspect of right hepatic lobe . Empiric antibiotics with imipenem and vancomycin were begun. The following day with the use of ultrasound guidance, 20 mL of purulent fluid specimen was aspirated from the liver lesion and a percutaneous pigtail catheter was placed for drainage . Gram stain from the aspirated materials showed rare Gram positive cocci, Gram negative rods but predominantly Gram positive rods. The blood cultures grew Gram positive rods. Bacteriologic studies confirmed that they were lactobacilli species from both the liver abscess and blood, however the exact strain identification was not performed. Her hospitalization was complicated with cardiac arrest which she survived. She was hospitalized for 3 weeks with near complete resolution of the hepatic abscess which was demonstrated on repeat imaging .