An 82-year-old male, with a history of CABG, who presented to an outpatient clinic with dyspnea on exertion and angina. He has a past medical history of coronary artery disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus type 2, hyperlipidemia, peripheral vascular disease, permanent atrial fibrillation, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and Meniere disease. His home medications include aspirin, coumadin, tamsulosin, vitamin D3, carvedilol, digoxin, insulin glargine, insulin aspart, finasteride, fluticasone, sennosides, torsemide, albuterol inhaler, tiotropium inhaler, budesonide/formoterol inhaler, and atorvastatin. He is allergic to lisinopril. The patient quit smoking 35 years ago and occasionally drinks alcohol. He underwent a four-vessel CABG 14 months ago, wherein the left internal mammary artery was grafted to his left anterior descending artery; saphenous vein was grafted to his obtuse marginal, diagonal branch and right coronary artery. He subsequently developed post-operative atrial fibrillation during the initial hospitalization for CABG. Initially, his dyspnea was attributed to his atrial fibrillation. His proposed symptomatic atrial fibrillation was refractory to pharmacologic rate and rhythm control. He subsequently underwent electrical cardioversion to alleviate his symptoms with restoration of sinus rhythm, within 3 months of patient developing atrial fibrillation. However, he continued to have progressive exertional dyspnea with peripheral edema despite optimal medical therapy and diuresis.
An echocardiogram was performed which showed a new cardiomyopathy with a severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 30–35%. Multiple echocardiograms following his CABG had consistently demonstrated preserved left ventricular systolic function. Further evaluation of his new cardiomyopathy was performed using a vasodilator nuclear stress test, which was negative. Due to persistent symptoms, a coronary angiography was performed. Coronary angiography demonstrated a saphenous venous graft that was anastomosed to a tributary vein with retrograde filling of the coronary sinus, instead of the obtuse marginal branch of the left circumflex artery . The intracardiac left to right shunting was hemodynamically significant with Qp/Qs of 1.8, leading to pulmonary hypertension and subsequent right ventricular dilatation. The patient had a pulmonary artery pressure of 62/27 with a mean of 45 mmHg.
Using a multidisciplinary approach and collaboration with interventional radiology, the decision was made to pursue a percutaneous approach for ACAVF closure. The procedure was performed using a 2.4 French microcatheter which was advanced over a 0.014-inch microwire into the mid/distal aspect of the saphenous venous graft. Four detachable 0.018-inch microcoils were placed into the graft until it was completely occluded (Video 2). A follow-up angiogram confirmed the position and almost complete resolution of the ACAVF . No contrast was visualized going into the coronary sinus. Follow-up echocardiography, performed 3 months post-coiling, revealed restoration of left ventricular systolic function to 50% and significant improvement in heart failure symptoms.