A 1-year-old Japanese girl was referred to our hospital for living donor liver transplantation from her father. She had the diagnosis of BA at the age of 2 months, when she presented with hypocalcemia (1.4 mmol/l; albumin-corrected calcium: 1.5 mmol/l; normal range: 2.0–2.8 mmol/l). She displayed no clinical signs of hypocalcemia, such as convulsion, muscle tremors, lethargy, and irritability.
Even though hepatoportoenterostomy had been performed 5 days after the diagnosis, progressive cholestasis required liver transplantation. Persistent hypocalcemia, which was considered to be associated with sustained vitamin D deficiency, occurred (25-hydroxy vitamin D [25OHD] was low [28.2 nmol/l, vitamin D deficiency is defined as <50 nmol/l]) . After the operation, she was treated with oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation (alfacalcidol). Alfacalcidol is the active form of vitamin D3 and is used to treat vitamin D deficiency in Japan because the native form of vitamin D is not available for medical use. Despite the observation that serum calcium levels were low and serum phosphate levels remained at normal to high levels (1.8–3.1 mmol/l; normal range: 1.3–2.1 mmol/l), intact PTH levels were within the normal range (19–66 ng/l; normal range: 10–72 ng/l).
At the first visit to our department, under conditions of oral calcium and abundant alfacalcidol (3.0 μg/day), laboratory data showed marked hypocalcemia (1.4 mmol/l; albumin-corrected calcium: 1.5 mmol/l), hyperphosphatemia (2.6 mmol/l), and a normal intact PTH level (66 ng/l) with severe vitamin D deficiency (undetectable levels). The urine calcium to creatinine ratio was 0.15 mmol/mmol and tubular reabsorption of phosphate (%TRP) was 99 %. Additionally, there were no skeletal abnormalities on a physical examination and on X-rays . These results suggested that she had hypoparathyroidism.
The patient’s height was 74.5 cm (-1.45 SD). Bone mineral density of the lumbar spine (L1–L4) measured by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry showed that the bone mineral density Z-score was −1.0.
Her family history showed that her mother had sensorineural deafness, hypoplastic left kidney, and a past history of an operation for right vesicoureteral reflux. Her mother’s serum calcium level was 2.1 mmol/l (albumin-corrected calcium: 2.1 mmol/l; normal range: 2.2–2.5 mmol/l) and intact PTH level was 55 ng/l (normal range: 10–65 ng/l). Further work-up by auditory brainstem response testing and abdominal ultrasonography showed that the patient had mild sensorineural left deafness and bilateral renal cysts. Based on these results, we strongly suspected that this patient and her mother have HDR syndrome and we conducted GATA3 gene analysis.
Genomic DNA was extracted using a genomic DNA Extraction Kit (Qiagen Inc., Tokyo, Japan). PCR primers were designed to amplify all six exons and exon-intron boundaries of the GATA3 gene. PCR products were purified with the QIAquick Purification Kit (Qiagen Inc.). Sequencing was performed with the BigDye terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit and the ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The primer sequences for PCR are available upon request. Sequence analysis showed a novel heterozygous mutation in exon 3 of GATA3, c.736delGinsAT , causing a frameshift with a premature stop codon after a new 57 amino acid sequence (p.G246Mfs57X) . No other mutation was detected in the cording region of the GATA3 gene. The same mutation was identified in her mother, but not in her father.
Before liver transplantation, 5 days of intravenous multivitamin supplementation (including cholecalciferol 200 IU/day) raised calcium levels from 1.8 to 2.3 mmol/l. After liver transplantation, cholestasis was resolved, but hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia were not improved. Therefore, oral calcium and alfacalcidol were required. At present, serum calcium and phosphorus levels are within the normal range by alfacalcidol (1.0 μg/day) alone.