A 44-year-old previously healthy male Causasian patient had a sudden onset of progressive dyspnea and wheezing in April 2019. The patient had no significant past medical conditions or illnesses, denied risky occupational exposure (worked in an office in the city), and reported social drinking and no smoking; family history was also unremarkable. Initial CT showed moderate pericardial effusion, bilateral pleural effusion , and signs of pulmonary edema . No other suspicious findings were reported. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed signs of restrictive ventricular filling, with preserved ejection fraction (65%). In total, 825 mL of pericardial fluid was drained (negative for malignancy), and intravenous corticoid was started. In October 2019, after recurrent pericardial effusion, cytology was positive for neoplastic cells.
Repeated CT in October 2019 showed improvement in pulmonary congestion, signs of pericardiocentesis, and the appearance of indeterminate liver lesions, subsequently confirmed on magnetic resonance as solid nodules . No conspicuous lesions were reported in intestines (although colons were not adequately distended). CT-guided liver biopsy was then performed, revealing adenocarcinoma of probable gastrointestinal origin (immunohistochemical analysis positive for CDX2, CK19, and CK20 and negative for CK7 and TTF1). Colonoscopy was carried out in November 2019, showing a vegetating and stenosing lesion of the sigmoid colon, biopsy-proven adenocarcinoma. The patient underwent laparoscopic rectosigmoidectomy and pelvic and retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy. Anatomopathological result was moderately differentiated invasive tubulopapillary adenocarcinoma. Peritoneal carcinomatosis was also observed. Pathological staging was pT2N2bM1.
Baseline tumor markers were CEA 363.8 ng/mL, CA 19-9 .5 IU/mL, and CA 125 41.3 IU/mL. First-line intravenous palliative chemotherapy was started with FOLFOX + bevacizumab, with clinical improvement and decreasing tumor markers. Genetic panel was obtained, indicating nonmutated KRAS and NRAS and microsatellite stability. Treatment response was assessed by CT scans in October 2020 and January 2021; disease was considered stable according to RECIST criteria. Currently, the patient receives chemotherapy with dose reduction, maintaining grade 1 thrombocytopenia without other laboratory changes and remaining asymptomatic (ECOG 0).