A five-month-old male born via Cesarean section for twin pregnancy with no complications presented to a hospital in Cusco, Peru, with sudden onset respiratory distress. Vital signs at presentation were as follows: heart rate 150 beats per minute; blood pressure 80/47 millimeters of mercury; respiratory rate 50 breaths per minute; oxygen saturation (SpO2) 70% on room air; and temperature 36° Celsius. He was found to be in poor general condition, cyanotic and lethargic with dry mucous membranes. He was tachypneic with subcostal retractions and faint expiratory wheezing. Cardiac auscultation revealed no audible murmurs.
Given these findings, the patient was suspected to be in acute respiratory failure due to severe bronchiolitis. As the patient presented early at the onset of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, COVID-19 remained high on the differential, given little was known regarding its effects on infants. Oxygen was administered via non-rebreather (NRB) mask with broad spectrum antibiotics and intravenous fluids (IVF) due to concern for sepsis. His labs were notable for white blood cell count of 10.6 × 103 per millimeter (mm3) (reference range: 5×103 – 10×103 mm3) with a lymphocytic predominance; hemoglobin 20.4 grams (g) per deciliter (dL) (14–17 g/dL); creatinine of 0.4 milligrams (mg)/dL (0–0.5 mg/dL); and a lactate of 12.5 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0–4 mmol/L). A COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction test was negative. Chest radiograph was interpreted by the emergency physician as technically limited due to rotation with diffuse prominent interstitial markings concerning for viral pneumonia .
The patient became more responsive after initial resuscitation with oxygen via NRB and IVF. However, he remained hypoxic with SpO2 of 76% and ongoing signs of respiratory distress. He was started on high-flow nasal cannula at nine liters per minute (L/min) with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 70% resulting in minimal improvement in overall respiratory status. Given his persistent hypoxia and cyanosis, cardiac POCUS was performed, which initially was notable for RVH raising suspicion for RVOT obstruction suggestive of a congenital heart disease.
Upon closer inspection, parasternal long-axis view revealed a ventricular septal defect with an overriding aorta and RVH concerning for TOF . Parasternal short-axis cardiac view redemonstrated RVH with interventricular septal flattening indicative of right ventricular pressure overload from RVOT obstruction . Pulmonary ultrasound revealed a normal A-line pattern, and POCUS assessment of the inferior vena cava showed a non-collapsing vessel.
Treatment was shifted from a focus on sepsis to TOF management. Additional IVF hydration was limited, and the patient was started on propanolol for rate control. Due to the patient’s age, the decision was made to not administer prostaglandins as he was likely not ductus dependent. He was found to improve after these interventions. Cardiology was consulted, and despite not identifying physical exam findings concerning for TOF such as skin discoloration signifying cyanosis, or a systolic thrill and ejection murmur at the left sternal border, once they were shown the POCUS images cardiology consult initiated procedures for referral to the National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases in Lima for definitive surgical treatment. Four days later a comprehensive echocardiogram confirmed the diagnosis of TOF.