A 51-year-old, previously healthy, woman experienced headache. Blood pressure had been monitored about one year earlier and she had been normotensive. At the time of admission she had hypertension with a blood pressure of 220/110 mmHg. CT of the brain was normal and cerebrospinal fluid examination was also normal. A physical examination showed nothing remarkable except for high blood pressure. The patient was discharged without further investigation or treatment. Some days later, she noticed a tingling sensation in the right part of her body. This was probably due to a seizure, and she was re-admitted. She had persistent severe headache on the days that followed, intermittently requiring morphine. Nausea and vomiting occurred frequently, decreased alertness was observed, and blurred vision gradually developed. Treatment with phenytoin and levetiracetam intravenously proved to be effective and the seizures stopped. Her blood pressure fluctuated, reaching 230/110 mmHg, but a diagnosis of hypertension was confirmed and treatment started. The hypertension was treated with labetalol and enalaprilat intravenously. After three days, the patient suddenly developed a left-sided hemiparesis and a left-sided hemianopia. The blood pressure at the time of symptom onset was reduced to 190/100 mmHg. MRI, T2-weighted images showed hyperintensity in both occipital and parietal lobes . DWI reveals rather extensive areas with high signal intensity with low signal on the ADC map reflecting cytotoxic oedema in both occipital and parietal lobes. PWI showed slightly reduced blood flow on the right side . Coronal T2-weighted FLAIR image shows the bilateral high signal intensity oedema. There was a small hemorrhagic component in the left occipital lobe and adjacent to it there was a small area with high signal . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) displayed no signs of vasospasm or intracranial/extracranial stenosis. Complete blood picture, and blood biochemistry were essentially normal. An electroencephalogram (EEG) was ordered and showed diffuse slowing indicating an encephalopathy. Echocardiography was essentially normal. Repeated electrocardiograms were normal. Her blood pressure improved and was 150/100 when the patient was discharged. Her symptoms diminished but she had residual hemianopia.
On follow-up MRI 5 months later, the T2-weighted images showed subtotal regression of the hyperintense lesions in both occipital lobes, and small areas consistent with infarctions had developed bilaterally . An extensive clinical work-up has not provided any explanation for the hypertensive crisis that caused her encephalopathy. All secondary causes as renal artery stenosis, renal disease, hyperthyroidism, functioning adrenal tumours, coarctation of the aorta and obstructive sleep apnoea were ruled out. A diagnosis of essential hypertension was established. The patient is currently asymptomatic except for residual hemianopia and her blood pressure varies within the normal range. She is continuing with antihypertensive treatment.