The patient is a 13-year-old girl who presented with generalized puffiness and cola-colored urine for 2 weeks associated with oliguria and headache for 1 week. There was no history of rash, arthralgia, oral ulcers, nasal discharge or stuffiness, cough, dyspnea, or hemoptysis; past history was not contributory. Physical examination did not reveal any abnormality except mild edema and hypertension stage 1 (130/90 mm Hg). Hematological and biochemical investigations indicated microcytic hypochromic anemia (hemoglobin 7.4 g/dL without schistocytes on peripheral smear), total leukocyte count 8,200/mm3, platelet count 400 × 103/mm3, deranged renal function (urea 69 mg/dL, creatinine 3.4 mg/dL), and hypoalbuminemia (albumin 2.4 g/dL). Urinalysis showed proteinuria (2+ qualitative) and hematuria (80–90 red cells/high power field), with no casts or crystals; the urine protein/creatinine ratio was 8.2 mg/mg. Complement C3 and C4 levels were within normal limits (97 mg/dL and 26 mg/dL), and ANA, anti-dsDNA, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic (anti-PR3 as well as anti-MPO) antibodies by enzyme linked immunoassay (ELISA) were negative. The Direct Coombs Test was negative. Ultrasound examination of the kidney showed normal size and echogenicity. With an empiric diagnosis of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, severe anemia, and oliguria, hemodialysis and methylprednisolone pulsing were started and a kidney biopsy performed.
Light microscopy revealed a total of 16 glomeruli, of which 3 were globally sclerosed, 1 was segmentally sclerosed, and the remainder showed cellular crescents (5/16, 31.2%), fibrocellular crescents (3/16, 18.75%), and one fibrous crescent. The crescents were associated with Bowman's capsule disruption. However, no giant cells were observed in the glomeruli or adjacent to the disrupted Bowman's capsules. Underlying tufts displayed mesangial expansion and hypercellularity. No endocapillary hypercellularity, neutrophilic infiltration, or active tuft necrosis was noted. Interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy occupied 25–30% of the biopsied cortex with dense chronic interstitial inflammation, interstitial edema, and diffuse acute tubular injury with presence of RBC, hyaline, and granular casts .
Direct immunofluorescence on the tissue showed coarse mesangial deposits of IgA (2–3+) and C3 (2–3+) along with capillary wall linear “paint brush stroke” positivity for IgG (3+) with a subclass profile of IgG1 (2–3+) and IgG4 (1–2+). Coarse mesangial and linear capillary wall positivity was also observed for both light chains, kappa and lambda. IgM and C1q were negative. No extraglomerular (tubular basement membrane or vascular) staining was observed for IgG or any of the IgG subclasses. Immunofluorescence for galactose-deficient IgA (KM55) was positive in the same location and with similar intensity as the IgA, confirming the galactose-deficient nature of IgA . Ultrastructural examination of the tissue could not be performed due to lack of glomeruli in the core sent. Electron microscopy on the paraffin embedded tissue was not contributory due to extensive anatomic distortion. A final diagnosis of IgA nephropathy with anti-GBM nephritis was rendered.
Based on the biopsy, (post-pulse) sera testing for anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies was performed by indirect immunofluorescence and ELISA, however was negative. Chest radiograph and high-resolution computerized tomography chest performed excluded pulmonary involvement.
Following kidney biopsy, 7 sessions (5 daily and 2 alternate day) of double volume therapeutic plasma exchange were performed with continued methylprednisolone pulses to a cumulative dose of 140 mg/kg (6 doses) and later switched to oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day). Once the child was shifted to alternate day plasma exchange, cyclophosphamide pulse (500 mg/m2) was also initiated. Hemodialysis was discontinued after 8 weeks. At the latest follow-up, which was 5 months from presentation, blood urea was 41 mg/dL, serum creatinine 1.26 mg/dL, and serum albumin 3.4 g/dL; 24-h urine protein was 5.6 g. Medications at the last follow-up included prednisolone at 10 mg and amlodipine 5 mg once daily.