A 48-year-old Sri Lankan woman was referred to our general surgical clinic for the management of a bladder stone following successful treatment for a urinary tract infection complicated with upper tract involvement. She complained of intermittent nonspecific lower abdominal pain, dysuria, and hematuria over the previous 6 months. During the same period of time she had three uncomplicated urinary tract infections that were managed by her general practitioner. The urine culture grew a pure growth of Proteus each time. She was managed with orally administered co-amoxiclav, according to the antibacterial sensitivity report, for 1 week during each episode. She was put on nitrofurantoin as a urinary antiseptic after the third episode of urinary tract infection. On presentation for the complicated, fourth urinary tract infection, this case underwent further investigation. She was found to be septic with a heart rate of 110 beats/minute, blood pressure of 130/90 mmHg, temperature of 38.9 °C (102 °F), and respiratory rate of 20/minute. She had neutrophil leukocytosis (18 × 109/ml), but her liver and renal function tests were normal. The radiographs of her kidney, ureter, and bladder showed a large bladder stone with three limbs and an imprint of a typical Copper T380A IUCD (Pregna International Ltd., Mumbai, India) in the middle of the stone . An ultrasound scan of her kidney, ureter, and bladder confirmed the intravesical location of the stone and left-side pyelonephritis. Urine culture yielded a mixed growth of coliform and Proteus. She was managed with intravenously administered cefotaxime according to the antibacterial sensitivity report for 1 week and was continued on the nitrofurantoin until she underwent surgery.
On further inquiry, our patient indicated that she had an IUCD inserted 15 years previously, after the delivery of her third child. Two years later, the threads of the IUCD could not be found during a routine visit to a Well Woman Clinic, and it was documented as a missing IUCD. A further workup was not conducted since she did not return for a follow-up. She had forgotten about the missing IUCD and only mentioned it after being questioned. She denied having any urinary or lower abdominal symptoms until the last 6 months. She did not have any previous medical conditions. She was a housewife and had no other risk factor for urolithiasis. She had no family history of urolithiasis. Her general and abdominal examinations were otherwise unremarkable.
The diagnosis of a bladder stone formed around a migrated IUCD was made and an open vesicolithotomy was scheduled for 4 weeks later due to the large size of the stone. The vesicolithotomy was uncomplicated, and the interior of her bladder was normal. A large bladder stone with three limbs measuring 6 × 5 cm was removed, the stone was broken, and the IUCD was found inside. The three limbs of the stone were shaped to cover the three limbs of the IUCD, with the threads of the device also completely covered by the stone material . Her postoperative period was uncomplicated and she was asymptomatic after the removal of the stone. At 6 months there were no further attacks of urinary tract infections.