A 42-year-old Gravida 3 Para 2 Living 2 with Gestational age of 12 weeks presented with vaginal spotting for 2 days. It was of gradual onset progressively worsening with no specific periodicity. She presented with fresh blood and one incident of passing clots, no reported products of conception seen. This was accompanied with lower abdominal pain cramping in nature, radiating to the lower back with no bowel or bladder habit change. She denied any history of nausea, vomiting or epigastric pain. She also denied any history of awareness of heartbeat, dizziness, or loss of consciousness.
Patient reported that her previous pregnancies were delivered vaginally without complication. She has no known chronic illness and denied any chronic familial illness. She denied any drug or food allergy. She has no smoking or alcohol use history.
On examination she was alert and oriented with a normal pulse rate of 84 beats per minute, Blood pressure 110/72 mmHg, other vital signs were normal. Abdominal examination showed normal abdominal contour, not distended, no scar, she had mild tenderness on deep palpation of the suprapubic region. Speculum examination revealed slightly open cervical os with products of conception not visible, oozing blood from external os. Systemic examination was unremarkable. A diagnosis of incomplete abortion was made, and laboratory results are as follows: White blood cell 4.6 × 109/l, Hemoglobin 11.4 g/dl, Platelets 255 × 109/l. Trans-vaginal ultrasound confirmed the findings as reported to show significant products of conception in the uterine cavity .
Medical management of incomplete abortion was initiated where the patient was started on sublingual misoprostol 600 microgram as initial dose. 4 h later nurse reported the patients' vitals to be 78/52 mmHg with pulse rate of 56 beats per minute. The patient reported to have increased blood clots after the dose was taken. Initial resuscitation was started with two large bore IV cannulas running 1 l of normal saline, a 14 French urinary catheter inserted that drained clear urine of 900mls, grouping and cross matching was done and requested 2 units of whole blood to be on standby. Vitals were checked 15 min later, and the patient was still deteriorating despite fluid resuscitation, peripherally shutting down and with cold extremities, blood pressure dropped to 62/40 mmHg with heart rate of 51 beats per minute. A vaginal inspection was done and revealed blood clots which where manually evacuated. A sterile speculum inspection done which revealed products of conceptus stuck at the cervical os.
Patient was the counselled for evacuation for which she consented and was taken to the operating theatre. With the patient in lithotomy position, Cusco speculum was inserted, and inspection was done. Products of conceptus were found stuck at the internal cervical os, evacuation of products from the cervical os was done using sponge holding forceps followed by gentle suction and curettage.
Soon after evacuation, the patients' vitals improved significantly to a blood pressure of 118/70 mmHg, heart rate of 65 beats per minute. The patient was reviewed 2 h post procedure in the ward and she was clinically and vitally stable where she continued with post procedure medication pain medication , Tablets Ferrotone 1 tab daily. She was discharged on day 2 post evacuation and she was clinically and vitally stable with hemoglobin levels of 10 g/dl. She was educated on danger signs and post abortal care was done. She was told to return after two weeks for serum beta HCG levels and ultrasound scan. Post discharge the patient was faring well and her recovery was without complication.