A 10-month-old female patient presented to the Pediatrics Department with melena, and bloody vomitus, accompanied by fever and dehydration. Four episodes of bloody vomiting were reported prior to the presentation. Medical history includes sepsis 3 days after birth, treated with exchanged blood transfusions via an umbilical catheter, meningitis, which had also been treated, and abdominal distention following each breastfeeding, for which it was received in the incubator department in the hospital, and then it was transferred to bottle feeding. The parents also reported frequent episodes of pyrexia, which respond to antipyretics, in addition to frequent respiratory infections. The patient’s parents were consanguineous, but no family history or medication history was recorded. The physical examination revealed pyrexia (temperature: 39°C), sunken eyes due to dehydration, generalized mild jaundice color of the skin, enlarged abdomen, navel bulge, bilateral inguinal hernia, and an enlarged spleen that could be palpated 4–5 cm below the left costal margin, but no liver enlargement. Laboratory findings demonstrated the following, as shown in Table . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed esophageal constriction stenosis caused by multiple esophageal ulcers, esophageal varices (IV degree), and congestive gastritis . Abdomen and groin ultrasound showed ascites measuring about 3 l, homogeneous splenomegaly, and an invisible portal vein in the hepatic hilum . Doppler ultrasonography further revealed previous thrombosis in the splenic vein, splenomegaly, varices in both the gastric antrum and splenic hilum, fibrosis, and impaired blood flow in the portal vein furthermore . Multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) showed total obstruction in the portal vein after the joining of the splenic and superior mesenteric veins, ascites that fill both the abdomen and the pelvic areas, splenomegaly (9×7×5 cm), and retroperitoneal swollen lymph nodes . Blood levels of antiphospholipid antibody, AT-III, protein S, protein C, and homocysteine were normal. The patient underwent sclerotherapy and paracentesis for ascites and was provided with a blood transfusion and supportive intravenous fluids. Octreotide (1 μg/kg/h), proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole), and antibiotics (vancomycin) were administered. Considering the follow-up, the patient was left on (linezolid), low doses of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), propranolol, and regular ultrasonic and endoscopic follow-up were recommended. The patient was discharged one-week post-operation in good general condition.