A 35 year-old patient, gravida 4 para 1, was seen in our clinic at 9 weeks’ gestation age with a history of recurrent pancreatitis. Splenomegaly was found on routine physical examination when the patient was 23 years old. The initial attack of pancreatitis resulted in fetal demise at 22 weeks of her first pregnancy 7 years ago. The next attack occurred during her second pregnancy 4 years ago presented at 26 weeks’ gestation, after treatment it subsided gradually. The following third attack occurred at 35 weeks complicated by multiple organ failure, an emergency cesarean section was conducted and a female neonate delivered with severe asphyxia, later was diagnosed with cerebral palsy. The patient’s platelet count fell to 40 × 109/L during the second pregnancy, with the level of 70–80 × 109/L at postpartum. The fourth pancreatitis attack occurred 2 years ago was mild. The patient had no history of gallstones, alcohol use, diabetes mellitus or medication use. The parents and two siblings of the patient were all healthy, with no known consanguinity marriage in the family.
At her first visit to our clinic at 9 weeks’ gestation, the fact that all the episodes of pancreatitis were triggered by taking fatty food was noted; the suspicious hyperlipidemic pancreatitis was diagnosed although without the laboratory test. The patient’s weight was 47 kg, height was 160 cm, and body mass index (BMI) was 18.4 kg/m2 before pregnancy. No xanthomas or lipemia retinalis was found. Abdominal ultrasound revealed splenomegaly but no hepatomegaly. The plasma triglyceride level was 2.64 mmol/L, a high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level 0.70 mmol/L and a cholesterol level 2.58 mmol/L. She was recommended a low-fat diet. Plasma lipid levels were monitored monthly, later bimonthly, and showed a gradual increase of triglyceride and cholesterol levels. At 18 weeks’ gestation, when the plasma triglyceride level was 13.91 mmol/L and cholesterol 6.75 mmol/L, fenofibrate (200 mg once daily) was started to reduce the triglyceride level and decrease the risk of pancreatitis, with minimal effect.
At 25 weeks, the patient was admitted to the obstetrical ward with a plasma triglyceride level of 17.09 mmol/L and a cholesterol level of 7.53 mmol/L (triglyceride levels throughout the pregnancy shown in Fig. ). A multidisciplinary team consisting of obstetricians, dieticians, general surgeons and internal medicine specialists was involved. Combining the patient’s history of recurrent pancreatitis and blood test results, chylomicronemia was diagnosed. A low-fat diet was provided to the patient with 11% of total calories from fat per day since admission, dieticians formulated detailed diet plans including specific food of specific weight and the cooking method was water-boiling without cooking oil; besides fenofibrate 200 mg once daily, she was placed on ezetimibe 10 mg once daily and a pregnancy-supplement tablet once daily (containing 200 mg docosahexaenoic acid and 80 mg eicosapentaenoic acid). Although omega-3 fatty acids were recommended by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE) to lower triglyceride , it was not administered to our patient due to a lack of approval in China. Magnetic resonance of the pancreas showed no signs of post-pancreatitis complications. With dietary adjustment later on with only 4% of calories from fat per day, plasma triglyceride levels were slowly decreasing and ezetimibe was discontinued at 275/7 weeks. Since 31 weeks’ gestation, the plasma triglyceride level was maintained between 5.64–5.98 mmol/L but could not be lowered any further. Monthly ultrasound showed normal growth of the fetus (fetal growth curve shown in Fig. ) and daily non-stress tests from 32 weeks did not yield abnormal results.
Taking into account the adverse pregnancy outcome of the patient and the knowledge of some acute pancreatitis occurrence with plasma triglyceride levels between 5.65 mmol/L to 11.3 mmol/L , it was recommended to perform cesarean delivery at 345/7 weeks. A single course of corticosteroids was administered 48 h before the operation. On the surgery day, plasma triglyceride increased to 8.02 mmol/L, indicating the influence of dexamethasone toward triglyceride metabolism. A healthy male neonate weighing 2500 g was born, with Apgar scores of 9 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Fenofibrate was discontinued post-partum, and she was discharged 8 days postpartum (plasma triglyceride level 6.06 mmol/L, body weight 58 kg). Keeping a low-fat diet with 6% calories from fat, until the latest follow-up (one hundred days postpartum), the patient’s plasma triglyceride at no time exceeded 10 mmol/L.
The neonate was admitted to Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) due to prematurity and was soon administered intravenously with lipid emulsion to correct the essential fatty acid deficiency. Although he suffered from recurrent apnea that required continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for 3 days, the neonate recovered well and was discharged on day 22. For the first one hundred days, the infant showed normal development physically.
Whole blood samples of the patient were sent to Beijing Genomics Institute-Shenzhen. The genomic DNA was extracted following standard protocols. The 3583 target genes for whole exome sequencing were based on Mendelian disease-causing variants from OMIM database (updated Jan 11th, 2016). Using the method of target capture and next-generation sequencing, the exons with intron-exon boundaries of target genes were sequenced in a BGISEQ-500 sequencer (MGI, Shenzhen). A total of 17,129.07 Mb of sequence data were produced with an average depth of coverage of 99.76 times and 95.89% of the total bases covered at 30 times. The result reveals a homozygous GPIHBP1 frame-shift mutation c.48_49insGCGG (p.P17A fs*22), which was absent from the ExAC database. The insertion of 4 nucleotides at the codon 17 in the signal peptide domain of GPIHBP1 leads to the introduction of the stop codon at the position 22, probably producing a truncated and nonfunctional protein. Combining results from the prediction tools Condel , PolyPhen2 and SIFT, this mutation is considered likely pathogenic according to the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics.