A 30-year-old Thai woman had had right ankle pain for 2 months and had a history of mild injury of the right ankle. Her ankle was swollen, especially on the lateral malleolus. Physical examination revealed a tender mass at the right lateral malleolus. Results of vascular, neurologic, and dermatologic examinations of the lower extremities were normal .
Radiographs showed an eccentric osteolytic lesion in the distal fibula . An incisional biopsy was performed . Tissue pathology reported multiple pieces of white tan soft tissue and bone. Microscopic examination revealed numbers of cellular plump malignant cells with a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, hyperchromatic nuclei, and prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures were frequently observed . Neoplastic bone formation was noted . The tumor staging was Enneking stage IIB that were high grade in histology, tumor extension out of the bone without metastasis at initial diagnosis. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin was administered for 3 months before definitive surgical treatment.
After chemotherapy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed in order to evaluate the extension of disease and guide for definite tumor removal. The images revealed a 2.4 × 1.6 × 2 cm mass above the removed bone in the fibula, indicating a poor response to chemotherapy and persistent tumor. The tumor involved underneath the peroneus longus and brevis tendons . A CT scan of the lungs showed no pulmonary metastasis.
The definitive surgeries included a wide resection of the right distal fibula and surrounding soft tissue on October 2011. The musculotendinous and tendinous part of the peroneus brevis and longus at the fibular bone were resected. After that, a medial incision at the navicular tuberosity was made. The tibialis posterior tendon was harvested from its insertion and retracted proximally. The tendon was passed under the tibia through the interossessous membrane. It was confirmed that the tunnel space was large enough for the tendon excursion without any kinking to the surrounding tissues. The level of the tunnel was at mid-tibia that allow tendon to transferred laterally by keeping the tendon axis in line. The tendon was sewn to the remaining distal part of the peroneus brevis with number 2 FiberWire. Tension of the ankle and subtalar joint were set in ankle neutral position . The balance of lateral and medial stability maintained in position of ankle in neutral. Subcutaneous tissue and skin were closed layer by layer and a redivac drain was installed.
The definitive tissue pathology diagnosis was conducted on a sample consisting of a segment of distal fibula and surrounding soft tissue measuring 10.5 cm in length, 4 cm in width, and 3 cm in thickness. There was also a 10.5 cm × 1.5 cm piece of skin on the lateral side of the specimen. The bone had been previously cut longitudinally, showing a 2.5 cm × 1.5 cm white-tan hard solid tumor at the bony cortex and medulla. The tumor had broken through the bony cortex into the adjacent soft tissue. Histologically, there were numerous large size pleomorphic malignant cells with less than 5% of the area showing tumor necrosis. Ongoing osteoid formation was observed.
The wound was completely healed within 2 weeks. Postoperative casting was applied for 2 months before commencing physical therapy. Chemotherapy with doxorubicin was continued for an additional 3 months after the operation. The symptom of pain was reduced and was completely relieved within 4 months. At 84 months after surgery, the patient could ambulate well with some limitations on daily activity. She walks with walking and dress shoes for most activity. She could stand on tiptoes. Moreover, she could do low-speed run, bicycle and jump. The plain radiographs showed no evidence of recurrent or metastatic cancer every year for 7 years The MRI scan of the ankle showed no evidence of recurrence at seventh year follow up.