The authors certify that written informed consent for publication was obtained from the patient or guardian.
A 60-year-old woman diagnosed with a distal anterior cerebral artery aneurysm was scheduled for a craniotomy and clipping of the aneurysm. The patient was known to have rheumatoid arthritis and to be taking 15 mg of oral MTX per week for the previous five years, the last dose of which was taken two days prior to admission. A diagnostic cerebral angiogram was performed on admission with 50 ml of intravenous iohexol (Omnipaque, 350 mg iodine/ml, GE Healthcare Pvt. Ltd, India) before surgery. Preoperative blood test results were unremarkable, and echocardiography revealed normal contractility, with an ejection fraction of 60%. The patient successfully underwent aneurysm clipping the day after admission, and the trachea was extubated following an uneventful intraoperative course. The patient was monitored in the neurocritical care unit in the immediate postoperative period and was treated with intravenous levetiracetam, mannitol, and paracetamol.
Gross abdominal distension was noted on the first postoperative day. Her blood test results were normal, except for a serum potassium level of 2 mmol/L. Emergent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the abdomen was performed with 60 ml of intravenous iohexol to rule out other possibilities. As the CECT of the abdomen was unremarkable, a diagnosis of postoperative paralytic ileus was considered, and intravenous potassium correction was initiated. The patient developed diffuse erythematous skin rashes 24 h after the CECT of the abdomen was conducted . Suspecting an adverse drug event, antibiotics and anticonvulsants were temporarily withheld. On the third postoperative day, an increase in liver enzymes and doubling of creatinine levels were noted. The blood counts revealed severe pancytopenia with hemoglobin, leukocyte, and platelet counts of 6.6 g/dl, 3.4 × 109/L, and 42 × 109/L, respectively. MTX toxicity due to repeated contrast agent exposure was suspected, and the patient was hydrated with intravenous fluids to maintain a positive balance. As per the rheumatologist’s advice, leucovorin rescue was initiated at 75 mg/day in divided doses. However, in the subsequent days, the patient suffered a progressive decline in cell counts with worsening hepatic and renal parameters. On the fifth postoperative day, the patient required trachea intubation and lung ventilation owing to her deteriorated sensorium. An emergent plain computed tomography (CT) brain scan was performed, which did not reveal any apparent detectable pathology. The patient developed severe hypotension on the same day (postoperative day 5) and bedside echocardiography revealed global hypokinesia with mild pericardial effusion. Stabilization of the patient’s hemodynamics required supramaximal doses of intravenous noradrenaline and dobutamine. The patient developed severe bradycardia and cardiac arrest within a few hours, with no return of spontaneous circulation, despite cardiopulmonary resuscitation.