A 56-year-old man visited our department with complaint of right eye pain and redness that had been diagnosed at a local hospital as acute conjunctivitis 1 wk ago.
The patient reported a 1-wk experience of pain and redness in his right eye (but no blurred vision) that prompted him to visit a local hospital, where he was diagnosed with acute conjunctivitis of the right eye. He was sent home with antibiotic eye drops to be applied for 1 wk. When he experienced no improvement in his symptoms, he presented to our department for treatment. We also gave the initial diagnosis of acute conjunctivitis, in accordance with the obvious eye redness. Levofloxacin eye drops were prescribed (6 times/d), but after 1 wk the pain and redness did not subside and the patient began to experience a decrease in vision.
The patient reported no history of systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease, stroke, smoking, or obesity.
The visual acuity in the right eye was found to have reduced to 0.6. The conjunctiva of the right eye was also found to be obviously congested. The patient’s cornea was transparent but a shallow anterior chamber was found in the right eye. The right pupil appeared round and with normal light reflection. There was no opacity in the right lens. The intraocular pressure was within normal limits. However, ophthalmoscopy revealed retinal folds around the optic disk in the right eye. The left eye was normal overall.
Laboratory examinations included tests for complete blood count, liver function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, autoantibody, rheumatoid immune antibody, syphilis antibodies, human immunodeficiency virus, herpes simplex virus 1 and hepatitis B virus. All results were within normal range. Immune complexes and tuberculosis were not detected.
Fundus photography revealed retinal folds around the optic disk in the right eye . B-scan ultrasonography revealed increased scleral thickening, with no 'T' sign . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed the neuroepithelial layer to be raised and wrinkled, with fluid underneath it and above the temporal part of the optic disc . Ultrasound biomicroscopy revealed edema and detachment of the ciliary body .