A 69-year-old man with a history of mitral valvuloplasty 11 years prior and esophagectomy (esophageal cancer) 4 years prior received elective mitral valvular replacement and tricuspid valvuloplasty under cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). The patient suffered dysfunction of the left limb after the operation, and a CT scan showed acute cerebral infarction. He was awake on postoperative day (POD) 3 and extubated on POD 4.
The patient’s temperature increased to 38.5 °C in the morning of POD 8, with hypoxemia, heart rate of 115 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute, and a blood pressure of 130/62 mmHg with norepinephrine (0.07 µg/kg/min) infusion. Pulmonary auscultation revealed bilateral basal crackles. Arterial blood gas analysis with a noninvasive V60 ventilator (PHILIPS, New Zealand) (IPAP: 16 mmHg, EPAP: 8 mmHg, FiO2: 100%) at that time showed pH 7.244, PaO2 84.7 mmHg, PaCO2 53.6 mmHg and PaO2:FiO2 (P/F) < 100 mmHg. Other laboratory data included a white blood cell count of 15.04 × 109/L with 92% neutrophils and 2.1% lymphocytes, platelet count of 81 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 78 g/L(preserved red cell 2U), hematocrit of 21.9%, blood lactate of 1.5 mmol/L, and blood glucose of 10.9 mmol/L. Immunologic condition evaluated on POD 11, showed decreased count of CD4 + and CD8 + lymphocytes (CD4 + : 107/µl, CD8 + : 42/µl), as well as decreased count of B lymphocytes and natural killer cells.
Chest radiographs showed ground glass-like changes in the lung fields. A CT scan of the chest showed diffuse bilateral alveolar infiltration and consolidation , compared with that on hospital admission . Diagnosis of myocarditis or heart failure was not considered because transthoracic echocardiogram measurement was normal..
ARDS was confirmed by P/F and CT. Endotracheal reintubation and mechanical ventilation (840 ventilator system, NELLCOR PURITAN BENNETT, Ireland) were performed due to respiratory failure with bilevel mode (PEEPhigh: 18 mmHg, PEEPlow: 10 mmHg, FiO2: 100%). Bronchoscopy was performed, which revealed a large quantity of clear serous secretions.
To identify the pathogen as soon as possible, we did blood culture and sputum culture before antimicrobial administration. Then detections of mNGS in serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were performed. Human PB19-specific nucleic acids were detected in both mNGS samples . Confirmatory examination showed that human PB19 IgM in serum was positive, while IgG was negative . Meanwhile, ARDS of the patient occurred during the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemics, the new coronal nucleic acid and antibodies were all negative. So, diagnosis of COVID-19 was excluded.
Empiric antibiotic administration (vancomycin and meropenem) was performed after sampling of blood culture and sputum culture, and discontinued until negative blood culture and sputum culture. The patient accepted prone position ventilation and thymopentin.
The patient’s P/F began to increase with radiographic improvement after three-day ventilation. The CT manifestation of chest improved greatly , then the patient was extubated after six-day ventilation. The patient was discharged from the ICU on POD 15 and discharged home on POD 22. With the improvement, the mNGS in serum showed reduced sequence numbers of parvovirus DNA . Before discharge home, the human PB19 IgM and IgG in serum were both positive . We followed up the patient at one year, he was alive and in a good condition.