A healthy 31-year-old nulliparous Chinese woman had a spontaneous monochorionic triamniotic triplet pregnancy. Three live fetuses (fetus 1, fetus 2, fetus 3) were seen at 8-week and 9-week ultrasound scans with crown-rump length measurements appropriate for gestational age which was calculated by last menstrual period. The scan showed a single placental mass, two intertwin membranes with T-sign and three amniotic sacs . At 11 weeks and 3 days of gestation, an ultrasound examination found fetus 1 measured 11 weeks and 2 days without cardiac activity. The surviving fetus 2 and fetus 3 measured 11 weeks and 2 days and 11 weeks and 4 days respectively. Fetal growth, liquor volume and umbilical artery Dopplers were assessed every 2 weeks. At 19 weeks’ gestation, the dead fetus was not visualized and anomaly scan including the central nervous system for the two remaining fetuses was normal. There was no ultrasound feature of fetofetal transfusion syndrome. However, at 23 weeks of gestation, ultrasound evaluation revealed the fetus 2 with dilated echogenic bowel (2 cm) and ascites. Fetal Doppler and growth were normal for both fetuses. The patient was informed that the findings were likely a result of underlying bowel abnormality. She declined invasive prenatal diagnostic test because of approaching the 24-week abortion limit. She chose to carry on the pregnancy.
At 28 weeks of gestation, the pregnancy was complicated by fetofetal transfusion syndrome. There was oligohydramnios (a maximum amniotic pool depth of 2 cm) in the fetus 2 (donor) and polyhydramnios (a maximum amniotic pool depth of 12 cm) in the fetus 3 (recipient). Amnioreduction was not performed because the mother did not have significant distending symptom. In view of possible rapid deterioration, a course of corticosteroid was administered for fetal lung maturation. Two days later, she complained of decreased fetal movement of one fetus. Ultrasound examinations revealed the fetus 2 with anhydramnios, invisible bladder and biophysical profile of zero. The fetus 3 had increased cardiothoracic ratio, significant tricuspid regurgitation and reverse flow in ductus venosus. The patient opted for immediate delivery. Two male babies were delivered by emergency Caesarean section. The first baby which was fetus 2 weighed 915 g (10th centile) and had Apgar scores of 5 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The second baby which was fetus 3 weighed 980 g (25th centile) and had Apgar scores of 6 and 8 at 1 and 5 min respectively.
Both babies were transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit for ventilation and received surfactant for respiratory distress syndrome. The hemoglobin levels of the first and second babies were 15.8 and 18.0 g/dL, respectively (a difference of 2.2 g/dL). An abdominal X-ray for bowel evaluation of the first baby showed a triple bubble sign, suggestive of small bowel obstruction. Laparotomy was done at 4 days old. The operative findings were jejunal atresia and small bowel volvulus. Small bowel resection was performed. The second baby was noted to have abdominal distension at 2 days old. An abdominal X-ray showed pneumoperitoneum and dilated bowel loops. Laparotomy was done and revealed gastric perforation. Repair of stomach and gastrostomy were performed. Both babies had uncomplicated operations and recovery of bowel function.
The brain ultrasound at 22 days old of the first baby showed bilateral periventricular hyperechogenicity and a grade 1 germinal matrix haemorrhage at right caudothalamic groove. On last follow-up at age 5 years, the child had normal growth and development.
The brain ultrasound at 22 days old of the second baby showed diffuse multiple cystic cavity formations of the cerebrum, predominantly in peritrigonal and parafalcial regions . The corpus callosum was thin. At 6 months of age, the baby started to have dystonic movements and global delay. On examination, he had small head. His head circumference was 36 cm (<3rd centile) and hypertonia of four limbs. An electroencephalogram disclosed epileptiform discharge. Metabolic screening was normal. At 1 year of age, the head circumference was 38 cm (<3rd centile). His neck control was poor. He could not roll over from prone to supine. His four limbs were hypertonic and lower limbs were hyperreflexic. Magnetic resonance imaging of brain confirmed the diagnosis of extensive multicystic encephalomalacia. There were diffuse and severe white matter loss at bilateral cerebrum, severe and diffuse thinning of the corpus callosum and ex-vacuo dilatation of bilateral lateral ventricles . The child developed epilepsy since 3 years old which was controlled with anti-epileptic medications. On last examination at 6 years of age, he still had severe global developmental delay. He could only vocalize but not yet speak. He could only sit and walk with support. A head computed tomography scan was performed for intractable seizure which revealed hypodense areas over parasagittal regions of bilateral cerebral hemispheres, in keeping with multicystic encephalomalacia .