A 14-year-old male presented to our facility after falling from his bicycle. He had lacerations on the right parietal area of his scalp and mild confusion that resolved quickly. He had lost consciousness for 1–2 min but remembered the events up to and through the traumatic incident. At the time of the original trauma, he had no associated vomiting, weakness, numbness, blurry vision, double vision, or neck pain and was not on blood thinning medication.
At presentation, neurological examination was benign with no focal neurologic deficits. The patient then began to have large volume emesis and increasing lethargy in the emergency department (ED), although he remained clinically stable. A head CT was performed which showed an EDH in the right frontotemporal region, measuring up to 7 mm in transverse dimension, with additional thin subdural hemorrhage extending along the lateral margin of the right temporal lobe . Acute SAH and a small hemorrhagic contusion of the lateral left temporal lobe were also present, as well as a 3 mm thickness acute subdural hematoma along the left tentorial leaflet. There was evidence of an acute, nondepressed fracture of the anterior right parietal bone associated with a scalp laceration, propagating through the anterior squamous portion of the right temporal bone into the greater wing of the right sphenoid bone. After a discussion with the neurosurgery and ED teams, embolization was requested with no indication for open surgical evacuation. The patient’s parents provided consent for treatment and the patient was taken to the neuroangiography suite in stable condition.
Following diagnostic angiography , the right MMA was embolized with coils. Due to robust ophthalmic region anastomoses, polyvinyl alcohol particles were not used. With a 6 French catheter in the right external carotid artery (ECA), a microcatheter was used to subselectively catheterize the right MMA over a micro-guidewire. Microcatheter angiography confirmed appropriate catheter positioning before subsequent embolization. Embolization was performed by instilling three fibered microcoils through the microcatheter into the right MMA. The right ECA angiography demonstrated complete occlusion of the right MMA postembolization . At this point, the procedure was concluded and all catheters were removed from the patient. A total of 60 cc of Omnipaque 300 were administered. Total fluoroscopic time was 8.6 min, and Air Kerma dose was 469.41 mGy. A pediatric neurosurgeon was present from admission to the ED, throughout the embolization procedure, and after the procedure to monitor the patient. An operating room (OR) was kept on standby if emergent craniotomy was needed.
There were no apparent complications, and the patient awoke from general anesthesia at his preprocedure neurologic baseline . The patient is neurologically intact with full recovery other than mild residual right lower extremity pain at 2-month follow-up.