A 25-year-old healthy Taiwanese woman without any underlying medical disease or inguinal hernia history had experienced persistent right lower abdominal pain for 1 week. The pain was dull, progressive, and not related to food intake. Associated symptoms included anorexia and nausea. She was brought to the emergency department (ED) due to progressive symptoms, including a positive McBurney’s point tenderness, mild muscle guarding, mild leukocytosis with a left shift, and elevated CRP levels. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed an engorged appendix with wall thickening, appendicolith along with small amount of abscess . No inguinal hernia was noted by CT, and the appendix was located in the paracecal position. Percutaneous drainage was contraindicated because of the engulfing surrounding intestinal loops and the more minimal volume of abscess. Therefore, she was treated with empiric antibiotics for a week and was discharged uneventfully.
Throughout the course of hospitalization, she did not complain of a bulging inguinal mass or inguinal pain. An interval appendectomy was scheduled at about three months after discharge.
However, she came to the ED a month later due to a persistent painful right inguinal bulging mass for one week. It was firm, tender and nonreducible. No recent history of coughing or constipation was mentioned. Pelvic CT was then arranged and revealed an inflamed appendix with abscess formation in an indirect inguinal hernia raising the question of an Amyand’s hernia with a perforated appendicitis. , including the preperitoneal region and right inguinal canal. It was most likely due to a perforated appendix incarcerated in the hernia sac. After thorough irrigation and debridement of the infected right inguinal region, right inguinal herniorrhaphy with McVay repair was performed by opening the sac, reducing the inflamed appendix into abdominal cavity, carefully avoiding contamination of the surgical field at inguinal region, and conducting high ligation of the sac. Use of a mesh-based repair was contraindicated because of the associated abscess. The reasons not to perform appendectomy in situ was that the cecal-appendiceal junction was still inside the peritoneal cavity and the appendiceal stump could not be safely secured if appendectomy was to be performed through the narrow opening of the sac. Furthermore, the peritoneal cavity had to be irrigated and cleared anyway. Therefore, closing the inguinal wound followed by laparoscopic appendectomy seemed to be the best choice under those circumstances. A laparoscopic appendectomy as well as irrigation of intra-abdominal abscess was then performed successfully , with one Jackson Pratt drain left at the cul-de sac. The drain was successfully removed 5 days after the operation. . The postoperative course was smooth without complications and the patient was discharged 5 days after the operation.