A 69-year-old woman presented with New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III dyspnoea, and recurrent hospital admissions for decompensated right heart failure refractory to medical therapy. Her comorbidities included a mechanical mitral valve replacement 36 years ago (Starr–Edwards valve) for rheumatic mitral stenosis, transvenous single-chamber permanent pacemaker (Biotronik) 6 years prior for tachycardia–bradycardia syndrome, permanent atrial fibrillation, and well-controlled asthma. Physical examination revealed predominantly signs of right heart failure, in particular jugular venous pressure up to the angle of her jaw with prominent v-waves, pansystolic murmur with a pulsatile liver and peripheral pitting oedema, consistent with severe TR. Her medications were Furosemide 80 mg twice daily, Spironolactone 25 mg daily, Acetazolamide 125 mg twice daily, Digoxin 125 µg daily, Atorvastatin 20 mg daily, Warfarin, and asthma inhalers. Blood test results including liver function tests were normal.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) confirmed severe TR with inferior vena cava plethora, and systolic flow reversal in the hepatic vein. The RV was severely dilated up to 5.2 cm basal diameter with reduced systolic function . The mechanical mitral valve was well seated with no regurgitation. There was diastolic septal flattening from RV volume overload, but the left ventricular systolic function was preserved. Biatria were severely dilated. Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) demonstrated severe TR predominantly due to transvenous pacing lead impingement of the posterior leaflet causing inadequate leaflet coaptation, with an element of secondary functional TR from annular dilatation (; , ).
Coronary angiogram showed minor coronary artery disease. Right heart catheterization showed mild post-capillary pulmonary venous hypertension (mean pulmonary artery pressure 29 mmHg), with raised pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (21 mmHg) and normal transpulmonary gradient (8 mmHg). Prominent v-waves were evident on right atrial (RA) pressure waveform tracings, with RA pressure higher than RV pressure (RA pressure 15 mmHg, RV pressure 12 mmHg), consistent with severe TR. Her cardiac output was preserved at 4.41 L/min (cardiac index 3.14 L/min) by indirect Fick’s method. Pacemaker interrogation revealed ventricular-pacing 60–65% of the time in underlying chronic atrial fibrillation.
Based on TOE, the Structural Heart Team hypothesized that the predominant cause of TR was lead impingement preventing adequate coaptation of the TV leaflets. Therefore, decision was for her to undergo lead extraction to reduce TR severity, and to prevent progressive TV annular dilatation. Her EuroSCORE II surgical mortality risk was estimated at 6.2%.
She underwent successful lead extraction with the aid of a 12-French laser along the TV and lead insertion point into the myocardium with no postoperative complications. Intraoperative TOE showed immediate significant reduction in tricuspid regurgitant volume (by approximately 50%). A new epicardial lead was tunnelled up via left minithoracotomy.
The patient experienced significant symptomatic improvement sustained months after lead extraction. While her diuretic therapy remained unchanged, she transitioned from NYHA Class III to Class I, with resolution of early satiety from hepatic congestion. Her jugular venous pressure and precordium examination remained consistent with moderate TR; however, she no longer experienced peripheral oedema. Three-month follow-up TTE showed residual moderate functional TR, and reduction of RV base diameter from 5.2 to 4.3 cm (; , ).