A 25-year-old male came with complaints of pain over the posterolateral aspect of his left ankle which was present for the past 9 years. The patient was a regular sprinter and had started having pain which was insidious in onset, gradually progressive, non-radiating, and relieved with analgesics and rest. Later, he started experiencing difficulty and pain while walking. He was under conservative management for 3 years which had provided no relief in the symptoms. He was diagnosed to have a loose body in the lateral compartment of the ankle after adequate clinical examination and radiographic analysis (X-rays and computed tomography [CT] scan), for which the surgeon had performed operative excision. Post-surgery, he did not have any relief of symptoms and additionally started noticing a prominent cord-like structure anterior to the fibula. He was kept on symptomatic treatment with physiotherapy by the treating surgeon. After 5 years from the date of surgery, the patient presented to us with pain around the left fibular region and an abnormal cord-like structure anterior to the fibula. On examination, he had an operative scar over the posterolateral aspect of the ankle. There was mild tenderness over the lateral aspect of the ankle below the lateral malleolus. Peroneal tendons were palpated as a cord-like structure anterior to the fibula. These tendons were able to displace posteriorly but again dislocated anteriorly as soon as manual pressure is taken out. There was no obvious structural deformity of the foot. The neurovascular function of the foot and ankle was normal. Signs of posterior impingement were also present. Radiographs disclosed no fractures or dislocations of bony structures . Soft-tissue shadow of swelling could be seen laterally to fibula on X-ray. CT was done which confirmed this finding . It also disclosed the presence of loose bodies and confirmed posterior impingement of the ankle. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the presence of a loose body and dislocated peroneal tendon anterior to the fibula .
The patient was explained about the need for surgery to stabilize the peroneal tendon and remove the loose body. It was decided to go forward with posterior ankle arthroscopy to recreate the fibular groove for the peroneal tendons as well as to address the posterior impingement syndrome and removal of the loose body. Consent for surgical management was obtained. The patient was positioned prone and standard posterolateral and posteromedial portals were used to debride the fibrofatty tissue. Burring of osteophyte along with prominent os tali was done. A loose body from the lateral gutter was removed . In the lateral compartment, thick fibrous tissue was encountered and the same was debrided with the help of an accessory portal made superior to the posterolateral portal. Following debridement, as the fibula could not be visualized properly, we decided to perform a mini-open approach to deepen the fibular groove along with SPR reconstruction . The periosteum of the lateral fibula is continuous with SPR. Hence, without doing a formal reconstruction of SPR, the periosteum was tied with the remnant of SPR. This maintained the continuity of the retinaculum. Peroneal groove deepening with superior retinaculum repair was done along with loose body removal and osteophyte excision. Subsequent fibrosis augmented with the deepening of the groove maintained peroneal tendon position in the retromalleolar groove. A below-knee slab was applied.
Postoperatively, the patient was mobilized on day 1. The slab was removed and he was started on physiotherapy with a range of motion exercises after 2 days. Partial weight-bearing mobilization with crutches was advised for 2 weeks followed by full weight-bearing mobilization. At the latest follow-up at 2 years, the patient is completely satisfied with relief of pain and no complications. He has the full range of motion and can walk without support without pain.