A 59-year-old woman with a history of frequent premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) visited the emergency room for chest discomfort and dyspnoea following a syncopal event and was admitted to our hospital. At admission, the patient was bradycardic (45 b.p.m.) with a junctional rhythm resulting from SSS . High blood pressure (151/52 mmHg), coarse crackle in her lower lung field, and mild leg oedema were noted. No significant heart murmur was detected. These findings suggested that she was suffering from heart failure. Chest X-ray revealed pulmonary congestion and bilateral pleural effusion . Blood tests revealed mildly elevated creatine kinase [CK, 705 IU/L, (normal range: 45–163 IU/L)] and hepatic enzymes [alanine aminotransferase 79 IU/L, (normal range: 10–40 IU/L); aspartate aminotransferase 56 IU/L, (normal range: 5–40 IU/L); lactate dehydrogenase 304 IU/l, (normal range: 124–222 IU/L); alkaline phosphatase 434 IU/l, (normal range: 115–359 IU/L); γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 49 IU/L, (normal range: <30 IU/L)]. However, no findings suggesting hepatic cirrhosis were observed on computed tomography.
One year before admission, she experienced chest pain with an elevated CK level and underwent coronary angiography at another hospital. However, no coronary stenosis was detected. For suspected vasospastic angina, a calcium channel blocker was initiated but she started to experience palpitations due to frequent PVCs. After discharge, she was referred to our hospital for further investigation of her symptoms and evaluation of arrhythmias. Electrocardiography revealed polymorphic PVCs and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT) ( and ). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed no significant abnormalities in morphology or left ventricular (LV) wall motion. For further evaluation of suspected cardiomyopathy, she underwent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI), which revealed normal LV morphology and systolic function and negative late gadolinium enhancement (LGE, ). Thallium/123I-β-methyl-P-iodophenyl-pentadecanoic acid scintigraphy showed a mismatch that did not correspond to coronary artery territories , and this was non-specific and did not suggest myocardial ischaemia. Based on these findings, sarcoidosis and amyloidosis were also deemed unlikely. At 35 years of age, an elevated CK level was noted during a health check-up, but the patient was not advised to visit a hospital. Thereafter, she did not have any muscular symptoms or cardiac disease-related ones, such as chest pain, palpitation, dyspnoea on exertion, dizziness, or syncope. History and symptoms related to substance abuse, genetic cardiomyopathy, or ischaemic heart disease were negative. Her family did not have the same symptoms or any heart or muscle disease. Thus, she had been treated as suspected idiopathic PVCs and NSVT, and β-blocker (bisoprolol 2.5 mg) was prescribed. She had been well before she came to the emergency room this time.
At the time of this hospitalization, TTE revealed normal LV wall motion and chamber size. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed almost normal LV morphology and mildly reduced LV systolic function (LVEF 45.9%, LVEDV 140 mL, LVESV 76 mL, LV mass 66.8 g), and positive LGEs in the mid-wall of the interventricular septum, anterior papillary muscle, and even in the interatrial septum , which was not found 1 year prior . Slight dilatation of the left and right atria was also noted . The LGE site in this case indicated non-ischaemic myocardial injury, but it was not specific to certain forms of cardiomyopathy. The differential diagnoses at this time point included sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, myopathy-related cardiac disease, myocarditis, and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Since arrhythmias were prominently observed, sarcoidosis was particularly suspected. However, the levels of lysozyme- and angiotensin-converting enzyme were within the normal range in the blood test. Further, gallium (Ga) scintigraphy demonstrated a negative finding . The ophthalmologic and dermatologic examination also revealed no findings indicating sarcoidosis. Thus, sarcoidosis was excluded. Endomyocardial biopsy was conducted and revealed non-specific findings, such as slight hypertrophy and derangement of cardiomyocytes and interstitial fibrosis ( and ). Based on these findings, myocarditis and other forms of secondary cardiomyopathy were unlikely.
The patient underwent permanent pacemaker implantation because of heart failure due to SSS. However, it proved difficult to detect the electrical potential and obtain electrical excitation in response to pacing in the right atrium. Successful atrial pacing was achieved solely at the lower right atrial septum, where the pacing lead was placed. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the hepatic enzyme levels reduced to a normal level, suggesting ameliorated hepatic congestion. However, the atrial threshold was markedly high (5 V/2 ms), and the P-wave height could not be measured even though the lead was not dislodged; thus, she depended on ventricular pacing. One month later, the atrial threshold had been non-captured . These findings suggested that sinus node dysfunction further progressed to an atrial standstill. Her symptoms such as dizziness, chest discomfort, and dyspnoea disappeared, and she had not had any muscle weakness or disability in activities of daily living. One year later, the patient reported fatigue and difficulty in grasping objects strongly. She underwent a neurological examination. Blood tests were positive for anti-mitochondrial M2 antibody. Muscle biopsy from the left biceps brachii showed some necrotic and scattered regenerating muscle fibres, in addition to mild type 2 fibre atrophy. Mild mononuclear cell infiltration was seen in the perimysium. No granulomas were observed. Mild endomysial fibrosis was observed. On immunohistochemistry, human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-ABC was mildly expressed in scattered fibres. The membrane attack complex was deposited in the sarcolemma in some fibres . These findings suggest the presence of a longstanding active myofibre necrotic and regenerating process, which is compatible with myopathy associated with anti-mitochondrial M2 antibodies. Serum hepatic enzymes remained within the normal range and abdominal ultrasound and computed tomography revealed no findings indicating PBC. A hepatologist was consulted and a liver biopsy was deemed unnecessary. Following the diagnosis of AMA-associated myopathy, steroid pulse therapy was initiated and was followed by oral prednisolone (PSL) administration. Steroid administration relieved her symptoms and lowered the CK levels . The patient has taken low-dose PSL and has had an uneventful course for 3 years. However, sinus node disease and atrial standstill remained. Annual echocardiography showed preserved LV systolic function and chamber size but the left atrial (LA) volume has increased gradually, indicating slowly progressive LA structural remodelling .