An 82-year-old woman came to the orthopedic outpatient clinic with pain and discomfort on her right elbow. The arm affected by the injury was her dominant hand, restricting her from farming and leisure activities. Seven months before admission, the patient suffered from an injury to the elbow caused by falling with an outstretched arm. The patient then went to a primary doctor and was referred to the nearest hospital. On the third day of admission, she was referred again to a third-referral hospital in the city because of lack of facilities. She was diagnosed with elbow dislocation and suggested to undergo open reduction by the orthopedic surgeon but the patient declined. The patient sought treatment from a bonesetter, and massages were performed to the injured elbow. Complaints did not subdue, and the patient felt numbness to the affected elbow. The patient eventually sought medication again at a hospital, but owing to complications from neglect and bonesetter treatment, she was referred to an orthopedic specialist with expertise in shoulders and elbows in a third-referral hospital. We performed open reduction to the dislocated elbow but failed on the third week postoperation. The patient was then scheduled for a TEA. The procedure was further delayed by a waiting period for the national health insurance in our hospital to approve the procedure. Seven months after the injury, the procedure had been approved to be performed. At the time, the patient's range of motion (ROM) in elbow flexion and elbow extension was 62.3° with 0° movement arc. Supination and pronation was not measured because the patient was unable to reach neutral position.
We conducted a physical examination. Right elbow varus deformity was found. The elbow was unstable due to traction by the retracted tricep. X-ray taken on the right elbow showed neglected right elbow joint dislocation and calcification of the soft tissues surrounding the elbow joint, indicating the presence of myositis ossificans. The right elbow joint was porotic as seen in the X-ray image . The preoperative diagnosis was neglected right elbow joint dislocation.