The patient is a 22-year-old female who was diagnosed with UC at the age of 5. This patient had been intermittently compliant with treatments including steroids and biologic agents. One year prior to presentation, she underwent a screening colonoscopy with biopsies of the terminal ileum, colon, and rectum. Gross colonoscopy demonstrated a normal-appearing terminal ileum, colon, distal rectum, and anal verge. Pathology demonstrated colonic mucosa with changes suggestive of quiescent inflammatory bowel disease and no dysplasia.
The patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of abdominal pain, nausea, and bilious emesis. On admission, she was tachycardic, mildly hypertensive and afebrile. Physical exam was notable for diffuse abdominal tenderness and mild distention without guarding or peritoneal signs. She had mild leukocytosis and lactic acidemia. A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was performed which demonstrated acute colonic obstruction with focal narrowing at the splenic flexure suggestive of stricture (see , ) and thickening of the sigmoid colon (see ).
Due to the concerning clinical presentation and imaging findings the decision to take the patient to the operating room for emergent exploration was made. A standard midline laparotomy incision was performed. During exploration of the peritoneal cavity, classic findings of toxic megacolon were identified. The right and transverse colon were distended with patchy areas of transmural necrosis. A mass involving the distal transverse colon was palpated. The rectosigmoid area was markedly indurated and thickened. Due to the previously mentioned findings and the underlying history of UC, we elected to perform a total abdominal colectomy with end-ileostomy. There were no postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 4. The procedure was performed at a teaching hospital by the senior colorectal surgery attending.
The pathology report demonstrated synchronous adenocarcinoma involving the ascending colon and transverse colon; 3 cm tumor in the ascending colon grade 1 with extension into pericolonic tissue and 4 cm tumor in transverse colon grade 1. Final staging was determined to be stage II synchronous colon cancer pT3N0. Genetic testing was performed and was negative for Lynch syndrome.
The patient was referred to medical oncology and the decision was made to proceed with adjuvant chemotherapy with Oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil and folinic acid.