A 43-year-old woman with no remarkable medical history underwent diagnostic arthrography of her right shoulder due to ongoing symptoms following a traumatic injury. Ten days later, the patient was admitted to the same general hospital with Staphylococcus Aureus sepsis. Ultrasound examination showed a fluid collection in her right shoulder. Repeated arthrocentesis was performed in order to drain the fluid and antibiotics were started. Three days after admission, she developed respiratory failure for which she was intubated and mechanical ventilation was started. The CT scan showed severe pneumonic infiltrates. Due to further deterioration, the patient was transferred to an academic hospital.
On transfer the patient was ventilated in the prone position . During the first week, a spontaneous right-sided pneumothorax developed for which a chest tube was placed. Surgical debridement of the right shoulder was performed in order to eliminate the persistent infection. After 7 days she developed refractory respiratory failure and VV-ECMO was initiated. Consecutive CT scans showed a large bronchopleural fistula of the right lung, multiple abscesses and lung parenchyma which at that time was regarded as being destroyed . The patient continued to deteriorate and due to the ongoing septic profile, she was referred to our center where the proposal was made to perform a bilateral pneumectomy and then clear the infection, whilst keeping the patient on ECMO until such time as bilateral lung transplantation was possible .
At the time of admission to our ICU, 35 days after intubation, the patient was in respiratory distress despite maximum VV-ECMO settings and tracheostomal high-flow oxygen therapy. She was not mechanically ventilated due to the impossibility of achieving adequate tidal volumes with lung protective settings. Successful donor matching for lung transplantation was considered highly unlikely due to the presence of multiple HLA antibodies (Panel-reactive antibody test = 100%). Furthermore, the patient was immobilized and had critical illness polyneuropathy, providing a further contraindication to transplantation. In order to facilitate lung recovery, we applied the TCAV™ method to set and adjust the APRV mode [, ] (Dräger Evita® V800). The TCAV™ method applies an extended high pressure CPAP Phase with intermittent very brief Release Phases for CO2 removal. We set the auto-release at 75%, resulting in termination of expiration at 75% of the peak expiratory flow rate, which initially yielded high frequencies and small tidal volumes (9). Our goal was to stabilize the lung with the very short Release Phase to minimize repetitive alveolar collapse-induced atelectrauma. The bronchopleural fistula and corresponding significant air leak persisted and initially worsened, however, because the patient’s collapsed lung parenchyma recruited increasing lung volume, tidal volumes were able to be increased and FiO2 decreased. A tracheostomy was performed eleven days after admission. After a month of APRV and while still on VV-ECMO, her arterial blood gas (ABG) normalized (see Table ). This strategy enabled the patient to be weaned off VV-ECMO and subsequently mechanical ventilation. After three months the patient was discharged from ICU , her tracheostoma had been closed but the chest tube was still in situ.
Two months after ICU discharge, surgery was performed to close several remaining bronchopleural fistulas and the patient was readmitted to ICU. Due to drain dysfunction, the fistulas unfortunately reopened. She was extubated the day after surgery, however, due to weakness, atelectasis and ongoing significant air leakage, the patient had to be reintubated after 3 days. One day later, a repeat tracheostomy was performed. Traditional pressure support and control ventilation modes were insufficient and resulted in significant atelectasis so the TCAV™ method was restarted. PHigh was reduced very slowly. Her clinical situation improved and attending physicians switched to pressure support ventilation, which was regarded as being more comfortable for the patient. However, hypercapnia occurred and after 2 days the patient was exhausted and the TCAV™ method was again restarted. Due to clinical suspicion of infection, antibiotic therapy was broadened. After this infection had been cleared, weaning from ventilation was initiated which was successful after a further 20 days .
After less than 2 months, the patient was discharged home with a portable chest tube. The tube dislocated but this did not result in pneumothorax. In October 2020, the patient tested positive for COVID-19, but she only had minor symptoms and there was no need for admission to hospital.