A 28-year-old male patient was admitted to the Minimally Invasive Urology Center of Shandong Provincial Hospital. The patient complained of bilateral scrotal vacuity which had been bothered him since his childhood. Two years ago when he was diagnosed with cryptorchid nodules in his right testis. He has been constantly bothered by symptoms such as occasional abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting for 10 years. He had a history of syphilis for 2 years, which had been treated with penicillin. Laboratory examinations including the routine blood test, liver function tests, coagulation analysis, urinalysis, and tumor biomarker tests such as alpha fetoprotein(AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen(CEA) and Human Chorionic Gonadotropin(HCG) were showing no abnormality. His syphilis was confirmed in the present study by a positive gelatin agglutination test result and the result of rapid plasma reactivity (1:2). The sex hormone assay demonstrated an increase of follicular stimulating hormone (FSH, 67.1 mIU/ml), luteinizing hormone (LH, 20.56 mIU/ml), and prolactin (P, 18.93 ng/ml) and a decrease of the estrogen (E, 17.04 pg/ml). However, the testosterone(T) was confirmed to be at a normal level (5.23 ng/ml).
The ultrasonography showed bilateral cryptorchidism and cryptorchid nodules . The abdominal Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral scrotal vacuity without clear testicular structure. In the anterior inner side of the right iliac vessel, a long and well-defined T1 and T2 signal (displayed as a shade) with a size of approximately 2.4 × 2.8 cm was identified as a suspected ectopic testicle. On the left side, a signal shade of approximately 0.7 × 1.3 cm was detected in the corresponding area. Both kidneys were of regular size and shape. A long circular T1 and T2 signal (signifying a lesion) with a diameter of about 0.4 cm was found in the lower posterior portion of the left kidney. No abnormalities were discovered in the remaining organs .
Laparoscopy was performed in our hospital in August 2018 to proceed with further diagnosis. During the operation, we found adhesions between the patient’s bowel loops and peritoneum. In addition, fibrous tissues were detected between small intestines, which fixed the intestines and made it hard to separate them . The right cryptorchid testis was found above the inner inguinal ring while the left cryptorchid testis was identified near the proximal end of the left ductus deferens. The patient underwent enterolysis and bilateral cryptorchiectomy. Postoperative pathological examination revealed the thickening of spermatogenic tubule basement membrane in the left testicular tissues with hyaline degeneration. The increase in the number of supporting cells and Leydig cells and the absence of spermatogenic cells demonstrated the pathological changes of cryptorchidism in the right testis. The mass in the right cryptorchid testis was confirmed as a seminoma with interstitial infiltration. There was no tumor identified in epididymis and vas deferens .