Eight years ago, a 12-year-old female presented to our centre with rashes over face and chest along with progressive swelling of both lower limbs for one month. There were complaints of myalgia, arthralgia of both knee joints and photosensitivity. On clinical examination, the erythematous maculo-papular rashes were present over the face and chest. Facial rashes were malar in distribution with sparing of naso-labial folds. There was pallor with pitting oedema of lower limbs. The laboratory investigations at the time of presentation are shown in .
Further investigations were done suspecting SLE and associated organ involvement. Urine routine examination showed hematuria and proteinuria. The peripheral blood showed normocytic normochromic anemia. Anti-nuclear Antibody (ANA) and anti-deoxyribonucleic antibody (Anti ds-DNA) were positive. On echocardiography, there was mild pericardial effusion and mildly dilated left ventricle. A diagnosis of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) was made according to Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinic (SLICC) criteria .
She was then put on oral Prednisolone and oral Hydroxychloroquine. Her body weight at the time of presentation was approximately 45 kg. Considering this, the initial dose of prednisolone was adjusted as 60 mg/day (1.3 mg/kg/day) and that of Hydroxychloroquine was 200 mg/day (4 mg/kg/day). The antihypertensive drugs (Amlodipine 10 mg once daily) were also administered due to high blood pressure (her blood pressure was above 95th percentile for her age).
During the course of her hospital stay, the oedema progressed gradually throughout her whole body. Since there was proteinuria, hematuria, hypoalbuminemia and low complement levels (C3 = 10 mg/dL and C4 = 3.06 mg/dL), the treating physicians suspected renal involvement and ordered renal biopsy. The biopsy showed Lupus Nephritis stage-IV.
Following the diagnosis of Lupus Nephritis, stage-IV, she was put on induction therapy with Cyclophosphamide (1.5 mg/kg once daily) for first six months. After that, maintenance therapy was started with Azathioprine (50 mg once daily), low dose steroid (Prednisolone 30 mg/day in tapering dose) and Hydroxychloroquine (400 mg once daily). She remained symptom-free for first two years. But, afterwards, she quitted her regular medications in between on her own for two times. Due to this, she had flare-up of symptoms and was admitted to hospital.
About 20 days prior to present episode, she was admitted in medical ward with the complaints of oedema, malar rashes and decreased urine output. She was treated with parenteral steroid, oral Hydroxychloroquine and intravenous human albumin. She was discharged on oral Prednisolone (55 mg/day), oral Hydroxychloroquine (400 mg/day) and Mycophenolate mofetil (1 gm/day).
At present time, she was brought to our centre with the complaints of irrelevant talks, abnormal behaviours and elevated mood for two days. There was also complaints of progressive swelling of whole body and decreased urination for ten days. According to her parents, she had some possessive spells, and she had been behaving as a goddess. She had been trembling her body, and worshipping herself and others nearby her. There was irrelevant self-talking with disturbed sleep. The Real Time-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) test for COVID-19 was negative. And previously, there was no any similar history.
On physical examination, there was facial oedema with periorbital puffiness. There was bilateral pitting oedema of both upper and lower limbs. Her vitals were normal except blood pressure, which was on the higher side. Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. On mental status examination, she was restless and agitated. She was not cooperative to the examiner. Mood symptoms were predominant with delusion of grandiosity. Her speech was pressured with increased tone and volume.
The baseline investigations were sent which were normal. She was put on benzodiazepine (Clonazepam 0.25 mg twice daily) for the first three days, and then tapered slowly for the next three days, and then stopped. The second-generation antipsychotic drug (Olanzapine 5 mg) was also started, and was titrated up to 7.5 mg on the third day. Her symptoms gradually resolved over three to four days.
During the present episode, there was dilemma among the treating physicians regarding her psychiatric symptoms. There were no other evident organic and non-organic causes that could explain the symptoms. The possible aetiology was either SLE or steroid. Amidst this confusion, benzodiazepine and antipsychotic were started. At the same time, steroid was gradually tapered (10 mg per weekly and was stopped at 5 mg/day). This brought complete resolution of her psychiatric symptoms over a period of week. Later, she became cooperative and had a good sleep.
The patient was continued on Olanzapine and called for follow-up after one month. She was referred to Nephrology unit for the further needful regarding lupus nephritis.