A 57-year-old man was admitted for the evaluation of recurrent lower abdominal pain that had persisted for 2 mo.
He received intermittent medications for abdominal pain in a private clinic for 2 mo. Two days before the visit, he underwent abdominal computed tomography (CT) at another hospital and was transferred for the differential diagnosis of tuberculous peritonitis and peritoneal carcinomatosis.
He received a diagnosis of a 5-mm-sized rectal neuroendocrine tumor at another hospital one year prior and underwent endoscopic mucosal resection.
He has smoked 1 pack a day for 30 years. He has consumed approximately 57 g of alcohol per week.
Physical examination revealed mild tenderness in the right lower quadrant. The patient’s temperature was 36.4 °C, heart rate was 72 bpm, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 125/85 mmHg
The white blood cell count was 4960/mm3 (reference, 4000-10000/mm3), the proportion of eosinophils was 4.4% (reference, 1%-5%), and there were no abnormal findings in the laboratory findings. The C-reactive protein level was 1.7 mg/L, which was within the normal range (reference, 0-5 mg/L). The carcinoembryonic antigen was 1.43 ng/mL (reference, 0-3.4 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 13.98 U/mL (reference, 0-34 U/mL). The interferon-gamma release assay test result was negative, and the results of tuberculosis tests, including sputum stain, culture, and PCR, were all negative. The stool examination result was negative.
Diffuse peritoneal infiltration and subtle wall thickening of the right colon with multiple reactive lymph nodes were found on abdominal CT . Meanwhile, no lung lesions were observed on chest CT, and no enlarged lymph nodes were observed. On colonoscopy, a scar caused by a previous mucosal resection was observed 2 cm above the anal valve, and there was no evidence of recurrence. Only atrophic gastritis was found on esophagogastroduodenoscopy.
Exploratory laparoscopy was performed to determine the cause of the peritoneal lesions. Intraoperative findings showed multiple small whitish nodules and an abscess in the peritoneum . Peritoneal nodules 1-2 mm in size were observed throughout the abdominal cavity, and excisional biopsy was performed. During right pelvic wall dissection, abscess pockets with pus surrounded by the omentum were observed. Omentectomy was performed for some of the omentum. An incidental appendectomy was also performed.
Based on the pathological reports, numerous eggs of P. westermani were confirmed in all specimens of the excisional biopsy, omentectomy, and appendectomy .
A postoperative ELISA revealed positivity for antibodies against P. westermani in the serum. There were no specific findings on brain CT.
During retrograde history-taking, it was reported that he often consumed food consisting of raw freshwater crab several months prior.