A 73-year-old man with pneumoconiosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and hypertension who had previously had a cerebrovascular accident and had undergone surgery for gastric cancer ten years earlier, was brought to our emergency department with a one-day history of acute-onset tremor and leg weakness. The chest radiograph and chest CT scan showed a large mass in the right middle lobe (RML) that was out of keeping with his pneumoconiosis. Lung malignancy was of concern; hence, a CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy was suggested and was performed after obtaining informed consent.
A coaxial biopsy system with a 19-gauge introducer needle and a 20-gauge core biopsy needle (length, 17 cm; Temno, CareFusion, France) was selected for this procedure. Once the introducer needle had reached the lesion, the internal stylet was removed and the core biopsy needle was inserted to procure a specimen. However, after obtaining the first specimen, we were unable to withdraw the core biopsy needle because of a kink. Several attempts to withdraw it resulted in it being pushed forward and kinked again; finally, it was forcibly removed. The core biopsy needle was found to be angulated proximally. Thereupon, free air sprang up from the introducer needle. Hence, the stylet was reinserted and the introducer needle was immediately removed. After withdrawal of the instrument, the patient coughed forcefully. An immediate post-biopsy CT scan was performed; it demonstrated free air with flow-related motion artifact within the RML mass, the left atrium, and the right pulmonary vein . A follow-up CT scan of the entire thorax demonstrated air collections in the ascending aorta and the right coronary artery . Because the patient had no symptoms or signs of acute stroke or myocardial infarction, he was kept in the CT room and oxygen was administered. Ten minutes later, a delayed chest CT scan demonstrated no air collections in the aorta or left heart, and total resolution of the air embolus in the right coronary artery . The patient’s condition was stable and an electrocardiogram showed no ST-segment elevation. He was thus transferred to the intensive care unit for close monitoring.
During his stay in the intensive care unit, neither air embolism nor new neurologic deficits developed, and his troponin I and CK-MB levels were normal. Five days later, brain magnetic resonance imaging was performed; it showed no evidence of acute infarction. The patient was transferred to the ward and was discharged days later in a stable condition. Table shows the timeline of course of events.