This 42-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with lower abdominal pain for 1 wk.
This patient was a Canadian who had lived in Taiwan for 5–6 years. He had suffered from intermittent lower abdominal pain for one week prior to admission. He had visited the clinic, where abdominal ultrasonography showed some ascites. Thus, he was referred to our outpatient department (OPD) for further survey. His accompanying symptoms included intermittent diarrhea, with some “white wire” noted in the stool and tenesmus. He denied fever, cough, dyspnea, weight loss, or urinary symptoms.
The patient had no comorbidity or operation history.
The patient drinks beer sometimes without addiction. He does not smoke or chew betel nuts. There was no remarkable family medical history.
The height and weight of the patient at admission were 174 cm and 74 kg, respectively. His consciousness was clear, and his vital signs were stable. His physical examination showed lower abdomen tenderness with rebounding pain over the suprapubic area. The remainder of the physical examination was normal.
Laboratory testing showed an elevated C-reactive protein (2.6 mg/dL), normal procalcitonin level, and no leukocytosis. Tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen, carcinoma antigen 199, and tissue polypeptide antigen, were within normal limits, but he had an elevated carcinoma antigen 125 (CA-125) of 167.4 U/mL. Screening for autoimmune titers, HIV, amebiasis antibody test, blood culture, and stool all showed negative results. The laboratory results are shown in Table .
Abdominal sonography showed minimal ascites at the cul-de-sac and negative signs of cirrhosis. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed irregular peritoneal thickening over the perihepatic and pelvic peritoneum, fat stranding infiltration within the greater omentum, and some ascites in the bilateral subphrenic spaces, paracoclic gutter, and pelvic cavity . Thus, differential diagnoses of TBP and carcinomatosis of an unknown nature were considered.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy revealed no malignant lesion. Because there were not enough ascites under sonography for fine needle aspiration, laparoscopy was performed . In total, 1000 mL of yellow ascites were collected for cytology and other analysis. Multiple whitish nodules were noted over the entire abdominal cavity, and the peritoneal cancer index was over 10. A local resection of dark red papillary lesions on the peritoneum was performed.
Histologically, according to hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining, biopsy of the peritoneum revealed soft tissue mesothelioma invasion composed of a papillary, tubular, single-cell arrangement of epithelioid cells with oval-round nuclei, conspicuous nucleoli, and moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm . The immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was positive with calretinin and WT-1 (focal+) , which were specific for MPM and negative for markers of adenocarcinomas, such as PAX-8, TTF-1, and CDX-2 . In addition, Ki-67 proliferative index was < 10% and IHC staining of napsin A was negative . Cytology with cell blocking showed atypical mesothelial cells that were positive for calretinin under IHC staining. No definite microorganism was observed under periodic acid-Schiff staining (PAS), Gomori’s methenamine silver (GMS), and acid-fast staining. The culture of ascites showed no isolated pathogen.