A 57-year-old woman presented with upper abdominal distending pain lasting 1 d.
The patient had persistent pain that was aggravated after eating, accompanied by nausea and retching. Her abdominal CT findings revealed an upper abdominal tumor originating from the spleen or pancreas. Therefore, she was admitted to the hospital for further examination and treatment.
The patient underwent traumatic abdominal exploratory surgery more than 30 years ago.
An old surgical scar with a longitudinal length of about 6 cm was observed on the upper abdomen. A mass was palpable in the left-upper abdomen, which was hard, poor in mobility, and slightly tender.
Routine blood test results showed a high neutrophil percentage, low lymphocyte and monocyte percentages, and a low eosinophil count. Routine urine and stool test results were normal. The levels of electrolytes (sodium, chlorine, calcium, and magnesium) were normal. Amylase, liver and kidney function, and tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125, CA72-4, CA19-9, and CA153 were also normal.
CT and contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen: Abdominal CT showed a mass with multiple calcifications between the pancreas and the spleen. The boundary between the mass and the pancreas and spleen was poorly defined . The maximum cross section of the mass was about 9.0 cm × 8.6 cm. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed that the upper abdominal mass was unevenly and gradually enhanced .
Abdominal 99mTc-MIBI SPECT/CT was performed 5 d after contrast-enhanced CT imaging. Scanning began 30 min after the injection of 740 MBq of 99mTc-MIBI. Abdominal 99mTc-MIBI SPECT/CT was performed using a PRECEDENCE SPECT/CT (Philips Medical Systems, Eindhoven, the Netherlands) system. CT scanning was performed in a spiral mode over the entire abdomen at 250 mAs per slice, 120 Kv, and with a slice thickness of 3.0 mm. Immediately after CT scanning, SPECT acquisition of the abdomen was performed. The SPECT system was equipped with low-energy, high-resolution parallel-hole collimators. The SPECT acquisition followed an elliptical orbit, with a step-and-shoot acquisition of 64 angles over 360° (180° per detector) and an acquisition time of 20 s per frame. The SPECT data were reconstructed with attenuation correction from CT acquisition and iterative reconstruction via AutoSPECT Pro software with astonish, four iterations, and 16 subsets. The 99mTc-MIBI SPECT/CT fused images were processed using Fusion Viewer (version 2.1) procedures. The SPECT slice thickness was the same as that of CT.
The 99mTc-MIBI SPECT/CT images showed the presence of a focal radioactive concentration, with mild radioactive concentration extending into the upper abdominal mass at the pancreatic body and tail .