A 36-year-old woman presented to her local emergency department with a 2 day history of a right sided headache, photophobia and blurred vision in the right eye, 14 days after her first dose of ChAdOx1 vaccine. At this time, the neurological examination, including visual acuity, performed in the emergency department was reportedly normal. Her D-dimer and platelet count were 0.74 mg/L (< 0.5 mg/L) and 258 × 109/L (150–400 × 109/L) respectively. CT venography showed no evidence of venous sinus thrombosis and thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome was considered unlikely.
She returned to the emergency department 2 days later with bilateral visual impairment and subjective colour desaturation, painful eye movements and fatigue. She did not report any weakness, sensory disturbances or bowel or bladder incontinence. Visual acuity was 6/15 (-2) on the right and 6/30 on the left which did not correct with pinhole. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect or asymmetric red desaturation. There was full range of eye movements without nystagmus or diplopia, although the eye movements themselves were painful. The rest of the upper and lower limb examination was unremarkable. She was admitted to the hospital on this occasion.
She had no significant personal medical history, including previous episodes of weakness or sensory changes and was not a migraineur. She had no known contact with COVID-19 positive cases, and no respiratory symptoms, hence a SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction test was not performed, as per the local testing protocol at that time. Her family history was notable for mother with multiple sclerosis and the patient had a normal MRI brain 5 years prior, prompted by her mother’s diagnosis.
Biochemical analysis, summarised in Table , did not reveal any significant abnormalities.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis performed on day 2 of admission showed a normal protein of 0.4 g/L (0.19 – 0.56 g/L), glucose of 4.8 mmol/L (2.8 – 4.5 mmol/L) with pleocytosis (white cell count 59 × 106/L) (< 5 × 106/L). CSF IgG was 0.06 g/L (< 0.03 g/L) with serum IgG of 12.4 g/L (7.0 – 16 g/L), and oligoclonal IgG bands were present, suggestive of intrathecal IgG synthesis. Serum and CSF aquaporin 4 antibodies were negative. Serum myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody (MOG) was negative. Visual evoked potentials performed on Day 1 were unrecordable from the left eye and delayed on the right, consistent with demyelinating pathology involving the anterior visual pathways bilaterally but more severe on the left.
3 T MRI brain (Skyra, Siemens, Germany) also performed on Day 2 showed multiple T2/ FLAIR hyperintense lesions involving the subcortical white matter, posterior limb of bilateral internal capsules, pons and left middle cerebellar peduncle. The largest lesion was in the right frontal centrum semiovale measuring 17 × 17 mm with multiple internal punctate foci of gadolinium contrast enhancement . There was no callosal involvement. Notably, there was no definite abnormal signal or enhancement of optic nerves. MRI of the spine showed no evidence of demyelinating disease.
Ophthalmology examination on Day 8 found visual acuity of 6/5 (20/16) in the right eye and 6/9 (20/30) in the left. Colour vision was depressed in both eyes with 12/17 Ishihara plates identifiable with the right eye and 10/17 with the left. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect detectable. The patient’s optic discs appeared healthy with no swelling or atrophy . There was no concurrent anterior segment or retinal disease. Formal visual fields were assessed with Humphrey Field Analyzer (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, USA), which demonstrated largely intact fields in both eyes, with only a few mild scattered non-specific deficits (Supplementary file ). Optical coherence tomography (CIRRUS™ HD-OCT 5000, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, USA) showed mild swelling of her retinal nerve fibre layer bilaterally, measuring a total thickness of 111 μm on the right and 108 μm on the left (Supplementary file ).
Based on these results, we concluded that the diagnosis that would best fit the clinical scenario and the investigation results was ADEM presenting with optic neuritis. She received 3 daily doses of 1000 mg of intravenous methylprednisone with marked improvement in vision and discharged home with plans for close outpatient follow up but without tapering regime of oral steroids.
On day 15, the patient reported worsening of vision in both eyes, worse in the left. Examination revealed further reduction in visual acuity in the left eye of 6/180 (20/200) and subtle reduction in the right eye of 6/6 (20/20). The colour vision was reduced to 0/17 Ishihara plates in the right eye and could not be assessed in the left. A dense relative afferent pupillary defect was present in the left eye. Optic nerves remained normal clinically with no swelling or atrophy. Loss of visual acuity in the left eye resulted in a sensory exotropia with poor fixation that precluded visual field or optical coherence tomography testing. Visual field testing of the right eye demonstrated severe depression with an inferior altitudinal defect (Supplementary file ). Although there was no significant change in retinal nerve fibre layer thickness detectable in the right eye, the left increased by 12 μm (Supplementary file ).
A repeat MRI Brain on day 17 from initial presentation, 2 weeks after the initial MRI showed significant reduction in size of the multiple T2/ FLAIR hyperintense lesions throughout the subcortical white matter. The right frontal centrum semiovale lesion reduced in size to 12 × 10 mm with contrast enhancement no longer present . No interval development of new lesions was evident. However, there was now abnormal signal and enhancement of both optic nerves but more prominent on the left, consistent with optic neuritis. These radiological findings mirrored the results of the visually evoked potentials performed during the first admission.
A further course of 3 doses of 1000 mg daily of intravenous methylprednisone improved her visual symptoms and she was discharged home on 50 mg daily of oral prednisolone with a tapering plan.
23 days after her initial symptoms her clinical picture had significantly improved. Her visual acuity was near baseline: right 6/5 (20/16), left 6/6 (20/20) with full Ishihara colour vision bilaterally. Both optic nerves demonstrated pallor . Her visual field testing was near full on the right and although the left was significantly improved, a dense inferior altitudinal defect remained (Supplementary file ). Her optical coherence tomography imaging revealed the retinal nerve fibre layer swelling had improved bilaterally (Supplementary file ) but her ganglion cell layer thickness of the retina was thinned by 15 μm in each eye suggesting irreversible optic nerve damage (Supplementary file ).
Repeat MRI Brain 6 weeks after symptom onset showed further improvement in radiographic appearance of the lesions with no contrast enhancement to suggest active inflammation. Visual evoked potentials at 3 months showed improvement in response bilaterally with responses being detectable on the left, where they were previously absent. There were no new symptoms to suggest a clinical relapse, consistent with a monophasic illness. A summary of the timeline of symptoms and investigations is presented in Fig. .