This is a case report of a 41 year old male patient who suffered a knife inflicted injury to the face. He was referred to our department 20 months after the incidence complaining of persistent discomfort with downward gaze of the left eye. He reported being agitated and feared a possible sight-threatening condition after the alleged assault. He was transferred to an emergency department where he was examined by an ophthalmologist who reassured him that his globe was intact and sutured the deep cut wounds related to his upper and lower eyelids. He was reassured that the facial edema would subside and the neurosensory deficit he was suffering from would eventually recover. Empirical antibiotics, Analgesia and tetanus prophylaxis were prescribed and the patient was discharged from the emergency department. He was unsatisfied with the resultant scar in his left eyelids and six months later was re-examined by a plastic surgeon that performed blepharoplasty. The persistent complaint of discomfort related to his left eye led him to seek medical advice again before being referred to our department.
Systematic thorough clinical and radiographic examination was performed. Upon inspection, it was noted that the left globe was displaced superiorly with increased scleral show (a). Bimanual palpation was done and a hard object could be felt behind the orbital rim of the left eye; although it was not visible externally. No evidence of diplopia was noted by ophthalmological examination. Plain radiography (Paranasal sinuses view (P.N.S) and lateral skull view) revealed a radiopaque foreign body (FB) lodged inside the orbital floor and directed downward & posteriorly (b and c). Computed tomography (CT) scan was ordered to precisely localize the foreign body and its relation to the surrounding structures. The foreign body was found penetrating the facial skeleton at the level of the orbital floor and transgressed the maxillary antrum and its tip reaching the pterygoid plates of maxilla (d–f).
Management of this type of injury has no formally documented guidelines in literature. The decision for surgical removal of this foreign body was made based on the patient's chief complain, general surgical principles and facial esthetics. An extraoral approach under general anesthesia was chosen and a preoperative informed consent was obtained. The orbital floor was exposed through a subciliary incision and the intraorbital portion of the foreign body was found firmly anchored to bone. A vertical osteotomy from the orbital rim to the anterior wall of the maxillary sinus was performed to avoid extraction of the object along its path of insertion. A wire-twister was used to firmly grasp the foreign body which was retrieved without any significant bleeding and was found to be a stainless steel knife blade (a). The orbital floor and rim were carefully evaluated and the need for internal orbital reconstruction was found unnecessary.
At that point it was noted that a portion of the foreign body, considered the blade tip, was not retrieved. A C-arm was used in an attempt to guide its localization and removal but provided insufficient information. The risks of proceeding with a blind surgical approach in the complex maxillofacial region outweighed the benefits of removing the retained foreign body and the decision to terminate the surgery was made. The possibility of returning at a later stage for a more extensive procedure after obtaining a new patient consent and the required radiographs was considered. The patient was discharged the same day of the operation and was regularly monitored in the first two weeks postoperatively (b–d).
At the first and third months of the follow up period, the patient has made rapid recovery with no signs or symptoms of infection. At 1 year of postoperative follow up, clinical examination showed normal symmetrical eye position and no ectropion (a) as well as improvement in the neurosensory deficit. At 2 years of postoperative follow up, radiographic examination showed bone healing of the previous defect at the orbital rim (b). It also demonstrated that the impacted portion of the foreign body has remained lodged in the exact same position (c). The option of leaving or retrieving the foreign body was presented again to the patient but he ensured us to be extremely satisfied with the outcome and refused to proceed with further surgical procedures.