A 49-year-old male patient sought treatment due to “repeated cough and sputum for one year and aggravation with chest tightness for one week.” Chest computed tomography (CT) in a local hospital revealed encapsulated effusion in the right thoracic cavity. Chest-enhanced CT after admission revealed a space-occupying lesion in the right chest. The pathological diagnosis according to percutaneous lung biopsy was a solitary fibrous tumor. Preoperative three-dimensional reconstruction showed that the blood supply to the tumor originated from the arteries and veins of the right lower lobe . After complete preoperative preparation, the patient underwent resection of the tumor with single-operation-incision thoracoscopy. Incision selection is one cm for the endoscope port (at the midaxillary line of the seventh intercostal space) and two cm for the operation port (at the preaxillary line of the fifth intercostal space). Intraoperative exploration revealed that the tumor had two tumor pedicles , and both were located in the right lower lobe. The tumor pedicles were intraoperatively separated using a linear stapling device. Because the specimen was large and the surface was smooth, bagging the specimen by the traditional method was difficult; therefore, the specimen was bagged by adjusting the operating table. The detailed procedure was as follows: First, the operating table was arranged with the head at a lower position, and the specimen bag was inserted into the thoracic cavity. Then, the operating table was adjusted such that the head was at a higher position to enable loading of the specimen into the specimen bag by gravity. Due to the large size of the specimen, extracting the specimen by the traditional method was difficult. Therefore, a special method named “pulling carrot” was applied to remove the specimen . The specific procedure was as follows. (1) The operation port was extended to five cm. (2) Several drawstrings were intermittently sewn at the smaller end of the longitudinal axis of the specimen. The area of suturing should be as large as possible, and if necessary, additional sewing should be carried out during the process of specimen extraction. (3) Two people synchronously pulled the drawstrings and the specimen bag, with up and down, left and right shaking. The size of the specimen was 18 × 12 × 6 cm . The surface of the specimen was smooth and the texture was soft and tough. Postoperative pathological examination revealed a solitary fibrous tumor immunohistochemistry: Vimentin (+), CD34 (+), bcl-2 (+), CD99 (+), SMA (−), S-100 (−), Desmin (−), P53 (−), CK (−), EMA (−), and Ki-67 positive rate of about 10%.