Acute promyelocytic leukemia (AML-M3, APL) was diagnosed in a 33-year-old male in August 1993 who was successfully treated with doxorubicin and cytosine arabinoside (ARA-C). In July 2003, a second relapse of leukemia was established and the patient achieved complete hematologic remission following induction chemotherapy. He then received consolidation chemotherapy. In neutropenic period, he developed first neutropenic fever that resolved with broad spectrum antibiotics. But, fever recurred and he developed signs of respiratory failure with tachypnea. Chest X-ray showed pulmonary infiltration in the left lower lobe. Intravenous broad spectrum antibiotics were started, and on day 3 of the beginning of respiratory symptoms, intravenous L-AmB (1 mg/kg/day) was added as an antifungal therapy. Aspergillus was not cultured from his sputum, and galactomannan antigen (GM), (Platelia® Aspergillus; Bio-Rad Laboratories, France) and blood culture were negative. Testing for Aspergillus antigenemia presented positivity and L-AmB dose was increased to 3 mg/kg/day, on day 6. At that time, high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed the presence of pulmonary infiltrates in the left and right superior lobes and a cavity in the left lower lobe . Thereafter, his respiratory condition improved and fever resolved within three days, and he recovered from neutropenia without use of granulocyte colony stimulating factor a week later. On day 11, a chest X-ray demonstrated reduction of pulmonary infiltrates, however the cavitary lesion persisted. After informed consent of the patient was obtained he underwent surgical treatment under general anesthesia on day 20. There was no adhesion in the thoracic cavity. The lesion was easily identified and pulmonary wedge resection was performed . The operative course was uneventful and blood loss was minor. Aspergillus flavus was cultured and many Aspergillus hyphae were demonstrated within the surgical specimen. In January 2004, a third relapse of leukemia was established. He again underwent induction and further chemotherapies, and then, in February 2005, he received allogeneic stem-cell transplantation. These procedures were established without IPA reactivation and he had no side effect thought to be secondary to pulmonary resection. However, three months after stem-cell transplantation, he died due to intracerebral hemorrhage.