A 46 year old lady presented with back and leg pain. She had a history of sciatica for 17 years. She also complained of poor appetite, loss of 3 stones of weight in 6 months. Patient also complained of intermittent nausea, vomiting, constipation. Past medical history included previous discectomy and laminectomy, Raynaud's syndrome, essential hypertension, and hysterectomy for endometriosis. Drug allergies included penicillin, erythromycin, septrin, acupan, doxycycline. On examination, pulse and blood pressure were stable. Chest and abdominal examination were normal. Serum investigations revealed a raised corrected calcium of 3.72 mmol/L, urea of 9.4 mmol/L and creatinine of 135 umol/L. ESR was 52 mm/hr, liver function tests were normal. Coagulation studies, protein electrophoresis were within normal limits. Patient subsequently underwent investigations for causes of hypercalcemia. Urine analysis was negative for Bence-Jones proteins. Thyroid function tests were within normal limits. Serum parathormone levels were 1.1 pmol/L. Serum angiotensin convertase enzyme levels were normal (26 U/L). Ultrasound abdomen revealed slightly enlarged spleen. Skeletal survey did not reveal bony secondary deposits or other abnormalities. MRI scan of lumbosacral spine showed posterocentral and right posterolateral disc protrusion at L5/S1 with compression of thecal sac, which explained the back and leg pain. Ultrasound of neck did not reveal thyroid or parathyroid abnormalities. Bone marrow studies were reported normal. CT scan of chest and abdomen was done to rule out occult malignancy as a cause of hypercalcemia. This revealed borderline enlarged spleen (cranio-caudal diameter of 12.7 cms) studded with multiple low density coalescent nodular lesions . Patient was started on oral steroids and was given an infusion of alendronate for hypercalcemia. All investigations were discussed in upper GI multidisciplinary meeting and a decision to perform splenectomy was made. Patient underwent laparotomy and splenectomy. Intra-operative findings included enlarged spleen studded with white nodules . Postoperative recovery was uneventful. Patient was given chemo-prophylaxis with oral penicillin V and prophylactic pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines. Histology of spleen showed epitheloid and giant cell granulomas dispersed throughout splenic parenchyma. Granulomas were non-caseating . Some of the giant cells within the granulomas contained calcific spherules. Sections from hilar lymph nodes showed a similar granulomatous process. Special stains did not identify fungi or mycobacteria. Final diagnosis of splenic sarcoidosis was made. Postoperatively, calcium levels returned back to normal. Follow-up after one month revealed no further clinical problems and normal serum calcium levels. At 6 months follow up, patient remained asymptomatic. Opthalmic opinion was saught in view of diagnosis of sarcoidosis,. This was found to be entirely normal.