A 30-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital because of fatigue, palpitation, body weight loss, finger tremor, and heat intolerance for 3 months. He was 166.2 cm in height and 60.2 kg in weight. His blood pressure was 110/50 mmHg, and his heart rate was 70 beats/minute and regular. His body temperature was 36.3 °C. The thyroid gland was slightly enlarged, non-tender, and softly elastic on palpation. Exophthalmos was not observed. Thyroid function test demonstrated elevated levels of FT3 and FT4, and complete suppression of TSH level, which was below the limit of detection. Serum anti-TSH receptor antibody (TRAb), anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb), and anti-thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb) were positive. Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland revealed diffuse enlargement without tumor lesions. The right and left lobes of the thyroid gland measured 49 × 24 × 20 mm and 54 × 22 × 20 mm, respectively. These results indicated that Graves’ disease was responsible for primary hyperthyroidism in this case. A diagnosis of Graves’ disease was made based on these findings. Methimazole (MMI) therapy was started at 15 mg/day. His symptoms improved gradually, and the dosage of methimazole was decreased as thyroid function normalized. After 6 months, methimazole therapy was continued at 10 mg/day, and the levels of TSH, FT3, and FT4 were maintained within the respective normal ranges. He was transferred to a local hospital. His thyroid function was followed up periodically, and the levels of FT3 and FT4 were elevated, but TSH levels were within normal range or slightly elevated on some occasions. At the age of 48 years, he was referred to our hospital for further endocrinological examination. On physical examination, his height was 165.4 cm, body weight was 58.6 kg, body mass index was 22.1 kg/m2, blood pressure was 122/70 mmHg, and his pulse was regular at 80 beats/minute. His body temperature was 36.8 °C. The thyroid was diffusely enlarged, softly elastic, and non-tender on palpation. Exophthalmos was not observed. Laboratory findings are presented in Table . The results of thyroid function tests with methimazole treatment at 10 mg/day revealed serum levels of FT3, FT4, and TSH of 5.4 pg/mL (normal range 2.4–4.3 pg/mL), 1.7 ng/dL (normal range 0.9–1.8 ng/dL), and 4.77 μIU/mL (normal range 0.35–4.94 μIU/mL), respectively, indicating SITSH. Chest X-ray and electrocardiographic findings were normal. His bone mineral density was 0.712 g/cm2 (88% of the young adult mean) in the femur. He showed no stigmata of thyrotoxicosis. Ultrasonography of the thyroid showed diffuse enlargement of both lobes with no tumor lesions. Increased blood flow was not detected on Color-Doppler imaging . Thyroid radioactive 123I uptake was 11.8% in 3 hours (reference range, 5–15%) . The titer of TRAb was weakly positive, and the dosage of methimazole was decreased gradually to maintain normal TSH level . Six years after he visited our hospital, methimazole treatment was ceased, and the titer of TRAb became negative. These findings indicated that Graves’ disease was in remission. The symptoms of hyperthyroidism, such as finger tremors, palpitations, and weight loss, were not observed. After cessation of methimazole treatment, his thyroid hormone levels fluctuated and showed occasional elevation of FT3 or FT4 with normal TSH level. His state of SITSH persisted. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for the differential diagnosis of TSH producing pituitary tumor, and revealed no tumor lesions. The results of TSH-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test are presented in Table . His TSH level showed a normal response to TRH stimulation. He was suspected to have RTH. A genetic investigation was conducted with the patient’s written informed consent. Blood samples were obtained, and genomic DNA was isolated from leukocytes. Direct sequencing analysis of the TRβ gene identified a heterozygous, missense point mutation in exon 8, AGA to AGC, resulting in substitution of arginine by serine at codon 282 (R282S) . He reported no thyroid disease in his family. Thyroid function tests and DNA analysis were not performed for other family members, because they declined to provide consent.
At the time of writing, he has no signs of thyrotoxic symptoms. His pulse rate is regular at 80–90 beats/minute. He is comfortable at rest, and capable in activities of daily living.