A 42-year-old Caucasian man had a 21-year history of a traumatic spinal cord injury and complete T6 paraplegia due to a motorcycle accident in 1989, which was initially treated non-operatively. He subsequently developed a syrinx from C3 to T5 associated with post-traumatic deformity and underwent posterior instrumentation with hooks, rods and posterolateral fusion from T3 to L3 in 1994 . In 2005 he sustained bilateral distal femoral shaft fractures after falling from his wheelchair and underwent bilateral retrograde femoral intramedullary nail fixation which achieved successful union of the fractures. He presented with a 6-month history of lethargy, increasing lower torso and lower limb spasms associated with severe sweating, hypertension and recurrent headaches. He noticed a change in his posture, with kyphotic deformity in his lumbar spine and was no longer able to sit upright in his wheelchair. He also developed symptoms of urinary retention whereas previously he could initiate urinary voiding with bladder tap.
Plain X-rays showed severe bony reabsorption and destruction distal to the previous fusion coupled with new bone formation around the destroyed L4 vertebra . A computed tomography (CT) scan showed extensive endplate and osseous destruction of his L3 and L4 vertebral bodies, with gas vacuum phenomenon at this level. A magnetic resonance imaging scan confirmed the bony and soft tissue destruction at L3 and L4, as well as showing abnormal paravertebral soft tissue and a complex paraspinal 7cm diameter mass within his psoas muscle with associated multifocal and multilocular fluid collections, areas of dystrophic ossification and nonspecific soft tissue inflammatory changes.
A staged combined surgical approach was undertaken in order to obtain circumferential arthrodesis. The first surgery involved a posterior approach and extension of the previous fusion from L3 to S1 with pedicle screws and rods (EXPEDIUM® Spine System, DePuy Spine, Raynham, MA, USA; Figure ). These were connected to the previous spinal instrumentation using rod connectors and cross-links. The second surgery was performed after 1 week and involved a direct lateral trans-psoas retroperitoneal approach to L4, where extensive destruction with bony debris was observed. L4 corpectomy and anterior reconstruction using an expandable titanium cage stabilized with vertebral body staples and screws in L3 and L5 held with a 6.25mm diameter rod (LEGACY™ Spinal System, Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN, USA) was performed . Histopathology of the corpectomy specimen showed necrotic tissue associated with nonspecific chronic inflammation, fibrosis and granulation tissue with no evidence of infection or malignancy . Culture results were negative for bacteria, acid-fast bacilli, Brucella, and fungi.
The patient was mobilized postoperatively but after 10 days unfortunately experienced recurrence of the clicking when sitting forward, associated with recurrence of intermittent sweats. Repeat X-rays showed disengagement and subluxation of the anterior cage, suggesting persisting instability of the Charcot spine at the operated level . He thus subsequently underwent a third surgery which was performed posteriorly, revealing severe loosening of the L5 and S1 screws bilaterally and involving revision and extension of the posterior instrumentation to his ilium with screws and cobalt-chrome rods (Expedium). Morcellized femoral head allograft and recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (INFUSE®, Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN, USA) were added to the decorticated bone. He was then immobilized in bed for 6 weeks. After this time, a repeat CT scan of his spine showed posterolateral spinal fusion consolidation of the bone graft and fusion mass from T4 to his ilium , he was allowed to mobilize and did not have recurrence of his symptoms.
At 10 weeks after his final spinal surgery and 4 weeks after recommencing mobilization, he heard a sudden crack in his right hip region when bending forward in his wheelchair. This was associated with deformity and swelling around the hip region and an immediately floppy leg. X-rays showed a comminuted intertrochanteric right femoral neck fracture, between the previous spinopelvic fixation and the retrograde femoral nail . The spinopelvic instrumentation was unchanged. He underwent further surgery involving removal of the previous retrograde femoral nail, reduction of the intertrochanteric femoral neck fracture and fixation with an antegrade femoral intramedullary device (Long Gamma® Locking Nail, Stryker Orthopaedics, Mahwah, NJ, USA). He made an uneventful recovery and was able to mobilize as tolerated. Of interest, radiographs taken at 6 weeks postoperatively showed a stress response of the bone on the contralateral (left) side, with periosteal bone formation in the subtrochanteric region .