A previously healthy 16-year-old adolescent man was referred to our institution with acute HF. Upon admission, he was classified as having New York Heart Association Class IV HF and was started on 4.4 μg/kg/min of dobutamine and 0.14 μg/kg/min of milrinone. Physical examination revealed that the patient had relatively low blood pressure and tachycardia (blood pressure, 94/62 mmHg; heart rate, 105 b.p.m.) combined with cold extremities, implying severe low cardiac output. Echocardiography revealed an enlarged left ventricle with severely reduced left ventricular contraction [left ventricular diastolic dimension (LVDd), 82 mm; left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), 19%], and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) increased to 1012.9 pg/mL at admission . Furthermore, high-intensity lesions in the basal ganglia were observed on T2-weighted-FLAIR magnetic resonance images (MRI; ). Based on morphological abnormalities of the mitochondria on electron microscopic imaging of the biopsied right ventricular myocardium and the basal ganglia lesions observed on MRI, the patient was diagnosed with mitochondrial cardiomyopathy . Similarly, a reduced enzyme activity of respiratory chain Complex I was confirmed via a biochemical analysis of the patient’s skeletal muscle. After intensive treatments, including 3 weeks of an intra-aortic balloon pump, 3 months of continuous inotrope infusion, and up-titration of cardioprotective medications, the HF resolved, and the basal ganglia lesions disappeared . No episode of metabolic acidosis was observed during the initial 6-month-long admission, and the patient was discharged with medications for HF, as indicated by the current guidelines. Details regarding echocardiogram, BNP value, and HF medications at discharge (including β-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists) are demonstrated in . Thirteen months after discharge, at 18 years of age, the patient was admitted again to our institution on account of gradually deteriorating HF. His BNP value, which had once decreased to <100 pg/mL, increased to >500 pg/mL, and despite aggressive treatment for HF, including multiple inotropic infusions (2.5 μg/kg/min of dobutamine and 0.25 μg/kg/min of milrinone), the patient’s condition did not improve. He finally underwent LVAD implantation (Jarvik 2000; Jarvik Heart Inc., New York, NY, USA) for a bridge to HTx. Immediately after LVAD implantation, the patient developed severe, acute liver injury with metabolic acidosis, which was diagnosed as Reye syndrome induced by aspirin administration; the metabolic acidosis and liver injury gradually resolved after 2 weeks of multidisciplinary treatments, such as mechanical ventilation, plasmapheresis, and continuous haemodialysis with conventional postoperative care. Regarding medications, carvedilol was changed to bisoprolol, and imidapril was changed to enalapril . He was finally discharged home with LVAD support, 8 months after LVAD implantation. At discharge, ventricular reverse remodelling was observed (LVDd, 42 mm; LVEF, 19%), and his BNP was within normal limits (16.8 pg/mL; ).
Two months after the second discharge, the patient was admitted for the third time to our institution due to an LVAD driveline exit-site infection. Despite various medical and surgical therapies, the infection worsened and finally involved the LVAD pump; he finally developed multiple drug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (MDRP) sepsis due to pump pocket infection. Despite treatment for sepsis, the patient’s overall condition deteriorated rapidly; he became weak and developed anorexia, recurrent vomiting, and tachypnea. Blood examinations revealed metabolic acidosis with hyperammonaemia, and mechanical ventilation was required. Along with the patient’s general condition, his cardiac function rapidly deteriorated (LVDd, 72 mm; LVEF, 10%) and his BNP increased to 886.2 pg/mL , despite substantial LVAD support. A metabolic screening was performed because the symptoms were characteristic of an inherited metabolic disorder, and PA was diagnosed from the typical results obtained from metabolic screening . Briefly, a diagnosis of PA is made when there are elevated concentrations of propionylcarnitine (C3), glycine, and alanine in the blood. Increased urinary excretion of 3-hydroxypropionate, propionylglycine, and methylcitrate are also characteristic of PA. Based on the diagnosis of PA, glucose was intravenously administered to avoid catabolism, and colistin was administered for MDRP sepsis, resulting in a gradual improvement of the patient’s heart function and general condition. He was weaned from mechanical ventilation, and partial left ventricular reverse remodelling occurred (LVDd, 52 mm), enough for him to be weaned-off LVAD . Further examinations for PA revealed genetic mutations in the PCCA gene (PCCA c.923dupT, PCCA c.229C > T), and the patient’s PCC enzymatic activity, quantified by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry, was low (2.24%; ). After he was weaned-off the LVAD, bisoprolol was uptitrated from 2.5 to 15 mg to enhance his myocardial recovery. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists were also added for cardioprotection .
The patient was again discharged from the hospital; however, his cardiac function gradually deteriorated while on oral HF medications (LVDd, 72 mm; LVEF, 31%); therefore, the patient was admitted and became inotrope dependent . After 2 years of waiting with inotropic support, the patient underwent HTx. At the time of HTx, additional prophylactic nutritional and medical support was introduced to avoid metabolic crisis . Postoperatively, glucose was intravenously administered for 3 days to maintain blood glucose levels between 120 and 200 mg/dL, and carnitine was intravenously administered at a daily dose of 3000 mg to facilitate organic acid metabolism, followed by oral carnitine at the same dose after extubation. Protein intake was restricted to between 0.5 and 1.0 g daily. Standard triple-drug immunosuppression therapy using tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and steroids was administered without induction therapy. Moderate acute cellular rejection (International Heart and Lung Transplantation grade 2R) was observed at 2 weeks post-HTx; otherwise, the clinical course was uneventful. Acute cellular rejection was resolved by administering 50 mg of prednisone daily for 3 days, and trough levels of tacrolimus was strictly maintained at no <10 ng/mL until 1 year after HTx. Because of mild renal dysfunction, immunosuppression therapy was converted to everolimus with reduced tacrolimus, 2 years after HTx. Currently, it has been 3 years since HTx, and the patient’s physical activity is unrestricted with no incidence of metabolic crises. The patient is currently stable and on a normal diet.