A 21-year-old female and non-smoker, presented with a 4-year history of sharp, episodic, retrosternal chest pains brought on with exercise. Exercise tolerance was however, unlimited with no breathlessness. She gave no relevant past medical history or family history of illnesses. Physical examination, ECG and an echocardiogram were normal. A chest radiograph revealed a hyperlucent left lung causing a shift of the mediastinum to the opposite side and a downward displacement of the left hemi-diaphragm . Further investigation with a contrast-enhanced CT scan confirmed the radiographic findings of a homogenous, hyperlucent, hyper-inflated left lower lobe compressing the adjacent left upper lobe and causing mediastinal and diaphragm displacement . The inferior pulmonary vein was seen draining anomalously into the left hemi-azygos vein . No aberrant systemic arterial supply was present. A hyper-inflated left lower lobe suggested the diagnosis of CLE with the differential diagnosis of CPAM or pulmonary sequestration (PS).
At surgery, performed using a left video-assisted thoracoscopic (VATS) approach, the left lower lobe appeared pink, grossly enlarged, and was spongy in texture. The left inferior pulmonary vein was seen draining into the left hemi-azygos system and no aberrant systemic arterial supply was seen. The left lower lobe bronchus and pulmonary artery were normally located. A left lower lobectomy was successfully performed. The resection was challenging due to the over-distended left lower lobe despite isolating the left lung with a double lumen tube. The visceral pleural of the over-distended lobe was incised to allow any trapped air to escape. However, cutting into the spongy lung tissue failed to deflate the affected lobe and on this occasion this manoeuvre was not helpful in making the operation any easier.
On histological examination the lung parenchyma showed areas of emphysematous appearance with abnormally large air spaces, many partially lined with bronchial type epithelium and with sparse lymphoid aggregates in the alveolar walls. Respiratory bronchioles, with smooth muscle in the walls appeared unusually prominent. Within this background there were a few dilated airways showing mucous plugging, although there was no obvious evidence of bronchial atresia. There were patchy, non-specific chronic inflammation but no granuloma formation and there was no evidence of malignancy. Morphologically, the features were closest to those of a type-II CPAM.
Following surgery, the compressed left upper lobe took time to re-inflate fully. She herself made an uneventful recovery. At one-month follow-up she was pain-free, and has remained asymptomatic at 6 months and at 2 years follow-up.