A case report regarding a 40-year-old female patient, who has been married, and lived with her family in poor socioeconomic status. She had worked as a registered nurse for 20 years.
The patient’s medical history was significant for a recent diagnosis of hypertension, psychogenic seizures diagnosed after neurological evaluation 3 years ago, and migraines diagnosed 10 years ago. Additionally, the patient had a history of menstrual irregularities with menorrhagia and underwent a total hysterectomy a year ago. Furthermore, 3 months ago, she underwent a bilateral mastectomy due to ductal carcinoma in situ and granulomatous mastitis.
The patient was admitted to the hospital due to the development of a cushingoid appearance. Notably, she reported a significant weight gain of 20 kg over the past 4 months, exhibiting a central distribution pattern of body fat, facial puffiness, frequent headaches, and spontaneous bruising on her extremities. She also experienced intermittent episodes of pleuritic chest pain that increased with respiration and movement, associated dyspnea that increased upon lying down, fatigue, emotional lability, and sleep disturbance. Furthermore, the patient reported being easily agitated and had a history of self-mutilating behaviors when stressed.
An unusual erythematous skin rash that stained her clothes and tissue paper was noted during the examination. The rash was characterized by red, flat patches on the skin with a distinct pattern resembling streaks or lines. The rash was mainly distributed on her face, upper extremities, and anterior chest. The patient denied any known allergies or irritant exposure but refused to disclose any information about potential exposure to dyes or other chemicals.
The patient stated that she did not experience any symptoms of hirsutism, voice deepening, hair thinning, or temporal balding. She also confirmed that she did not smoke or drink and did not exhibit any clinical signs of depression. Furthermore, she consistently denied taking prescribed glucocorticoids or herbal supplements. The patient’s medications included amlodipine, doxazosin, omeprazole, topiramate, and levetiracetam.
During the physical examination, manifestations of CS were noticeable. The patient displayed a centripetal accumulation of fat in the trunk and abdomen, which included a prominent dorsocervical fat pad and a full, flushed appearance known as a moon face. Additionally, she had enlarged fat pads that filled the supraclavicular fossae. Upon examining the skin, an erythematous rash was noted, multiple reddish striae were visible on the lower abdomen and chest, and bruises and scratches were present on the lower extremities. Furthermore, the patient had grade 2 pitting edema.
The patient’s blood pressure was recorded as 157/96 mmHg, with a heart rate of 89 BPM, a weight of 95 kg, and a height of 170 cm.
The laboratory results indicated a hemoglobin level of 13.5 g/dl, a white cell count of 24.0 10e3/µl with 87% neutrophils and 8% lymphocytes in the differentiation, a creatinine level of 0.65 mg/dl, a sodium level of 134 mmol/l, a potassium level of 3.7 mmol/l, a fasting blood sugar level of 201.3 mg/dl, and a HbA1C level of 6.1.
The patient had a high 24 h urinary-free cortisol collection before admission, and an abdominopelvic computed tomography scan revealed the normal size and appearance of the adrenal glands, which are isodense to the liver with no mass or abnormal findings. Upon initial investigation, the patient was found to have low levels of morning cortisol (1.91 µg/dl) and plasma ACTH levels of less than 1.50 pg./ml, along with a suppressed overnight low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. However, subsequent testing showed a normal 24 h urinary-free cortisol level (33 mcg/24 h), which argued against endogenous CS and suggested the possibility of exogenous glucocorticoid use. Additionally, the patient was found to have panhypopituitarism, with low levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone, free thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, and suppressed prolactin levels but normal gonadotropins. A brain MRI scan showed normal shape, size and signal intensity of the pituitary stalk, and anterior and posterior pituitary lobes with homogenously enhancing and no focal lesions after IV contrast injection .
The patient was confronted with evidence that her high steroid levels were not endogenously produced and initially became defensive. She became angry and accused doctors of thinking she had a mental illness, insisting that her concerns were legitimate. However, she eventually confessed to taking prednisone 40 mg daily for the past 4 months and receiving multiple dexamethasone injections over the past few months.
The patient received a psychiatric evaluation where she exhibited a blunted affect with low mood, expressed reduced pleasure in socializing, and insomnia. She was diagnosed with factitious disorder, functional neurological symptom disorder (conversion disorder), and dependent personality disorder. It is worth noting that although a connection between factitious and borderline personality disorder has been established in the literature, not much can be found regarding dependent personality disorder.
Regarding the management plan, the patient received regular follow-up care with her endocrinologist and was initially prescribed a tapering course of prednisone. Later, she was switched to a daily dose of oral hydrocortisone 10 mg, because of the persistent suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which resulted in symptomatic improvement and normalization of laboratory abnormalities. In addition, a psychiatric re-evaluation was performed, and treatment with a serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressant (sertraline 50 mg daily) was commenced for 6 months.