A 12-year-old neutered female domestic shorthair cat with no previous significant clinical concerns was presented to our hospital with acute-onset intermittent syncope (day 1 of illness). The cat had been vaccinated against feline herpesvirus-1, feline calicivirus and feline panleukopenia virus. During the physical examination, auscultation did not reveal any abnormalities; however, the mucous membranes were pale. Blood biochemical analyses revealed decreased potassium (2.6 mEq/l; reference interval [RI] 3.1–5.0 mEq/l) and albumin (2.3 g/dl; RI 2.4–3.8 g/dl) concentrations and increased alanine aminotransferase (111 U/l; RI 18–108 U/l), blood glucose (302 mg/dl; RI 63–132 mg/dl) and troponin I (0.102 ng/ml; RI <0.02 ng/ml) concentrations. White blood cell count (13,300/µl; RI 5500–19,500/µl), urea nitrogen (30.3 mg/dl; RI 17.6–32.8 mg/dl), creatinine (1.0 mg/dl; RI 0.8–1.8 mg/dl) and thyroxine (1.8 μg/dl; RI 0.6–3.9 μg/dl) were within the RIs. Radiographs revealed mild cardiomegaly (vertebral heart scale, 8.4; normal cats: 7.5 ± 0.3), with no abnormalities identified in the lung field.
ECG at the first visit showed P waves without QRS complexes for approximately 20 s, followed by a normal sinus rhythm . Syncope developed and was consistent with the absence of the QRS complex. This syncope occurred repeatedly approximately every 5 mins along with a spontaneous recovery cycle. Echocardiography revealed diastolic regurgitation originating from the mitral valve to the left atrium when the QRS complex disappeared on the ECG. However, diastolic regurgitation was not observed in any valve in the systolic and diastolic phases when normal AV conduction was maintained. There was no hypertrophy or thinning of the myocardium or morphological abnormalities in the cardiac chambers, valves, aorta or pulmonary artery, and the rest of ECG was unremarkable. The left ventricular fractional shortening was 51.5%. Based on these findings, high-grade AV block without underlying structural heart disease was diagnosed.
presents a chronological summary of body weight, vital signs, clinical signs and treatment. On day 1, the cat was maintained in a 40% oxygen atmosphere and received dobutamine (8 µg/kg/min, dobutamine hydrochloride injection; Koa Isei) and atropine (0.05 mg/kg, atropine sulfate injection; Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma) intravenously and cilostazol (8 mg/kg q12h; Pletal, Otsuka Pharmaceutical) orally. On day 2, the cat was eupnoeic in room air and there was no syncope. Each of the P waves was associated with QRS complexes; however, ECG revealed wide QRS complexes (QRS interval: 60 ms) . The cat regained activity and appetite, and was discharged thereafter. Blood glucose (128 mg/dl) was within the RI. The owner declined pacemaker implantation. The cat continued to receive cilostazol (8 mg/kg q12h, increased to 10 mg/kg q12h later) orally. On day 147, ECG revealed a normal sinus rhythm , and the cat showed no clinical signs that were potentially referable to a bradyarrhythmia.
On day 403, the cat became lethargic and anorexic, and intermittent syncope developed. Over a long period of time during ECG examination, P waves were observed, whereas QRS complexes were absent, which were suggestive of a high-grade AV block . ECG revealed normal sinus rhythm followed by a period without any ventricular escape activity (approximately 20 s). The cat received aminophylline (7 mg/kg q12h neophyllin; Eisai Co.) orally in addition to cilostazol. After this treatment, the cat’s activity and appetite returned to normal and no syncope occurred. A normal sinus rhythm was observed during ECG on day 428 .
On day 538, the cat revisited the hospital because of occasional collapse, but its activity and appetite remained normal. ECG revealed normal sinus rhythm followed by unconducted P waves, which were suggestive of high-grade AV block. A maximum of nine P waves were blocked for approximately 3 s. Ventricular escape rhythm with wide QRS complexes (QRS interval 73 ms) was observed during the loss of AV conduction . ECG revealed mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitations during systole. The left ventricular fractional shortening was 51.5%.
On day 640, the cat became lethargic and anorexic again, and showed increased frequency of syncope. ECG revealed tachycardia (230 bpm) with low-amplitude QRS complexes and inverted T waves, followed by regular biphasic wide R waves at a slow rate (75 bpm; ). The ECG waves observed later suggested ventricular escape rhythms. For treatment, in addition to the administration of cilostazol and aminophylline, isoproterenol (0.8 mg/kg q12h Proternol S; Kowa Co.) and isosorbide dinitrate (1 mg/kg q12h Frandol; Astellas Pharma) were orally administered. However, this treatment failed to improve the clinical signs, and the patient presented with dyspnoea on day 644. Ultrasonography revealed pleural effusion and ascites. Auscultation revealed a grade 2/6 systolic left apical murmur. ECG revealed positive or negative biphasic wide R waves, and normal sinus rhythm intermittently appeared . ECG also revealed slight mitral and tricuspid regurgitations, enlargement of the left and right atria, and flattening of the interventricular septum. The left ventricular fractional shortening was 37.7%. The cat was maintained in a 40% oxygen atmosphere and received intravenous furosemide (1 mg/kg/6 h Lasix injection; Sanofi), followed by thoracocentesis.
On day 650, the cat became unconscious. Ventricular rhythms without clear P waves were observed during ECG . The cat arrested on day 651.
Necropsy revealed enlarged right and left atria, but normal valves and myocardium. The liver was congested but the macroscopic examinations revealed no abnormality otherwise. Histopathological examinations of the heart revealed no abnormality of conducting cells in the AV node and the proximal part of the penetrating His bundle . However, a remarkable decrease was observed in the number of conducting cells between the middle part of the penetrating His bundle and the proximal part of the bifurcating His bundle . The lesion was partly or completely devoid of conducting cells and was replaced by immature fibrous tissues. Severe fibrosis was also observed in the basal part of the central fibrous body and crest of the ventricular septum. There was no abnormality in the sinus node, sinoatrial conduction path, distal part of the bifurcation of the His bundle, or left and right bundle branches.