A 12-year-old Caucasian girl presented to our Department of Paediatric Surgery with a 30-day history of evening fever (38.5 to 39°C). Her general condition was good. After 7 days of fever, laboratory results showed a white blood cell count of 10,000/mm3 and a platelet count of 600,000/mm3 of blood. Inflammatory indices were increased: erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 56mm/hour, and C-reactive protein was 208mg/L; microhaematuria was also present (20/high-power field of red blood cells). The results of urinary tests and urine culture were negative. An abdominal ultrasound scan initially revealed no abnormalities and, although a focus of infection was not evident, antibiotics were administered as a preventive measure. After 3 weeks of fever and poor response to antibiotic therapy, prednisone was administered as it was suspected that she had rheumatoid arthritis. After this treatment, she had a remission, but in the following month she complained of suprapubic pain. A physical examination showed painful palpation of her hypogastria and no inflamed lesion on the surface of her skin. A repeat ultrasound evaluation of her abdominal wall revealed abscess formation without any communication with her bladder. In the absence of any umbilicus discharge, we suspected an infected urachal cyst .
Afterwards, she underwent an immediate exploratory laparoscopy, which confirmed the presence of an infected urachal cyst. Because of inflammation and bleeding, we decided not to excise the cyst but to perform only a large incision and drainage . Tissue specimens were taken for histological examination, which revealed inflammatory infiltrate with no evidence of malignancy and residual mucosa. There were no postoperative complications or recurrences after the incision and drainage of the infected urachal cyst. To our surprise, during the follow-up, echographic studies, performed after 3 and 6 months, showed a gradual reabsorption of the cyst; it was completely reabsorbed after 12 months. Six years later she is well and the urachal cyst has remained absent on magnetic resonance scans .