This 57-year-old female had SLE under methotrexate 7.5 mg/week and prednisolone 7.5 mg/day treatment with C3 level 65.00 mg/dL (Normal range 90–180 mg/dL) and C4 level 18.20 mg/dL (Normal range 10–40 mg/dL) for 27 years. She received a right total hip replacement due to right hip avascular necrosis on September, 2006. She complained progressive anal pain with bloody stool for months. There was no fever, no chills, no abdominal pain, no oral or genital ulcers and negative pathergy test. Laboratory exam showed positive anti-SSA antibody (Ab) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG, but negative anti-SSB Ab, anti-RNP Ab, Amebic AB, CMV IgM, CMV DNA, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) DNA, blood culture, stool cultures (Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, Clostridium difficile), Clostridium difficile toxin or Rotavirus. Sigmoidoscopy revealed rectal ulcers, 0.5–0.8 cm, 3–10 cm level above anal verge , and histology revealed the features of acute inflammation (lymphoplasmacytic infiltration) and chronic inflammation (crypt branching, dropout and shortfall), which were compatible with inflammation bowel disease without evidence of CMV infection or vasculitis. She received hydrocortisone and mesalazine enema once daily. Bloody stool subsided and anal pain improved initially, but the condition progressed after 2 weeks of treatment.
Colonoscopy showed huge and deep rectal ulcers 2 months after first endoscopic examination, and histology revealed acute on chronic inflammation with crypt abscess, granuloma and positive immunohistochemical staining for CMV . Ganciclovir (200 mg IV Q12h) was prescribed for 2 weeks followed by valganciclovir (450 mg/tab 1PC BID) for another 6 weeks to treat CMV colitis and hydroxychloroquine (200 mg/tab 1PC BID) and prednisolone (10 mg daily) were given for SLE control. The follow-up sigmoidoscopy 6 weeks after anti-viral treatment showed healing ulcers and repeated immunohistochemical staining for CMV were both negative. We kept valganciclovir, hydroxychloroquine and prednisolone using. However, she had recurrent pain with bloody stool, and sigmoidoscopy showed a huge progressive rectal ulcer 3 months later . Blood CMV Ag, CMV IgM, EBV Ag, Clostridial difficile toxin and rectal tissue IHC staining for CMV were all negative. Adalimumab was prescribed for Crohn’s disease.
Besides, she had an episode of cryptococcal pneumonia proved by lung biopsy and cryptococcal Ag 1:64 3 months after receiving adalimumab therapy. She mentioned the exposure history to pigeon manure because her neighbor was a pigeon fancier. Amphotericin B and flucytosine were prescribed, and symptoms improved. She also complained progressive bloody stool and noted some stool passage from vagina under adalimumab treatment course. Sigmoidoscopy , fistulogram and MRI all confirmed the rectovaginal fistula. Then, we arranged a transverse colostomy and shift the biologics to vedolizumab. She had clinical remission 2 months later, and we kept vedolizumab using. One year later, Sigmoidoscopy revealed no inflammation, and she received a restorative proctectomy with colo-anal anastomosis and vaginal repair. Follow-up endoscopy showed no more rectal ulcers or fistula tracts , and contrast enema also noted no residual rectovaginal fistula 10 months later.