A 15-year-old girl presented to our hospital on September 13, 2018 with a 2-month history of pain in the left lower extremity that worsened for 1 month. Major clinical manifestations included lumbago and radiating pain along the femoral nerve distribution with decreased sensation and paresthesia of the left lower extremity. She also had limitation of motion of the lower limb, which was relieved after rest. The patient visited a local hospital in July 2018 and received no definite diagnosis. She was given vitamins and calcium supplementation, but her pain was not alleviated. In August 2018, her pain worsened and swelling also appeared in the left thigh. She visited the Department of Neurology of our hospital on September 6, 2018. Electromyography revealed injury of the left femoral nerve; she received mecobalamin and vitamin B12, but pain failed to improve. The patient had no history of trauma. Her medical history was unremarkable.
Physical examination at admission revealed firm, tender mild swelling of the left proximal thigh, with normal overlying skin. Adduction and flexion of the left hip were limited and elicited pain. There were no other remarkable abnormalities. Plain radiographs showed increased density of the greater trochanter of the left femur . CT displayed thickened cortex in the anterior surface of the left proximal femur with specks of calcification and inhomogeneity of the adjacent bone marrow cavity . Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an oval mass in the bone marrow cavity of the proximal femur, which was 5.5 × 2.1 cm in size and hypointense in the T1-weighted image and hyperintense in the fat-suppressed T2-weighted image. The intertrochanteric bone had slightly sheet-like hyperintense signal on fat suppression and a sharp protrusion was seen anterior to the lesion and its wide base was connected to the bone. The adjacent soft tissue showed a long curved shadow on T2 fat-suppressed signal. The local cortical bone was interrupted. No obvious soft tissue shadow was seen . Considering that pain was the predominant symptom in the patient and the fact that osteoid osteoma is more common, especially in the proximal femur , based on the radiological (X-ray, CT and MRI) findings, a diagnosis of left femur tumor with a high likelihood of osteoid osteoma was made.
The patient underwent surgical exploration. Soft tissue swelling was observed adjacent to lesion in the proximal femur and massive granulation tissues were present in the medullary canal. The periosteum, and the granulation tissue and cartilage tissue were excised by curettage and pathological study revealed thickening of the periosteum and bone . Iliac crest grafting in the femur lesion was performed. The surgery was uneventful and postoperative X-ray examination showed a hypodense area in the left proximal femur. A final diagnosis of enchondroma of the proximal femur was made. The patient received conventional postoperative care and was discharged from the hospital 16 days after surgery. The patient received follow-up at the hospital at 1, 3, 5 and 18 months postoperatively. At the last follow-up visit, the left hip showed good range of motion including flexion, adduction and medial and lateral rotation. The patient could ambulate without difficulty. Signs of left femoral nerve injury disappeared. Roentgenography showed irregular patchy inhomogeneous hypodense shadows with an indistinct border. No other abnormalities were seen. The imaging and pathological findings of the patient are shown in Table .