In this case report, we illustrate the diagnosis of a 65-year-old male with a past medical history of hypertension who presented to the emergency department with complaints of headache, sudden onset of memory loss, and confusion. The patient, normally considered a very independent person, during his drive home from the restaurant had suddenly become confused, lost, and disoriented. He continued to drive on the highway for several hours, unable to recall his way back home or where he lived. After 4 h of being lost, he was able to find his way home. When his wife found him, he was disoriented and was unable to recall what had happened.
On physical examination, the patient was found to have a blood pressure of 115/83 mm Hg, heart rate of 88 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and temperature of 98.4 F. Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score was 27, with no apparent neurological deficits on physical examination.
Laboratory data on presentation were unremarkable on the chem 7 panel and the complete blood count panel showed cholesterol of 224 mg/dL (range: 100–199 mg/dL) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) of 137 mg/dL (range: 0–99 mg/dL). Noncontrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain was conducted but it failed to illustrate any acute intracranial changes except mild diffuse cortical atrophy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was ordered and showed nonspecific periventricular and subcortical foci of altered signals on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)- and T2-weighted sequence without diffusion abnormality, and was negative for any acute intracranial pathology.
Further laboratory workup continued to be inconclusive, which consisted of a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 3.21 uIU/mL (range: 0.45–4.5 uIU/mL), vitamin B12 of 492 pg/mL (range: 211–946 pg/mL), a normal folate level, and a negative urine drug screen. As there continued to be a lack of support or findings explaining the neurological deficits and vitamin B12 as well as other lab results such as folate, rapid plasma regain, thyroid stimulating hormone and others were found to be non-significant; the neurologist recommended testing homocysteine levels. As it has been linked to stroke and there are conflicting ideas on its association with dementia, homocysteine was obtained and was found to be elevated at 37.1 mcmol/L (range: 4–17 mcmol/L). Its increased levels may have been due to the patient's history of smoking and increased age; no other significant cause could be determined at the time. One day after observation, the patient showed cognitive and full neurological improvement and was thus considered stable for discharge with conservative management and further workup on an outpatient basis. Although no new incident of amnesia was reported by the patient, he was contacted for repeat homocysteine levels at a later date but failed to be compliant with his scheduled appointments.