A 72 year-old male was diagnosed with subungual melanoma removed from the nail bed of his right thumb in 2007 with a depth of 1.0 mm at the site of prior melanoma in situ dating back to 1981. In 2009, he had a recurrence at the same site extending down his digit and necessitating amputation of the distal phalanx. Resected sentinel nodes showed a melan-A positive focus of hyperchromatic atypical melanocytes in one node and S-100 positive dendritic cell staining in the other two nodes. Due to potential surgical complications and patient preference for observation, complete dissection was not performed.
In 2010, the patient presented with multiple bullae on the back. The diagnosis of BP was made by a skin biopsy and clinical and pathological correlation [Fig. ]. Disease activity was managed with high dose oral prednisone with eventual taper and disease remission after one year. In 2011, the patient noticed a new lump in his right axilla. Pathology confirmed malignant melanoma with a cKIT mutation (L576P in exon 11) completely replacing a lymph node. Positron-emission tomography (PET) revealed lung nodules, suspicious for metastatic disease. The patient declined a recommended lung biopsy and, after discussion of the risk of BP flare, therapy was initiated with ipilimumab at 3 mg/kg. Several days after the second dose, he experienced severe exacerbation of his BP with mucous membrane involvement for which he was hospitalized and treated with a 9-week course of 60 mg of prednisone. He subsequently maintained control of BP with 15 mg of prednisone daily.
After discontinuing ipilimumab, computed tomographic (CT) scan showed numerous enlarging bilateral pulmonary lesions and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed small volume brain metastases to the left internal auditory canal and the inferior aspect of right cerebellum, which were clinically asymptomatic. He declined radiation therapy for the brain lesion and began therapy with nilotinib, a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor for cKIT mutant melanoma, at a dose of 400 mg twice daily. After three weeks of treatment, CT scan showed interval improvement in previously noted mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Over the following year, his nilotinib dose was reduced to 200 mg BID or held due to elevated liver function tests and prolonged QT interval. During this time, imaging showed interval progression of his brain and lung metastases. He received stereotactic radiosurgery to the right cerebellar lesion with subsequent stabilization of the brain lesions on imaging.
In 2014, he developed new osseous metastases to the thoracic vertebrae. Nilotinib was discontinued and he received palliative radiation to the spine for local disease control. At this time the patient completed prednisone taper without flare of his BP. The patient then received pembrolizumab, at a dose of 2 mg/kg given every three weeks. The first 3 doses of pembrolizumab were well tolerated with minimal bullous eruption, which was controlled with clobetasol 0.05 % topical cream. Imaging after 10 weeks of treatment showed essentially stable disease, and a cutaneous metastasis on his wrist flattened and regressed [Fig. ]. However, following the fourth cycle, the patient developed a severe BP flare resulting in discontinuation of pembrolizumab and the start of oral prednisone at 60 mg a day. Over the next three months, the patient’s BP lesions had resolved and prednisone was tapered off, allowing for a fifth cycle of pembrolizumab [Fig. ]. The patient again developed a flare of BP requiring patient to stop anti-PD1 and again start prednisone at the same dose. He had improvement of skin lesions but was unable to taper below 15 mg without worsening symptoms. One year following initial treatment with pembrolizumab, scans show stable disease with unchanged brain, pulmonary, and osseous metastases. Clinically, the patient feels well and denies symptoms related to his metastases. He is undergoing continued monitoring of both his metastatic melanoma and his BP.