A 35-year-old G4P2 attended for reproductive surgery consultation to discuss a variety of problems she began to experience subsequent to undergoing the Essure® procedure for permanent sterilization. HS was performed in October 2012 under general anesthesia; pre-procedure pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Before HS, the patient was in good general health and all of her pregnancies were established without medical assistance. Cervical cytology was routinely normal, the patient did not smoke and she never had a miscarriage. Soon after the Essure® devices had been placed, the patient reported gradually increasing pelvic pain, headache, dizziness, lower extremity paresthesia and fatigue. In the first six months following the Essure® procedure, the patient registered a 20 pound weight gain. The patient’s concerns persisted over a three-year interval, although her gynecologist was disinclined to attribute any of the problems to Essure®.
Three months after HS, the patient presented for hysterosalpingogram as recommended. While the study did confirm bilateral tubal occlusion, it also revealed an abnormal (bifid) uterine cavity. 3-D ultrasound or other imaging was not performed to clarify or refine the diagnosis of the uterine anomaly and the patient received no further counseling.
The patient later requested surgical removal of the Essure® implants and the possibility of device migration required evaluation . A repeat HSG was obtained in 2015. This study revealed minimal device migration and no contrast dye spill from either Fallopian tube, a deeply bifid uterine cavity was again the most conspicuous finding .
At our center the patient was counseled about the atypical nature of her Essure® placement given the anatomical abnormality of the uterus. After obtaining informed consent, the patient underwent diagnostic hysteroscopy which verified an abnormal bifid uterus . The ostia on the right was normal as was the entire right uterine segment. However, the Essure® device on the left partially extended into the endometrial compartment . The exterior uterus was consistent with ESHRE Class IIb anomaly (uterine septum) . There was no evidence of tissue perforation by either contraceptive device. Laparoscopic dissection of the left cornu and partial tubal resection bilaterally achieved complete removal of the Essure® implants. Removal of terminal markers was confirmed. Electrocautery was maintained at 40 W power throughout the case, blood loss was estimated to be less than 50 mL. The patient was discharged three hours after surgery and her postoperative convalescence has been uneventful.