A 76-year-old Japanese woman presented to our facility with epigastric discomfort; she had previously undergone an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) procedure at another hospital. The EGD had revealed gastric wall thickening, suggesting scirrhous gastric carcinoma, so our patient was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
A barium upper gastrointestinal X-ray series indicated rigidity and poor extensibility of the gastric wall from the fornix to the lower gastric body, and irregular, enlarged folds were also noticeable . EGD revealed reddish and markedly swollen folds at the greater curvature from the upper to the lower part of the gastric corpus . The mucosa surface was hemorrhagic and erosive. A biopsy specimen revealed amyloid deposits in the submucosal layer with no malignant findings. Endoscopic ultrasound showed obvious thickening of the third layer corresponding to the submucosal layer with no disruption of the gastric wall structure . Computed tomography (CT) revealed thickening of the gastric wall and enlarged circumambient lymph nodes. Biopsy specimens from the rectum and ileum indicated no amyloid deposition. Laboratory test results were negative for Bence-Jones protein in the urine, and serum immunoglobulin levels were normal. No abnormal signs were detected on echocardiography.
We resected a representative portion of the lesion by endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) using the strip biopsy method to obtain sufficient tissue specimens, and we then conducted a detailed histological evaluation . There were no complications associated with the EMR. The resected specimens revealed deposition of amyloidal materials in the gastric mucosa and submucosa with no malignant findings. Congo red staining results were positive for amyloidal protein and exhibited green birefringence under polarized light microscopy. Congo red staining with prior potassium permanganate incubation confirmed the light chain (AL) amyloid protein type. An immunohistochemical examination revealed that κ-chain-positive plasma cells were present only in the inflammatory infiltrate in the superficial lamina propria, while λ-chain-producing plasma cells were detected both in the mucosa and in the underlying lymphomatous proliferation . Based on these results, gastric malignancy, systemic amyloidosis and amyloid deposits induced by inflammatory disease were excluded and the lesion was consequently diagnosed as localized gastric amyloidosis. Our patient was an older woman and there were no findings relative to an increase in gastrointestinal symptoms or anemia, so no further treatment was performed and she continued to be in good condition with no findings of disease progression six years after verification of our diagnosis.