Female patient in utero of 26 weeks’ gestation by obstetric ultrasound product of a third pregnancy from a 30-year-old woman with a history of gestational diabetes diagnosed at 12 weeks’ gestation, treated with Metformin. During week 20 of gestation, an obstetric ultrasound is performed, which reveals an occipital encephalocele .
A fetal magnetic resonance scan demonstrated a single product of approximately 26 weeks by fetometry with a midline cranial protrusion of neural and meningeal content similar to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in occipital region measuring 1.6 × 2.8 × 3.3 cm and an estimated volume of 7.7 cc as well as an occipital bone defect of 6 mm [-].
The multidisciplinary team evaluated the potential risks described for open fetal surgery and, along with the ethics committee of the hospital institution and the signed informed consent, decided to perform the postnatal surgical technique for the repair of an occipital encephalocele adapted to an in-utero procedure.
The surgical procedure was performed at the National Medical Center La Raza Mexican Institute for Social Security in Mexico City on April 27, 2023. The steps followed in the surgical obstetric technique were like those proposed by Adzick et al. in the MOMS study.
The abdominal wall is opened with an extended Pfannenstiel incision; the gravid uterus is extracted from the abdominal cavity, followed by a detailed mapping of placenta localization and identification of the parts of the umbilical cord by means of a transoperative echography. The site of the hysterotomy depends on the placenta localization. A 3 cm longitudinal mini-hysterotomy was performed [-].
The neural surgical steps begin with the positioning of the head of the fetus on the site of the uterine opening guided by transoperative ultrasound. The repair of the encephalocele starts with a midline incision of the hernial sac . Hemostasis is performed with a bipolar clamp at a very low intensity. Then, exposure of meninges and circumferential dissection is carried out, followed by cutting at the level of the external table of the occipital bone by means of micro scissors and monopolar at a very low intensity .
A safety margin of 1.5 cm was maintained in the meningeal layer to have a tight closure without complications. The protruded neural tissue was returned to its intracranial position, and a tight closure of the meningeal layers with a 5-0 propylene running suture was completed .
The cutaneous remnant was excised, and the skin was reconstructed, avoiding redundant tissue with a 25 3-0 poliglecaprone running suture. After the repair of the occipital encephalocele, the fetus was returned to the uterine cavity . The immediate postsurgical management was done in an obstetric intensive care unit where the mother stayed for approximately 24 h and was discharged home 72 h later.