A 46-year-old female with past medical history of tobacco dependence presented for low-grade fever and sudden onset of severe right upper quadrant abdominal pain with associated nausea and vomiting. Computed tomography (CT) completed in the emergency department revealed an intraluminal polypoid filling defect arising from the isthmus of the aorta projecting into the proximal descending aorta and findings consistent with infarctions of the spleen and right kidney . Given the fever, there was a concern for sepsis so she was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics. Heparin has also initiated cardioembolic phenomena of unclear etiology; however, it was later discontinued to prevent hemorrhagic transformation of the existing infarcts. The patient was admitted for further evaluation.
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed no findings to suggest valvular or cardiac source of embolus . An agitated saline bubble contrast study was performed with no evidence of intracardiac shunting . A transesophageal echocardiogram was then completed and revealed a large echogenic mobile mass attached to the wall of the descending thoracic aorta . Bilateral lower extremity arterial Dopplers were obtained and revealed severe popliteal-tibial arterial disease in the left lower extremity .
Work-up for other organic causes was extensive. Infectious work-up was negative and included testing for bacterial infection, fungal infection, HIV, Bartonella henselae antibody, Coxiella burnetii antibodies, Leptospira antibodies, syphilis, aspergillus galactomannan antigen, and histoplasma antigen. Hypercoagulability work-up was also unremarkable and included DRVVT screening for lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies (×2), homocysteine levels, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria screening, Protein C and S activity, antithrombin mutations, and factor V Leiden and prothrombin genotyping. Autoimmune work-up was also unyielding and included testing for antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antidouble-stranded DNA antibody, rheumatoid factor, cyclic citrullinated peptide, Sjogren antibody, myeloperoxidase antibodies, proteinase 3 autoantibodies, complement levels, Smith antibody, and RNP antibody. Given that there are no acute threat to limb or organ ischemia, the largely negative work-up, and no straight-forward mechanism to remove the aortic thrombus, we decided to manage the patient medically with close outpatient follow-up. She was started on heparin while inpatient which was transitioned to apixaban 5 mg twice a day and 81 mg of aspirin daily. This was done primarily because of the patient's preference to avoid frequent INR checks. A board-certified hematologist agreed with the use of apixaban with monthly outpatient follow-up to ensure patient compliance and clinical improvement. Patient was also counseled regarding smoking cessation. Catheter-based or surgical thromboembolectomy would have been considered if the patient would have developed acute limb ischemia or threatened organ.
At one month, the patient was seen in the clinic and denied symptoms of chest, back, or abdominal pain. She denied significant pain at rest or with exertion and did not exhibit any nonhealing wounds in either of her lower extremities. She noted being able to walk roughly one-quarter of a mile without symptoms prior to resting. She reported adherence with her daily aspirin and twice-daily Eliquis. At this time, arterial computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis was repeated which revealed complete resolution of the filling defect involving the aortic isthmus and proximal descending aorta. There was no CT evidence to suggest vacuities. The spleen exhibited a lobulated superior margin with volume loss and the right kidney demonstrated a lobulated appearance of the right lower pole compatible with scarring from the previous infarct . The patient was instructed to continue with her antithrombotic regimen and follow-up in one month.
At this time, the patient no longer expressed having any symptoms of LE pain, swelling, or claudication. She reported being able to resume her daily activities with no limitations. Findings of the CTA were discussed with the patient at her two-month follow-up, and she was encouraged to continue with activity as tolerated. At this time, given the resolution of the mass after anticoagulation, it was felt that it was most likely an aortic thrombus. With regards the duration of therapy, we felt that this was likely unprovoked, and given it was arterial, we decided to continue anticoagulation for at least 12 more months pending further hematologic evaluation.