A 31-year-old man with no related medical history visited his general practitioner because of epigastric pain. Acute cholecystitis was suspected, and the patient was referred to the surgical department of our hospital. On admission, the vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 124/70 mmHg; pulse, 70 beats/min; and temperature, 36.5 °C. The physical findings included right upper quadrant pain, negative Murphy sign, and no rebound pain. Blood tests revealed the following elevated inflammatory markers; white blood cell count, 9300/μL (3100–8400/μL); C-reactive protein level, 12.1 mg/dL (< 0.3 mg/dL); total bilirubin level, 2.2 mg/dL (0.4–1.5 mg/dL), and gamma glutaryl transferase level, 87 U/L (13–64 U/L). Contrast-enhanced abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed a 30-mm oval soft tissue mass with microlobulated margins below the gallbladder. The density of the mass was similar to the pancreas . In addition, CT revealed a cystic lesion adjacent to the mass with a thick enhanced wall, which communicated with the jejunum . These findings suggested an ectopic pancreas and a jejunal duplication. CT also showed that the ascending colon ran up the midline, suggesting that the patient had intestinal malrotation . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed an ectopic pancreatic duct without communication to the normal pancreatic duct draining into the jejunal duplication . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with acute peritonitis due to the acute pancreatitis of ectopic pancreas in a jejunal duplication and intestinal malrotation. The acute pancreatitis was classified as mild according to the revised Atlanta classification of acute pancreatitis; the patient exhibited neither organ failure nor local complication .
The patient was treated with antibiotics his symptoms and blood test parameters improved in 5 days. However, contrast-enhanced CT revealed indistinct margins and increased fat density around the ectopic pancreas and jejunal duplication, suggesting worsening peritonitis. Thus, the patient was scheduled for surgery. Although the surgery indicated as a laparoscopy, it was converted to open laparotomy because of inflammation and adhesions in the right upper quadrant of the abdominal cavity. An intra-abdominal abscess was observed between the tip of duplication and the gallbladder. Adhesions between the gallbladder and small intestine were dissected, and the abscess cavity was opened. A 12-cm jejunal duplication was observed on the opposite side of the mesentery, located 100 cm distal to the descending part of the duodenum. The tip of the duplication was swollen. Additionally, cord-like tissue was found between the duodenum and the ascending colon. The ligament of Treitz was absent, and the cecum and ascending colon were not fixed to the retroperitoneum . Partial resection of the jejunum, including the jejunal duplication, was performed. The Ladd’s procedure, including release of the Ladd’s band, repositioning of the duodenal flexure, and appendectomy, was performed . The operation time was 176 min and the intraoperative blood loss was 5 mL. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 11.
The macroscopic findings of the resected specimen revealed jejunal duplication bifurcated from the jejunum in a T-shaped manner and communicating with the lumen of the normal jejunum . Microscopically, intestinal mucosa, submucosa, and muscular and serosal layers were detected in the jejunal duplication . Ectopic pancreatic tissue with acini and ducts was observed in the adipose tissue between the muscular and serosal layers at the tip of the duplication . Part of the ectopic pancreatic tissue exhibited chronic pancreatitis with the proliferation of fibroblasts and lymphocytic infiltration . Hemorrhagic necrosis was observed in the serosa at the tip of the duplication, and pancreatic tissue was not identified, probably because of the strong inflammation .