A 59-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to the emergency department with a rapidly expanding mass in the thoracic wall in relation to the inferior part of the left shoulder blade. His medical history included mild renal insufficiency and epilepsy. He did not take any antiplatelet or anticoagulant medication. Six weeks earlier he fell 4 m from a ladder, resulting in multiple rib fractures and a left-sided pneumothorax diagnosed on chest radiography. The pneumothorax was treated with a chest drain placed in the left anterior axillary line at the level of the papilla. Pain-relieving medication included paracetamol, ibuprofen, and oxycodone, and the patient was released from the hospital after 5 days of treatment.
The mass in the thoracic wall had appeared the previous evening about 8 hours before the patient came to the hospital and kept expanding slowly during his stay in the emergency department. He had pain in his left shoulder, and his left-hand fingers felt cold and tingling with no further neurological symptoms. A clinical examination revealed a skin-colored, sore swelling approximately 10 cm in diameter in relation to the inferior angle of his left shoulder blade. Vital parameters were normal. Blood results showed hemoglobin levels of 9.18 g/dL compared with 11.92 g/dL 6 weeks earlier.
Thoracic computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a large hematoma in relation to the left scapula located between the costae/intercostal muscles and the serratus anterior muscle. The hematoma measured 7 cm × 14 cm × 18 cm (anteroposteriorly × right–left × craniocaudally) equaling a volume of approximately 930 mL (Eq. ). Two sites of active bleeding were identified on the left dorsal scapular artery located between the medial border of the scapula and numerous rib fractures. The CTA showed rib fractures from the 3rd to the 12th left rib, including double rib fractures of the 4th to 7th rib, corresponding to the shape of the scapula .
The patient remained stable and was transferred to the department of cardiothoracic surgery. Open exploration was chosen because of compression symptoms. At primary surgery, the hematoma was evacuated beneath the left latissimus dorsi. The bleeding source was not found, and the resulting cavity was packed with gauze binding. At second look the following day, the scapula was lifted, coagulated blood was removed, and the bleeding sources on the left dorsal scapular artery were identified and ligated. The patient was discharged from the hospital after a total of 3 days. Six months later, the patient was well with no sequelae.
We conducted a review of the literature to identify how previous cases of chest wall hematomas exterior to the endothoracic fascia following blunt trauma have been diagnosed and managed. We hypothesized that most cases were diagnosed by CTA of the chest and managed by surgical drainage similarly to our case.