A 29-year-old man was admitted to emergency room 30 hours after ingestion of about 1 liter of homemade alcohol. The clinical picture began with frequent vomiting, blurred vision and back pain. Initial examination demonstrated an agitated and confused patient with respiratory distress. The respiratory rate was 26 per minute, pulse rate of 82 per minute, blood pressure of 130/80 mm Hg and axillary temperature of 36.5 C and laboratory tests as presented in .
In clinical examination both pupils were dilated and the response to light was slow. The results of examination of the heart, lungs were normal and the findings of chest x-ray were unremarkable. There was no cyanosis or edema.
The patient was intubated in emergency room and mechanical ventilation was started. The PH was 7.017, gavage of ethanol, infusion of sodium bicarbonate was started and folic acid, pantoprazole was administered in accordance with intravenous fluids. In quantitative test of methanol assessment, the serum methanol level was estimated at the level of 50 mg/dl. The victim underwent two courses of hemodialysis. Over the course of poisoning, the level of Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) deteriorated and on the seventh admission day the status of GCS remained at the level of B-C. The pupils were not reactive. The patients was required to be under ventilator in intensive care unit (ICU). The results of the laboratory tests at this time are presented in .
Two units of packed cells were transfused and a brain CT scanning showed large and symmetric brain edema as well as brain hematoma in subcortical brain over frontal and occipital lobes bilaterally as well as in putamen and right capsule areas. . Repeated clinical examinations, x-rays of the heart and lungs as well as the results of laboratory tests were normal and several attempts of weaning patients from the ventilator were unsuccessful and so a tracheostomy as well as percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy was performed on the 18th day of hospitalization. Combined enteral and parenteral nutrition was continued according to current treatment criteria . The status of consciousness improved over the hospitalization period and the patient could be detached from the ventilator on the 79th day of hospitalization with GCS level of 9-10.
Follow-up examinations were continued for six months. At the latest examination the general condition of patient improved a little as compared during hospitalization time and was poor because of visual and neurological complications. The patient had urinary and fecal incontinence. The visual capacity of patient was limited to recognizing only a shaking hand and the potential of motor system was limited to slight movement of the hands and feet. The latest brain CT scanning demonstrated symmetrical brain atrophy of both frontal lobes. The lateral ventricles were dilate d, there were hypodensities in external capsule, left internal capsule and bilateral caudate areas .