The patient was a 55-year-old male, a parent of one of our youth outreach patients. He reported being First Nations, living in a single-room-occupancy hotel, and supported by income assistance. He had a long history of opioid and stimulant use disorders. Given the incredible urgency and need for flexibly service delivery in the context of OAT, he was taken as a patient in our youth outreach program to help family members in innovative ways. His presentation was complicated by an evolving left leg cellulitis, untreated hepatitis C, and a history of gout. At the time of initial assessment, he was not taking any medications. Our team was consulted to see him for buprenorphine/naloxone microdosing induction in his residence. Visiting the patient in his residence was used as a measure to lower the threshold for access to care and improve his engagement with the treatment.
On initial assessment, the patient self-reported injecting 200 mg of heroin daily 200 mg of crystal methamphetamine every 3 days. The actual amounts used was difficult to measure given the variability in chemical make-up and potency of heroin and other street drugs in Vancouver, including their adulteration with fentanyl and other contaminants [, ].
The patient had previously trialed methadone but had relapsed. He had multiple trials of traditional buprenorphine/naloxone inductions but was unable to complete them due to his intolerance of withdrawal symptoms. He had experienced at least one overdose requiring resuscitation with naloxone.
Outreach visits to this patient began February 28, 2018 and he was seen four times (out of five attempted visits) over 3 weeks at his residence. The patient was prescribed a buprenorphine/naloxone microdosing regimen (see Fig. ). The BUP/NLX tablets were split by the local pharmacy for off-label administration of small doses in microdosing protocol. Since the smallest available dose in Canada is 2 mg, it was more practical to split the tablets into 0.25 mg as opposed to 0.2 mg, which was prescribed in Bernese Method. The patient was instructed to use decreasing doses of heroin as buprenorphine/naloxone doses increased, then to stop heroin once the buprenorphine dose reached 12 mg. He completed the microdosing regimen and over the course of 7 days his dose was titrated to 12 mg daily. On day 8 the dose was increased to 16 mg daily and the patient abstained from illicit drugs. Despite the team offering to deliver the medication to the patient’s home, he chose to pick them up himself daily from the pharmacy. The outreach team supported him with reminders to pick up his medications regularly. Due to a prescription error, he missed 3 days of his buprenorphine/naloxone (March 20–23, 2018), and a relapse of heroin and crystal methamphetamine ensued. A subsequent retrial of buprenorphine/naloxone microdosing induction was prescribed, but the patient did not pick up his medications, and was difficult to find for follow up.
The patient was seen again on outreach visits to his residence and neighbourhood starting on May 14, 2018. He was contemplative about quitting heroin. He wanted to retrial the microdosing induction method. We conducted a medical history, screening for major health concerns, liver failure, other medications and allergies. Blood work from December 2017 showed normal complete blood count, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine. December 2016 liver function tests were normal. A microdosing buprenorphine/naloxone regimen was re-prescribed, along with a blood requisition for updated liver function tests, human immunodeficiency virus, treponema pallidum, hepatitis B virus, complete blood count, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine. Medication was dispensed daily to the patient at a pharmacy situated across the street from his residence. The prescriber and the pharmacy stayed in close phone and in-person connection regarding dosage adjustments and medication adherence.
The patient picked up and took all but two doses in the first week.
There were no symptoms of withdrawal throughout the induction. This was documented via the patients self-report and the clinicians’ overall assessment of the patient’s withdrawal symptoms as the use of standardized tools was neither feasible nor necessary given that withdrawal prior to induction is not a requirement in microdosing technique. The patient reduced illicit heroin use to 200 mg every 2 days during the week of the microdosing. The patient had mild cravings when he reached 12 mg, though decreased his use to 100 mg every three days. Follow up was challenging because the patient had difficulty keeping appointments, and we were not always able to locate him on outreach. The team looked for the patient in his home and in the neighborhood, and after several attempts assessed him on May 28, 2018. At the time, he was on 12 mg daily. He continued to self-report using heroin 500 mg every 3 days and experiencing cravings, so his dose was increased to 16 mg. He continued to stay on buprenorphine/naloxone 16 mg daily, with no further missed doses.
He was assessed again on June 11, 2018. Notably, a painful left leg cellulitis persisted, and he continued to use heroin 500 mg every 3 days when he felt leg pain. While he reported mild cravings, he reported using heroin to manage pain. The team connected him to a nearby primary care clinic for wound care and antibiotics. The dose of buprenorphine/naloxone was increased to 20 mg daily. He adhered to his agonist medication till August 27, 2018 and reported using 50 mg approximately every 4 days, which he was willing to taper. Interestingly, he reported no longer using any other illicit substances. The outreach team supported him to connect with an adult-oriented primary care and OAT clinic, and his care was transferred accordingly.