A 78-year-old man underwent vascular graft replacement for an abdominal aortic aneurysm. Immediately after the operation, his right foot turned blue, the dorsalis pedis artery was not palpable, and thromboembolism occurred in the right lower limb. In addition, thrombus occlusion from the popliteal artery to the 3-artery bifurcation was observed at the site below the right knee. Thrombectomy with a catheter was immediately performed and a 3-cm thrombus was removed. Alprostadil was used as an anticoagulant. Ischemic necrosis occurred in the right forefoot, which turned black, and the range of necrosis extended to the central part of the sole three months after operation . It would have been difficult to cover the amputated end with well vascularized soft tissue if we had performed Lisfranc amputation, so lower leg amputation was planned. However, walking with a prosthetic leg was predicted to be difficult due to weakened muscles after a prolonged bedridden state. We considered surgical methods that preserve the heel so that the patient could bear weight without a prosthesis, so Chopart amputation was performed. In the operation, a fish mouth incision was made in the margin of the normal tissue to expose and amputate the Chopart joint. To prevent varus and equinus deformity, we reconstructed the cut tibialis anterior tendon, which is a dorsiflexor muscle, and weakened the plantar flexor muscle strength. The Achilles tendon was lengthened with a Z-plasty. In order to balance the plantar dorsiflexor tendon, the lengthened Achilles tendon was sutured at an ankle plantar dorsiflexion position of 0 degrees, resulting in an extension of 2 cm. Then the tibialis anterior tendon was transferred through a tunnel created in the neck of talus, and the peroneus brevis tendon was transferred through a tunnel created in the anterior part of the calcaneus. Next, after extending the Achilles tendon to 0-degree plantar dorsiflexion of the ankle and suturing it, the tibialis anterior tendon, which had moved to the talus, was tensioned at 5 degrees dorsiflexion of the ankle, and fixed to the talus with staples. Similarly, the tendon of the peroneus brevis, which had been moved to the calcaneus, was tensioned at 5 degrees dorsiflexion of the ankle, and fixed to the calcaneus with staples. Postoperative radiographs showed good fixation of the staples and no varus or equinus deformity .
Four weeks after the operation, the wound at the amputation end was closed, and no complications, such as infection or re-necrosis, occurred. At the final follow-up 7 years after the operation, no varus or equinus deformity was observed. Active dorsiflexion and plantarflexion of the ankle was possible, and the range of motion was 5 degrees of dorsiflexion and 10 degrees of plantarflexion . The patient became able to stand up and walk on his heel without a prosthesis. Six weeks after the operation, a foot prosthesis was made to enable the stepping motion of the foot . The patient found it easy to put the foot prosthesis on by himself. Five years postoperatively, he was able to walk for approximately 1 km, as well as get on and off busses independently.