A 59-year-old woman suffering from tetraparesis due to cervical spinal cord myelopathy presented with a sudden drop in blood pressure (BP) after tamsulosin use for 9 d.
A cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study was performed. The patient was diagnosed with cervical spinal cord myelopathy at the C3-C6 level and fractures at the C4-C6 level. She was classified as C3 AIS D (American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale). After surgery, she was transferred to the rehabilitation medicine department after Foley catheter insertion for urination.
Considering her completeness of injury (AIS D), we removed her Foley catheter to identify residual urine using clean intermittent catheterization (CIC). On the day of removal, she was able to self-void, but residual urine was in the range of 160-200 mL. On suspicion of voiding difficulty due to neurogenic bladder, a complication of her SCI, we scheduled a urodynamic study, but the patient refused due to discomfort. In the absence of a urodynamic study, we prescribed the recommended dose of 0.4 mg tamsulosin once daily[,]. For bladder management, we planned CIC at least 4 times/day, followed by self-voiding. Because she had been diagnosed with cervical spinal cord myelopathy, we encouraged a total fluid intake of approximately 2000 mL/day to prevent orthostatic hypotension.
After administering tamsulosin for 6 d, we reduced the dose to 0.2 mg once daily as her residual urine remained less than 200 mL. In addition to voiding difficulty, tamsulosin use produced other symptoms. Though her BP remained stable, she experienced occasional dizziness, likely due to orthostatic hypotension. She also experienced constipation and post-defecation symptoms such as nausea, lightheadedness, and sweating. We attributed these symptoms to orthostatic hypotension due to cervical myelopathy aggravated by tamsulosin. We reduced the dose of tamsulosin to 0.2 mg and expect resolution of the symptoms.
After tamsulosin use for 9 d, her BP suddenly dropped to 70/40 mmHg. Before the event, she had difficulties defecating and experienced dizziness. Her heart rate was 50 beats/min (bpm), and body temperature (BT) was 36.3 ℃, although there was no alteration in consciousness. Despite treatment with normal saline hydration, supplemental O2, and norepinephrine, her BP decreased to 50/40 mmHg. We did not suspect hypovolemia as the underlying cause and administered atropine for possible cardiogenic shock. However, her electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus bradycardia and vasovagal syncope as potential causes of her symptoms. After several minutes, her BP increased to 120/80 mmHg, and all other vital signs returned to within normal range, including BT. No abnormal result was found in her laboratory tests, including urinalysis. We stopped tamsulosin immediately because of its possible hypotensive effect.
On the next day, her BP dropped to 60/40 mmHg after defecation. Once again, she remained conscious and alert. Atropine was administered but had no effect. Norepinephrine was administered, her BP increased to 100/60 mmHg, and heart rate ranged from 90 to 110 bpm.
After the second event, there was no additional event of hypotension or difficulty in defecation after stopping tamsulosin.
The patient had a medical history of diabetes and hypertension and use of associated medications for the previous 20 years. Her BP and blood glucose level had been well-controlled. She had not experienced previous orthostatic hypotension or hypoglycemia.
She had no family history of cervical cord disorder and other diseases.
Her motor strength was 3/5 grade in the upper extremities and 4/5 grade in the lower extremities. She suffered hypoesthesia below the C4 dermatome. Deep anal pressure and voluntary anal contraction were intact. According to physical examination, she was classified as C3 AIS D.
Her blood glucose level was 74, 84, 94, 74, and 75 mg/dL pre-meal and 122, 133, 102, 106, and 140 mg/dL on 2 h after a meal. We did not examine hemoglobin A1c because we thought that her blood glucose level was well-controlled.
At the first hypotensive event, the laboratory test results showed white blood counts (WBC) of 8500/mm3, C-reactive protein (CRP) of 0.77 mg/dL, and procalcitonin of 0.04 ng/mL; troponin-I, lactate dehydrogenase, and creatinine levels were normal.
Cervical spine MRI revealed cord signal change at the C4-C6 levels in the emergency room . Chest and abdomen x-ray revealed no specific finding at the first hypotensive event .