A 50-year-old male with history of prior lap band surgery in 2004 with subsequent revision to loop DS in September 2022 presented with epigastric pain with radiation to the back for one day. Overall, he had lost 88 pounds since his loop DS surgery. The pain began after eating and was associated with bloating and nausea. Labs were significant for leukocytosis (white blood cell 13.3 K/μL) and elevated lipase (>5000 U/L). Aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin were within normal limits. Abdominal ultrasound revealed cholelithiasis with gallbladder wall thickening. Common bile duct (CBD) was measured to be 6 mm. Computed tomography (CT) abdomen and pelvis revealed peripancreatic fat stranding and inflammation with diffuse pancreatic parenchymal edema and swelling suggestive of acute pancreatitis.
After improvement of pancreatitis symptoms and lipase, he was taken to the operating room for laparoscopic cholecystectomy and intraoperative cholangiogram (IOC). Laparoscopic cholecystectomy proceeded in standard fashion and IOC revealed a filling defect in the distal CBD. Saline flushing and glucagon injection were not successful. Due to unavailability of a choledochoscope, gastroenterology (GI) was consulted at this time for intraoperative ERCP. Multiple attempts to pass a guidewire through the cystic duct into the duodenum to assist with ERCP guidance but was unsuccessful. An enterotomy with a 2-0 PDS purse string suture was made approximately 30 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz (LT). Using the purse string suture, the bowel loop was brought up to the abdominal wall and a 15 mm port was advanced into the jejunum . The purse string suture was tied around the port for security. GI was able to advance the side viewing endoscope retrograde through the jejunum to the second portion of the duodenum. The papilla was identified and noted to be inverted. Multiple attempts at biliary cannulation were attempted but unsuccessful. The ERCP was aborted and the enterotomy was closed with running 3-0 V loc suture. Interventional radiology (IR) placed a percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC)-assisted 8.5 French Cook internal/external biliary drain across the CBD occlusion and into the duodenum. This drain was then used the following day for repeat trans enteric ERCP. A fresh enterotomy was made 20 cm distal to the LT. GI proceeded with trans enteric ERCP where the papilla was identified and the biliary drain was seen emanating from the ampulla. A 0.035 450 cm Jagwire was advanced through the PTC catheter into the duodenum. The wire was grasped with a snare and removed through the endoscope. A biliary sphincterotome was loaded over the wire and advanced into the biliary duct . The CBD was successfully cleared with multiple balloon sweeps. The IR placed biliary drain was then removed and enterotomy was closed via previously described technique. Patient did well postoperatively and was discharged after two days.