A 16-year-old male complained of painful swelling on the left scrotal for the last 3 months before visiting respirology clinic in April 2023. This lump had first appeared on the left scrotum approximately a year before admission (February 2022). However, the pain persisted even after receiving paracetamol 500 mg q.i.d orally from the community health center for 1 week. The complaint was accompanied by a persistent cough for 2 months and no weight gain in the last year. There were no complaints of fever, urinary problems, or history of trauma to the genital area. In February 2023, the patient was taken to the regional hospital and treated for 4 days, receiving ceftriaxone 80 mg/kg/day intravenously, and the genital US showed left epididymitis. There were no TB contacts identified, and no history of drug abuse, smoking, or active sexual intercourse. The patient was well-nourished, had not been given the BCG vaccine, and lived in a district 13.2 km from the capital city, with low-income family.
Genital examination showed an enlarged left scrotal, palpable mass with hard consistency, flat surface, firm borders, measuring 7 × 4 cm, pain, and redness. The transillumination test was negative, while multiple bilateral, enlarged lymph nodes with a 1−1.5 cm diameter were palpated in the inguinal region. Other physical examinations were within normal limits.
Routine blood test results were within normal limits, anti-HIV was negative, and tumor markers (including alpha-fetoprotein/AFP, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin/ Beta HCG, lactate dehydrogenase/ LDH) were within normal limits. Urinalysis presented leukocyturia, while urine culture for both bacterial and M. tuberculosis was negative. PPD test was negative, but CXR showed perihilar lymphadenopathy due to TB. Furthermore, acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear, GeneXpert MTB/Rif, and M. tuberculosis culture examination of induced sputum had negative results, well as GeneXpert MTB/Rif from urine. The available supporting examination data from the previous hospital included testicular US which was suggestive of epididymitis sinistra with septal hydrocele and suspected left scrotal hernia . The testicular US was repeated at our hospital 2 months after the previous one, and the results suggested grade II−III varicocele with enlarged left epididymitis (post-infection) and inhomogeneity of the left testicle . The patient was subjected to genital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which was suggestive of left epididymal-orchitis and bilateral multiple inguinal lymph node enlargement, with no hydrocele, varicocele, or signs of malignancy. .
Based on the examination results, the patient was diagnosed with isolated epididymal TB and treated with an adult Fixed-Dose Combination (FDC) 4 tablets per day. This combination consisted of isoniazid 75 mg/-rifampicin 150 mg/-pyrazinamide 400 mg/-ethambutol 275 mg for 2 months, then continued with isoniazid 75 mg/-rifampicin 150 mg for 4 months daily. After treatment, clinical improvements were found in weight gain of 5 kg (from 52 to 57 kg), improved appetite, as well as no complaints of coughing and left scrotal swelling. There were no side effects during the treatment, and at the last physical examination, the size of the testicle had decreased from 4 × 7 cm to 3 × 2 cm, similar to the right testicle, and no signs of inflammation were found. However, sperm analysis results at the end of treatment showed the presence of teratozoospermia, which remained under therapy.