Our patient was a 75-year-old Japanese woman. Two days prior to being examined at our hospital in January 2017, she became aware of mild bleeding due to gum injury caused by a maxillary denture fracture. After the initial bleeding, she experienced pain around the gingiva of the left maxillary second premolar (tooth No. 25) and left facial swelling, for which she was examined at the Emergency Department of our hospital. Acute odontogenic infection was considered, and she was referred to our department.
She had a history of aplastic anemia, renal dysfunction, bronchial asthma, and osteoporosis. She had no history of allergy, and she was currently taking orally administered cyclosporine, febuxostat, montelukast sodium, and theophylline. Epoetin beta pegol, a continuous erythropoietin receptor activator (CERA), was administered intravenously once a month.
On initial examination, she presented with marked swelling and tenderness from her left lower eyelid to her left cheek and to the left side of her upper lip. Spontaneous pain was present on the left temporal area. The stump of tooth No. 25 was intact, with swelling and tenderness around the gingiva. Pulsation was perceived upon palpating the buccal gingiva. A panoramic radiograph revealed radiolucency surrounding apical region of tooth No. 25. . A simple computed tomography (CT) image revealed extensive inflammation, with adipose tissue opacities in the soft tissues of her left cheek . Although no abnormal image was seen in either of the maxillary sinuses, there was radiolucency surrounding apical region of tooth No. 25 . Blood tests at the initial examination revealed a leukocyte count of 6700/μL, which was a normal value; however, her C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration was high at 7.15 mg/dL. Our patient’s platelet count was slightly lower at 97,000/μL; this was attributed to her history of aplastic anemia. The blood urea nitrogen concentration was 34.1 mg/dL; the serum creatinine concentration was 1.43 mg/dL, which is indicative of renal dysfunction .
The buccal gingiva corresponding to the apical region of tooth No. 25 revealed swelling; as pulsation was perceived upon palpating the region, the Hematology Medicine Department of our institution was consulted regarding incision and drainage of the pus. Although anemia was present, her leukocyte count was normal, so it was considered safe to proceed with the intervention. On the same day, a fine-needle aspiration was performed under local anesthesia, and the suctioned pus was submitted for a bacterial culture test. Incision and drainage of the pus were then performed, followed by the placement of a gauze drain. She was hospitalized immediately, and anti-inflammatory therapy with intravenously administered ampicillin/sulbactam was initiated. As she had renal dysfunction, the dose of the antibiotic was lower than normal; ampicillin/sulbactam 9 g/day was administered. The Hematology Medicine Department was currently treating our patient with cyclosporine for aplastic anemia; after consultation, continuation of the oral treatment was permitted as long as her leukocyte count remained stable. Blood tests performed on day 5 of hospitalization revealed a leukocyte count of 5200/μL and a CRP value of 12.33 mg/dL, with no marked changes; however, she exhibited a fever of approximately 38 °C, so two sets of blood cultures were performed. Reddening around the gingiva of tooth No. 25, widespread facial swelling, and tenderness had all improved, but there was no improvement in the left temporal headache. In addition, there was onset of pain in the left side of her neck on the same day. Since the neck pain was mild, her condition was monitored by follow-up observations. Blood tests performed on day 9 of hospitalization showed a procalcitonin (PCT) concentration of 0.2 ng/mL, which was negative. Her leukocyte count was 6500/μL, and the CRP concentration was 25.62 mg/dL, indicating marked worsening of inflammation. A chest radiograph and culture tests (blood, urine, sputum, and fecal cultures) were performed to assess any remote infections, and the infection control team was asked to perform an examination. The chest radiograph revealed no evidence of pneumonia or other infections, and all culture tests were negative. In addition, inflammation of her left cheek improved, so the worsening of the inflammatory values could not be considered a causal factor. Head, neck, and chest contrast CT images were obtained on day 10 of hospitalization to more accurately identify the source of infection. Calcification around the odontoid process of the second cervical vertebra was observed and based on the history of temporal and neck pain, CDS was suspected . She was immediately referred to the Orthopedic Surgery Department for consultation, and CDS was considered the most likely cause of her increased leukocyte count and CRP value. Orally administered acetaminophen 600 mg/day was initiated to provide symptomatic therapy. Blood tests on day 11 of hospitalization revealed a leukocyte count of 4700/μL and a CRP level of 12.82 mg/dL, which constituted marked improvements. On day 13 of hospitalization, the symptoms were in remission, and she was discharged. Tooth No. 25, which was considered the cause of the buccal swelling on the left side, was extracted on a subsequent out-patient visit . After tooth extraction, symptoms of neck pain and temporal pain improved, completing the orthopedic surgery intervention.