A 35-year-old woman presented to the ear, nose, and throat outpatient department of the hospital with the swellings of right-sided neck, one in the region of the angle of the right jaw and the other below the right jaw (corresponding to submandibular region). She first noticed these swellings about 2-3 years ago when they were about the size of a bean. The swellings gradually progressed in size. There was no history of pain, fever, trauma, difficulty in mouth opening or facial nerve weakness. There were no comorbidities or history of addictions. On examination, she was found to have swellings present in relation to the right parotid and submandibular regions. The parotid swelling was about 2.5×2.5 cm in size, non-tender, firm, lobulated, mobile with normal overlying skin.
The swelling in the submandibular area was also about 2×2 cm in size, non-tender, firm, lobulated, mobile with normal overlying skin . Facial nerve functions were within normal limits. Mouth opening was normal and there was no bulge in tonsillar fossa or the floor of the mouth.
Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) from both the lesions showed a cellular smear with abundant chondromyxoid matrix associated with singly scattered and poorly cohesive myoepithelial cells with plasmacytoid appearance. There was no atypia. The features were suggestive of a pleomorphic adenoma.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of face and neck showed a well-defined, slightly lobulated mass lesion involving right parotid gland, suggestive of mild heterogeneous contrast enhancement. Another well-defined smooth marginated tumor with no significant contrast enhancement involved right submandibular gland. The radiographic appearance of tumors in both the locations was suggestive of a benign pathology .
With the presumptive diagnosis of pleomorphic adenoma of right parotid and submandibular region, the patient was planned for right-sided superficial parotidectomy and right submandibular gland excision under general anesthesia. A modified Blair incision with cervical extension was performed to surround the submandibular area. The superficial parotidectomy and submandibular gland excision were performed after raising skin and subplatysmal flaps, which preserved the function of the facial nerve and its branches . Intraoperatively, the tumors in both the locations were firm and lobulated. The treatment policy was the excision of entire tumors, superficial lobe of the parotid gland, and entire submandibular gland . Postoperative period was uneventful and facial nerve functions were normal.
On gross pathological examination, the parotid and submandibular gland tumors were measured 34×25×22 mm and 45×25×20 mm, respectively. Serial slicing of the tumor showed grey white firm well-circumscribed lesion with pushing margins, with a surrounding rim of normal salivary gland tissue. Microscopic inspection showed both the tumors were surrounded by a capsule. The biphasic population of epithelium and mesenchymal cells were observed with epithelial cells in glands and myoepithelial cells embedded in the chondromyxoid stroma. The investigated regions had no necrosis or significant atypia. The final histopathological diagnosis of parotid and submandibular gland pleomorphic adenoma was performed postoperatively .