A 74-year-old woman was admitted to our department for a left retroperitoneal neoplasm that was found 1 mo prior during a routine checkup.
One month prior, abdominal non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) at a local hospital revealed a left retroperitoneal neoplasm. However, the patient had no symptoms.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 20 years and had been taking 0.15 g irbesartan once a day to control blood pressure to within the normal range. In addition, the patient had a history of auricular fibrillation for 1 mo and had been taking 0.1 g aspirin each night for anticoagulant therapy and 47.5 milligrams succinic metoprolol once a day to control the heart rate to approximately 90 beats/min.
The patient had no superficial lymph node enlargement. An abdominal physical examination showed that her abdomen was flat and soft without tenderness.
Routine blood tests, biochemical function, coagulation function, and tumor markers, as well as the levels of cortisol (19.13 μg/dL, reference range 6.24-18 μg/dL), aldosterone (105.04 ng/L, reference range 50-313 ng/L), the three hypertension items [plasma renin activity, 1.03 μg/L/h, reference range 1.45-5 μg/L/h; angiotensin I, 0.96 μg/L; angiotensin II, 50.19 ng/L, reference range 32-90 ng/L) were all within normal ranges.
A CT scan of the abdomen was performed in our hospital, on which the neoplasm presented as a circular heterogeneous hypodense soft-tissue shadow . On contrast-enhanced CT, the neoplasm presented heterogeneous septal enhancement in the arterial phase and persistent enhancement in the portal phase, and its boundary with the left renal vein was ill-defined .
To further clarify the diagnosis, we also performed a contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. On T1-weighted images, the neoplasm showed a circular heterogeneous hypointensity . On T2-weighted images and diffusion-weighted images, the neoplasm showed a circular heterogeneous hyperintensity . On arterial phase post-contrast T1-weighted images, the neoplasm showed obvious septal enhancement . On axial and coronal portal venous phase post-contrast T1-weighted images, the neoplasm showed persistent enhancement and its boundary with the left renal vein was ill-defined .