A 44-year-old male, with moderate low back pain at rest and severe low back pain on movement, was admitted to our hospital. He had been experiencing the pain for 2 weeks before the consultation. Although he was prescribed a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, the analgesic effect was poor. The medical team diagnosed the patient with MM. He had pathological compression fractures on the first and second lumbar vertebrae; therefore, we attributed his low back pain to the VCFs.
The region of pain was on the right side of the fractured vertebrae, and the pain resembled muscle cramping and spasm on movement. On the numerical rating scale (NRS) ranging from 0 to 10, the patient rated the pain as 8 at rest and 10 on movement. This severe, breakthrough low back pain induced fear and anxiety, preventing the patient from sitting upright. Regarding neurological symptoms, although there was a slight numbness in the right lower limb, no obvious decrease in sensation was observed. No motor and bladder dysfunctions were observed in this patient. Blood and other laboratory tests revealed renal dysfunction, anemia, and hypercalcemia.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed change in the first and second lumbar vertebrae, resembling fish-vertebrae; however, no spinal root compression or collapse of the facet joint was observed. Bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone therapy was initiated 7 days after consultation.
We initially prescribed acetaminophen 3000 mg/day; however, this was ineffective. Next, we administered continuous intravenous infusion of fentanyl 500 μg/day, ketamine 40 mg/day, and lidocaine 400 mg/day using a patient-controlled analgesia pump (i-Fusor Plus™; JMS Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). His pain at rest was mitigated and rated 3 on the NRS. Nevertheless, the pain on movement remained unchanged even after the fentanyl dose was increased to 700 μg/day, including bolus administration. This severe breakthrough pain escalated the patient’s stress, inducing presyncope. The patient and his family refused treatment for cancer and strongly urged for pain relief. There were no contraindications to percutaneous interventions or blocks such as coagulopathy, hence, diagnostic blocks of nervous structures or radiofrequency denervation were important in this patient. However, he was unable to assume the appropriate position for neural blocks.
We prescribed clonazepam 0.5 mg/day as an analgesic and anxiolytic agent. On the day after first intake of clonazepam, his pain during movement was dramatically relieved, and 3 days later, the patient was able to sit up in bed and continue cancer treatment. The adverse effects of clonazepam, such as drowsiness and dizziness, were tolerable. Fentanyl could be reduced to 1 mg with a patch. Pain improved with treatment of the MM, clonazepam was not needed 3 weeks later, and the opioid analgesics were discontinued 2 months later.