A 77 year old Caucasian female was admitted to Basildon University Hospital with a one year history of poor appetite and weight loss of 2 stones accounting for a quarter of her body weight. She did not complain of any abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, haematemesis or malaena. Apart from a history of clinical depression her past medical, family and social history was unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed a well looking elderly lady with normal vital signs. There was no peripheral lymphadenopathy and examination of the abdomen was unremarkable. The liver and spleen were not palpable and there was no ascites. Laboratory investigations showed FBC haematocrit of 39%, WBC of 4.9 × 109/L and Hb of 13.9 g/dL. Liver enzymes and other relevant biochemistry tests were normal.
Subsequent multiple upper GI endoscopies revealed a large malignant ulcer of the greater curve of the stomach with multiple satellite lesions extending proximally. Histological examination of biopsies taken showed the ulcer to be benign. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a tumour extending from the cardia into the body of the stomach with a large polypoid component. There was no evidence of lymphadenopathy in the vicinity of the tumour or in the para-aortic region. The liver, spleen and the pancreas were normal. Furthermore there was no evidence of mediastinal or hilar lymphadenopathy or pulmonary deposits.
Staging laparoscopy did not reveal any intra abdominal seedlings, ascites or lymphadenopathy. At laparotomy intra-operative findings were of a large tumour involving the lesser curvature, the body and the greater curvature of the stomach with a 7 × 6 × 1 cm ulcer on the greater curvature infiltrating into the stomach wall. A radical gastrectomy was performed with en-bloc resection of 4 lymph nodes from the lesser curvature, 5 from the greater curvature and one from the greater omentum.
Initial histopathological examination of the resected stomach from the ulcer site at the local hospital showed abundant lymphocytic infiltration composed of lymphocytes and eosinophils. Immunohistochemical staining showed numerous CD30 positive large cells . A preliminary diagnosis of anaplastic large cell lymphoma was considered. Specimens were sent for a second opinion to University College London Hospital. A polymorphous lymphoid infiltrate was identified including scattered large cells showing Reed-Sternberg morphology . A panel of immunohistochemical markers were stained for. A predominant expression of CD30, CD15 and EBV-LMP1 were seen in the cells while being weakly positive for CD20. Staining for CD79a, CD3, bcl-2 and bcl-6 were negative. A diagnosis of "Classical Hodgkin's disease of the stomach" was made.
The postoperative period was uneventful and follow-up with repeat CT scans at 3, 6 and 12 months revealed no evidence of residual disease or relapse. No chemotherapy was initiated; however a plan to administer a regime of chlorambucil and prednisolone was made should there be a relapse of disease on further follow-up.