A 56-year-old woman was introduced to Kochi Medical School from a private hospital for right renal tumor detected by abdominal computed tomography (CT). She had been undergone radical nephrectomy for left renal cell carcinoma (RCC) 7 years before. An abdominal CT of the present tumor revealed a right renal tumor, 5.3 cm in diameter, showing poorly-defined margins, irregular contrast and no findings of metastases . An abdominal CT that was performed 7 years ago revealed a left renal tumor, 7.0 cm in diameter, showing well-defined margins, irregular contrast and no findings of metastases, diagnosed clinical stage T1b N0 M0 left RCC . She did not have any other medical history or family history.
Open right partial nephrectomy was performed under a presumed diagnosis of clinical stage T1b N0 M0 right RCC, recurrent or due to metastasis from the previous left tumor. The tumor was a macroscopically well-circumscribed solid mass. The cross-sectional surface was lobulated and heterogenously yellow to brown with bleeding and necrosis . Microscopically, the tumor showed an alveolar growth pattern admixed with eosinophilic and clear cytoplasm. Papillary architecture was also focally seen. In some areas, eosinophilic coarse granules were identified in the tumor cytoplasm. Pathological stage was pT1b pN0 with negative surgical margin. Nuclear Grade corresponded to largely Fuhrman Grade 3 and partly Grade 4. Hyaline nodules and psammoma bodies were observed in the stroma. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed diffuse positivity for renal cell carcinoma-maker (RCCMa, PN-15, 1: 100, Cell Marque, CA, USA) and cluster differentiation (CD)10 (56C16, prediluted, Novocastra Laboratories Ltd., Newcastle, UK) and negativity for Cathepsin K (3F9, Abcam, Tokyo, JP), Melanosome (Human melanoma black; HMB45, prediluted, DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), Melan A (A103, 1: 100, Novocastra Laboratories Ltd., Newcastle, UK), and alpha smooth muscle actin (data not shown). Seventy percent of neoplastic cell nuclei stained positive for TFE3 (MRQ-37, prediluted, Ventana Medical Systems, Inc., Tucson, AZ), with a staining intensity of (moderate) 2+ to (strong) 3+ . Staining for transcription factor EB (TFEB, polyclonal, V-17, 1: 400, Santa Cruz, Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, TX) was generally negative (data not shown).
Hematoxylin and eosin, and immunohistochemical stains from the previous tumor were retrospectively reviewed. In H and E staining, tubular, papillary, and alveolar growth patterns were noted admixed with eosinophilic and clear cytoplasm. Additionally, very large tumor cells were seen and dedifferentiation with a discohesive area and rhabdoid features was also noted. Necrosis and hemorrhage were present. Pathological stage was pT1b pN0. Nuclear Grade corresponded to Fuhrman Grade 4. Small venous invasion by carcinoma cells was seen. Neoplastic cells showed diffuse immunohistochemical expression of RCCMa, CD10, Alpha-Methylacyl-CoA Race (AMACR; P504S, 13H4, 1: 100, DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) and negative results for cytokeratin 7, Carbonic Anhydrase IX (CA9, D47G3, Cell Signaling, MA, USA), HMB45, Melan A and Cathepsin K (data not shown). TFE3 was positively stained in the nuclei of 5% of neoplastic cells with a staining intensity of 2+ to 3+ .
We performed a dual-color, break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay to identify the chromosomal break point of TFE3 in paraffin-embedded tissue . Briefly, the break-apart FISH assay with probes upstream and downstream to TFE3 showed red and green signals. A fused or closely approximated green-red signal pattern was interpreted as a normal result, whereas a TFE3 fusion resulted in a split-signal pattern. Signals were considered to be split when the green and red signals were separated by a distance of more than 2 signal diameters. For each tumor, a minimum of 100 tumor cell nuclei were examined under fluorescence microscopy at × 1000 magnification. Only nonoverlapping tumor nuclei were evaluated. Positive findings were defined as more than 10% of the tumor nuclei showing the split-signal pattern . The TFE3 gene showed gene splitting in 71.55% of 130 neoplastic cells and in 76.82% of 233 neoplastic cells in the present and the previous tumor, respectively. Typical TFE3 break-apart signals of the present and previous tumors are presented in Fig. .
Total RNA was extracted from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue of the previous tumor and from frozen tissue of the present tumor using a standard organic extraction method (MACHEREY-NAGEL, Germany and QIAGEN, Germany, respectively). ASPL-TFE3 fusion transcripts were detected using an ASPL forward primer: 5’-AAAGAAGTCCAAGTCGGGCCA-3′ and a TFE3 exon 4 reverse primer: 5’-CGTTTGATGTTGGGCAGCTCA-3′. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) transcripts were detected using the forward: 5’-CGGATTTGGTCGTATTGG-3′ and reverse: 5’-TCCTGGAAGATGGTGATG-3’ GAPDH primers . The ASPL-TFE3 fusion gene was detected in the tissue from the present and the previous tumor but was not detected in the normal tissue. GAPDH that was used as a loading control was detected in each reaction .
There is a no evidence of recurrence at 8 months postoperatively.