A 27-year-old woman at 31 + 5 weeks’ gestation (gravida 0 para1, G0P1) presented to the emergency department with a three-day history of the left lower abdominal pain. The pain was constant and getting progressively more severe. She did not complain of nausea or vomiting. There were no history of urinary symptoms, fevers, vaginal bleeding or uterine contraction. Ovarian hyperstimulation therapy was not performed. The patient’s ovaries were noted to be normal on ultrasound prior to the start of pregnancy.
On examination, the patient’s vital signs were stable. Abdominal palpation revealed a tender abdomen on the lower left side without signs of peritoneal irritation. The uterus was enlarged corresponding to 31 + 5 weeks, and the cervix was closed with a little discharge. An obstetric US demonstrated the fetal parameters that corresponded to gestation with normal amniotic fluid and fetal activity. A heterogeneously hypoechoic mass of 87 × 61 mm was discovered in the left abdomen adjacent to the left uterine border with unclear boundaries, which contains several non-echoic millimetric cysts. Doppler revealed a lack of perfusion within the mass . US did not show whether the mass originated from the left ovary or the uterus.
To clarify the origin and the nature of the mass and decide the need for immediate surgical intervention, the patient subsequently underwent a prompt MRI scan. MRI showed the left ovary was increased in size to 82 × 42 × 85 mm with peripheral follicles. On fat-suppressed T2-weighted images, the signal intensity of the lesion was significantly decreased compared with the right ovary. On fat-saturated T1-weighted images, the enlarged left ovary had a signal intensity equal to that of muscle but was not homogeneous . The adjacent fallopian tube was thickened, the diameter of the thickened tube was 11 mm . Its signal intensity was similar to that of the left ovary. A small amount of fluid was detected between the mass and the uterus, as well as in the pouch of Douglas. The normal right ovary was also visualized. Combining the clinical symptoms with the US examination, three radiologists with about 20 years of experience in abdominal MR imaging diagnosed ovary infarction secondary to adnexal torsion.
With the provisional diagnosis of adnexal torsion, the patient was taken to surgery. During surgery, the left ovary was found to be twisted twice over (720°) around its pedicle and the left tube. The left ovary was 80 × 60 × 50 mm with a purple hue. The right adnexa and uterus were normal. As there was extensive hemorrhage and necrosis, a left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The histopathology confirmed an extensively hemorrhagic fallopian tube and ovary with partial necrosis and described multiple follicular cysts in left ovary. The pregnancy continued without problems, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 3.