This is a 19-year-old female of Egyptian ethnicity, born of a consanguineous marriage and known to have glycogen storage disease type III since the age of 2½ years. She presented to us with a history of several days of polyuria, polydipsia, and loss of weight.
Review of her records revealed that she had been diagnosed with GSDIII at the age of 2½ years, when the mother reported an increasing abdominal girth, failure to thrive, and repeated attacks of afebrile convulsions of 1 year duration. The diagnosis of GSDIII was confirmed at the time by a liver biopsy showing a picture suggestive of GSD (swollen cells and mosaic cytoplasmic appearance with mild fibrosis) as well as demonstration of debrancher enzyme deficiency. She was prescribed long-term therapy with cornstarch for hypoglycemia and colchicine for associated hyperuricemia. Unfortunately, there was variable follow-up by the mother together with non-adherence to management regimens.
Over the years she developed progressive chronic liver dysfunction with persistently high liver transaminases and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase together with coagulation profile compromise and bleeding tendency. Jaundice was documented only once during an attack of acute hepatitis on top of her chronic dysfunction. Her most recent follow-up liver biopsy (done years prior to her current presentation) had shown increased fibrosis and changes suggestive of very early cirrhosis, but with intact limiting plates. Subsequently, evidence of vitamin D and A deficiencies developed with metastatic soft tissue calcifications and osteoporotic bone fractures, together with poor night vision and dry skin, respectively. Moreover, the patient later developed myopathy, with progressive muscle weakness and pain, indicating a diagnosis of GSDIII type a (both liver and muscle involvement). Fortunately, about four years prior to her current presentation the patient's hypoglycemic attacks improved and eventually disappeared. Her family history is positive for two younger sibs, both diagnosed with GSD.
Upon physical exam, she appeared dysmorphic, stunted, with a mild degree of dehydration and dry skin. Abdominal exam revealed a firm and enlarged liver, but with no splenomegaly or ascites. Neuromuscular system examination revealed reduced muscle power in both upper and lower limbs, while cardiovascular system exam excluded any evidence of cardiomyopathy. Pubertal staging revealed primary amenorrhea, but with adequate development of secondary sex characters. Positive clinical findings are summarized in Table .
Emergency labs done at the time of presentation revealed a fasting blood glucose (FBG) of 276 mg/dl and no ketones. Her arterial blood gases (ABG) were essentially normal with a pH of 7.36, PCO2 44.1, HCO3 22.1, BE -1.1.
Further lab studies showed pus cells in urine, and a culture later grew Escherichia coli. A complete blood count with a differential count showed a marked shift to the left. Her liver transaminases, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase were mildly elevated, while her kidney functions and electrolytes were normal. Her uric acid and lactate levels were also normal, but her creatine phosphokinase was high at the time.
After careful consideration of different treatment options and considering the patient was free of hypoglycemic attacks for an adequate time without treatment and that she had already developed liver dysfunction and early cirrhosis, we decided to begin the patient on very low doses of insulin therapy. She continued to show high blood glucose (BG) readings with a daily average of about 263 mg/dl, requiring that we gradually increase her total dose to about 0.8 u/kg/day. She is currently relatively well controlled and has continued to be free of hypoglycemic attacks; rather she tends to err on the high side with a daily average BG of approximately 160 mg/dl. Figure shows average daily glucose levels during the initial period of dose adjustment.