A 62-year-old man was diagnosed with end-stage renal disease 20 year ago, and a native AVF was created at the left wrist for hemodialysis treatments. One year later, the patient received his first kidney transplant in the right iliac fossa and took a combination of immunosuppressive medications (including azathioprine, cyclosporin A, and corticosteroids). After that, the AVF was abandoned. Fifteen years ago, physical examination found that the AVF was occluded. At 6 years after renal transplantation, the patient suffered from lower extremity edema and was diagnosed with acute kidney transplant rejection based on renal biopsy. The failed transplanted kidney was surgically removed, and the patient received his second kidney transplant in the left iliac fossa. After the transplantation, the patient continued immunosuppressive therapy, with serum creatinine levels ranging between 120 and 130 μmol/L.
Eighteen months ago, the patient presented with orthopnea, nausea, and vomiting, and was admitted to the Department of Nephrology. On physical examination, there was no thrill or pulse over the AVF and no bruit on auscultation. Vascular ultrasound examination revealed the patent brachial and radial arteries and the totally occluded AVF with no blood flow , which was illustrated in the skin . Serum creatinine concentration was 853 μmol/L and blood urea nitrogen was 34.1 mmol/L. The patient was diagnosed with renal allograft failure, and immediate hemodialysis restart was required. To promptly prepare a vascular access, we decided to attempt percutaneous revascularization of the patient’s chronically occluded AVF. Since we already had successful experience in treating stenotic and acutely thrombosed AVFs with ultrasound-guided transluminal angioplasty, we performed the revascularization under ultrasound using the Apollo 500 system (Toshiba, Tokyo, Japan), equipped with a 9–18 MHz linear transducer probe. The AVF was retrogradely punctured with a 22-G needle, and a 6-Fr sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was retrogradely inserted into the fistulous vein . At first, a 0.014-in. Hi-Torque BMW Elite guidewire (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was advanced to the lesion, but failed to cross the chronic total occlusion lesion at the AVF after switching the wire tip direction several times . An additional movie file shows this in more detail (see Additional file ). With the support of a 6-Fr angiographic catheter advanced to the occlusion site, the guidewire was carefully and gradually inserted the chronic total occlusion lesion and successfully crossed the lesions at the fistula, anastomosis, and the radial artery, and parked in the radial artery . An additional movie file shows this in more detail (see Additional file ). Subsequently, the radial artery was dilated with a 4.0 mm × 20 mm TREK balloon (Abbott Vascular) three times at 4, 8, and 12 atm , and the occluded lesion was dilated at 12, 18, and 20 atm. Then, further dilation of the lesion was performed with a 6.0 mm × 40 mm TREK balloon (Abbott Vascular) three times at 12 and 20 atm . The procedure took 54 min. After the dilation, the diameter and blood flow of the radial artery were 3.3 mm and 138 cm/s, respectively; and the cephalic vein diameter and blood flow were 2.9 mm and 251 cm/s, respectively. The diameter of the anastomose site was 3.2 mm .
The revascularized AVF was used for hemodialysis after the intervention and remains patent for as long as 18 months. At the 2-, 6-, and 18-month follow-ups, the anastomose site diameter and AVF blood flow were 3.8 mm and 340 cm/s , 3.8 mm and 291 cm/s , and 0.8 mm and 255 cm/s , respectively. Although the anastomose site was stenotic at 18-month visit, the proximal AVF segment was normal with a diameter of 4.5 mm.