An 80-year-old woman had been followed up for autoimmune hepatitis-related liver cirrhosis and recurrent HCC. Colonoscopy for chronic diarrhea revealed rectal cancer, and the patient was accordingly admitted to our hospital for resection of the tumor. High anterior resection was performed. On postoperative day 10, the patient complained of right hypochondriac pain.
The patient had been followed up for autoimmune hepatitis-related liver cirrhosis and recurrent HCC. The patient’s condition was classified as Child-Pugh Class B (7 points) with hypoalbuminemia (2.1 g/dL) without encephalopathy or ascites. Gadoxetate sodium enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed masses that were highly suspicious for HCC located in the Segment VIII (S8) near the liver surface . RFA was performed under ultra-sonographic guidance using an expandable needle (LeVeen™ Needle Electrode; Boston Scientific, Inc., Natick, MA, United States) 55 mo before hernia repair, with no early complications. No artificial pleural effusion or artificial ascites was used. Twenty-eight months before the hernia repair, the patient underwent repeat RFA for recurrent HCC located in S8 near the inferior vena cava . Artificial pleural effusion was used during the second RFA.
The patient had medical histories of hypertension, hyperuricemia, heart failure, pneumonia, and laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
There was no family history of malignant tumors.
On her physical examination, the patient showed tenderness of the right hypochondrium without rebound tenderness, although the vital signs were normal.
A blood test revealed normal white cell count (4800/μL; normal range, 3500-8000/μL) and C-reactive protein level (0.22 mg/dL; normal < 0.30 mg/dL). It also revealed low albumin level (2.1 g/dL) and coagulopathy, including low platelet count (8.7 × 104/μL; normal range, 15-35 × 104/μL) and high international normalized ratio of prothrombin time (1.29; normal range, 0.80-1.20) due to liver cirrhosis.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed small intestine incarcerated in the right thorax . No findings suggested intestinal ischemia.