A 45-year-old Japanese man received an intra-articular injection of glucocorticoid (betamethasone 2 mg) for pain in his right elbow joint 2 days prior to admission. On the day of admission, he experienced general fatigue. Two hours later, he experienced a sudden, severe headache and was brought to our emergency department in an ambulance.
He was diagnosed as having hypertension at 44 years of age, and his blood pressure was under control with lisinopril 10 mg/day. He had no other significant past medical history or any episodic headaches. He was a tobacco smoker (20 cigarettes/day) for the past 24 years, and consumed approximately 50–100 g/day of alcohol, but was not addicted to any drugs, such as cocaine. He was married and had two children (a daughter, 12-years old; a son, 1-year old). His family had no history of diabetes, cancer, or any endocrine diseases, like pheochromocytoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma, parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia, mucosal neuroma, and kidney cancer.
His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 240/126 mmHg; pulse, 120 beats/minute (regular); temperature, 37.6 °C; respiratory rate, 25 breaths/minute. Except for excessive perspiration and sinus tachycardia, physical and neurological examinations showed no significant findings, such as pallor, tremor, enlarged thyroid gland or palpable thyroid nodule, enlarged lymph nodes, abnormal lung or heart sounds, meningeal irritation, and central or peripheral nerve dysfunction. Initially, subarachnoid hemorrhage was suspected due to severe headache and elevated blood pressure. However, computed tomography and magnetic resonance images of his head were normal. In addition, the cerebrospinal fluid drawn by lumbar puncture was clear, eliminating the possibility of cerebral vascular diseases, including subarachnoid hemorrhage. The results of the initial laboratory tests are shown in Table . Based on severe hyperglycemia and metabolic acidosis with normal HbA1c level on investigations, we suspected DKA caused by FT1DM.
We initiated the standard treatment for DKA, including intravenous insulin infusion and fluid replacement. The course of insulin infusion rates and plasma glucose levels is presented in Fig. . Following the initiation of insulin infusion, his plasma glucose level rapidly decreased and recovered to normal within 2 hours. In 18 hours, the lowest insulin infusion rate (0.1 U/h) was required to maintain normoglycemia. At the same time, our investigations showed that his basal insulin secretion was normal, and plasma ketone levels were not elevated, as shown in Table . These findings indicated metabolic acidosis induced by lactic acid, and excluded the possibility of FT1DM. Subsequently, he was screened for secondary diabetes. A left adrenal gland tumor (3 cm in diameter) was detected by abdominal computed tomography . The levels of urinary catecholamine metabolites (metanephrine and normetanephrine) and serum catecholamines were significantly elevated; however, the other hormone levels were normal . Elevated levels of serum adrenaline and noradrenaline did not reduce following the clonidine test, which indicated an autonomic catecholamine secretion. A functional scintigraphy of the adrenal gland using iodine-131 metaiodobenzylguanidine showed a strong uptake in the region of the left adrenal gland . These findings led to a diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. However, there were no findings suggestive of medullary thyroid carcinoma, parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia, or any other endocrine diseases. His blood pressure was controlled with an α1 adrenergic receptor blocker doxazosin (12 mg/day), following which a left adrenalectomy was performed 85 days after his admission. The tumor size was approximately 118.75 cm3 (9.5 cm × 5 cm × 2.5 cm, Fig. a, b). On histopathological assessment, most tumor cells were positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin, which were consistent with the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma . There were no signs of lymphovascular or capsular invasion. However, markers of malignancy, such as Ki-67 labeling index and Pheochromocytoma of the Adrenal Gland Scaled Score indicated borderline abnormalities (1.5% and 4, respectively), which required careful follow-up [, ]. Since this first event, he showed no signs of pheochromocytoma crisis such as paroxysmal hyperglycemia and hypertension. During the postoperative follow-up for 28 months, he did not show any symptoms or signs indicating recurrence of pheochromocytoma.