A 17-year-old, otherwise healthy White male was brought in by his mother to the emergency department (ED) for abdominal pain that had been constant for two months. He was previously seen at an urgent care and unsuccessfully treated for a urinary tract infection despite having normal urinalysis. He had followed up with his pediatrician and was referred to the ED for further computed tomography (CT) imaging and laboratory studies. He described his pain as sharp, located in the umbilical region, and worse with physical activity. Pain was not worse with eating. He’d had intermittent nausea and vomiting since he was a child. The patient was notably thin and had a lifetime of short stature and being underweight, but his growth curve was otherwise tracking. He typically had one to two bowel movements daily without any pain relief.
Due to concerns for a vascular etiology of his abdominal pain, a CT angiogram of the abdomen and pelvis was obtained in the ED, which demonstrated narrowing of the origin of the celiac artery at the location of median arcuate ligament and post stenotic dilation . The celiac artery was otherwise patent. The rest of his CT showed normal findings. His other workup in the ED, including a complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel, and lipase, was unremarkable. The patient subsequently followed up with the vascular surgery outpatient clinic, where vascular ultrasound demonstrated significant velocity elevations in the celiac artery at rest, further increasing with end expiration—an indicative finding of MALS. He was referred to gastroenterology for further evaluation of other, more common causes of abdominal pain.
During subsequent months, the patient underwent a comprehensive gastroenterological workup, which included negative celiac antibodies, normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate, normal C-reactive protein, and esophagogastroduodenoscopy. The endoscopy revealed normal findings in the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum, with biopsies indicating minimal evidence of acid reflux but did not otherwise explain his periumbilical pain. The patient trialed esomeprazole for acid reflux with minimal improvement observed. The gastroenterology team suggested trying sertraline or amitriptyline for neuropathic gastrointestinal pain, but the family declined this option. Instead, they opted for conservative management of MALS, focusing on non-operative treatment through endoscopic ultrasound celiac plexus block. Post-treatment follow-up will determine whether surgical management is necessary in the absence of significant symptom improvement.