A 47-year-old male was admitted to our orthopedic department for bilateral knee pain and preoperative fixed flexion contracture of 90°. He had been unable to walk for nearly 30 years. On examination, severe bilateral flexion deformity of the knee was observed . The range of motion was −90° of extension and 135° of flexion in bilateral knees. The American Knee Society knee score (KSS) was 19. Plain radiography revealed almost complete disappearance of the knee joint space . In addition, range of motion was normal in both ankles. The diagnosis of equines could be excluded.
The patient’s medical history revealed that he had been admitted to another hospital for a high spiking fever, salmon-colored rash and bilateral knee and wrist pain when he was 17 years old. The hematological studies showed leukocytosis (25,300 cells/mm3) and negative findings for rheumatoid factor. By the time he was 19 years old, the knee flexion contracture had progressed, and a fixed flexion contracture of 90° was present. We found that the patient’s past symptoms were consistent with Yamaguchi’s criteria for AOSD. The diagnosis of AOSD is based on clinical findings . It requires compliance with Yamaguchi’s criteria, which have a sensitivity of 96.2 % and a specificity of 92.1 % for AOSD. The major criteria include a fever, arthralgia, rash and leukocytosis. The minor criteria include sore throat, lymphadenopathy, liver dysfunction and negative findings for rheumatoid factor . After careful scrutiny of the patient’s medical history, we found that he satisfied four major and one minor diagnostic criteria based on the Yamaguchi criteria. He was therefore diagnosed with AOSD.
Our treatment protocol consisted of initial TKA, the application of serial casting, and knee mobilization. At first, bilateral arthroplasty was performed to avoid the difficulty of rehabilitating the first knee in the presence of a severe flexion contracture in the second knee. Both TKAs were implanted using midline incision and parapatellar approach, with posterior stabilized implants (NexGen, Zimmer, Warsaw, IN). To increase the extension gap, an additional 6 mm distal femoral resection and an additional 4 mm tibial resection were created. Removal of posterior osteophytes and posterior capsular release were performed after the bony cuts had been made. However, after performing these steps, it was noted that the knees still did not fully extend. Residual flexion contractures of 10° were present. Oral tramadol (37.5 mg) and paracetamol (325 mg) was given every eight hours for ten days postoperatively to reduce the patient’s pain and inflammatory reaction. Next, serial casting was used to achieve full extension for four weeks after surgery. The legs were immobilized in a long leg cast from the thigh to ankle. A posterior-based wedge was made at the level of the knee joint every two or three days, opening the cast by approximately 5° with plaster spreaders, and then completing the cast . In this way, the residual flexion contractures were corrected gradually. This serial casting was done continuously during the first four weeks. Finally, knee mobilization using a continuous passive motion machine was performed twice a day for one week after the casts were removed. The range of motion of the bilateral knees had improved to 0° of extension and 110° of flexion at five weeks postoperatively. The KSS score for the bilateral knees was 70. No complications of the serial casting were noted. The radiographs revealed satisfactory alignment of the prostheses . After discharge home, the patient received outpatient physical therapy services to prevent recurrence of the knee flexion contracture. At the three-month follow-up, the patient could ambulate without the use of assisting devices and was able to walk up and down stairs in a reciprocal manner. The range of motion was 0° of extension and 120° of flexion. The KSS score was 74. A recent two-year follow-up confirmed that the patient’s recovery was satisfactory and that the patient was still doing well in terms of the movement of both knees. The range of motion was 0° of extension and 120° of flexion. No recurrent flexion contracture was observed. The KSS score was 78.