A 22-year-old male was admitted to our electrophysiology department for an EP study. For more than 10 years, he had been experiencing WCT of unclear aetiology leading to syncope. An EP study had been offered at different times but was rejected. The patient’s parents who were taking medical decisions at that time were very reluctant towards an EP study as they were afraid of procedure-related complications. However, in view of the potentially life-threatening event (after a first syncope while exercising 4 years earlier), the parents accepted implantation of a subcutaneous implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD; SX-RX 1010, Cameron Health Inc.) in 2013. Since ICD implantation, multiple WCT episodes were recorded and shocked by the device . Most episodes developed when exercising. During the episodes, he experienced dizziness, rapid heartbeats, heavy sweating, and intense fear. Otherwise, he reported hardly any physical complaints, but over time felt highly restricted in his daily living because of the fear of receiving shocks at any moment. The patient had no other pre-existing medical conditions and denied use of alcohol and illicit drugs. The only medication he was taking on a regular basis was the beta-adrenergic blocking agent bisoprolol (2.5 mg bid). His family history was unremarkable with respect to sudden cardiac death (SCD), cardiac arrhythmias, or channelopathies. Accordingly, electrocardiograms (ECGs) obtained from both parents were unremarkable. Exercise stress tests and Holter ECGs were performed without significant findings. A genetic testing had been scheduled but was not attended. He had undergone magnetic resonance imaging in 2013 with no evidence of a structural heart disease, in particular no signs of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
After several years of receiving numerous ICD shocks, the patient felt increasingly frustrated with his situation. As a 22-year-old adult, he came back to the suggestion of an EP study and gave his consent.
Physical examination on the day of admission revealed no significant findings and lab values were normal apart from mild hypokalaemia. An ECG was recorded showing sinus bradycardia without signs of pre-excitation, ST-segment alterations, or a prolongation of the QT interval . Echocardiography displayed a normal left ventricular systolic function.
The patient underwent an EP study on the following day. Intracardiac electrogram tracings [coronary sinus (CS) 1/2] during sinus rhythm revealed premature ventricular activation of the lateral mitral annulus . This initial finding indicated the presence of a left-sided accessory atrioventricular pathway (AP). Accordingly, direct pacing at CS 1/2 produced an increasing degree of pre-excitation . Rate incremental ventricular pacing resulted in a distal to proximal atrial activation sequence with the earliest site of atrial activation at the distal CS due to a non-decremental conduction of the AP . The anterograde effective refractory period of the AP was defined as the longest basic cycle length which failed to conduct with pre-excitation and yielded 240 ms in the patient indicating an AP with an increased risk of SCD. Ultimately, orthodromic atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT) without aberrancy and a cycle length of 316 ms was induced. Neither atrial fibrillation (AF) nor a WCT were inducible during the EP study.
Using a retrograde transaortic approach, the AP was localized using a mapping catheter by displaying the earliest ventricular activation in pre-excited sinus rhythm. Electroanatomic mapping denoted activation of the left ventricle by conduction via the AP as well as impulse propagation (Video 1). Radiofrequency energy was delivered at the site of earliest ventricular activation at the lateral mitral annulus (CS 1/2), resulting in disappearance of pre-excitation . Programmed ventricular stimulation did not induce ventricular tachycardia (VT).
Follow-up on the day after the procedure revealed no complications and the patient was discharged without medications. An appointment for the ICD explantation was scheduled to take place 3 months after the EP procedure.