A 34 year old woman was admitted to the hospital with dyspnea, submandubular gland tumefaction and parotid swelling.
On physical examination, we found the tumefaction of the parotid and the submandibular gland. The respiratory frequency was 24 cycles per minute. The rest of the clinical examination was without abnormalities.
Laboratory results were as follows: Haemoglobin 10 g/dl, white blood cell count (WBC) 11 200/mm3, platelets 450 000/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 76 mm/h, calcium 12 mg/dl (normal: 9-11 mg/dl ). Muscle enzymes, ANA, rheumatoid factor, VDRL, and complement components C3 and C4 were negative. The angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level was 135 UI/L.
Chest radiography showed "Bilateral interstitial involvement". Thoracoabdominal CT scan showed "Multiple mediastinal and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, with moderate hepatomegaly". The respiratory functional test showed the presence of a restrictive syndrome.
The lung fibroscopy was normal. The biopsy confirmed the presence of a non caseating granuloma in the bronchial mucosa. The bronchoalveolar lavage showed a predominantly lymphocytic cell with the elevated Cd4/CD8 ratio.
Ophthalmological examination confirmed the presence of dry eye syndrome. There was no uveitis. The salivary gland biopsy confirmed the presence of a granuloma without caseous necrosis.
Sarcoidosis was diagnosed, and the patient received prednisolone 60 mg/day. After 1 month of treatment, all complaints have been resolved.
Seven months later, when she received 10 mg/day of prednisolone, she consulted for respiratory distress. Her left brachial and radial pulses were absent, and her blood pressure was 180/120 mm Hg as measured from the left arm. Bruits were audible over the course of the left carotid artery and the left and the right subclavian artery. The patient had elevated ERS (100 mm/H).
An Ultra Sound Colour Doppler (USCD) was performed showing a circumferential parietal swelling interesting the left subclavian artery reducing his superficies of 76%, demodulating the Doppler spectrum and edema of the vessl wall[Figure ]. These data were confirmed by MR-agniography.
We diagnosed the patient having TA associated with sarcoidosis. She received prednisolone 40 mg/day with Methotrexate 10 mg/week and amlodipine 5 mg/say.
As a response to treatment, blood pressure was normal 2 weeks after. The USCD control confirmed the therapeutic benefice showing a reduction of the parietal anomalies.