An 81-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with general malaise and brown urine. He had previous histories of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and chronic renal failure. Laboratory blood examinations revealed elevated levels of serum aspartate aminotransferase (497 U/L, normal 13–16), alanine aminotransferase (703 U/L, normal 10–42), total bilirubin (15.3 mg/dl, normal 0.4–1.5), and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (196 U/ml, normal 0–37).
Computed tomography (CT) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiography revealed a protruded tumor arising from the left wall of the common hepatic duct with dilation of the intrahepatic bile duct . CT imaging also showed regional lymph node swelling in the hepatoduodenal ligament and supra-pancreatic area. Tumor invasion to the right hepatic artery was not identified, and distant metastasis was not detected by fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography. Endoscopic biliary drainage was performed to relieve jaundice and an endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage tube was placed into the left hepatic bile duct. Repeated endoscopic bile duct biopsies revealed malignant epithelial cells without glandular differentiation and also that the main tumor was located in the common hepatic duct. Mapping biopsy showed that the tumor extended from the hepatic duct confluence to the intrapancreatic bile duct around the superior edge of the pancreas (Bismuth type II).
The patient needed additional endoscopic biliary drainage due to the insufficient alleviation of jaundice. A preoperative tumor assessment and the amelioration of jaundice required 5 weeks, and the tumor increased in size from 23 to 45 mm during this period .
Before surgery, the indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min (ICG–15R) was 13.7% and ICG-K 0.124. The calculated remnant right liver volume was 55% by three-dimensional CT with Synapse Vincent (Fujifilm, Tokyo, JAPAN). We then planned (1) segmental bile duct resection (BDR), (2) left hemihepatectomy with extrahepatic bile resection, or (3) subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy based on the intraoperative frozen section diagnosis of the bile duct stump because of the age of the patient.
During surgery, we initially collected samples of white liver nodules and para-aortic lymph nodes (station 16b1 int.), which were confirmed to be negative for malignancy in the intraoperative rapid diagnosis. After dissection of the lymph nodes in the hepatoduodenal ligament and superior- and inferior-pancreatic area, the intrapancreatic bile duct was resected 2 cm from the duodenal papilla. The distal duct stump was also negative for malignancy. We then resected the right and left hepatic bile ducts, and invasive cancer was intraoperatively confirmed in the left hepatic duct only. Left hemi-hepatectomy and caudate lobectomy with bile duct reconstruction were performed.
Pathological findings showed that the protruding nodular tumor (50 × 35 mm) was located from the common hepatic duct to the left intrahepatic bile duct . The tumor mainly contained pleomorphic mononuclear cells indicating undifferentiated carcinoma (more than 95% of the tumor, highlighted in red in Fig. C), and well-moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma was only observed around the periphery of the tumor (highlighted in blue in Fig. C). Biliary intraepithelial neoplasm-3 was noted from the left intrahepatic bile duct to the cystic duct (Bismuth type IIIb). There was lympho-vascular infiltration, but no lymph node metastasis. In an immunohistological analysis, the undifferentiated component was strongly positive for vimentin and weakly positive for CK AE1/AE3 , but negative for Periodic Acid Schiff staining. The pathological diagnosis according to the WHO classification of tumors and the TNM staging system of UICC 8th edition was Stage II (T2a N0 M0) perihilar anaplastic undifferentiated carcinoma [, ].
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged from hospital 23 days after surgery. One month after surgery, he was re-admitted to the hospital with cholangitis. CT imaging at that time showed liver nodules suggestive of multiple liver metastases. Due to his poor general condition, the patient was unable to receive chemotherapy for recurrence. Three months after surgery, he died of the disease.