A 44-year-old female presented at our emergency department with a rapidly progressive sensory loss of the lower limbs combined with severe balance difficulties.
Her medical history included atopic eczema, gastric banding and plastic surgery for breast augmentation. Both surgeries had taken place almost 20 years ago. There were no relevant findings in her family history. Aside from vitamin B and folic acid, started recently because of the symptoms, she denied taking any prescription drugs.
Three months earlier, her symptoms had started with paresthesia and dysesthesia in her feet and lower part of her legs, more prominent on the right side. The nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) were only minimally abnormal with an increased latency of the sural nerve sensory nerve action potential (SNAP). Given her complaints, there was a suspicion of a sensory polyneuropathy. The initial work-up before presentation at our hospital, showed a mild lymphocytosis (3.42; reference value 1–3.2 × 103/mm3) and serum folic acid deficiency (2.5; reference value 3.9–26.8 μg/L). Vitamin B12 was normal (369 nmol/L, reference values 197–779 nnmol/L). Vitamin B and folate substitution were started. Contrast-enhanced lumbar and cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not show any abnormalities. A brain MRI with gadolinium was also normal. Two months after the onset of symptoms, a lumbar puncture was performed, which showed a marginally elevated white blood cell count (7.2; reference value 0–5/μL), normal glucose (52, reference value 40-70 mg/dL), in the absence of protein elevation (74.1; reference value 64-83 g/L). However, there was a raised IgG index (0.97; reference value 0.3–0.77) and three supplementary bands in the cerebrospinal fluid on iso-electrical focusing. Because an underlying autoimmune disease was suspected, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were checked. Erythrocyte sedimentation appeared slightly elevated, whereas ANCA and ANA were found to be negative, aside from cytoplasmic staining with AC 18 pattern on indirect immunofluorescence on HEp-2 cells. Vitamin B6 level was elevated (1430 nmol/L, reference values 35–110 nmol/L), but was measured after starting substitution and not-fasting.
Three months after onset, the patient was referred to our tertiary centre for further work-up. By this time, the paresthesia in her distal lower limbs had evolved to a numbness of both legs, chest and back. Since a few weeks her hands were also involved in an asymmetrical and patchy pattern. Meanwhile, she had developed a severe gait instability, especially when walking barefoot or in the dark, resulting in multiple falls. Apart from fluctuating paresthesia in her face (especially in the left lower cheek), there was no other cranial nerve involvement: no diplopia, no dysarthria or dysphagia, no signs of facial palsy.
At first clinical evaluation, she had normal strength in both upper and lower limbs, but global areflexia. She had severe sensory deficits with almost absent vibration sensation, impaired proprioception and absent graphesthesia in the lower limbs. She indicated a sensory level around Th 7–8. There was severe ataxia in both legs, both on heel-to-shin test as on walking. She was unstable, needed support and had to look at her feet, which exhibited a pseudo-athetosis when walking.
The patient was admitted to our neurology department for further work-up. Given the new sensory symptoms in the face and the sensory level, neuroimaging was repeated with contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain and the full spine without signs of central demyelination or peripheral inflammation.
Nerve conduction studies now showed bilateral absent sural nerve SNAPs and undetectable right ulnar nerve SNAP. Right median nerve SNAP was still normal, but right radial and left ulnar SNAP were markedly reduced (with an amplitude of respectively 4 μV and 6 μV, normal values > 11 μV). Motor responses were normal, as well as needle EMG findings and blink reflex. Somatosensory evoked potentials showed a normal N8-latency (at the popliteal fossa), no detectable responses in the lumbar region (possibly constitution-related), an absent cortical response from the right leg and a delayed cortical response from the left leg. In summary, electrophysiological testing revealed a non-length dependent, asymmetric loss of SNAPs, best in keeping with a sensory ganglionopathy.
MRI full spine did not show the dorsal column atrophy that is sometimes seen in the chronic phase of a ganglionopathy [, ], but this could well be due to the early timing of the imaging in the disease course.
Laboratory results were negative for paraneoplastic antibodies, anti-ganglioside antibodies, anti-aquaporin 4/anti-neuromyelitis optica (NMO), anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) and coeliac antibodies. Further, we noted a HbA1C of 5.8%, with normal serum protein electrophoresis and copper levels. Following vitamin levels were normal (i.e. vitamin B1 252 nmol/L reference values 67-200 nmol/L; B12 542 ng/L, reference values 197–771 ng/L; folic acid > 20 μg/L; vitamin E 1.4 mg/dL, reference values 0.5–1.8 mg/dL), as well as homocysteine and methylmalonic acid. Vitamin B6 was somewhat elevated (vitamin B6 585 nmol/L, reference values 35-110 nmol/L), but likely not-fasting. These levels were measured while already taking vitamin supplements (combination of folic acid and vitamin B1-B2-B6-B12). Serology for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Hepatitis (A/B/C/E), Herpes Simplex, Varicella Zoster, Borrelia/Lyme, and Syphilis were all negative. Auto-immune screening for rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, ANA, ANCA, cryoglobulinemia and complement levels revealed atypical ANCA (4+) and ANA (2+) with further extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) differentiation positive for anti-Ro52 antibodies.
A clinical evaluation by the rheumatologists was requested, given the anti-Ro52 antibodies and suspicion of SS. There were no signs suggestive of connective tissue disease, e.g. no Raynaud phenomenon, arthralgia/myalgia, glandular swelling, sicca (xerostomia, xerophthalmia), cough, dyspnoea, nor signs of autonomic dysfunction. Ultrasonography revealed heterogenicity of the submandibular gland. Subsequent biopsy of the minor salivary glands confirmed a focus score of more than one, a histopathological finding compatible with SS . Additionally, performing a Schirmer’s test could have been useful, though the patient was not open to this.
A full body positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed enlarged lymph nodes extending from the left axilla to the left side of the left breast prosthesis and alongside the left thoracic internal artery . Additional dedicated ultrasonography confirmed leakage of silicone of both breast implants and enlarged lymph nodes compatible with silicone lymphadenopathy. Biopsy confirmed lymphoid tissue surrounding silicone material and could exclude a lymphoma .
The ruptured breast implants were resected 1 month after the presentation at our emergency department. A few days later, our patient reported an improvement of her general well-being and a stagnation of the - until then - progressive sensory complaints. The reported paresthesia in her face disappeared before any additional therapy was started, but the overall clinical picture remained stable over the next month. Vitamin B supplementation was stopped. After exclusion of malignancies in the resected breast tissue, oral corticosteroid therapy was initiated (at a dose of 60 mg prednisolone a day) in association with hydroxychloroquine 200 mg two times daily and methotrexate 15 mg once a week with folic acid 1 mg daily for 6 days a week. Preventive measures with a proton-pump inhibitor, calcium supplement, Vit D, trimethoprim/sulphametoxazole 160 mg/800 mg (3 times a week) and weekly bisphosphonates were added to her therapy. Steroids were tapered by 10 mg a month. At 3 months follow-up, she did not report new improvement of her symptoms. However, repeated NCS did show a clear amelioration with presence of sural and ulnar SNAP and a normalised radial SNAP. Further follow-up is necessary to show whether there will be clinical improvement.