The patient is a 44-year-old woman who had bioprosthetic TV replacement for endocarditis in 2001. In October 2019, she developed dyspnoea and was diagnosed with AF and was cardioverted and started on warfarin. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) at that time at her local institution demonstrated a mean gradient (MG) of 9 mmHg, but TS was considered only ‘mild’. In March 2020, the patient developed neck and left arm swelling and pain as well as acute worsening in her dyspnoea. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) at her local institution revealed PE, but also RA thrombus with massive retrograde extension into the SVC, left brachiocephalic, subclavian, and axillary veins . On TTE, MG was 10 mmHg and TS was labelled as ‘moderate’. The patient was switched to Rivaroxaban. Left arm swelling improved, but dyspnoea worsened, in parallel with more oedema and abdominal distension. Plan for evaluation at specialized Valve Center was planned but not followed through due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The patient was referred to our institution for urgent consultation in April 2020. In reviewing outside CTA and TTE, we were concerned for severe bioprosthetic TS. The patient was admitted to the hospital and was switched to intravenous unfractionated heparin. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a heavily calcified, immobile bioprosthesis with critical stenosis (MG: 11 mmHg) and a massively enlarged RA compressing the LA into a small conduit . Colour Doppler on TTE suggested only mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR), but the presence of an enlarged right ventricle together with the triangular-shaped, low-velocity tricuspid regurgitant signal raised the suspicion of significant TR.
Four-dimensional CTA showed persistent large RA thrombus, but significant improvement in the clot burden in the subclavian vein and pulmonary arteries. There was no significant coronary artery disease. The bioprosthesis was calcified and immobilized in a partially open / partially closed position . The valve area at maximal diastolic opening was 1.2 cm2, consistent with severe stenosis and 1.05 cm2 at end-systole, consistent with severe regurgitation . Imaging revealed no thrombus in the inferior vena cava, hepatic, or iliofemoral veins. Thrombophilia testing was unremarkable.
Due to persistent RA thrombus and the need to reduce the volume of the giant RA, surgical intervention was recommended. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography showed significant TR, presence of RA thrombus , and immobile prosthetic cusps . The RA pressure was massively elevated at 24 mmHg. The explanted valve appeared severely calcified . A 31 mm bioprosthesis was implanted, the RA thrombi were removed, and RA size was reduced.
Post-operative TTE showed excellent tricuspid bioprosthetic function (MG: 2 mmHg). The patient’s overall status and dyspnoea rapidly improved after the surgery, and she was started on warfarin in the setting of the new bioprosthetic valve.