A 64-year-old man was admitted to our department for abdominal distension. Two months ago, he experienced abdominal pain for 1 day and was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis in another hospital. There was no cystic lesion of pancreas at that time. The patient did not present with cutaneous or sclera icterus, fever, melena, swallowing difficulties or diarrhea but did present with weight loss of 2 kg. After admission, the physical examination showed that the patient had tenderness in the upper abdomen, and a mass approximately 5.0 × 6.0 cm in size and soft in texture could be felt in the upper abdomen. The results of other physical examinations were unremarkable. He denied alcohol use or any history of chronic or significant medical or family illnesses. After admission, laboratory tests showed the following: amylase 400 U/L (normal, 0–40 U/L), lipase 403 U/L (normal, 0–60 U/L), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) 347 U/mL (normal, < 39 U/mL), and albumin 31.4 g/L. Other routine laboratory tests did not indicate any abnormalities.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed pancreatitis with a pseudocyst (diameter 7 cm), in which there was fluid . In the cyst, no necrotic tissue was found and the boundary was clear. Additionally, no obvious low-density mass was found around the cyst and the tail of pancreas was atrophied. The diameter of the pancreatic duct was approximately 0.45 cm. There were no enlarged lymph nodes in the upper abdomen. In addition, the CT scan of the chest was normal. MRCP revealed that there was no debris in the cyst, the pancreatic duct in the head of pancreas was not dilated, and the main pancreatic duct was not connected with the cyst.
Gastric endoscopy showed no abnormal findings in the upper gastrointestinal tract. During the linear EUS examination, a large pseudocyst was observed in the body of the pancreas with a maximum US cross-section of approximately 5.4 × 5.2 cm. The margin of the cyst was clear and no blood flow was detected with color Doppler ultrasonography. Some hyperechoic floccules were observed in the cyst and there was septum in the lumen. There was no debris in the cyst, and the cyst fluid aspirated by EUS-FNA was also without debris. There was no obvious dilatation of the pancreatic duct. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) was performed. The exact site of EUS-FNA was the posterior wall of the upper part of the stomach, and the distance between the ultrasonic probe and the cyst was no more than 1 cm. After puncturing the cystic lesion, the stylet was removed, and 10 mL of negative pressure suction was applied within the lesion. The syringe was filled with brown liquid. We collected 20 ml of fluid for the examination of amylase, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and CA19-9. We also performed EUS-FNA to obtain specimens for histopathology and placed a plastic stent for drainage of the pseudocyst through the pancreas and stomach . Puncture fluid examination revealed the following: CA19-9 > 12,000 U/ml, CEA 7097.42 ng/ml, amylase 27,145.3 U/L, and lipase > 6000 U/L.
After EUS-FNA, pathological cytology revealed an atypical cell mass, and cancer was suspected. Based on the immunohistochemistry results, CK ( +), P40 ( +), p63 ( +), CK7 (-) and Ki-67 (30%), the patient was diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) .
The patient refused surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. After drainage, the cyst shrank, but the patient died 3 months after diagnosis, due to liver metastasis and multiple organ failure.