We describe the case of a 79-year-old woman, with a history of atrial fibrillation, who had undergone left atrial appendage (LAA) closure device implantation due to contraindication for anticoagulation because of a previous subdural haemorrhage. She was admitted for elective mitral valve replacement due to asymptomatic severe primary mitral regurgitation caused by anterior veil prolapse. An echocardiogram performed a month before showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 56% and normal LV diameters. CT-angiography prior to surgery showed absence of coronary lesions. On admission, cardiac auscultation revealed a systolic murmur in mitral focus at the apex. Lung auscultation was normal. Prior to the surgery, the patient was on acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg/day. Cardiac surgery was uneventful. Since valve repair was not considered feasible, a Magna Ease biological mitral valve was implanted, maintaining the LAA closure device. Intra-operative transoesophageal echocardiography showed normal functioning of the prosthesis and extracorporeal circulation was concluded. Only low doses of noradrenaline (0.05 μg/kg/min) were required after extracorporeal circulation.
On arrival to the intensive care unit (ICU), the patient presented with cardiogenic shock: she presented cold extremities and oliguria, systolic blood pressure was 80 mmHg and blood analysis showed metabolic acidosis and elevated serum lactate; therefore, requiring vasoactive agents (noradrenaline at 0.1 μg/kg/min and dobutamine at 5 μg/kg/min). An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed atrial flutter with a rapid ventricular rate (150 b.p.m.), which was electrically cardioverted. An ECG performed after cardioversion showed inverted T waves in precordial leads and pulmonary congestion was evidenced on chest X-ray . The findings of an echocardiogram showed severe LV dysfunction (LVEF 20%) with mid to distal diffuse hypokinesia that was more severe in the anterior and septal walls, which were almost akinetic. Contractility was much better in all basal segments (, Video S). Mitral prosthesis function was normal. Owing to a suspected coronary complication secondary to cardiac surgery, the patient underwent urgent coronary angiography, which showed absence of significant coronary lesions (, Video S). Troponin I levels were elevated to 0.12 ng/mL (normal value <0.08). Her haemodynamic status was compromised for the following 48 h, during which time vasoactive drugs (noradrenaline ranging from 0.1 to 0.2 μg/kg/min and dobutamine ranging from 5 to 7 μg/kg/min, adjusted to haemodynamic status) and intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation were needed. Daily echocardiographic evaluations showed similar images that resembled the first one, with severe LV dysfunction and regional WMA in the mid to distal segments. After 48 h, the haemodynamic status of the patient suddenly improved, leading to progressive suspension of supportive measures; echocardiography at 48 h showed partial recovery of LV systolic function, with an LVEF of 45–50% and mild paradoxical septal motion (, Video S). The electrocardiographic changes also reverted . Altogether, the clinical picture of the patient was interpreted as a stress cardiomyopathy occurring in the postoperative period of mitral valve replacement surgery. After 1 week, the patient was discharged. Treatment at discharge was acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg/day. One month later, she was asymptomatic and had low to normal LVEF (50%).