A 71-year-old male subject presented to us in very poor general condition (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 3) with a history of hoarseness (3 months) and dysphagia (1 month). Clinically, the left supraclavicular lymph node (3 × 3 cms) was palpable. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen demonstrated extensive swelling of the mediastinal lymph nodes extending from 4 cm above the level of the upper margin of the sternum to 2 cm below the carina, the esophagus was compressed and trachea shifted to the right of the midline. Primary esophageal tumor was not separately identifiable from the mediastinal lymph nodes. Lymph nodes in the superior and middle mediastinum measured approximately 12 × 7.7 × 6.0 cm . Left supraclavicular (3.3 × 3.0 cm) and abdominal node (1.9 × 1.5 cm) metastases were also observed (,). Esophagoscopy demonstrated a 10 mm pigmented polypoidal lesion (25 cm from the inscisor) and multiple pigmented flat lesions . Esophageal narrowing due to extrinsic compression was seen from 19 cm to 24 cm. Histopathology of the biopsy specimen from the esophagus showed diffuse proliferation of atypical polygonal cells with hyperchromatic oval to round nuclei, eosinophilic cytoplasm, and prominent nucleoli, accompanied by various amounts of melanin pigments and immunohistochemically - positive for S-100 protein. These findings were all compatible with malignant melanoma of the esophagus. A final diagnosis malignant melanoma of the esophagus T4N1M1a, stage IVa (UICC-TNM classification ) was made.
Due to the fact that PS was 3, palliative radiotherapy was offered for palliation of dysphagia and tracheal compression and chemotherapy was not administrated. He received radiation therapy for primary tumor and mediastinal and left supraclavicular lymph nodes in a dose of 45 Gy (gray) in 15 fractions over 3weeks at 5 fractions per week, using anteroposterior and posteroanterior field with10-MV photon. Patient tolerated the radiotherapy well. The patient’s dysphagia resolved completely shortly after radiotherapy. 1 week after radiotherapy there was a marked decrease in the size of the mediastinal lymph nodes and subject improved symptomatically. The axial dimensions of the lymph node were maximal around the level of the aortic arch where it measured approximately 4.5 × 3.5 cm 1 week following completion of radiotherapy . Patient had sustained palliation i.e, continuous relief of dysphagia for 4 months after radiotherapy.