A 48-year-old male patient presented to our clinic with chest and back pain that had persisted for 13 h. The patient complained of sudden onset of pain in the precordial region more than 13 h prior during the course of a meal, which was persistent and dramatic, and then radiated to the abdomen and waist, with profuse sweating, posterior abdominal distension, vomiting of approximately 200 ml of dark brown fluid, no clots, no syncope, no diarrhea, no cough, or expectoration. The etiology of this condition remains unclear. The patient denied any history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, tumor, trauma, or previous surgery, and had a 30-year history of smoking.
Physical examination revealed an acutely ill face, clear consciousness, poor spirit, heart rate of 125 beats/min, blood pressure of 210/94 mmHg, distended abdomen, drum sounds on percussion, no tenderness or rebound tenderness, and the presence of femoral and dorsalis pedis pulses. According to the aortic dissection detection risk scoring (ADD-RS) system proposed by the aortic diagnosis and treatment guidelines in 2014, ADD-RS = 1. The etiology of the patient was unknown; clinicians could not rule out aortic dissection, urinary calculi, or other related diseases; therefore, echocardiography and abdominal urinary ultrasonography were performed on the patient. Echocardiography showed normal findings, and abdominal ultrasonography revealed a mass in the left adrenal region (72 × 57 mm, ). Contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed that the intimal flap moved inward from the descending part of the thoracic aorta to the level of the bilateral common iliac arteries, the lumen showed “double-lumen” changes, the right renal artery opened into the false lumen, and the left renal artery opened into the true lumen, consistent with aortic dissecting aneurysm (Stanford type B). A soft tissue mass was observed in the left adrenal gland, with uneven density, approximately 61 × 53 mm in size, with a clear boundary, and with significant enhancement after contrast-enhanced scanning in which there was necrosis; pheochromocytoma was first considered . The patient subsequently underwent aortic computed tomographic angiography (CTA), which revealed Stanford TBAD . Laboratory tests showed a 24-h urine vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) level of 20.51 mg/24 h (reference value: ≤12 mg/24 h) and a D-dimer level of 6.75 mg/L (reference range 0.0–0.5 mg/L).
Nitroglycerin and esmolol hydrochloride were administered to the patient for antihypertensive treatment after admission and was later replaced with a phentolamine drip due to persistent blood pressure fluctuation. Forty-eight hours after the onset of symptoms, blood pressure control was relatively stable after treatment, and because the patient developed abdominal pain and distension, vomiting of dark brown fluid, and the occult blood test was positive (+ + +) in vomitus, the clinician was concerned about aortic dissection involving visceral malperfusion. After communicating with the patient and his family, the patient actively requested surgery; therefore, thoracic endovascular aortic repair was performed.
Due to concern regarding adrenergic storm caused by intraoperative pheochromocytoma secreting a large amount of catecholamines, a phentolamine drip was given for active antihypertensive treatment before surgery, metoprolol was given to control heart rate, and preoperative blood transfusion preparation was actively performed. The phentolamine drip was continued during the operation and was closely observed by the anesthesiologist, without signs of hemodynamic instability. During the procedure, we sealed the dissection of the descending aorta, with good stent curvature. Multiple digital subtraction angiography (DSA) at the distal end of the stent revealed difficulty in opening the true lumen at the distal end of the graft. The patient's family was informed, and partial artificial blood vessel replacement of the abdominal aorta was recommended. Because of the high surgical risk, the patient's family refused, and requested conservative treatment. Nitroglycerine and esmolol were continued as antihypertensive treatments after surgery, and the blood pressure was stable at 101–154/51–80 mmHg.
After the patient was stable for 14 days, the adrenal mass was treated in the urology department and laparoscopic resection of the adrenal mass was performed. The postoperative tumor pathology report included (left adrenal gland) pheochromocytoma with focal hemorrhage, degeneration, and necrosis (size 6.5 × 5.5 × 3.5 cm). Immunohistochemical staining showed chromogranin A (CgA) (+), S-100 protein (S-100) (+), synaptophysin (Syn) (+), CD56 (+), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (−), vimentin (+), GFAP (−), and Ki-67 (+5%) . The patient recovered well after surgery; blood pressure and 24-h urine VMA levels returned to normal after re-examination, and the patient was discharged. The patient tolerated both procedures well. When the pheochromocytoma was removed, the improvement in blood pressure was significant, and the patient eventually stopped all antihypertensive drugs. Six months after surgery, we performed a telephone interview; the patient was in good general condition and had stable blood pressure, which was regularly reviewed at a local hospital, and he participated in light physical work five times a week.