An 81-year-old female who walked with the aid of a stick presented with left knee pain, giving way of the knee, and patellar instability while climbing stairs, all of which had persisted for 18 months.
She had fallen from the stairs and had sprained her left knee 18 months previously. Since then, her symptoms had gradually worsened. Range of motion (ROM) in her left knee was 15° to 80° of flexion due to apprehension and pain around the medial patella. The lateral patellar apprehension test was positive.
On initial examination, roentgenogram showed lateral patellar subluxation, a Q angle of 0°, congruence angle of −35°, and sulcus angle of 153° . By contrast, roentgenogram taken 2 years previously during a medical check-up of the knee had shown no remarkable findings. The Kellgren–Lawrence grade for her knee had been 0, with a femorotibial angle of 175°, Q angle of 3°, congruence angle of 0°, and sulcus angle of 145° .
T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed a slack and torn MPFL at the femoral attachment . Computed tomography (CT) showed 8° of tibial external rotation.
Her Kujala score was 66 points, and Barthel index score, which is used to qualify the activities of daily living (ADLs) among aged people, was 70 points (total score, 100 points).
After the initial examination, conservative therapy, including the application of a patella-medializing knee orthosis, and physiotherapy were started, but her symptoms of instability, pain, and giving way of the patella when standing up from a chair and climbing stairs did not resolve even after 3 months of follow-up. We noticed that her hip joint was externally rotated during walking, although she did not complain of any other symptoms except for those related to her left knee. However, roentgenogram of her hip joint showed narrowing of the left joint space, which was diagnosed as left hip OA . Hip ROM was 125°/75° of flexion, 40°/30° of abduction, and 45°/15° of internal rotation. The Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) hip score was 87 points (total score, 100 points), and the Harris hip score was 88 points. The patient and her family confirmed that her gait had not changed for years.
Based on the aforementioned findings, we considered that she had asymptomatic left hip OA and had injured her left MPFL during the fall from the stairs; a valgus force had been applied to her left knee, with external rotation of her left hip joint.
We performed MPFL reconstruction and lateral release to reconstruct the primary stabilizer and to achieve proximal realignment of the patella.