A 48-year-old Japanese Woman presented with a 4-month history of progressive right visual disturbance. She had no history of other diseases. Ophthalmic examination revealed decreased visual acuity in both eyes. The right visual field showed generalized depression, and the left visual field showed temporal hemianopsia. Neurological examination found no other abnormalities. Computed tomography revealed a huge sellar tumor with extensive destruction of the midline skull base . Magnetic resonance imaging showed a well-demarcated mass with maximum diameter of 82 mm, extending from the sella to the interpeduncular cistern, with extensive destruction of the clivus. The both intracavernous carotid arteries were totally encased, and the roofs of the both cavernous sinuses were elevated superiorly. The tumor appeared hypointense on T1-weighted images and isointense on T2-weighted images, with marked enhancement with gadolinium . These neuroimaging features were consistent with giant pituitary adenoma.
All biochemical parameters and hormonal status were within the normal ranges except for slight elevation of the prolactin value. Cerebral angiography demonstrated a hypervascular tumor with thick feeding arteries arising from the right meningohypophyseal trunk (MHT) . The tumor was also fed partially by the right inferolateral trunk, vidian artery, middle meningeal artery, left MHT, and inferolateral trunk. Preoperative embolization was planned based on the presumed diagnosis of giant pituitary adenoma with hypervascular nature.
Transarterial embolization was performed via the femoral approach under general anesthesia. After general heparinization, a 7-F guiding catheter was inserted into the right internal carotid artery. A Marathon microcatheter (ev3, Irvine, MN, USA) was navigated selectively over a 0.010-inch Chikai microwire (Asahi Intec, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan) into the right MHT branches supplying the tumor. Super-selective angiography demonstrated diffuse opacification of the lesion. These branches were occluded using 15 and 20% n-butyl cyanoacrylate. Post-embolization angiography demonstrated marked devascularization of the tumor . Additionally, the feeder from the right middle meningeal artery was occluded using microcoils.
The tumor removal was performed via an extended transsphenoidal route in a two-stage operation. First surgery was performed on the same day of embolization as gross decompression to avoid mass effect of the tumor due to swelling of necrotizing tissue, and the following surgery was performed 18 days later expected easier removal of the tumor by simple aspiration. And subtotal removal was achieved without complications . Intraoperative findings showed thick artery (about 500 μm of diameter) and mesh-like thinner arteries (around 150 μm of diameter) ran inside the tumor, which were coagulated and devascularized one by one. The blood loss during the two operations was 671 mL in total. The postoperative course was uneventful, with remarkable improvements in her visual acuity and visual field. The prolactin level was normalized and she had no diabetes insipidus after operation. She was discharged 12 days after the second transsphenoidal surgery. Pathological analysis confirmed the diagnosis of null cell adenoma. The surgical policy was explained preoperatively to the patients and written informed consents were obtained. Overall study design was approved by the Ethical Committee of Kohnan Hospital 2015.