The following patient information was de-identified: A 17-year-old male adolescent, who had migrated from Mesoamerica to the United States 6 weeks prior to his initial hospital presentation, was brought to the emergency room after an episode of disorganized and aggressive behavior with delusional thoughts and auditory hallucinations. Multiple collateral sources, including the patient’s mother, with whom he had lived his entire life, confirmed that he had no prior psychiatric or medical history, other than myopia. He had never required or received psychiatric treatment, and there was no pertinent family history of mental illness. Upon entering the United States as an unaccompanied minor in December 2021, he was detained for 4 weeks after crossing the Mexican border. No behavioral abnormalities were noted during this period, but the patient had a fever of 38°C (100.4°F), along with nasal congestion, cough, and headache with positive rapid antigen testing for SARS-CoV-2 and a positive rapid streptococcal antigen test. A chest x-ray presented no abnormalities. He was treated with a five-day course of oral amoxicillin and further received vaccinations against hepatitis A, hepatitis B, human papilloma virus, influenza, meningococcus, measles, mumps, rubella, tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, polio, and varicella. The patient later reported being held in social isolation for 15 days and experiencing a “change to his mind” along with problems with his memory during this period.
After being released from border detention, the patient went to stay with relatives in the United States. Initially, no behavioral or neurological abnormalities were noted; however, 1 week before his presentation, the patient likely experienced a generalized seizure with symptoms such as tongue biting, loss of consciousness, postictal paresis, and confusion, as later reported by his family. He also started to display intermittent aggression and endorsed auditory hallucinations of voices, which prompted his initial presentation to an outside hospital. The medical workup, including the basic bloodwork, urine toxicology (see ), and a non-contrast computed tomogram (CT) of the head, was unremarkable. He was initially considered to be suffering from a primary psychotic disorder, started on risperidone, and transferred to our care 4 days later.
During our initial evaluation, the patient displayed intense and labile affect and periods of confusion, loss of orientation to time, location, and situation, with aggressive behavior. He voiced subjective complaints about problems with his ‘nerves’ and ‘memory.’ He appeared internally preoccupied and reported both visual and auditory hallucinations. Additionally, he exhibited significant paranoia, believing that individuals were pursuing him with an attempt to physically and sexually assault him. These manifestations lasted for hours at a time and were interleaved with periods of linear thought process and appropriate thought content. The presentation appeared most consistent with delirium with psychotic features, although the etiology was unknown at the time. A primary psychotic disorder was considered as a differential diagnosis and had initially been suspected by the referring hospital. However, this seemed less likely on our assessment given the absence of any psychiatric history and the strong fluctuance of symptoms. The initial neurological examination performed while the patient was fully oriented and with organized thought process revealed deficits in attention and delayed recall, but no focal neurological deficits were identified. In the later hospital course, 2–3 weeks after admission , the patient further developed hypersomnolence and fluctuating catatonic features, including verbigeration, stupor, minimal verbal responsiveness, staring, posturing, negativisms, waxy flexibility, Mitgehen, and mild autonomic instability [Bush-Francis score up to 23]. In addition, he started to show neurological symptoms, specifically dysarthria and gait ataxia.
During the physical exam, a maculopapular rash was observed on the patient’s chest and back (as shown in ). This rash had started to develop approximately 2–3 weeks prior to the initial presentation. Magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium contrast (,) did not show any structural abnormalities or abnormal intracranial enhancement. An electroencephalogram with video observation was discontinued by the patient after 6 h and showed very mild diffuse polymorphic slowing with no evidence for focal cerebral dysfunction or epileptiform activity. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed normal cell counts, protein, and glucose levels , but later tested positive for autoantibodies against NMDA receptors. Further infectious, metabolic, and autoimmune serum and CSF studies provided no significant findings . CT studies of the chest and abdomen, along with a testicular ultrasound, did not indicate any underlying malignancy.
Initial treatment attempts with Risperidone, started in the outside hospital and later switched to Chlorpromazine upon admission to our unit, resulted in modest improvements of agitation without major changes in psychotic symptoms . Due to the reported occurrence of a generalized seizure prior to hospitalization, valproic acid was added to the treatment regimen in the first week of admission and continued throughout the hospitalization. The patient remained seizure-free for the remainder of the follow-up period. Lorazepam was added after the development of catatonic symptoms 3 weeks into the hospitalization, resulting in improvements in catatonia . However, residual verbigeration, posturing, rigidity, negativisms, and verbal paucity persisted. These symptoms continued to fluctuate and were not always present at the same time. The patient did not tolerate increases in the dose of Lorazepam above 1.5 mg three times daily due to excessive sedation. CSF studies were considered early in the hospital course, but the results were delayed for a number of logistical reasons. The presence of autoantibodies against NMDAR in the CSF was confirmed 3 weeks into the hospital course, and the treatment with methylprednisolone, IVIG, and rituximab was initiated and tolerated without major side effects. This led to significant improvements in neurological symptoms, behavioral control, and organization of his thought process, which enabled us to discharge the patient 5 weeks later with near-total recovery from his baseline mental functioning.
The patient was monitored for 3 more months in an outpatient setting. Olanzapine, lorazepam, and valproic acid were briefly continued after the patient was discharged from the hospital with a plan to gradually taper but then self-discontinued by the patient and his family. The patient’s psychiatric and neurological status continued to remain at his personal baseline for several weeks despite discontinuation of all medications and therefore no attempts were made to re-initiate them. He could be discharged from the outpatient clinic without any residual psychiatric or neurological symptoms in June 2022 .