A 63-year-old immunocompetent male patient with prior twice resection of a frontal atypical meningioma (central nervous system world health organization grade 2) the last of which was 3 months ago before presentation, was admitted to our department of neurosurgery from the outpatient clinic of our hospital for incidental discovery of a brain abscess on the routine postoperative enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). During the interview with the patient, he reported no recent clinical symptoms and he insisted that his postoperative course was strictly free of abnormalities. Throughout this period, he denied any infection of the surgical wound and that the stitches were removed without incident 15 days postoperatively according to conventional methods. Upon examination, the patient was awake with good orientation to time, place, and person without any neurological motor or sensory deficit. His surgical wound was strictly clean and dry without any pus or serous fluid discharge. He was in apyrexia and good general condition. Initial vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 130/82 mmHg; pulse rate, 60/min; respiratory rate, 20/min.
The MRI he brought revealed a left frontal fluid collection at the site of the old meningioma measuring 65 × 69 × 70 mm in diameter. This collection was in isosignal on T1-weighted sequence and discrete hypersignal on T2-weighted sequence with heterogeneous and peripheral enhancement after gadolinium chelate injection. On T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery image (FLAIR), it was surrounded by a perilesional edema with a significant hypersignal on diffusion weighted sequence (DWI) and without bleeding on the gradient echo sequence (GRE). All these radiological features suggested a brain abscess.
A complete assessment of the blood test revealed a normal white blood cell count of 7800 WBCs/μl (neutrophils, 54%; lymphocytes, 33%; monocytes, 8%; eosinophils, 4%; and basophils, 1%) with a C-reactive protein level below 3. The rest of the blood test was within reference ranges. The frontal chest x-ray was also normal.
An exhaustive toxicology and infectious disease investigation, including peripheral blood cultures, was conducted. These toxicological results were not revealing and proved negative for HIV, syphilis, hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
Informed consent was obtained from the patient and a routine preanaesthetic testing was performed urgently before surgery. The patient underwent, therefore, a complete evacuation of the collection, via his old craniotomy, having liquefied yellowish pus with large amounts of purulent matter with pasty consistency. The postoperative course was marked by the onset of a grade 4/5 left hemiparesis. The patient was empirically started on cefotaxime (200 mg/kg/day intravenous divided every 6 hours), metronidazole (15 mg/kg/day IV divided every 8 hours), and vancomycin (60 mg/kg by slow intravenous injection). All samples taken were transferred into several 10 ml sterile syringe and sent immediately to the microbiology laboratory. Microscopic direct examination showed an abundant inflammatory reaction and Gram staining revealed the presence of immobile bifid and not sporulated pleomorphic gram-positive bacilli. The samples were cultured on blood, chocolate and thioglycolate broth agar plates, incubated aerobically for 10 days at 37 °C, no microbial development was observed on the blood and chocolate agar plates. After a week of incubation, turbidity of the liquid medium was observed and Gram staining showed pleomorphic gram-positive bacilli that did not develop in aerobiosis concluding to a multi-resistant agent: Propionibacterium acnes. Later, the antibiogram study showed a significant sensitivity to several antibiotics including cefotaxime and vancomycin and a resistance for both kanamycin and gentamicin (minimum inhibitory concentration range respectively 2–8 and 2–4).
The patient has completed 30 days of intravenous antibiotic therapy (cefotaxime and vancomycin). He continued, therefore, to improve with complete disappearance of hemiparesis and no focal findings on examination. The final brain computed tomography revealed no signs of suppuration. The antibiotic therapy was then switched to the oral route made of ciprofloxacin (1000 mg/day divided every 12 hours) and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (2400 mg divided every 8 hours) for a period of 15 days. The patient was, therefore, discharged from our department with an outpatient clinic appointment.