The patient was a 64-year-old male laborer. He came to the emergency department of our hospital and presented with dyspnea and chest tightness due to inhaling black sewage after falling into an elevator shaft. Computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse exudation of both lungs and no craniocerebral hemorrhage. Tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were administered in the emergency room. Arterial blood gas analysis showed an oxygenation index of 86. The patient was diagnosed with aspiration pneumonia-induced ARDS and then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for treatment.
The patient was in a sedated and analgesic state at admission to the ICU. The temperature was 36.4℃, heart rate was 115 beats per minute, and blood pressure was 132/98mmHg. Heavy moist rales could be heard in both lungs. The heart rhythm is regular, with no pathological murmurs detected, and no lower limb edema observed. Arterial blood gas test showed pH of 7.32, lactate level of 2.4 mmol/L, partial pressure of oxygen 69mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 93%. The white blood cell count was 1.9 × 10^9/L, with an absolute neutrophil count of 0.9 × 10^9/L. Liver and kidney function, as well as coagulation function, were normal. No abnormalities were noted on the echocardiogram, and no inotropic support were being used. Bedside fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed a moderate amount of gray, frothy sputum in the airway. Symptomatic and supportive treatment were given, including a protective mechanical ventilation, prone-position ventilation, fiberoptic bronchoscopy, lung recruitment, fluid management, anticoagulation, and anti-infection.
On the 6th day after admission to the ICU, the patient’s body temperature and inflammatory indices increased, and his oxygenation deteriorated. CT showed that the exudation of bilateral lungs had progressed more than before, indicating that the pulmonary infection was aggravated. His antibiotics were adjusted. However, the next day, the patient’s oxygenation continued to deteriorate, urine output was significantly reduced, and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome developed. The arterial blood gas test revealed pH of 7.15, lactate level of 7.1 mmol/L, partial pressure of oxygen of 70 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 94% while the patient was on invasive mechanical ventilation with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 100%. The oxygenation index decreased to 70. Echocardiography was performed to assess cardiac function, which was found to be adequate. The ICU’s ECMO team quickly made the decision to start VV-ECMO.
During the ultrasound evaluation before ECMO cannulation, the patient had bilateral internal jugular vein thrombosis . No thrombus floating in the superior vena cava was observed. After discussion, we decided to perform VV-ECMO via femoral–axillary venous cannulation. A preoperative scanning was conducted to examine the axillary vein in the long axis and short-axis view. The long-axis, in-plane, real-time, ultrasound-guided approach was used in which the axillary vein and the entire needle were simultaneously visualized during cannulation. When introducing the needle, the progression of the needle into the vein was visualized in real time. Under the ultrasound guidance, we used Maquet HLS cannulae and percutaneous insertion kits, to perform the modified Seldinger technique for percutaneous cannulation. The proximal right femoral vein was punctured, and a 23-F drainage catheter (Maquet Cardiopulmonary AG, Rastatt, Germany) was run from the right femoral vein to the right atrium at a depth of 40 cm. Using the same technique, a 19-F return catheter (Maquet Cardiopulmonary AG, Rastatt, Germany) was inserted into the right axillary vein at a depth of 15 cm. Echocardiographic guidance was used for positioning of wire and cannula. No ventricular arrhythmias were observed during the placement of the wire and cannula. The location of the axillary vein cannula was confirmed by bedside chest X-ray . VV-ECMO pump was started at 2700 rpm, a blood flow of 3.8 L/min, an oxygen flow of 3 L/min, and oxygen concentration of 100%.
After starting VV-ECMO, we initiated ultra-protective ventilation and the ventilator settings as follows: pressure controlled ventilation mode, with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 40%, plateau pressure of 15cmH2O, positive end expiratory pressure of 5cmH2O, respiratory rate of 10 breaths per minute, and an inspiratory to expiratory ratio of 1:1. Meanwhile, concurrent continuous renal replacement therapy was started, with the dialysis catheter connected to the ECMO circuit. Unfractionated heparin is used for systemic anticoagulation to prevent thrombotic events. After ECMO initiation, the arterial blood gas test showed pH of 7.37, lactate level of 4.6 mmol/L, partial pressure of oxygen of 72mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 97%. The oxygenation index improved to 180. Vascular ultrasound showed unobstructed blood flow, and no increase in CPK level. According to the results of sputum and blood tests, it was found that the patient was infected with multiple pathogens, including klebsiella pneumoniae, stenotrophomonas maltophilia, aeromonas veronii, aspergillus flavus, among others. We administered meropenem, tigecycline, sulfamethoxazole, and voriconazole for the anti-infection. Unfortunately, the pulmonary infection continued to advance and led to septic shock, multiple-organ dysfunction, including liver failure, renal failure, and respiratory failure. In the end, the patient died of hyperkalemic ventricular fibrillation after 36 h on VV-ECMO. During the VV-ECMO support period, ECMO blood flow was stable without any complications, such as bleeding, vascular injury, or obstruction of venous return.