Our patient was a 55-year-old Sinhalese man who was admitted to a tertiary care hospital in central Sri Lanka with bilateral upper limb and lower limb numbness with associated weakness of 5 days’ duration. Five days earlier, he had felt numbness in his upper and lower limbs bilaterally and noticed weakness in his toes on the second day of illness. He had progressive weakness, and at the time of admission to the hospital, he had weakness in both upper and lower limbs. He had no associated respiratory difficulty, swallowing difficulty, or urinary or fecal incontinence or retention. He denied a history of preceding gastroenteritis and respiratory or other infections. Other than having hypertension, his past medical history was unremarkable. He denied alcohol abuse, smoking, or recent immunizations. On examination, his higher functions were normal, and he had bilateral symmetrical upper and lower limb weakness with prominent lower limb involvement. His distal muscles were weaker (grade 3) than his proximal muscles (grade 4). His limbs were flaccid, and all the reflexes were absent with flexor plantar response. He did not demonstrate any abnormalities in sensory, sphincteric, and coordination examinations. Left-sided isolated partial ptosis was noted without associated ophthalmoplegia , and his pupils were of normal size, symmetric and reactive to light. He had no associated ataxia. He did not complain of any double vision and had no associated fatigability. His other cranial nerves were also normal. His cough reflex and neck muscle power were normal with 500 ml of spontaneous tidal volume. His blood pressure was 160/100 mmHg with a pulse rate of 72 beats/minute and a respiratory rate of 12 breaths/minute. The result of his full blood count was normal with normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein concentration. His liver and renal profiles were normal. His serum potassium, calcium, and magnesium levels were normal. A nerve conduction study showed a severe demyelinating type of polyneuropathy. No decremental response to repetitive nerve stimulation was observed, and the result of single-muscle-fiber electromyogram (EMG) was negative. The patient’s ptosis did not improve with the ice pack test.
A diagnosis of GBS was made, and the patient was treated in the high-dependency unit with supportive care and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg; a standard single IVIg dose [0.4 g/kg bodyweight/day] for 5 consecutive days). Lumbar puncture done on the tenth day of the patient’s illness showed cell protein dissociation (cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] protein was 670 mg/dl with no white cells). The results of Gram staining and CSF cultures were all negative. His condition was gradually deteriorated over the next few days, and he became quadriplegic despite completing 5 days of IVIg therapy. Later he developed bi-lateral lower motor neuron–type facial nerve palsy. Apart from these, he developed difficulty in swallowing and impaired palatal movement on the 15th day of his illness with no associated other cranial nerve involvement. By this time, his left-sided ptosis had progressed to complete ptosis with a normal right eye. He never developed ophthalmoplegia or ataxia. His neck muscle power became weak, and he required mechanical ventilation due to respiratory failure. MRI of the brain, cervical and thoracic spine showed an unremarkable brain, cerebellum, brainstem, and cervical and thoracic spine with contrast enhancement in the intracranial part of the optic nerve and the Vth, VIth, VIIth, and VIIIth cranial nerve roots in the right side with left VIIth and VIIIth cranial nerves and basal leptomeninges. No mass lesion or obstruction of CSF fluid was seen. Ten days after completion of IVIg therapy, plasma paresis was arranged because of worsening of the patient’s illness. Plasma exchange was started with an exchange of about 2 L of plasma every other day for 5 days. A gradual improvement of respiratory function and left-sided ptosis was observed without significant improvement in peripheral muscle strength after the second cycle of plasma exchange, and after the fifth cycle of plasma exchange, the patient was weaned from mechanical ventilation. The neurologist’s opinion was taken, and it was decided to complete ten cycles of plasmaparesis. The patient’s peripheral muscle strength started to improve gradually with the seventh cycle of plasma exchange, when his proximal muscles of both upper and lower limbs improved earlier than his distal muscles. By this time, the patient’s left-sided ptosis was totally improved. He was given physiotherapy and discharged from the hospital after nearly 2 months of illness. He was regularly followed up in the clinic, and his proximal muscle power in both upper and lower limbs was normal when he was examined 1 month after discharge. His distal muscles' power had only slight improvement even after 4 months of illness.