A 5-year and 11-month-old boy presented with left frontal subcortical hematoma due to ruptured AVM and underwent the removal of AVM with the decompressive craniectomy [Fig. a, b]. Four months after the initial surgery, cranioplasty was performed using microporous hydroxyapatite (APACERAM®). We used two bioresorbable plates and eight screws (Lactosorb®) at the frontal region and one titanium plate at the temporal region to fix the artificial bone flap [Fig. c]. He was discharged without any neurological deficit after initial treatment.
Nine weeks after the cranioplasty, he hit his left forehead on a refrigerator. The next day, he noticed an abnormal bulge in the injured area. He took a medical check at our department because the bulging area was increased, and there were no signs of recovery. At the time of our check, his consciousness was clear, and he had no other neurologic deficit. The bulging area was located where we performed cranioplasty at the initial treatment. The bulging area was soft, and there were no signs of inflammation.
Head computed tomography (head CT) showed the fluid collection under the scalp and epidural space [Fig. ]. The CT Hounsfield number of this lesion was low; this finding was suggesting the collection of cerebrospinal fluid rather than that of bleeding. We speculated that the cerebrospinal fluid leakage had occurred due to a dural laceration at the previous surgical site. We decided to surgically repair this lesion based on our speculation.
The previous skin incision was made, and the skin flap was flipped. Though we found no fracture of the artificial bone flap, two bioresorbable plates we used previously were both fractured in the middle [Fig. a]. After taking off the bone flap, there was a dural tear at the point of the bone edge, and the cerebrospinal fluid was leaking. [Fig. b]. We repaired the injured dura with polyglycolic acid (Dura wave®) with fibrin glue. We fixed the bone flap previously used again by a titanium plate. After the repairment, the bulging area vanished, and he was discharged without any adverse effects. We have followed him for 3 years, no troubles have been seen of his skull.