A 33-year-old female, who had undergone FP as palliation for a single ventricle anomaly at 6 years of age , presented alphafetoprotein (AFP) of 3005 ng/mL. Computer Tomography (CT) showed features of CLD associated with a 3.4 x 4.5 cm solid hepatic lesion in segment V . Considering the compensated cardiocirculatory condition (normal systolic heart function, no arrhythmias, good functional capacity) and the CLD grading (Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score: 9, Child-Turcotte-Pugh stage: A) a LLR was planned.
The patient was placed in supine position, with her legs apart to apply the French position and the surgeon stood between the patient’s legs. Four trocars (two 11 mm, one 12 mm, one 5 mm) were placed into the abdomen as shown in . After achieving a predetermined pressure of 10 mmHg, a 30-degree endoscope was inserted and a cirrhotic liver with small amount of ascites was visualized. The intraoperative ultrasound of the liver confirmed a 4 x 4.5 cm lesion of segment V near by the gallbladder and multiple regenerative nodules not suspicious of malignancy. Due to the close proximity of the lesion to the gallbladder, a conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy was carried out.
With the assist of intraoperative ultrasound, an inner line was made on the liver surface with diathermy to mark the periphery of the tumor. Then, a radiofrequency ablation (RFA) with single needle probe was performed along the free-tumor margin of the hepatic lesion (2 cm outside -away from- the inner line of the tumor) in order to reduce the cut surface bleeding. The next step was an non-anatomical wedge resection of segment V. The parenchymal transection was performed without Pringle manoeuvre, by applying the harmonic scalper and the Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA). Vessel structures were clipped by locked clips and then cut. The resected lesion and the gallbladder were extracted by endobag trough the supraomeblical trocar incision. The pneumoperitoneum was maintained at 8–10 mmHg through out the entire procedure and intraoperative blood losses were 100 mL.
During surgery, the anaesthetic management consisted of sevuforane/fentanyl and invasive central venous/arterial pressures monitoring to maintain a stable cardiac function and oxygenation, which were achieved by infusion of intravenous fluids (11 ml/Kg/h) and dopamine (3 mcg/Kg/min). A stable cardiac function was maintained during all intra- and peri-operative phases.
A well-differentiated HCC with trabecular growth pattern (Edmondson grade I; absence of vascular infiltration) of 4.5 × 4 x 4 cm (volume: 72 cm3). No malignant cells were found in surgical margins of 1 cm (R0 resection). For immunohistochemistry, the HCC showed positive glypican, while negative pattern for beta-catenine, glutamine synthetase and loss of expression of liver fatty acid binding protein.
Post-operative course was uneventful, characterized by stable liver and cardiac function; after 7 days the patient was discharged. After 3 months, AFP level was 30.14 ng/mL with negative CT. At 7 months from surgery HCC recurrence was detected and Sorafenib treatment combined with transarterial radioembolization was performed as downstage for combined heart-liver transplantation.