A 66-year-old man presented to the emergency department of the Third Affiliated Hospital,Wenzhou Medical University (Wenzhou, China) with acute fever for 24 h. He also complained of intermittent productive cough with pale bloody sputum associated with chest heaviness, pectoralgia and dyspnea at rest. The patient was previously healthy and had no definite history of epidemiological contact except for there was a history of poultry contact 3 days ago. However, he said that he had a 50-year history of cigarette smoking and alcohol ingestion and had not quit before being sent to our hospital. He was not currently employed. Besides, he had no previous hospitalization, antimicrobial use history and healthcare institution visiting record in 1 year. Furthermore, he had never sought medical treatment for his current condition.
On admission, he appeared acutely ill, but was conscious. His blood pressure was 100/69 mmHg, respiratory rate 26 breaths per minute, pulse rate 119 beats per minute, and was febrile with body temperature of 38.8 °C. A regular heart rhythm was observed. There were coarse rales in the right lung field. Under 5 L/min oxygen flow through nasal catheter, the oxygen saturation can only be maintained at 85–90%.
The laboratory results were as follows: white blood cell count 5.0 × 109/L with neutrophil predominance (72.0%), hemoglobin 163 g/L, platelet count 181 × 109/L, and inflammatory markers was significantly increased, C-reactive protein (CRP) 133.68 mg/L, procalcitonin (PCT) 18.98 ng/ml. Creatinine 177 μmol/L, alanine aminotransferase 24 U/L, total bilirubin 33.1 μmol/L, total protein 60.1 g/L, and albumin 36.8 g/L. The arterial blood gases (O2 5 L/min via nasal catheter) showed pH 7.41, pCO2 28.3 mmHg, pO2 62.7 mmHg, HCO3
− 17.6 mmol/L, lactate 3.6 mmol/L, and O2 saturation 89.4% . A chest radiograph showed infiltration of the right upper, middle and lower lung lobes , and chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple exudate consolidation in the right upper, middle and lower lung lobes .
A diagnosis of severe community acquired pneumonia with acute kidney injury was entertained. Intravenous ciprofloxacin were administered empirically. Four hours after admission, his respiratory distress worsened, consciousness began to blur, blood pressure dropped, and the blood oxygen saturation can only maintain in 80–85% even if he was treated with oxygen at 7 L/min via mask.
After an exigent consultation, he was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU) for septic shock and persistent type 1 respiratory failure. Emergency tracheal intubation with mechanical ventilation was administered . Fluid resuscitation therapy and vasoactive agent were used to maintain vital organ perfusion. At the same time, sputum and blood samples were sent for culture and NGS (BGI sequencing center, Wuhan, China). According to the laboratory results, Chest computed tomography and the rapid deterioration of the patient, hypervirulent Klebsiella pneumoniae was suspected. His antibiotics were upgraded to intravenous imipenem (500 mg Q6H) combined with moxifloxacin (400 mg daily). Considering his history of poultry contact, oral antiviral oseltamivir (150 mg Q12H) was added empirically for possibility of Influenza A virus.
NGS detection was completed within 48 h . Its procedure and results were as follows: a volume of 300 uL plasma and sputum samples were taken for RNA extraction using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instruction. Then complementary DNA (cDNA) was generated from the extracted RNA templates by reverse transcription. Specimens were used for the construction of DNA libraries following published procedure, including DNA-fragmentation, end-repair, adapter-ligation and PCR amplification and quality control by Agilent 2100. Qualified libraries were sequenced by BGISEQ-50 platform. After removing low-quality and short (< 35 bp) reads, quality-passed sequencing were processed for computational substraction of human host sequences (hg19) and alignment to updated Microbial Genome Databases, consisting of 1798 viruses, 6350 bacteria, 1064 fungi, and 234 parasites. The classification reference databases were downloaded from NCBI . NGS detected 274,127 of 20 million reads that matched A. baumannii from the sputum samples .
For the analysis of antibiotic resistant genes, the CARD included analyzing software Resistance Gene Identifier (RGI) was used to predicts antibiotic resistance genes from the metagenomic sequence data and the un-annotated genome sequence assembly contigs (Additional file : Table S1 and S2).
According to the results of NGS and clinical manifestation of the patient, we judged that A. baumannii was the main pathogen, and this A. baumannii strain was susceptible to imipenem which was confirmed by subsequent antibiotic susceptibility results . After ruling out the possibility of viral infection, we discontinued oseltamivir. Two days after the NGS results were reported, A. baumannii was also identified in the culture of sputum samples taken on admission . No specific pathogens complex nucleotide sequences were detected in the sample of blood by NGS, and the cultures of blood came back negative as well. The antibiotic susceptibility of the A. baumannii isolate were tested by using the broth microdilution method. The results showed the strain was susceptible to ampicillin/sulbactam, piperacillin/tazobactam, ceftazidime, cefepime, imipenem, amikacin, gentamicin, tobramycin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, sulfamethoxazole and cefoperazone/sulbactam .
Five days after admission, patient’s vital signs stabilized, and the fever subsided. Follow-up CRP and PCT showed improved consolidation . Six days after admission, the patient was extubated and set up for nasal high-flow therapy and changed imipenem to intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g Q8H) based on culture susceptibility . Seven days after admission, he was transferred out of ICU. Thereafter, the patients’ respiratory condition gradually improved. Twenty days after admission, piperacillin/tazobactam was changed to intravenous ceftazidime (1 g Q8H) as further antibiotic de-escalation therapy. Twenty-eight days after admission, the chest radiograph and chest CT showed that the pneumonia had improved. The patient was discharged on day 29 and followed as an outpatient with no significant complications .