A 33-day-old Caucasian girl was brought to the Tabriz Children's Hospital with poor breastfeeding, recurrent vomiting and anorexia. She was admitted with a primary diagnosis of septicemia.
She was born from a mother with pre-eclampsia through normal vaginal delivery at the 34th week of gestation, with a birth weight of 1670 g. Her Apgar scores at one and five minutes were five and six, respectively. During delivery and before admission to the Tabriz Children's Hospital, she had been hospitalized in the Talegani neonatal intensive care unit for prematurity, septicemia, respiratory distress syndrome and gastrointestinal bleeding. In Talegani Hospital, she had received antibiotic therapy, including ampicillin and gentamicin, then her medication was changed to cefotaxime and vancomycin, and finally her treatment continued with intravenous immunoglobulin, imipenem and ceftazidime.
Her physical examination revealed that she was pale, cachectic, anorexic and hypotonic, and her Moro and sucking reflexes were weak. She also exhibited grunting and had substernal and intercostal retraction. The patient's body weight, height and head circumference were 1700 g, 43 cm and 31 cm, respectively. Her vital signs, including pulse rate, respiratory rate, body temperature, O2 saturation under the oxygen hood and without using the oxygen hood were 158/min, 48/min, 38.6°C, 95% and 89%, respectively.
Her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was purulent, and CSF analysis showed 520 mg/dL protein; 16 mg/dL glucose; many white blood cells (WBCs), with 85% polymorphonuclear cells and 15% lymphocytes; and 25 red blood cells (RBCs)/mm3. The results of the other laboratory tests are shown in Table . In the CSF and blood culture, K. pneumonia was resistant to most of the antibiotics and sensitive only to ciprofloxacin and co-trimoxazole. Her chest X-ray showed bilateral humeral osteomyelitis and bilateral glenohumeral joint arthritis .
On the basis of the paraclinical evidence, diagnoses of K. pneumoniae septicemia, meningitis, arthritis and osteomyelitis were made, and a treatment protocol with a combination of intravenous ciprofloxacin and co-trimoxazole antibiotics was started (for 28 days). At the end of the intravenous treatment period, she weighed 2420 g, and her CSF analysis and culture were within normal range. Afterward, she was discharged with oral ciprofloxacin, co-trimoxazole and rifampicin for another 28-day period. Figures and show her chest X-rays obtained on the seventh and 28th days of oral antibiotic therapy, respectively. At the end of 28 days of oral antibiotic therapy (when the patient was 88 days old), her weight had reached 4250 g and normal glenohumeral joints and humerus bones were shown on her chest X-ray. During three years of follow-up, she had normal developmental milestones and was not readmitted to the hospital.