A 39-year-old Caucasian man presented to our emergency department with a 1-day history of nausea, vomiting, and severe peri-umbilical pain that radiated to the mid-scapular region of his back. The patient had a history of muscular dystrophy, hypertension, and transient renal insufficiency. There was no elicited history of jaundice, cholelithiasis, or bleeding diathesis. The patient used smokeless tobacco products and consumed three or more alcoholic drinks per day. On admission, laboratory results revealed no leukocytosis, a normal serum hemoglobin concentration, and normal renal function. Serum lipase was elevated at 1985 U/l. Transaminases and alkaline phosphate levels were mildly elevated; serum bilirubin was normal. Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrated edema of the pancreatic head without evidence of cholelithiasis. Computed tomographic (CT) imaging with intravenous and oral contrast confirmed inhomogeneous pancreatic enhancement localized to the head and uncinate process without evidence of necrosis or associated hemorrhage. The patient was maintained nil by mouth and admitted to the hospital for intravenous resuscitation and monitoring.
The patient developed multiple system organ dysfunction secondary to pancreatitis. On day 28, CT scanning and percutaneous sampling confirmed infected pancreatic necrosis (>50%).
The patient was taken to the operating room for laparotomy and exploration of the retroperitoneum. Diffuse fibrinous inflammation of the intra-abdominal contents and omentum was identified as was extensive retroperitoneal necrosis of the pancreas and surrounding peri-pancreatic tissues. An 80% pancreatic necrosectomy was performed which was accompanied by significant retroperitoneal bleeding. Attempts at hemorrhage control with electrocautery and suture ligation were unsuccessful. Associated hypotension required damage control treatment ; the retroperitoneum was packed with cotton sponges, the abdomen left open under sterile dressings, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Progressive coagulopathy and hemodynamic compromise necessitated continued transfusion of blood and blood products and the intravenous administration of activated Factor VII (VIIa). Several hours after ICU admission, the abdomen was re-explored at the bedside for unabated bleeding and continued hypotension, despite correction of coagulopathy. Two liters of hemoperitoneum were evacuated and diffuse microvascular bleeding was encountered in the retroperitoneum of the left upper quadrant. Electrocautery and suture ligation were ineffective and the abdomen was repacked with cotton laparotomy pads and the abdomen left open.
Mesenteric angiography was performed after failure to achieve operative hemostasis; this demonstrated splenic arterial thrombosis without active arterial bleeding. Hemodynamics briefly improved and the patient was returned to the operating room for re-exploration and pack removal. The cotton packs were noted to be densely adherent to the retroperitoneum and diffuse re-bleeding occurred after their removal. Cautery and suture ligation again yielded incomplete hemostasis and fresh packs were replaced. Following additional transfusion and resuscitation in the ICU, the patient was returned to the operating room for another attempt at pack removal. Again, hemodynamically significant bleeding occurred from the exposed retroperitoneum upon pack removal. A splenectomy was performed to reduce the potential for collateral bleeding in the setting of proximal splenic arterial thrombosis but significant bleeding continued from the pancreatic bed.
Two 4-inch by 48-inch rolls of woven Stasilon® textile (Entegrion, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA) were packed into the retroperitoneal space and pressure was applied for 4 minutes . Hemostasis was achieved with this maneuver, hemodynamics improved, and the patient was returned to the ICU for continued resuscitation with the new packs in place. Following the Stasilon® packing, additional transfusions were not required, and hemodynamics were maintained. Forty-eight hours later, the patient was again returned to the operating room for re-exploration. At laparotomy, the packs were noted to be within a hemostatic field. Although directly contiguous with exposed structures, the Stasilon® dressings did not adhere to the retroperitoneal tissues and the material was able to be removed from the pancreatic bed atraumatically . Complete hemostasis was noted in the retroperitoneum and left upper quadrant; no further hemostatic maneuvers were required . The region was widely drained and the abdomen closed with Dexon™ mesh.
Postoperatively, adequate hemodynamics were restored, resuscitation was successful, and vasopressor infusions were discontinued. Despite the eventual achievement of retroperitoneal hemostasis following the necrosectomy, the patient's subsequent hospital course was marked by progressive multiple system organ dysfunction and numerous associated complications. Ultimately, supportive interventions were ended and the patient died approximately 4 weeks after the final laparotomy that established retroperitoneal hemorrhage control.