A 51-year-old healthy female underwent uneventful cataract surgery in her right eye. During the procedure, viscoelastic and vancomycin (1.0 mg/0.2 mL) were injected into the anterior chamber. Visual acuity on the first postoperative day was 20/20 and no other postoperative complication was detected.
On the seventh postoperative day the patient complained of acute painful visual deterioration. Visual acuity was 20/32 in her right eye with minimal anterior chamber and vitreous reaction, not suggestive of endophthalmitis. She was referred to our clinic 2 days later (post-op 9 days) for further investigation. Ophthalmic examination revealed best corrected visual acuity of 20/32 and 20/25 in the right and left eye respectively. Intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in both eyes, pupil reaction was normal. Slit lamp examination of the right eye revealed 1+ cell in the anterior chamber and 1+ cell in the anterior vitreous. Fundus examination of the right eye was notable for mild vitritis, vascular attenuation, and peripheral artery occlusion, as well as scattered intraretinal and perivascular hemorrhages.
Fluorescein angiography revealed delayed retinal filling, peripheral vascular occlusion, extended areas of non-perfusion, and scattered areas of perivascular staining . Optical coherence tomography examination was unremarkable . A 6 × 6 zone was acquired using optical coherence tomography angiography demonstrating the junction between perfusion and non-perfusion areas showing the choroidal vasculature intact.
Diagnosis of hemorrhagic occlusive retinal vasculitis was suspected based on the recent cataract surgery where intracameral vancomycin was used and characteristic clinical findings of the disease. As with previous reports of vancomycin-induced HORV, thorough systemic workup was unremarkable. Based on reports in the literature indicating the poor prognosis of the disease, the poor therapeutic effects of steroids and immunosuppressive treatment, we decided to proceed with early anti-VEGF treatment in an attempt to halt the progression of vision loss and reduce the risk of neovascular glaucoma. An intravitreal injection of bevacizumab (Avastin; Genetech, South San Francisco, CA) was administrated.
The following days the patient reported gradual pain relief and an improvement in her vision. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/25. Fundus examination showed no change, while fluorescein angiography showed reduced vascular staining. Οn the 25thpost-operative day best corrected visual acuity was 20/20.
Despite visual acuity restoration, extended peripheral zones of non-perfusion were noted on fluorescein angiography. We discussed our concerns with the patient and we proposed continuation of anti-VEGF for at least 3 months to minimize the risk of neovascularization development. A total of three intravitreal injections were administrated in a 3-month period after surgery. We decided to proceed with photocoagulation treatment only in the occurrence of neovascularization.
At a 6-month follow-up examination best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 with no sign of neovascularization. Fundus examination and fluorescein angiography revealed no sign of disease activity. We decided to closely monitor the patient at regular intervals over the next 2 years in order to promptly, detect and treat a possible occurrence of neovascularization. The patient was provided a written informed consent in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki to having their medical data used for research purposes. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.