A 31-year-old-male with no former medical and surgical history presented to the emergency room (ER) with an acute headache for 5 days in the summer of 2020. The patient noticed symptoms initially while lifting weights at the gymnasium. The headache was localized frontally. The pain was described as sharp and non-pulsating in nature and 10/10 in intensity. It worsened gradually and was associated with nausea and one episode of non-bilious, non-bloody vomiting. He took over-the-counter NSAIDs for the headaches with no improvement.
He denied any recent trauma, sick contacts, viral illness, blurred vision, diplopia, photophobia, tinnitus, hearing loss, neck stiffness, ataxia, focal motor or sensory, neurological deficits, cough, fever, chills, abdominal or chest pain, alteration in bowel habits, personal or family history of stroke and autoimmune diseases. The patient has been healthy and took no medications. He was up to date with his vaccinations and received his MMR vaccine the prior week as part of his workplace requirement. The patient was USA-based and was confirmed to have received the MMR vaccine manufactured by Merck Pharmaceuticals. He reported two dermatomal varicella-zoster virus infection episodes in the past, first during childhood and second at 29 years. There were no other complications, and the recovery was uneventful.
On physical examination, he appeared uncomfortable and complained of a persistent frontal headache. Vitals were within normal limits, and physical examination was unremarkable without any dermatomal rash. Signs of meningeal irritation were negative. COVID-19 PCR and COVID-19 antibody testing were negative. CT head and CT angiogram head and neck were unremarkable .
Lumbar puncture was performed, which showed elevated proteins (86 mg/dL) and mononuclear cells with a lymphocytic predominance (96%) on initial studies suggestive of viral meningitis .
The patient received empiric overage of IV acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g every 12 h) based on cytology of lumbar puncture studies. The patient reported an improvement of his symptoms on hospital day 2 with an appropriate pain control regimen. CSF PCR studies (performed on tube 2) were positive for VZV PCR (6800 copies/mL) and negative for Herpes Simplex Virus 1 and 2 . Diagnosis of aseptic meningitis secondary to VZV was made. VZV IgG came back positive. Intravenous acyclovir with appropriate hydration was continued. The patient’s headache resolved gradually, and he was discharged home (hospital day 4) on oral acyclovir for 10 days. The patient was followed up after discharge and was doing well with complete resolution of symptoms.