A 55-year-old female with a history of controlled arterial hypertension, presented to the Retina and Neuro Ophthalmology service at FOSCAL (Bucaramanga, Colombia), reporting a history of 13 years of progressive decrease of visual acuity OU, bilateral ptosis and ophthalmoplegia. She had no remarkable ocular or systemic past history. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in both eyes (OU) was 20/50. Asymmetric bilateral ptosis was found with generalized limitation of extraocular movements in OU with an exotropia in primary position of the gaze , The cornea showed some none confluent guttae in OU and mild cataract both eyes. Fundus exam showed a normal optic nerve with atrophic and RPE changes with a salt and pepper appearance . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed areas of hyperfluorescence and hypofluorescence in a mottled pattern. The HD SD OCT (Carl Zeiss Cirrus 4000 HD OCT) revealed areas of outer retinal layer atrophy in OU, predominantly temporal to the fovea, with a disruption of the ellipsoid zone in mottled pattern in OD, severe diffuse asymmetric macular thinning and areas of RPE hyperplasia without changes in choroid. OCT-A (DRI OCT-1 Triton Topcon Japan) showed a normal vascular pattern in the choriocapillaries, superficial and deeper vascular plexus . At 2 years’ follow-up with HD SD OCT (Carl Zeiss Cirrus 4000 HD OCT) showed a mild decrease of the macular thickness and a decrease of the ganglion cell OU . Specular microscopy showed a decrease of endothelial cell density (OD: 1526 cel/mm2 and OS: 1779 cel/mm2) with mild polymegathism and pleomorphism . The computerized visual field of OU showed a diffuse depression of retinal sensitivity in OU with peripheral predominance . The electrophysiological studies evidenced a compromise of the rod and cones with a subnormal level in the scotopic response with a borderline photopic response in the full field electroretinogram (ERG) and multifocal ERG corroborated with the computerized visual field . Cardiological assessment showed electrocardiographic abnormalities compatible with left branch block of the bundle of Hiss (LBBB) and also signs of right ventricular hypertrophy. The serum lactate level was 4.6 mg/dL (normal values: 0.75–3.1). Myasthenia gravis and dysthyroid ophthalmopathy were discarded. The muscular biopsy showed polygonal fibers with peripheral placed nuclei, “Ragged Red fibers” were observed on Gomori Trichrome staining. Genetic consultation was done; no genetic testing was performed. With all these features, the clinical and histopathologic diagnosis of KSS was made.