A 55-year-old woman with a history of a right frontoparietal clear cell ependymoma treated with surgery, adjuvant radiation therapy, and infusional chemotherapy 12 years before presented with symptomatic recurrence of a right frontoparietal mass. The specimen obtained from the initial resection was formalin fixed, paraffin embedded, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin, as well as the following immunohistochemical stains: GFAP, EMA, progesterone receptor (PR), and phosphohistone H3 (PHH3). Microscopic features demonstrated GFAP, EMA, and PR- positive tumor cells with round nuclei and perinuclear clearing; the tumor had focal perivascular pseudorosettes, a low mitotic rate on PHH3, and no high-grade features. A diagnosis of clear cell ependymoma was rendered at that time and no further molecular testing was performed. Retrospective review showed ependymoma, CNS WHO Grade 2, and NOS, with predominant clear cell morphology. Initial treatment consisted of involved field radiation to 5940 cGy over 33 fractions and systemic chemotherapy.
Twelve years later, the patient developed breakthrough seizures and progressive left-sided weakness. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain identified an enhancing lobulated cortical lesion within her right frontoparietal lobes, in the same location as her original mass that was compressing the primary motor and sensory cortices and extending into the dura . A right frontoparietal craniotomy for the resection of likely recurrent tumor with neuronavigation, somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs), motor mapping, and intraoperative microscope was performed. The lesion was yellow and well- circumscribed intraoperatively and, following excision, a small rim of residual tumor adherent to the functional cortex remained . Pathology demonstrated ependymoma with cytomorphologic characteristics similar to her original mass, including clear cells lacking high-grade features . She then completed six cycles of palliative chemotherapy with cisplatin (80 mg/sqm) and etoposide (100 mg/sqm days 1–3) every 3 weeks. Radiation therapy was planned, but the patient did not follow-up with radiation oncology, in part because of limited transportation means and the distance between her home and our center.
Fifteen years after her original presentation and 3 years after the treatment of her first recurrence, she presented with ataxia and left-sided hemiparesis severe enough that she did not have functional use of the left upper or lower extremity. In the same region as her prior tumors, MRI demonstrated a new right posterior parietal convexity, heterogeneously enhancing mass lesion arising along the superior aspect of the resection cavity within the right perirolandic cortex , as well as multiple surrounding subcentimeter enhancing satellite nodules and a subcentimeter nodule in the corpus callosum. There were also adjacent pachymeningeal enhancement and vasogenic edema with leftward subfalcine herniation . After multidisciplinary evaluation at tumor board and discussion with the patient, the decision was made to perform a third craniotomy for palliative resection of the right perirolandic mass with plans for adjuvant radiation therapy for the treatment of the corpus callosum nodule. We recommended a more aggressive resection than the prior excision given the lack of functional use on the left and the aggressive behavior of the tumor. Due to severe scalp thinning, free flap reconstruction was also planned and performed in conjunction with plastic surgery. Neuronavigation, SSEPs, motor mapping, and intraoperative microscope were employed for safe resection. Frozen specimen was consistent with a glial neoplasm and the frontoparietal lesion and satellite lesions were completely resected on examination with the operative microscope. Postoperative MRI found enhancement along the resection cavity, but no nodular residual lesion was detected, consistent with gross total resection. Postoperatively, her course was complicated by infection of her free flap, which was treated with washout and debridement.
Microscopic analysis of the second recurrence [-] showed regions of tumor with morphological and immunohistochemical features typical of ependymoma, including perivascular pseudorosettes and focal dot-like EMA positivity, as well as malignant features including increased mitotic activity with elevated Ki67 proliferation index, marked hypercellularity, and microvascular proliferation. In addition, the neoplasm contained large nodular regions of clear cells exhibiting extensive immunoreactivity for synaptophysin as well as other markers suggestive of neural differentiation, including neuronal nuclei (NeuN) and insulinoma-associated protein 1 (INSM1). The tumor cells were focally positive for glial markers, including GFAP and oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2. Electron microscopy showed poorly formed and ill-defined junctional complexes, but no cilia, microvilli, or dense granules were seen . The presence of a C11orf95-RELA, now known as ZFTA-RELA, fusion was detected on RNA sequencing, a highly sensitive and specific platform, thereby confirming the diagnosis of supratentorial ependymoma, ZFTA fusion positive. Immunohistochemical surrogate markers for RELA fusion, L1CAM and p65, were not performed due to cost restrictions and their inferior specificity compared to sequencing. Next-generation DNA sequencing also identified a pathogenic PTCH1 c.2084dupA mutation with p.D695fs protein alteration. Homozygous deletion of CDKN2A/B, a reported independent predictor of poor outcome in ependymomas with ZFTA: RELA fusions, was not detected.
These findings were presented at tumor board and radiation therapy was recommended. Therapy was delayed in part due to her limited means of transportation. Planning MRI 3 months postoperatively showed an area of intense enhancement within the right frontoparietal vertex, concerning for a third recurrence. She received 3000 cGy in 10 fractions to the visualized tumor using image-guided intensity modulated radiation therapy (IG-IMRT). Two months later, there were moderately increased size and degree of enhancement of the affected area, as well as development of multiple satellite nodules. After another 2 months, the mass had demonstrated rapid growth with significant mass effect as well as necrotic bubbly enhancement of the perirolandic and deep white matter consistent with rapid tumor progression and radiation necrosis, respectively .
Her case was discussed at tumor board. Although she could lift her left arm, she had no functional use of the hand or lower extremity. A fourth resection was recommended to maximize her survival and allow for potential enrollment in a clinical trial. The resection was performed with neuronavigation, SSEPs, motor mapping, intraoperative microscope, ultrasonic aspiration, and plastic surgery management of her scalp flap. Intraoperatively, the tumor had a firm, gray and red center with an infiltrative border. After gross resection of the lesion, ultrasonic aspiration was used to remove all remaining lesion, with additional guidance based on neuronavigation. Pathology revealed an ependymal neoplasm and necrosis of brain parenchyma, compatible with radiation necrosis ; given the histomorphologic similarity to the prior specimens, molecular and immunohistochemical testing was not repeated. Postoperative MRI showed mild residual irregular enhancement along the inferior and superior aspects of the resection cavity, suggestive of a small amount of residual lesion. Unfortunately, her care was again delayed due to transportation issues, and she was unable to enroll in the clinical trial that had been planned. Given the presence of PTCH1 mutation, she received targeted smoothened (SMO) inhibitor vismodegib therapy on a compassionate basis. She received three cycles of chemotherapy, but continued to decline clinically with worsening seizures managed on multiple antiepileptic medications. She was placed on hospice care 5 months after her fourth resection. Ultimately, she succumbed to her disease 16 years after her original diagnosis and 8 months and 23 days after her fourth surgery.