An 80-year-old, 112 kg, 188 cm man with chronic atrial fibrillation (treated with apixaban), urothelial carcinoma, and metastatic prostate cancer with pulmonary nodules underwent implantation of a dual chamber pacemaker for sick sinus syndrome as an outpatient at the authors' institution (A). The procedure was uncomplicated. Thirty-nine days after the pacemaker was placed, the patient presented to the emergency department complaining of new-onset left-sided pleuritic chest pain. Pertinent history was unchanged from previously described; family, social and other medication histories were unremarkable. A bedside ultrasound examination indicated that the patient had a left pleural effusion. A chest radiograph confirmed this finding (B). The patient was admitted for further diagnostic evaluation and treatment. Pacemaker interrogation demonstrated transient increases in impedance and pacing threshold with dropped R waves. Right ventricular lead perforation was suspected as a cause for left pleural effusion. The patient underwent non-contrast CT imaging, which verified the presence of a left pleural effusion (A, B, and C), but lead displacement, pericardial effusion, and perforation of the RV or the pericardium were not apparent. Despite these negative findings, cardiothoracic surgery was consulted for a possible lead perforation. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal RV and left ventricular dimensions and function. There was no evidence of a pericardial effusion. Color Doppler blood flow mapping did not show unusual flow from the RV into or within the pericardium. The patient underwent a thoracentesis 48 -h after apixaban was discontinued. A total of 1.2 L of blood was drained from the left hemithorax, after which the patient's symptoms improved. Analysis of the pleural fluid was consistent with a non- malignant, bloody effusion; Gram stain and cultures were negative.
The patient was taken to the operating room by the senior author (GHA) for a subxiphoid pericardial window and lead removal for presumed RV perforation and placement of a new pacing RV lead. During surgery, the pericardium appeared to be intact without a puncture or a protruding pacemaker lead. The pericardium was incised, revealing a minimal amount of bloody effusion. No palpable lead or other abnormality was noted along the surface of the heart including the apex during gross inspection. The heart was displaced to the right using a laparotomy sponge to expose the apex more clearly, and a lead was seen to be protruding from the RV apex without evidence of active bleeding or thrombus. The protruding lead was cut, and the RV repaired. No direct communication with the left pleural space could be identified. The incision was closed. The electrophysiologist (EF) then proceeded to extract the remainder of the RV pacing lead and insert a new pacemaker lead. The patient tolerated the procedure well. Serial postoperative chest radiographs were obtained to monitor for pleural effusion recurrence, which did not occur. The remainder of the patient's hospital course was unremarkable, and he was discharged on the fourth postoperative day. At the latest follow-up telephone visit (January 2022), patient remains active and doing well and expressed his appreciation for the care he received seven months earlier.