A 70-year-old Asian man visited our hospital complaining of hemoptysis for 6 months. He was a pack-a-day smoker for 50 years and presented with hypertension. He was not taking any antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents. Chest X-ray revealed a mass in the right pulmonary hilum, and chest computed tomography (CT) showed a tumor in the pulmonary hilum with stenosis of the right upper lobe bronchus . Positron emission tomography-CT revealed a tumor in the pulmonary hilum with a standardized uptake value of 8.5 . Semicircular calcification of the ascending aorta was also noted . A bronchoscopic examination revealed redness and irregularity in the bronchial epithelium in an extensive area between the trachea and the lower lobe bronchus, with stenosis of the right upper lobe bronchus. Transbronchial biopsy of the lesion revealed a pathological diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma. The results of biopsies from the lower trachea, one ring above the tracheobronchial angle and that of the B6/B7–10 spur, were also positive for squamous cell carcinoma. Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration showed no malignant cells in the subcarinal lymph nodes. The patient was able to tolerate right pneumonectomy, which was concluded from the results of a pulmonary function test; the patient’s forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was 2850 ml (116.1% of the predicted value), and the diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) was 15.80 ml/minute/mmHg (90.1% of the predicted value). Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed no metastasis or infarction. The clinical stage of the disease was T4N0M0, and right sleeve pneumonectomy was planned.
Right sleeve pneumonectomy was performed using median sternotomy. During surgery, the ascending aorta was repeatedly mobilized to adequately expose the tracheobronchial bifurcation . Mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed, and the left main bronchus and the trachea were transected and anastomosed using 4-0 polydioxanone (PDS) under ventilation through the operative field. A running suture in the membranous portion was performed with ventilation of the diseased lung to better expose the operative field. The cartilaginous portion was anastomosed with interrupted sutures after the endotracheal double-lumen tube was forwarded into the left main bronchus. Following the anastomosis, the right main pulmonary artery and right superior and inferior veins were stapled, the right lung was extirpated, and right sleeve pneumonectomy was performed. After surgery, the patient was extubated and admitted to the intensive care unit; however, he was not fully conscious, and mild paralysis of both upper extremities was noted.
Head magnetic resonance imaging was performed on postoperative day (POD) 1, which showed multiple high-intensity areas in the brain, mainly in the cerebellum . Head magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed no significant change in the cerebral or vertebrobasilar arteries. No cardiac thrombus, malformation, or valvular disease was detected by echocardiography and contrast-enhanced CT, and the multiple embolic stroke was thought to be caused by repeated mobilization of the ascending aorta to expose the operative field for tracheobronchial anastomosis.
Heparinization therapy and administration of edaravone, a neuroprotective agent, were initiated. From POD 14, warfarin administration was initiated, and the amount of warfarin was adjusted to a prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) of 1.5–2.5. The patient received continuous anticoagulant therapy and rehabilitation and was eventually discharged on POD 30 without any sequelae. The patient is currently doing well without recurrence 5 years after surgery.