A 21-year-old female patient was first admitted for high fever, swelling and pain in the lower limbs. Physical examination revealed that she had swollen knee joints, stiff skin, Raynaud’s phenomenon in the fingertips, and normal blood pressure. Routine blood examination showed white blood cell count of 3.7 × 109/L with 70.3% neutrophilic granulocyte and hemoglobin 102 g/L. Her C-reactive protein was 17.2 mg/L. Her antinuclear antibodies (ANA) test was positive, with positive antibodies of anti-Scl-70, anti-SSA, and anti-Ro-52. She also had low complement and normal serum creatinine of 68 μmol/L. Her chest computerized tomography (CT) showed infection in the lobe of the right middle lung. She was administered antibiotics, immunoglobulin, methylprednisolone 40 mg/day, and rituximab 100 mg twice (interval period of 1 week). After treatment, her symptoms were relieved and she was discharged. Two weeks after being discharged, she complained of gross hematuria accompanied by nausea, vomiting, backache, and decreasing urine volume. Then she was re-admitted.
Physical examination at her second admission revealed that she had swollen knee joints, stiff skin, and mild symmetrical edema in the lower limbs. No weakness of the muscles. The pulmonary and cardiac tests showed no pathological findings. The blood pressure was 141/101 mmHg.
Her blood routine analysis showed a hemoglobin level of 42 g/L, platelet count of 24*109/L, and reticulocyte of 20.68%. Her biochemical analysis showed that her serum creatinine was 118 μmol/L, which rapidly increased to 424 μmol/L in 2 days. She had normal aminotransferases, creatine kinas 353 U/L, creatine kinas-MB 57 U/L, total bilirubin 84.7umol/L, indirect bilirubin 65.3umol/L, and lactic dehydrogenase 1712 U/L. Her urinalysis showed albumin +, red blood cells 20/ul, occult blood +++, proteinuria creatinine ratio 86.83 mg/g. She had normal C-reactive protein but high erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 55 mm/h, low complement 4 (C4) 0.04 g/L and complement 3 (C3) 0.28 g/L, low plasma complements H factor (CHF) concentration 135.63 ng/ml (reference range 210–452.5 ng/ml), and negative anti-CHF antibody. She had positive ANA 1:1000 with anti-Scl-70 +, anti-SSA +, anti-Ro-52 +, and anti-dsDNA-. She had normal activity of ADAMTS13 (74.2%, reference range 68–131%), negative anti-ADAMTS13 antibody, positive Coomb’s test, and 6–11% fragmented red blood cells in peripheral blood.
Her pulmonary CT showed a small-sized pericardial effusion without obvious pulmonary interstitial change. Her heart echo showed pulmonary hypertension and her urinary ultrasound revealed decreased blood flow signal in both kidneys.
Renal, skin, and muscle biopsies were performed after her recovery from anemia and thrombocytopenia. Her skin biopsy showed reticulodermal keratosis, local basal cell proliferation, tpigmentation of the basal layer, disappearance of epidermal protrusion, proliferation of small blood vessels, and proliferation of collagen fiber in the superficial dermis. The above data met with pathology changes of scleroderma skin. Her muscle biopsy showed the pathology change of inflammatory myopathy. Her renal biopsy showed TMA changes in the kidney. The walls of the renal arterioles were thickened due to endothelial edema and endometrial fibrosis. The renal arterioles’ lumen was diffusely narrow and occluded. The glomerulus capillary loops were diffusely narrow and the glomerulus showed diffused ischemia. Electron microscopy showed occlusion of the vascular lumen, widening of the basement membrane, and the diffused fusion of the foot process .
Her diagnoses were overlap syndrome of SSc, SLE and PM, and secondary TMA caused AKI. She was treated with glucocorticoids (methylprednisolone 500 mg/day for 3 days, then prednisone with gradually tapered dose), rituximab 500 mg twice with 2 weeks’ interval, renin-angiotensin system inhibitors, and sildenafil. Also, she was administered emergency hemodialysis (HD) and plasma exchange (PE) for 9 times. After the above treatment, her anemia and thrombocytopenia were quickly recovered. Her sedimentation rate and complement became normal. However, her renal function did not recover and she was switched to peritoneal dialysis (PD) before discharge. At discharge, we added mycophenolate mofetil (250 mg twice per day) and hydroxychloroquine (200 mg twice per day) to maintain the immunosuppressive treatment. Two months after being discharged, her serum creatinine decreased to 292 μmol/L and her urine volume increased to 1200 ml per day. Then, she stopped peritoneal dialysis. Her serum creatinine decreased to 109 μmol/L 8 months after her first admission.