A 24 year old man was referred to us complaining of blurred vision and slight pain in the left eye for 5 days. He underwent an intraocular foreign body (an iron splinter from a working lathe) extraction at a local hospital half a month before presentation. The foreign body was extracted from the corresponding pars plana incision using an electromagnetic tip. His right eye’s best corrected vision was 0.9 while his left eye’s vision was counting fingers at 20 cm, with a normal intraocular pressure. Slitlamp examination revealed moderate congestion in the left eye, with a transparent cornea, anterior cells4+, about two millimeters high hypopyon, a transparent lens and multiple clusters of white coalescent lesions on the fundus, while the large vessels of retina could still be obscurely observed . B scan showed a severe vitreous opacity without any posterior vitreous detachment . So, a diagnosis of infectious endophthalmitis was presumed and vitreous samples were immediately obtained for pathogenic identification. Contemporary gram stain showed a gram-positive bacilli infection, so empirically 0.1 ml of amikacin (400μg) combined with vancomycin (0.8 mg) was injected intravitreally and topical 0.5% levofloxacin eye drops 4 times one day were administered. After keeping stable for three days, his left eye deteriorated obviously on the 4th day, with a vision of only hand movement and an unobservable fundus . On the 5th day, the conventional cultures characterized the bacterium as an Actinomyces sp. on the basis of colony morphology and conventional biochemical reactions. Meanwhile 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing was conducted using a pair of universal primers. The obtained product sequences (1408 bp) were compared with published sequences in the GenBank database , which confirmed the pathogen as Gordonia sputi (Gordonia sputi strain IFM 10747 16S rRNA gene, partial sequence, Sequence ID: , 100% similarity). Therefore, a complete pars plana vitrectomy combined with lensectomy and silicone oil tamponade was performed. Massive white purulent clusters in the vitreous body and on the retinal surface with huge retinal breaks in the peripheral retina were found during the surgery. An intraocular irrigation with penicillin G (a concentration of 80μg/ml) was adopted. Post-operative administration included intravenous penicillin G 4 million units twice one day for a week, topical 0.5% levofloxacin and 1% prednisolone acetate eye drops 4 times one day for two weeks. A relatively normal fundus with slight intracameral inflammation was observed a week after the operation , and the best corrected vision recovered to 0.15. One year later the retina remained attached with slight fibrous proliferation beside the optic head and his vision remained 0.1 .