A 65-year-old man with type-2 diabetes and a beta-thalassaemic trait was referred to urology presenting with a left groin lump. This had appeared about 1 year ago and gradually increased in size. Initially, the lump was slightly painful but later became painless.
There was no history of any testicular trauma, sexually transmitted diseases, UTI, undescended testis, or groin/scrotal surgery of any kind. There was no family history of malignancies.
Clinical examination revealed a soft abdomen and normal testes. There was a non-tender, 2x2cm well-circumscribed, mobile, firm left inguinoscrotal mass which appeared to be attached to the spermatic cord.
Ultrasound of the left groin showed a 1.8x1.4x1.9cm well-circumscribed ovoid nodular lesion in the upper left inguinal area just lateral to the left pubic tubercle. It appeared solid with a heterogeneous internal echotexture. There were no internal calcifications and internal vascularity was demonstrated with color Doppler assessment.
Three-phasic contrast CT showed the mass as 30 x 25 x 23mm, marginally larger than on ultrasound. The mass appeared to be continuous with the spermatic cord. No lymph node involvement or distant metastasis was demonstrated.
Laboratory parameters were all within normal limits. Testicular tumor markers such as beta-HCG, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were in the normal range.
The patient underwent a biopsy excision of the lesion. Histopathology showed spindle-shaped, elongated, moderately atypical cells in fascicular arrangement with oval to elongated nuclei showing mild to moderate mitotic activity . On immunohistochemical staining, cells were positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), muscle-specific actin (MSA), desmin, and negative for pancreatokeratin, S-100, and SOX10. There was no necrosis. These findings were strongly suggestive of LMS.
The French Federation of Cancer Centres Grading System for sarcomas was employed to further classify the specimen [5]. Each of its domains is mentioned below, along with their respective scores:Tumor differentiation: 2 Mitotic count: 2 Tumor necrosis: 0
With an overall score of 4, our specimen was suggestive of a Grade 2 LMS of the spermatic cord.
Consequently, the patient underwent left orchiectomy with excision of the spermatic cord up to the deep inguinal ring via an inguinal open approach.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The final histopathology of the orchiectomy specimen showed that the LMS had earlier been resected completely. Follow-up surveillance with the CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis did not reveal any recurrence, lymph nodes, or distant metastasis. Twelve months of follow-up did not reveal any recurrence. The patient was satisfied with the treatment given to him. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.