A 71-year-old female patient was admitted due to dizziness, instability, and intensive pain in the upper part of thoracic spine. Initial neurological examination revealed the left leg monoparesis, lower extremity reflexes were lively presented, accompanied with positive Babinski sign on the left. Initial brain CT was unremarkable and initial chest X-ray revealed no inflammation infiltrates; thoracic spine and pelvis CT revealed degenerative changes that corresponded to age.
At the admission, she was tested with fast antigen SARSCoV-2 and SARS-CoV-2 RT PCR test (three sequences), both tests were positive. The patient had mild respiratory symptoms of COVID-19 and was afebrile.
Before admission, the patient was taking acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg due to stents implanted more than 10 years ago, and in hospital 0.3 ml of Clexane was administered daily. Coagulogram at the admission was inside normal range (D-dimers 0.66, CRP 1.8). Within 3 days from admission, she developed left leg plegia, severe right leg paresis, and hypoesthesia at the Th10 level on the left and at the Th8 level on the right side and was not able to control the sphincters.
MRI revealed acute subdural hematoma at the level C VII to Th III, length 55 mm and 6 mm thick; in segments C V to Th III the elevated spinal cord signal corresponds to compression myelopathy .
The patient underwent a decompressive laminectomy of levels Th I and Th II. After subdural hemorrhage evacuation, a small coil of thrombosed blood vessels partially adherent to the arachnoid and thoracic roots laterally was completely removed without any damage to the neural structure. The surgery went without any complications. Postoperative MRI revealed a satisfactory postoperative finding, including good decompression and re-expansion of the spinal cord with regression of myelopathy .
Postoperatively, CRP levels were increased, with peak of 41.9 on 2nd postoperative day, and lowering to 1.8, while the levels of D-dimers were also increased (> 4.37) and persisted until discharge. The left leg was paretic with movements in knee joint and foot, right leg recovered completely, while full control of the sphincters was not regained. COVID-19 symptoms remained mild. The patient was further appointed to stationary medical rehabilitation.