The patient is a 44-year-old man who presented with a duodenal tumor recently diagnosed at an outside facility. He was admitted to another hospital with melena and anemia with a serum hemoglobin of 6.0 g/dL. Four units of red cell concentrate was transfused and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed for hemostasis of the duodenal lesion. Gastrointestinal bleeding was then stabilized for several days. The patient was discharged from that hospital and returned home with instructions to be evaluated at our hospital. Two weeks later, he presented with appetite loss and vomiting. Past medical history, family history and social history were unremarkable. The physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory studies showed a serum hemoglobin of 7.8 g/dL. Serum tumor marker levels were within normal limits (CEA 0.7 ng/ml, CA19–9 7 U/ml, IL-2 receptor 323 U/ml).
Repeat upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a circumferential soft tumor with a friable surface in the second portion of the duodenum. It was difficult to insert the endoscope distally, and difficult to identify the papilla . Though four biopsies were taken from the tumor edge and a small round cell sarcoma was suspected, a definitive diagnosis could not be made.
Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a greater than 10 cm tumor with heterogeneous enhancement on a dynamic study and some air suggesting necrosis and infection inside the tumor . The tumor compressed the inferior vena cava and infiltrated the ascending colon. The common bile duct and intrahepatic bile ducts were dilated. No obvious metastases were seen in other viscera or the lung fields, and intraperitoneal lymph nodes were not enlarged.
Based on imaging studies, we considered a duodenal sarcoma with bleeding and necrosis. Due to gastrointestinal obstruction and bleeding, urgent surgical resection was recommended to the patient and undertaken. A pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with partial resection of the inferior vena cava and right hemicolectomy were performed. The patient developed delayed gastric emptying and was discharged 22 days postoperatively.
Pathological examination of the pancreaticoduodenectomy specimen demonstrated a pale tan-colored tumor in the duodenum, measuring approximately 16 × 8 × 4 cm, accompanied by hemorrhage and necrosis, and invading into the serosa of the adjacent colon. The tumor invasion breached through the mucosa of the duodenum, extending to the duodenal papilla, but the common bile duct and the pancreas were uninvolved. Surgical margins were negative for tumor invasion.
Histologically, the tumor consisted of solid nodules of relatively uniform and round neoplastic cells . Focal necrosis and lobulation with fibrous stromal septa were seen. The neoplastic cells harbored a mild degree of nuclear pleomorphism and focally prominent nucleoli accompanied by clear to slightly eosinophilic and scant cytoplasm, with a Ewing sarcoma-like appearance. The neoplastic cells were immunohistochemically positive for WT1 (diffuse), ETV4 (diffuse), vimentin (diffuse), CD99 (diffuse) and bcl-2 (diffuse and weak), but negative for epithelial membrane antigen, broad cytokeratins (AE1/AE3), low molecular weight cytokeratins (CAM5.2), CD34, CD45, CD56, CD117, DOG-1, S-100 protein, aSMA, desmin, myogenin, myoD1, chromogranin A, synaptophysin and D2–40. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using a CIC break-apart probe set demonstrated CIC rearrangement. Thus, the final diagnosis of a CIC-rearranged sarcoma was made.
Two months postoperatively, the patient presented with low back pain. CT scan showed a new 16 cm tumor at the resection site and new lesions in the posterior segment of the liver and lingula of the lung . This recurrence of the CIC-rearranged sarcoma progressed with rapid deterioration of the patient’s status. We provided palliative care, and the patient died 3 months postoperatively.