A 69-year-old man was referred to the Microsurgery Unit of the Orthopaedic Department of the IRCCS Galeazzi Orthopaedic Institute in September 2009 because of left-sided coxalgia which had progressively worsened over the past year. Although the hip pain limited movement, he was still able to walk without the aid of crutches. There was no localized or generalized inflammation. Plain x-ray films showed marked degeneration of the left coxofemoral joint, with necrosis of the proximal epiphysis of femur and morphological alterations of the acetabulum without protrusion. The patient reportedly had no history of previous infections, trauma, or cancer; he was reluctant to give details on further questioning. No other investigations were performed and a clinical diagnosis of primary coxarthrosis was made. Hip arthroplasty was offered but the patient decided to postpone surgical treatment.
Three months later, he arrived at the Emergency Department of our institute because of a sudden deterioration of his condition and severe left hip pain. The patient was hospitalized.
The white cell count was elevated (10.1 × 109 cells/L; 74% neutrophils and 15.4% lymphocytes), the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 102 mm/h and the C reactive protein (CRP) level was 68.0 mg/L. The thromboplastin time was 21 sec (international normalized ratio [INR] 3.0); the activated partial thromboplastin time was 1.68 sec. CT scans revealed a wide zone of bone destruction . Because of poor bone quality and high risk of infection, a Girdlestone's procedure (non-prosthetic arthroplasty) was performed with a view to delay definitive prosthesis until the patient's general condition had improved. Histologic examination revealed complete destruction of the bone structure, with extensive areas of bone resorption and very few residual necrotic bony trabecules . The intertrabecular spaces revealed coagulative necrosis with histiocytic infiltration. In the residual vital bone there was lymphoplasmacellular infiltration, with non-necrotizing granulomas and multinucleated giant cells. Special staining (PAS, Ziehl-Neelsen, and Warthin-Star) showed no evidence of microorganisms.
Microbiological cultures of surgical samples for bacteria, acid-fast bacilli and fungi were negative. Since no apparent infectious etiology could be determined, serological syphilis testing was performed. The serum rapid plasma reagin test was positive; the Treponema pallidum particle agglutination test (TP-PA) was positive at a titer of 1: 20480, indicating reactivation of syphilis. The TP-PA titer was confirmed on a second independent sample obtained two days later.
The rates of syphilis have been increasing in the HIV-seropositive population. This man did not voluntarily reported his HIV or HCV serostatus, but the yield from questions about sexual history can be quite low. Only when confronted with the laboratory findings did he disclose his true serostatus. A diagnosis of HIV-HCV co-infection was subsequently confirmed by serology.
According to test results obtained from another laboratory in January 2010, the HIV viral load was below the limit of detection (40 IU/mL) due to previous successful antiretroviral therapy; the HCV RNA was 1071650 IU/mL; the liver enzyme values were as follows: GOT 40 U/L; GPT 54 U/L; and γGT 251 U/L. On admission to our hospital, the liver enzyme values were: GOT 52 U/L; GPT 67 U/L; and γGT 445 U/L. The man stated that he was not in therapy for HIV or HCV infection. No other data about his clinical history could be obtained because he had been treated in another hospital.
Further serological testing excluded recent infection by Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV), although high IgG levels were detected for both viruses.
The interferon-gamma release assay (Quantiferon TB-Gold) was negative; latent or active mycobacterial infections were therefore excluded. Although histological findings were inconclusive, when we considered the constellation of findings from surgical specimen culture and chest imaging and the absence of clinical signs or symptoms of active tubercular infection, the positive serology for syphilis associated with a progressive arthropathy was thought to be diagnostic of tertiary syphilis for which no treatment was given.
On the basis of these findings, the diagnosis was revised to neuropathic destructive arthropathy of the left hip.
After an immobilization period of 20 days, the patient entered a physical rehabilitation program which is still continuing. He has partially recovered weight-bearing but still requires the aid of crutches for walking. With appropriate therapy, further improvement in his walking ability can be expected.