A 7 month old male patient was referred to our medical centre with symptoms of respiratory distress due to choanal atresia. An operation plan was made for this disorder when he was 48 days old. He was born by normal spontaneous vaginal delivery at 34th gestational week with a birth weight of 1750 g. He had no siblings. The non-consanguineous parents were both 23 years old. The mother had no medical history for spontaneus or medical abortus. The family history for congenital heart defect was unremarkable.
The patient weighed 5.5 kg (< 3 percentile) and his height was 61 cm (< 3 percentile). Vital signs were normal. Blood pressures were in normal range and there was no significant blood pressure gradient between upper and lower extremities, with systolic pressures 75 mmHg and 77 mmHg respectively. Physical examination revealed dysmorphic appearance, facial asymmetry (absence of depressor anguli oris muscle), short neck, choanal atresia, cleft palate, bilateral preauricular skin tags, bilateral hypoplastic ear lobes, epibulbar dermoid cyst in right eye . On cardiac examination there was a 3/6 degree holosystolic heart murmur best heard on left middle side of sternum. The other organ system examinations were all normal.
Routine blood tests including complete blood count, blood biochemistry, arterial blood gas, coagulation tests were all in normal ranges. Abdominal ultrasonography was normal.
Roentgenograms revealed hypoplasia of the right first rib, agenesis of left 12th rib, hypoplasia of the left side of 5th thoracic vertebra, unilateral 3rd thoracic hemi-vertebra and bilateral hemi-vertebra sign on 5th thoracic vertebra.
The paranasal computed tomography revealed bilateral choanal atresia, osseous in right side and membranous in left side on coronal and axial sections.
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging revealed increased extra cerebral cerebrospinal fluid distance of fronto-temporal and pre-pontin regions. Third and lateral ventricles were mildly dilated. Cleft palate was also noted in coronal sections.
In echocardiographic assessment a VSD on perimembraneous outlet septum - 5.5 mm in diameter and with left to right shunt- , a small secundum ASD and a double lumen appearance in transverse aortic arch were determined. Brachiocephalic trunk, left common carotis artery and left subclavian artery were seperating from upper, original aortic arch . Measurements revealed aortic valve annulus 9 mm, ascending aorta 10 mm, upper aortic arch 4.6 mm, lower arch –PFAA- 5.8 mm, proximal descending aorta 5 mm. Systolic functions were in normal range with ejection fraction 69% and shortening fraction 37%. Left ventricle was mildly dilated, with end-diastolic diameter of 26 mm (Z score + 1.8 SD). Pulmonary artery was dilated (diameter 15.6 mm, Z score + 3.1 SD). There was no subvalvular or valvular pulmonary stenosis.
The ECG findings were in normal ranges with sinus rhythm, a heart rate of 135 beats per minute, normal axis, normal intervals including corrected QT of 0.39 s. There was no pathological ST or T wave findings, AV block or extra beats.
In three-dimensional computed tomographic angiography it was determined that, aortic arch was divided into two parallel lumens opposite to the seperation of right brachiocephalic truncus, suggesting persistent fifth aortic arch, and these parallel lumens joined with the proximal part of the descending aorta. Left carotis communis artery and left subclavian artery were leaving from original, superior, aortic arch as its branches .
Routine chromosomal analysis of peripheral blood showed normal male constitutional caryotype 46, XY and fluorescense in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis for 22q11.2 deletion (Vysis Inc.) was also normal.
As the patient presented strong facial dysmorphism and severe congenital heart defects, an Array CGH analysis was planned to rule out the possible microdeletions and duplications. This was done by NimbleGen CGH 6x630K ISCA Plus Cytogenetic Arrays after obtaining a normal karyotype and normal FISH results for 22q11.2. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) analysis also did not reveal any apparent causative mutation. However a 84 kb duplication in the region 22q11.2 was interpreted as possibly pathogenic . The mutation was related to Cat Eye Syndrome which included overlapping clinical manifestations with OAVS. Detailed genetic study could not be performed for the parents because of social reasons.
The patient was diagnosed as OAVS, operated for bilateral choanal atresia when he was 50 days old with a satisfactory result. Cardiac glycoside and diuretic medical treatment were given in clinical follow up at fifth months of age because of clinical symptoms of heart failure as insufficient weight gain and mild continuous tachypnea. Chronic heart failure symptoms were under control with this treatment, he gained adequate weight and tachypnea improved within 1 month. He had no extra symptoms due to double lumen aorta. He is still under clinical follow up and gaining adequate weight.