An 88-year-old Japanese woman with bacterial pneumonia was admitted to our hospital. Her medical history included angina pectoris and nontuberculous mycobacterial pulmonary infection. She had no history of atrial fibrillation. She occasionally felt pain at rest in her left leg during hospitalization. Pneumonia resolved with antibiotic therapy. On the 23rd day of hospitalization, she complained of constant pain at rest and cyanosis in the left leg. Two days later, the pain and skin color worsened. Her body temperature was 36.6 °C; blood pressure, 150/70 mmHg; regular pulse rate, 80 beats/min; and oxygen saturation, 93% (without oxygen administration). The ankle-brachial pressure index of the left leg was 0.57. Myogenic enzymes and lactic acid were not elevated in laboratory findings, and the left lower limb had not become necrosed. Computed tomography (CT) angiography revealed severe stenosis of the left common iliac artery (CIA) and total occlusion of the left external iliac artery (EIA) . As for the CIA lesion, the plaque seemed to exist at the ostium of the CIA . The arteries below the knee were also severely stenosed or occluded. We made a diagnosis of acute exacerbation of chronic limb ischemia and considered that the possibility of acute embolization was relatively low. We discussed the treatment strategy, including optimal medical therapy or surgical bypass grafts. Considering the patient’s age, severe symptoms, and general condition, we thought the endovascular approach would be more suitable. We administered EVT to treat the left CIA and EIA lesion, in addition to the medical treatment comprising heparin, aspirin, and alprostadil. The results of initial angiography agreed with those of CT angiography , and we planned to place stents for both CIA and EIA lesions. Since the left common femoral artery (CFA) had moderate to severe stenosis and the crossover approach via the right CFA seemed to be difficult because of the left CIA lesion, we inserted a 6-Fr Sheathless PV® guiding catheter (Asahi Intecc, Japan) into the terminal aorta via the left brachial artery. We attempted antegrade wiring using a 0.018-in. wire with intravascular ultrasound (IVUS), changing wires several times. We finally passed a 0.014-in. wire into the left CFA. We performed pre-dilatation with a 4-mm balloon for both CIA and EIA lesions, and thrombus aspiration for the EIA lesion using a 6-Fr straight guiding catheter but no thrombus was aspirated. Subsequently, angiography showed good antegrade blood flow . To simplify the adjustment of the stent deployment position, especially the stent proximal edge, we switched to the left CFA approach; we re-punctured the left CFA and passed the wire into the aorta. IVUS in the EIA lesion showed that the wire passed through the true lumen and the lesion consisted chiefly of mixed plaque with no calcification . We did not perform IVUS for the CIA lesion. We first performed single-stenting using a self-expandable stent, an Epic® stent (120 × 40 mm) (Boston Scientific, USA), for the left CIA lesion, and then placed two other Epic® stents (90 × 100 mm and 80 × 40 mm, respectively) at the EIA lesion. After post-dilatation with a 5-mm balloon for each lesion, angiography showed significant plaque shifting to the right CIA . Moreover, the stent in the left CIA completely crossed over the contralateral CIA . We inserted a 6-Fr sheath via the right CFA and performed an IVUS for the shifted plaque. A large mobile plaque with a high risk of distal embolization was observed. We considered that it would be challenging to implant an additional stent in the right CIA to cover the plaque. Therefore, we performed long balloon inflation with an 8-mm balloon to compress and stabilize the shifted plaque. The final angiography showed good blood flow in both lower limbs with no evidence of distal embolization. Since there was no flow limitation or pressure gradient across the shifted plaque, we completed the procedure. On the day after EVT, the patient developed livedo reticularis on both lower limbs, with a high inflammatory response and worsening renal function. Although eosinophilia was not observed, we considered that the cause of death was cholesterol embolization based on this clinical course. Eventually, the patient died of multiple organ failure 3 days after EVT despite treatment.