A 35-year-old Japanese male presented with abdominal pain.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed a right renal tumor with a venous to arterial thrombus . No remarkable invasion in the peripheral organs or metastasis was observed. The stage of the tumor was determined to be cT3N0M0. The level of the tumor embolism was evaluated as IV based on Novic’s classification. The eastern cooperative oncology group- performance status (ECOG-PS) was evaluated as 1. The patient had a medical history of renal transplantation at 26 years of age and immunoglonblin A (IgA) nephropathy, and was being treated with the immunosuppressants tacrolimus and prednisolone.
After reviewing whether surgery should be performed promptly or drug therapy should initially be conducted, the risk of perioperative complications was explained to the patient and his family. Preoperative drug therapy with sunitinib was subsequently selected. The risk according to the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) scale was regarded as intermediate (hemoglobin and time from the diagnosis to treatment).
Eight courses of sunitinib therapy were administered. Because the patient had previously undergone renal transplantation, the initial dose of sunitinib administered was 25 mg. This dose was gradually increased while monitoring the patient for adverse events: 1st to 2nd courses, 25 mg; 3rd to 4th courses, 37.5 mg; 5th to 7th courses, 50 mg; and 8th course, 37.5 mg. Edema was exacerbated during the 2 weeks of discontinuation; therefore, the discontinuation period was established as 7 to 10 days from the 4th course. The relative dose intensity was 79% in all courses.
After the 1st course had been completed, CT revealed that the sizes of the primary focus and tumor thrombus were decreased by 13% and 17%, respectively (Response evaluation criteria in solid tumors [RECIST] ver 1.1). Sunitinib therapy was conducted for 10 months. Although no changes were observed in the level of the tumor thrombus (IV), the size of the primary tumor decreased by 33%, while that of the tumor thrombus was reduced by 39.5% (Figure ). Edema (G2), fever (G1), general malaise (G2), and an increase in creatinine level (3.71 mg/dl, G2) were observed as adverse events.
Surgery was performed using the following procedures: an L-shaped dermal incision, liver mobilization, securing the right ureter/renal vein, and ligation of the renal artery.
Peripheral inferior vena cava (IVC) blood flow was blocked by cardiopulmonary bypass. The IVC to the right atrial region was incised to extirpate the right atrial tumor. Adhesion was noted between the tumor embolus and vascular wall. The right kidney and tumor embolus were extirpated as a mass. The IVC wall was partially and simultaneously resected.
The operation time was 17 hours and 43 minutes. The volume of intraoperative blood lost was 9,807 cc, while that of blood loss in the presence of a Cell Saver® was 23,578 cc. Regarding blood transfusions, 130 units of red blood cells (RBC), 80 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and 20 units of platelets (Plt) were required.
Histopathologically, clear cell carcinoma with a sarcomatoid component (less than 10%) (pT3c, G2 = G1 > G3, INFc, v1, ly0, ig, fc1) was suggested. A viable cancer cell nest with vitrification and necrosis was observed in the tumor embolus.
Right subclavian arterial hemorrhage (post operative day (POD) 14, Clavien Grade IIIa), abdominal wound infection (POD 35, Grade IIIb), and central venous catheter infection (POD 89, Grade II) occurred as perioperative complications. The patient was discharged on the 113th postoperative day.
CT revealed a recurrent tumor (measuring 20 mm) in the right retroperitoneal floor 1 month after surgery, which had increased to 45 mm at 4 months after surgery (Figure a). A partial response was achieved after 3 months of therapy, as shown by a 73% reduction in the size of the tumor. CT showed a CR after the administration of sunitinib for 9 months (Figure b). An additional course was subsequently administered, and the treatment was completed after 11 months. No relapse or metastasis as observed during the 2-year follow-up following completion of the administration of sunitinib (interval from the start of treatment: 3 years), and CR was maintained.