A 78-year-old man presented to our department with mild motor weakness of the right leg. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain demonstrated small masses in the left frontal and parietal lobes . The abnormal lesion had been increasing rapidly for 3 weeks, and a new lesion appeared in the frontal lobe . All of the tumors on MRI findings showed high intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), and they were homogeneously enhanced to a high degree with gadolinium (Gd) [ and ]. However, there was no hyperintense connection between the left hemisphere lesions and the right frontal lobe tumor on fluid- attenuated inversion recovery. 11C-methionine PET showed abnormal uptake corresponding to the lesion. The maximum standardized uptake values were left frontal mass 5.28, left parietal mass 4.76, and right frontal mass 2.83 . Laboratory examinations, including cerebrospinal fluid studies, showed no abnormal findings, and the concentrations of tumor markers remained with normal limits. To confirm the histological diagnosis, surgical gross total resection of the right frontal lesion was performed by craniotomy. Histological findings obtained from hematoxylin and eosin staining of the tumor showed diffuse astrocytoma, and the tumor cells showed negative immunostaining for R132H-mutated isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (IDH-1), P53, and phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted from chromosome 10 (PTEN). The Ki-67 (MIB-1) proliferation-related labeling index was low, at 4.0% [ and ]. Given the pathological results, only radiotherapy without chemotherapy was planned, but the remaining left frontal and parietal tumors progressed further within a short period . Therefore, it was thought that these tumors were malignant glioma, such as GBM, and a biopsy of the left parietal tumor was performed. Histological diagnosis showed highly cellular and medium-sized rounded cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and laterally positioned nuclei . On immunohistochemical examinations, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and integrase interactor 1 (INI-1) staining were observed in epithelioid cells [ and ]. In addition, O6- methylguanine-methyltransferase immunoreactivity of tumor cell nuclei was also observed at the positive rate of 76.3%. However, most tumor cells were negatively stained for p53, PTEN, and R132H-mutated IDH-1. The MIB-1 labeling index was high, at 40.0% . BRAF V600E mutations were not identified, but TERT promoter mutations were recognized (C250T: c.−146C>T) . Taking all these results into account, the final diagnosis was epithelioid GBM in accordance with the 2016 WHO Classification of Tumors of the CNS. Immediately after surgery, the patient was treated with chemotherapy using temozolomide (TMZ) (75 mg/m2) and extended local radiotherapy (40 Gy/15 fractions). Nevertheless, after the administration of TMZ at 3 weeks, the tumors showed further growth on MRI , and the symptom of right hemiparesis worsened apparently, so bevacizumab was added at this point. There were then no signs of recurrence, and MRI at 10 months after initial treatment showed marked size reduction and disappearance of peritumoral hyperintense lesions . In addition, the patient’s neurological findings returned to near normal.