A 68-year-old, 179 cm, 108 kg man presented to the authors’ preoperative anesthesia clinic for evaluation before anticipated removal of infected total knee arthroplasty hardware, placement of antibiotic spacers, incision and drainage procedures, and revision arthroplasty. The patient had undergone a right total knee arthroplasty for osteoarthritis eight years before the current evaluation, but he subsequently developed a draining sinus tract in the operative joint consistent with a chronic infection that had not responded to conservative treatment. The patient’s past medical history was notable for obstructive sleep apnea, tobacco abuse, moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (documented with pulmonary function tests; responsive to inhaled bronchodilators), and squamous cell carcinoma of the right true vocal cord (stage T2N0) for which he had previously undergone a right vertical hemilaryngectomy nine years before current evaluation. A tracheostomy that was performed as part of the hemilaryngectomy had been allowed to spontaneously close as he recovered from the operation. The patient was not treated with head and neck radiation therapy nor did he receive adjuvant chemotherapy. The patient reported that he was chronically short of breath and had been intermittently since the tracheostomy closed. He was unable to tolerate continuous positive airway pressure equipment for treatment of his obstructive sleep apnea. He described dyspnea on exertion with minimal exercise. Indeed, he was noticeably short of breath after walking from the waiting room to the clinic office (a distance of less than 50 feet). Reduced breath sounds with inspiratory and expiratory wheezes were heard during auscultation of his lungs. Intermittent inspiratory stridor was also present. The patient’s voice was coarse and soft in character. A Mallampati class 3 upper airway was present, the thyromental distance was approximately 5 cm, and cervical osteoarthritis limited the patient’s ability to extend his neck. These findings suggested that endotracheal intubation may be somewhat more difficult using direct laryngoscopy, but based on this standard assessment, the authors felt that the patient’s airway could be easily secured using a videolaryngoscope. Nevertheless, the previous hemilaryngectomy, closed tracheostomy, obstructive sleep apnea, and mild inspiratory stridor, prompted the authors to perform a transnasal videoendoscopy examination of the upper airway. Topical local anesthesia [consisting of 4% lidocaine mixed with phenylephrine (200 mcg)] was applied into the right nares and upper oropharynx using an atomizer with the patient in sitting position. A videoendoscope (Olympus ENF-VH, Tokyo, Japan) was then gently passed through the right nares and advanced through the oropharynx to a position immediately above the glottis. Absence of the right arytenoid complex was noted consistent with the previous hemilaryngectomy . The left vocal cord moved normally with phonation, but supraglottic scarring narrowed the glottic opening. Subglottic airway narrowing was also observed beyond the glottic opening ; the authors did not attempt to further examine the proximal trachea as a result. A large amount of redundant tissue was also noted in the lower oropharynx that caused partial airway obstruction with the patient breathing spontaneously. This latter finding was consistent with the established diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The videoendoscope was removed after the examination was completed. The patient tolerated the procedure well.
Because of the patient’s symptoms and the authors’ videoendoscopy findings, the patient was referred to the otolaryngology clinic for further evaluation. Computed tomography revealed tracheal stenosis; a segment of the proximal subglottic trachea was narrowed to a diameter of approximately 4 mm . Computed tomography also showed cartilageous erosion consistent with tracheomalacia. The otolaryngology consultant initially proposed tracheal reconstruction, but this option was not feasible in the short term because of the urgent need to address the infected knee arthroplasty. The otolaryngologist concurred with the authors who were concerned that repetitive endotracheal intubation and extubation was not an option for this patient with a substantially narrowed glottis and subglottic stenosis. As a result, the patient underwent an elective permanent tracheostomy under conscious sedation (intravenous midazolam and fentanyl) to obtain definitive control of his airway immediately before the infected knee arthroplasty was removed and antibiotic spacers were placed after induction of general anesthesia. A subsequent incision and drainage procedure was also performed. The patient eventually underwent a revision total knee arthroplasty several months later after the infection had been successfully treated. The patient made an uneventful recovery after each operation.