A 63-year-old woman of Chinese lineage with a medical history of XLAS diagnosed at age 23, presented at the emergency room after reporting repeat chest pain and a "clammy" feeling that persisted for >2 hours. Laboratory tests showed an elevated BUN to creatinine ration of 27, (27mg/dl BUN/1.0 mg/dl creatine) consistent with possible kidney damage. The patient has a history of hypertension, and medications included lisinopril (20 mg) with hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg) and allopurinol (300 mg daily, for gout). The patient did not report other risk factors for cardiovascular disease. The workup, including the chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (EKG), enzyme levels, and stress tests, were normal. Outpatient cardiac calcium score imaging revealed the presence of an ascending aortal aneurysm that was confirmed by computerized tomography (CT) angiography . Genetic testing of the patient at age 65 years, confirmed mutation of the XLAS-linked Col4a5 gene (variant: c.4791T>A (p.Tyr1597*) as well as an ABCC8 gene mutation (variant: c.4178G>A (p.Arg1393His) that can lead to metabolic disorders.
Echocardiography showed no evidence of significant valvular heart disease other than minimal aortic stenosis and stage I diastolic dysfunction. The patient underwent heart catheterization, which showed no evidence of significant coronary artery disease. Electively and without complications, the patient received an ascending aortic aneurysm replacement utilizing a Hemashield graft. The excised aortal tissue was collected, fixed, and stained for histopathological studies, including hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), Alcian blue, and CD45 immunostaining. After aortic aneurysm repair, her medications were changed to chlorthalidone (12.5 mg), atorvastatin (20 mg), carvedilol (12.5mg), and aspirin (80mg) per day. The case timeline is outlined in Fig. A.
Noteworthy, as presented in the genogram , the patient has a family history of AS, including a 55-year-old brother with severe hearing loss, chronic end-stage renal disease, and double kidney transplants. Irregularities of the brother’s aorta or presence of hypertension are not reported. The patient’s son also has an AS diagnosis, wears hearing aids, and has undergone double kidney transplantations. The son is also hypertensive and has a diagnosis of mild aortic aneurysm.