An 80-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency medical center of our hospital based on a complaint of myalgia and abdominal pain. According to the patient and his daughter, the patient had no known comorbidities, including psychiatric disorders, immune deficiency or trauma-related problems. The patient was hemodynamically unstable; he was hypotensive, and his body temperature was increased to 40.7 °C upon the first examination. As the patient exhibited jaundice with abnormal laboratory findings (total bilirubin, 5.46 mg/dL; aspartate transaminase, 251 U/L; alanine transaminase, 143 U/L), bedside biliary ultrasonography was immediately performed, and the results showed no abnormal findings with regard to the biliary system. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed diffuse wall thickening and several diverticula of the sigmoid colon with multiple air bubbles in the portal venous system . Nevertheless, we found no abnormalities in the biliary system, such as a gallstone or cholelithiasis; however, no further information could be established via the CT scan because the study was performed without contrast enhancement due to the decreased renal function of the patient. The initial diagnosis made at the time of admission was septic shock caused by atypical biliary disease; therefore, this patient was admitted to our surgical intensive care unit and received fluid resuscitation and empirical antibiotic treatment (meropenem against suspicious gram-negative bacteremia), although we could not determine the definitive infectious source of septic shock in this patient.
After admission to the intensive care unit and 5 days of hospitalization, the patient became hemodynamically stable, and the laboratory findings of jaundice and renal function were improved; however, he complained of persistent abdominal pain. As the renal function of the patient improved, we performed a consecutive abdominal CT scan with contrast enhancement to identify any possible cause of the abdominal pain in this patient and to recheck for any infectious origin of the sepsis. In contrast with the initial CT scan, the second CT scan showed a 5 cm abscess in the mesentery of the sigmoid colon and aggravated pylephlebitis of the portal venous system . Additionally, Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteremia was confirmed via a blood culture test performed at the time of admission; therefore, the diagnosis of this patient was changed to sigmoid colon diverticular perforation with pylephlebitis based on both initial and consecutive CT scans. We performed sigmoidoscopy to identify the diverticula of the sigmoid colon; however, no diverticular disease was found . As the results of the diagnostic work-up were conflicting and fatal outcomes were expected due to persistent pylephlebitis and abdominal pain, we performed an exploratory laparotomy on the 8th hospital day. The abdominal cavity was entered via a low midline incision. The peritoneal cavity was clean with no contamination, and we could not find any perforation or abnormalities in the biliary system or intestine, including the sigmoid colon. Instead, we observed an extraordinary retroperitoneal bulge, to which the sigmoid colon mesentery was attached, and retroperitoneal dissection revealed a 5 × 5 cm whitish abscess pocket around the iliac artery bifurcation . This abscess cavity was completely separated from the sigmoid colon mesentery, and the capsule was severely adhered to the aorta and left iliac artery. The capsule was a solitary abscess with no fistula with adjacent organs. As the complete removal of the abscess cavity required massive dissection and might have caused unpredictable complications, we performed only incision, drainage, and curettage. A microbial culture test was also performed on the tissue and pus of the abscess cavity. Finally, an additional examination of the whole peritoneal cavity and organ systems was conducted; however, no infectious origin of the RA was found in the gastrointestinal or genitourinary system.
After the operation, microbial blood culture tests were performed, and intravenous vancomycin was empirically added to the antibacterial regimen to cover methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), which is one of the major pathogens isolated from RAs. After a detailed interview with his daughter, we found that this patient had received frequent acupuncture by an unqualified therapist in the low lumbar region to treat chronic back pain, and the point of the acupuncture was exactly identical to that of the RA. The clinical and laboratory parameters of the patient gradually improved, and oral feeding was resumed on the 4th postoperative day. MRSA was identified in the microbial culture tests of pus and tissue; however, a blood culture test performed immediately after the surgery revealed no pathogen. In addition, there was no evidence of tuberculosis or malignancy on pathological examination for retrieved tissue. The patient responded well to the treatment and was discharged from the hospital at 20 days after the operation. We checked a follow-up CT scan taken in the outpatient department 40 days after the operation and identified no remaining pylephlebitis or abscess.