A 41-year old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with chief complaints of high-grade intermittent fevers and severe abdominal pain.
The patient described the fever as episodic, high grade (maximum temperature of 103F), without chills or rigors, and associated with a non-productive cough for one week. He also complained of severe, intermittent, diffuse abdominal pain associated with diarrhea and hematochezia for 2 d prior to this ED visit. He did not have a sore throat, rhinorrhea, abdominal pain, joint pain or rash.
The patient had a past medical history significant for UC. The patient had lived in the Great Lakes region for his entire life, worked in construction for many years and had no history of recent travel. He lived with 3 young children who all had recently suffered from a viral respiratory tract infection lasting approximately 1 wk. He had pets at home including a gecko, a rabbit and 2 dogs. 10 mo prior, he had presented to the ED with similar complaints of diffuse abdominal pain and diarrhea associated with haematochezia for 6 wk. Investigation for common conditions such as gastrointestinal infections, endocrine disorders, food allergies and medication changes were ruled out, and a decision was made to perform a colonoscopy with tissue biopsy. Biopsy from the colon revealed non-specific histological findings i.e. crypt abscess, mild architectural distortion of the lamina propria and chronic inflammation. Markers of acute inflammation such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and c-reactive protein (CRP) were also found to be elevated, suggesting a diagnosis of UC. The patient was started on prednisolone 40 mg daily which lead to resolution of his symptoms. A decision was made to have the patient continue on prednisolone 40 mg daily after failed attempts to switch the regimen to mesalamine lead to mesalamine-induced pancreatitis, and treatment with Vedolizumab lead to an allergic reaction after the second dose.
Family history was significant for IBD in his mother. The patient had no other significant past medical history.
On examination, he was febrile with a temperature of 103F, heart rate 112 beats/min, and blood pressure 124/74 mmHg. On abdominal examination, no tenderness was noted but mild splenomegaly was appreciated. The working diagnosis of the patient’s presentation at this time was believed to be an acute exacerbation of his underlying UC.
Laboratory investigations were ordered, and infectious disease was consulted, with recommendations to start broad spectrum antibiotics until a definite cause could be established. Laboratory investigations revealed a Hemoglobin of 11.8 g/dL, white blood cell (WBC) count of 4.1 × 109 cells/L with 70% granulocytes, 22% lymphocytes and 0.1% eosinophils. Procalcitonin was elevated at 0.39 and elevations in the liver enzymes were also noted with alanine aminotransferase 232 U/L, Alkaline phosphatase 266 U/L and aspartate transaminase 79 U/L. Blood cultures showed no growth, and stool analysis was negative for Clostridium difficile (C. diff) and parasites. Interestingly, H. capsulatum antigen was detected in the urine. Hence, the working diagnosis was changed from an acute exacerbation of UC to GIH.
To confirm the diagnosis of GIH, the patient was offered a colonoscopy with biopsy, however he refused this stating that he preferred treatment for H. capsulatum based on the high specificity of the urine antigen testing.