A 58-year-old Japanese man visited us because of a soft tissue mass on the lateral aspect of the left shoulder that had been noticed 2 years prior. His past and family histories were not contributory. All other laboratory examinations showed no abnormalities. The spherical tumor, measuring 5cm×4cm, was elastic and firm on palpation and immobile. There were no other findings of inflammation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the lesion was localized in the left deltoid muscle. On MRI scans, the tumor showed low signal intensity or isointensity to skeletal muscle at the center. It showed high signal intensity at the periphery of the lesion on a T1-weighted image . It also showed high signal intensity on a T2-weighted image and a gadolinium-enhanced image . However, the signal intensity was substantially lower than that of normal subcutaneous adipose tissue. On the basis of these radiological findings, we suspected a lipogenic tumor. A needle biopsy was performed to make a histological diagnosis. Histologically, the tumor was a lipomatous tumor consisted mostly of atypical lipocytes with a slightly greater variation in size and shape than those of normal fat. Although the atypism of the cells was slight and mitoses were not seen, a few lipoblast-like cells and fibroblast-like cells were seen. The results of MDM2 immunostaining were negative.
On the basis of the pre-operative diagnosis of intramuscular lipoma, we removed the tumor with the patient under general anesthesia. During surgery, it was confirmed that the whole lesion was localized underneath the fascia and embedded within the deltoid. There was no adhesion to the surrounding tissues . The tumor was removed with surrounding musculature and fascia. The excised tumor was 5cm×4cm×3cm in size and had a yellowish color like that of a lipoma . However, it was slightly harder than a typical lipoma. The bisected surface was whiter than a typical lipoma . To make a pathological diagnosis, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The tumor consisted of spindle cells, collagen fibers and lipocytes . The striated muscle fibers were infiltrated and entrapped by mature lipocytes in a diffuse manner. There were no lipoblasts or atypical cells. The results of immunohistochemical staining with MDM2, CDK4 and p16 were all negative. Therefore, we diagnosed intramuscular SCL of the left shoulder.