A 66-year-old Caucasian male underwent right-sided uretero-nephrectomy due to high-grade muscle-infiltrating urothelial carcinoma, pT2N0M0, stage II in October 2006 and radical cystectomy with Mainz pouch II urinary diversion for high-grade muscle-infiltrating urothelial bladder carcinoma, pT2N0M0, stage II in April 2010. The malignant urothelial cells from bladder were positive for cytokeratin CK7 and cytokeratin CK20, and showed negativity for p63, vimentin and calretinin. The patient was observed by a urologist.
On March 3, 2017, an enlarged lymph node in the right groin was surgically removed and relapse of urothelial carcinoma was confirmed by histopathology examination. Abdominal, pelvic and thoracic computed tomography (apt-CT) with contrast was performed on March 27, 2017. This showed lymphadenopathy (LAP) in the left supraclavicular area, in the retroperitoneum, bilaterally in the para-iliac area, and in both groins. Bajorin prognostic score (performance status > 1 and the presence of visceral involvement) was zero in this patient. Median survival of patients with no negative prognostic factors was 33.0 months in this study by Bajorin et al. .
From March 28, 2017 to July 18, 2017, this patient underwent six courses of gemcitabine (G, 2000 mg/m2 intravenously on days 1 and 8) with cisplatin (C, 70 mg/m2 intravenously on day 1) without any serious adverse event of grades 3 and 4. Only grade 1, anemia and fatigue were recorded. The first apt-CT scan on May 31, 2017, showed a complete response, which was confirmed by subsequent apt-CT scan after GC completion on August 10, 2017. Then, the patient was observed by an oncologist. Cardiac function was assessed by echocardiography before GC initiation. Only type 1 diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle (LV) and a slight degenerative rearrangement of the valves were determined. LV ejection fraction was 63%, no pericardial effusion was present.
On November 10, 2017, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed localized pathological LAP close to the left external iliac vessels and in the left groin area, clinical scrotal oedema was present. Due to localized relapse, external beam radiotherapy (ExRT) to the total dose of 40 Grays (Gy) was applied to the area of LAP from November 13, 2017 to December 12, 2017 without any serious acute toxicity.
A restaging apt-CT scan was performed on January 17, 2018, revealing an enlarged aortocaval retroperitoneal lymph node sized 25 mm × 18 mm (a target lesion, Fig. ) and another enlarged retroperitoneal lymph node sized 39 mm × 13 mm (a non-target lesion). Bellmunt prognostic score (performance status < 0, hemoglobin level less than 10 g/dL, and the presence of liver metastasis) was zero in this patient. Median survival of patients without any negative prognostic factors was 14.2 months in this Bellmunt study .
From January 17, 2018, this patient who met the inclusion criteria was treated within the clinical trial NCT02928406 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier) with atezolizumab (1200 mg intravenously every 3 weeks), a monoclonal antibody against PD-L1. On the pre-planned restaging apt-CT scan on August 8, 2018, complete remission was shown. The enlarged aortocaval retroperitoneal lymph node (a target lesion) decreased in size from 25 mm × 18 mm to 6 mm × 5 mm ; however clinical scrotal oedema persisted. The patient was treated with immunotherapy until September 20, 2018 without any serious (grades 3 and 4) adverse event. Only grade 1 fatigue was recorded during this systemic therapy.
On October 4, 2018, the patient was admitted to the hospital with clinical deterioration in terms of anxiety and restlessness, weakness, rapid breathing, fainting, dizziness followed by rapid loss of consciousness. On admission, hypotension (blood pressure 60/35 mm Hg), peripheral cyanosis, and distant heartbeat sounds on auscultation were present. Increase in aminotransferases (alanine aminotransferase 6300 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase 6300 IU/L), creatine of 3.62 mg/dL, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypo-coagulation state, and metabolic acidosis were also recorded. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed low QRS voltage and sinus tachycardia (120 per minute). Echocardiography could not be utilized because during physical examination, the patient went into pulmonary circulatory arrest, resuscitation was unsuccessful and he died due to cardiorespiratory failure.
In making differential diagnoses, we considered the toxicity of atezolizumab since complete response was present on the most recent CT re-evaluation. On pathological examination, no macroscopic visible neoplasia was found. However, in the pericardial cavity a small amount (less than 50 ml) of sanguinolent effusion was present and the pericardium was covered by irregular grey coatings. The complete pericardium was covered by gray-to-white coatings and in evaluated sections infiltrated by neoplastic cells, histologically corresponding to the metastatic dissemination of invasive urothelial carcinoma . Microscopic examination showed thickening of the pericardium infiltrated by neoplastic proliferation and the formation of irregular nests of epithelioid cells with marked pleomorphism, enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei with a high n/c ratio. No significant inflammatory infiltration was present. Immunohistochemical examination confirmed pericardial infiltration by high grade urothelial carcinoma. The neoplastic cells showed positivity for cytokeratin markers CK7 and CK20 and were negative for p63, vimentin and calretinin. The activated mesothelial cells were weakly positive for CK7, negative for CK20 and p63 and showed regular positivity for vimentin and calretinin. PD-L1 expression was analyzed immunohistochemically using the rabbit monoclonal antibody against PD-L1 (28–8 clone, Merck Cell Marque, Rocklin, California, USA). PD-L1 status was negative . The paraaortic lymph nodes were not significantly enlarged, with elastic consistence and gray color on cross-section. No metastatic dissemination was found in evaluated in lymph nodes.
In this patient, progression-free survival (PFS) following first-line GC treatment was 8.3 months and 8.5 months for second-line immunotherapy. Overall survival (OS) from initiation of systemic therapy until death was 19.1 months.