A 26-year old man from the outskirt of Kota Bharu in Kelantan presented with sudden onset of reduced vision of the left eye for one week duration. Initially it was a central field loss which had then progressively involved the whole visual field. It was associated with floaters but was painless with no eye redness, itchiness or discharge. He had four cats at home which he had a very close contact with. He denied any trauma to the eye or any eye injury and he had no past ocular history or medical illness.
His visual acuity was hand movement on the left eye with presence of relative afferent pupillary defect and 6/6 on the right eye. Left eye examination showed no inflammation in the anterior segment or the vitreous cavity. Funduscopic examination disclosed a white live nematode, approximately two disc diameters in length, moving slowly in the macula at the subretinal space . The body of the nematode was roughly tapered at one end and slightly rounded at the other end. There was presence of macular oedema and multifocal chorioretinal lesions at the peripheral retina. There was no evidence of worm track found clinically, no vasculitis or any retinal hemorrhage. However, fundus fluorescein angiography and visual evoked potential was not done in this patient. The right eye findings were normal. Systemic examination showed no significant finding with no jaundice or hepatosplenomegaly.
The blood investigations revealed white blood count of 10.4 × 109/L (high normal) with normal eosinophil count (0.12 × 109/L), hemoglobin of 17.0 g/L, red blood cell count of 6.38 × 1012/L (increased) and normal platelet count. The erythrocyte sedimentation rates (ESR), Mantoux test, liver function test, serum urea and electrolytes as well as his chest x-ray were also normal. Blood for serum toxocara antibody was negative.
Clinically he was diagnosed to have intraocular nematode with diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis. He was treated with oral albendazole 400 mg 12 hourly for five days based on recommendation by the infectious disease specialist. Two days after the treatment, the nematode was immobile, but its morphology and the rest of the retina remained the same . After completed five days of antihelminth, the nematode had disintegrated, leaving a mottled appearance of the macula with mild hyperpigmentation and resolving chorioretinal lesions . At the same time, oral prednisolone 30 mg perday for a week was also started in order to reduce the inflammation that might caused by toxins liberated from the dead nematode. Then, the dose of prednisolone was tapered down by 5 mg per week. The patient was discharged after one week with oral prednisolone of 25 mg/day. Upon discharge, his left eye visual acuity remains the same with no vitritis and resolved chorioretinal lesions.