A 54-year-old male presented to our hospital with a 1-year history of progressive numbness of the middle finger with point tenderness at the level of the middle phalanx. One year ago, he had visited our hospital and was diagnosed with a neuroma. Consequently, he was treated with the neurotrophic drug methylcobalamin, which resulted in no response. He had no trauma history. The patient had no family history of cancer and hereditary disease. The results of the cold sensitivity test were positive, which demonstrating an increase in localized pain on exposure of the affected finger to cold water. No swelling or superficial soft tissue solid mass was observed in the middle phalanx of the affected finger, but there was point tenderness at the level of the ulnar middle phalanx, which is associated with paresthesia and numbness. The Tinel’s sign was positive . Mobility and flexibility of fingers were normal.
Results of laboratory studies were all within normal ranges. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a small, hyperintense signal with dimensions of about 3.7*2.1 mm on T1 and T2-weighted images. The boundary was clear, and the images increased significantly after contrast enhancement. It was diagnosed as middle finger ulnar abnormal signal, neurogenic tumor or hemangioma. The patient was placed under general anesthesia. A brachial tourniquet was used, and the procedure was carried out using surgical loupes. The ulnar side of the middle finger was incised longitudinally, and the digital nerve was exposed. Two solitary tumors were observed within different fascicles of the same digital nerve. . One tumor was excised along with a segment of the surrounding nerve fascicle, while the other tumor was removed leaving the corresponding nerve fascicle intact. Nerve grafting was not performed because one nerve fascicle was preserved . Hyaluronate (HA) was used to prevent adhesion during the operation. Pathologic findings indicated the presence of multiple intraneural glomus tumors with proliferated nervous fibers. A tumor (4 mm × 2.5 mm in size) was wrapped by nervous fibers. Another tumor was 2 mm × 1.3 mm in size. The tumor cells surrounded the blood vessels and grew in a circular or fusiform shape. The cytoplasm was rich in eosinophils and interstitial mucus degeneration. No obvious cavernous blood vessels, no smooth muscle cells and no eosinophilic cytoplasm were observed. Therefore, the diagnosis of glomangioma, glomangiomyoma and oncocytic glomus tumor were excluded. The atypical features, mitoses and pleomorphism were not observed. Immunohistochemistry results were as follows: CD34 for vascular tumors (+), CK (pan) for tumors of epithelial origin (−), CD31 for endothelial cells and tumor angiogenesis (−), Desmin for mesenchymal tissues origin (small quantity +), EMA for epithelial origin (weak +), Ki-67 for cell proliferation in tumours (+ 2%), S-100 for nervous tissue origin (−), SMA for tumors of smooth muscle origin (+), Nestin for nervous tissue origin (+), CgA for tumors of neuroendocrine cells origin (−), and Syn for tumors of neuroendocrine cells origin (+) . The patient received celecoxib (Celebrex, 200 mg; Pfizer Pharmaceuticals Ltd., USA) twice a day for 1 week and methylcobalamin tablets (0.5 mg; Eisai Co. Ltd., Japan) every 8 h for 3 months after the surgery. The patient achieved full recovery of nerve function and experienced no tumor recurrence in the 2 years after surgery. The above study protocols were approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of the College of Medicine, Zhejiang University.