Appetite loss for several months.
A 76-year-old male visited our hospital complaining of appetite loss for several months.
The patient had hypertension.
The patient had no familial medial history.
Tenderness and percussion pain in the left flank were observed during the physical examination.
The complete blood count, serum electrolyte values, and urine analysis results were all within the normal ranges. The patient showed normal kidney function test with blood urea nitrogen of 15.7 mg/dL, serum creatinin of 0.75 mg/dL, serum uric acid of 5.3 mg/dL and modification of diet in renal disease-estimated glomerular filtration rate of 100.99.
On renal ultrasonography, an 11 cm × 10 cm cystic lesion was identified in the right renal lower pole with a 4.4 cm × 1.8 cm solid component on the posterior aspect of the cystic lesion, which showed increased vascularity on color doppler mode . On computed tomography (CT), a pre-contrast phase axial CT shows a cystic lesion with a mass at the posterior-lateral aspect of the right kidney interpolar region-lower pole . A subtle high-attenuation area is seen in the cystic lesion, suggesting hemorrhage. Corticomedullary and excretory phase axial CT shows progressive enhancement of the mass (pre-contrast phase: 40 HU, corticomedullary phase: 70 HU, excretory phase: 80 HU) and a suspiciously indistinct margin and invasion of the sinus . Corticomedullary phase coronal CT scan shows an irregular enhancing mass in a lesion with indistinct margins .
Ultrasound guided, core needle biopsy: Under suspicion of cystic papillary renal cell carcinoma (RCC), an ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy was performed for a targeted intracystic solid mass. Histological evaluation revealed solid sheets of primitive, small, and uniform cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and scant cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for synaptophysin and CD99. Staining for desmin, FLI1, leukocyte common antigen (LCA), pan-cytokeratin, neuron-specific enolase, and S100 were negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues showed a t(11; 22) Ewing sarcoma region 1 (EWSR1) translocation (zytolight SPEC EWSR1 dual color break-apart probe, ZytoVision GmbH, Fischkai 127572 Bremerhaven, Germany). The mass was suggestive of ES.
Surgical examination: The patient underwent a radical nephrectomy. The tumor was located at the lower pole of the right kidney. The large cystic tumor was well demarcated by the perirenal adipose tissue without rupture. Most tumors were cystic lesions, whereas the solid area showed gross infiltration of the renal parenchyma . The border of the tumor infiltrating the renal parenchyma was confirmed using hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining . The tumor exhibited multifocal necrosis . The solid part of the tumor in the specimen was composed of small round cells with scanty cytoplasm, similar to that in the biopsy specimen . Ancillary tests for CD56, chromogranin A, FLI1, LCA, thyroid transcription factor-1, and cytokeratins (AE1/AE3) were negative. The tumor cells exhibited diffuse membranous staining for CD99 and NK2 Homeobox 2 (NKX2.2) . FISH using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues showed a t(11; 22) EWSR1 translocation (zytolight SPEC EWSR1 dual color break-apart probe, ZytoVision GmbH, Fischkai 127572 Bremerhaven, Germany).