A 17-year-old boy complained of pruritic vesicular rash surrounded by erythema on his arms, legs, and trunk for few days. He was seen by his family doctor and was diagnosed with chickenpox caused by varicella-zoster virus. The doctor gave him symptomatic treatment (calamine lotion) for the pruritis and acyclovir. Two days later, the rash kept getting worse and bullae started to appear; he also developed painful mouth lesions . The patient was seen by a dermatologist in his clinic who suspected bullous pemphigoid and sent him to be admitted to our hospital for treatment as the patient could not have anything by mouth.
On admission, the patient had stable vital signs but looked dehydrated with cracked lips and dry skin. Diffuse skin involvement was seen including axillae, arms, legs, trunk, oral mucosal membrane, and the groin area. Nikolsky sign was negative on examination. Lab tests were all in the normal range for his age, including complete blood count, Thyroid function tests, basic metabolic panel, liver function tests, and kidney function tests. So, he was started on intravenous (i.v.) fluids to prevent dehydration, pantoprazole 40 mg i.v., amoxicillin/clavulanic acid to prevent secondary skin infection, triamcinolone cream for his oral lesions, clobetasol lotion (corticosteroid) for his skin lesions for 2 weeks and methylprednisolone 80 mg IV*1 to be converted to prednisolone 40 mg once oral intake is tolerated.
Two punch biopsies were taken and the diagnosis of BP was confirmed by direct immunofluorescence and histopathological examination.
Few days into treatment, the patient’s lesions started healing and he could tolerate soft food intake. He was discharged on prednisolone 40 mg per day to be tapered for the next 2 months by 5 mg per week before stopping the drug. A week later, the patient had improved significantly, and his lesions were healing well with no new lesions. On follow-up, his lesions healed and he was back to his normal life.
The patient presented in this case had free medical and surgical history, no family history of autoimmune diseases, and has not taken any drug for the past few months since the lesions started.
This work has been reported in line with the Surgical CAse REport (SCARE) criteria, which is used by authors, journal editors, and reviewers to increase the robustness and transparency in reporting medical and surgical cases.