A 15-year-old girl presented a history of recurrent syncope, dyspnea and dizziness. Echocardiography revealed a non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with a septal thickness of 25 mm (z-score + 17) and impaired diastolic function. Repeated Holter ECG monitoring revealed no life threatening arrhythmias. The patient was started on beta-blockers (metoprolol). Risk stratification was performed according to the 2014 ESC guidelines estimating a 5-year risk for sudden cardiac death (SCD) of 7%, indicating that an ICD should be considered. Throughout the process of finalizing diagnostic work-up and decision making, we instructed the girl for meticulous use of a wearable cardioverter-defibrillator (LifeVest, ZOLL, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA). Further work-up included genetic testing, revealing a TNNC-1 gene mutation known to be related to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . However, family history was unremarkable in regard to sudden cardiac death or cardiomyopathy. Exercise testing (bicycle ergometer) resulted in angina symptoms and ST-segment depression in the left precordial leads, leading to a maximum performance of 1.2 W/kg. Symptoms resolved quickly after discontinuing exercise. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and late gadolinium enhancement revealed areas of lower perfusion and fibrosis. The patient was scheduled for implantation of an ICD system given her high-risk constellation. Five days prior to the scheduled ICD implantation, after wearing the WCD for 6 weeks, the patient was admitted after experiencing another syncope with successful termination of a sustained VT by the WCD. During that episode she was running a very short distance to catch the school bus but then collapsed inside the crowded vehicle. After shock delivery by the WCD she recovered very quickly and was admitted to the hospital completely uncompromised. The ECG documented by LifeVest revealed severe ischemic changes right before initiation of ventricular tachycardia. Figure shows VT and shock delivery by the WCD on the ECG tracing obtained by LifeVest. The ischemic changes prompted a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the coronary arteries. Subsequent coronary angiography revealed myocardial bridging of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) causing a 90% stenosis in systole . The patient underwent surgical unroofing of the LAD and a left internal mammarian bypass proximal to the bridged LAD was performed. Due to sustained VT, low cardiac output and low perfusion of the distal portion of LAD, a venous bypass distally to the bridged artery was performed during the same session. Postoperatively she needed 3 days of mechanical cardiac support and recovered slowly. Finally, an ICD was implanted. Following the single event of VT, life threatening arrhythmias have not recurred. Due to progressive restrictive heart failure and increasing severe angina symptoms following occlusion of the left mammarian artery bypass, she successfully underwent heart transplantation 2 years after her first event.