A 22-year-old woman presented with the chief complaint of an anterior open bite. Intraoral findings revealed a −3.0-mm overbite, −0.5-mm overjet, and a Class III molar relationship. Cephalometric analysis revealed that the mandibular incisor had a protrusion, the maxillary incisor had a buccal inclination, and the mandibular incisor had a lingual inclination . There was no evidence of major medical, family, or psychosocial history. Preoperative orthodontic treatment was performed by extracting the bilateral upper first premolars. Sagittal split ramus osteotomy was subsequently performed at the age of 26 years to achieve a skeletal relationship and occlusion. Surgical orthodontic treatment was completed at the age of 29 years and transitioned to a retention period. The occlusion was stable for 3 years after surgery. However, she was diagnosed with schizophrenia at 34 years of age. The patient was administered haloperidol (5 mg/day), olanzapine (5 mg/day), or fluvoxamine (100 mg/day). Ten years after the start of the retention period, the patient returned to our department complaining of an anterior open bite (overbite: −4 mm) at 40 years of age. After consultation with her psychiatrist, her prescription was changed to aripiprazole (12 mg/day), Olanzapine (2.5 mg/day), and fluvoxamine (50 mg/day). We also informed her to use a retainer with a tongue crib to reduce the effect of tongue thrust. Her medication was decreased to aripiprazole (9 mg/day) and fluvoxamine (50 mg/day) at 41 years of age, and was again reduced to aripiprazole (3 mg/day) and fluvoxamine (50 mg/day) at 43 years of age. At 44 years of age, the dosage was decreased to aripiprazole (3 mg/day) and fluvoxamine (50 mg/day). At 47 years of age, there was a decrease in the open bite, and at 50 years of age, there was a further decrease and improvement in the open bite . The patient’s open-bite gradually improved (, ). The patient reported that the use of the device made her feel mentally reassured. Currently, there have been no cases of dental relapse in this patient, and no adverse psychological effects have been observed during treatment.
For ethical considerations, we have written the report in such a way that the patient cannot be identified, and written consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this report. This case report is based on the information obtained from the patient herself, as detailed information could not be obtained from her psychiatrist because of privacy concerns.