A 48-year-old Sri Lankan Moorish woman from Colombo presented to our emergency treatment unit with bilateral sudden-onset painless loss of vision. There was no associated tearing, irritation, or red eyes. Six months previously she had noted bilateral, slowly growing breast lumps for which she has not taken medical advice, on cultural grounds. The lumps subsequently became ulcerated, with intense pain and discomfort . She also complained of painful non-healing ulcers in her palate over the previous 3 months, with no associated anogenital ulceration . Background constitutional symptoms had been present for 1 year, but the results of the rest of her systemic review were normal. After admission, she developed a dry cough and moderate hemoptysis without fever. She had no family or contact history of TB, and no family history of malignancies or autoimmune disorders.
A general examination revealed that our patient was of average build with no lymphadenopathy. She did not consent to a genital examination. An examination of her respiratory system showed bilateral diffuse coarse crepitations. There was no dullness over her lung fields and no bronchial breathing was present. Her skin and nails appeared normal with no stigmata of chronic disease. Results from cardiovascular, rheumatological, and neurological examinations were normal.
Our patient’s light perception was absent bilaterally and she had no direct or indirect light reflexes, suggesting a bilateral visual pathway lesion. Results from magnetic resonance imaging of her brain and orbits were normal, excluding any gross abnormality of the posterior visual pathway. Indirect retinoscopy showed retinal hemorrhage due to retinal vascular angiopathy in her left retina with bilateral panuveitis . Visual evoked potentials were unrecordable on both sides, further supporting this diagnosis.
Our patient’s immune markers were elevated, with an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 135 mm/h and C-reactive protein level of 96 mg/dL. Chest radiography showed bilateral mid-zone and lower-zone infiltrates with cavitation and small pleural effusions . Contrast-enhanced thoracic computed tomography confirmed the presence of multifocal alveolar infiltrates, cavitations, and effusions . A Mantoux test was not performed because she had undergone one previously, though the results were not available. Although a γ-interferon-release assay would have been useful, we did not have the facilities to perform this investigation. A sputum acid-fast bacilli (AFB) test was negative in three consecutive samples. The difference between her serum and pleural fluid protein levels was 15 g/L and the differential lymphocyte count was 70 %. Her lactate dehydrogenase level was 600 U/L in her pleural fluid. Results from cytology, Gram staining, AFB, and TB polymerase chain reaction and cultures of the pleural fluid were negative.
An ultrasound scan of her breast showed multiple hypoechoic ill-defined areas suggestive of abscesses. A biopsy of the abscess wall showed well-formed granulomas with collections of histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells. There was no caseation to indicate TB or cytological abnormalities suggestive of malignancy. Histologic examination of the palatal ulcers indicated a similar pattern of granulomatous inflammation with some necrotic areas. Screening for human immunodeficiency virus was negative and her normal levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme excluded sarcoidosis. Her renal function and results of a full urine report were normal. However, her serum PR3-ANCA titer was significantly elevated at 190.74 IU/mL (normal <20 IU/L) although her myeloperoxidase-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-nuclear antibody, and rheumatoid factor titers were all normal. Her pleural fluid adenosine deaminase (ADA) level was significantly elevated at 101 IU/L (normal <2 IU/mL).
The pulmonary and oral manifestations together with strong positivity for PR3-ANCA confirmed the diagnosis of generalized GPA in our patient . This was associated with rare manifestations of breast granulomatosis and hemorrhagic retinal angiopathy. However, renal involvement, which indicates a poor prognosis, was absent . Significantly elevated pleural fluid ADA together with cavitating lung lesions suggested probable concurrent TB. TB commonly causes upper lobe lung cavitation, compared with mid-zone and lower-zone cavitations that are more common in GPA. Our patient refused to have a pleural/lung biopsy, which would have provided histological and/or microbiological confirmation of TB. According to the consultant chest physician’s opinion, we considered probable coexisting TB based on her markedly high pleural fluid ADA levels. Initiation of cytotoxic treatment presented a management dilemma in our patient because of the presence of organ-threatening GPA.
Our patient was started on intravenous methylprednisolone (1,000 mg/day for 3 days) and intravenous cyclophosphamide at a dose of 15 mg/kg every 2 weeks for the first three pulses, followed by infusions every 3 weeks for the next 3–6 pulses, as per European League Against Rheumatism recommendations . She was also started on full anti-tuberculous therapy (ATT) with rifampicin 5 mg/kg, isoniazid 10 mg/kg, pyrazinamide 30 mg/kg, and ethambutol 15 mg/kg with pyridoxine, as per World Health Organization guidelines. Her pulmonary, breast, and oral lesions slowly improved, but her vision did not recover. Her liver and renal functions were closely monitored. After completing 2 months of treatment she presented with sudden-onset generalized tonic clonic convulsions. Brain magnetic resonance imaging indicated multiple infarctions, suggesting possible cerebral vasculitis, though results from a magnetic resonance arteriogram and magnetic resonance venogram were normal. Tests for anti-phospholipid antibodies were negative, excluding the possibility of coexisting anti-phospholipid syndrome. Refractory disease was considered and she was started on second-line rituximab 375 mg/m2 by intravenous infusion once weekly for 4 weeks, with intravenous methylprednisolone 1,000 mg/day for 3 days followed by prednisone 1 mg/kg per day [, ]. Aspirin 75 mg was started daily. Complete clinical remission was achieved, though her vision did not recover, probably because of permanent damage to the retina. She continued with ATT for 6 months on the basis of probable TB, with resolution of the pulmonary lesions. Our patient was referred to a rehabilitation program to address her blindness.