A fifty-six-year-old male, weighing 60 kg and height 160 cm, chronic smoker (40 pack years) quit four months before admission, with history of occasional alcohol intake. He was a known case of hypertension and coronary artery disease (CAD) of 10 years duration, but on irregular treatment. Patient presented on 03/05/2012 with unstable angina, underwent urgent coronary angiogram, which revealed 100% stenosis of right coronary artery (RCA) and 80% stenosis of left anterior descending (LAD) branch. An attempt at percutaneous coronary angioplasty (PTCA) to RCA failed and patient was referred for surgical revascularization. Preoperative medications included acetyl salicylic acid, metopralol, amlodipine, rosuvastatin, and ivabradin. Clopidogrel was discontinued 10 days prior to surgery. All biochemical investigations prior to surgery were normal, including renal and liver function tests.
Patient was premedicated with oral lorazepam (2 mg) on the night before surgery and morphine 5 mg intramuscular with metoclopramide 10 mg intramuscular on the morning of surgery just before transferring to operating room. Anesthesia was induced with intravenous boluses of fentanyl, midazolam, etomidate and cisatracurium, airway was secured with an 8.5 mm internal diameter (ID) endotracheal tube. Standard monitoring including arterial blood pressure (20 G in right radial artery), central venous pressure (8.5 Fr. right internal jugular vein), 5 lead electrocardiogram (ECG), pulse oximetry (SPO2), end tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2), end tidal concentration measurement of inhalational agents were instituted. Anesthesia was maintained with intravenous infusions of propofol (60 mg/hour), fentanyl (250 mcg/hour), cisatracurium (3 mcg/kg/minute) and sevoflourane at 1 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) as inhalational agent. After harvesting the left internal mammary artery (LIMA) and right internal mammary artery (RIMA) and systemic heparinisation with 400 IU/kg, the patient was put on cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) after securing an activated clotting time (ACT) of 480 seconds.
The LIMA graft was anastomosed to LAD. The anastomosis of RIMA to RCA was beset with technical difficulties necessitating repeated return to CPB thrice to redo the graft as there was poor flow, and eventually a saphenous vein graft was used to anastomose RCA. Total CPB time was 250 minutes and the aortic cross clamp time was 55 minutes (Figure ). The patient was weaned off CPB with modest doses of adrenaline and noradrenaline infusions. Patient received 2 units of packed red blood cells (PRBC), 6 units of platelets and 2 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), directed by thromboelastography (TEG) during the procedure. The total duration of surgery was nine hours. The patient was shifted to the cardiothoracic surgery intensive care unit (CTICU) for recovery.
The patient remained hemodynamically stable in the CTICU. His laboratory showed increase in serum creatinine to 185 micromol/L, had persistently elevated potassium levels (corrected by glucose insulin boluses) and mild lactic metabolic acidosis. Patient was extubated around midnight on day zero as he maintained stable hemodynamics with minimal chest drains. He remained in the CTICU for four days, during which time his serum creatinine remained elevated, but urine output was maintained at >1 mL/kg/hour, albeit with reddish discoloration. The patient’s serum potassium remained elevated and calcium resonium was started as per nephrologist’s advice. The patient’s creatine kinase (CK) remained elevated from zero post-operative day and a diagnosis of RML was made. At the same time there was mild derangement in liver function tests. Patient was transferred to surgical step-down unit (SSDU) on the fourth post-operative day.
The patient’s course in the SSDU was complicated by a progressive rise in serum creatinine, CK, myoglobin, and liver enzymes. There was progressive decline in urine output and furosemide infusion was instituted, with little improvement. At the same time the patient became septic as evidenced by elevated levels of procalcitonin and white blood cell (WBC) counts and was started on broad spectrum antibiotics for suspected nosocomial infection. The patient was shifted back to the CTICU on the eighth post-operative day as his general condition had deteriorated with fluid overload, sepsis and AKI.
On readmission to the CTICU his serum creatinine was 460 micromol/L, CK was 23321 u/L (Figure ), and serum myoglobin was 40228 ng/ml, with significant elevation in liver and cardiac enzymes. He became anuric and had severe lactic metabolic acidosis on the day of readmission to CTICU, and hemodialysis was instituted. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was done on the 11th post-operative day revealed severe right ventricular dysfunction with normal left ventricular function (LVF). The patient’s general condition worsened progressively with drowsiness, hypoxia, hypotension, and evidence of low cardiac output, and he was electively intubated and put on mechanical ventilation on the 11th post-operative day. The patient was kept sedated with infusions of remifentanil (0.05-0.1 mcg/kg/min) and propofol (50–70 mg/hour). Hemodynamics was maintained with infusions of dobutamine (5–10 mcg/kg/min) and noradrenaline (0.05-0.1 mcg/kg/min) and vasopressin (2–4 u/hour).
On the 12th post-operative day the patient developed abdominal distension and melena, his serum biochemistry revealing deranged coagulation profile, liver function tests (LFTs), worsening renal parameters and increased markers of sepsis. He was kept sedated and ventilated from the 11th to the 18th post-operative day. The patient developed generalized edema and intra-abdominal pressure was elevated. CT scan of the abdomen revealed moderate ascites and diffuse liver surface nodularity. Klebsiella and Enterobactor faecalis were isolated from the patient’s urine during this period. The patient underwent regular hemodialysis with gradual restoration of renal function and was extubated after eight days of sedation and ventilation on the 18th post-operative day. He was transferred out of the CTICU to SSDU after 14 days of stay on the 22nd post-operative day. The patient underwent regular nephrology follow-up with frequent hemodialysis until his renal function recovered after a further two weeks. He was discharged from the hospital in another week and has been followed up regularly. He had recovered from his heart failure, as evidenced by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) done prior to discharge. His total hospital stay was 56 days, of which 46 had been post-surgery.