A 30-year-old man with a 3-year history of progressive loss of peripheral vision in his right eye was referred to our clinic following the discovery of a suprasellar mass on imaging. He denied any headaches, history of seizures, recent changes in weight, breast discharge, heat or cold intolerance, or changes in shoe size or facial features. His only complaint was a progressive visual field defect in the right upper quadrant of the right eye. He had no significant other medical or surgical history, and, apart from a visual field defect of the right eye (quadrantanopia), he had an otherwise unremarkable physical exam including intact cranial nerves III to XII. Endocrine workup was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast of his brain revealed a multilobulated complex mass with both cystic and solid components in the suprasellar region measuring 28.7 mm × 34.5 mm × 37.2 mm (AP by TR by CC) . The radiological differential diagnosis was craniopharyngioma.
The patient underwent surgery for the resection of the suprasellar tumor through an endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal approach. The intraoperative visualization of the tumor showed that the mass appeared to be arising from the optic chiasm rather than the Sella. Furthermore, intraoperative resection was complicated by significant adherence of the tumor capsule to local structures, including the carotid arteries. To prevent damage to the surrounding structures, the operation was concluded with an estimated 50–60% of the tumor resected. Intraoperative frozen pathology sections results revealed nonspecific glial reactive tissue. Postoperatively, the patient remained at neurologic baseline except for a new left lower quadrant visual field defect. He did not have any oculomotor nerve palsy. MRI confirmed expected partial resection of the suprasellar mass as well as the decreased mass effect on surrounding tissues . The patient’s postoperative course was unremarkable, and he was discharged home. Initially, we considered adjuvant radiotherapy for the tumor that was adherent to the chiasm and carotids; however, the patient’s case was discussed at our hospital neuro-oncology tumor board (neuro-oncologists, pathologists, neurosurgery, and radiation oncology teams) and given the indolent course of the PXA, a decision was made to follow the patient clinically and with serial imaging and if he had a worsening of his symptoms during the follow-up period to perform radiosurgery then.
At 1-year follow-up, MRI of his brain revealed the stable size of the known residual with no new areas of enhancement and improvement of the tumor local mass effect. The patient endorsed subjective improvement of his vision, and ophthalmologic follow-up at 1 year revealed partial improvement of his visual fields deficits compared to preoperative evaluation. At 1-year follow-up, the patient was not in any hormonal supplementation.
Microscopically, the tumor was consistent with a glial neoplasm with variable morphology. Some cells were spindled, others were within a mucin-rich matrix, and focal cells with lipidized cytoplasm were present. Eosinophilic granular bodies, lymphocytic infiltrates, and Rosenthal fibers were also noted to be present . Immunohistochemical workup showed the tumor to be GFAP, vimentin and S-100 positive. Synaptophysin immunohistochemistry showed focal weak positivity, and neurofilament stains showed rare entrapped axons. IDH1 was negative, and trichrome staining showed collagen within the tumor. Ki-67 index was <2%. Additional workup showed diffuse CD34 positivity, positive MAP2 staining, and negative BRAF and V600E staining. Based on these findings, a final diagnosis of PXA was made.