A 45-year-old Turkish man presented with diarrhea three to four times per day, without pus or blood, and fatigue for the previous six months to our outpatient Internal Medicine clinic. Diarrhea was frequently combined with fecal incontinence which had a marked negative impact on his social life. He also described muscle weakness especially in the proximal parts of his extremities that had been present for nearly five years. His walking style had changed and he was having difficulty while climbing stairs, dressing and performing routine daily activities. He had not been examined medically for these complaints before.
He had had libido loss and impotence for the previous three years for which he had been receiving sildenafil tablets on occasion. A spermiogram made three years ago, revealed azoospermia. His family history revealed that several members of his immediate family had an undiagnosed neurological disease. One of his parents had hyperthyroidism and the other suffered from cardiac arrhythmia.
Physical examination showed that his vital signs were normal, his body mass index was 22.7 kg/m2 (height: 178 cm, weight: 72 kg), and depressed affect was remarkable. His thyroid gland was non-palpable. Cardiovascular and respiratory system examinations were normal. No organomegaly or rebound tenderness was detected on abdominal examination. Neurological examination revealed weakness and atrophy in the neck, face, and extremity muscles, especially involving his distal muscles, and tetraparesis, hypo-active deep tendon reflexes and steppage gait on the right side due to distal weakness. Bilateral cataract was found on ocular examination.
Laboratory findings were as follows: whole blood count was normal; serum levels of glucose: 98 mg/dl, BUN: 12, creatinin: 0.8 mg/dl, calcium: 9.1 mg/dl, albumin: 3.9 mg/dl, sodium: 138 mmol/L, potassium: 4.2 mmol/L, creatine kinase: 315 U/L, free T4: 1.25 ng/dL (0.93 to 1.7), TSH: 1,3 uIU/mL (0.27 to 4.2), PTH: 26 pg/ml, morning cortisol: 12 μg/dL, LH: 5.5 mIU/ml (1.7 to 8.6), FSH: 12 mIU/ml (1.5 to 12.4), total testosterone: 2.7 ng/ml (2.8 to 8.0), free testosterone: 6.8 pg/ml (9 to 55), sex hormone binding globulin: 80 nmol (20 to 70).
Stool examination for ova and parasites was negative. Microscopic evaluation of feces did not reveal any blood or leucocytes. No bacterial growth was observed on stool cultures. Ileocolonoscopy demonstrated no abnormality with normal-appearing mucosa. Gastroscopic evaluation revealed antral gastritis and insufficiency of cardioesophageal sphincter. On histopathological examinations of the upper and lower gastrointestinal system endoscopic biopsy samples, no pathology was detected.
Anorectal manometric study showed that internal and external sphincters were weak with reduced resting and squeezing anal pressures. Rectal sensation was within normal limits. Internal anal sphincter relaxed normally on rectal distension.
External anal sphincter electromyography (EMG) showed myopathic features and polyphasic high-amplitude motor units. However, myotonia was not observed.
His electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with no signs of ischemia. Minimal mitral and tricuspid valve insufficiencies were reported on echocardiography. An X-ray of his lumbosacral vertebrae showed minimal scoliosis.
EMG showed signs of a myopathic process in the distal muscles of his extremities. Typical myotonic discharges were recorded. These results are compatible with MD.
We performed overnight polysomnography which showed sleep efficiency of 84%; REM phase comprised 6.7% of the sleep; apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) was 23.1%; desaturation index (ODI) was 21.8%, minimum SaO2 was 82%, mean saturation was 94%. We recommended noninvasive intermittent positive-pressure ventilation.
Our patient was euthyroidic. Hypotension, hyponatremia, and hyperpotassemia were not noted. Hypothalamico-pituitary-adrenal axes were intact. However, the patient had a history of libido loss and impotence for three years. Gonadal functions were compatible with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Further endocrine tests were performed to exclude multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes. Serum prolactin, calcium, parathyroid hormone, calcitonin and gastrin levels, and 24-hour urine catecholamine levels were all in normal ranges. The patient was started on intramuscular testosterone injections of 250 mg monthly. The dose was adjusted to achieve a total testosterone concentration of 3 to 4 ng/ml (immediately before injection). His gonadal symptoms improved in a few months.
The final diagnosis of MD was confirmed with genetic evaluation.