A 15-year-old male presented with insidious onset of pain and a palpable mass on the left foot for 1 year. The burning pain was combined with paresthesia on the medial plantar aspect of the forefoot to the middle foot region, along the innervation of the medial plantar nerve. The symptoms were aggravated upon walking or prolonged standing and were relieved at rest. No previous trauma or surgical history was reported. On physical examination, there was a fixed, hard mass-like lesion palpated on the posteroinferior aspect of the medial malleolus. The range of motion of the lower extremity including subtalar motion was normal and no evidence of hindfoot malalignment was detected. Light touch and pin prick were performed and the patient complained of hypoesthesia of 80% the normal contralateral leg along the medial plantar foot area. A positive Tinel’s sign was detected.
The plain radiographs of both axial and lateral views of the calcaneus showed a large pedunculated mass located posteroinferomedial to the sustentaculum tali. In addition, corticomedullary continuity between the sustentaculum tali and the mass could be detected . No other visible pedunculated lesion could be detected on the whole body x-ray. To clarify the lesion, a computed tomography (CT) was performed, which showed a 2.5 × 1 cm sized bony protuberance below the sustentaculum tali, demonstrating an apparent corticomedullary continuity with the underlying bone. Neither the talocalcaneal coalition nor fracture within the bony protuberance was detected . Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) scans confirmed the high T2 signal intensity mass extended from the sustentaculum tali, occupying the tarsal tunnel. The fatty bone marrow was observed on the central portion of the mass, continuously with the marrow cavity of the underlying bone, surrounded by thin cartilaginous cap . The Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) was 81.11 points . Electromyography was not performed due to typical signs and symptoms of tarsal tunnel syndrome and surgical intervention was indicated due to presence of tunnel occupying lesion.
Surgical excision of the bony mass was performed under the general anesthesia. The flexor retinaculum was released and 2.5 × 1 cm sized bony mass was found on the posteroinferior border of the sustentaculum tali, compressing the posterior tibial nerve underneath. No talocalcaneal coalition bar was detected. The bony lesion was completely excised from the sustentaculum tali using the osteotomes and rongeur until no remaining protuberance was seen within the tunnel, and the tension on the nerve was eventually released . Excised bony mass was sent to the pathology department for histologic examination.
The histologic sample was confirmed to be osteochondroma . A below-knee splint was applied for 2 weeks and the patient was allowed to fully bear weight and return to the regular activity after the stitches on the wound were removed. The patient’s pain was relieved immediately after surgery and the hypoesthesia disappeared 3 months postoperatively. No complications or recurrence of symptoms were detected at the 2-year follow-up and the FAOS improved to 100 points.