A 54-year-old woman presented to the hospital due to with a heart murmur detected at a routine examination. On physical examination, the patient's general condition and vital signs were quite unremarkable; only the 2nd to 3rd costal segment of the left margin of the sternum appeared abnormal, and 3/6 systolic blow-like murmurs could be heard; pericardial frictional sounds were not heard, and there was no edema in either lower limb. Echocardiography indicated right ventricular space occupation. Cardiac plain scan and enhanced MRI showed soft tissue signal mass shadows in the outflow tract of the right ventricle . CT angiography showed no macrovascular lesions. What's more is that patient had undergone hysterectomy in a local hospital 10 years previously due to excessive vaginal bleeding from uterine leiomyoma. The family histories were noncontributory to the diagnosis.
The patient underwent right ventricular mass resection under general anesthesia with low-temperature extracorporeal circulation. The patient recovered well after the surgery. The surgical findings showed that there was a 3 cm × 3 cm oblong tomato-like mass with a smooth surface and tough texture occupying the right ventricle. The tumor pedicle was connected to the chordae of the tricuspid valve and protruding into the right ventricular outflow tract, but other portions of the tumor had no adhesion to the heart. The specimens were laid out along their longitudinal axes and fixed in 10% neutral formalin for 12 h. Ten representative tissue samples were taken from different areas, dehydrated, embedded in paraffin, and sequentially sectioned into 3-μm-thick sections. The sections were incubated with primary antibodies against desmin, ER, PR, myogenin, MyoD1, caldesmon, pan-CK, Ki-67, SMA, CD117, FH, RB-1, MDM2, and CD34. PBS replaced the primary antibody as a negative control. DAB color development and hematoxylin counterstaining were performed. The primary antibodies and the kit were purchased from Beijing Zhongshan Jinqiao Company.
On histopathologic examination, the tumor appeared as a grayish-white tubercle, with no exact capsule; it was solid and tough and measured 3 cm × 3 cm × 1.5 cm in size . Under the microscope, the spindle cells within the tumor showed clear boundaries, mild cell morphology, fascicular arrangement, and no mitotic figures . Immunohistochemical staining for desmin, caldesmon, ER, PR and SMA was positive, and the Ki-67 index was approximately 2% . These morphologic features and the immunohistochemical staining pattern confirmed a diagnosis of benign metastasizing leiomyoma to the heart.