A 70-year-old gentleman presented with a two-month history of bleeding per rectum and altered bowel habits. There was no history of tenesmus but sensation of incomplete evacuation following defecation as well as a feeling of a lump in the anal canal was present. His appetite and weight had been stable.
Clinically he looked well and abdominal examination revealed no abnormality. Per rectal examination revealed a mass in the posterior wall of the rectum with intact mucosa, which had significantly narrowed the lumen. Colonoscopy revealed the presence of a mass in the posterolateral wall of the rectum extending from 4 to 14 cm from the anal verge, with normal overlying mucosa. In addition, there was also a large sessile polyp in the descending colon and an ulceroproliferative growth at the splenic flexure; histopathology confirmed adenomatous polyp and adenocarcinoma respectively.
Computerised tomography (CT) of the pelvis showed thickening of the distal rectum with an obvious low density poorly enhancing lesion with possible calcification in its wall. Tissue plane between this lesion and prostate was not clearly seen but there was no infiltration of the ischiorectal fat . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a very large well-defined mass in the left presacral / ischio-anal fossa contiguous with rectal wall and thus almost certainly arising from one of the elements of the rectal wall . Barium enema showed an apple core lesion in the splenic flexure as well as narrowing of the distal rectal lumen .
The case was fully discussed at the colorectal multidisciplinary team meeting and all the surgical options including left hemicolectomy combined with rectosigmoidectomy plus transverse colostomy were fully evaluated. However, the consensus was that the additional presence of an adenocarcinoma as well as an adenoma higher up in the colon combined with the size of rectal schwannoma (12 cms) made panproctocolectomy with permanent ileostomy the best viable option. Furthermore, this was also the preferred choice of the patient as he opted to have an ileostomy rather than a colostomy. Surgery was performed without complications and the postoperative recovery was uneventful. At 6 months follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen confirmed the malignant tumour in the splenic flexure, the polyp in the descending colon and a 10 × 12 cm tumour with a well-defined pseudocapsule in the postero-lateral wall of the mid and low rectum . The surface of the latter lesion was fusiform with bluish-grey colour and its cut surface was irregularly lobulated with occasional cystic and necrotic areas.
Histopathology of the splenic flexure lesion showed an invasive moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (G1; Dukes B; Stage2). The polyp further down the colon was a tubulovillous adenoma with moderate focal dysplasia. The rectal tumour showed irregularly running fascicles of spindly to plump mesenchymal cells. The tumour was fairly vascularised with presence of a number of dilated and engorged vessels. The mitotic count was 4 per high power field. Some parts of the tumour were quite cellular while few areas were hypocellular reminiscent of the Antoni A and Antoni B patterns respectively . Immunostaining revealed strong reactivity for neuron specific enolase (NSE), vimentin, CD34 and focal positivity for S100 . Smooth muscle markers actin and desmin were negative.