A 65 year-old woman with a history of acute myelogenous leukemia treated two years prior with allogenic peripheral blood stem cell transplant from an HLA-matched unrelated donor presented for left buccal squamous cell carcinoma resection. Her transplant course was complicated by severe graft versus host disease (GVHD) affecting multiple organ systems including the oral mucosa that required long-term immunosuppression with tacrolimus and prednisone. She discontinued tacrolimus five months prior due to peripheral neuropathy and was prescribed a prednisone taper, taking 10 mg daily at the time of presentation . Reduction in immunosuppression led to increased painful ulceration of her oral mucosa. Initial diagnostic biopsy of two oral lesions showed inferior labial “mild dysplasia and lichenoid inflammation” consistent with GVHD as well as left buccal SCC. One month later, the two regions were excised. Histopathologic evaluation with Olympus BX41 microscope and image capture with Olympus cellSens software (72 dpi with no downstream processing) of the left buccal resection specimen showed multinucleated tumor cells with glassy eosinophilic nuclear inclusions . An HSV I and II immunohistochemical stain using mouse monoclonal antibodies that react with viral envelope glycoproteins and core proteins (clone: 10A3/BSB-116, isotype: IgG2a) demonstrated strong nuclear staining, confirming superimposed HSV infection . The lower lip specimen showed invasive, well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma without evidence of superimposed viral infection.
Upon clinical exam, the patient had crusted herpetic lesions on her inner inferior labium, a subtle finding in the context of post-surgical trauma from the SCC resection and facial reconstruction. She endorsed having oral ulcers prior to surgery, although it was difficult to distinguish the ulcers clinically as caused by HSV, GVHD, or focal SCC. On the initial biopsies described previously, only the latter two were identified.
HSV-1 DNA was detected in a sample swabbed from the base of the labial ulcer by real-time PCR. The serum anti-HSV Ab titer was not collected. She was treated with a 14-day course of valacyclovir 1000 mg three times daily without complication and recommended to start HSV prophylaxis after treatment.