A 66-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a 1-week history of a quasi-circular and painless mass in her left breast. Physical examination of the breast revealed an analogous round nodule in the lateral quadrant of the left breast, approximately 4.0 × 3.0 cm in size. It was mobile and well-circumscribed. She had a surgical history of thyroidectomy that was performed around 10 years prior due to a thyroid nodule. In addition, she had a 13-year history of type 2 diabetes and a 3-year history of thrombocytopenia.
Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the breast revealed a mass measuring 42 × 29 × 28 mm in the upper lateral quadrant of the left breast . The margin of the lesion was lobulated and ill-defined with respect to the adjacent pectoralis major muscle. There were multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left axillary region. It was considered to be a breast carcinoma and metastasis could not be excluded. The patient was highly anxious and insisted on surgical treatment. Therefore, radical mastectomy was performed, with intraoperative frozen-section examination.
Macroscopically, the cut surface of the resected breast specimen showed a hoary solid tumour, measuring 3.8 × 1.5 cm, with medium texture and an unclear boundary. Frozen sections from the tumour showed scattered atypical cells accompanied by signet ring-like cells, which are difficult to distinguish from breast lobular carcinoma. Microscopically, the breast lobules were atrophic with small lymphocyte infiltration around the lobules in the paraffin sections. Moreover, lymphoid cells with relatively consistent morphology, medium size, deeply stained nuclei, and less cytoplasm were diffusely distributed in the fibrous stroma and invaded the breast lobules . Interestingly, signet ring-like cells were scattered in the mesenchyme .
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) results showed that the tumour cells did not express cytokeratin , ER, PR, E-cadherin, and P120, excluding the diagnosis of invasive lobular carcinoma and metastatic carcinoma. Tumour cells, with no CD3 expression , diffusely expressed PAX-5, CD79a , and CD20 , confirming that they were B-cell-derived, and they expressed CD10, MUM-1 , and Bcl-6, suggesting the absence of germinal-centre type B-cells. The proliferation rate was relatively high . Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) demonstrated the absence of Bcl-2 , Bcl-6 , and c-MYC genes, which confirmed the diagnosis of DLBCL. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) examination revealed the following: (1) Striped hypermetabolic foci in the liver along the left and right bile ducts, (2) nodular hypermetabolic foci on the right scapula, left clavicle, and sternum, and (3) multiple nodular hypermetabolic foci in the hilar area, near the head of the pancreas, and retroperitoneum in the upper abdomen. The results were suggestive of a secondary signet ring cell-like DLBCL of the breast.
To further determine the nature of the vacuoles, immunofluorescence examination was performed. The results revealed that abnormal secretion and accumulation of IgM and IgG contributed to the prominent signet ring cell morphology.
In addition, interestingly, the non-neoplastic breast tissue surrounding the lymphoma showed various morphological changes. Lymphocyte infiltration was observed around the breast ducts and lobules. Moreover, B-lymphocyte infiltration was seen around the vessels in the interstitium, which was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining for CD20 and CD3. Dense, keloid-like fibrosis and epithelioid myofibroblasts were also seen in the breast interstitium. All these morphological characteristics and a history of type 2 diabetes confirmed a diagnosis of diabetic mastopathy.
After receiving the final diagnosis, the patient went to a specialist hospital for further treatment. She received four courses of CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone) chemotherapy and achieved partial remission; however, she unfortunately died of secondary pneumocystis pneumonia infection 3 months later.