The patient is a 28 year-old male who had been diagnosed with right testicular cancer. He underwent right high orchidectomy in the department of nephro-urologic surgery in Mie University Hospital in Tsu city, Mie, Japan. The pathological diagnosis was seminoma, pT1N0M0, pStage IA according to the classification established by the Japanese Urological Association . The risk status of tumor was classified as low risk by the International Germ Cell Consensus classification (IGCC) . Thereafter, he received periodic check-ups. Follow-up CT performed at 3 months, 9 months, and 15 months after surgery did not indicate any abnormal findings suggesting recurrence and distant metastasis, but CT performed at 21 months after surgery detected a solitary dumbbell-shaped hypovascular tumor measuring 20 mm in Segment 7 of the liver . Abdominal ultrasonography revealed an 18.7 × 11.4 mm heterogeneous iso- and hypoechoic mass which displayed an irregular shape and indistinct margin and included hyperechoic spots in segment 7 of the liver, and it did not show flow signal in color doppler mode . Serum tumor markers, including CEA, CA19–9, AFP, PIVKA-II and hCG, were not found to be elevated. MRI showed a dumbbell-shaped liver tumor in segment 7 which had a low signal intensity on T1-weighted images (T1WI), high signal intensity on T2-weighted images (T2WI), marked signal hyperintensity in diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), and no signal hypointensity on the ADC map . PET-CT was performed to confirm the presence of a malignant liver tumor and to search for further metastases in the other organs, but the liver lesion had no specific 18fluoro-deoxyglucose (FDG) uptake compared with normal liver tissue. No other metastasis was detected. Metachronous liver metastasis of testicular cancer was suspected and laparoscopic partial hepatectomy of segment 7 was performed. The resected liver sample included a white nodule of 12 mm in diameter with a regular border in which a tiny pinhole was present macroscopically . Microscopic examination showed epithelioid granuloma with central necrosis and infiltration of inflammatory cells such as monocytes and eosinophils infiltrated around the granuloma. Within the central necrosis, a small hole showed the presence of exogeneous material. There were no findings consistent with malignancy. The exogenous material displayed a lumen structure which was suspected to be due to larva migrans. A detailed microscopic examination revealed that the larvae had Y-shaped lateral cords, which are specific to anisakid larvae . However, it was difficult to make a definitive pathological diagnosis, because the larva body had collapsed. Therefore, the slide was sent to the National Institute of Infectious Diseases (NIID) to identify the type of larvae, and genetic examination using PCR method was performed. DNA was extracted from the deparaffinized slide, and the entire internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region (ITS1-28S region) was amplified by PCR using the primers NC5 and NC2 in the first round. Then nested PCR was performed in the second round to amplify the ITS1-28S region using the following primers that were originally constructed: AniT1F1: 5′-GTTGAACAACGGTGA CCAATTTGGC-3′, and AniT1R1: 5′-GAGTGATCCACCGCCAAGATTTGTAC-3′. An amplification product of 174 bp was obtained, and its sequence alignment was consistent with that of Pseudoterranova decipiens sensu lato but not with Anisakis simplex sensu stricto . Finally the liver lesion was pathologically and genetically diagnosed as hepatic anisakiasis due to Pseudoterranova decipiens sensu lato. These findings showed the liver lesion was not due to recurrence of testicular cancer. The patient was without recurrence for 2 years and 4 months.