A 25-year-old male presented to us with complaints of painful swelling of his right knee joint with inability to bear weight. He had undergone surgery (done elsewhere) for GCT of lateral condyle of femur 22 months ago in the form of curettage and bone grafting from iliac crest (: Pre-operative and : 3-month post-operative radiograph). The patient did not relieve his pain in knee joint (which he had before surgery) throughout the course of the treatment. He consulted the primary surgeon for the same and advised active range of motion exercises. The pain kept on increasing, especially in last 6 months, and on examination, he had tenderness over lateral and posterior aspect of knee joint with diffuse swelling and limited range of motion (10—°) when presented to us. Investigation in the form of radiograph depicted diffuse osteolysis and cortical destruction in lateral femoral condyle. Magnetic resonance imagingMRI of the lesion illustrated the heterogeneous decreased signals on T1 sequences and areas of hyperintensities on T2 sequences with overall picture suggestive of recurrence ( and ). Complete surgical excision of the tumor and articular surface reconstruction was planned as described by D’ Aubigne . A 15-cm long vertical incision was made over anterolateral aspect of distal thigh and right knee and quadriceps tendon, patella and patellar tendon exposed. A 3-cm wide, musculovascular pedicle separated at inferior border of vastus lateralis muscle, approximately 10-cm proximal from lateral border of patella. Patella was then enucleated from rest of its attachments, releasing quadriceps tendon all around except the pedicle, leaving a rim of 4-mm soft tissue to spare vascular supply. Lateral condyle of femur was exposed and excised en bloc with whole tumor mass with the help of saw and osteotome. The deep articular surface and medial aspect of patella were freshened. The anterior surface which was to be used as articular surface was rotated inferiorly, brought at the level of medial condyle and the patella was fixed with two lag screws as depicted in . The rest of the condylar defect was filled with fibular strut graft and bone chips from iliac crest. The extensor mechanism repair was done by turning down the aponeurotic flap of rectus femoris and suturing it to patellar tendon and vastus expansion. Wound closure done after hemostasis achieved. Bulky dressings with a long posterior plaster of Paris (POP) slab applied which were changed on the 2nd post-operative day. Knee was kept in posterior POP slab for immobilization up to 6 weeks and active mobilization exercises started subsequently. Patient was kept non-weight-bearing till adequate radiological strength achieved, i.e., 16 weeks and a knee brace was worn while walking with a stick support up to 1 year. Patient recovered uneventfully and at the end of 2 years there was no sign of recurrence or deformity with good function as he walks without support and performs his routine activities with fair range of movements (0—°). Radiological evaluation suggested good healing of lesion without any evidence of osteolysis or collapse of reconstructed lateral femoral condyle . The quadriceps strength was found to be of Grade 4/5. There was no laxity or instability. Musculoskeletal tumor society score was found to be 25 suggesting gratifying outcome. The patient is to be followed up for the long-term results.