A 1-year old Pakistani origin male child with Down’s syndrome, presented with gradual enlargement of the head, and developmental regression over the last few months. He was born at 38 weeks via vaginal delivery after an uncomplicated pregnancy to nonconsanguineous parents (mother 33 years old, and father 38 years old). His birth weight was 2.95 kg, length was 52 cm, and head circumference was 35 cm. His Appearance, Pulse, Grimace, Activity, and Respiration (APGAR) score was 7 at 1 minute, and 10 at 5 minutes. Down’s syndrome was diagnosed soon after birth, based on typical facial features and presence of palmar crease, and later confirmed karyotypically for Trisomy 21. His two siblings, aged 6 and 4 years, were alive and healthy. Further social and family history was unremarkable. From a growth standpoint, at birth, he was 10th percentile for weight and 25th percentile for length. At both 6 months and 1 year, he was 25th percentile for weight and 50th percentile for length. His head circumference was 50th percentile at birth, at 6 months it was at 97th percentile, and at 1 year when he presented to the clinic, it was 20 standard deviations (SD) above the 99th percentile. From a growth milestone standpoint, at 9 months, he smiled and laughed at “peek-a-boo,” lifted arms up to be picked up, crawled, and sat up without support. However, at 12 months, his parents noticed that he cried more, stopped responding to his name, and preferred to lay flat rather than crawl or sit. He was also less vocal and less interested in toys.
On physical examination, he appeared to have macrocephaly, along with signs of Down’s syndrome including flat nasal bridge, upward slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds, and simian crease. He appeared to be mildly irritable. Cardiac, respiratory, abdominal, genitourinary, and integumentary examinations were unremarkable. Neurological examination showed intact cranial nerves and sensations to noxious touch. However, there was generalized muscular hypotonia with muscle wasting, with −2 bilateral knee and ankle reflexes, and bilateral upgoing plantars. His initial blood tests did not show any abnormality. His hemoglobin (Hb) was 11.5 g/dL and white blood count (WBC) was 13 × 109/L with normal differential. His liver and renal functions were within normal limits. Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were also within normal limits. Hepatitis B and C serology were negative. Urinalysis and chest X-ray also did not show any abnormality. He was admitted, and a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, which showed a large cystic tumor in the right parieto temporo occipital regions . Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast showed a 10.9 × 11.4 × 8.9 cm, heterogeneously enhancing, mixed solid and cystic supratentorial mass, with surrounding vasogenic edema in the right parieto temporo occipital lobe. The solid component was dural based, measuring 6.4 × 6.0 cm, showing heterogeneous intensity on T2W imaging with marked enhancement on post-contrast images. There was a midline shift towards the left, with compression on the ipsilateral right lateral ventricle. Moderate obstructive hydrocephalus was also noted .
Two weeks later, a right partial craniotomy was performed, and the cystic component of the tumor was completely excised. Removal of the posterior dural-based solid mass was omitted due its attachment to the highly vascular dura mater. Postoperative course was uneventful.
The tumor specimen was sent for histopathological examination, which revealed low cellularity with intervening bands of fibrous tissue and collagen fibers. Neoplastic cells had a high nuclear/cytoplasmic (N/C) ratio with hyperchromatic nuclei. Some areas showed hypercellular pleomorphism, necrosis, and microvascular proliferation. Some cells with rhabdoid morphology were also present with abnormal mitosis . Staining was performed for integrase interactor 1 (INI-1), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), desmin, creatine kinase (CK), synaptophysin, and Ki-67. INI-1 came out strongly positive, ruling out atypical teratoid and rhabdoid tumors. A large proportion of tumor cells were positive for GFAP and negative for synaptophysin, desmin, and CK. Ki-67 index was low in the majority of the tumor. However, areas with increased cellularity had raised Ki-67 to 50%. Morphology and immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis of DIA with aggressive histological features, which correlated with clinical and radiological findings. Further molecular studies were not done.
A postoperative CT was done that showed removal of the major bulk of the tumor. A residual mass (3.1 × 1.3 cm on axial images) was seen adherent to the dura of posterior interhemispheric fissure . The patient was subsequently discharged home. At follow-up at 6 weeks, his mother reported gradual functional improvement, along with recovery of motor milestones evidenced by his ability to sit with support, and return of moderate hand grip.
A 2 months postoperative, brain MRI with contrast showed a comparatively enlarged 4.2 × 2.6 × 4.1 cm homogeneously enhancing dural-based residual supratentorial mass along the right occipital location. This mass was adherent to the posterior interhemispheric fissure, as well as the tentorium cerebelli . Keeping in view this extremely rare presentation of high-grade DIA with growing residual mass adherent to the dura, prospective treatment options were discussed by the multidisciplinary tumor board. With recurrence after the initial surgery, the parents were nonconsenting for further surgical intervention, and chose chemotherapy in the hope of controlling further tumor growth and halting subsequent functional decline.
Of note, although Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval was not needed for this case report, detailed written informed consent was obtained in English from the parents of the patient (who were fluent in the language) for the use of clinical data, imaging, and histology slides for publication purposes.