A 12-year-old boy was admitted to the emergency room after having felt a severe pain in his left knee on kicking the ground while skateboarding earlier that day. Knee swelling, tense hemarthrosis, and periarticular tenderness were noted. On physical examination, an extension lag of 15° was observed. The active range of motion of the injured knee was 45-90° of flexion. Radiography showed an avulsion fracture of the lower pole of the patella and a high-riding patella . The injured knee had an Insall-Salvati ratio of 1.48. Sleeve fracture of the patella was diagnosed clinically based on the signs of a high-riding patella and a gap in the extensor mechanism at the lower pole of the patella. At the next day after the injury, we performed open reduction and internal fixation surgery.
During surgery, we found that half of the articular cartilage of the patella and a corresponding portion of the patellar retinaculum were avulsed, together with a small fragment of bone . Initially, we tried to perform open reduction with tension band wiring, but the distal bony fragment was too small to be laced by Kirschner wire. We subsequently sutured the patella tendon from the distal to proximal portion with polyester suture thread (No. 5 ETHIBOND®), similarly to a Bunnell method, and inserted a needle into two sites of the distal bony fragment. We made two bone tunnels in the direction of the long axis on the proximal bony fragment, and can each thread through these bone tunnels . We confirmed the distal bony fragment to be reduced and in a good position, and performed knot-tying on the upper pole of the patella. Subsequently, we performed cerclage wiring of the patella tendon, soft tissue around the patella, and quadriceps tendon using laced soft wire. Finally, we sutured the patellar retinaculum as reinforcement. The immediate post-operative Insall-Salvati ratio was 0.92 .
The knee joint was immobilized in a cylinder cast for 4 weeks after surgery. Physical rehabilitation was started, and eventually, the patient made a successful recovery. At 9 months after surgery, there was no extension lag, and the active range of motion of the injured knee was 0-140° of flexion. Callus formation over the fracture site and bone union was confirmed , and the cerclage wire was removed . To date, he had no further symptoms and has been able to carry out all types of physical activities, including skateboarding. The patient and his parents were asked if data concerning the case could be submitted for publication, and they consented.