A 59 years old, previously healthy man, presented at the emergency room of First Dept. of Surgery, Athens Medical School, LAIKON GENERAL HOSPITAL, with a left lower quadrant abdominal pain, that arisen 24 h ago in the umbilical area, accompanied with low fever, as well as anorexia and constipation. Physical examination showed the patient to be febrile (body temperature of 38.4) with a mild suffering secondary to point tenderness on palpation of his left lower quadrant. Left-sided "Rebound" and "McBurney's" signs were also noted. Laboratory tests showed mild leukocytosis (11.6 × 109/L), accompanied with moderate polymorphonuclear predominance (89%) and an elevated CRP concentration (1 mg 55/L) and normal blood biochemistry analysis.
A standard preoperative chest radiograph demonstrated dextrocardia, with the stomach bubble situated on the right as well. Therewithal both Ultrasound (US) and Computed tomography (CT) abdominal scanning revealed situs inversus, with the appendix in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen, with remarkable thickening in its wall. It should be underlined that until then the patient had been unsuspicious of having situs inversus. These findings reached to the diagnosis of acute appendicitis with situs inversus and a standard appendicectomy with a McBurney - like (oblique) left lower quadrant muscle-splitting incision was performed. The patient recovered uneventfully and two days after was exited the hospital in a fine condition.
The appendix was submitted for histopathological examination. On gross examination accumulation of mucus within the lumen and focal thickening of the wall were observed. Histological examination revealed a mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix with the tumor to infiltrate the wall throughout the length of the muscular layer, with no invasion whatsoever of the subserosa and the periappendiceal fat. The mucinous appendiceal adenocarcinoma was classified as stage A on Duke's staging system and as T2N0Mx according to TNM classification. Additionally, there was no evidence of malignancy in the appendiceal stump and the patient was planned to a subsequent hemicolectomy.
Three months after the pathologic evaluation, the patient underwent a subsequent extended left hemicolectomy, in the pattern of the formal extended right hemicolectomy, with resection as well of 19 lymph nodes. On histology, no malignancy was indentified, only three lesions of tubular adenomas, while the lymph nodes presented plainly reactionary inflammation. No evidence of local recurrence or metastatic disease is confirmed by the standard follow-up, including yearly CT scanning of the abdomen , and the patient is fit and in good spirit 16 months subsequent to the surgical treatment.