A 4-month-old female domestic shorthair kitten weighing 1.5 kg was presented for growth
retardation, nasal discharge and sneezing episodes related to food intake since birth.
Clinical findings revealed a body condition score (BCS) of 3/9, intermittent snoring but no
abnormalities on pulmonary auscultation, and a cleft palate involving the whole length of
the secondary palate, with a relative width of soft tissue defect extending up to 15% of the
maximal width of the palate .
A CT scan of the skull (Canon Aquilion lightning SP 80-slice) revealed a large PBD, 2.6
times wider than the soft tissue defect, representing 20% of the total palatal surface area
. No other
craniomaxillofacial congenital abnormalities were found and all relevant structures of the
skull were normal (particularly dental occlusion and skull symmetry; , top row).
Surgical treatment was provided. After premedication with methadone (0.2 mg/kg IM
[Comfortan; Dechra]) and dexmedetomidine (7 µg/kg IM [Dexdomitor; Zoetis]), anaesthesia was
induced using alfaxalone (4 mg/kg IV [Alfaxan; Dechra]) and maintained with isoflurane
(1–2.3%) in oxygen. Intravenous fluids were administered during surgery, and pain was
managed using fentanyl (1 µg/kg IV [Fentadon; Dechra]), as needed. Perioperative antibiotic
therapy consisted of amoxicillin (20 mg/kg IV [Clamoxyl; Zoetis]). A mucoperiosteal incision
was made along the right dental arch from the rostral to the caudal margins of the defect.
An overlapping flap was created by mucoperiosteal elevation, taking care to preserve the
major palatine arteries. On the left side of the defect, incisions were made 1–2 mm lateral
to the cleft and along the dental arch; the bed flap was created by subsequent
mucoperiosteal elevation on this side . The hard palate defect was closed by medial rotation of the overlapping
flap, which was secured under the bed flap with full-thickness horizontal mattress sutures
using glycomer 631 (Biosyn 4-0; Covidien). The medial margins of the soft cleft palate were
incised and two partial thickness releasing incisions were made laterally. The soft cleft
palate was closed by suturing the edges of the nasopharyngeal mucosa on one side and of the
oropharyngeal mucosa on the other side, with two simple continuous patterns using 4-0
glycomer 631 (Biosyn; Covidien) ( and ). Postoperatively,
buprenorphine (30 µg/kg q8h for 1 day [Bupaq; Virbac]), meloxicam (0.05 mg/kg q24h for 5
days [Metacam; Boehringer Ingelheim]) and ampicillin–sulbactam (20 mg/kg q12h for 7 days
[Unacim; Pfizer]) were prescribed along with a soft food regimen for 1 month. The cat
recovered uneventfully and was discharged the day after surgery.
Granulation tissue was observed on the palatal bone 2 days later . This granulation tissue covered all
exposed palatal bone at 18 days (–). At 1 and 2 months
postoperatively, 70% and 100%, respectively, of the palatal bone surface exposed at the time
of surgery was epithelialised (,). However, two small
oronasal fistulae (ONFs) were noted 2 months postoperatively in the mid-sagittal part of the
hard palate, with no associated clinical signs . Six months postoperatively, the ONFs size
and BCS (4/9) improved vs assessment at the initial presentation . Control CT revealed a 50% increase in PBD
size, extending to 30% of the overall palatal area . However, harmonious growth of the skull was
noticed (, bottom row). At
9 and 12 months
postoperatively, the two ONFs were consistently present, but the owners reported good
quality of life without nasal discharge or sneezing episodes.