A 67-year-old woman experienced nausea and non-projectile vomiting accompanied by upper abdominal discomfort, abdominal distension, fatigue, and poor appetite approximately 20 days ago. The vomit was stomach contents, and the nausea was relieved after vomiting. The patient had no obvious cause of the nausea or vomiting and no history of gastrointestinal bleeding. After undergoing upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and biopsy at the local hospital, the patient was diagnosed with intramucosal gastric adenocarcinoma. Then, she came to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Both the physical examination and the routine laboratory investigations were unremarkable.
The endoscopic examination in our hospital showed that there was a slightly faded, rough-surfaced, flattened, elevated lesion on the lesser curvature of the middle gastric body. The background of the lesion mucosa was pale, the mucosal vessels’ visibility increased, and the gastric folds disappeared, which were the specific features of atrophic gastric mucosa . There was no suspected hard-texture area in the lesion, so the depth of the lesion was expected to be intramucosal. The narrow-band imaging (NBI) result showed a well-defined, slightly faded elevated area within a demarcation line , and the size of the lesion was approximately 30 mm. The magnifying endoscopy with NBI (M-NBI) showed that vessels of the lesion with an epithelial circle (VEC) pattern. An irregular microvascular and microsurface architecture was observed in the circular intervening part between crypts lined by circular marginal crypt epithelium. The microvascular architecture showed dilated and tortuous atypical vessels with differences in the caliber . Besides this, the VEC pattern shown by M-NBI is a promising marker for preoperative diagnosis of papillary adenocarcinoma . Based on the details above, we predicted that it is a lesion with a diameter of 30 mm and an infiltration depth of T1a (M). Therefore, an endoscopic submucosal dissection was performed.
The histopathologic examination of the resected specimen revealed that the surrounding mucosa of the elevated lesion was atrophic gastric fundic glands with intestinal metaplasia . The lesion was located in the mucosal layer with a LVI . The horizontal resection margin and the vertical margin were negative, the lesion’s superficial layer was a dense tubular and papillary structure resembling the foveolar epithelium but without a differentiation gradient, and some of the tubular and papillary structures were elongated and extended to the whole mucosa. Moreover, the deeper layer of the lesion was pyloric gland-like glandular duct . In the magnified images, the superficial part of the elevated lesion had obvious architectural atypia and low-grade cellular atypia. The nuclei of the lesion were round to oval with disturbed polarity, and the cell cytoplasm was translucent and rich in mucus but lack mucus stratification . These cells were MUC5AC positive . Furthermore, the deep pyloric gland-like cells, which were positively stained for MUC6 , proliferated and differentiated to form irregular, fused glandular ducts and eventually led to the pyloric gland-type tubular adenocarcinoma . Both layers, namely, the superficial part and the deep part, displayed negativity for MUC2 and CD10 , which was consistent with gastric type adenocarcinoma. The Ki-67 labeling index was high in the superficial foveolar-type papillary adenocarcinoma but low in the deep pyloric gland-type tubular adenocarcinoma , and P53 was a wild-type expression in the lesion. The expression of MSH2 and MSH6 protein was lost. Therefore, the final pathological diagnosis was a type 0-IIa, 18 mm × 16 mm, VWDA of gastric type, pT1a, Ly1, V0, pHM0, and pVM0 .