A 2.5 year old girl was admitted to the hospital on suspicion of a meningitis. Because of recurrent otitis prophylactic TMP/SMX was initiated 2 weeks prior to admission. She presented with fever, intermittent drowsiness, crying and positive Kernig’s sign. Blood tests showed normal white blood cell count and C-reactive protein. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed pleocytosis (41 x 10^6 WBC/L, 100% mononuclear cells), normal glucose and protein levels. CSF gram stain showed no bacteria. With a suspicion of viral meningitis aciclovir was started intravenously. TMP/SMX prophylaxis was continued and switched into intravenous administration because of poor intake. In the following days symptoms of meningitis did not improve. CSF culture and PCR on mumps virus, enterovirus, parechovirus, herpes simplex and varicella zoster virus were negative. Blood culture was also negative. Because of the common association of aseptic meningitis and some autoimmune diseases, antinuclear antibodies (ANA) were measured, which were negative .
On the fourth day of admission she developed jaundice. The laboratory tests showed a conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia (total 76 μmol/L , conjugated bilirubin 74 μmol/L) with increased transaminase levels (AST 332 U/L, ALT 358 U/L). An ultrasound of the liver and gallbladder was normal. Serology on EBV, CMV, Hepatitis A, B, C and E, Bartonella Henselae and Borrelia Burgdorferi were negative. Immune globulin serum levels (IgA, IgG and IgM) were normal. Markers for auto-immune hepatitis (ASMA, AMA, ANCA, anti-LKM-1, Anti-DNA antibodies) for hepatitis were negative.
After exclusion of infectious or auto-immune causes drug-induced aseptic meningitis with cholestatic hepatitis was considered and the TMP/SMX and Aciclovir treatment were discontinued. Because of increasing cholestasis we initiated urosodeoxycholic acid therapy on the 9th day of admission. The dynamics of parameters for hepatitis are depicted in Fig. .
The clinical condition of the child improved. After cessation of the TMP/SMX, symptoms of meningitis quickly resolved. Two weeks after her admission she was discharged from the hospital in good clinical condition. She reached convalescence for both clinical and laboratory parameters in a few weeks.