A 62-year-old male, who is a known diabetic presented with sudden, acute severe abdominal pain with vomiting for fifteen days. He was in pain, not pale or jaundiced. Abdominal examination revealed positive Murphy’s sign, but no palpable gallbladder. Abdominal ultrasound showed thick-walled gallbladder with multiple stones and thick bile content with fluid level suggesting chronic cholycystitis. CT abdomen showed distended gallbladder, thick enhanced wall with peri-cholycystic inflammatory changes and a large stone at the gallbladder neck. Adjacent liver parenchyma showed ill-defined hypo-density, focal inflammatory changes in the right lobe indicating calcular cholecystitis with element of hepatitis (star sky appearance). MRI showed features of acute calcular cholecystitis with markedly dilated gall bladder. Blood analysis showed hemoglobin concentration of 11.0 grams/dl, total white cells count of 8 000 cells/Cumm, total bilirubin of 1.1 mg/dl, albumin concentration of 3.2 grams/dl, AST and ALT levels of 50 IU/dl and 33 IU/dl, respectively. HBs Ag/HCV serology was non-reactive. CA19-9 level was 914.8 U/ml. Following informed consent, open cholecystectomy was done using inverted L-shaped incision. Intra-operatively, the liver was cirrhotic, Calot’s node was enlarged and adhesions were found in the hepatic flexure, duodenum, gallbladder and colon. Neither, ascites nor peritoneal lesions were seen. The right hepatic artery was encased by the tumor. Intra-operative cholangiogram and Doppler ultrasound was used to assess the patency of the right hepatic artery. The cystic artery was identified and ligated. The patient recovered uneventfully. Macroscopically, the specimen was yellow-white with thick-walled and ulcerated gallbladder. Microscopically, the gallbladder wall was infiltrated by sheets of polygonal cells showing eccentric nuclei, abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with some multinucleated (PAS+) cells . There was no evidence of malignancy. The tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein . The tumor was diagnosed as a benign granular cell tumor of the gallbladder . The patient was well with no surgical complications or tumor recurrences after one year follow up. The patient consented to the publication of his case.