An 11 year old boy from a rural area in Sri Lanka presented to us with polyuria, polydipsia of one year duration and intermittent headache of one month duration.
He was the first born child to second degree consanguineous parents from a poor socio-economic background. The antenatal and the perinatal periods were uneventful. He was born at term with a birth weight of 2.5 kg(-2SD) and length of 46 cm (-2SD). His developmental milestones were delayed, and he achieved his pincer grasp at 2 years, was able to walk at 3 years and spoke his first meaningful word at 4 years.
At the age of 7 years the child had developed darkening of the skin involving the neck and axillae, which had gradually increased in severity. The parents had also noticed that this boy had excessive hair growth all over his body. Two months prior to the current presentation he had become thin and was very lethargic thus prompting parents to seek medical attention. Except for few upper respiratory tract infections he did not have any significant past medical problems. There were no hospital admissions with hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia before. There is no family history of any significant medical problems. His two younger siblings are healthy and did not have any dysmorphic features.
On examination he weighed 17.5 kg (-3SD), his height was 111 cm (-6SD), head circumference 47 cm (-3SD), weight for height was -1SD to –2SD indicating significant growth failure. Facial dysmorphism characterized by small head, large ears, broad nose, prognathism, malocclusion of teeth were noted along with prominent nipples. There was extensive acanthosis nigricans, hypertrichosis, thick finger nails and coarse hands .
Examination of the cardiovascular system, respiratory system and neurological system were apparently normal, abdominal examination did not reveal any organomegaly and his external genitalia appeared to be normal. The blood pressure was 100/60and was within the normal limits for his age. Developmental assessment showed that his motor skills and vision were age appropriate, but his speech was delayed and he could make only two word sentences. Formal assessment showed that this boy also has moderate learning difficulties.
Investigations revealed significantly raised Random blood sugar (RBS), Fasting blood sugar (FBS)and Glycated Hemoglobin (HbA1c) . There was no associated ketonuria or ketonemia. Serum electrolytes and renal functions were within the normal range. Ultrasonography of the renal tract revealed that both his kidneys were significantly enlarged for the age. Measuring the insulin levels and C-peptide levels would have been very useful at this point, but due to the unavailability of these tests in state hospitals and the cost we could not perform the tests.
Based on the clinical findings, our patient underwent genetic studies to detect possible mutations in the INSR gene. Genomic DNA was isolated from the patient’s blood sample and enriched for the coding exons of targeted genes using hybrid capture technology. Prepared DNA libraries were then sequenced using a next generation sequencing technology at Fulgent Diagnostics, California, USA. Variants were interpreted manually using locus specific databases, literature searches, and other molecular biological principles. A homozygous variant in the INSR gene, NM_000208.2:c.1042A > T (p. Ile348Phe), was identified in our patients’ sample. This particular missense mutation has not been reported previously in patients with RMS. Polyphen2 online tool was used to assess the effect of this novel missense mutation and it was stated as possibly damaging.
After the initial assessment the boy was started on a combination of Soluble and Isophane insulin 0.5U/kg/day and then increased to 1U/kg/day. As the blood sugars were still high, Metformin was added to counter the insulin resistance. Subsequently the dose of Insulin was further increased to achieve normal glycemic control. With a Metformin dose of 500 mg three times a day and Insulin dose of 2U/kg/day the blood sugar levels were maintained below 15 mmol/L. After starting the treatment in order to titrate the Insulin doses this boy underwent blood sugar series test which showed that the pre-prandial sugar levels were in the in the range of 10-12 mmol/L and post prandial blood sugar levels were 12-14 mmol/L. Due to the financial constraints on the family, expensive newer diabetes drugs were not considered.
Referrals to the Dermatologist, Orthodontist and Endocrinologist were done for management of other associated problems. Parents were counselled about the course of the disease, management options, long term prognosis and recurrence in the family. The counselling was very useful to alleviate the psychological stress of the parents and to face the challenges in dealing with a child with RMS. None of the immediate family members of the index patient had any physical features or biochemical abnormalities suggestive of Rabson Mendenhall syndrome. Unfortunately, due to the high cost of the test, parents and the siblings did not undergo the genetic analysis.
In our patient the diagnosis of RMS was made based on the clinical presentation with significant acanthosis nigricans, hirsuitism, dysmorphic characteristics, growth retardation, insulin dependent diabetes requiring large amounts of insulin and this was confirmed by genetic analysis.