A 53-year-old female patient, known to have diabetes mellitus, and hypothyroidism, and no family history of cancer, was diagnosed in 1999, with endometrial cancer and was treated with hysterectomy and left salpingo-oophorectomy, relapsed few months later, as left pelvic mass, excised with sigmoidectomy, without adjuvant chemotherapy.
She was well until May 2016, when she presented with few months’ history of abdominal pain and rising CA 125. MRI and PET CT scan showed retroperitoneal mass that invaded inferior vena cava with no distant metastasis .
The mass was excised together with inferior vena cava angioplasty and the pathology showed lymph node metastasis with poorly differentiated carcinoma, forming cribriform/papillary growth pattern (: image 1) and focal clear cell changes (: image 2) in favor of endometrial primary. The excisional margin was positive. The tumor board decided either adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy, which was declined by the patient.
In September 2016, the tumor relapsed in the retroperitoneal lymph node between L3-4 and in the lungs. Since then until April 2017, the patient received three lines of chemotherapy: Carboplatin/Paclitaxel/Bevacizumab, Topotecan and then Liposomal Adriamycin that were poorly tolerated. The disease progressed further locally causing mass effect on the right ureter and spread to the lungs .
In July 2017, immunohistochemical stains for DNA Mismatch Repair proteins of the resected retroperitoneal lymph node, demonstrated significant complete loss of nuclear expression of MLH-1 (: image 3) and PMS-2 (: image 4), with intact expression of MSH-6 (: image 5) and MSH-2 (: image 6).
The retroperitoneal mass and paracaval lymph node were sent to pathology for evaluation. The retroperitoneal mass consists of an irregular, lobulated firm mass surrounded by fibro-adipose tissue. Sections submitted revealed an invasive high-grade malignant tumor with mixed cribriform/papillary growth and infiltrative clear cell solid growth. The area of the cribriform/papillary growth pattern ( images 1,2). Complete loss of nuclear expression of MLH-1 ( image 3) and PMS-2 ( image 4). Intact expression of MSH-6 ( image 5) and MSH-2 ( image 6). The area of the clear cell tumor demonstrated obvious voluminous clear cytoplasm ( image 7). High power section demonstrates malignant tumor composed of large voluminous clear cytoplasm, distinct margins, enlarged angulated pleomorphic hyperchromatic bizarre nuclei with prominent nucleoli ( Image 8).
Based on a strong predictor of response to treatment, i.e. MSI High status, combined with the overall favorable toxicity profile of Pembrolizumab, she was given Pembrolizumab on the 2nd of September 2017.
At this time, the patient ECOG status was 2, with neurological examinations. Biochemistry results found WBC at 4.7 ×109/L, Hb at 8.6 g/dL, platelets at 201 ×109/L, and MPV at 6.5 fl. Two days later, after receiving two units packed red blood cells, the WBC were at 5.6 ×109/L, Hb at 11.7 g/dL, but the platelets dropped to 72 ×109/L. Six days later, the patient developed seizure and upon regaining consciousness, she started to have visual hallucination, with frank cerebellar signs (horizontal nystagmus, dysmetria, with ataxic gait), WBC at 3.5 ×109/L, Hb 11.6 g/dL, platelets 21 ×109/L, HIT test was negative and fibrinogen level was normal.
Recurrent seizures with confusion were recurred, MRI head, on 11th of September 2017, did not show bleeding, brain metastasis or features of encephalopathy.
The patient’s performance status dropped further to become bed bound. The consulted neurologists suggested clinical recurrent confusion, lack of comprehension, and on and off lip smacking were in favor of non-convulsive status epilepticus; however, the existence of cerebellar symptoms, visual hallucination, episodes of on and off unresponsiveness was in favor of limbic encephalitis which were suggestive of paraneoplastic syndrome versus immunotherapy side effect. Therefore, an EEG was requested On the 14th of Sept 2017, WBC 2.9 ×109/L, Hb 7.6 g/dL, platelets reached 9 ×109/L and MPV were 12.2 fl; a picture in favor of peripheral consumption. Direct Coombs test was positive, and the peripheral smear showed pancytopenia.
Bone marrow was assessed (, & ), and the patient was kept on Methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg for seven days, was planned to be tapered by 10 mg weekly.
IVIG was given as per neurologist request for five days to treat limbic encephalopathy. During the following days the WBC reached 1 × 109/L, platelets 10 × 109/L and Hb 7 g/dL . She developed septic shock, then passed away on the 24th of September 2017.