A 44-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed in March 2017 with a stage IIIB cutaneous nodular melanoma on the right forearm, with a tumor Breslow thickness of 3.43 mm, without ulceration (pT3a), one clinically detected tumor-involved axillary lymph node (pN1b), and no evidence of distant metastasis (cM0). He was treated with wide local excision, axillary lymph node dissection, and then with high-dose adjuvant ipilimumab monotherapy at 10 mg/kg i.v., according to EORTC 18071 protocol [, ]. Two days after the first ipilimumab infusion, he developed a persistent grade 2 colitis, which was corticosteroid-resistant, treated with infliximab, and that imposed termination of the treatment.
In September 2017, a follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan revealed pulmonary progression (one unique lesion) and wedge resection of segment 10 of the left inferior lobe was performed. The pathology confirmed metastatic melanoma, programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) positive (60%) and wild-type BRAF. Three months later, subsequent imaging by CT scan and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed metastatic progression in lung with multiple lesions in the left superior and inferior lobe, hilar lymph nodes, and brain with one cerebellar and 4 millimetric contrast enhancing lesions in the frontal white matter. A CyberKnife (Accuray Incorporated, Sunnyvale, California) stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) was administered 2 weeks later to the 5 cerebral lesions in one single fraction of 24 Gy and an immunotherapy anti-PD1 with nivolumab (3 mg/kg as monotherapy) was initiated. The decision to administer nivolumab as monotherapy was based on the very high PD-L1 positivity (60% of tumor cells), but also to minimize the risk of new irAEs, given his previous ipilimumab-induced corticosteroid-resistant colitis, and knowing that combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab result in more complications [, , ].
Two weeks after the first nivolumab infusion the patient presented with asthenia, headache, and apraxia of the upper right limb with impaired coordination of the right hand, and later developed a grade 1 erythematous maculopapular rash. A brain MRI showed multiple new metastatic brain lesions in the cerebellum, the left frontoparietal cortex, and the brain stem. The lesions were all complicated by perilesional oedema, for which he was administered dexamethasone (1 mg i.d. for 7 days and 5.25 mg tapered over 14 days). There was no evidence of infection and thyroid function studies were normal. Within 1 week, he presented at the hospital after a generalized epileptic seizure with clonic movements of the right-hand side of his body. Electroencephalogram (EEG) recording, performed after the seizure, was considered normal despite the presence of a discreet left temporal slowing. MRI revealed no changes in the known brain metastases and no evidence of ischemic or haemorrhagic events. He was hospitalized and an anti-epileptic treatment was introduced (Levetiracetam 500 mg bid) which prevented a recurrence of the seizures. In January 2018, CyberKnife SRS was administered to treat 7 new small metastasis (24 Gy in one fraction) and 3 large ones (35 Gy in five fractions) .
In February 2018, the immunotherapy with nivolumab was resumed (3 mg/kg, every 2 weeks). Follow-up brain MRI in April 2018 showed early evidence of good response with decrease in size or disappearance of the multiple pre-existing lesions without any new metastasis . In June 2018, after 11 cycles of nivolumab, a routine follow-up brain MRI showed multiple new diffuse white matter lesions, consistent with active CNS demyelination with a patient that was completely asymptomatic . These lesions consisted of multiple, well-defined, ovoid, T2-hyperintense lesions with incomplete ring enhancement (i.e. open ring sign) after i.v contrast administration and hypovascularization on perfusion weighted imaging . In addition, there was no abnormal diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) in these lesions. They were mainly located in the juxtacortical and periventricular white matter of the fronto-parietal lobes, respecting Dawson fingers distribution, classical of demyelinating lesions . In contrast, previously treated brain metastases were T2-hypointense with central necrosis and large perilesional oedema, had complete ring enhancement on post-contrast T1-weighted imaging and hypervascularization on perfusion weighted imaging . Hence, demyelinating lesions could radiologically clearly be distinguished from brain metastases. The patient was asymptomatic and there were no findings indicating an infection or progression of his melanoma. Systematic neurological examination did not reveal any cranial or peripheral nerve abnormalities and he showed no cognitive function impairment. The EEG was repeated and was found unchanged from previous exams. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed clear appearance with normal glucose and lactate levels. Elevated white blood cells (14 × 106/l) and lymphocytes (13 × 106/l) counts were found. Elevated protein level (594 mg/l, normal range: 150–450) and elevated albumin level (316 mg/l, normal range: 80–300) were observed. The CSF thus revealed a disrupted blood-brain barrier. Oligoclonal bands were absent, Immunoglobulins gamma (IgG) pattern and total IgG levels were normal in the CSF. Protein electrophoresis was normal, and serum autoantibody testing (anti-CNS, anti-LGT1, anti-CASPR2, anti-NMDA-R, anti-GluR1–2 AMPA) was negative. No tumor cell could be identified. Nivolumab immunotherapy was discontinued due to these demyelinating lesions. Since the patient was asymptomatic, it was decided not to give him any immunosuppressive treatment.
Strikingly, 1 month after cessation of nivolumab, the multiple demyelinating lesions spontaneously regressed , strongly suggesting an IrAEs of the immunotherapy, which was permanently discontinued. The patient has been followed by close monitoring for neurological symptoms and remained asymptomatic. Follow-up brain MRI every 3 months revealed complete resolution of these demyelinating lesions 6 months after initiation of nivolumab treatment along with stability in size and appearance of the prior identified cerebral metastases without new lesions. Tumor evaluation every 3 months by 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan did not reveal any hypermetabolic lesions and confirmed a complete systemic and cerebral response over 12 months after occurrence of his irAE.