A 45-year-old man presented with massive hemoptysis and breathlessness on exertion for 3 days with a history of 30 pack-years of smoking. He had moderate fever but no night sweats, anorexia, or weight loss. The patient did not have any potential medical treatments or relevant pre-existing conditions that may cause these symptoms. The patient had a respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min and oxygen saturation of 91% on ambient air. Chest physical examination revealed mild respiratory distress, obvious percussive dullness, and diminished breath sounds on the left side of the chest. Other physical examination was unremarkable. He had moderate leukocytosis (16,500/µL) and procalcitonin (11.3 mg/L), and serum CEA was normal (2.2 ng/mL). Other laboratory tests were normal. Enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a cystic mass that was mildly enhanced in the left lower lobe supplied by an anomalous artery arising from the descending thoracic aorta with massive pleural effusion . Therefore, he was initially diagnosed with PS with inflammatory pleural effusion. Nevertheless, tube thoracostomy revealed hemothorax, while the CEA in the pleural effusion reached 98 ng/ml, and cytological analysis demonstrated that neutrophils were the major type of leukocyte. These findings complicated the diagnosis, such that we could not rule out the possibility of advanced stage lung cancer, so lobectomy was not appropriate in the patient’s condition. Hemoptysis was stopped after bronchial arterial embolism (BAE) with coils and polyvinyl alcohol . Bronchoscopy and thoracoscopy were performed after BAE. Bronchoscopy was unremarkable, and thoracoscopy showed some lesions on the parietal pleura, bloody effusion and fibrous adhesions . However, the histopathology of the pleural lesion only implied chronic inflammation with some necrosis. CT-guided needle biopsy of the retrocardiac mass was performed twice . None of the histopathological and cytological examinations suggested malignancy, but only elevated neutrophils and Aspergillus hyphae emerged. Because there was no evidence of malignancy, left lower lobectomy was performed, and the lesion was removed thoroughly . Postsurgical histopathology examination confirmed the diagnosis of intralobar pulmonary sequestrations (IPSs) and the existence of septate hyphae as well as some fibrinoid necrosis . After the surgery, the CEA in the pleural effusion and the temperature returned to normal. The postoperative recovery was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged 7 days later. One month later at outpatient follow-up, the patient showed good recovery, except for slight left chest pain.