A 31-year-old woman (weight 58 kg) with a history of coeliac disease and sideropenic
anaemia for several years, 34 weeks pregnant, was presented to a local emergency room with
sudden onset of slurred speech, severe right hemiparesis, facial nerve central palsy, eyes
deviation to the left, psychomotor agitation resulting in an NIHSS of 16 points, pain in the
right lower limb, normal blood pressure and tachycardia at 124/min. Standard 12-lead
electrocardiogram was normal; laboratory studies showed haemoglobin of 86g/L, D-dimer of
4.27 mg/L; other parameters, were normal. Brain computed tomography (CT) was negative ; CT angiography was not
performed, as there was no sign of hyperdense artery, and due to psychomotor agitation, the
patient was not suitable for transport to a secondary stroke centre.
Obstetric ultrasound was normal, without signs of placental alterations; therefore, 65 min
after admission and 120 min after symptoms onset, intravenous rt-PA was administered by the
standard protocol. We assumed that rt-PA does not pass into the placenta, so we calculated a
weight of 48 kg before delivery and thus a dose of 40 mg was administered. The patient
recovered within a few hours to mild hemiparesis and slight aphasia, resulting in an NIHSS
of 4 points after 7 h and 1 point after 10 days. Nine hours after the intravenous
thrombolysis (IVT), brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA) showed acute ischaemia in the territory of the left middle cerebral artery
(MCA), severe stenosis of the M1 segment of left MCA ( and ) and two small ischaemic lesions in the right
hemisphere. Twenty-four hours after rt-PA, dual antiplatelet treatment with acetylsalicylic
acid (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg/day) started because of MCA stenosis.
Hypomagnesaemia and decreased calcium were surrogated. Two days after rt-PA, deep vein
thrombosis of the right lower limb was confirmed; enoxaparin 50 mg twice daily was added and
clopidogrel was dropped.
Transthoracic echocardiogram and prolonged Holter monitoring were negative.
Transoesophageal echocardiography planned in view of the deep vein thrombosis to evaluate
the right-left shunt was contraindicated by the cardiologist during pregnancy; after
delivery, patent foramen ovale, or atrial septal defect was not confirmed.
In consideration of recurrent miscarriages, the patient was tested before the current
pregnancy for antiphospholipid syndrome, lupus anticoagulant antibodies, anti
β2-glycoprotein-I antibodies and anti-cardiolipin antibodies, with negative
results.
Twenty-three days after IVT, the patient delivered in the 37th week, labour started
spontaneously; the patient delivered a healthy term male infant 3350 g/50 cm, Apgar score
10/10, without complications; the puerperium was normal. The aetiology of stroke was not
revealed even after delivery.