A 30-year-old male presented to us in the outpatient department with the complaints of pain and deformity of the right elbow with a non-healing wound for 5 weeks. The patient had a history of a road traffic accident while driving a two-wheeler, following which he had pain, swelling, and deformity of the right elbow with a wound over the olecranon. He had sought treatment from a local hospital and was tested positive for COVID-19 and was managed conservatively with posterior above elbow slab. After getting treatment for COVID-19, the patient visited our hospital for the persistent deformity and stiffness of the right elbow.
On examination, the right elbow joint had flexion deformity and wasting of muscles of arm and forearm was evident. On palpation, the olecranon process was found to be displaced anteriorly from the olecranon fossa of the right humerus, crepitus could be felt and a non-healing wound was present over the olecranon (3*2 cm). There were no signs of active infection, and therefore, blood culture was not done. The flexion deformity was 30° with further flexion up to 60°. Pronation was restricted at 10° and supination was possible till 40°. On further examination, valgus laxity could be appreciated with no associated neurovascular deficit. On radiographic examination, the right elbow was found to be anteriorly dislocated with medial epicondyle fracture and comminuted lateral condyle fracture . A computed tomography (CT) with 3D reconstruction confirmed an anterior dislocation of the right elbow joint with the associated distal humerus, lateral sagittal, partial articular, trans-trochlear multi-fragmentary, epiphyseal-metaphyseal lateral condyle fracture, and medial epicondyle fracture (AO/OTA Classification – 13-B1.3).
We planned an open reduction internal fixation with plating as it was an already delayed presentation and was an unreduced fracture dislocation of elbow. Surgery was performed under general anesthesia with intubation. The patient was positioned laterally with the elbow flexed on a sidearm fixed to the table. A pneumatic tourniquet was applied and we performed an open reduction and internal fixation of the elbow by taking a midline posterior approach. The dissection was done in layers and the ulnar nerve was identified and preserved avoiding any kind of traction or pressure injuries. We took a paratricipital approach, and after further dissection and extensive release of fibrous and osteoid tissues, we were successful in relocating the elbow joint. Special care was taken to protect the medial and lateral collateral ligaments which were found to be intact. Any overlapping cartilage was further trimmed to attain bleeding metaphyseal bone. During the exposure, the articular cartilage was carefully handled to preserve it and avoid the nibbling of soft tissues around it. The small articular fragments were preserved and disimpacted with the help of a fine elevator and interposed tissues were removed. After the reduction of all major fragments, multiple Kirschner wires (K-wires) were used for provisional fixation . The coronal articular fragments were found to be severely comminuted with a lack of bone stock. The articular fragments were too small and thin for Herbert screws and had minimal subarticular bone for any 2.5 mm screws through the plate. Subarticular K-wires were inserted just below the articular cartilage in parallel cantilever pattern and along the para-articular curvature of the articular surface of capitellum and then the ends were coalesced and buried under a lateral pillar plate to provide a stable and rigid interface with the lateral column. Final tightening of the screws was done after engaging all the K-wires behind the plate. K-wires were used for fixation as the articular fragments were too thin to get hold with screws. With lack of bone stock and thin subarticular bone, cancellous screws could not be used for the same.
The medial epicondyle was cartilaginous and quite small, making it unsuitable for screw fixation without a substantial risk of comminution. The ulnar collateral ligament was visualized and no frank tear was found. The fracture was stabilized with help of K-wire and was then fixed with the help of suture anchors and FiberWire sutures but satisfactory fixation was not achieved. The medial epicondyle was then fixed with the help of K-wires and tension band wiring. At the end of the procedure, we confirmed the stability of the elbow by testing the range of motion in all planes and found it satisfactory. The wound was then closed in layers after anterior transposition of the ulnar nerve and putting a suction drain. The necrotic skin tissues were excised along with the non-healing wound and skin edges were freshened which left a fresh wound of (4*3 cm) without skin coverage. The rest of the wound was sutured with staples. A posterior above-elbow slab was applied after proper antiseptic dressing of the wound. The drain was in situ for 24 h and later removed. The patient was started on Indomethacin 25 mg 8 hourly for 2 weeks post-surgery. After proper wound care and inspection, the patient was discharged on the 6th post-operative day and was advised for wound management follow-up weekly. Active-assisted mobilization of the elbow joint was started after 3 weeks of surgery. The patient was advised to attend the rehabilitation department for physiotherapy for 6 weeks and his progress was monitored throughout. At 8 months post-operative period, the patient had a painless range of motion of the flexion-extension with flexion of 110° and extension lag of 20°. The radiographic review at 8 months also showed good bony union . The range of supination was 80° and pronation was at 5° . The post-operative wound was completely healed with no complications.