A 69-year-old female called an ambulance after experiencing chest pain and breathlessness. Her past medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypercholesterolaemia, hypothyroidism, and being an ex-smoker of 16 years.
On attendance, paramedics found her pale and tachypnoeic. She had a respiratory rate of 30 b.p.m. with bilateral basal crackles, oxygen saturation of 89% on room air, a heart rate of 102 b.p.m., and blood pressure of 109/63 mmHg and was febrile with a temperature of 38.4°C. Her jugular venous pressure was not significantly elevated, heart sounds were normal with no added murmurs, and she did not have any peripheral oedema. Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with inferolateral ST elevation .
The most significant differential diagnosis from her presentation was acute ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). She was therefore given antiplatelet loading therapy (aspirin 300 mg and ticagrelor 180 mg) and transported to the nearest primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PPCI) centre. Differential diagnoses include pericarditis, myocarditis, acute aortic syndrome, or TTS.
At the PPCI centre, blood tests showed a markedly elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I at 29 421 ng/L (normal range 0–16 ng/L). Echocardiography demonstrated severely impaired left ventricular function with ejection fraction visually estimated to be 30–35%, with akinesia of mid to apical left ventricular segments and hypercontractile basal segments (Video 1; see online, ).
Urgent invasive coronary angiogram revealed unobstructed coronary arteries with mild irregularities (see online, ). Left ventriculogram identified once again an akinetic mid to apical left ventricle with hypercontractile neck (Video 2).
Myocardial infarction with non-obstructed coronary arteries was therefore the working diagnosis for her presentation, and she was referred for an inpatient CMR scan to identify the precise aetiology of her MINOCA, which she underwent 5 days later. This showed a similar pattern of wall motion abnormalities to the left ventriculogram (Video 3A–C) typical of classical pattern TTS. Left ventricular ejection fraction from short-axis volumetric quantification was borderline impaired for her age at 60% (normal range 60–78%). Right ventricular function was normal with an ejection fraction of 70% (normal range 57–81%).
T2 short tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequences demonstrated hyperintense myocardial signal intensity in the mid to apical regions .
Native T1 mapping and T2 mapping sequences demonstrated increased relaxation times throughout the mid to apical regions reflecting oedema (normal native T1 range 975–1065 ms; normal T2 < 55 ms for 1.5 T Siemens MAGNETOM Sola MRI scanner).
Early gadolinium sequences and late gadolinium sequences ( and ) demonstrated subtle diffuse and patchy/diffuse mid-wall enhancement respectively in mid to apical segments. No thrombus was identified. Absence of subendocardial fibrosis ruled out myocardial infarction, and absence of subepicardial fibrosis made myocarditis less likely.
Antiplatelet medications were discontinued, and she was commenced on heart failure medication (ramipril 1.25 mg twice a day, dapagliflozin 10 mg once a day, and eplerenone 25 mg once a day). She remained haemodynamically stable and was subsequently discharged with resolving ST-segment elevation but with persistent inferolateral T-wave inversions (see online, ). A 6-week follow-up echocardiogram was arranged.