A five-year-old girl diagnosed with DiGeorge syndrome at the age of 5 months with thymic hypoplasia and decreased T-cell counts was transferred to our department from a secondary paediatric department. She had been admitted the day before with worsening diarrhoea, vomiting, and malaise. She had contracted varicella two weeks prior to her admission and still had fresh vesicles covering most of her body on arrival, indicating a prolonged primary VZV infection. Two months prior to infection she was considered to have a close to normal T-cell function and a normal B-cell function. On admission, a chest X-ray had shown pneumonic infiltration, and she was being treated with intravenous antibiotics and acyclovir. C-reactive protein (CRP) steadily began to decline from 250 to 210 mg/l and white cell count (WCC) from 17.7 to 15.6 × 109/l (normal age-adjusted range 4.5–12.5 × 109/l) of which segmented neutrophils declined from 14.2 to 11.7 × 109/l (normal age-adjusted range 1.8–8.9 × 109/l).
An acute abdomen was suspected, and a CT-scan revealed possible free air and fecaliths, indicating a likely perforated appendix. It was at this point that she was transferred to our department.
On the basis of the CT-scan and the clinical findings of guarding and severe abdominal pain in the right lower quadrant, an open laparotomy was performed and a gangrenous perforated appendix was removed. Histopathological examination showed an appendix coated with fibrin and segmented neutrophils with increased wall thickness, transmural acute necrotising inflammation, and distal perforation. Postoperatively the intravenous antibiotic treatment with meropenem, ciprofloxacin, metronidazole, and acyclovir was continued. The WCC normalised within the first postoperative day (POD) and CRP declined to 127 × 109/l on the second POD.
On the fifth POD the WCC started to rise again, and the patient developed a fever of over 39°C. On clinical examination her abdomen was tense in the right lower quadrant. An ultrasound showed an intraperitoneal localised fluid collection, which was emptied with ultrasound guided technique. Microscopy of the pus showed a few gram positive rods, and Clostridium cadaveris was found in the culture. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay detecting VZV DNA identified VZV in DNA material isolated from two tissue samples from the appendix and in one sample of pus from the abdomen. PCR for VZV DNA in the patient's saliva was negative. On the tenth POD the WCC rose again, and an ultrasound showed a recurrence of the abscess. This was subsequently incised, and while no fluid was extracted, the patient improved quickly. On POD thirteen, CRP had declined to 13 × 109/l and acyclovir was stopped. The child was discharged on POD fourteen, and antibiotic treatment was continued with oral ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin for seven days after discharge. The parents cancelled a planned follow-up two weeks after discharge because the child was doing so well.