A 48-year-old man presented to the emergency department of a regional hospital with acute chest pain and suspected acute coronary syndrome (ACS). The day before, he had visited his general practitioner due to thoracic discomfort with tightness in the chest. A few weeks earlier, he had experienced an upper respiratory tract infection and sore throat. Noteworthy, in the days before, his wife and children (pre-schoolers) suffered also from acute tonsillitis. Physical examination revealed a febrile, generally ill appearing middle-aged man. He had a regular pulse, S1/S2 were normal without murmurs, gallop, or rub. Both lung and abdomen examination were unremarkable. No skin lesions, rash, cyanosis, or oedema were present. The patient had no relevant personal or family past medical history, was a smoker (20 pack-years) and denied any substance abuse or regular medication.
On admission, resting electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated ‘saddle-shaped’, anterior ST-segment elevations; PR interval was normal . Transthoracic echocardiography showed a hypercontractile left ventricle without wall motion abnormalities . Laboratory studies revealed signs of inflammation with elevated leucocytes (15.85 × 103/μL; normal values: 4–10 × 103/μL) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (6.28 mg/dL; normal values: <0.50 mg/dL) as well as of acute myocardial injury [high-sensitive cardiac troponin T (hsTropT) = 589 pg/mL initially with increase up to 1009 pg/mL; normal values: <14 pg/mL, creatine kinase (CK) = 410 U/L, creatine kinase - myocardial band (CK-MB) = 15 ng/mL; normal values: <174 U/L and <5 U/L, respectively]. Chest X-ray was unremarkable.
Due to the suspicion of acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) 500 mg aspirin and 5000 units of heparin (IV) were administered and the patient immediately underwent coronary angiography which revealed normal coronary arteries. Additional laboratory tests showed no signs of infection with potential cardiotropic viruses [Coxsackie A/B Echoviruses immunoglobulin A (IGA) negative] and no flu infection (Influ-A/-B PCR negative). Moreover, testing for Lyme disease [anti-Borrelia burgdorferi immunoglobulin G (IgG)/immunoglobulin M (IgM)] was negative. There was no sign of an autoimmune cardiac disease (anti-cardiac-muscle-, myolemm-, sarcolemm-antibodies negative). Noteworthy, an increased anti-streptolysin O (1879 IU/mL; normal values: <200 IU/mL) and streptococcal anti-DNase B (2000 U/mL; normal values: <200 U/mL) titer indicated a recent streptococcal infection. Repeated blood cultures (aerobic and anaerobic) turned negative. The patient was put on a trial of ampicillin/sulbactam due to suspected streptococcal pharyngitis-associated inflammatory disease with consecutive obvious clinical improvement. Concurrently, ST-segment elevation slowly resolved over days and was followed by T-wave inversion without development of Q waves .
Interestingly, during a 3-day interruption of antibiotic—to obtain blood cultures, marked recurrent chest pain and hsTropT elevation (up to 1000 pg/mL) occurred. To elucidate the respective cause, a cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) study was performed and established the diagnosis of acute perimyocarditis with impressive myocarditis and mild corresponding pericarditis. Presence of marked, subepicardial to transmural, late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) together with pronounced myocardial oedema, as indicated by increased signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging, was documented in the mid-ventricular anterior- and anterolateral wall segments; corresponding focal hypo- to akinesia was noted; pericardial involvement with mild oedema and LGE over the anterior wall, but without substantial pericardial fluid, was also seen . Interestingly, this pattern did not match the patchy subepicardial LGE in the inferolateral left ventricular wall, typically seen in ‘viral myocarditis’—but suggested a rather a different, more confluent, myocardial damage.
A full 10-day course of antibiotic (ampicillin/sulbactam) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (ibuprofen 600 mg/t.i.d.) was prescribed, in view of streptococcal pharyngitis-associated acute perimyocarditis (SPAM) with persistent chest pain. Due to pronounced regional myocarditis—confirmed by CMR, despite limited evidence in case of a preserved global left ventricular systolic function, a beta-blocker (bisoprolol 2.5 mg/day) was started to supress ventricular ectopy and an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ramipril 1.25 mg/day) to prevent adverse left ventricular remodelling. In the same context, an 3- to 6-month wearable cardioverter defibrillator (LifeVest®, ZOLL Medical Corporation, USA) was discussed and finally indicated on discharge. Restriction of physical activity for the same time period was recommended. In the absence of valvular injury, long-term antibiotic prophylaxis was deemed unnecessary.
One month after first CMR, the patient was referred to our centre for follow-up. The aforementioned wall motion abnormality had resolved and the extent of LGE and myocardial oedema had markedly decreased . A complete normalization of the ECG was documented . The anti-streptococcal antibody concentrations significantly dropped (anti-streptolysin O = 989 IU/mL, streptococcal anti-DNase B = 1000 U/mL) and there was no sign of ongoing myocardial damage (hsTropT = 6 pg/mL, CK = 16 U/L).