A previously healthy 56-year-old woman was admitted with fever and confusion. The three previous days she had experienced abdominal discomfort and some diarrhea, but no bloody stools. On admission she had a temperature of 36.9 °C, Glasgow Coma Scale score of 14, and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP). There was tenderness in the right upper abdomen, otherwise normal physical examination. Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and hemolytic anemia were noted. She had oliguric renal failure and a respiration frequency of 20 per minute needing oxygen supplement. Treatment for sepsis was initiated.
The next day (day 1) she was transferred to Oslo university hospital due to progressing renal failure in need of dialysis and a thrombotic microangiopathy warranting further diagnostics. She was confused, in respiratory distress requiring high flow oxygen therapy and developed petechial bleedings. Pleural end pericardial effusions were observed. Blood smear showed schistocytosis and anisocytosis, and few, but normal platelets. Bone marrow smear showed hypocellularity suggestive of toxic bone marrow failure. Computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a slightly enlarged spleen and swollen kidneys. No intracerebral pathology was demonstrated. A selection of laboratory values is presented in Tables , and .
The clinical picture suggested systemic infection with secondary TMA, accompanied by cerebral confusion, respiratory impairment, and acute renal failure. Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura (TTP), Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC) and complement mediated TMA were possible differential diagnoses.
Initial treatment included IV meropenem 1 g twice daily, IV linezolide 600 mg twice daily and continuous veno-venous hemodialysis. Suspecting TTP, corticosteroids and plasma exchange (PE) were initiated, but were discontinued 24 h after admission, when we received data on ADAMTS13 [a Disintegrin And Metalloprotease with a ThromboSpondin type 1 motif, member 13] activity, which was within normal limits (> 70%), excluding TTP. Differential diagnosis of DIC as part of severe bacterial infection was less likely, since she was circulatory stable and had elevated rather that decreased levels of fibrinogen.
Within the first day, low levels of complement factors C1q, C3 and C4 were detected, accompanied by an elevated level of soluble terminal complement complex sC5b-9 and diminished Factor H . There were also markedly elevated levels of von Willebrand factor (vWf) and soluble interleukin 2 receptor (sIL2R) suggesting activation of endothelial cells and T cells, respectively. Since we could not exclude a diagnosis of complement mediated TMA, treatment with the complement C5 inhibitor eculizumab was initiated with a starting dose of 900 mg.
During the first week, extensive diagnostics were performed. E. coli derived shigatoxin and streptococcal infection were excluded. Blood-cultures, viral DNA PCR (Cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr virus, Influenza virus A and B) and antigen/serology tests (HIV, Hepatitis A, B and C) were all negative. Legionella and pneumococcal antigen in urine were negative. Autoimmune disease was unlikely based on negative autoantibodies (anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-granulocyte cytoplasmatic antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, antiphospholipid-antibodies and anti-glomerular basement membrane- antibodies). There was no evidence of malignancy based on findings in bone-marrow biopsy, CT and Positron emission tomography (PET) CT scans.
On Day 2, Rod-shaped bacteriae were suspected upon reexamination of initial blood smear at the primary hospital. On day 4 there was growth in blood cultures taken on first admission. This led to the suspicion of a slow-growing bacteria such as C. canimorsus. The patient had a dog, but no recent history of bites. Based on this finding, meropenem was continued, linezolid stopped, and clindamycin 900 mg three times daily added to the regimen. On Day 5, C. canimorsus was confirmed by mass spectrometry.
The patient recovered cognitively on Day 2 and physically on Day 4, when she was transferred to the medical ward. However, on day 5, a rise in CRP and leukocytes occurred. Ultrasonography demonstrated impaired splenic blood flow. On day 8 an open splenectomy was performed. Histological examination showed a necrotic spleen with signs of TMA and C. canimorsus was demonstrated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Based upon the possibility of complement-driven TMA, eculizumab injections were repeated after 7, 23, 30 and 38 days (doses of 900 mg). The planned dose on day 14 was withheld due to completely suppressed complement activation pathways.
Following splenectomy, the patient rapidly recovered. Dialysis was tapered and last session given on day 12. Meropenem was discontinued on Day 13, clindamycin on day 17. The patient was discharged after 30 days. She had not experienced any significant side effects from the treatment. During outpatient follow-up over the next months, she further regained her premorbid health status, except for a slightly reduced renal function. Eculizumab was continued in doses of 1400 mg every 3 weeks for 3 months. Genetic analyses found a heterozygous variant factor B Gly252Ser, associated according to Osborne with complement mediated TMA in a few cases and with a reported prevalence of 2% in the population according to the ExAC database. Eculizumab was then discontinued, after a total of 7 doses.