A 81 years old female presented to the Department of Surgery with a history of right breast erythema and edema associated to breast pain, with over two weeks duration and progressive worsening.
She linked the appearance of these signals with an episode of breast trauma and she denied the presence of previous breast nodules, nipple drainage, nipple retraction, fever and constitutional symptoms.
The patient was multiparous (three pregnancies and three births) and nursed all children.
She had multiple medical co-morbidities but there was no past history of breast pathology or family history of breast malignacy.
Physical examination demonstrated mammary asymmetry because right breast was bigger and tender . The outer quadrants and the periareolar region had inflammatory signs with orange peel skin . There was no palpable masses or nipple changes. The left breast was normal.
She had the right upper limb swollen and palpable axillar and supraclavicular lymph nodes .
The principal suspicion was an inflammatory breast cancer.
The ultrasound of the right breast revealed skin thickening and tissue densification involving principally the external quadrants, and it was identified an irregular hypoechoic mass with 8 cm × 5 cm and multiple axillary and supraclavicular enlarged lymph nodes. The ultrasound of left breast and of left axilla was normal.
Core needle biopsy of an axillary lymph node and of the breast mass identified morphological and immunophenotypic features consistent with diagnosis of primary non-Hodgkin DLBCL.
The CT scan of the chest confirmed right breast alterations identified in ultrasound and ipsilateral axillary and supraclavicular lymph node enlargement. No other enlarged lymph nodes were observed. CT scans of the brain, abdomen and pelvis were normal. Bone marrow aspiration was negative. Serum lactate dehydrogenase level was normal.
After confirming diagnosis, the therapy plan included R-CHOP x8 (Rituximab (375 mg/m2, D1), cyclophosphamide (750 mg/m2, D1), doxorubicin (50 mg/m2, D1), vincristine (1.4 mg/m2, D1), prednisone (50 mg twice a day, D1–D5)). She also received radiotherapy (4500 cGY) to the breast and regional lymph nodes with 180 cGY daily fractions.
She is currently well at follow-up 24 months after presentation and without evidence of residual disease.