A 39-year-old man with CF and CF-related diabetes came to our Unit due to symptoms of pulmonary exacerbation. At the same time, he started to present gross hematuria, back pain and headache. At admission, laboratory analysis showed increase in serum creatinine of 1.5 mg/dl together with hematuria and mild proteinuria (1 g/24 h). Intravenous antibiotics for pulmonary exacerbation (piperacillin/tazobacatam and colimycin) were started and a renal biopsy performed to investigate the cause of hematuria and renal failure. Biopsy was consistent with IgAN (see Fig. ), with morphological features of mesangial and endocapillary hypercellularity (Oxford classification M1, E1, S0, T0) As the patient presented dyspepsia, he was offered upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with duodenal biopsies (one from duodenal bulb and three from descending duodenum). Duodenal mucosa was reported as normal on hematoxylin/eosin stain. While compatible HLA alleles for celiac disease (DQ2) were identified, both serum anti-endomysium (EMA) and anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies (anti-tTG) were negative. It has been demonstrated that coeliac IgA targets intestinal TG2 early in disease development even when serum celiac autoantibodies are not present. Extraintestinal deposits of coeliac IgA further indicate that humoral immunity may have a pathogenetic role . Therefore, double immunofluorescence on duodenal mucosa was performed to detect mucosal deposits of anti-tissue transglutaminase type 2 using the technique described by Karponay-Szabo et al., with some modification . Briefly, 5 μm sections from the duodenal specimen included in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound were obtained and stored at − 80° in liquid nitrogen. Sections were fixed in acetone and incubated with Normal Rabbit Serum (Calbiochem Germany) for 20 min to block nonspecific sites. Sections were then incubated with anti-tissue transglutaminase type 2 (anti-tTG-2) from mouse (CUB7402 from Neomarker, Fremont CA) for one hour, and then with secondary antibodies conjugated with fluorochromes to detect total IgA (in green using Polyclonal Rabbit anti-Human IgA/FICT from Dako, Denmark) and anti-tTG-2 (in red using Polyconal Rabbit anti-Mouse RPE F (ab’) 2 from Dako, Denmark) for 30 min. The overlap of green and red (yellow) indicates the deposits of anti-tTG2. Analysis was performed on confocal microscopy. The same technique was performed on 5 μm renal sections. In both cases, an overlap of green and red in yellow was seen, thus demonstrating deposits of tTG-2 . In particular, in renal biopsies, deposits of tTG-2 that topographically replicated mesangial deposits of IgA were detected.
Given the morphological features of IgAN, and the presence of proteinuria, steroid therapy was started according to a standardized six month’s protocol . After one month, proteinuria decreased to 100 mg/24 h and hematuria resolved. Steroids were stopped after six months of treatment. The patient continued on a gluten containing diet.
Considering that intestinal deposits of anti-tissue transglutaminase IgA are predictive of forthcoming enteropathy after one year arepeat upper endoscopy was performed even though anti-tTG were still negative. At this time, a Marsh 2 type duodenal pathology was detected . A gluten free diet was started (for a complete timeline history see Additional file : Table S1).