A 63-year-old Brazilian woman was referred to the hospital with a 20-year history of an increasing size of the anterior portion of the neck associated with progressive exertional dyspnea, nighttime snoring and coughing, dysphagia of solids and daytime sleepiness. She had no history of hypertension, cigarette smoking, alcohol ingestion, weight loss, fractures or fever. Her medical history was significant for intermittent claudication.
Physical examination showed a thin woman (body mass index of 17 kg/m2) with a hard, irregular, painless, mobile tumoration on the anterior surface of the neck. No lymph nodes were palpable and hoarseness was evident. There was no craniofacial abnormality. The results of oral cavity, thyroid, cardiopulmonary and abdominal examination were unremarkable. The femoral arteries appeared to be thickened and pulses were frail although there were no signs of acute limb ischemia.
Pelvic and lower extremity roentgenograms showed dense, "rail tracking" femoral artery calcification associated with near-total obstruction of these vessels confirmed by translumbar aortography . A neck X-ray and computed tomography evidenced grossly calcified areas of soft tissue in the topography of the pharynx and larynx. Direct laryngoscopy confirmed exophytic calcic deposits in the left pyriform sinus . No other images of abnormal calcifications were found at any other sites, such as the arms, lung, heart, aorta or abdomen. A bone scintigram showed increased uptake of 99 mTc-methylene diphosphate in the calcified femoral arteries and on the anterior surface of the neck . Right hip and lumbar spine bone densitometry evidenced supportive findings of osteoporosis. Chest X-ray revealed mild enlargement of cardiac area associated with ectasic thoracic aorta; pulmonary aspects were normal. Doppler echocardiography revealed mild pulmonary hypertension (39 mmHg) associated with mild left atrium and moderate left ventricle enlargement; there was a diffuse left ventricle hypokinesia associated with an ejection fraction of 32% (indirectly measured by echocardiography). Also, there was an eccentrical left ventricular hypertrophy, severe mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. There was no abnormality in the right ventricle. Cineangiocoronariography was attempted to directly analyse any coronary disease as a possible cause of these abnormalities, but the rigidity of femoral and brachial arteries impeded the insertion of the catheter.
Sleep variables obtained from polysomnography were indicative of severe OSA with an apnea/hypopnea index of 51.6 per hour (40.9 apnea episodes/h), 89% of which occurred together with bradycardia and extra beats. Minimal oxygen saturation was 88%. The spirometric study demonstrated mild obstructive airway disease with no responsiveness after bronchodilator test. Also, there was a moderate decrease in the pulmonary diffusion capacity (Collins GS Plus Modular System, Warren E Collins Inc. Braintree, MA).
Except for the impaired fasting glucose state (fasting blood glucose of 117 mg/dl), there were no other biochemical abnormalities concerning calcium, phosphate, magnesium, creatinine and parathyroid hormone. Clinical and laboratory findings excluded any kind of rheumatologic disease such as dermatomyositis, scleroderma or systemic lupus erythematosus. Biopsy specimens from the pharynx and temporal artery revealed soft tissue calcification and medial artery calcinosis, respectively .
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) tritation for treatment of such obstructive sleep apnea has been tried twice on different occasions, but the patient has complained of extreme discomfort (she could hardly sleep during the procedures). A pressure of 10 cm H2O was reached during some short periods of sleep with a very low effect on the frequency of episodes of apnea. So, with the aim of stopping further vascular and soft tissue calcification, intravenous dissodic pamidronate was administred (60 mg IV diluted in 250 mL of saline solution once a day for 1 day).