We report a 75-year-old female with stage IV poorly differentiated ovarian carcinoma diagnosed in 2000, on palliative carboplatin-based chemotherapy since 2011. Past treatment included bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy and hysterectomy, ileostomy due to small bowel obstruction with subsequent fistulae formation and bilateral nephrostomy drainage after radiation-induced ureteric obstruction. She had experienced recurrent urinary tract infections and nephrostomies were previously colonised with methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Staphylococcus epidermidis & Candida albicans. She had never received anti-fungal prophylaxis. Co-morbidities included hypertension, multiple pulmonary emboli on enoxaparin and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. There were building works underway in the hospital during her hospital admission, although she was not in the immediate vicinity.
The patient was admitted to hospital due to a brief syncopal episode with associated lethargy, nausea, light-headedness and increased watery ileostomal output following chemotherapy one week earlier. Clinical examination including central nervous system was unremarkable, and she was haemodynamically stable and afebrile. Laboratory investigations revealed sodium 127 mg/mL (135–145 mg/mL), creatinine 145 mg/mL (45–90 mg/mL), haemoglobin 87 g/L (115–165 g/L), white cell count 4.52 cells/μl (3.9–11.1 cells/μl) and lymphocyte count 0.7 cells/μl (1.0–4.0 cells/μl). On day 2 of admission, she developed fevers of 38.5 °C and was empirically commenced on piperacillin-tazobactam and vancomycin. Staphylococcus epidermidis isolated from the nephrostomy fluid was considered colonisation and the nephrostomies were changed. Initial septic screen was non-contributory, including negative faecal microscopy.
Persisting fever during her third week of admission, with negative sterile site cultures 14 days into her admission, prompted assessment for metastatic disease progression with FDG-PET scan. There was no evidence of metastatic malignant disease detected, but an area of abnormal avidity was identified on the aortic valve . Subsequent transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a small mobile echo-density superior to the aortic valve. Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) revealed a pedunculated mass within the ascending aorta arising from the commissure of the right & non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve with a calcified base (20 × 14 × 11mm). An additional movie file shows this in more detail [see Additional file ].
The patient became delirious on day 17 with a fluctuating level of consciousness. Brain MRI identified a contrast-enhancing right parasagittal frontal lobe lesion consistent with an embolic lesion .
On day 22 of admission, fungi were isolated from repeat blood cultures after 3 days of incubation using the automated BacT/ALERT 3D system (bioMerieux, USA) subsequently morphologically identified as Lomentospora prolificans . Identification was based on classical morphological findings from colonies grown on potato dextrose agar. The fungus had high minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) to amphotericin (>32 mg/l) and itraconazole (>32 mg/L), and in-vitro sensitivity to voriconazole (0.5 mg/L) using Etest methodology (bioMerieux, USA).
The patient was commenced on therapy with voriconazole (loading dose 600 mg IV 12 hourly). Unfortunately, due to her underlying advanced malignancy, disseminated fungal infection and poor clinical status, she was considered unsuitable for surgical management. She was managed with palliative intent and passed away five days after the fungus was isolated on day 27 of her admission.