We present the case of a 66-year-old woman referred for management of a gallbladder tumor, which was incidentally found during an abdominal ultrasonography indicated for gallbladder stones. The patient had no history of abdominal pain or fever, and the findings on physical examination were unremarkable. The blood tests showed normal levels of tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen = 2.7 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19–9 = 5.4 U/mL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed wide-based mass of approximately 10 mm in diameter contrasted in arterial phase at the fundus of the gallbladder. MRI showed a nodule in the fundus of gallbladder with high signal in diffusion-weighted imaging and low in apparent diffusion coefficient. Since there was no Rokitansky–Aschoff sinus in the nodule, the possibility of gallbladder adenomyomatosis was considered low. The tumor was limited within gallbladder; it was hard to predict precise depth of tumor even by radiologist . A gallbladder cancer was suspected. Therefore, an open whole-layer cholecystectomy with regional lymph nodes dissection (#12c, 12b, 12p, 12a) was performed. The resected specimen showed a nodular-expanding tumor, located at the fundus of the gallbladder, measuring 10 mm in diameter . The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on the postoperative day 6.
Pathological findings revealed both adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine components in the tumor. In immunostaining, the neuroendocrine component (which spanned from the submucosal to the subserosal layers) was positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 . The Ki-67 index was above 95%, and the neuroendocrine component was considered equivalent to large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC).
While there was venous infiltration in the adenocarcinoma area, there was no vascular involvement in the neuroendocrine area.
The exocrine (adenocarcinoma) and neuroendocrine components were each present in more than 30% of the tumor mass. Therefore, the tumor was diagnosed as a GB-MiNENs with invasion of the subserosal layer and with no lymph node invasion classified T2aN0M0 pStage IIA (according to the Union for International Cancer Control 8th edition staging system).
After the operation, she received oral adjuvant chemotherapy (tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil potassium combination) for 5 months. She later discontinued the chemotherapy due to loss of appetite and diarrhea. However, 14 months after the operation, a local recurrence was detected. She was referred to another hospital for chemotherapy.