Here we present the case of a 37-year-old male with a psychiatric history and harmful use of alcohol and cocaine. He was admitted to emergency services after falling from the third floor of a building. The patient was hemodynamically unstable upon arrival and did not improve with aggressive fluid therapy. X-rays were taken of the pelvis and thorax, and a chest tube inserted in the left thorax due to pleural effusion with serosanguineous fluid discharge. A Echo-FAST was performed where abundant free fluid was observed in all the quadrants, being transferred to the operating room for an emergency laparotomy, evidencing a 4-liter hemoperitoneum secondary to an active arterial bleeding from a complete avulsion of the hepatic artery itself as well as multiple hepatic lacerations. The patient remained unstable throughout surgery, requiring massive transfusion and vasoactive agents, thus we decided to ligate the proper hepatic artery and perform temporary abdominal closure using the vacuum pack technique .
He was admitted to the Resuscitation Unit and after hemodynamic recovery, a CT scan was performed with no neurological lesions, confirming the findings observed intraoperatively as well as the absence of blood flow in the hepatic artery .
Hepatic dysfunction (ALT 3 800, TBil 6, 74 000 platelets/μl, IP 40%), probably secondary to ischemic hepatitis, was observed during the immediate postoperative period. The abdomen was closed definitively three days after the trauma.
On the seventh postoperative day (POD), discharge of bile contents was observed by the abdominal drainages. Therefore, given the suspicion of ischemic cholangiopathy (IC) and the poor clinical situation of the patient, a transparietohepatic cholangiography was performed for diagnostic and therapeutic intention, demonstrating a destructuring of the intra- and extrahepatic bile duct compatible with ischemic cholangiopathy, so an internal–external transhepatic drainage was inserted. After clinical improvement, the study was completed with an MRI that showed signs of multiple hepatic infarctions and diffuse IC .
After a slight clinical improvement, on POD 40, the patient developed a septic shock secondary to cholangitis with multiple bilomas observed on a CT scan.
Considering the irreversible IC, and after sepsis control, it was decided, in a multidisciplinary committee, to include it in the waiting list for liver transplantation . The transplant was performed 70 days after admission, requiring biliary reconstruction with a hepaticojejunostomy
After the transplant, the patient required three re-operations and two arteriographies due to hemoperitoneum, without revealing the origin of the bleeding.
On day POD after the transplant, he presented bilateral mydriasis and decreased level of consciousness. The brain CT scan showed multiple bilateral ischemic lesions and a right occipital hemorrhage. After consulting with neurosurgery and in a multidisciplinary session, it was decided to limit the therapeutic effort, dying on POD 36 after transplantation.