A 33-year-old woman with a 3-month history of unexplained fever but no other significant past medical history nor recent dental procedures suffered an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. She received bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and rhythm check on arrival of the ambulance crew revealed pulseless electrical activity. Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved after 29 min of downtime, and the patient was transferred to local hospital. Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was introduced immediately from femoral vessels, and emergency coronary artery angiography revealed total occlusion of the LMT . Emergency PTCA was performed, and stents were deployed from the LMT to the proximal left ascending artery (LAD) and the left circumflex artery (LCX); there was no aneurysm at this time . The laboratory examination indicated increased inflammation, revealing white blood cell (WBC) count of 16 600/µL (normal range: 3500–9100/µL) and C-reactive protein levels of 1.5 mg/dL (normal range: <0.10 mg/dL). A post-catheterization transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed large mobile vegetation on the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, measuring 10 mm and moderate-to-severe mitral regurgitation . The TTE also showed left ventricular (LV) dilation (diastolic diameter, 63 mm; systolic diameter, 60 mm) and severely reduced LV ejection fraction (EF, 10%). The mitral valve replacement using a mechanical valve was performed on the same day (American Thoracic Society standard, 27 mm). The creatine phosphokinase levels peaked at 8700 U/L (myocardial bound, 617 U/L), suggesting critical myocardial ischaemia, the implanted mechanical valve remained closed due to peripheral VA-ECMO flow, and her arteries were too small to continue peripheral mechanical support. The patient was transferred to our institution the following day and underwent an extracorporeal LVAD (Biofloat, Nipro Co., Osaka, Japan) implantation for bridge to recovery. Despite LVAD support and full medication (200 mg/day of sacubitril valsartan, 10 mg/day of carvedilol, 25 mg/day of spironolactone, and 5 mg/day of ivabradine), her cardiac function did not improve, and nuclear medicine scans revealed extensive myocardial infarction and poor cardiac viability . Thus, we planned conversion surgery to HeartMate 3 (Abbot, Abbott Park, IL, USA). The IE was treated with 1200 mg/day of linezolid and 3 g/day of doripenem. After the culture results from the previous hospital were obtained (Abiotrophia defectiva), 12 g/day of ampicillin and 135 mg/day of gentamicin were administered for 48 days. However, coronary artery angiography revealed a large LMT-CAA at the coronary stent site (size, 9.5 mm), and repeated coronary angiography showed rapid enlargement of the aneurysm (size, 14.3 mm, + 4.8 mm/per 2 weeks) . Blood culture was negative for 6 consecutive weeks, and the patient presented with non-specific symptoms, including fever and malaise. The laboratory examination showed no elevation in inflammatory reaction, revealing 4680/μL of WBC and 0.78 mg/dL of C-reactive protein. The gallium 67 single-photon emission computed tomographic imaging examination showed no obvious accumulation at the aneurismatic region. Collectively, the infection was well-controlled.
The operation was performed 48 days after the extracorporeal LVAD implantation. Intraoperatively, the aneurysm was identified without transection of the main pulmonary artery. After bypassing to LAD, we induced cardiac arrest and opened the ascending aorta. Under retrograde cardioplegia infusion, we ligated the LMT with a 5–0 polypropylene suture and confirmed that the blood flow from the left coronary orifice had completely disappeared. Then, we identified the coronary stent with Veri-QC echography (Medistim ASA, Oslo, Norway) and ligated the LAD and LCX just distal to the coronary stent using a 5–0 polypropylene suture. Using Veri-QC, we confirmed the lack of flow in the CAA. Then, we completed CABG from the ascending aorta to the LAD and LCX. Finally, HeartMate 3 was implanted.
The post-operative course was uneventful, and post-operative contrast-enhanced coronary computed tomography angiography showed successful obstruction of the arteries supplying the aneurysm and patency of the bypass grafts without infection recurrence .