A 76-year-old man was referred to Mie University Hospital due to exacerbation of swelling of the right buccal mucosa. He had a history of cirrhosis (Child-Pugh class B) and chronic renal dysfunction. He was taking prednisolone for rheumatoid arthritis. In addition, he had maintained complete response for 3 years after treatment with six cycles of the rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone regimen for methotrexate-related malignant lymphoma (DLBCL). Physical examination revealed a mass of the right buccal mucosa (28 × 25 mm) and a mucosal lesion on the soft palate . He had redness and induration on the skin near the right corner of the mouth. Computed tomography (CT) with contrast showed an enhancing tumor in the right buccal mucosa, and the lesion was suspected to extend to the soft palate . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed similar findings. An enhancing effect was observed on the skin near the right corner of the mouth, and skin infiltration was suspected. No infiltration of the mandible was observed. There were no findings suggestive of metastatic lymph nodes or distant metastases. Imaging studies and buccal mucosal biopsy indicated a buccal mucosal squamous cell carcinoma (cT4aN0M0, stage IVA).
If surgery were to be performed, it would have required extensive resection and subsequent reconstructive surgery, not just the extent of the tumor invasion. Problems such as plastic surgery, anesthetics, and postoperative functional impairment were also considered. Therefore, the patient requested IA-CRT. Sequential boost intensity-modulated radiotherapy was delivered at a total dose of 70 Gy. The gross tumor volume (GTV) included the primary tumor (GTVp) and clinically metastatic lymph nodes (GTVn). Although there were no lymph node metastases at the time of staging, GTVn was defined as lymph nodes that showed shrinkage as irradiation proceeded. The clinical target volume 1 (CTV1) included the GTVp plus a 5- to 10-mm margin and elective nodal regions (ipsilateral levels I to V and the contralateral levels I to IV). CTV2 included GTV plus a 5- to 10 mm margin. CTV3 included GTVn plus a 5-mm margin. Three planning target volumes (PTV1-3) were created that encompassed the corresponding CTV with a setup margin of 3 mm. Dose prescriptions were 40 Gy in 20 fractions for PTV1, 60 Gy in 30 fractions for PTV2 and 70 Gy in 35 fractions for PTV3. A catheter was inserted through the right superficial temporal artery and placed between the right facial and maxillary arteries . CT angiography and the arterial infusion of indigo carmine were performed to detect tumor-feeding arteries. His creatinine clearance was 45.5 ml/min and we planned to administer cisplatin 40 mg/m2/week. Sodium thiosulfate (STS; 16 g/m2) was used for neutralization. Cisplatin 65 mg was injected into the right facial artery (35–40 mg) and the right maxillary artery (25–30 mg). After the completion of the three courses, neutropenia grade 3 (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 5.0) was observed and the treatment was temporarily discontinued. After confirming the recovery of neutrophils, chemotherapy was resumed and six courses were administered. The overall treatment time was 65 days.
Regarding acute adverse events, neutropenia was the only adverse event with grade 3 or higher. No exacerbation of liver or renal function was observed during the course of treatment or after the end of treatment. After the end of treatment, the tumor shrank significantly, and visual inspection and imaging showed a complete response . There were no symptoms of recurrent tumor or unexpected complications from treatment at the 12-month follow-up after the completion of intra-arterial chemoradiotherapy.