Our patient was a 65-year-old Japanese woman whose NFomas began to appear when she was in elementary school. She was born without any perinatal anomalies. At age 28, she was diagnosed as having NF1. In 2012, a spinal compression fracture was identified during a visit to a local orthopedic surgeon for lumbago. In 2017, she visited a local orthopedic surgeon with a chief complaint of lateral chest pain, and multiple rib fractures were identified. Hence, she was referred to our department for endocrinological examination. Pregabalin 50 mg was administered daily, and loxoprofen sodium hydrate 60 mg was used at the time of pain.
She was 147.1 cm tall, weighed 47.5 kg, body mass index was 22.0 kg/m2, body temperature was 36.6 °C, blood pressure was 105/72 mmHg, and pulse was 72 beats/minute and regular. She showed no mental retardation, and no pigmentation on her skin and oral mucosa. Her cardiopulmonary examination was normal. She had no abnormal abdominal and neurological findings or skeletal abnormalities. Soft NFomas of various sizes were scattered all over her body, and relatively large masses approximately 4 cm in diameter were present on the surface of her right forearm and left upper arm . Her eldest daughter has also been diagnosed as having NF1. She was a caregiver; our patient drank alcohol occasionally but did not smoke tobacco. Her serum levels of inorganic phosphorus (IP), 25(OH)D3, and maximum transport of phosphorus in the renal proximal tubules (TmP/GFR) were inappropriately low . Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP), intact parathyroid hormone (intact PTH), bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BAP), tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRACP 5b), and undercarboxylated osteocalcin (ucOC) levels were all elevated. Her serum level of FGF23 was high. The results of total blood cell count and other biochemical parameters were almost within normal limits . BMD using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry of the second to fourth lumbar vertebrae (L2–4, total) and left femoral neck were 0.764 g/cm2 and 0.504 g/cm2, with a young adult mean (YAM) of 64% and 54%, respectively. Computed tomography displayed no space occupying lesions other than NFomas on the body surface. Multiple areas of abnormal tracer uptake were seen in her rib on 99technetium (Tc)-methylene diphosphonate bone (MDPB) scintigraphy. Slight abnormal accumulation of tracers was observed in the NFomas located on the surface of her right forearm and left upper arm on 111indium-pentetreotide scintigraphy (Octreoscan) . She did not agree with venous sampling because of difficulty in maintaining her supine position for prolonged periods because of systemic pain. Since she strongly desired resection of the NFomas on her right forearm and left upper arm, we respected her wish and excised them in February 2018. Pathology evaluation demonstrated benign NFomas. Unfortunately, there was no improvement in serum IP levels after surgery. Therefore, we administered eldecalcitol (active vitamin D3 analogue) 0.75 μg per day, which also failed to produce improvement in hypophosphatemia and other abnormal data. Subsequent combination with dibasic calcium phosphate hydrate (3.0 g/day) led to improvement in some of the abnormalities, including hypophosphatemia: IP, 3.1 mg/dL (2.7–4.6); ALP, 209 U/L (106–322); intact PTH, 46 pg/mL (10–65); BAP, 12.4 μg/L (3.8–22.6); and TRACP-5b, 309 mU/dL (120–420) (data not shown). After 6 months, serum calcium, IP, intact PTH, and BAP were 9.1 mg/dL, 3.6 mg/dL, 37 pg/mL, and 14.4 μg/L, respectively, and were stable in the normal range. Furthermore, pain also improved.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed on formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue from the resected NFomas, which demonstrated FGF23 weak positivity of the NFomas . Pathological processing and evaluation was performed by GenoStaff Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan).
Total ribonucleic acid (RNA) extraction from the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Human pancreas total RNA (Zyagen, San Diego, California, USA) was prepared as a control . Next, we performed real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing for housekeeping genes and actin β gene (ACTB), and the fibroblast growth factor 23 gene (FGF23), according to the manufacturers’ instructions. Amplification curve plotting using fluorescence intensity by ABI PRISM SDS 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) was performed . All samples were amplified in triplicates. Once out of three times, the threshold cycle (CT) value for FGF23 was 35.95 in resected NFomas, but it was not detected in human pancreas . Unfortunately, these results did not clearly confirm expression of FGF23 in the excised NFomas. These tests were conducted by GeneticLab Co., Ltd. (Sapporo, Japan).