A 52-year-old man, with a known history of osteopetrosis and previous fractures in his bilateral femurs and right tibia, was referred for treatment of a right subtrochanteric femur fracture in January 2018. His medical history is summarized in Table , which shows that the patient suffered from chronic osteomyelitis of tibia after traction treatment of tibial tubercle. A pedigree chart was drawn according to his family history . In the chart, III-2 is the patient, and his previous generation, sister, cousin and his wife had no similar medical history, whereas two of his brothers suffered from osteopetrosis, and one of them presented with osteomyelitis of the mandible. Additionally, his daughter was healthy, but his niece suffered from osteopetrosis. When admitted to the hospital, he presented with severe functional limitation of the right hip and pain, and his radiograph showed that the lateral transverse fracture of the right femur was mildly displaced with a dense sclerotic line. In addition, the bone cortical density of the pelvis and the bilateral femur increased, and the proximal regions of bilateral femurs were deformed, with rough and irregular bone cortex, as well as narrowed medullary cavity, and signs of "sandwich vertebrae" were seen on the lower lumbar vertebrae. Additionally, laboratory testing showed mild anemia and slight hypocalcemia. According to family history, we judged the genetic pattern of the patient to reflect autosomal recessive inheritance. Together, his condition was diagnosed as IRO, accompanied by chronic osteomyelitis, mild anemia and hypocalcemia.
Before the operation, we evaluated the patient's bone condition and decided to treat the fracture using internal fixation with DHS. Importantly, we made sufficient preparation for the operation to deal with potential adverse events, such as drill bit fracture and bone necrosis. During the operation, we exposed the fracture site and found that the end presented a solid white amorphous appearance. As speculated, no medullary cavity existed in the femur. Two drill bits were used to create holes before inserting the screws with extreme care so as not to shatter the femoral shaft, and we chose a short hip screw with a length of 65 mm. The femur was resistant to drilling and it was done slowly under constant irrigation with ice-cold saline and with repeated cleaning of the drill bit. Eventually, we took triple longer duration than usual to complete this operation. X-ray images of our patient's pelvis, right hip, and right femur were taken 1 week after the operation and showed satisfactory alignment of the fracture had occurred. Unfortunately, the right femoral internal fixation screws fractured , caused by a careless sprain 3 months after the operation. After re-admission, we performed a repeat of the DHS internal fixation for postoperative screw fracture in a right subtrochanteric fracture, and postoperative X-ray examination showed that the fracture was aligned .
Drawing a lesson from the previous failure of internal fixation, a double hip herringbone brace was fixed for 3 months to prevent the internal fixation from breaking again. Our patient returned for follow-up 3 months after the revision, at which time the radiograph still failed to demonstrate any healing progression . A blurred fracture line and callus formation were observed at 6 months after the revision . However, good evidence of callus formation and fracture healing was demonstrated by the radiograph at 12 months after the revision surgery . At 15-months follow-up, there were no clinical signs of infection, and laboratory tests remained within the normal range, except for a minor abatement in hemoglobin and serum calcium. At present, the patient displays stable internal fixation, with no limitation of activities, and is pain-free.