A 75-year-old woman (height 132 cm, weight 34 kg) consulted a medical doctor with loss of appetite lasting for 1 week. She had taken aspirin, celecoxib, and amlodipine because of angina and hypertension. Laboratory examinations showed that her Hb decreased modestly to 10.7 g/dl. Two weeks later, she was admitted to our hospital because her anorexia had worsened day by day. On admission day 1, she was alert and fully oriented. Her blood pressure and pulse rate were stable. Laboratory examinations showed that the levels of Hb and hematocrit decreased remarkably to 4.8 g/dl and 15%, respectively. The values for white blood count and C-reactive protein (CRP) increased slightly to 9900 /mm3 and 4.64 mg/dl, respectively. Additionally, her albumin level decreased to 2.5 g/dl and the creatine level increased slightly to 1.14 mg/dl (estimated glomerular filtration rate was 41.7 ml/min). Chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) failed to detect abnormal lesions. On admission day 2, she vomited large amounts of bright red blood. Her Hb level further decreased to 2.9 g/dl. She underwent an urgent transfusion of 560 ml of red blood cells. Endoscopic examination detected active bleeding from a gastric ulcer, and endoscopic clipping was performed against the bleeding lesion.
The next day, her Hb improved to 8.9 g/dl. However, she did not respond to verbal or pain stimuli despite her eyes having opened. She showed normal light reflexes without anisocoria. On brain MRI (fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, FLAIR), high signal intensities were seen in the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres, bilateral watershed regions, right thalamus, and white and gray matter of the bilateral occipital and occipitoparietal lobes. DWI also showed high signal intensities in these lesions, while ADC maps show low signal intensities in the cortical and subcortical regions with small high signal intensities in the surrounding area. These image patterns indicated that the lesions were damaged by extensive cytotoxic edema with restricted vasogenic edema . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed no stenosis or occlusion of brain arteries. MR venography and 3-dimensional CT angiography was negative for sinus thrombosis, although the left transverse sinus was hypoplastic.
During this process, the maximum systolic blood pressure was 130 mmHg. Laboratory examinations showed no abnormality in liver and coagulatory functions. The level of serum creatinine was stable. Autoantibodies, such as anti-nuclear antibody, anti-thyroid antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, were negative. There was no mutation at position 3243 of the mitochondrial DNA. The cerebrospinal fluid was clear, colorless and acellular with a total protein level of 41 mg/dl and a glucose level of 79 mg/dl. Transthoracic echocardiography showed that myocardial wall motion was normal without foramen ovale or left ventricular thrombus. Holter electrocardiogram showed no atrial fibrillation. From these examination results, the clinical course, and characteristic MRI findings, we considered the possibility of PRES and performed conservative treatment by monitoring the fluctuations of blood pressure and vital signs.
On admission day 7, her responsiveness to external stimulation improved. However, her visual acuity had declined to 20/100 in the right eye and 20/200 in the left eye, and visual field test showed defects of the left lower quadrants in both eyes. Her optic disc and retina were normal. Two months later, her Mini-Mental State Examination score improved to 16 from 8 on admission day 14. However, the disturbances of visual acuity and fields remained unrecovered. When compared with MRI findings, high signal intensities on DWI images were diminished on admission day 7 . In addition, high signal intensities on FLAIR images were diminished until 4 months after onset, and these lesions alternatively involved low signal intensities, indicating cystic change . There were no findings showing cardiogenic embolism and cerebral venous thrombus. The cystic lesion in posterior lobe seemed to represent ischemic change, because PRES is reported to cause ischemic change as a complication .