A 43-year-old male was referred to the medical retina clinic with a presumed diagnosis of pattern dystrophy. He had experienced a progressive visual acuity loss that had been worsening over 2 to 3 years, associated with weight loss, dyspnea and fatigue. He had no relevant medical history despite a medically controlled hypercholesterolemia. Ocular mobility was normal and the patient had no complain of diplopia. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/32 for both eyes with − 1 (− 1.5)75° for the right and − 0.5 (− 2.50) 90° for the left eye. Visual field testing was within normal limit. There were neither eyelid abnormalities nor conjunctival changes. Anterior segments were unremarkable and the intraocular pressure was normal. Fundus examination however revealed well-defined, pigmented clumps at the macula and yellowish spots in the mid-periphery which were better seen along the superior vascular arcades in both eyes . Near infrared and short wavelength fundus autofluorescence imaging revealed multiple hyperautofluorescent spots over the posterior pole expanding nasal to the optic disc in both eyes On fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography, these lesions were hypofluorescent with a masking effect. There was no evidence of diffusion or choriocapillary ischemia . Before the diagnosis (after 3 months follow-up), the hyperautofluorescent spots were more numerous in both eyes .
The SD-OCT (Spectralis® OCT, Heidelberg Engineering, Dossenheim, Germany) revealed bilateral serous retinal detachments (SRD), in which outer segment structures appear elongated and heterogeneous with the presence of subretinal hyper-reflective deposits. In addition, the choroidal thickness was increased (432 μm) with an enlarged choriocapillaris (52 μm) .
With this atypical presentation, a systemic work-up was ordered which revealed a moderate hypertension, a nephrotic syndrome with a hypercreatinemia and a proteinuria mainly composed of free kappa light chains. A kidney biopsy with Congo red coloration showed amyloid deposits confirming the diagnosis of kappa AL amyloidosis. The patient was started on chemotherapy which consists of 8 cycles of Velcade (2.2 mg/m2), Endoxan (500 mg) and dexamethasone (20 mg).
After these eight cycles the patient was considered to be in complete remission with a normalization of the free kappa and lambda light chains (kappa/lambda ratio of 1.73) in peripheral blood but a persistent mild glomerular proteinuria without nephrotic syndrome and hypercreatininemia. His asthenia and dyspnea had disappeared.
On follow-up visits, BCVA improved to 20/25 in both eyes. After an initial progression of the chorioretinal lesions, the hyperautofluorescent spots remain stable . Retinal detachments resolved in both eyes with the persistence of hyper-reflective retinal deposits on SD-OCT. The choroidal thickness (429 μm) remained unchanged on EDI, as did the expansion of the choriocapillary.