An 18 year old male presented with pain in his left (non-dominant) wrist for the past one year. The pain was progressively increasing in nature with difficulty in carrying out activities of daily living like holding a glass and toilet activities. Patient had no history of trauma or strenuous activity and no known risk factors for avascular osteonecrosis like deep sea diving, sickle cell disease, Gaucher’s disease, coagulation disorders, systemic lupus erythromatosus (SLE), high dose corticosteroid administration, and alcohol abuse. Clinical examination revealed tenderness over proximal carpal row. Wrist movements were painful and decreased range of motion with 30° of palmar flexion and 60° of dorsiflexion, in comparison to the uninvolved wrist. Patient had a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) score of 6 for wrist pain.
Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs of the wrist showed a collapsed and sclerotic lunate bone with negative ulnar variance of the wrist . MRI revealed a diagnosis of grade 4 Kienbock’s disease (progressive carpal collapse and osteoarthritis) according to the Lichtman et al grading system for Kienbock’s disease .
Based on the grade of the disease, we treated the patient surgically by excision of lunate bone using a palmar approach under regional anaesthesia. Interposition arthroplasty with ipsilateral coiled Palmaris longus muscle belly and tendon was done. The palmar incision used to excise the lunate bone was extended proximally and the palmaris longus muscle was identified and detached from its origin, keeping the insertion of the palmaris longus tendon intact. The muscle belly along with the tendon was coiled and placed into the void created by the excision of lunate . Since tendon and muscle belly rolled combined formed a good size roll, it fitted snuggly in the void and we felt no need for temporary K wire fixation. Postoperatively, wrist was immobilized in a cast for four weeks. Patient subsequently underwent physical therapy to improve strength and range of motion of wrist. Nine months postoperatively, the patient was relatively pain free with a VAS score of 2 as compared to VAS score of 6 pre-operatively and was able to carry out most of his routine activities. The radiograph at final follow-up [9 months post surgery] showed no carpal collapse . Palmar flexion and dorsiflexion at final follow up were 25° each .