A 72 year old gentleman presented to his family doctor with mild confusion of 3 weeks duration. He had a history of locally aggressive prostate cancer diagnosed a few months previously and had finished a course of chemotherapy. He was also on warfarin for atrial fibrillation. Neurological examination was unremarkable. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was arranged by the family doctor to look for intracranial metastases. This was done at his local hospital and reportedly did not reveal any evidence of malignancy, but revealed a small left-sided chronic subdural hematoma. This was confirmed on a computed tomography (CT) scan . He was initially managed conservatively, though warfarin was stopped. Four weeks later, he had worsening confusion and a repeat CT scan showed that the left-sided chronic subdural hematoma was now larger and causing significant mass effect and midline shift. There was also some new acute hemorrhage in the parietal region. His International Normalized Ratio (INR) was 1.7 at the time and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was also slightly deranged, even though warfarin had been stopped. He was transferred to the neurosurgical center where he subsequently underwent emergent surgery after receiving fresh-frozen plasma and platelets. A frontal burr hole and parietal minicraniotomy were performed. At surgery, oil-black liquid typical of chronic subdural hematoma mixed with some fresh clot was evacuated. Hemorrhagic subdural membranes were found at the parietal site and gently removed, but not sent for pathology as this is not the common practice in our institution.
Postoperatively, he initially did well, with improvement in his confusion. Postoperative CT showed satisfactory evacuation of the subdural hematoma and resolution of the midline shift. However, after 1 week, his coagulation profile showed that he was in DIC, which was treated with fibrinogen. He became drowsier and also developed mild right hemiparesis. Repeat CT showed that there was a significant recurrent left-sided chronic subdural hematoma with mass effect and midline shift. He then had re-evacuation of the chronic subdural hematoma. This time, the surgery was performed by a different surgeon, and the clot and some of the subdural membranes from the parietal region were sent for histopathology as the membranes appeared very hemorrhagic. Postoperatively, the patient failed to improve neurologically and remained in DIC in spite of aggressive intensive care therapy. He also developed pneumonia and remained on the ventilator. The pathology report showed that he had dural metastases and malignant cells in the subdural fluid. The patient died a week after the second surgery. No autopsy was performed at the request of the family. A review of the original MRI performed at his local hospital showed that despite the initial report, there was infact, evidence of dural enhancement suggestive of dural metastases.