Our patient was a 13-year-old Caucasian female with a history of anxiety, depression, and anorexia nervosa. She was admitted twice to our hospital. The first admission was in September 2019, when her parents brought her for losing 16 kg over 3–4 months. She was weighing 40 kg (BMI 16.0 kg/m2, 8.7%ile, z = − 1.4) and had sinus bradycardia (HR 30–40 BPM). Table and Fig. show changes in her lab values during her two admissions.
The patient reported sadness, loneliness, anhedonia, and hopelessness and admitted to restrictive eating behaviors to lose weight. There was no history of purging, bingeing or laxative use. Although emaciated, she minimized the severity of her nutritional status or her preoccupation with her weight and body image. She denied suicidal ideation but desired death rather than pursuing an eating disorder treatment. The patient had compulsive tendencies for academic work and extracurricular pursuits and was highly driven. She had several moves during childhood and reported increased anxiety after a recent move to live with her father following parental divorce. She was starting a new school, as well. We placed her on 1:1 for safety concerns.
The patient started restricting around the age of ten after having a growth spurt at puberty. Following her diagnosis of AN, she received eating disorder treatment at different levels of care, including inpatient, residential, partial hospitalization or Day Program, and intensive outpatient programs in four states. She would become physically aggressive towards staff and family to sabotage her recovery. In one incident, she bit a chunk off the nape of her sister’s neck during a family visit in her residential stay, leading her to be discharged. She admitted to becoming jealous of the sister as she was to go home after the visit while the patient was to remain confined to the unit. She had no remorse about the incident. There was a report where she left the gas stove on to burn the house and kill her mom and her siblings when she was angry. She again had no regrets about her actions. She had history of hurting the family cat. This history of repeated aggression over several years toward other people and animals indicated a possible CD diagnosis. Family history was pertinent for anxiety and mood disorders and AN.
During admission, she hid meals, avoided cardiopulmonary monitoring, and refused nasogastric tube. She would engage in isometric exercises and avoid lying down. She did not take medication for anxiety. As she failed weight restoration in the medical hospital, we referred her to an out-of-state inpatient eating disorder unit for further treatment. Right before the transfer, she jeopardized the transfer by stabbing her pediatrician with a pair of scissors that she hid from the Child Life Services supplies in her room. She intended to hurt the physician for transferring her to the inpatient unit. A room search discovered multiple sharp objects under her mattress, including plastic knives, forks, and medical supplies. For ongoing aggression, she necessitated physical restraints and emergency use of Lorazepam. The patient was formally diagnosed with CD after this incident.
The inpatient eating disorder facility refused to accept the patient after the violence, which led our interdisciplinary team to plan her weight restoration by implementing behavioral expectations and positive reinforcement techniques for meeting daily nutritional needs. Some of the privileges were using the phone, watching TV, or playing video games. We initiated and titrated chlorpromazine 50 mg twice daily for aggression. She gained 2.7 kg in about 6 weeks and her bradycardia resolved (see Fig. ). Her T3 and prealbumin normalized (see Table ). After 24 days in the hospital, she was discharged with a plan to start an eating disorder partial hospitalization program.
Following discharge, she participated in the partial hospitalization program for 5 days. On the morning of the sixth day, she entered her father’s bedroom and stabbed him three times with a butcher’s knife. She had purchased the knife the day before to kill her father, blaming him for the eating disorder treatment. She was arrested and remanded to Juvenile Justice Center (JJC), where she started refusing to eat or to take chlorpromazine. She rapidly lost weight and was readmitted for her second admission to our pediatric hospital. On readmission, she weighed 36.5 kg (BMI 14.6 kg/m2, z = − 2.3, 1.0%ile) and was bradycardic and mildly hypothermic with a reduction in T3 and prealbumin. An echocardiogram demonstrated a trace posterior pericardial effusion with normal cardiac function. She was handcuffed and ankle-cuffed to her bed throughout her stay. We switched chlorpromazine to olanzapine (3.5 mg in divided doses), and added fluoxetine (10 mg daily) to address anxiety. She used Lorazepam for anxiety during feedings via NG tube initially. After gaining about 8 kg in about 6 weeks (see Fig. ), she was discharged back to the JJC, where she continued receiving eating disorder treatment. We suspected that some of the weight gain was related to rehydration. Her pericardial effusion resolved ultimately.
We observed a shift in her statements during weight restoration. For example, “I don’t see how a boy could like me now that I have gained weight” changed to “it does bother me to gain weight, but I try and focus on getting my period back, which makes it easier.” The JJC’s focus on positive reinforcement and reward systems seemingly motivated her to earn additional privileges for desired behaviors. She proudly shared when gaining access to the commissary at JJC, an upgrade in her shoes, a later bedtime, and her ability to spend time with peers in the gym under supervision to prevent over-exercise. JJC staff, many of whom chaperoned her during hospitalization, learned positive reinforcement and practical techniques taught to parents in family-based treatment (FBT) programs and implemented those strategies while she remained incarcerated. Her desire of “never to be hospitalized again” served as a motivation to completing her meals. She had regular follow up with our adolescent medicine team to monitor her progress. As she continued to gain weight, and her anxiety and aggressive impulses decreased. After one visit with our psychiatry team 4 weeks after her discharge, JJC’s psychiatrist took over her psychiatric care and titrated olanzapine to 7.5 mg twice daily and fluoxetine 20 mg daily. Her olanzapine was subsequently decreased to 5 mg twice daily for mild elevation in transaminases that later resolved. Six months after discharge from the hospital, she was still in custody at the JJC, and her nutritional status remained stable. Her menses returned. After complaining of weight gain as an adverse effect of psychotropics, she discontinued olanzapine and later on fluoxetine. However, she maintained her body weight after stopping the medications (see Fig. ). She has remained in outpatient treatment; and we anticipate that this will be needed long-term given the severity of her symptoms of CD and AN.