A 68 year-old Caucasian woman, last seen awake 10 hours earlier, was found unresponsive in front of her apartment. The patient had a history of hypertension, but, it is unclear if she had used any long-term medication. On physical examination in our Neurological Emergency Room, she was comatose with Glasgow Coma Scale 4 and the following initial vital signs: pulse 60 beats/min, respiratory rate 16 breaths/min and blood pressure 110/53 mmHg. Pupillary light reflex in the right eye was non-reactive and the left eye poorly reactive. The right pupil was dilatated. Passive examination of the ocular movements showed complete vertical gaze palsy. The patient was afebrile and no meningeal signs were present. She flexed the right arm and extended the left leg on painful stimulus. Babinski could not be provoked on the left and was in flexion on the right. No other pathological signs were present. The following laboratory tests were all unremarkable: complete blood cell count, glycaemia, electrolytes, liver enzymes, creatinine, ammonia, arterial blood gas values, ethanol, benzodiazepine and opioid levels. The international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.15. In this case the neurological examination was misleading due to unspecific clinical signs and symptoms which were unhelpful in the process of achieving the correct working diagnosis.
The initial CT performed 60 minutes after finding the patient (and an unknown time after loss of consciousness) showed no acute haemorrhage or early signs of ischemia, only an old lacunar infarction in the left thalamus . CTA of neck and intracranial arteries was interpreted as normal. A new head CT was performed 24 hours later. It revealed areas of hypodensity (16× 10 mm) in the medial thalami, which were not present on the previous CT examination . The right hypodense area extended into the anterior part of the mesencephalon and cerebral peduncle. The left hypodense area extended only into the anterior part of the mesencephalon. The chronic ischemic change in the posterior part of the left thalamus remained unchanged.
Due to our findings on the second CT, we decided to perform another reading of the CTA examination performed at the time of the patients’ admission, which revealed a duplication of the right superior cerebellar artery and a filling defect of the P1 segment of the right posterior cerebral artery .
There was no improvement in the patients’ neurological status in the following days and she was included in our palliative care program. On day 5, the patient became febrile with raised inflammatory parameters. Although we applied an antibiotic, the patient’s clinical status deteriorated and she died of cardiopulmonary failure on the 13th day of hospitalization. This study was conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the institutional ethical committee.