We describe the case of a 47-year-old, Caucasian woman treated for HIV-1 infection, who developed buffalo hump during antiretroviral therapy consisting of RAL and unboosted ATV. She was diagnosed with HIV disease in February 1999: the CD4+ cell count was 214/mm3 (11%) and the HIV viral load was 253,200 copies/ml at that stage. An initial highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) regimen consisted of zidovudine, lamivudine and indinavir. After 18 months, the therapy was changed to stavudine, lamivudine and nevirapine because of an episode of acute renal colic. Our patient attended outpatient clinics on a regular basis, and was found to have a good immunological and virological response to HAART. By July 2004, she presented with a progressive peripheral fat loss; facial lipoatrophy was apparent but not severe. For these reasons the HAART combination was changed (November 2004), and stavudine was replaced by a nucleotide analogue tenofovir. The CD4+ count was 599/mm3 (16%) and the HIV viral load was < 50 copies/ml at the change of the antiretroviral medications. She was on nevirapine and lamivudine plus tenofovir for five years with a good immune-virological response. We observed neither other fat accumulation nor fat loss and no significant metabolic disorders after the switch. Body Mass Index (BMI), glucose, cholesterol, triglyceride, plasma cortisol and insulin concentrations were normal.
In November 2009 the patient presented with a HIV viral load of 1551 copies/ml; a subsequent test of resistance showed the presence of K65R, K103S, M184V, and G190A. Because she refused therapies with an increased risk of metabolic alterations, the antiviral treatment was changed to RAL 400 mg with unboosted ATV 200 mg twice daily.
Three months later, it was noted that she developed a new progressive increase of lipohypertrophy of the dorso-cervical region of the neck. There was no localized accumulation of fat in her abdomen and in the submental region of her neck. The hump in the back of her neck was causing neck pain, headaches off and on and sleep apnea. It was causing her discomfort and affecting the motion of her neck. An ultrasonography scan of the cervical region reported a large amount of subcutaneous fat around the posterior aspect of the neck . The results of DEXA confirmed these data. Fasting lipid profile showed a total Cholesterol of 170 mg/dl, HDL-Cholesterol 42 mg/dl and Triglycerides 148 mg/dl. Fasting plasma glucose and response to a glucose tolerance test were normal. Her waist circumference was 80 cm and her BMI was 21. Moreover, there were no significant changes noted in diet, physical activity, and body weight. Thyroid hormones, plasma insulin, cortisol, estradiol, progesterone, prolactin, luteinizing and folliclestimulating hormone concentrations were normal. Her CD4-lymphocyte count was 844/mm3 (20%) and HIV viral load was < 50 copies/ml.
In the next three months she developed a massive lipohypertrophy of the dorso-cervical region of her neck. For this reason the plastic surgery staff proposed surgical removal of the BH due to discomfort, localized pain and the progressive increase of lipohypertrophy of the dorso-cervical region of the neck. The patient refused this option and six months later we observed a stabilization of the subcutaneous fat of the cervical region.