A 29-year-old female was presented to the emergency department with chest pain and
nausea. Her symptoms began suddenly 3 days before the presentation. She complained
of retrosternal chest pain that radiated to her left arm and shoulder. The pain was
not positional or pleuritic and not related to her physical activity. She also
complained of the flu-like syndrome, including mild fever, rhinitis, and myalgia,
accompanied by mild dyspnea and diaphoresis 1 day before her chest pain began, but
she denied having any cough. She was vaccinated with 2 doses of the BIBP (Sinopharm)
vaccine, and her last injection was 3 months before the onset of her symptoms. She
had a history of hypothyroidism, using levothyroxine for her condition, but no other
history of cardiovascular or metabolic disease. She had no risk factor for coronary
artery disease. The intensity of her pain increased gradually from the onset of the
symptoms; thus, she decided to consult with her primary physician. Her primary
physician ordered an ECG due to her acute-onset chest pain. Her electrocardiogram
showed ST-segment elevation in the anterolateral leads with reciprocal ST-depression
changes in the inferior leads. then she was referred to our tertiary heart center for further
evaluation. Upon her arrival at the emergency department, her vital sign was stable.
Her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg, pulse rate was 80 beats/minute, respiratory rate
was 18 breaths/minute, body Temperature was 36.8°C, and SPo2 was 96% without
supplemental oxygen. On physical examination, she was conscious and oriented, no
cardiac murmur was heard, lung examination was normal, and other examinations were
unremarkable. She was transferred to the Cath lab with the initial diagnosis of
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction caused by suspected spontaneous coronary
artery dissection (SCAD) according to her age and gender. She was started on
nitrate, beta-blocker, ondansetron, statin, dual anti-platelet agents including
aspirin and clopidogrel and morphine sulfate; then, she was undergone coronary
angiography (CAG).
There was no evidence of coronary artery obstruction or stenosis in her angiogram
. Her chest
pain continued, despite the administration of pain relief agents and normal coronary
angiogram; therefore she was admitted to CCU for additional evaluation and
observation. She continued to receive nitrates for her chest pain and ondansetron
for her nausea, but other medications were discontinued. Her initial laboratory
tests revealed a normal complete blood count and kidney function but an elevation of
cardiac troponin I and creatine kinase-MB (85 U/L, normal <28 U/L) .
A bedside echocardiogram was performed, which revealed a left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) of 45% and Antero-apical hypokinesia without valvular or pericardial
abnormalities. During her second day of hospital admission, her blood pressure
suddenly dropped to 88/53 mmHg, and oxygen saturation fell to 87%, requiring
inotrope and supplemental oxygen to maintain blood pressure and oxygen saturation,
respectively. Her dyspnea worsened, and her body temperature rose to 38.6°C. Nitrate
was discontinued according to her reduced blood pressure. Her ECG showed sinus
tachycardia with prominent ST-segment elevation in anterolateral leads and new right
bundle branch block (RBBB). Second echocardiography was performed; Her LVEF dropped to 15%
with global hypokinesia, especially in the anterior circulation, and significant LV
enlargement. She was suspected of missed or new myocardial infarction complicated with
cardiogenic shock, so she was transferred to the Cath-lab and underwent her second
CAG. Similar to her previous coronary angiogram, there were no signs of obstruction
or stenosis, and also there was no angiographic evidence of SCAD. According to the
CDC definition of probable acute myocarditis, she was clinically diagnosed with
possible acute myocarditis and was scheduled to receive IVIG, colchicine, and
corticosteroid.
Because of her flu-like symptoms at the time of the COVID-19 pandemic, a
nasopharyngeal swab was obtained and tested for SARS-COV-2 virus using the RT-PCR
method on the third day of her admission; the result was positive. Viral serology
and autoantibody screening tests were performed, and they were all negative. The
spiral chest CT scan revealed bilateral pleural effusion, pericardial congestion,
significant cardiomegaly, and peripheral/hilar ground glass opacity, indicating
possible COVID-19 lung involvement ; therefore pulmonology
consultation was requested, and then she was started on antiviral agent remdesivir
and was continued to receive corticosteroid. The following day the patient’s
condition continued to deteriorate and her skin became icteric; her liver function
test showed abnormal AST, ALT, and bilirubin due to possible congestive hepatitis;
therefore, her remdesivir was discontinued. She was transferred to the intensive
care unit. During the ICU admission her condition gradually improved, her blood
pressure back into normal ranges without inotropes, the elevated hepatic and cardiac
blood test gradually reduced, and her LVEF increased to 35% on following days. She
was discharged with oral prednisolone taper (50 mg once daily for 2 weeks, then
25 mg once daily for 1 week and 5 mg twice daily for 2 weeks), colchicine 1 mg once
daily for 3 months and captopril 12.5 mg 3 times a day after 11 days of
hospitalization. She was recommended for exercise restriction for 6 months.
6 days after her discharge a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was performed.
LVEF was 41.6%, and severe hypokinesia was noted in the mid to apical anterior,
inferolateral, and anterolateral walls of the left ventricle. Left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH) was not reported. The right ventricular ejection fraction was 55%,
and there was no evidence of regional wall motion abnormalities or systolic
dysfunction in the right ventricle. There was also no sign of edema on T2 STIR
weighted imaging, but T2 mapping showed prolongation of T2 relaxation time in
multiple segments of the left ventricle, which may be considered diffuse
inflammation/edema .
Abnormal T1 relaxation time and increased extracellular volume (ECV) were observed in
the left ventricle’s interventricular septum and lateral wall, which indicates
scar/necrosis in these segments.
Mid-wall delayed enhancement was seen in the inferoseptal wall of the left ventricle,
and subepicardial delayed enhancement was seen in the anterior and lateral wall of
the left ventricle. ( and )
On her 4-month follow-up, her general condition was favorable, she complained of
fatigue and intermittent mild non-typical chest pain but no symptoms similar to
admission time. Her ECG pattern was regular, and her echocardiography revealed
normal LV size and mild LV systolic dysfunction (EF: 45%). Her biventricular
function improved significantly; there was no valvular abnormality except for
persistent mild to moderate mitral regurgitation. She was scheduled for a follow-up
CMR 6 months after discharge to evaluate mid-term cardiac risks.