A 38-year-old Caucasian man presented four years ago to our urology service with right-sided groin pain, and, on clinical examination, bilateral undescended testes were discovered. Clinically, the right testicle raised suspicions of malignancy, and a scrotal ultrasound confirmed a solid testicular mass. Tumor markers, including serum β-human chorionic gonadotropins, α-fetoprotein and lactate dehydrogenase, were normal. A right-sided radical orchidectomy was performed, and the left testicle appeared clinically healthy and was brought down into the left hemiscrotum and underwent successful three-point orchiopexy. Both the chest X-ray and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan were negative for metastasis. The tumor histology results revealed an 8 cm seminoma confined to the testicle and stained positive for placental alkaline phosphatase. There were no syncytiotrophoblastic elements and no vascular or lymphatic invasion. The tumor was diagnosed as stage Ι testicular seminoma.
The patient received precautional PA field radiotherapy. Treatment was given five days per week for four weeks with daily fractions of 2 Gy up to a target dose of 25 Gy. The patient's follow-up protocol consisted of clinical evaluation, chest X-ray, tumor markers and an abdominal CT scan. The results of these investigations have remained normal to date.
Three years following prophylactic radiotherapy the patient presented with an episode of acute urinary retention mandating urinary catheterization. A full neurological examination did not reveal any abnormality. Urodynamic findings were a bladder capacity of 480 mL, absent detrusor instability and intact bladder sensation, but maximum detrusor pressure rose only to 11 cm/H2O at maximum capacity with an inability to micturate for voiding cystometry. A trial of pharmacotherapy with bethanechol chloride for four weeks at a dose of 10 mg thrice daily failed to improve both clinical and urodynamic findings. Consequently, the patient was commenced on clean intermittent self-catheterization, which he is managing well to date. A gadolinium-enhanced brain and dorsolumbosacral MRI scan showed in the lower two thoracic vertebrae (T11-T12) and all lumbar vertebrae (L1-L5) an increased signal in the marrow fat consistent with previous irradiation and with no obvious mass lesion in the spinal cord or vertebrae .