The authors present the case of a 52-year-old-Caucasian male, admitted to the emergency department in May 2007 with fever, polyarthralgia and peripheral edema, with inflammatory signs in the back of the left foot. Six days prior he had been discharged from the emergency department with the diagnosis of erysipelas, medicated with levofloxacin. Blood cultures were drawn. As his complaints persisted, he was readmitted and, because the blood cultures were revealed positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), he was admitted to an internal medicine ward with the diagnosis of MRSA bacteremia.
About three weeks earlier, he had been hospitalized in a Pneumology ward with the diagnosis of aggravated chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. During the hospital stay he developed phlebitis with abscess of the right arm at the site of an intravascular catheter. He was medicated with flucloxacilin with resolution. One day after being discharged he started fever.
In what refers to his past habits, he had an alcohol consumption quantified in 60 grams/day and was a heavy smoker - approximately 72 units of pack-years. In the last 8 years he had been a stoker, referring contact with black dust, without any protection of the airways.
His past history was marked by bronchitis in childhood and arterial hypertension; he referred two past episodes of bronchopneumonia. He was medicated with perindopril 5 mg, aminophilin 225 mg, furosemide 40 mg and inhaled bronchodilation therapy (tiotropium bromide and fluticasone/salmeterol).
He had family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, cerebrovascular and coronary artery disease.
Blood tests on admission showed leukocytosis (16.5 G/L), elevated C reactive protein (17.21 mg/dl, with normal range < 0.5 mg/dl) and slight elevation of alanine aminotransferase (86 U/L, with normal range 10-40) and γ-glutamyl-transferase (84 U/L, with normal range 11-49). We started intravenous therapy with Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 960 mg twice daily, as the antibiogram showed sensitivity for this antibiotic, and also for tetracyclines, rifampicin and glycopeptides. Initially, fever subsided, but in the sixth day his condition worsened, with fever and pain in his right thigh. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was suspended and he started intravenous vancomycin 1 g twice daily. The following day he presented a palpable, painful, non pulsatile mass with 3 cm in diameter located in the internal aspect of his right thigh, with edema, redness and heat; pedal pulse volume was diminished in his right limb; the ankle-brachial index was not determined; a femoral bruit could be heard; there were neither signs of hemorrhage nor clinical signs of carotid or renal artery stenosis. An ultrasound demonstrated soft tissue heterogeneity at the level of the superficial femoral artery, in a sagittal extension of 8.9 cm, corresponding to an atheromatous process of the artery associated with inflammation. An occlusion of the superficial femoral artery was detected by doppler and an angio-computed tomography (CT), multislice with tridimensional reconstruction demonstrated atheroma plaques in all arterial vascular beds focused , with lumen reduction above 70% in the medial third of the right superficial femoral artery, with an aneurysmatic sacular formation downstream (1.6 × 1.3 cm of antero-posterior axis) ; a contiguous inflammatory process extending for 4 cm was noted. Surgical treatment was postponed until septic process was medically controlled. Rifampicin was added while continuing vancomycin. Seven days later, as the tenderness of the right thigh persisted, the ultrasound was repeated, showing an abscess with 11 cm in diameter, with gas inside . The following day the patient was submitted to surgical resection of a false mycotic aneurysm of the right superficial femoral artery, with placement of a femoro-femoral interposition graft of reversed homolateral internal saphenous vein. Metronidazole was started in association with vancomycin and rifampicin; at day 4 metronidazole and rifampicin were discontinued and replaced by imipenem because of a cutaneous allergic reaction. After fifteen days of vancomycin, creatinine started to rise (from basal value of 0.9 to 1.4 mg/dl, with normal range 0.7-1.3), and this antibiotic was replaced with linezolid 600 mg twice daily, intravenously.
The patient underwent trans-thoracic echocardiographic study, which demonstrated fibrotic nodular thickening of the subvalvular aspect of the mitral valve and calcification of the head of the papillary muscles; a thickening of the intimate-media complex was obvious in the thoracic aorta, with multiple atheroma plaques, suggesting advanced atherosclerotic process. Later on, trans-esophageal echocardiogram was repeated with no evidence of infectious vegetations. The labeled leukocyte scintigraphy showed no other sites of accumulation besides the right thigh. A thoraco-abdomino-pelvic angio CT demonstrated calcified atheromatous plaques in the abdominal aorta and iliac arteries, with no evidence of other aneurysmatic formations .
In the twenty seventh day of admission, eighth day of imipenem and sixth day of linezolid, the fever completely subsided and the patient showed favorable progress. The only complication was a normocytic anemia in day 18 of admission (Hemoglobin - 7.4 g/dl, with MCV of 86.6 fL), with the need for packed red cells transfusion. Imipenem was stopped after nine days and linezolid after 28 days. He was discharged after 49 days to our outpatient clinic for follow up; 9 days after being discharged he underwent another transfusion for normocytic anemia (hemoglobin of 7.6 g/dl, with MCV of 84.8 fL). The white blood cell and the platelet counts remained unchanged; only red blood cell count was affected. He maintained smoking habits and, in spite of some claudicating complains he keeps full usage of his right limb.