A 22-year-old man was referred from the neurology department due to transient sinus bradycardia during his admission for fever and transient loss of orientation in time and place. The patient was suspected to suffer from a central nervous system infection but this was not actually proven from the subsequent investigation in the neurology department. The patient’s personal medical history was unremarkable of any known condition although it was evident that he had some kind of mild mental retardation. No history of syncope or pre-syncope was evident. He had a known family history of MD (mother and grandfather), while three incidents of sudden death at young ages (23-, 40-, and 42-year-old subjects) in mother’s relatives were also reported (they had no established diagnosis of a specific disease). Physical examination did not reveal any abnormal finding while the patient was afebrile. Systemic arterial blood pressure was 105/68 mmHg, heart rate at rest 62 b.p.m., and arterial oxygen saturation 98%. On heart auscultation normal rhythmic heart sounds without any heart murmurs were evident and no increased central venous pressure was found. Lung auscultation revealed no abnormal sounds while no peripheral oedema was present. Neurological and opthalmological examination was reported to be normal at that moment. Surface electrocardiogram (ECG) , while the patient was afebrile, showed normal sinus rhythm without any conduction abnormalities while repolarization abnormalities with mild ST elevation in V1–V2 leads suggestive of Type 3 Brugada ECG pattern were present . An echocardiographic examination showed normal dimensions and contractility of both ventricles without signs of hypertrophy. No signs of diastolic dysfunction were evident. A mild prolapse of the anterior mitral valve leaflet was noted without any significant regurgitation.
A procainamide provocation test for BS was performed (10 mg/kg i.v. infusion of procainamide over 10 min) and at the end of the test the ECG changed towards a typical Type 1 Brugada pattern . After a thorough discussion with the patient and his family an EPS was suggested for further arrhythmic risk stratification mainly due to his family history of sudden death incidents. The ventricular stimulation study was performed and polymorphic ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation was induced at a drive train cycle length of 400 ms and two extrastimuli (S1–S2: 240 ms, S2–S3: 260 ms) in the right ventricular apex . All other measurements of the electrophysiologic study were within normal limits. The patient was screened for MD and following an extensive clinical and laboratory investigation including electromyography he was finally diagnosed with MD1, while a genetic testing for MD confirmed the diagnosis. Subsequently, a single chamber ICD was implanted to the patient for primary prevention of SCD. Subcutaneous ICD was excluded based on the high incidence of conduction disorders in the life of MD patients. No antiarrhythmic medication was started throughout the course of the diagnostic evaluation of the patients or the follow-up period. Family screening for MD and BS was also performed and revealed that his brother is suffering from MD without evidence of Brugada pattern on ECG. Of note, 8 months after the procedure the patient suffered an appropriate ICD shock due to rapid polymorphic ventricular tachycardia . A pedigree chart is depicted in Figure .