A 65 year old South-Asian female presented to the medical ward with an acute febrile illness with characteristic prodromal symptoms on day 1 of her illness. Being an endemic country to dengue viral infection, clinical suspicion made us prioritize our investigations and a positive dengue NS1 antigen confirmed dengue viral infection. She had a significant past history of symptomatic aortic stenosis which necessitated surgery and had undergone mechanical aortic valve replacement in 1999. She was on oral warfarin and had maintained a therapeutically appropriate internationalized ratio (INR) while on 5 mg with no prior episodes of significant bleeding. She additionally gave a history of hypertension with dyslipidemia and was also an asthmatic on medical management with good compliance. She also had a notable obstetric past history which had required a classical caesarean section.
Preliminary examination revealed a normotensive patient with a blood pressure of 130 mmHg systole and 80 mmHg diastole and had a regular pulse of 92 beats per minute. Cardiac auscultation revealed a mechanical click coinciding with 2nd heart sound and an ejection systolic murmur favoring a functional mechanical aortic valve in the absence of any other findings favoring decompensation. Though respiratory examination revealed scattered bilateral rhonchi, the patient appeared stable with a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute. Abdominal examination revealed a midline scar keeping in with the history of a classical caesarean section. Neurological examination was unrevealing. A decision was taken to continue her routine metered dose inhalers of salmeterol and fluticasone 250/50 micrograms twice daily. Additionally she was also nebulized 8 hourly with oxygen driven salbutamol. Though she had been on oral losartan 50 mg bd for her hypertension and rosuvastatin 10 mg nocte for her dyslipidemia a clinical decision was taken to discontinue both. However in consideration of her mechanical aortic valve, we took the clinical decision to continue her warfarin without dose reduction at 5 mg vesper.
On admission, which was day 1 of her illness, whole blood analysis revealed a hemoglobin of 9.3 g/dL (11–15) with a low total white cell count of 3.89 × 109/L (4–11) and a platelet count of 113 × 109/L (150–450). Her INR was 2.7 (<1 normal and target range of 2–3 in her situation). Warfarin was cautiously continued while judiciously following her drop in platelet counts with frequent whole blood analysis. Her liver functions showed a mild but acceptable derangement of transaminases with an aspartate transaminase of 144 (<35 IU) and alanine transaminase of 62 (<40 IU) with a normal reference range for activated thromboplastin time. On day 4 of her illness when her platelet count dropped to below 50 × 109/L (150–450), warfarin was stopped and a clinical decision was taken to change over to intravenous unfractionated heparin (at 1000 IU/h) as the anticoagulant of choice to ensure continued anticoagulation for her mechanical heart valve. She was closely monitored with activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) at six hourly intervals. However, a rapid and unexpected prolongation of APTT to >200 s (<40 s) prompted us to reconsider continuation of heparin and decision was taken to transiently withhold heparin. During this period she was neither symptomatic nor had clinically evident signs of bleeding or its manifestations. She was continuously monitored and on day 6 her platelets continued to drop to its lowest nadir of 27 × 109/L (150–450). Her deranged APTT had normalized by this point and were within normal reference parameters.
On day 7 of illness with an already rising platelet count of 50 × 109/L (150–450), and normal coagulation parameters (an INR of 1.1 and APTT of 35 s) she complained of a continuous lower abdominal pain. However clinical examination was unrevealing. While still being monitored with frequent whole blood analysis an observation was made of a drop in both haemoglobin and haematocrit from 9.3 g/dL (11–15) to 7.9 g/dL (11–15) and from 33 (35–45) to 27 (35–45) respectively, which also coincided with a notable drop in her urine output (<0.5 cc/kg/h) which had maintained till then. Despite a tachycardia of 110 beats per minute her blood pressure remained within acceptable parameters, suggesting compensated shock. A possible intra-abdominal bleed was suspected. Ultrasonographic examination revealed a right sided rectus sheath haematoma measuring 13 mm by 15 mm. There were however no features to favor dengue haemorrhagic fever as features of fluid leakage were absent ultrasonographically. Failure of the parameters to correct, prompted us to do a follow up ultrasound abdomen which confirmed the extension of the haematoma on the right to 71 mm by 53 mm with a new haematoma forming on the contralateral left side as well, measuring 33 mm by 23 mm . No further bleeding sites were identified. Additional occult bleeding was suspected and based on haematological and haemodynamic parameters, she was initially volume resuscitated with normal saline and to err on the side of caution she was also transfused with 3 units of packed red cells to achieve stabilization and counteract blood loss. Post transfusion haemoglobin was 10.1 g/dL (11–15) and haematocrit was 34 (35–45). A decision was taken not to transfuse fresh frozen plasma or platelets as tested coagulation parameters (APTT & INR) were normal, and platelet counts were 50 × 109/L (150–450) and rising. With defervescence of temperature and rising platelets, her haematological parameters stabilized and intensive monitoring was continued. After 72 h of clinical stability she was started on oral anticoagulation and bridged with low molecular heparin until the INR reached acceptable therapeutic range. The patient thereafter made an uncomplicated recovery.