A 67-year-old white woman developed gradually increasing right hip and thigh pain over three months. Physical examination revealed a 20 × 10 cm medial and posterior soft tissue mass in right thigh with moderate tenderness to palpation. Motor power and sensation were intact. An MRI showed an 18.6 × 13 × 11-cm mass within the hamstring musculature . A biopsy revealed a high-grade UPS , and a PET-CT revealed bilateral hypermetabolic lung nodules and right inguinal chain hypermetabolic lymphadenopathy consistent with metastatic disease. She was treated with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) and infusional ifosfamide with mesna . Repeat imaging demonstrated resolution of the lung nodules after 1 cycle. However, after the 3rd cycle, imaging revealed progression in the primary tumor (21 × 20 × 30-cm) and multiple new pulmonary metastases. The primary tumor was surgically excised for symptom control; pathology of the resection specimen revealed a FNCLCC grade 3 UPS with lymphovascular invasion and negative margins with a chemotherapy effect in ~ 60% of the tumor .
Next generation sequencing (NGS) using the FoundationOne platform of the primary tumor revealed several genetic changes including missense mutation of AXL (R368Q) and RB1 (R661W) and intron 5 rearrangement of FAS. The tumor was microsatellite stable and had a tumor mutational burden of 3 mutations/Mb. In addition, several variants of unknown significance were identified, including T535N in ALK, R496H in BRCA1, L2277F in BRCA2, Q740H in BRIP1, S301F in CCT6B, L219I in CSF3R, S1134C in CUX1, R127Q in ETV6, P197L in IL7R, L168* in JAK3, K2148N in MKI67, I754M in MSH3, G1366S in NOTCH1, and ROS1 rearrangement. The TBXT gene, which encodes brachyury, is not included in the FoundationOne testing (Additional file : Technical specifications of FoundationOne NGS platform. Genes examined and mutations detected). Immunostaining of the primary UPS specimen revealed no detectable nuclear brachyury staining . Due to disease progression and performance status, treatment with gemcitabine was initiated . The patient only received 1 cycle of treatment before she developed acute hypoxic respiratory failure with bilateral pleural effusions and left pneumothorax, with clinical and imaging findings of disease progression. The treatment regimen was changed to pembrolizumab plus pazopanib [–]; although well-tolerated, she developed continued tumor progression and passed away 8 months after diagnosis.
Her past medical history was notable for a spheno-occipital chordoma excised at age 39. Interestingly, ten members of her family were diagnosed with chordoma. Of ten cases, nine involved the clivus or nasopharynx with the age of diagnosis ranging from 6 to 68-years-old. One brother was diagnosed at age 28 with an aggressive sacral chordoma and later died of metastatic disease. The patient and members of her family were involved in extensive genetic studies to identify the genetic abnormality in familial chordoma, which showed TBXT gene duplication on 6q27 and contained a SNP variant rs2305089 [, ]. Her last follow-up MRI, at age 61, still revealed a stable 1.2 × 0. 8 × 2.3-cm soft tissue mass localized in the posterior nasopharynx appearing to connect a midline defect in the clivus. There was no evidence of progression or metastatic disease, and clinical observation was recommended. There was no history of second malignancy in her other family members with chordoma.
At age 52 she was diagnosed with SCC, which was incidentally found in the pathology specimen after hemorrhoidectomy. This was an invasive carcinoma treated with further surgical excision with no adjuvant therapy. Follow-up high-resolution anoscopy with biopsies revealed no evidence of any residual dysplasia or carcinoma in situ. She also was diagnosed with several superficial BCC lesions, which were removed during the previous 15 years before her death. She also had an adenomatous colonic polyp removed at age 59. At age 62 she developed a gradually enlarging right neck mass over 2 months. A biopsy revealed classical Hodgkin disease, nodular sclerosing type, and PET-CT imaging showed bilateral hypermetabolic supraclavicular, mediastinal, and left hilar adenopathy (stage IIA). She was treated with four cycles of doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine as the ABVD regimen; PET-imaging after two cycles revealed a complete response. She completed chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy to the mediastinum, left hilar, and supraclavicular areas. She had no subsequent evidence of lymphoma recurrence. She also had a benign PET-negative thyroid nodule found during work-up for lymphoma that remained stable. She had no significant exposure history, worked in an office, and was a never smoker.