A 62-year-old Caucasian male patient, with a height of 170 cm and a weight of 82 kg, presented with hematuria and was admitted to the emergency department of our institution. Abdominal ultrasound examination revealed a voluminous right renal mass that extended through the IVC. He denied having any pain, fever, or lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). On physical examination, the abdomen was globose with fat, no mass was palpable and the patient reported no previous abdominal surgery. CT scan confirmed the presence of a right renal tumor with intravascular extension into the IVC and right atrium. The tumor was classified as a type IV thrombus according to the Mayo classification . MRI was consistent with the CT scan findings and no lymph node involvement, expansion to nearby organs, or distant metastases were detected on preoperative imaging, and clinical staging was T3cN0M0 . The tumor thrombus in the right atrium was approximately 3.5 cm in size and extended from the right renal vein for about 16 cm.
The patient had a medical history of type II diabetes mellitus on insulin therapy, dyslipidemia under medication, and hypertensive heart disease with an inferior myocardial infarction episode approximately 20 years ago. Coronary angiography indicated a localized 90% stenosis in the anterior descending coronary artery. Preoperative arterial and venous Doppler ultrasound of the carotid, jugular, and vertebral arteries and veins, as well as the upper and lower limbs, excluded thrombosis and assessed major vessel patency. Given the patient’s cardiac condition and the potential for intraoperative bleeding, urologic surgery carried a particularly high risk. However, due to the complex preoperative situation and the high risk of disease progression, postponing surgical intervention could be critical. Following an interdisciplinary discussion involving urologists and cardiac surgeons, a combined procedure was deemed appropriate.
A multidisciplinary team, comprising a cardiothoracic surgeon, a general surgeon (specialized in hepatobiliary surgery), and an urologist performed the surgical intervention. The patient was placed in lithotomy position and underwent median sternotomy, pericardial opening, and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) using the left internal mammary artery (LIMA) on the beating heart. The anterior wall of the chest was exposed with a tissue stabilizer, and an epicardial electrode was placed on the right atrium. After a subcostal incision Chevron type enlarged to the right, the inferior vena cava and right renal vein were isolated and fully exposed, the right gonadal vein, ureter, and right renal artery were identified, ligated, and cut. The surgical procedure involved the meticulous mobilization of the kidney, including the adrenal gland, by ligating the ureter and artery, leaving only the renal vein as the sole remaining attachment. The right renal vein and the inferior vena cava were markedly enlarged, with ecstatic collateral circles and intercavo-aortic lymphadenopathy due to the known venous thrombosis. Extracorporeal circulation was then established through cannulation of the superior vena cava and right common femoral vein for venous drainage, and the ascending aorta for arterial return.
Following medial derotation of the liver, the caudal IVC, left renal vein, and hepatic peduncle were all completely clamped with vascular tourniquet to arrest any venous backflow. The renal vein was incised at the confluence with the vena cava; the cavotomy was extended cranially until the caval thrombus was completely extracted under transesophageal ultrasound control. Then, radical nephrectomy was completed, and the IVC was then reconstructed. Total surgery time was 600 minutes and the blood loss was approximately 2000 mL. During the operating time, 2 units of concentrated red blood cells were transfused. Pathological examination revealed renal cell carcinoma, clear cell subtype (Fuhrman grade 3) in the absence of tumor necrosis and sarcomatoid differentiation .
From the first postoperative day, the patient received acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg therapy, which was deemed necessary due to the aortocoronary bypass that was performed. There were no significant incidents of postoperative bleeding, and prior to discharge, the patient underwent a series of diagnostic tests, including a transesophageal echocardiogram, chest X-ray, and electrocardiogram, which revealed no abnormalities or significant findings. On the 10th postoperative day, the patient was discharged from the hospital after an uncomplicated postoperative course in the ward.
The patient was then placed under close follow-up with a total body CT scan every 3 months; no other pharmacological therapies were necessary. At the 9-month follow-up visit, the patient was in good general clinical condition. Good recovery was observed after surgery, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0; the patient was self-sufficient in his daily activities. The patient’s height was 170 cm, while his weight at the visit was recorded as 76 kg with a body mass index (BMI) of 26.30 kg/m2. We report only a slight anemia with hemoglobin equal to 9.9 mg/dL. On the control total body CT scan, there were no evident signs of disease recurrence.