A 10-year-old healthy Indian boy presented to the Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology with a complaint of a small swelling in the roof of his mouth. His parents reported that the swelling was noticed 10 days earlier and he had no prior complaints. The onset was spontaneous with no history of trauma due to any cause. It was associated with minor bleeding and mild pain on chewing food. He did not report any nasal block or epiphora. His past medical history (immunized for age), social history, family history, and environmental history were noncontributory. General examination revealed normal vital signs (afebrile, heart rate of 100 beats/minute) with no signs of pallor, cyanosis, or icterus. His height was 108 cm and his weight was 18 kg. He was conscious, cooperative, and well oriented to time, place, and person. There were no demonstrable neurological deficits. Intraoral examination revealed a well-circumscribed growth along the midline on the posterior aspect of his hard palate, approximately 2 cm in diameter, dark purple in color with overlying whitish-yellow pseudomembrane . The surface over the growth appeared slightly irregular. On palpation the lesion was sessile and soft-to-firm in consistency with tenderness. There was no bleeding on manipulation and a diascopy test showed mild blanching. Taking his young age and clinical presentation into account, hemangioma/vascular malformation, pyogenic granuloma, and angina bullosa hemorrhagica were considered for clinical differential diagnoses. Contrast-enhanced Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the oral lesion was well encapsulated with thinning of the floor of his nasal cavity , which indicated the possibility of a hemangioma. Considering the clinical and radiological investigatory findings, the differential diagnoses that were taken into account were encapsulated vascular lesions and palatal minor salivary gland tumors. His preoperative laboratory values were all within the normal range: hemoglobin 10 g/dl; hematocrit 32%; mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) 17.6 pg; mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) 31.2 g/dl; mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 56.3 fl; platelet count 285×103/μl; red blood cell (RBC) count 5.68×106/μl; total white blood cell (WBC) count 14×103/μl; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 28.5 seconds; serum urea 18 mg/dl; and serum creatinine 0.5 mg/dl. Serological tests were non-reactive for human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B. Following this he was posted for elective surgical excision of the lesion. Complete removal of the growth was done under general anesthesia and the specimen was sent for histopathological examination.
Histopathological examination revealed a tumor with surface ulceration and inflammation, composed of bland spindle-shaped cells that had ovoid-shaped to spindle-shaped tumor cells arranged in a fascicular pattern and swirls with intervening pale mucoid to myxoid stroma. No areas of increased mitosis, necrosis, or pleomorphism were noted. As the tumor tissue was received in multiple bits, the marginal clearance could not be commented upon. However, the tumor lacked features such as infiltrative growth pattern, necrosis, or perineural invasion owing to which a diagnosis of benign myoepithelioma was considered. Differentiating features between benign and malignant counterparts of myoepithelioma are cytological atypia and mitosis. The tumor cells on immunohistochemistry stained positive with S100, CK5/6, and p63 . A diagnosis of palatal myoepithelioma (benign spindle cell variant) was made based on the above features.
His postoperative recovery was uneventful with complete healing of the palatal area and no clinical evidence of recurrence (7 months postoperation). He was advised to have clinical/ radiological follow-ups on an annual basis.