A 54 year old female Caucasian patient presented to the orthopaedic outpatient clinic complaining of left arm and left knee pain. She had been diagnosed with malignant melanoma of the palpebral and forniceal conjunctiva 2.5 years before and had received treatment at the regional ocular oncology centre in the form of surgical excision, cryotherapy and adjuvant Mitomycin C.
During her oncological follow up 30 months following the original diagnosis, multiple bilateral pulmonary metastases all measuring <0.5 cms in diameter as well as a 4 × 2 cm right ischial lesion were identified. She was complaining of left arm and left knee pain and was therefore referred to the orthopaedic clinic.
The pattern of the pain was constant with occasional nocturnal exacerbations and was aggravated by weight bearing activities of both extremities. Clinical examination demonstrated localized areas of tenderness over the midshaft area of the left humerus as well as over the anteromedial aspect of the left proximal tibia. Furthermore a non-fluctuant swelling measuring 2 × 2 centimeters in diameter was palpable over the corresponding left proximal tibial metaphysis. All neighbouring joints examined normal. Her right ischial lesion was asymptomatic.
Radiographic evaluation demonstrated lytic lesions of the left humeral diaphysis and proximal tibial metaphysis with associated cortical involvement and ill defined zones of transition, however no evidence of fracture . A bone scan confirmed the presence of three active areas corresponding to the lucent radiographic areas of the left humerus, left tibia and right ischium. It did not identify any further skeletal lesions
Regarding her osseous lesions she underwent intramedullary nailing procedures of both long bones on a semi-elective basis due to the danger of impending fracture. According to the Mirels classification for metastatic bone disease at risk of fracture, she scored 9 points for the humerus and 10 for the tibia.
A standard reamed and locked nailing technique was applied for stabilization of both bones with no associated intra-operative complications . Venting of both bones was performed during the procedure in an attempt to reduce intra-osseous pressure and prevent the risk of fat and tumour embolisation. Intramedullary reamings, as well as specimens obtained via open curettage of the radiologically suspect lesions were sent to the histopathology department.
The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged home within 4 days. Histological examination confirmed the presence of devitalized bone and extensively necrotic, heavily pigmented epithelioid tumour, consistent with a diagnosis of metastatic malignant melanoma. There was a low mitotic count (1/mm2) and no significant lymphocytic infiltrate .
At her latest follow up visit in the orthopaedic clinic 6 months post-operatively, she remains pain-free with no radiographic evidence of further metastatic spread of the involved bones. Further oncological input consisted of palliative radiotherapy to her right ischial and left humeral lesions, as well as bisphosphonate administration. No conjunctival recurrence has been identified 3 years following the original diagnosis.