A CAH was suspected when he was two-years-old because of an increased growth rate with advanced bone age, precocious pubarche, and acne. The diagnosis of CAH was then confirmed by a pathologic ACTH stimulation test and by the genetic analysis, revealing a steroid 21OHD (classic form) due to a compound heterozygosity: he inherited the paternal chromosome carrying the point mutation A/CG intron 2 (655) and the maternal chromosome with the point mutation Ile-Asn-17 (999).
He started replacement treatment with oral hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone acetate with good compliance. Biochemical and somatic parameters were monitored every 3 months, adjusting the therapy to gain adequate androgen control. Some follow-up controls revealed adrenal androgens excess.
Child’s development proceeded regularly, but he didn’t start gonadal puberty. When he was 16 years-old, his testicular volume was still of 3–4 ml, assessed both using orchidometer and scrotal ultrasound. Testes ultrasound showed no signs of adrenal rest tumor.
He had wholly developed pubic hair and a pubertal penis length. He also had a family history of delayed puberty and his bone age was delayed by 3 years. Blood examination revealed low basal testosterone (1.82 ng/mL), normal basal FSH (10.1 mUI/mL) and basal LH (7 mUI/mL).
LH peak after GnRH stimulation test was 34.9 mUI/ml and FSH peak 16.2 mUI/ml.
A short hCG stimulation test was performed to assess the testes ability to produce testosterone: it showed a good gonadal response, with an increase in serum testosterone after hCG stimulation from a basal value of 2.45 ng/mL to 5.53 ng/ml.
Serum antimüllerian hormone (17.3 ng/mL) and serum inhibin B (44 ng/dL) were normal .
His brain magnetic resonance imaging was normal.
When he was 18, he reported a regular sexual activity without erectile dysfunction. His physical appearance was unremarkable, he reached his target height, and his weight and body mass index were normal, but testicular volume was still 4 ml. A new testes ultrasound showed small testis with no signs of adrenal rest tumor.
Gonadotropin levels were slightly increased (FSH 12.92 mUI/ml and LH 10.38 mUI/ml). Semen analysis showed no sperm, even after centrifugation of the specimen; there were just a few round spermatids.
Then Klinefelter Syndrome was suspected, and a karyotype was carried out: it confirmed a 47,XXY chromosomal arrangement on 50 metaphases, so Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) was diagnosed. Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms-array was normal.