A 52-year-old man with a history of treated hypertension and diabetes mellitus presented to our hospital following a single seizure attack; he regained consciousness shortly before arrival. Two weeks before this, he had a head injury that resulted in some minor scalp abrasion and bleeding. No obvious neurological deficit was noted at that time, and he was discharged following a period of observation without imaging. However, on the day after the discharge, he experienced another seizure attack that lasted for 5–6 minutes with subsequent loss of consciousness. He was then admitted to our hospital.
Initially, the patient experienced generalized tonic-clonic seizures twice daily. Persistent right calf paresthesia was also noted; this presented as a focal seizure when aggravated and often progressed to a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. Under antiepileptic medications, focal seizures remained persistent but progression to secondary generalized seizures became rare.
On physical examination there were no clinical signs to suggest other organ involvement, in particular there was no glandular enlargement or orbital disease. Abdominal ultrasound showed a normal liver, gallbladder, pancreas and kidneys.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed thickening of the meninges with enhancement near the superior sagittal sinus; skull bone defect was also noted . We initially suspected meningitis or skull metastasis with dura invasion. Subsequently, lumbar puncture was performed for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination. Sugar level was within normal limit compared to peripheral blood sugar levels, and no visible leukocytes were noted. Hemogram did not reveal leukocytosis, and C-reactive protein level was also within the normal limit. Thus, infection seemed unlikely. CSF cytology revealed no malignant cells.
Left parietal skull and dural nodule excision were then performed for both pathological diagnosis and symptomatic relief . Duroplasty was also performed with autologous fascia, and the skull defect was covered with Titanium mesh. Hyperostosis of the skull was noted, and the overlying galea aponeurotica showed thickening and a whitish color change . Gliosis was noted along the cortical vessels and gyrus just below the involved dura area .
Microscopically, sections of the dura and galea showed mixed inflammatory cell infiltration, composed mainly of lymphoplasma cells, in a stroiform fibrous background with occasional eosionphils. Lymphoid follicles with germinal center formations were also observed in the galeal tissue sections . Skull sections revealed focal fibrosis and chronic inflammation in the marrow space. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed some inflammatory cells and spindle cells that were immunoreactive to S-100 stain. We concluded that a chronic inflammatory process was occurring, and a diagnosis of idiopathic hypertrophic cranial pachymeningitis was subsequently considered.
Immunohistochemical analysis using the avidin-biotin-complex (ABC) stain revealed an increased IgG4 (+) plasma cell count, which accounted for more than 50% of the IgG (+) cells with a mean more than 30 in 3 high power fields (HPFs); this was assessed by counting 20 HPFs . No evidence of spirochete infection was observed. Autoimmune profiles were normal, including findings for antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factors. Increased serum IgG4 (939 mg/dl; normal ranges: 1–140 mg/dl) was noted. Based on the histopathological and immunohistochemical findings, as well as the exclusion of known causes of pachymeningitis, a diagnosis of IgG4-related hypertrophic intracranial pachymeningitis was made.
After total excision of the affected skull bone and meninges, the patient’s seizures stopped; he was smoothly tapered off antiepileptic medication. In addition, his serum IgG4 levels returned to normal, and no obvious sequela was noted after the operation. Follow-up imaging study and physical examinations in 3 months later revealed that the infiltration of the arachnoid membrane had vanished and there was no involvement of other organs.