A 71-year-old female of normal weight presented with a large mass on the dorsum of her right foot which has been gradually increasing in size over 4 months prior to admission to the hospital. Two years before she had a soft tissue injury at the same location, but without any complication and sequels. Otherwise she was without serious illness. Her family history revealed no lipomatous disorders. On physical examination a firm, palpable tumor mass, 6–7 cm in diameter, poorly-defined from surrounding tissue and attached to underlying structures and skin, was detected. The mass was painless, unless examined by deep palpation. Skin above it was of normal color and structure. Laboratory findings, including blood count, were completely normal. On plain x-rays only an ill defined mass on the dorsum of the foot, with no clear correlation to the bone, was observed. Computed tomography revealed invasive tumorous mass. Scintigraphy with Tc99 was positive. Magnetic resonance imaging showed expansive infiltrative process of the dorsum of the foot with penetration between metatarsal bones to the plantar side, and partial destruction of the fourth metatarsal bone. Histologically, in biopsy sample, areas with lipogenic characteristics were surrounded by nonlipogenic areas . In lipogenic areas lipoblasts of different size and shape with variably expressed pleomorphism and number of nuclei were found . The number of lipoblasts also varied considerably from field to field as was the intensity of mixoid change so that some areas had a myxofibrosarcoma-like appearance, a pattern dominating the first biopsy . In nonlipogenic areas sheets of pleomorphic spindle cells with multinucleated giant cells (complying to the pattern of so called malignant fibrous histiocytoma, MFH) were interspersed with more pleomorphic parts or dense collagen . Occasionally some cells showed rhabdoid or epitheloid features . No significant necrosis was present. A panel of antibodies was studied immunohistochemically: vimentin, S-100, desmin, CD34, CD68, cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), myoglobin, myogenin and smooth muscle actin (SMA) (all antibodies from DAKO; Copenhagen, Denmark). In tumor cells S-100 was occasionally positive with better expression in lipogenic than in non-lipogenic areas. Positivity for CD68 and myogenin were observed rarely. CD 34 and SMA were positive only in vessel walls, and negative in tumor, while other antibodies yielded no specific staining. Proliferation rate measured with Ki-67 was 40% measured in hot spot areas.
After histological diagnosis below the knee amputation was indicated. No further therapy was indicated, and patient is still alive, 6.5 years after the diagnosis was made.