A 66-year-old woman was admitted with a 6-week history of rapidly progressing cognitive impairment. Being previously asymptomatic, her family reported that the patient showed clumsiness with progressive inability to carry out the normal activities of daily living. Confusion combined with recent memory disturbances and abnormal involuntary movements of the left upper limb had developed in the patient. Complex visual hallucinations involving animals and plants were also present.
Her vital signs and the findings of a general examination were normal. A cognitive examination upon admission demonstrated severe impairment of short-term memory and orientation. Her speech was normal, but left visual neglect was striking. Her behavior was inappropriate due to disinhibition, with the most prominent inappropriate behavior being continuous laughter. Her pupils were in the middle position, symmetric, and reactive to light. The fundus was normal. A bedside examination of the visual fields showed no gross abnormalities, but simultagnosia was found. An examination of eye movements demonstrated the absence of smooth horizontal and vertical pursuit, and the inability to execute voluntary visually guided saccades. An en-bloc rotation of head and trunk was needed to reach a visual target. She was unable to grab an object displayed in the center of her visual field. These findings (peripheral visual inattention, optic ataxia, and acquired ocular motor apraxia) were consistent with Balint's syndrome. Oculocephalic maneuvers evoked normal reflex eye movements. Irrigating the external ears with cold water elicited normal and symmetric responses. Left-arm myoclonus, left-leg myoclonus, and continuous left-hand dystonic movements were evident during an examination. A gait examination revealed truncal ataxia. Other findings of the neurologic examination were normal.
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed mild bilateral basal ganglia and parieto-occipital cortex hyperintensities. Electroencephalography demonstrated generalized, continuous periodic 2-Hz epileptiform discharges. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a normal cell count, glucose levels, and protein levels, but a positive result for 14-3-3 protein. A presumptive clinical diagnosis of CJD was made. Genetic analysis of the prion protein gene demonstrated methionine/valine heterozygosity in codon 129 on the short arm of chromosome 20.
Over the next 2 days the patient deteriorated into cortical blindness, left hemiplegia, and thereafter stupor and coma. Myoclonic jerks now appeared continuous and generalized. Abnormal spontaneous vertical eye movements were evident from the fourth day after admission, consisting of a conjugate slow downward deflection followed by a rapid return to the primary position. These movements were intermittent and not rhythmic, and were consistent with OD. Intermixed roving eye movements sometimes appeared between OD cycles, but other abnormalities of vertical gaze were not seen. Doll's eye movements were full in all directions at every moment. The intensity and frequency of abnormal spontaneous eye movements consistent with OD progressively decreased until they disappeared 8 days after onset, before subsequently evolving into sustained downward deviation intermixed with occasional roving eye movements. The patient died 24 days after admission. An autopsy was performed after obtaining consent from relatives.
A gross examination of the brain at the autopsy revealed moderate cortical atrophy. A pathological examination demonstrated widespread spongiform changes with the presence of neuropil vacuoles, neuronal loss, and astrocytosis involving the cortical gray matter, hippocampal CA1 and CA2 sectors, amygdala, thalamus, hypothalamus, putamen, caudate, superior and inferior colliculi, substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, pontine and medullary tegmental nuclei, olivary nuclei, dentate nuclei, and molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex . Diffuse synaptic and axonal deposits of prionic protein were evident after 3f4 antibody immunostaining. Scarce neuropil threads and tau-positive neurons were found in the parahippocampal gyrus and hippocampal CA2 sector. Alpha synuclein and TAR-DNA-binding protein-43 kDa staining were negative. Amyloid deposits were present within the walls of some of the small cerebral vessels. A pathologic diagnosis of sporadic CJD was made.