A 73-year-old male patient resorted to the General Surgery consultation due to multinodular goitre, after seeing his General Practitioner because of cervical discomfort. A cervical ultrasound (US) identified a slightly enlarged thyroid gland with multiple nodules in both lobes, the bigger ones in the left lobe with 23 mm and 12 mm, without enlarged lymph nodes nor substernal extension. The patient was euthyroid with a TSH of 1.559 (0.55–4.78) and LT4 of 1.0 g/dL (0.89–1.76). A fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the bigger nodule was performed. Pathology concluded for a Bethesda III: follicular lesion of undetermined significance (FLUS). A second FNAC was performed 6 months later, with the same diagnosis. The patient was on antihypertensive medication and had no other relevant past medical history. The patient underwent an uneventful total thyroidectomy. During surgery, there were no features suggestive of malignancy, no extrathyroidal extension, no substernal extension, and no enlarged lymph nodes. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home on the second day, taking levothyroxine 0.1 mg a day. Pathology revealed eight synchronous papillary carcinomas of the thyroid, all intraparenchymal, without perineural invasion nor vascular invasion, pT1b(m)NxMx. Of those, four were in the right lobe, ranging from 0.2 cm to 0.6 cm (microcarcinomas). The remaining four were in the left lobe, ranging from 0.6 cm to 1.8 cm.
At 3 months of follow-up, a cervical US was performed revealing several unspecific nodules adjacent to the carotid artery. Thyroid function was difficult to control, ranging from subclinical hyperthyroidism to hypothyroidism, needing light adjustments in levothyroxine dosage. Additionally, serum thyroglobulin was elevated (31.71 ng/mL). Thus, a cervical and thoracic CT scan was performed, revealing a 60x30mm tumour mass in the anterior and superior mediastinum, hyperreflective and heterogenous, suggestive of tumoural recurrence or metastasis . No lymph nodes were found. The perivascular nodules described in the US were not evident in the CT. Following a multidisciplinary discussion, surgical treatment was proposed, and accepted by the patient.
Mediastinal tumour resection was performed by video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). The patient was placed in left-side decubitus and three 10 mm trocars were placed on the right lateral thoracic wall (3rd, 5th, and 6th intercostal spaces). A 30° camera was used. The tumour was encapsulated in the anterior mediastinum with vascularization derived from intrathoracic vessels. There was no communication to the neck. Resection was performed using blunt and sharp dissection with LigaSure Maryland Thoracic Sealer (Medtronic) . A drain was placed in the pleural cavity. The surgery was uneventful. The drain was removed the day after, and the patient was discharged home on the 2nd postoperative day free of symptoms.
Pathology concluded for an ectopic thyroid tissue of 55 × 45 × 25 mm, with multiple hyperplasic nodules and a 4 mm intraparenchymal papillary microcarcinoma, without perineural or vascular invasion (pT1aNxMx) . After a second multidisciplinary discussion, no adjuvant treatment was delivered.
One month after surgery patient resumed normal activity without symptoms and with an excellent aesthetic result. Six months later the patient was doing well, with controlled thyroid function and serum thyroglobulin 0.33 ng/mL. No further imaging evaluation was performed so far.