A 45 years old female, presented with 3 years history of huge right breast mass. She noticed rapid growth about four months prior to the presentation. There was no personal or family history of breast cancer. Her past medical history was insignificant. Her menarche was at the age of 13 and she had five children.
Physical examination revealed a mass measuring 40 × 46 cm, lobulated and cystic-solid in consistency, fixed to the chest wall and overlying erythematus skin with prominent veins and normal nipple areola complex [, ]. Multiple enlarged and mobile lymph nodes were palpable in the right axilla; the contra-lateral breast, axilla and neck examination was normal.
Breast ultrasound showed a heterogeneous mass occupying the right breast with solid and cystic components, having fluid collections and multiple enlarged right axillary lymph nodes.
Core tissue biopsy revealed prominent mixed fibroepithelial and stromal proliferation, suggestive of phyllodes tumor.
CT scan of the chest and the abdomen revealed; bilateral pulmonary metastasis without mediastinal adenopathy, invasion of tumor into the chest wall, axillary lymph node enlargement with central necrosis and an enlarged hyper vascular inter-pectoral lymph node measuring 2.5 × 2.5 cm [, ].
She was diagnosed as metastatic phylloides tumor and underwent palliative modified radical mastectomy for her symptoms. The involved pectorals major muscle was excised as en-bloc, the enlarged inter-pectoral lymph node was excised separately and the wound was closed primarily.
Grossly the specimen measured 35 × 39 cm with nipple areola complex measuring 6 × 5 cm, focal ulcerated area also identified measuring 3 × 5 cm and axillary tail 13 × 7 cm ex vivo. Additionally, grossly identified enlarged axillary lymph node measured 5 × 5 cm. The histopathological findings were consistent with malignant phylloides tumor with osseous and chondroid metaplasia (, ). The resection margins were free of tumor. Tumor was positive for Vimentin and negative for Cytokeratin immunostains (, ). Six out of 25 axillary nodes were positive with perinodal extension, the largest one measuring 5 cm in diameter. The interpectoral node was also found to be positive for metastasis and measured 3 × 2.5 cm .
Her post-operative recovery was uneventful with well healed wound. She was referred to medical oncology where she received chemo-radiotherapy. During her post operative follow up for 12 months, no local recurrence was noted but her pulmonary nodules were increasing in number and size despite chemotherapy .