One day after receiving the first dose of COVID-19 vaccine with mRNA-1273 (Moderna Biotech, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA) a 26-year-old German man developed fever, shivering and headache. During the following days, he developed rash, vertigo and nausea, culminating in a single syncopal episode 8 days after the vaccination, as shown in Fig. . The patient was referred to the nearest local hospital because his symptoms were suspected to be due to vaccine-associated side effects. He was provided with analgesics and fluid, and the symptoms rapidly resolved. Detailed sexual history-taking revealed an episode of unprotected anal intercourse with another man 23 days previously. He subsequently tested positive for HIV on a fourth-generation p24/ab-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The patient was referred to our tertiary medical center for further assessment and initiation of treatment.
On arrival, the patient complained of a mild headache, general weakness and persisting skin flushing. Blood biochemistry showed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (2.0 mg/dL; reference: < 0.5 mg/dL) and hematology showed lymphocytopenia (2.49 G/L), with a CD4 T-cell count of 284 cells/μL and a CD4/CD8 ratio of 0.2. He was retested for HIV using a screening test (HIV Ag/Ab Combo performed on Abbott Architect, Chicago, Illinois, USA) and HIV-immunoblot (recomLine HIV-1 and HIV-2 by Mikrogen, Neuried, Germany). The screening test was reactive but the HIV-specific western blot was negative and no HIV-specific antibodies were detected. Realtime HIV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing (Abbott, Chicago, Illinois, USA) revealed a high viral load of 49,817,530 copies/mL, thus confirming the diagnosis as Fiebig stage II acute HIV infection, as shown in Table . Coinfection with SARS-CoV-2 was excluded multiple times by SARS-CoV-2 PCR (TaqMan™-PCR performed on Roche cobas® 6800, Basel, Swiss). The patient was discharged without any symptoms and initiated on antiretroviral therapy with bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide.