A 77-year-old woman presented with a history of chronic right leg pain, paresthesias and proximal right leg weakness. There was no history of bowel/bladder dysfunction. Neurological examination revealed 4/5 strength in the right psoas muscle. There were no other motor or sensory deficits. Magnetic Resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a large dumbbell-shaped extradural foraminal lesion at the L3–L4 level with significant extraforaminal extension [Figure and ]. The patient underwent a minimally invasive GTR of the tumor. Pathology confirmed the lesion to be a benign schwannoma. Postoperatively, the patient's symptoms improved and she was discharged from the hospital on the second postoperative day. Postoperative MRI showed no residual tumor [Figure and ]. The patient returned to normal activities after 2 weeks and remained asymptomatic with no neurological deficits at final 6 months follow-up.
After sedation and endotracheal intubation, the patient was placed in the prone position on an operating table. Standard sterilization and draping of the lumbosacral area was done. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral intraoperative fluoroscopy was utilized to localize the L3–L4 level with a k-wire. At this level, a 20-mm-long paramedian skin incision was performed 5 cm from the midline. This paramedian longitudinal incision allowed adequate angle to access the ipsilateral L3–L4 extraforaminal space. The lumbar fascia was incised parallel and slightly medially to the skin incision. A Steinman pin was docked on the right L3–L4 facet complex. A series of dilators were introduced to split the paraspinal muscles. A final 18-mm Spotlight tubular retractor was fixed in place with a table-mounted flexible arm (Depuy Spine, Raynham, MA). The Spotlight was attached to the tube and connected to the light source. Fluoroscopy confirmed the adequate position of the tube retractor in between the right transverse processes of L3 and L4, just lateral to right L3–L4 facet complex . The surgical microscope was introduced . The fascia and intertransverse membrane were opened allowing access to the tumor capsule. Prior to entry into the tumor capsule, stimulation was performed on the tumor capsule to ensure that there was no nerve root. Standard microsurgical techniques were used. Following coagulation of the tumor capsule, intracapsular debulking was performed using cavitron ultrasonic surgical aspirator (CUSA) . This allowed us to infold the tumor edges upon themselves and perform extracapsular dissection between the tumor and the psoas muscle. A dissection plane was maintained with paddies. Intraoperative stimulation was performed throughout to ensure that no viable nervous structures were harmed. Following tumor resection, the L3 nerve root was identified and stimulated, confirming its integrity. Hemostasis was performed with standard hemostatic agents and bipolar cautery. The retractor was then removed. The fascia was closed with absorbable sutures and the 20-mm paramedian skin was closed with 2-0 vicryl sutures.