A 6-year-old male from the West Region of Cameroon diagnosed with HIV 3 years back and on pediatric first line highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) regimen—Abacavir, Lamivudine and Efavirenz (ABC/3TC/EFZ),—was referred from a health center to our institution for suspicion of pulmonary TB based on a 10 days history of productive cough, intermittent nocturnal fever and generalized abdominal pain, which persisted despite administration of undocumented broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics for 8 days. His mother was on the first month of hospitalization at our institution for management of MDR-TB, a referral hospital for MDR-TB.
On examination, the child had respiratory distress with a pulse rate of 137 beats/min, respiratory rate of 22 cycles/min and temperature of 40.1 °C. His weight and height were 20 kg and 80 cm, respectively. There was pallor of the conjunctivae, palms and soles. The BCG scar was present on the left forearm. The heart was tachycardic with audible functional systolic murmurs. A bilateral consolidation syndrome was also noted on examination of the lungs. An initial diagnosis of pediatric pulmonary TB/HIV coinfection, associated with a clinical anaemia was made. MDR-TB was the principal differential diagnosis.
A sputum analysis done was positive for acid-fast bacilli. Since he was a household contact of the mother and given that he became very ill, and unable to produce one more sputum, we chose to collect the gastric aspirate and sent for gene Xpert MTB/RIF and culture/DST in other to make a good diagnosis early enough. The gastric aspirate was positive for a Mycobacterium tuberculosis Rifampicin resistant strain using Xpert MTB/RIF assay. After performing the proportional method -drug susceptibility testing (PM-DST) on Lowenstein Jensen slopes, the child was found to have the same resistance pattern like the mother (Isoniazid-susceptible, Rifampicin-resistant, Ethambutol-susceptible, Kanamycine-susceptible, Ofloxacine-susceptible and streptomycine-not done). Due to the severe anaemia at 6.1 g/dl, he received 20 ml/kg (400 ml) of whole blood in emergency. The results of his pre-therapeutic work-up for MDR-TB regimen were as follows: slightly raised Aspartate Aminotransferase but normal Alanine Aminotransferase at 68 and 28.5 U/l, respectively; Serum Creatinine was normal at 0.45 mg/dl. An antero-posterior view chest X-ray revealed a bilateral micro-nodular interstitial opacity associated with bilateral hilar adenopathy . Also an audiogram and electrocardiogram (ECG) done were not contributive.
After discussing the case with the MDR-TB consultant of the National Tuberculosis Program (NTP), with regards to the results of his pre-therapeutic work-up, the short 9 month—regimen was initiated according to his weight: 4 months of Amikacin/Moxifloxacin/Prothionamide/Isoniazid/Clofazimin/Ethambutol/Pyrazinamid for the initiation phase, followed with 5 months of Moxifloxacin/Clofazimin/Ethambutol/Pyrazinamid for the continuation phase [4(AmMfxPtoHCfzEZ)/5(MfxCfzEZ)]. His viral load was 23,144 copies/µl and the CD4 cell count 149cells/mm.
Day 36 of hospitalization was marked by another episode of decompensated severe anaemia at 3.9 g/dl and non-infectious enteritis (with abdominal pains and watery stool). This prompted another transfusion of whole blood cells at 20 ml/kg (400 ml), and iron and folic acid syrup at a dose of 6 mg/kg/day (120 mg) were continued twice daily for a month. In addition, the patient presented with mild bilateral knee pain which was immediately controlled with 2 mg/kg (40 mg) dose of diclofenac divided twice a day. He also presented with a progressive brownish discoloration of the eyes with no visual impairment for which he is been followed-up. During the course of the treatment, the child was doing well and was able to produce a good sputum sample; he was discharged 4 months after the initiation phase with consecutively negative monthly sputum controls . The child is presently on the ninth month of treatment with no further complaints.