A 9-year-old Caucasian girl presented to the genetic clinic with mild to moderate learning disability. She was noted to have numerous dysmorphic features including a small mouth with heaped up palate, a small chin and a small over folded ear, straight eyebrows, fifth finger clinodactyly and short toes. She had required grommets for treatment of glue ear and had hypermetropia. An 11-week scan detected nuchal oedema and ventriculomegaly was detected on a later antenatal scan. She was of normal birth weight but had feeding difficulties including reflux from birth. A delayed ability to sit, speech delay, and late walking at 22 months were also noted. Height and weight were both in the 50–75th centile at four and a half years old with an occipital-frontal circumference in the 98th centile. A diagnosis of Di George syndrome was initially suspected and she was referred for 22q11 fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis and routine cytogenetic investigations, both of which revealed an apparently normal female karyotype (46, XX). Examination of the subject's mother revealed some mild dysmorphism, clinodactyly of the fifth finger and mild learning disability. The maternal grandmother was also assessed and was phenotypically normal. The proband's father was not available for assessment, however it was reported that he had fathered another child of different maternal origin who also displayed growth and developmental problems.
The proband was the eldest of three sisters, all of whom had different fathers. The second sister had intra uterine growth retardation and low birth weight (4lb 3oz at 37 weeks), with all growth parameters <0.4th centile at 23 months. Similar dysmorphic features as evident in the proband were noted, including small mouth and chin. Cutis marmorata, long slim feet, complete 2/3 syndactyly of the toes and mild to moderate learning disability were also present. Conventional cytogenetic analysis of this sibling revealed a normal female karyotype.
The youngest sister showed an apparently normal development, with mild dysmorphia similar to that of her mother. Currently, the proband's mother is pregnant with a fourth child of different paternity, and has undergone prenatal diagnosis, the conventional cytogenetic analysis for which has revealed a normal female karyotype.
aCGH was performed on DNA from the proband using the Version 2 CytoChip™ from BlueGnome. These arrays are constructed using clones from the widely validated Roswell Park (RP) Cancer Institute Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) library. The quality control (QC) parameters for diagnostic reporting of this experiment were met with a spot inclusion of 99.71% and a standard deviation (SD) of the autosome value of 0.061 (failure thresholds are <95% and >0.075, respectively) from a 5 μm scan. The scan results, processed by BlueFuse software (BlueGnome), revealed two major genomic imbalances. The first was a five BAC clone deletion between 1.4 and 2 Mb long, mapping to 1p36.32. These clones were (in order of most distal): RP3-395M20, RP11-333E3, RP4-785P20, RP11-46F15 and RP1-286D6.
The second imbalance was an amplification of two contiguous clones, at 1p32.3 between 0.4 and 1.7 Mb in length. These clones were (in order of most distal): RP11-117D22 and RP11-243A18. The aCGH results for these imbalances of chromosome 1 are illustrated by a scatter plot . The 1p36 deletion was confirmed by FISH using fluorescent probes from two of the five clones (RP11-333E3 and RP11-46F15). Confirmation of the 1p32.3 amplification by FISH (using fluorescent probes from both RP11-117D22 and RP11-243A18) revealed the duplicated segment to be inserted at a position distal to its normal locus, situated within the subtelomeric region of chromosome 1p . Parental samples were requested in order to ascertain the origin of this rearrangement. A paternal sample was unavailable but FISH analysis of the mother, grandmother and siblings of the proband revealed a normal diploid compliment in each case for all of the investigated clones. At present, it cannot be determined whether the chromosomal anomalies found in the proband were the result of a de-novo rearrangement of 1p or familial inheritance from her father.
In silico analysis of the deleted and duplicated BAC clones through interrogation of the Ensembl database revealed numerous characterised and unknown genes using both the Ensembl and EST transcript gene tracks. Additional file summarises the genes associated with the five deleted BAC clones on 1p36.32 and the two duplicated clones on 1p32.3, in relation to their putative function. Also listed are those genes that lie within the flanking sequences between the deleted clones and neighbouring clones, which may also have been included in the copy number changes.