A 16-month-old girl from Ankole in Western Uganda was admitted to the surgical ward of Mbarara University Teaching Hospital in Western Uganda with a dark lesion on the left cheek. This lesion had been present for 5 days prior to admission. It had started as a small red lesion on the left side of the upper gum and had quickly spread to the inner cheek. The child had been subjected to a tooth bud extraction on that side of the gums by a traditional herbalist 1 week prior to admission. The procedure had been done to cure Ebiino, a diagnosis that was reached by the traditional herbalist after the parents reported that the child was experiencing cough and flu and that they had spotted erupting tooth buds.
Associated with this dark lesion was a high-grade intermittent fever and pain. The girl’s feeding was also described as difficult, owing to her pain, but manageable. The child is the first born of the family and was up-to-date with her growth milestones and immunizations. Her mother has never attended any formal education and is a small-scale subsistence farmer together with the father of the child. The family hails from a village in Bushenyi district, which is located in Western Uganda.
A physical examination revealed that the child was in fair general condition. She had features of malnutrition that included brown, sparse hair, and she weighed 7.3 kg, which is below the fifth percentile on the weight-for-age chart adopted from the National Centre for Health Statistics. This showed failure to thrive. The child also had moderate pallor of the mucous membranes and was afebrile with a temperature of 36.6 °C.
Locally, she had a dark necrotic patch on the left cheek that involved most of the upper lip and nose and extended into the left upper gingival area. The lesion was generally oval in shape and measured about 8 cm × 5 cm. It was tender to touch. The rest of the local examination was unremarkable.
The history and findings pointed to the diagnosis of noma. The child was admitted to our hospital and started on intravenous ceftriaxone 400 mg once daily as well as rectal paracetamol for pain. A blood sample was also taken for a complete blood count, which showed mild leukocytosis and an estimated hemoglobin level of 10 g/dl. Radiology services were not available at the hospital at the time, and the parents could not afford to have it done outside the hospital. Surgical debridement was also done . The necrotic tissue was removed to show the full extent of involvement . A nasogastric tube was inserted to aid feeding. The child was then referred to a specialist hospital for more rehabilitation and reconstructive surgery.