A 27-year-old female had productive cough for 8 days, with no response to the levofloxacin treatment. A high-resolution CT scan showed a 12 mm part-solid nodule (consolidation to tumor ratio 0.17) that was located centrally in the number 8 segment of left lung (LS8) . She was scheduled for CT-GHWL to ensure an adequate surgical margin from the nodule prior to VATS segmentectomy of LS8. After determining the puncture site by initial CT scan and applying local anesthesia, a hook wire was entered through a 20 gauge needle (Mammography Localization Set; PAJUNK, Geisingen, Germany). Another CT scan was performed to ensure the wire location. The tip of the hook-shaped wire was secured at a distance of 1.0 cm from the nodule . There was no obvious hemorrhage and pneumothorax after the procedure.
After double lumen endotracheal intubation under general anesthesia, the operation was performed on segmentectomy of LS8 through a single-port VATS. When entering the thoracic cavity, the hook wire was visualized in the left lower lung lobe. Its tail outside the chest wall was resected to minimize any bacterial contamination. After the lower pulmonary ligament was freed, the needle suddenly disappeared in the video-assisted thoracoscopic vision field. The hook wire was not found after the extensive search of the left thoracic cavity. The needle was also not found in the lesion or residual lung after resection of LS8. Bronchoscopy did not find any foreign body in the left bronchus. We immediately performed a chest X-ray examination, which also did not identify the needle. Therefore, the skin incision was lengthened to approximately 8 cm, with no hook wire found by manual palpation of the residual left lung. The chest X-ray examination was performed again after the patient turned to the supine position. A high-density shadow was observed near the left main bronchus, which could not be differentiated from the metal in the intubation tube. A chest CT scan was done after removing the tracheal intubation tube. We performed sagittal reconstruction on the CT images. It showed a metal spot in the subglottic area, which was considered the “wandering” hook wire . The patient was transferred to the tracheoscopic interventional unit. The front-end hook wire was removed by biopsy forceps under the flexible bronchoscopy. The patient recovered well and was discharged 1 week after the operation. Postoperative pathology showed adenocarcinoma, mainly the adherent growth type.