A 40-year-old Ukrainian female had a check-up and the ultrasonography (US) of the neck was performed. Previously, no complaints of the presence of lumps or pain zones were recorded. The patient had lived in a highly insolated climate zone for several years. She did not report a history of radiation exposure or thyroid diseases among her relatives.
US of the neck noted hetero echogenicity of the thyroid gland with distinct areas of hypo- and hyperechogenicity. The volume of the gland was 8.3 cm3. Also, a small hypoechogenic 8 mm wide nodule with an irregular, spiculated margin and with microcalcifications was found in the left lobe. The nodule was taller than wide, which is a specific feature of malignancy. Also, the US of the neck detected small lymph nodes (less than 10 mm) in the bilateral compartments, which were hypoechoic, oval with a smooth margin, echogenic hilus and hilar vascularity. In the central compartment, no suspicious lymph nodes were found.
A fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy was performed several days after the pathology had been found. The result belonged to Bethesda category 6 (malignant). FNA of the nodules in the lateral compartments was not performed because of absence of the suspicious signs during the US. The main laboratory tests that could affect the thyroid function were as follows: thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)—2.28 mU/L (reference 0.45–4.0), free thyroxine (T4)—0.7 ng/dL (reference 0.8–1.8), thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPO Ab)—544 IU/ml (less than 9), ionized calcium—1.23 mmol/L (reference 1.16–1.31).
The patient underwent total thyroidectomy (TT) with central lymph node dissection (CLND) one month after the pathology had been detected. The Delphian’s node, pretracheal lymph nodes and fat tissue were dissected.
Histopathology revealed typical features of the Warthin-like papillary thyroid carcinoma (ICD-O 8260/3): oxyphilic follicular cells which were lined out on the papillae structure; infiltrative lymphocytic stroma; with the lymphatic invasion of the tumor . Also, one of 5 dissected lymph nodes was diagnosed as metastatic. The diagnosis was confirmed as pT1aN1aM0 I stage. The patient was discharged the next day. Medications with calcium and vitamin D were prescribed for 6 months.
One month after the surgery, inpatient radioactive iodine (RAI) ablation was conducted with a 100 mCi dosage. Thyroxine withdrawal was used to achieve hypothyroidism. One month after TSH equaled 75.0 mU/L. No other complications following RAI were detected. In 5 months after the surgery laboratory tests were as follows: TSH—0.11 mU/L (reference 0.45–4.0), Tg—0.2 ng/ml (disease-free reference < 0.2), Tg Ab—20 IU/ml (reference < 40). No proof of recurrence or persistence of the disease was detected on the US of the neck. L-thyroxine was prescribed to achieve a 0.5–2.5 mU/L TSH level. The five-year follow-up identified the absence of the recurrence. It was confirmed by neck US with no evidence of structural disease, a Tg test (< 0.2 ng/ml) and a Tg Ab test (<4 IU/ml). Suspicious US changes of the neck lymph nodes were also not detected .
The CARE guidelines were applied in writing this report.