A 59-year-old male, known diabetic and hypertensive for the past 5 years and on medications, presented with a history of breathlessness on exertion for the past 2 months. There was no history of chest pain, cough, palpitations or syncope. On examination no significant findings could be elicited. Laboratory investigations and complete haematological profile was within normal limits (no features of hypercoagulable disorders). Echocardiography showed dilated right atrium and right ventricle with impaired right ventricular systolic function. The pulmonary valve appeared thickened with possible mass attached to it, with turbulence and gradient in the main pulmonary artery. A contrast enhanced CT was performed which revealed a hypodense filling defect in the main and bilateral pulmonary arteries which did not exhibit any significant post contrast enhancement . Based on the clinical and radiological findings a diagnosis of pulmonary thromboembolism was made and pulmonary thromboendarterectomy was planned. Under GA, midline sternotomy was performed and main pulmonary artery was opened. Grey white organised mass with thrombosed areas was removed by separating it from the main pulmonary artery, bilateral pulmonary artery branches and pulmonary valves. On histopathology the tumor was composed of spindle to epithelioid cells exhibiting moderate to marked pleomorphism with vascular growth pattern and prominent areas of intratumoral haemorrhage and fibrinoid necrosis. Interspersed were mitotic figures and areas of focal myxoid change showed features of high grade sarcoma involving the media and intima and the lumen of the pulmonary artery with epithelioid morphology . On Immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were diffusely positive for Fli1 , which is a surrogate vascular marker; focally weakly positive for CD31, while were negative for CD34. Tumor cells were negative for SMA, desmin and H-caldesmon (myogenic/myofibroblastic markers). The final diagnosis was primary pulmonary artery high grade sarcoma and the suggestive histogenesis was vascular (angiosarcoma).
The immediate post-operative period was uneventful. Two-month post-surgery patient present with on and off pleuritic type of chest pain and was referred to our tertiary care centre for further management. As a part of the work up, Cine-cardiac MRI was performed which showed non-enhancing altered signal intensity lobulated mass in the left pulmonary artery with both exophytic and endophytic intravascular component . CT was performed to rule out pulmonary metastatic disease however CT thorax revealed ill-defined focal patchy pneumonic areas in bilateral lung parenchyma that were in favour of pulmonary changes as a sequel to chronic thromboembolic phenomenon . In view of the progressive residual disease patient was treated with definitive external beam radiotherapy (60 Gy in 30 fractions; dose per fraction: 200 cGy). During the course of treatment patient had occasional haemoptysis which resolved spontaneously. Follow-up imaging after 12 cycles of radiotherapy revealed significant progression of the primary disease with new development of pulmonary parenchymal metastasis . In view of the disease progression with short disease free interval period the patient is currently treated with metronomic therapy.