In 2015, a 36 year-old woman was admitted to the rheumatology department of Strasbourg University Hospital (CHU) suffering from lumbar pain (or low back pain) with hyperalgesia and addiction to painkillers. A divorced mother of a child, the patient had been employed until 2008. Her medical history included chronic spinal pain over a one-year period, two cases of deep vein thrombophlebitis (2001), pulmonary embolism (2001), a transient ischaemic attack (2004) with negative blood test results, and an appendectomy (2008). Owing to the functional consequences of left wrist surgery following a work accident, she left her job and received disability benefits. In 2014, she received opioid treatment and 3 epidural infiltrations for lumbar and radicular pain. As an outpatient, she was treated with pregabalin combined with transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), but the hospital then lost track of her. Her psychiatric and addictological record contained reports of an episode of depression, a morphine overdose-induced coma, hospitalization for opioid withdrawal, and an addiction to tobacco. When admitted to the rheumatology department in 2015, her treatment consisted of diazepam 10 mg three times per day, hydroxyzine 100 mg twice daily, venlafaxine 150 mg in the morning, oxycontin® extended-release 60 mg twice daily, oxycodone 10 mg every 4 h, and acetaminophen/codeine 300 mg/25 mg 6 times per day. She abused oxycodone and codeine, and her physicians refused to prescribe opioid treatment in such high dosages. Her medical examination revealed lumbosacral pain with intermittent irradiation towards the posterior side of her thigh down to the top of her left knee, painful limitation of flexion, extension, right rotation of the spine, limited flexion in both directions. The patient also reported pain upon palpation of the left pelvic-trochanter region, and cellulalgia in the dorso-lumbar region. She was suffering from dysuria and constipation due to opioid treatment. Biological investigations, CT-scan and X-ray results were normal. A spinal MRI scan found lumbar degenerative disc disease (L4-L5 and L5-S1). Rheumatologists asked for a specialist opinion from a pain specialist, who, in view of the patient’s prior psychiatric history, decided to contact psychiatrists and addictologists for their opinion. The patient presented with a histrionic personality (eg. need to be the center of attention, dramatization within the therapeutic relationship, reactivity of mood, excessive sensitivity to criticism or disapproval, inappropriate seductive appearance, rapidly shifting emotional states that may appear superficial and rash decision-making according to DSM-5 ). She also presented with some borderline traits (eg. unstable interpersonal relationships alternating idealization/devaluation, identity disturbance with unstable sense of self, difficulty controlling anger, transient paranoid ideations). Given the patient’s psychiatric symptoms and the fact that she wanted to withdraw opioid treatment by herself and attempted to do so, the physicians proposed she be admitted to the hospital’s psychiatry department to be treated for opioid withdrawal with the administration of ketamine to manage lombo-sciatic pain. She was informed of the side effects of ketamine and of the need to follow the protocol correctly and to report any opioid withdrawal symptoms. Faced with the fact that no physician could prescribe such high dosages of opioid medication, the patient agreed to be transferred to the psychiatric department. There she received ketamine oral solution (5 mg/ml, magistral formulae) 1 mg/kg, and two days after ketamine initiation her opioid treatment was gradually reduced (10 % reduction in the initial dosage each two days). The patient reported no withdrawal symptoms (Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Symptoms score of 0/11 in the first and seconds week after the physician started reducing her opioid medication), pain or cravings while her opioid treatment was being reduced. She complained of no side effects of ketamine other than an unusual weakness. However, because of her borderline and histrionic traits, the reduction in opioid treatment took longer, and we had to extend the period of ketamine treatment. In fact, the patient’s need to be at the center of attention caused many problems with other patients and with nurses, who found her demands difficult to deal with. As she presented with emotional and paranoid reactions, the medical staff proposed a long weekend break, thus interrupting her care and delaying her treatment. Although we had to extend the hospitalization period and ketamine treatment, in the end ketamine withdrawal was achieved without withdrawal symptoms, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. She consulted her addictologist and psychiatrist. She now takes very small dosage of opioids for pain relief (codeine 50 mg three times per day). To control administration of the remaining opioid medication, it is administered at home by a nurse. Functional re-education was also organized.