A 17-year-old girl with no disease history initially presented to a local community hospital for the acute onset of intense cephalagia, emesis, and left hemiplegia with normal mental state with bilateral pupils equal and reacting.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed the right frontal parietal lobe intracerebral hemorrhage of the patient at the local hospital, and the patient underwent evacuation of hematoma by emergency craniotomy. Nine days after the first surgery, the patient complaint of severe headache, accompanied by jet vomiting, and the vomit was gastric contents. The patient underwent another evacuation of hematoma by craniotomy. Five days after the second operation, a third attack of headache and vomiting began, and the patient underwent the third evacuation of hematoma by craniotomy to control the hemorrhage. Postoperative pathological examination showed foam-like histiocyte proliferation, and tumor cells were found in the hemorrhagic and necrotic tissues . Immunohistochemical results: pan-cytokeratin (+), epithelial membrane antigen (+), human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) (+), granulocyte chemotactic protein-3 (+, focal area), Sal-like protein 4 (+), octamer binding transcription factor 3/4 (-), and placental alkaline phosphatase (-), supporting metastatic choriocarcinoma. After confrontation, the patient admitted to having a sexual history and having had an abortion 2 years ago. She hid her medical history for fear that her parents would find out. Laboratory findings revealed that serum β-HCG level was more than 200000 U/mL. Based on all these findings, choriocarcinoma was strongly indicated. She received mannitol dehydration and brain protective treatment, and was then transferred to a general hospital for further treatment, at which time she was transferred to our center.
The patient’s menstrual cycle was regular and she declared no history of sexual intercourse or abortion. No history of hypertension could be identified.
No personal and family history available.
On presentation in our hospital, the patient was in a normal mental state with bilateral pupils equal and reacting. The muscle strength of left limb was grade III, the right limb grade V. The physical examination showed there was a bluish violet nodule with a diameter of about 6 cm at the cervix.
The blood level of β-HCG was 766510.0 mIU/mL (normal value, < 2.0 mIU/mL).
Brain CT with contrast enhancement showed the right parietal lobe in the area of the previous operations had obvious edema, and local softening foci were formed. The adjacent meninges and brain were swollen, indicating residual tumor at the surgical area. Chest CT showed multiple round nodules and masses of variable sizes in both lungs, with scanty amounts of right pleural effusion, compatible with lung metastasis. Abdomen CT showed an abnormal, high and low mixed density in the spleen and kidneys, and the cervical was enlarged with uneven and enhancement CT value.