A 48-year-old Chinese woman was referred to our hospital, complaining of occasional pain in the right lower back for one month. The pain was blunt, lasting several minutes each time. The episodic pain occurred 5–6 times altogether. The patient was otherwise healthy, without any remarkable history of diseases. Ultrasonography of the urinary system revealed enlarged right kidney with dilated pelvis and ureter, and multiple calculus in the right kidney and ureter. Intravenous urography (IVU) following a KUB showed hydronephrosis and a 2.5 cm × 1.0 cm high-density mass in the right ureter at the L3 level (Figure ). Lithiasis was diagnosed. PNL was indicated and performed. The whole procedure, lasting 40 minutes, was successful, with little blood loss.
Three hours after the surgery, the patient became feverish (body temperature up to 39.5 degrees centigrade). Emergent blood routine test was normal at that time, with blood samples simultaneously collected for hemoculture. The patient’s conditions deteriorated rapidly. Six hours after PNL, her blood pressure decreased to 80/60 mmHg, indicative of septic shock. The body temperature was as high as 41.0 degrees centigrade, and the heart rate was 110 beats per minute. An abnormal blood cytology was noted (WBC 13.97 × 109/L, neurophil percentage 92.4%, lymphocyte percentage 4.6%, monocyte percentage 2.9%, hemoglobin concentration 105 g/L, platelet 43 × 109/L. Primaxin (imipenem and cilastatin, 0.5 g, q6h, i.v.d.) was administered to control the infection. On the 2nd day after PNL, the patient’s conditions deteriorated even further; delirium, irritability and dyspnea appeared. The oxygen saturation decreased sharply to 60% and the patient fell comatose. Intubation and mechanical ventilation were immediately initiated. Five percent sodium bicarbonate (12.5 g) was intravenously administered to correct acidosis. The patient’s blood pressure could not be maintained above 90/60 mmHg by continuously infusing dopamine and metaraminol, use of methylprednisolone (40 mg, q.d., i.v.d., for 7 days) was initiated. On the 3rd day after PNL, her blood WBC count was increased to 24.66 × 109/L (neutrophil percentage 84.3%, lymphocyte percentage 6.7%, monocyte percentage 4.4%) and platelet count decreased to 32 × 109/L. Level of creatinine in blood was elevated to 237.8 μmol/L. During the fourth day after PNL, absence of bilateral deep tendon reflexes was noted, whereupon neurologists were consulted. The Glasgow coma scale score was 7. She had even pupils with normal light reflex. Deep tendon reflexes were absent and pyramidal signs were negtive bilaterally; the Kennedy sign was positive. Since the patient was comatose, we could not examine the muscle strength of her extremities. ECG did not reveal any abnormalities. Laboratory tests showed an elevated serum level of aspartate transaminase (AST) (157 IU/L, normal range: 5–40 IU/L), creatine kinase (CK, 5452 IU/L, normal range: 25–200 IU/L), CK-MB (93.3 IU/L, normal range: 0–25 IU/L), and CK-MM (5393.3 IU/L, normal range: 0–150 IU/L ). Although CIP/CIM were suspected, Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) could not be excluded. IgG antibodies against GM1, GM1b, GD1a, and GalNAc-GD1a in serum, were negative. Considering the patient’s critical situation, electrophysiological investigations and lumbar puncture were not performed though advised. Intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/(kg body weight)/day, i.v.d., for 5 days) was empirically administered. On the 7th day after PNL, a methicillin resistant strain of S. aureus. was identified from her blood cultivation. Treatment combining vancomycin (1000 mg, b.i.d., i.v.d.) and fluconazole (50 mg, q.d., p.o.) was employed.
Two weeks after PNL, the patient turned conscious and partially cooperative to neurological examinations. The proximal motor power of her upper extremities was 1/5 and distal 2/5; the proximal motor power of her lower extremities was 1/5 and distal 2/5. Her muscle tone was reduced symmetrically in the limbs. Sensory tests including light touch, pain and vibration were not affirmatory. Lumbar puncture was performed, showing negative findings in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with regard to cell count (WBC: 1 × 106/L; RBC: 0 × 106/L) and protein level (0.2 g/L). Since the patient was awake and cooperative, electrophysiological studies were performed. Decreased motor nerve action potential, reduced amplitude of the nerve conduction potentials (compound muscle action potential (CMAP)) and absent sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) with preserved conduction velocity were found, which pointed to a diagnosis of axonal motor polyneuropathy and myopathy. Combined with the elevated level of CK-MM in the serum, a diagnosis of CIP/CIM was thus established.
The patient’s blood pressure and body temperature returned to normal 18 days after PNL. Four weeks after PNL, she was weaned from mechanical ventilation when she was wide awake and could breathe spontaneously. Vancomycin and fluconazole were thereafter discontinued. Her muscle weakness gradually recovered. Six weeks after PNL, the patient still remained weak and unable to stand independently. Upon neurological examination, the proximal motor power of her upper extremities was 3/5 and distal 3/5; the proximal motor power of her lower extremities was 4/5 and distal 4/5. Her muscle tone was normal in the limbs. Bilateral deep tendon reflexes and pyramidal signs were absent. A second lumbar puncture was thus performed. The results were still normal. With an adjuvant therapy with vitamins 1 and 12, her muscle strength gradually recoverd in the following weeks and she could walk independently 2 months later.