An 80-year-old man was hospitalized for decompensated HFpEF with New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class IV symptoms at a neighbouring hospital. The patient complained of a loss of appetite and orthopnoea, which started 4 weeks prior to admission. The patient had a history of chronic kidney disease (CKD); permanent AF for >20 years and cerebral infarction leading to hemiparesis; and repeated heart failure (HF) hospitalization, for which he was receiving an oral anticoagulant (warfarin) and diuretics (azosemide, 60 mg/day; spironolactone, 25 mg/day). Despite receiving intravenous dobutamine (3 µg/kg/min), the patient developed anuria and was transferred to our institution on the third day because of a deteriorating HF. His blood pressure was 107/92 mmHg, heart rate was 62 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation was 95% on 3 L/min of oxygen. He appeared ill, and a physical examination revealed a Levine III holo-systolic murmur on auscultation of the apex and pitting oedema on the lower extremities. The blood tests suggested progressive multiple organ failures, including hypoperfusion (elevated serum lactate, 5 mmol/L), acute renal failure (estimated glomerular filtration rate, 21 mL/min/1.73 m2, CKD Stage 4), and hepatic failure (total bilirubin, 2.3 mg/dL; cholinesterase, 145 IU/L). N-terminal prohormone brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was elevated to 1872 pg/dL. Electrocardiography showed AF, and chest radiography revealed bilateral pleural effusion. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a severely enlarged LA (LA dimension, 90 mm; and LA volume index, 444 mL/m2), dilated LV (diastolic/systolic dimension, 59/40 mm; diastolic/systolic indexed volume, 148/57 mL/m2), and preserved LV systolic function [LV ejection fraction (LVEF), 62.1%] (, ). Severe MR with eccentric jet due to a combination of Carpentier Type I [a dilated annulus with a flattened anterior mitral leaflet (AML)] and Type IIIb [hamstringing of a tethered posterior mitral leaflet (PML)] was observed, with a regurgitant volume of 95 mL and an effective regurgitant orifice area of 0.65 cm2 on the flow convergence method. Moderate tricuspid regurgitation was also noted. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed a wide regurgitant jet mainly originating in the A2/P2 segments of the MV. The mitral annulus (MA) was dilated to an anterior–posterior diameter of 45 mm, the MV area was 7.6 cm2, and the mean pressure gradient of trans-mitral flow was 2.0 mmHg. Although both mitral leaflets had sufficient lengths, the AML was flattened along the MA plane, and the PML was tethered towards the posterior LV, thus presenting the asymmetrical tethering angles of the AML and PML to the annular plane (7° and 36°, respectively). A notable coaptation gap was observed between the A2/P2 tips (6.5 mm) . Thus, AFMR was considered the main cause of decompensated HF. Right heart catheterization (RHC) showed an elevated pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) of 22 mmHg, mild pulmonary hypertension with pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) of 45/20/29 mmHg, and a low cardiac index (CI) of 1.5 L/min/m2. Coronary angiogram showed no significant stenosis. Finally, the heart team opted for MitraClip therapy, considering that the estimated Society of Thoracic Surgeons mortality risk of surgical MV replacement was prohibitive at 12.5%, and catheter AF ablation was very unlikely to restore sinus rhythm due to the history of long-standing AF and severe enlargement of the LA.
MitraClip therapy (MitraClip G4 System, Abbott, USA) was performed under general anaesthesia and TEE guidance. An XTW clip was aligned perpendicularly to the middle of the A2/P2 segments; however, it was difficult to grasp both leaflets at a time because of the obvious gap between the AML and the PML . Adenosine-5′-triphosphate was administered intravenously to facilitate grasping, but it failed because the leaflets stopped moving in the open position. After the trajectory of the clip delivery system (CDS) was changed to target the AML, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) was applied by mechanical ventilation. Under 20 cm H2O of PEEP, the coaptation gap decreased to 0 mm, thus enabling the independent grasping of the AML first, followed by PML . The clip was closed, and TEE showed a mild MR and improved pulmonary venous flow from a systolic blunting to a systolic-dominant pattern . The patient was weaned from dobutamine without recurrent signs of multiple organ failure. On RHC 1 week later, CI increased to 2.7 L/min/m2, and PAP and PAWP decreased to 27/8/12 and 15 mmHg, respectively. The patient was discharged on Day 18, and the NT-proBNP value decreased to 1096 pg/mL. Six months after MitraClip therapy, he had not been hospitalized for HF and had remained stable with only NYHA II symptoms.