A 62-year-old man with chronic hepatitis C was referred by his physician to our hospital for surgical treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. Imaging findings on enhanced computed tomography (CT) and dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed two tumors located in segments 5 and 8, respectively . Although the alpha-fetoprotein level was within the reference range, the serum level of prothrombin induced by the absence of vitamin K or antagonist-II was high (530 mAU/ml). After a preoperative evaluation based on a three-dimensional (3D) imaging study, anterior segmentectomy was performed. Each branch of the hepatic artery, portal vein, and biliary duct for the anterior segment were ligated together as the Glissonean bundle (so-called, fully simultaneous transection of the Glissonean pedicle [FSTG]) . Perihilar FSTG involved a transfixation suture by using an absorbable thread. The tumor in segment 8 was in contact with the middle hepatic vein. However, this tumor was well-encapsulated, and the tumor and vein were easily dissectable. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 14.
Three months later, dynamic MRI was performed to check for intrahepatic recurrence, and no imaging findings of recurrence were observed. However, an arterioportal fistula and portal vein aneurysm were incidentally detected . Layers of old and subacute hematomas were clearly observed, and these layers surrounded the aneurysm. Surprisingly, the patient did not have subtle symptoms and showed no episodes of pain, ascites, liver dysfunction, or other abnormalities. We suspected a pseudoaneurysm at that time. Although a perfect angiographic evaluation could not be ensured, IVR was needed to avoid sudden rupture and possible death. Therefore, we decided to attempt IVR after evaluation of the vessels on dynamic CT, and transcatheter arterial embolization was proposed thereafter.
First, angiography via the celiac artery was performed. Arteriography was subsequently used to create a portogram via this APF, and portography clearly revealed hepatofugal flow of the portal vein. Portography also showed that the stump of the anterior portal vein had developed a portal vein aneurysm (PVA) with a diameter of 40 mm . Selective catheterization of the common hepatic artery was then performed. This arteriography clearly demonstrated a fistula between the hepatic artery and portal vein (i.e., APF) at the stump of the anterior branches . Based on these angiography findings, we definitively diagnosed PVA due to an APF, not a pseudoaneurysm.
Next, an adequate length of APF to perform embolic therapy was confirmed to avoid any occlusion and disturbance at the bifurcation of the right hepatic artery . Selective embolization of the anterior hepatic artery was then accomplished by placing several titanium coils in the whole length of the stump of the anterior hepatic artery. Finally, the flow of blood through the APF was drastically reduced . Arteriography via the superior mesenteric artery showed a remarkable restoration of portal venous flow, and hepatopetal portal flow was clearly observed .
Complete closure of the APF could be estimated by additional expansion of the metallic coils over time after IVR. Dynamic CT and 3D images 3 days after embolization clearly demonstrated perfect interruption of the APF and disappearance of the PVA .
Imaging studies and serum biomarkers showed no evidence of recurrence. At the time of this study, the patient was good in health and had been reintegrated into society.