Herein, we present a case of an 83-year-old female patient who presented with acute left upper limb pain, pulselessness, and paraesthesia. The patient had a history of arterial hypertension and was on treatment with 16 mg candesartan per day at the time of admission. Duplex sonography revealed thrombotic occlusion of the axillary and brachial arteries and severely diminished flow both in the ulnar and radial arteries. Electrocardiography exhibited atrial fibrillation with a resting heart rate of 110 b.p.m. Due to the severe symptoms of the patient, staged as Rutherford grade IIB, reperfusion was promptly scheduled and performed. Thus, after puncture of the right common femoral artery, digital subtraction angiography confirmed the occlusion of the distal axillary and brachial artery with slow flow reconstitution in the ulnar and radial arteries . Rotarex® 6F mechanical thrombectomy catheter was performed , which resulted in thrombus resolution in the brachial artery but unfortunately led to relevant peripheral embolization, causing occlusion of both the radial and ulnar arteries . Since (i) catheter aspiration was not possible due to limited catheter lengths and (ii) the diameter of the 6F Rotarex® catheter was considered too large for selective thrombectomy in the radial and ulnar arteries, puncture of the distal radial was attempted to facilitate retrograde thrombus aspiration. Indeed, the distal radial artery could be successfully punctured in the snuff box using the antegrade wire as a marker. After successful puncture, a 0.018″ guidewire and a 5F sheath were inserted into the artery . Subsequently 5F Envoy catheter aspiration was performed , which lead to complete flow restoration in both the radial and ulnar arteries of the patient and to complete resolution of her ischaemic symptoms. Duplex sonography at the next day revealed biphasic flow of the brachial and hyperaemic monophasic flow of the distal radial and ulnar artery.
In addition, echocardiography was performed, demonstrating good systolic left ventricular (LV) function with normal LV (LV end-diastolic diameter = 42 mm, LV ejection fraction = 56%, and LV end-diastolic volume = 101 mL) and increased left atrial diameter (45 mm). Transoesophageal echocardiography excluded the presence of residual thrombus in the left atrial appendix. During the hospital stay, our patient spontaneously converted to sinus rhythm and was discharged without functional deficits 3 days after the index procedure. A combination treatment of rivaroxaban (15 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg/day) for 3 months, followed by rivaroxaban (20 mg/day) thereafter was recommended. After 3 months, the patient remained uneventful without ischaemic symptoms or functional deficits of her hand.