In November 2018, a 30-year-old woman presented to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery of Chonbuk National University Hospital with a complaint of pain and swelling in the left mandible that had appeared 10 days earlier. Eleven years ago, she was diagnosed with CFD and had received bone contouring in the left zygomaticomaxillary complex and left mandibular region under general anesthesia in the same department . Postoperative healing was uneventful and 18 months postoperatively, there was no specific problem with the lesion . The patient had subsequently been lost to follow-up until November 2018.
A review of medical history prior to November 2018 confirmed that she had not received any dental treatment or suffered trauma to the painful left mandible area in recent months. Her pain intensity rating was 4 points on the numeric pain rating scale. Clinical examination revealed slight swelling in the left midface and left submandibular areas, along with bony expansion from the posterior of the left mandibular angle to the inferior aspect of the #34 tooth. The patient did not complain of hypoesthesia or pain when pressure was applied to the area. During an intraoral observation, the swelling was found from the distal aspect of #33 to the mesial vestibule area in relation to #36. During the endodontic examination, tooth mobility and percussion reactions were not observed in #34, 35, and 36. Moreover, the electric pulp test (EPT) showed normal response from #34, 35, and 36. No evidence of gum inflammation, such as periodontal pockets or gingival sulcus swelling and bleeding, was found during the periodontal examination. Furthermore, in the panoramic view, the dental origin with the possible infection source was not observed .
A well-defined multilocular radiolucent lesion in the left posterior mandibular region was identified on the panoramic radiograph, and the location of the lesion overlapped with the existing FD. In addition, amorphous calcified foci were observed inside the lesion .
Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) showed an expansive bone lesion with a ground-glass appearance spanning the left frontotemporal bone, crista galli, orbital wall, ethmoid bone, sphenoid bone, zygoma, pterygoid plate, and maxilla regions . An ill-defined (partially well-defined) irregular osteolytic lesion was observed inside the left mandibular lesion, and cortical thinning, buccolingual expansion, and cortical destruction were also identified .
A decision to perform a marsupialization procedure was made to first control edema and pain, and second to take a biopsy. The marsupialization procedure was performed after an intraoral incisional biopsy of the area surrounding the #34 and #35 teeth, followed by root canal treatments on these teeth. The biopsy results revealed some evidence of chronic inflammation and that the lesion may be a bony lesion with inflammatory reaction rather than FD. During a 3-week observational period, the size of the lesion was unchanged according to clinical and radiological findings . Eventually, we decided that cyst enucleation under general anesthesia should be performed in the mandibular region. However, in the maxilla region, since there was no pain or discomfort, we decided to follow-up without any surgical treatment.
At the time of surgery, the lesion had expanded from the inferior aspect of the #34 tooth to the mesial root of the #36 tooth, with fibrotic tissue scattered within the lesion. Subsequently, the soft tissue lesion was removed by cyst enucleation. The perilesional bone and the roots of the #34, 35 teeth, and the mesial root of the #36 tooth were ground. Electrocautery was applied to the interior of the lesion and a thorough curettage was performed .
The lesions removed by cyst enucleation were sent for tissue biopsy. The largest lesion was approximately 3 × 2 × 1.5 cm and was lined by a thick, fibrotic tissue layer .
Hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stained sections showed dense collagenous tissue surrounding the osseous trabeculae, and peritrabecular clefting was present . Mitosis or atypia was not seen . The biopsy result revealed active nonspecific chronic inflammation with fibrosis.
In view of the radiographical and intraoperative findings, the absence of any history of trauma, a low probability of dental infection being the cause (as per endodontic and periodontal examinations), absence of evidence of malignant transformation (confirmed by histological findings) [–], the researchers confirmed that the case involved non-specific cystic degeneration in the CFD site. Postoperative healing was uneventful , as was the postsurgical follow-up over a 6-month period . Thereafter, the patient was lost to follow-up.