Our patient is a 4-year-old African-American boy born full-term via vaginal delivery, following an uneventful pregnancy, with a birth weight of 2722 grams (9th percentile). He required two weeks in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit for neonatal abstinence syndrome and poor feeding. He was only breastfed a handful of times, and various formulas were tried without success. His difficulties with feeding persisted following discharge, and soon after birth, he developed chronic diarrhea. Throughout his first year of life, he also suffered from multiple respiratory tract infections. His motor development was appropriate while both social and language development were advanced; he was very talkative and interactive. He first presented at two years of age with rectal prolapse. Given his history and presentation, cystic fibrosis was considered (frequency of 1:15,000 in the African American population) , but sweat chloride testing was negative. He went on to develop recurrent rectal prolapse, requiring a surgical reduction at three years old. The cause of the rectal prolapse was likely diarrhea and malnutrition, secondary to his underlying diagnosis .
At three years of age, he was again admitted for emesis and weight loss in the setting of chronic diarrhea and worsening abdominal distention. It was reported that despite his persistent weight loss, he typically had a good appetite. His family denied both generalized protein aversion and episodes of severe illness following protein-rich meals. At the time of presentation, he weighed 13.2 kg (3.2 percentile) and was 93 cm (1.6 percentile) tall. His hair had gradually become straighter and lighter than was typical for him over the preceding year. He had significant hepatomegaly, with a liver span of 18 cm on ultrasound. Laboratory examinations demonstrated mild anemia, hypokalemia and hypoalbuminemia in the setting of transaminitis with a normal ammonia. Radiographs of his femurs and hands bilaterally, in addition to lumbosacral spine and pelvis, all demonstrated osteopenia. An echocardiogram showed mild left atrial enlargement, a small pericardial effusion and respiratory mitral inflow variability, all consistent with constrictive pathophysiology, thought to be secondary to his systemic processes. Congenital disorders of glycosylation were considered, however carbohydrate deficient transferrin levels were only slightly elevated, inconsistent with congenital disorders of glycosylation, though possible in cases of hereditary fructose intolerance. Urine amino acids were significant for elevated lysine and ornithine, though not to the extent expected in lysinuric protein intolerance. He was discharged with a working diagnosis of hereditary fructose intolerance, instructed to follow a fructose-free diet.
Though he had initially improved on the fructose-free diet, after three days, his condition worsened. He developed food aversion and began spiking intermittent fevers. He was readmitted two weeks later with fever, decreased oral intake, weight loss, worsening abdominal distension and pain following an additional episode of rectal prolapse. The 60 most common CFTR mutations were tested at this time and were all negative. Plasma and urine amino acids were collected and the patient was started on empiric citrulline while awaiting results (, ).
Targeted DNA Sequencing looking for SLC7A7 gene variants was ordered, and was negative for any pathogenic mutations. However, deletions, duplications and intronic variants will not be detected by this testing. LPI can be caused by deletion or duplication of SLC7A7 in approximately 15–20% of patients; however, a deletion/duplication assay could not be obtained . Biopsies of the middle and distal esophagus, stomach, duodenum, terminal ileum and ascending and transverse colon were significant only for a focal increase in lamina propria eosinophils in the duodenum. Liver biopsy was significant for moderate to severe steatosis of the parenchyma, focal mild cholestasis, mild inflammatory infiltrate with scattered eosinophils and fibrosis. Both an upper GI series and contrast enema were completed but unrevealing.
Following protein restriction and initiation of citrulline to correct for the intracellular defects of arginine and ornithine, carnitine was also started as levels were found to be low. On this regimen, our patient’s condition improved. His family reports he has had significantly more energy and his hair has begun to darken. Follow-up after 5 months showed a significant improvement regarding his nutritional status. His weight is 17.1 (45th percentile) but his height is still at 1st percentile.