A 65-year-old Indian male complained of progressive blurring of vision in both eyes for three months with right-sided headache and shoulder pain. He has been a moderately controlled diabetic and hypertensive patient for 10 years. At the initial ophthalmologic examination, the corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) was 20/120 in the right eye (RE) and 20/80 in the left eye (LE). The anterior segment examination was normal in both eyes. The dilated fundus examination revealed multiple dot and blot and flame-shaped hemorrhages in all quadrants with macular edema in both eyes [Figure 1]. The working diagnosis at this time was very severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) with DME.[
Spectral domain OCT (SDOCT; Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) in both eyes revealed CME and SMD with a central foveal thickness (CFT) of 527 microns in the RE and 628 microns in the LE [Figure 2]. Fundus fluorescein angiography revealed a normal arm-to-retina time, macular hypofluorescence, no vascular leakages, and few areas of capillary non-perfusion [Figure 3]. Over the following nine months, the patient received three bevacizumab (1.25 mg/0.05 ml) and two triamcinolone acetonide (4 mg/0.1 ml) intravitreal injections in each eye. There was some, though never complete, resolution of the subretinal fluid in both eyes during this period; however, the edema showed no response to the treatment and there was an increase in subretinal hyperreflective foci. The patient was lost to follow-up for four months and returned with a CFT of 953 microns and 1122 microns in the RE and LE, respectively [Figure 4]. After systemic evaluation, the diabetes appeared to be fairly well-controlled. The patient was referred to a hematologist to rule out other underlying systemic pathologies and was diagnosed with multiple myeloma after a detailed evaluation.
The patient was under the care of a hemato-oncologist for about a year during which he did not undergo any ophthalmic treatment. During remission 13 months later, he came to us with the complaint of further decrease in vision-to-hand movements in both eyes. The examination revealed that there was a mature cataract in both eyes for which he underwent phacoemulsification surgery with intraocular lens implantation one month apart for each eye. Post-surgery, the CDVA was 20/80 in the RE and 20/60 in the LE. The fundus examination in both eyes showed multiple dot and blot and flame-shaped hemorrhages with a decreased SMD and hard exudate plaque present at the fovea. The SDOCT of the RE showed vitreomacular adhesion, minimal subretinal fluid, and subfoveal ellipsoid zone (EZ) disruption with a CFT of 340 microns and the LE showed complete resolution of the SMD and EZ disruption with a CFT of 265 microns [Figure 5]. In the last follow-up exam, vision further improved to 20/60 in the RE and 20/30 in the LE, with the fundus picture and SD-OCT findings remaining stable.