A 30 year old right hand dominant male presented to our institution following a pushbike accident . He had suffered a head on collision with another cyclist, both travelling at approximately 30 km/h and was thrown from his bicycle. Examination revealed deformity of the shoulder girdle and abrasion over the posterior aspect of the shoulder. The upper limb was neurovascularly intact. The patient had a past medical history of ankylosing spondylitis and IgA nephropathy. Radiographic examination of the right clavicle demonstrated a displaced midshaft clavicle fracture with a Rockwood Type V acromioclavicular joint dislocation . The injury was confirmed on computed tomography (CT) scan undertaken as part of the routine trauma protocol . Operative management of the injury was recommended and this was undertaken as outpatient treatment five days following the initial injury.
Operative management was performed with the patient placed in beach chair position, with the head inclined approximately 30 degrees. A transverse incision was made over the clavicle and extended laterally over the AC joint. The lateral clavicle was found to be posteriorly translated with complete disruption of the acromioclavicular joint capsule and ligaments, and coracoclavicular ligaments. The fracture fragments were identified and reduced with bone reduction forceps. The reduction was held with a lag screw applied using standard AO techniques. The acromioclavicular joint was then reduced and a precontoured 3.5 mm hook plate (Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA) applied to hold the AC joint reduction. This reduction and fixation was then augmented with a precontoured mid shaft clavicle locking compression plate (Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA) applied to the anterior surface of the clavicle bridging the fracture site. This provided a strong orthogonal construct stabilizing both the clavicle and the AC joint complex. Suture anchor repair of the acromioclavicular ligaments was then undertaken to augment the repair of the AC joint complex .
The post-operative protocol consisted of no loadbearing for six weeks, the use of a broad arm sling for comfort and range of motion exercises as tolerated with the only range restriction being no shoulder abduction past 90 degrees. Hook plate removal was undertaken four months following initially surgery.
At six month follow up the patient demonstrated full range of motion and had no pain. Radiographs demonstrated a united fracture and stable acromioclavicular joint . The patient had an American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons Shoulder Score of 90 (out of 100) at final follow up.