A 35-year-old Caucasian man was evaluated at our facility for neck pain radiating to his left arm and left leg. He had numbness in his left leg and foot, which was accompanied by weakness in the left leg. His pain was intermittent and was worse when he was supine or sitting. The pain was alleviated with walking. Our patient had tried physical therapy and chiropractic care to no avail. He denied loss of bladder or bowel control. He denied any significant past medical and surgical history except for hypertension. His family history was unremarkable except for heart failure and myocardial infarction. He denied the use of alcohol, cigarettes, or recreational drugs. A general review was negative except for occasional headaches, difficulty sleeping, and tiredness. On physical examination our patient exhibited hyperreflexia and intermittent twitching in the lower extremities. He had no footdrop or saddle anesthesia. Motor strength and sensation of his upper and lower extremities were all normal.
Routine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of the cervical spine was performed in the sagittal and axial planes using T1, T2, and short T1-inversion recovery (STIR). MRI without addition of intravenous contrast showed that there was a loss of disc height with right-sided disc herniation at the C5 to C6 level . All other cervical levels were normal without central canal stenosis or neural foraminal stenosis. The cervical cord was posteriorly displaced at the level of the C5 to C6 disc space. The moderately large herniation was prominent in the right paramedian aspect. The cervical cord was of normal signal. There was extension of the herniated disc in the right C6 neural foramen that compromised the exiting nerve root. The results of MRI scans of the brain and the lumbar spine were negative.
An anterior cervical discectomy was performed at the C5 to C6 level and an inter-body graft and plate were placed. The surgery was without complications.
At 12-day follow-up our patient reported no residual pain from the surgery and resolution of left-sided symptoms. He reported resolution of all the symptoms that he had prior to his surgery, including his neck pain. X-ray imaging was completed and showed stable hardware .
Our patient was followed up for two years after his surgery. He was unable to attend the clinic, so instead he was questioned over the telephone about his symptoms. Our patient reported that the neck and left arm pain present before surgery were now completely resolved. He reported some residual left leg pain that was however vastly improved from before the surgery. The weakness in his left leg was also vastly improved compared to before surgery.