A 43-year-old lady presented to cardiology services with progressively worsening shortness of breath in her-follow up visits. Her symptoms started following her laparoscopic cholecystectomy done a year ago complicated by bleeding, necessitating conversion to open surgery. She is a known case of congenital heart disease (cor-triatriatum repair 16 years ago; at the age of 27). She was on regular follow up with cardiology since then. She was doing fine after the congenital cardiac surgery operation. Her last follow-up prior to the laparoscopic surgery showed normal cardiac function, including LV ejection fraction of more than 55 %.
Her symptoms kept worsening despite medical treatment, turning into grade 3 (NYHA) heart failure, with exertional dyspnoea on minimal activity.
On physical examination, her heart rate was 68 bpm, with high blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg despite being on three antihypertensive medications of 100 mg Atenolol, 2.5 mg of Enalapril and 25 mg of Spironolactone all once daily. Cardiac exam revealed a pansystolic murmur. Jugular venous pressure was raised, with positive hepato-jugular reflux.
A 2-dimensional transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a mild to moderate eccentric mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. The right ventricular systolic pressure was elevated at 65-70 mmHg. Right atrial pressure was 20–25 mmHg with no evidence of a residual membrane in the left atrium. Her echocardiogram also revealed an EF to be more than 55 %. Her body-mass index was 21.7. Her laboratory tests, including thyroid function tests, arterial blood gas and renal function tests were normal, except for trace proteinuria (1+). She was eventually diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension.
Cardiac catheterization was done and showed no structural cardiac defect. During the same procedure, angiography showed an arterio-venous fistula between the inferior vena cava and renal artery. She was then referred to our vascular surgery clinic.
We investigated her with a CT Angiography, it showed an arteriovenous fistula between the right renal artery and inferior vena cava (IVC). The fistula was found at 1.5 cm distal to the origin of the right renal artery. The IVC was significantly dilated with early filling (, ). All findings were consistent with a high output heart failure secondary to a renocaval AVF. After explaining the procedure to the patient, an endovascular repair was planned.