A 75-year-old Saudi Arabian man with a known clinical history of diabetes and hypertension presented to the emergency department with a 4-day history of “a painful area of redness” over his right upper abdomen. He denied any other symptoms at the time of presentation. The patient’s past history was remarkable for multiple episodes of colicky, transient, but tolerable upper abdominal pain associated with heavy meals. His past surgical history included bilateral inguinal hernia and hydrocele repair. He denied any relevant drug or family history.
Upon examination, the patient was ambulatory, conscious, and oriented. He looked well, not pale or jaundiced. He was afebrile with stable vital signs. Except for the area of redness over the right upper quadrant, his abdomen was soft, lax, nontender, and nondistended. The right upper abdomen showed a raised area of cellulitis (erythematous, warm to touch, and tender). A review of other systems revealed no significant findings.
Routine laboratory workup showed a slightly elevated white blood cell count of 10.4 × 109/L (4–10 × 109/L), and hypokalemia of 3.1 mmol/L (3.5–5 mmol/L). Liver function test results were within the reference ranges.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple collections involving the anterior right upper abdominal wall with superficial and deep components between the abdominal wall muscles. The superficial component measured approximately 2.0 × 5.0 × 5.0 cm (anteroposterior, transverse, and craniocaudal dimensions), and the deep component measured approximately 1.5 × 5.0 × 8.5 cm . Additionally, an inflamed gallbladder was observed in close proximity to the abdominal wall. We selected a two-staged surgical approach in this patient, with initial surgical drainage of the abscess and antibiotic therapy followed by interval cholecystectomy.
We performed incision and drainage of the abscess under local anesthesia. We drained about 20 mL of purulent content and sent a sample for culture and sensitivity testing, which later came back to be negative (that is, no growth). The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on oral antibiotics. He was pain free and had recovered uneventfully at the first postoperative visit at 2 weeks. However, examination showed an opening at the edge of the wound site with mucoserous discharge. Therefore, the patient was admitted for further evaluation.
We performed fluoroscopy guided fistulography , and observed free passage of the contrast agent into the subcutaneous tissue extending up and down, and a lateral view showed a sinus tract located medially. Plain abdominal CT performed in the same setting revealed accumulation of contrast material in the subcutaneous tissue of the right upper quadrant and a sinus tract filled with contrast and extension to the deep subcutaneous tissue. The contrast material was observed to pass through a small sinus tract and reached the gallbladder fundus and emptied into its lumen. The fundus was attached to the abdominal wall without a cleavage line. The gallbladder was contracted, without accompanying biliary dilatation. We diagnosed the patient with chronic cholecystitis and a communicating CCF and performed laparoscopic cholecystectomy and fistulous tract excision.
Intraoperatively, we performed meticulous dissection to separate adhesions around the fistulous tract until the fistulous tract was clearly visible . The tract was divided near the abdominal wall, Calot’s triangle was exposed, and we placed a drain after successful cholecystectomy. We made an elliptical incision around the site of the external opening, excised the fistulous tract, and performed primary wound closure.
The patient showed an uneventful postoperative recovery. The drain was removed on the second postoperative day, and the patient was discharged. He was followed up 2 and 4 weeks postoperatively and recovered well with complete symptom resolution. Final histopathological evaluation confirmed diagnosis of acute-on-chronic xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis.