A 12-year-old boy, who had no notable medical, family, or psychosocial history, presented with headache and vomiting. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hydrocephalus and a pineal region tumor with a major axis of 34 mm. Serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin were within the normal range. Initially, the tumor was suspected of germinoma; hence, endoscopic biopsy and third ventriculostomy were performed. Although hydrocephalus improved, histological diagnosis could not be obtained.
Combination chemotherapy using carboplatin and etoposide was administered as a diagnostic treatment. However, the tumor had grown 1 month after (maximum diameter, 46 mm) [ and ], for which the patient underwent surgical resection.
Preoperative three-dimensional computed tomography angiography revealed that the right internal cerebral vein (ICV) and the vein of Galen had shifted to the right side, and the left ICV passed through the tumor [-]. The margin between the tumor and the left thalamus (pulvinar) was unclear on MRI. These findings suggested that the tumor arose from the left side within the pineal gland or the left pulvinar thalami. Initial surgery was performed using the left occipital transtentorial approach (OTA) to preserve the ICVs. The lower half of the left side of the tumor was removed [ and ].
Based on the 2007 WHO classification, the tumor was classified as a malignant pineal parenchymal tumor or malignant glioma at our hospital and was diagnosed as a malignant glioma through a central review. Subclassification was difficult because of chemotherapy-induced tissue degeneration.
During the central review, postoperative therapy was initiated with whole-brain irradiation (26 Gy, 2 Gy/fraction) and switched to local irradiation (34 Gy) concomitant with temozolomide (TMZ). However, post treatment MRI revealed tumor regrowth (maximum diameter, 47 mm) [ and ], and surgical removal was again performed using bilateral OTA. The tumor firmly adhered to the bilateral ICVs and was maximally removed, except for these parts. Postoperative MRI showed a removal rate of 90% [ and ]. The patient was discharged 2 weeks after the second surgery without any complications.
One month after discharge, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed high glucose metabolism in the residual tumor , suggesting high tumor activity. Since a total local dose of up to 80–100 Gy was considered a possible option for local control, additional stereotactic irradiation (gross target volume, 14.19 mm3; planning target volume, 17.01 mm3; central dose, 30 Gy; margin dose, 27 Gy; and six fractions) was performed using Novalis® (Brainlab Co., Japan). The equivalent total dose in 2 Gy/fraction to the tumor site reached 97.5 Gy. Maintenance chemotherapy was continued for 2 years with bevacizumab (Bev) along with TMZ.
MRI performed 2 months after the end of chemotherapy (29 months after the first surgery) again revealed an enlargement in the enhanced area . FDG-PET and 11C-methionine (Met) PET did not show any accumulation. Tumor recurrence, radiation necrosis, or combination of both were considered possible. Since radical resection was difficult, Bev monotherapy was chosen; Bev effectively decreased the enhanced lesion. Six years after the initial treatment, the tumor size remained stable , and the patient has not encountered any problem in his student life.
Written informed consent for molecular analyzes and publication was obtained. The sample from the first surgical removal was histologically investigated according to the 2021 WHO classification. Hematoxylin-eosin staining revealed marked proliferation of astrocytic tumor cells with nuclear atypia. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for H3.3 K27M and negative for H3 K27me3 . The Ki67 index was 37%.
The mutations of IDH1/2, H3.3 encoded by H3F3A, and BRAF were screened by the high-resolution melting (HRM) analysis and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The promoter methylation status of O6-methylguanine-DNA- methyltransferase (MGMT) was analyzed by a methylation-sensitive HRM (MSHRM) analysis. In the HRM analysis, IDH1/2 and BRAF were wildtypes, but the mutation of H3F3A was indicated. Sanger sequencing revealed K27M mutation in H3F3A (c.83A>T) , and the MGMT gene promoter was unmethylated . Finally, the patient was diagnosed with DMG, the WHO Grade 4.