The patient was a 52-year-old female who presented an epigastric pain persisting for 6 months. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a small submucosal lesion in the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed an ill-circumscribed lesion with the main focus in the third layer of the duodenum (the submucosal layer, Fig. b). The estimated size was 8 mm. The fourth layer (the layer of the muscularis propria) beneath the lesion was focally thickened, suggesting slight invasion of the muscularis propria. Endoscopic biopsy was performed, and the patient was diagnosed as DuNEN with positive chromogranin A and a Ki-67 index of 3.3% [G2 categorized by the World Health Organization (WHO) 2019 classification , Fig. c–e]. There was a small low-density area in the segment 5 of the liver on contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CE-CT) with unclear significance. Because of the small size and marginal G1/G2 of the primary tumor, we did not emphasize its significance. On multidisciplinary discussion, endoscopic resection was not indicated due to the possible invasion of muscularis propria; pancreaticoduodenectomy was considered to be too invasive a procedure for the small size and tumor location. Hence, we decided to perform a partial duodenectomy. On laparotomy, there were no apparent findings of liver metastasis or peritoneal dissemination. The tumor was located in the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb, and the whole layer resection of the duodenum was performed. The duodenal wall was closed by the Albert–Lembert suture in the transverse direction. Adjacent lymph nodes were dissected (#5, #8a, #12p, and #13 according to the Classification of Pancreatic Carcinoma from Japan Pancreas Society ). The patient recovered well without complications and was discharged on postoperative day 14. Pathological examination of the resected specimens revealed DuNEN with positive chromogranin A and somatostatin receptor type 2 (SSTR2, Fig. a–d). The tumor exhibited an infiltrative pattern extensively involving the muscularis propria . The site of biopsy was observed as an erosion at the very superficial part of the entire lesion. Nuclear staining of Ki-67 was heterogenous across the lesion; relatively higher in the invasive front than in the superficial part near the site of biopsy . Ki-67 index was calculated as 13.5% (G2) in the “hot spot”. Lymph node metastasis was present in 1 of 11 nodes examined [a node in the anterosuperior group along the common hepatic artery (#8a)].
Because the malignant potential was higher than expected on preoperative workup, the hepatic low-density area detected on preoperative CE-CT was elucidated by gadoxetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging and appeared to be a solitary liver metastasis with 8 mm in size . Two months after the initial surgery, the patient underwent a laparoscopic partial hepatectomy of the segment 5. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 14. Pathological examination of the liver specimen showed a metastatic neuroendocrine tumor (NET) with well-differentiated morphology and positive chromogranin A and SSTR2 . Notably, nuclear staining of Ki-67 was much conspicuous in the liver metastasis compared to the primary DuNEN, and the Ki-67 index was calculated as 27.5% (NET-G3, Fig. e).
The patient was observed without adjuvant therapy, but multiple liver metastases appeared 1 year after the hepatectomy . Thereafter, she has been managed by medical treatments with everolimus and lanreotide. She has been alive for 14 months since the hepatectomy.