A forty-six-year-old female was presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a two-month-headache and progressive numbness of her right leg. She also complained of nausea and dizziness 2 weeks before admission. The patient’s medical and family history revealed no significance. On admission, the patient seemed excitable with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 14 (E:4; V:4; M:6); other vital signs were in their normal ranges. In a general examination, no lymphadenopathy or organomegaly was found. A neurological examination revealed numbness in her right lower limb with no motor dysfunction, cranial neuropathy, or signs of increased intracranial pressure. However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain showed multifocal lesions scattered across the left occipital and parietal lobes; the largest one measured 16 mm in its transverse dimension. These lesions demonstrated a hypointense signal on the T1W sequence, a hyperintense signal on FLAIR, and no abnormal diffusion restriction on DWI images . They also revealed rim enhancement following gadolinium contrast injection.
Concern for brain metastases prompted further diagnostic procedures, including thoracic and abdominal contrast CT, lumbar and thoracic spine MRI, endoscopy of the gastrointestinal tract and ENT, but they identified no abnormalities. The patient then underwent a surgical biopsy with two samples resected from the two largest masses in the left occipital lobe. Microscopically, the lesions were composed of small lymphocytes and neoplasm cells with plasma cell morphological features. The immunohistochemical (IMH) test showed tumor cells are positive for CD79a, CD138, CD38, and MUM-1, but negative for CD3 and CD20 . These microscopic and IMH findings were consistent with lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. Quantitative determination of the serum globulin test showed an increase in IgE at 740 IU/mL; other globulin levels were in their normal ranges (IgG 1206 mg/dL, IgM 155 mg/dL, IgA 220 mg/dL, Free Kappa 12.2 mg/L, Free Lambda 12.5 mg/L). Her serum protein electrophoresis and serum immunoelectrophoresis tests identified no monoclonal gammopathy. Bone marrow biopsy and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis detected no cancerous involvement. Pieces of the evidence above confirmed the diagnosis of stage I primary CNS LPL, according to the Arbor-Cotswold staging system for lymphomas.
Since the disease was confined to her brain and she denied every chemotherapy approach, we decided to treat her with whole-brain radiation at a 32 Gy dose (20 fractions of 1,6 Gy per faction). She also received a combination of dexamethasone during radiation therapy. Her headache was relieved after 2 weeks, and the left-foot numbness occasionally only after treatment. Two years after irradiation, clinical examination and imaging workup revealed no neurological deficits or recurrences.