A 76-year-old Asian woman was admitted to the Department of Cardiology owing to transient dizziness and blackouts, which had manifested for 1 year. The patient had undergone mechanical bileaflet heart valve (MTR29LFM, Sorin Biomedica Cardio S.P.A.) replacement 4 years ago owing to massive tricuspid regurgitation. Holter monitoring after admission exhibited persistent atrial fibrillation with long pauses (the longest interval was 4.976s with the symptom of dizziness); furthermore, the 24 h total heartbeat count was 72,767 beats, and the mean heart rate was 50 beats per minute. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed that the metal tricuspid valve was hyperechoic and fixed in position, with no abnormal echo attachment, normal opening of the valve leaflets, as well as the enlargement of the right atrium (RA) (54*59 mm), left atrium (57 mm), and left ventricle (52 mm). The biochemical indicators (e.g., electrolyte and thyroid function) exhibited no significant abnormalities. In addition, the patient had consumed warfarin for a long duration after tricuspid valve replacement. No long-term medication history that affected heart rate was observed.
Based on the preceding results, the patient was diagnosed with transient dizziness and blackout related to long-term persistent atrial fibrillation with long pauses for which ventricular pacemaker implantation was required (I, C) according to the 2018 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline on the evaluation and management of patients with bradycardia and cardiac conduction delay. However, due to the tricuspid mechanical valve, it was impossible to implant lead in the right ventricle, which is the conventional practice. A preoperative chest radiograph of the patient was depicted in . In addition, the patient's family rejected the surgical placement of an epicardial LV lead. Therefore, we first considered the implantation of LV lead through the CS; however, due to the large and abnormal RA, the surgeons could not locate the orifice of the CS after many intraoperative attempts. Meanwhile, to avoid the risk pertaining to the incarcerated metal valve during the searching, we decided to implant LV lead through TSP, after consultation with the patient's relatives. In consideration of the enlargement and variability of the RA, the risk pertaining to the incarcerated metal valve, and the safety of TSP, we decided to puncture the septum using the total three-dimensional (T3D) technique. T3D transseptal puncture based on the CARTO 3 system and the electrographic characteristics of fossa ovalis (FO) enables surgeons to puncture the center of the FO, and the technique has been expertly utilized in the radiofrequency ablation of cardiac tachyarrhythmia . We obtained the femoral venous access, and we utilized the ablation catheter (ThermoCool SmartTouch, Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, California) to create the 3D shell of the RA as well as the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava under the CARTO3 system (Boisense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA). The ablation catheter was sent to the 4 to 5 o'clock position of the superior vena cava; subsequently, it was slowly pulled down at left anterior oblique (LAO) 135° and LAO 45° projections. During the process of descending, when the “jump” appeared and atrial signals decreased to less than 1/3 of the atrial signals, we initially labeled FO and repeated the aforementioned operation 3 times. Based on those points, we moved the catheter up and down and left and right; furthermore, we noted the atrial signals and determined the centre (blue point) of the FO . The electrical amplitude at the central FO was significantly lower than the FO border . The puncture needle could be recognized as a bipolar catheter when its tail was connected to the CARTO by a bipolar clip, and its tip or electric potential became visible during 3D modeling. Under the guidance of CARTO 3, we successfully punctured the center of the FO; the outer sheath was utilized to repeatedly expand the puncture site, and a long guide wire was inserted into the LA as a guideline. The CS lead was adjusted to pass through the FO and mitral valve via the axillary vein, subsequently, maneuvered into the left ventricular free wall (LVFW) through the Tear-away Introducer System (HLS2509M, Merit Medical Systems, Inc., South Jordan, USA) followed by the Left-heart Delivery System (Attain Command + SureValve 6250VIS, Medtronic, Inc. Minneapolis USA) under 3D mapping and an x-ray system . Along the CS lead, a SureValve 6250VIS was placed in the LA and pointed toward the LVFW. The LV lead (3,830, Medtronic, Inc. Minneapolis USA) was placed along the SureValve 6250VIS and rotated into the myocardium . The parameters were as follows: ≥5.6 mV R-wave sensing, ≥10.3 mV current of injury (COI), 0.5 V pacing threshold, and 704 Ω impedance. Finally, the SureValve 6,250 VIS was torn off, the lead was connected to pacemaker, and the wound was stitched. x-ray images were illustrated in . The postoperative pacing parameters did not change significantly; there were no intraoperative or postoperative complications. Postoperative ECG was depicted in .