A 52-year-old woman was admitted to the cardiology department ICU with generalized edema and orthopnea in July 2008. She had no significant medical history and was not taking any medications. An electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 178 beats per minute. A chest X-ray detected pulmonary edema and cardiomegaly. A two-dimensional echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 57%, an enlarged left atrium without thrombi and grade 3 diastolic dysfunction. Diltiazem was used for heart rate control, but amiodarone or dopamine was not used during the hospitalization. Thyroid function tests were ordered as part of the atrial fibrillation evaluation. Serum free T4 level was 0.282 ng/dL (normal, 0.8–1.71 ng/dL), T3 was 0.307 ng/mL (normal, 0.6–1.6 ng/mL), and TSH was < 0.005 μIU/mL (normal, 0.4–4.8 μIU/mL). A physical examination revealed no apparent thyroid associated orbitopathy, but a large asymmetrical goiter, which was easily visible and palpable, was observed. A thyroid ultrasonogram demonstrated a 4.6 × 5.1 × 2.3 cm cystic dominant nodule in the lower portion of the right thyroid lobe and atrophy of the contralateral lobe . Five milliliters of serous, thin fluid was aspirated from the cyst. Aspiration cytopathology of the solid portion of the nodule was consistent with adenomatous goiter. An endocrine consultation was sought to evaluate the possibility of thyroid disease. She was diagnosed with NTI accompanying heart failure and a decision was made not to replace thyroid hormones but to follow-up on the thyroid function testing. Her symptoms resolved after 2 weeks, and she was subsequently discharged with a calcium channel blocker, an angiotensin receptor antagonist, a diuretic and aspirin. Thyroid function tests demonstrated a free T4 level of 0.860 ng/dL, and a TSH level of 0.017 μIU/mL at discharge.
The thyroid function tests were not followed up until February 2012 (42 months) when she consulted the endocrinology department again for follow-up of the thyroid nodule. Her free T4 and T3 levels had increased to 5.30 ng/dL and 4.80 ng/mL, respectively, and TSH was < 0.005 μIU/mL. Anti-thyroid antibodies including anti-TPO antibody, anti-thyroglobulin antibody and TSH-binding inhibitory immunoglobulin were all negative. A follow-up thyroid ultrasonogram revealed an increase in the size of the previously observed nodule in the right lobe to 6.4 × 7.8 × 3.2 cm with contralateral lobe atrophy. A 99m-Technetium-pertechnetate thyroid scan demonstrated heterogeneous uptake in the large nodule of the right thyroid gland with no visibility in the remaining gland, suggesting a functioning toxic nodule . She refused an operation or radioactive iodine therapy; therefore, 10 mg methimazole twice per day was prescribed. Her free T4 and T3 levels normalised (0.873 ng/dL and 0.941 ng/mL, respectively) 2 weeks later, and TSH was 0.009 μIU/mL.