A 90-year-old male was admitted to our hospital for the complaint of lower abdominal pain. The physical examination revealed tenderness in the lower abdomen; however, he had no symptom of peritoneal irritation. He presented with comorbidities of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hyperuricemia. He had no history of surgery and trauma. The laboratory data revealed anemia and low estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (hemoglobin level: 10.3 g/dL; eGFR: 35 mL/min/1.73m2). All the other data were within the normal range. The abdominal contrast-enhance CT indicated a mass with coexisting low- and high-density areas with a maximum diameter of 120 mm adjacent to the stomach and transverse colon (a,b). An extravasation was observed in the mass in the arterial phase, and it spread in the portal phase (c,d). The mass was diagnosed as a mesenteric hematoma. We selected conservative therapy, because the vital signs were stable and the anemia was mild. In addition, there was an improvement in the abdominal pain. On the 2nd day of the admission, the anemia progressed (hemoglobin volume: 9.5 g/dL); therefore, the abdominal contrast-enhance CT was performed again to confirm the findings. It was observed that the density of the mass had decreased; the size of the mass had reduced; and the extravasation was not present. The patient’s hospitalization course was uneventful. He was discharged on the third day after admission due to the improvement of anemia (hemoglobin volume: 11.4 g/dL) and his strong hope. After 7days from discharge, we checked his laboratory data in the outpatients clinic; showed no anemia progress (hemoglobin level: 11.4 g/dL). After 15 days from discharge, he was admitted to the hospital again for the complaint of bloody stool. He had no other complaints, such as fever and abdominal pain. The laboratory data revealed that his white blood cell (WBC) count was within the normal range; but, the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was elevated (18.36 mg/dL); the hemoglobin level was 10.5 g/dL, which was not different from that during the first visit. On the abdominal contrast-enhanced CT, an air-filled mass measuring 90 mm in diameter was observed . We diagnosed it as a mesenteric hematoma with a fistula between the transverse colon. We thought that the etiology, malignancy or not, change operation methods. We decided to perform a colonoscopy on the following day. The colonoscopic findings revealed many ulcers and fistulae with the blood flowing out at the transverse colon at the splenic flexure (a,b). There was no diverticulum. We selected an antibacterial drug therapy before the operation, because he had no other complaints and his vital signs were within the normal range. Subsequently, the patient underwent a laparoscopic transverse colectomy. The mass was confirmed in the mesentery of the transverse colon at the splenic flexure, and it had formed adhesions between the stomach, pancreas, and omentum. We changed the procedure to hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery (HALS) to perform the operation safely (a,b). The total operation time was 248 min, and the total intraoperative blood loss was 268 ml. Macroscopically, the fistula was found between the transverse colon and mesenteric hematoma . Histopathologically, an ulcer was also identified in the wall of the transverse colon. The bottom of the ulcer was connected to the mesentery by an abscess cavity (a-c). There were no findings of mesenteric aneurysm and arterial sclerotic change. Abscess wall was constituted of inflamed granulation tissue with internal bleeding. The patient was diagnosed with a spontaneous mesenteric hematoma that formed a fistula to the transverse colon without any malignancy. The postoperative course was uneventful, and hence, the patient was discharged on the 10th postoperative day.