This study reports on a 4-year-old boy who was born by vaginal delivery on August 7, 2013 (gestational age: 39 weeks; birth weight: 3,354 g; Apgar score: 3/10). Since he had been having respiratory disturbance since birth, oxygen therapy was administered. In addition, he had a swallowing disorder, etc. He underwent a complete physical examination after his admission to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit at Osaka Medical College Hospital, Takatsuki-City, Japan, to investigate the causes of his condition. In regard to brain abnormalities, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the boy's head revealed a thin corpus callosum, fissile brain disease, and polymicrogyria . Examination by MR urography revealed prominent ureteral dilation and hydronephrosis, and stenosis was observed at both the left and right ureteral inlets . In addition, atrial septal defects and milky skin were observed. Dandy-Walker syndrome was considered as a distinguishing malformation syndrome from the brain MRI findings, yet no definitive diagnosis was made. Thus, he was referred to the Department of Medical Genetics at Osaka Women's and Children's Hospital, Izumi-City, Japan. Upon examination, genetic testing results indicated a deletion of the Prader-Willi syndrome/AS (PWS/AS) areas. In combination with the results of methylation analysis, the diagnosis of AS was ultimately reached.
At 1 month after birth, the boy was referred to the Department of Ophthalmology, Osaka Medical College. Upon examination, no pupillary discrepancies in either eye and no obvious relative afferent pupillary defects were observed; however, the direct light reflection almost disappeared, and no visual response was observed. In regard to anterior ocular segment findings, the cornea was clear but slight hypopigmentation was observed in the iris . No abnormalities were found in the crystalline lens. In regard to fundus examination findings, hypopigmentation of the retinal pigment epithelium and the choroid and optic atrophy were observed in both eyes . Although he had been followed up periodically, no significant ophthalmic changes were detected in both optic atrophy and fundus oculi albinoticus with the development of his eyeballs. Now at 4 years old, both eyes have no light reflex and no visual responses, such as visual tracking.