A 51-year-old Caucasian man with a four-year history of left hand pain, dysesthesia and weakness that progressed over the subsequent year to involve the left upper extremity presented to our clinic. He was initially diagnosed with Raynaud’s disease and treated with nifedipine. His pain continued to worsen and later progressed to involve bilateral upper extremities all the way up to the elbows. Over the subsequent two to three years he developed progressive right upper extremity as well as bilateral lower extremity weakness. Neurologic examination revealed quadriparesis and impaired sensation to all modalities over bilateral upper extremities up to the elbows and bilateral lower extremities up to a few inches below the waistline.
He underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and cervical spine which showed a 2.7 × 1.1 × 1.5cm avidly enhancing intramedullary lesion at C2-C4 with a cervical cord syrinx, marked cord edema and expansion, extending from the medulla through T3. He was taken to the operating room and an attempt at surgical resection was unsuccessful due to the lack of a defined surgical plane and the high vascularity of the tumor mass. A biopsy was performed which confirmed the diagnosis of hemangioblastoma. The syrinx was not entered or drained during this procedure. The patient refused testing for von Hippel-Lindau disease but no other hemangioblastomas were seen on whole neuraxis scanning and fundoscopic examination. Postoperatively he continued to deteriorate to the extent that he became wheelchair bound. Oral dexamethasone (16mg daily) was initiated approximately one week postoperatively because of increasing arm weakness and he showed minimal improvement. The improvement was short-lived and dexamethasone was subsequently tapered over the ensuing two to three weeks.
Bevacizumab was started after obtaining appropriate informed consent. The patient was given a 10mg/kg infusion every two weeks (initially for two cycles) and an MRI of the cervical spine was obtained. The MRI revealed significant improvement in the T2 signal change surrounding the enhancing component and a decrease in the size of enhancing disease from 2.7 × 1.0 × 1.5cm to 2.2 × 1.0 × 1.5cm . His arm strength improved from 3/5 to 4/5 bilaterally but he was receiving rehabilitation treatment during that time. He remained wheelchair bound with 2/5 strength in both lower extremities. Four additional cycles of bevacizumab were given (to a total of six cycles) and a repeat MRI showed a further decrease in tumor dimensions, now measuring 2.0 × 0.8 × 1.5cm . He subsequently developed arthralgia and elected to stop bevacizumab treatment but he had already started taking a few steps with assistance. Bevacizumab was restarted after several months and he showed slow clinical improvement. Currently, he is able to ambulate about 200 feet with minimal assistance after two years of bevacizumab treatment.