A female patient in her seventies had been suffering from POP for the past 2 years. She visited our department with a complaint of lower urinary tract symptoms, mainly poor urinary stream. Pelvic examination revealed stage IV POP (cystocele) on the POP-Q system. Her medical history revealed hypertension and diabetes mellitus. She had three vaginal deliveries with no history of abdominal surgery. She was not sexually active. Vaginal pessary treatment was attempted, but it failed to retain and fell out every time. We recommended surgical repair for POP, and she decided to undergo RSC.
We performed RSC (DaVinci Xi surgical system; Intuitive Surgical, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and supracervical hysterectomy. We secured the mesh (ORIHIME™; CROWNJUN Co, Chiba, Japan) to the sacrum and closed the peritoneum using a running absorbable 3-0 V-Loc™ (Covidien™, Mansfield, MA, USA). The console time was 123 min with minimal bleeding. The patient had vomiting and abdominal distension on postoperative Day 4. She was diagnosed with postoperative intestinal obstruction based on an abdominal X-ray . A computed tomography scan revealed a small intestinal obstruction in the lower right abdomen . Conservative treatment with an ileus tube failed to improve the condition. The diagnostic laparoscopy was performed on postoperative Day 14. Laparoscopic examination revealed the entanglement of the tail of V-Loc™ with the small intestinal mesentery . The tail of V-Loc™ was laparoscopically detached from the mesentery without damaging the small intestine. Furthermore, the V-Loc™ was adhered to fatty appendices of the sigmoid colon . That part was also detached to avoid an internal hernia. The tail of the V-Loc™ was trimmed, and an antiadhesive material (INTERCEED®; Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA) was applied to the peritoneal closure line and the trimmed tail of V-Loc™ . On postoperative Day 1, the ileus tube was removed and the patient was allowed to drink water. She was discharged from the hospital on postoperative Day 3.