A 29-year-old man presented with hyperglycemia detected during a medical checkup. He was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes based on the clinical findings and laboratory tests. During the diagnostic process for diabetes, a 2.5-cm mass was incidentally detected at the body and tail of the pancreas by abdominal ultrasound. He had no symptoms or dermal lesions, and his abdomen was soft with no evidence of a palpable mass. There was no past or family history of neurofibromatoses. Tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9) were within normal ranges.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass at the body and tail of the pancreas. The mass was gradually enhanced, and the tumor border was clearly demonstrated . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed low signal intensity of the mass on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted images . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed no abnormal findings in the main pancreatic duct . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a lobulated, low-echoic mass with a clear boundary . EUS-guided fine needle biopsy was performed, and spindle-shaped cells that were strongly immunopositive for S-100 and negative for c-kit and desmin were detected. The Ki-67 positivity rate was less than 5%. According to these findings, we diagnosed the mass as a neurogenic tumor, particularly schwannoma arising from intra- or extrapancreatic nerve fibers.
It was unclear whether the location of the tumor was inside or outside the pancreas, and it seemed difficult to divide the tumor from the parenchyma of the pancreas, so we planned a laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy instead of tumor excision. Intraoperatively, the tumor was observed at the body and tail of the pancreas and was tightly connected to the splenic plexus . The tumor could be easily dissected from the adventitia of the splenic artery. Therefore, we ultimately performed laparoscopic spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy with conservation of the splenic artery and vein.
Macroscopically, the excised tumor was 3.2 × 1.5 cm in size and consisted of multiple yellowish-white nodules surrounded by a thin fibrous capsule . Microscopically, the lesion mainly consisted of hypercellular areas composed of fascicular and interlacing proliferation of spindle cells with indistinct cytoplasmic borders (Antoni A areas). In these areas, the cell nuclei were aligned in palisades with the formation of Verocay bodies. Hypocellular areas with loose stroma (Antoni B areas) were also occasionally observed, while mitosis was rarely seen . These findings confirmed a diagnosis of plexiform schwannoma. There was no pancreatic parenchyma on the dorsal surface of the tumor , which suggested that the tumor arose from the peripancreatic nerve plexus.
After surgery, the patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on postoperative day 10. The patient was followed for 34 months and continued to do well without any signs of recurrence or complications at the last follow-up.