A 6-year-old Ethiopian boy was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit of the Black Lion Specialized Hospital with medulloblastoma and hydrocephalus. He was the first child in his family and came from low socioeconomic status. No history of birth defect, head injury, trauma, central nervous system infections, malignancy and related conditions, except that a year prior, he had been admitted in the private hospital intensive care unit, for more than a month; a ventriculoperitoneal shunt was placed for treating hydrocephalus but there was no recorded history of infections and complications. He presented in our hospital with high-grade global type of headache, poor appetite, nausea, vomiting, tiredness, decreased vision, and drowsiness. These are typical signs and symptoms for medulloblastoma. However, at admission he had no fever, cough, or chest pain. He was also conscious, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15/15, with no motor deficit or sensory disorder. On admission, his blood pressure (BP) was 140/85 mmHg, with a regular heartbeat of 60 beats per minute, heart sounds were clearly auscultated with no murmur, there was no murmur of mitral insufficiency or ventricular defect, no signs of heart failure, and he was without edema of his lower limbs. His peripheral pulses were perceived symmetrically. The rest of the physical examination was also normal.
On admission, a brain computed tomography (CT) scan and brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) was performed and indicated the presence of medulloblastoma (a mass that was involved the posterior fossa, Fig. ). An immediate craniotomy procedure was performed for the removal of the mass. A biopsy was also performed and revealed no malignancy or spread of brain tumor. The radiologist and neurologist team suggested that no further treatment was needed, radiotherapy or chemotherapy. However, following the craniotomy procedure, the neurological findings progressively deteriorated. This showed he had developed obstructive hydrocephalus as he presented with gait disturbance, low attention, seizure, and uncontrolled body movement with an elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). To restore this CSF circulation within both lateral ventricles, a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt was placed. However, his mental status could not be improved. Thus, on the 4th day, the VP shunt was replaced with external ventricular drainage (EVD) which was undertaken to control the elevated ICP because of hydrocephalus.
On the 6th of the surgery, he became comatose with a GCS score of 7/15 and hemiparesis. He needed nasogastric tube (NGT) feeding for nutrition. Meanwhile, he presented with high-grade fever (39.8 °C), severe headache, vomiting, lethargy, and deteriorating consciousness. The CSF examination revealed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count of 21.0 (109) cells/L), reduced blood sugar (29 mg/dL), and elevated protein level (219 mg/dL).
A blood culture specimen was drawn from his CSF. Awaiting the culture results, an empiric antibiotic therapy was initiated with an intravenous dose of vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam. However, he did not respond to this regimen. The second (a day after) CSF result showed that a glucose concentration of 32 mg/dL, a protein level of 260 mg/dL, and a WBC cell count of 20.0 (109) cells/L). The gram staining of the CSF had also shown no organisms. Seven days after surgery, blood culture revealed no growth.
However, the clinical condition of the patient still did not improve. The vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam regimen was changed to cefepime and gentamycin for 7 days. Later, those regimens were also switched to intravenous ciprofloxacin and metronidazole. Despite taking these medications; his fever still persisted and a poor clinical response was observed. Thus, the CSF analysis was repeated on the 18th day of illness and revealed a glucose concentration of 21 mg/dL, a protein level of 200 mg/dL, and a total WBC cell count of 24.0 (109) cells/L). The CSF smear for Gram statin did not reveal any bacteria. However, the patient still had fever; low consciousness level, a low glucose level, and an elevated protein level were noted.
On the 25th day of admission, along with the ventriculoperitoneal shunt infection the MRI showed evidence for ventriculitis, including intraventricular debris in the ventricles on diffusion-weighted imaging and abnormal periventricular intensities on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging . Examination of his CSF revealed a persistent elevation of his white blood cell count and reduction in glucose level. This was confirmed with one CSF culture along with a positive Gram stain, which was generated by A. baumannii. Although the shunt system was removed immediately and antibiotic treatment was initiated, the infection persisted despite intravenous administration of antibiotics including vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime with gentamycin, followed by ciprofloxacin with metronidazole. The bacteria was resistant to all the antibiotics examined in the laboratory by disk diffusion susceptibility test, including β-lactamase inhibitor penicillins, carbapenems, cephalosporins, fluoroquinolones, and aminoglycosides. However, sensitivity to colistin, aztreonam and tigecycline was not tested because of it was unavailable in our hospital.
Later, with the organism identified; the intravenous antibiotic therapy was continued with ampicillin-sulbactam 1.3 g every 6 h. For CSF isolates of A. baumannii, the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of ampicillin-sulbactam was 4 μg/mL (details of each antibiotic MIC is stated in Additional file : Tables S1 and S2). Our patient’s fever begun to subside and he became afebrile on the 3rd day of the systemic therapy with ampicillin-sulbactam. The CSF culture was performed and was negative on the 10th day of this systemic therapy, and the CSF cell count had reduced to 15.0 (109) cells/L). On the 14th day of the therapy with ampicillin-sulbactam, the CSF culture was completely sterile, the CSF cell count had also dropped to 9.0 (109) cells/L), and the therapy was discontinued. The gradual improvement and clinical outcome of our patient was noted. Our patient’s level of consciousness rapidly improved. The overall condition of the child was improved oddly and progressively, he began to feed orally and became more collaborative. Three consecutive blood culture analyses were performed and revealed no microbial growth all over. Indicating that the infection had gradually subsided and had been cured.
Furthermore, no complications or side effects were witnessed during the treatment. The clinical status of our patient was progressively and remarkably improved. Meantime, after a month the surgical team had diverted the EVD to the left side. Finally, our patient was discharged from the hospital in a stable and good condition. Our patient has been followed up for 2 months after being discharged from the pediatric ward as ambulatory. We found no evidence of recurrence of infection or any neurological defects or malfunction had occurred as of 6 months postoperatively . The patient is now able to walk without mobility aids, eat meals by himself, and live independently at home.