A 31 year-old woman presented to clinic complaining of visual loss in the right eye and hearing loss. She had a past medical history of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and was taking levothyroxine 75 mg/day at the time of first visit. The cerebrospinal fluid exam showed lymphocytic pleocytosis (88 cells/mm3 and a total protein of 78 mg/dl) without oligoclonal bands. Brain MRI demonstrated hyperintense signal in the corpus callosum and multiple periventricular black holes which are respectively consistent with corpus callosum thinning and periventricular white mass microinfarctions .
On ocular examination, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/60 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. There were no anterior segment abnormalities, anterior chamber reaction, vitritis or impaired pupillary light reflex in both eyes. Color fundus photograph (TRC50DX, Topcon, Japan) of the right eye revealed a superior temporal arteriolar narrowing within macular area and was unremarkable in the left eye . FA (HRA, Heidelberg Engineering, Germany) showed BRAO in the superior temporal macula of the right eye and vascular leakage in the temporal peripheral retina of the left eye . B-Scan OCT (Spectral-domain OCT Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering, Germany and DRI Swept Source OCT Triton, Topcon, Japan) demonstrated inner retinal thinning on the temporal side of the macula in both eyes . This temporal retinal thinning was more pronounced in the right eye. OCTA (Spectral-domain OCT RTVue-XR Avanti, Optovue, United States and DRI Swept Source OCT Triton, Topcon, Japan) revealed vascular hypoperfusion within the macular area in both superficial and deep capillary retinal plexuses . The area of OCTA vascular hypoperfusion corresponded to the topography of BRAO seen on FA in the right eye. The OCTA segmentations in the outer retina and choriocapillaris were unremarkable in both eyes.
The functional tests VF (SITA strategy, stimulus III White, Humphrey HFA II 750, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Germany) and MP (MP-3, Nidek Technologies, Italy) showed visual function loss in both eyes . VF demonstrated nasal, central and paracentral decreased sensitivity in the right eye, and solely peripheral nasal decreased sensitivity in the left eye. MP depicted decreased sensitivity in the upper, inferior and temporal macula in the right eye, and decreased sensitivity in the temporal macula in the left eye. These low VF and MP sensitivity signals corresponded to the decreased vascular perfusion seen on the OCTA density map .
The patient was treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy intravenously 1000 mg/day for 3 days, and the BCVA improved to 20/40 in the right eye at 1-month follow-up. A decrease in the left eye visual acuity (from 20/20 to 20/40) was noted at 6-month follow-up. Although fundus color photograph did not reveal any change in comparison with the baseline fundus exam , a vascular leakage was observed in the retinal periphery of the left eye . In the right eye, at baseline, the vascular density index was 38.85 and 36.61% in the superficial and deep capillary plexuses, respectively. At 6-month follow up visit it was 40.14 and 41.78% in superficial and deep capillary plexuses respectively. In the left eye, at baseline, the vascular density index was 40.71 and 50.15% in the superficial and deep capillary plexuses, respectively. At 6-month follow up visit, it was 47.67% in superficial and 50.7% in the superficial and deep capillary plexuses, respectively. .
A new course of methylprednisolone pulse therapy followed by oral prednisone (20 mg q24 h) and azathioprine (50 mg q12 h) was initiated. Following this treatment, the patient became asymptomatic and the BCVA returned to 20/20 in both eyes.