A healthy, 28-year-old Caucasian woman in her first pregnancy (gravida 1, parity 0) with grade one placenta previa presented 2 weeks past her expected date of delivery (at 39+2/40) for elective Caesarean section. She had had no pre-operative treatment for her condition and Caesarean section was carried out under spinal anaesthesia (2.7ml 0.5% bupivicaine with 300mcg; L3-L4 intervertebral space). There were no operative complications and there was minimal maternal blood loss. The total operating time was 11 minutes and a healthy baby boy weighing 3.1kg was delivered.
Postoperatively, the patient initially recovered well, although she required paracetamol (1g 4 × daily), diclofenac (50mg 3 × daily) and dihydrocodeine (60mg 4 × daily) regularly for analgesia. On postoperative day (POD) 1, she reported abdominal distension and absolute constipation but no abdominal pain, and she was treated with lactulose. She developed shoulder-tip pain in the early hours of POD 2 which developed into colicky, central abdominal pain although she had passed flatus and had no vomiting. Physical examination revealed soft, abdominal distension with right-sided abdominal tenderness and no clinical evidence of peritonitis. Plain radiographs revealed widespread colonic dilatation with no free air and a provisional diagnosis of acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (OS) was made.
Conservative management which comprised nasogastric tube insertion, intravenous fluids and analgesia was instituted. Over POD 2, the patient's condition did not improve and two 2mg doses of intravenous neostigmine were given prior to attempted colonoscopic decompression. A rectal tube was inserted after colonoscopic decompression, although the patient did not have any symptomatic benefit. Despite these interventions, her condition deteriorated and her right-iliac fossa pain worsened. Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed widespread colonic dilatation and a maximum caecal diameter of 8cm .
The patient proceeded to emergency laparotomy where a significantly distended colon with caecal perforation and evidence of caecal ischaemia was found. There was no evidence of mechanical obstruction. A right hemicolectomy was performed with primary two-layer seromuscular anastomosis. Postoperative recovery was unremarkable.