We present the case of a 30-year-old woman with a history of an unexplained neurological event 2 weeks after the normal vaginal delivery of her 2nd child. She lost power in her right arm whilst hovering. She was assessed at a local hospital, by which time her weakness had resolved and her symptoms were attributed to post-delivery pain medication. She did not have any imaging or an echo at this time. She had no other relevant past medical history. Following the normal vaginal delivery of her 3rd child, 3 years after this event, she described exertional dyspnoea (NYHA Class II). On examination, she had a resting sinus tachycardia and a soft systolic murmur with no further relevant examination findings. An electrocardiogram performed showed left ventricular hypertrophy . Echocardiography performed 2 weeks post-partum demonstrated a dilated and severely impaired left ventricle (LV) with ejection fraction of 20% , moderate functional mitral regurgitation, and mild tricuspid regurgitation. The study was performed by a senior echocardiographer who mentioned ‘prominent left ventricular trabeculations’ on the study report but did not quantify this (ratio of non-trabeculated to trabeculated myocardium) or further assess with intravenous echocardiographic contrast.
Echocardiographic findings were felt consistent with PPCM due to the temporal relationship with delivery and she was commenced on conventional left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) medications (angiotensin-converting enzyme-inhibitor, beta-blocker), Bromocriptine (standard regime of 2.5 mg bd for 2 weeks followed by 2.5 mg od for 6 weeks, to augment LV recovery in PPCM by cleaving implicated 16 kDa prolactin), and anticoagulated (given previous unexplained neurological event concerning for a transient ischaemic attack). Relevant cardiomyopathy screening blood tests (thyroid function, ferritin, full blood count, C-reactive protein, autoimmune screen) were unremarkable. Bromocriptine was given according to the 2018 ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines. As breastfeeding is contraindicated with this drug, our patient did not breastfeed.
She underwent cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) at 1.5T field strength 6 months later, which confirmed a mildly dilated left venrticular end diastolic volume (LVEDV) 177 mL [reference <175mL], LVEDVI 97 mL/m2 [reference <96], left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 52% [reference >57], and mildly impaired LV with hypertrabeculation at the apical, mid-anterolateral and mid-inferior segments, and papillary muscles. The right ventricle (RV) was of normal size and systolic function. There was mildly increased tricuspid valve-mitral valve offset (11 mm/m2) consistent with the known phenomenon of associated Ebstein’s anomaly . Due to the LV dilatation and volume overload, the basal diameter of the ventricle was enlarged on the four-chamber view, reducing the end-diastolic offset between the tricuspid and mitral valves to 12.7 mm (6.9 mm/m2), making it challenging to appreciate in echocardiography . There was no significant valve dysfunction, no infarction, no significant scarring or fibrosis, and no left ventricular thrombus . Findings were keeping with LVNC, meeting the most commonly used Petersen CMR criteria (end-diastolic non-compacted to compacted ratio of >2.3 in long-axis imaging) ( and ). Due to the LV dilatation and volume overload, the basal diameter of the ventricle was enlarged on the four-chamber view, reducing the end-diastolic offset between the tricuspid and mitral valves to 12.7 mm, making it challenging to appreciate the increased offset .
Repeat CMR 12 months later confirmed persistent myocardial and papillary muscle hypertrabeculation and mild global LVSD (LVEDV 170 mL, LVEDVI 98 mL/mL, LVEF 49%). Native (pre-contrast) LV T1 times were mildly elevated confirming the presence of subtle diffuse myocardial fibrosis. The conclusion was that the PPCM was due to decompensation of occult and previously undiagnosed and asymptomatic LVNC. Although systolic function improved compared with the episode of PPCM, it remained mildly impaired long term.
She is currently asymptomatic on supportive conventional LVSD/heart failure treatment and long-term anticoagulation. She was last seen in November 2020 for her annual CMR and clinical follow-up. She and her family have been referred to an inheritable cardiac conditions clinic for genetic and family screening for LVNC.