A 48-year-old woman was hospitalized due to severe pain in the lumbosacral region, hydronephrosis of the left kidney with dilation of the left ureter (abdominal part) caused by outside infiltration (CT and MRI were performed). During her stay at the urology ward, she had fever, increased CRP (C-reactive protein) (161 mg/l) and PCT (procalcitonin) (0,1 ug/ml). Both urine and blood culture examination were carried out and the results came back negative four times. Despite that, owing to the high CRP level, she was empirically treated with antibiotics, without any outcome. Blood pressure was normal. Renal parameters were gradually increasing but the function of the kidneys was preserved. The patient underwent gastroscopy, colonoscopy and non-contrast abdominal CT and some fluid in pleural, pericardial and abdominal cavity were found. Moreover, the CT revealed a large tumour (dimensions 34x27x51 mm with 5 mm calcification) possibly infiltrating the left internal obturator and iliopsoas muscle (as showed in ). The size and location of the tumour, together with ROMA (the Risk of Ovarian Malignancy Algorithm, using CA125 and HE4 concentration in patient’s serum) score of 96,7%, raised the suspicion of disseminated ovarian cancer and inclined the need for gynaecological consultation. Small erythrocyturia revealed in urinalysis was firstly associated with cancerous infiltration of the urinary tract.
Nephrostomy of the left kidney was performed with no urine outflow. Due to the lack of diuresis, primary renal diseases, rather than obstruction of the ureter, were investigated and, after a nephrological consultation, additional laboratory tests, such as MPO-ANCA and PR3-ANCA, were carried out. Due to acute kidney injury (increasing renal parameters: creatinine 5,99 mg/dl, urea 87 mg/dl), the patient was transferred to the Nephrology Clinic, where a haemodialysis catheter was placed. After haemodialysis, patient’s general state improved but kidney function wasn’t retrieved. Meanwhile, the patient underwent diagnostic laparoscopy with removal of left uterine appendages. Due to the size of the tumour, it came as a surprise that the peritoneum was intact and with no signs of infiltration.
The results of the laboratory tests came back three days after the surgery and both MPO and PR3-ANCA were found (32 IU/ml and> 200 IU/ml respectively), giving the diagnosis of vasculitis, suggesting GPA. Histopathological examination revealed the involvement of small vessels with necrotizing and granulomatous inflammatory infiltrate predominantly composed of neutrophils as well as lymphocytes and eosinophils and chronic purulent inflammation of the connective tissue surrounding iliac arteries and left ureter, inflammatory tumour of the left ovary with no sign on neoplasm within the uterine appendages, which confirmed the diagnosis of GPA.
Later, the patient complained of recurrent nasal bleeding and laryngological consultation was made. Nasal ulcer was found and then biopsy was performed. Histopathological examination’s result, combined with clinical symptoms revealed the progression of GPA. The patient was treated with 100mg/d oral cyclophosphamide and 3 x 1.0 g intravenous methyloprednisone, followed by 40 mg/d oral prednisone. Due to hepatitis B in the past and unknown current level of viral DNA in serum, the patient was disqualified from rituximab treatment. Despite general state’s improvement, renal function wasn’t retrieved. The patient was haemodialyzed 3 times a week and treated with immunosuppressive drugs as above.
The patient was re-hospitalised due to anaemia (4,3 g/dl), haemoptysis and purpura on both lower legs. CT revealed diffuse alveolar haemorrhage ( and ). She was given a high dose of cyclophosphamide and overwent seven plasmapheresis complicated by transient leukopenia treated with granulocyte colony stimulating agent (G-CSF). After the treatment, the patient was discharged from hospital in general good condition. After a year of haemodialysis, the patient successfully underwent a kidney transplant.