A 69-year-old male presented to our hospital complaining of abdominal distension and discomfort for 3 years, worsening for 1 week. His medical history included chronic appendicitis and he had undergone an appendectomy 2 years ago. Recently, there was no significant change in weight. One week ago, the patient felt a marked increase in abdominal distension and pain, mainly in the upper and middle abdomen, and presented to our hospital. The results of the examination were as follows: normal vital signs, fecal occult blood test (++), ALB: 33.05 g/L, Hb: 96 g/L and HCG-β: 66.12 mIU/ml. Liver and kidney function, electrolytes and blood glucose were normal. Abdominal Doppler ultrasound showed a solid mass in the upper abdomen, which was suspected to be gastric cancer . Gastroscopy revealed chronic atrophic gastritis stage C1 (C1: indicates atrophic gastritis involving the gastric sinus region) . Pathological examination of the specimen taken under gastroscopy revealed high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia in the (sinus) mucosal glands . Tumour marker examination showed normal tumour series CEA, AFP and CA199 except CA72-4: 10.07 U/ml (0–6 U/ml). MRI of the abdomen showed that the gastric sinus was occupied, with the main lesion located outside the gastric wall . Biopsy consultation at another hospital showed a moderate chronic mucosal inflammation with mild intestinal metaplasia. Considering the patient's current relevant investigations and findings, we considered a gastric occupying lesion (suspected mesenchymal tumour). The patient was stable and had clear indications for surgery. We therefore performed a laparoscopic-assisted distal gastrectomy and a Billroth type 1 anastomosis. The postoperative gross specimen showed a mass measuring approximately 9 cm × 7 cm × 6 cm, which was reddish-grey in section, suggestive of solid soft tissue . Pathology of the postoperative specimen showed PGC cancerous tissue invading the entire gastric wall (T4aN0M0). Metastases were found only in the vascular system and no other system had been identified. No tumour was found at either side of the resection margins. Microscopic examination showed marked tumour heterogeneity with visible cancerous areas, tumour cells of variable size, ovoid or polygonal in shape, with clear, lightly stained or granular cytoplasm, a single vacuolated nucleus with a distinct nucleolus, many nuclear fission signs, some cells could appear multinucleated, with abundant cytoplasm and large nuclear heterogeneity. The cells are of cytotrophoblastic and syncytial trophoblastic origin and are devoid of villous structures . Immunohistochemistry showed CD10 (+) , ck8/18 (+) , CK19 (+) , CKP (+) and a Ki-67 labelling index of 60% (+) . Histochemical staining showed PAS (+) , while immunohistochemistry showed positive for HCG antibodies . A postoperative blood HCG-β (β-human chorionic gonadotropin) test was performed at 66.12 mIU/ml, followed by cranial MRI and chest and abdominal CT, which showed no signs of distant metastases. The diagnosis of PGC was now almost clear. The patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day and was followed up until June 2022, with good recovery and no recurrence.