A 43-year-old Asian male presented to the emergency department (ED) with left side eye pain and increased lacrimation associated with blurred vision for three days. He also reported a subjective fever since the onset of eye problems, but he denied any respiratory symptoms. He has no significant past medical history, no history of allergy. The patient denied any trauma history and no previous history of a similar incident.
During his stay in the ED, the patient developed one spike of high-grade fever (oral temperature = 38.5C). On examination, the left eye showed profuse clear fluid lacrimation, and there is hyperemia in the inferior nasal quadrant of the left eye. Examination of other systems was unremarkable.
The ophthalmology team was consulted, and comprehensive eyes examination, including slit-lamp and fundoscopy, was performed. Corneal examination showed one central and four paracentral pinpoint scars in the Oculus Sinister (OS). Intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. Visual acuity was discordant between two eyes with OS 6/18 and normal acuity of Oculus Dextrus (OD).
The patient mentioned that three of his roommates have been complaining of flu-like illness lately. Initial laboratory results were unremarkable, apart from elevated C-reactive protein (50.5 mg/L) and Ferritin (658 μg/L). Given the documented fever and positive history of contact with sick people, a Nasopharyngeal swab for COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was sent, which came positive with (CT value of 26.18).
On day two of the hospital stay, the patient started to complain of a productive cough. Chest x-ray was repeated (The first one done in ED was normal) and showed new bilateral lower chest zones infiltrate . Accordingly, the patient was transferred to a quarantine facility and started on treatment as per national protocol. He was started on an antibiotic, hydroxychloroquine, and lopinavir/ritonavir. Three days post-admission, the patient started to improve in terms of eye pain and secretions.
A swab was taken from the eyes for COVID-19 PCR which came back negative (sample was taken four days after the nasopharyngeal swab).
The patient was discharged from the quarantine facility on day 10 of the hospital stay.
On day 10, after discharge from the quarantine facility, the patient presented to ED due to bilateral orbital pain associated with blurring of vision. He was examined by an ophthalmologist, found to have reduced vision acuity bilateral. Intraocular pressure was high in both eyes; he was diagnosed with closed-angle glaucoma and started on acetazolamide. Currently, the patient is following in the ophthalmology clinic.