A 49 year-old female patient visited our outpatient department on March 11, 2019, and presented with dull abdominal and back pain, discomfort after eating, fatigue, and a recent weight loss of 5 kg. These symptoms lasted for about two months and were not relieved. Clinical examination was normal. Besides, there was no relevant tumor or family medical history. Blood routine test showed moderate anemia: low red blood cell count (3.21 × 109/L; normal 3.80–5.10 × 109/L), low hemoglobin level (70.0 g/L; normal 115.0–150.0 g/L). However, markedly increased carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (941.60 ng/mL; normal 0–5.00 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125 (271.60 U/mL; normal 0–20.00 U/mL) levels were detected. Computer tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a huge PC with the right liver metastasis .
After preliminary evaluation by our department, surgery could not be performed for this patient due to the huge volume of tumor, liver metastasis, invasion of gastroduodenal artery (GDA), superior mesenteric artery (SMA), superior mesenteric vein (SMV), and anterior wall of portal vein (PV).
Subsequently, an MDT treatment was employed. The imaging department, interventional department, and oncology department were invited for a discussion and development of a detailed therapeutic plan.
First, a genetic test for the patient was performed. The result showed that there was no somatic and germline mutation, no genetic mutation covered by the Chinese society of clinical oncology (CSCO) guideline for diagnosis and treatment of PC, and low tumor mutation burden (1.9/Mb). Besides, compared to other chemotherapeutic drugs, a relative lower toxic side effect of fluorouracil drugs was detected.
Second, percutaneous biopsy guided by CT for the primary lesion was performed by interventional department doctors. Histopathological results showed that this tumor was a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . Tumor immunohistochemistry results were as follows: CK (+), CK7 (+), CK20 (+), Villin (-), P63 (-), P40 (-), Syn (-), and CgA (-).
Subsequently, transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), chemotherapy, and radiative seeds implantation were performed based on National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) clinical practice guidelines for pancreatic adenocarcinoma and the results of genetic test and percutaneous biopsy.
The primary lesion and right liver metastasis were stained through the superior mesenteric artery and celiac trunk angiography . After entering the blood supply artery of PC using an ultramicro catheter (MC-PE27131, TERUMO, Japan), chemotherapeutic drugs (gemcitabine 1.0 mg + cisplatin 40 mg + recombinant human endostatin 15mg) were given. A similar procedure was performed for the right liver metastasis but with different dosages (gemcitabine 0.2 mg + cisplatin 20 mg + recombinant human endostatin 15mg). TACE has performed again on April 18, 2019 with a similar procedure as the previous one.
In addition, S-1 (20mg per capsule) was given with a dose of 60 mg, twice a day. The whole therapeutic cycle was 28 days, and an interval of 14 days was between 2 cycles. S-1 is composed of tegafur (FT, a precursor of 5-FU) and gimeracil (CDHP. It can inhibit the catabolism of 5-FU released from FT by dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase.), and otilasi (Oxo. It can block the phosphorylation of 5-FU and reduce the toxicity of 5-FU.).
On May 20, 125I radiative seeds were implanted around the primary lesion using laparoscopy.
CT-chest-abdomen, CEA, and CA-125 were performed on April, May, and July, respectively. Surprisingly, we noted that the tumor shrunk rapidly and concurrently with tumor biomarkers decrease .
On August 14, after evaluation by the general surgery department surgeons and imaging department doctors, the tumor shrunk significantly and the invasion of surrounding blood vessels also reduced. As a result, pancreatoduodenectomy was performed. During surgery, we found that there was a hard, irregular mass (2×2×1.5 cm) at the head of the pancreas . It adhered to the SMA and the anterior wall of the PV. However, through careful dissection, it was completely removed. Subsequently, the right liver was carefully examined for metastasis using intraoperative color doppler ultrasound, based on the images of the CT before surgery, but nothing was found. Finally, after thorough hemostasis and cleaning, two drainage tubes were placed in the surgical site. Generally, this operation was a great success.
Postoperative histopathological results showed that there were only fibrous tissue hyperplasia, and inflammatory cell infiltration. Besides, peripheral and mesenteric lymph nodes showed reactive hyperplasia . However, no neoplastic tissue was found.
After surgery, the patient recovered smoothly without any postoperative complication, and was finally discharged on August 31, 2019.
During postoperative follow-up, the patient visited our outpatient department every three months for examinations. The CT-chest-abdomen showed no signs of recurrence and metastasis . Tumor biomarkers (CEA and CA-125) remained within the normal range . The whole therapeutic process is shown in . The last follow-up examination was performed on October 14, 2020. All main laboratory test results are shown in .
At present, a regular dose of S-1 per therapeutic cycle has been recommended for this patient. Afterward, positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) will be arranged for the patient to check for potential recurrence and metastasis.