Our patient was a 57-year-old Asian woman diagnosed with locally advanced cervical cancer (T4aNxM0; stage IVa) 6 years prior to presentation. She had undergone six courses of chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin, as well as whole pelvic irradiation (57.8 Gy) followed by abdominal total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. However, she developed tumor recurrence at the para-aortic lymph nodes 3 years later and underwent three courses of chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin again, followed by para-aortic and pelvic lymphadenectomy and omentectomy. Despite the aggressive treatment of her disease, she presented with a new onset of right hydronephrosis and hydroureter secondary to upper ureteral obstruction caused by retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis . She had complicated pyelonephritis due to MUO; thus, she was referred to our department for securing of the urinary tract and drainage. A double-J polymeric stent was inserted and exchanged at regular intervals every 8 weeks for 1 year. Because of the progression of the disease and the patient’s complaint of frequent stent replacement, we replaced the double-J polymeric stent with a full-length metallic ureteral stent (Resonance). One year after the start of metallic ureteral stenting, we had to replace the ureteral stent because of febrile urinary tract infection. Six months after the second metallic stent placement, the patient complained of gross hematuria that presented bladder tamponade. Cystoscopy was performed by removing the hematoma, although the inside of the bladder was intact. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a hematoma at the right ureteropelvic junction but did not reveal the bleeding source . After that, the patient’s intermittent macrohematuria and marked anemia progressed; retrograde pyelography was performed for suspected ureteroiliac artery fistula. When the tip of the ureteral catheter was removed from the ureteroileal intersection, massive bleeding from the internal opening of the ureteral catheter was observed. We finally diagnosed her with ureteroiliac artery fistula and immediately requested the placement of a covered stent by endovascular treatment during interventional radiology. Angiography showed narrowing of the external iliac artery but did not detect a fistula to the urinary tract . A heparin-bonded stent graft (Gore Viabahn; W.L. Gore & Associates, Inc., Newark, DE, USA) was placed in the narrowed external iliac artery, followed by expansion of the stent graft with crimping . Although the patient’s gross hematuria disappeared thereafter, and no further episodes of hemorrhage occurred, she died 11 months later of progression of her primary disease.