We followed up a 20 year-old male with SWS at Hiroshima University Hospital since 10 years ago. A review of the medical history of his family members revealed no known medical history of SWS. He was gain from another hospital for an uncontrolled IOP. At baseline examination, port-wine stain showed bilateral frontal and maxillary distribution, and the best corrected visual acuity was 20/50 with +1.25DS −1.0DC A90 in the right eye (RE) and 20/40 with +4.50DS −1.25 A25 in the left eye (LE). The IOP was 27 mm Hg in the RE, and 24 mm Hg in the LE with 4 anti-glaucoma eyedrops. The anterior chamber depth was shallow in the RE and normal in the LE, and mild lens opacity in both eyes. He had a history of undergoing an MRI procedure that showed severe left-brain hemiatrophy in the frontal and parietal lobes and leptomeningeal angioma.
Has undergone multiple surgeries since birth, and in 2015, his RE developed serous retinal detachment. Intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) combined with photodynamic therapy (PDT) was ineffective, whereas proton beam therapy has successfully reattached the retina. Previous surgeries to decreased IOP included 3 trabeculotomies in both eyes and a Baerveldt tube shunt in the RE in 2018. Micropulse trans-scleral cyclophotocoagulation procedure in both eyes was performed in 2020 and 2021. In early 2022, IOP in the RE increased to nearly 30 mm Hg. We performed non penetrating trabeculectomy on March to the RE with an IOP monitoring outcome between 15 and 20 mm Hg. Severe retinal and choroidal detachments developed at the end of March 2022 .
To manage this situation, we prescribed acetazolamide 500 mg/d to activate the retinal pigment epithelium and to decrease the transudation of choroidal vessels, and performed scleral window surgery in the inferior temporal quadrant of the globe to support transscleral drainage. As a result, drainage of the choroidal fluid allows retinal reattachment and enhanced uveoscleral outflow.[ Two days after the drainage procedure, the SRF vanished, allowing the retina to reattach and improve the uveoscleral outflow.[
Informed consent is provided by our patient who is aware of this case report. The data was also acquired with the ethical consent of Hiroshima University.