The patient was a 17-year-old white male, previously in good health. He was not on any medications, he was a non-smoker, and he weighed 50 kg. Regarding the social status of the patient, he was living with his family, as he was high school student. He was brought by family members to our emergency department (ED) in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The patient was admitted after an overdose of digoxin 4 hours before presentation in a suicide attempt. He ingested 192 tablets of 0.25 mg digoxin (total dose of 48 mg). He developed dizziness, nausea, and vomiting after ingestion. Upon presentation, his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 14/15, as the patient’s eyes opened to verbal commands. He was slightly drowsy but responded to questions and was fully oriented. The rest of other systems examinations were all unremarkable. The patient’s vital signs were as follows: heart rate, 118/minute; blood pressure (BP), 128/90 mmHg; respiratory rate, 19 breaths/minute; and maintaining oxygen saturation, 99% on room air. The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia . While the patient was being assessed, he started having more symptoms, including seeing yellow hues and having a decrease in consciousness level, with a GCS score of 8/15. He responded with incomprehensible sounds, withdrawing his limbs and opening his eyes to pain. As the patient’s GCS score deteriorated, he was intubated for airway protection. After securing the patient’s airway, 50 g of activated charcoal was administered through a nasogastric tube (NGT). Shortly thereafter, despite the patient being under sedation using propofol and fentanyl infusions, he showed synchronized tonic–clonic movement of all limbs, for which he received midazolam 5 mg. Five DIGIFab vials (200 mg) were administered as a bolus after extracting all routine laboratory tests, along with serum digoxin levels and urine toxicology screening. The intensive care unit (ICU), toxicology center, and cardiology services were consulted. He was immediately transferred to the ICU for further medical management. The initial serum chemistry was normal, except for a potassium level of 2.9 mmol/L, so he received 20 mmol of potassium chloride intravenously. The toxicological levels in our patient revealed a digoxin level of 8.04 ng/mL in the blood 4 hours post-ingestion and before he received the DIGIFab. Labs results, including complete blood count (CBC) and renal and liver functions, were all within normal range. In addition, serum ethanol concentration and urine toxicology screening results were negative for cocaine, opioids, cannabis, and amphetamine. In the ICU, the patient received five vials of DIGIFab intravenously. Given the high serum digoxin level and the patient’s condition, both a dialysis line and a central venous catheter (CVC) were inserted electively, and were used later for TPE management and medication administration, respectively. TPE was performed for over 2 hours using a dual-lumen CVC, (replacement used = 2210 ml; plasma removed = 2345 ml; TBV processed = 1.1 volume). Serum digoxin measured immediately after TPE was 4.07 ng/ mL . Shortly after TPE, the patient’s ECG demonstrated a first-degree heart block with a heart rate of 43 beats per minute (BPM) and T-wave inversion. Another two vials (80 mg) of DIGIFab were used. The patient was closely monitored, and serum electrolyte and digoxin levels were regularly monitored, showing a gradual decrease over time . Four days after continuous monitoring, gradual improvement was marked clinically, with the absence of any ECG changes and the disappearance of any signs of digoxin overdose. Two days later, the patient was extubated and found to have hyperactive delirium with agitation; he was disoriented and was pulling on his lines. Haloperidol (5 mg) was administered. Subsequently, the patient gradually became less agitated and showed an improvement in his mental status. The following day, the patient’s mental status returned to baseline, and he was transferred to a general ward, where he underwent a psychiatric assessment and was discharged in a stable condition after 7 days of hospitalization. Upon follow-up in 6 months, a phone call was made to his legal guardian to check up on the patient, since the discharging team did not schedule any follow-up as the patient status was not needed. According to him, he is in good health and doing regular follow-up with his primary care and psychiatric physicians.