In October 2019, a 50-year-old fair complexion man, resident of Lower Silesia (Poland), construction manager by profession, after dermatological consultation was directed for a mycological examination to the local laboratory. The first skin changes patient observed on chest in May 2019 and then disease manifestations developed systematically. In an interview, the patient revealed that in August 2019, with no prior medical consultation, he administered an antifungal cream containing 0.5% fluconazole. According to the patient the treatment was irregular (i.e. two times per week for 2 weeks) and for this reason with no visible improvement. During the visit to the dermatologist, basic physical examinations and those using the Wood lamp and dermatoscope were carried out. On the day of consultation, extensive hyper- and hypopigmented macules on patient’s skin were diagnosed that were characterized by and with an uneven edges, moderate skin scaling and the accompanying mild itching, clearly visible when using a dermatoscope. Skin lesions covered the chest, shoulders, back, arms and forearms . Patches were not spilled, but took the form of numerous small beige discolorations, with the exception of forearms where patches were white and rather resembled vitiligo . It should also be noted that forearms, due to sunlight exposure during many hours of construction work in the field, were clearly tanned, unlike other parts of the body where hyperpigmented macules were found. The patient was immunocompetent and in overall good health. Medical records and an interview indicated that neither the patient nor his family had any systemic, psychosomatic or chronic skin diseases. The patient had no prior history of immunosuppressive drugs treatments. Based on characteristic symptoms PV was diagnosed. The decision on the type of antifungal therapy was made based on the characteristic clinical symptoms of the disease, and the results of direct mycological examination, and susceptibility tests. Despite the fact that the skin lesions were quite widespread, oral treatment with systemic antifungal drugs was not included. This allowed to avoid interference with the composition of the gastrointestinal microbiome, and minimized disturbance of the mycobiome of healthy skin. After obtaining patient approval, at the beginning of November 2019, based on the results of the in vitro susceptibility tests, the therapy was set as follows: topical administration of ciclopirox 1% cream once daily (applied overnight), and terbinafine 1% emulsion gel applied once daily (in the morning) for 14 and 7 days, respectively. Direct microscopy examination of the skin scrapings, collected from hyper- and hypopigmented macules, performed 2 weeks after completed treatment, still revealed the presence of some fragments of pseudohyphae and single degenerated cells, while the results of cultures on modified Leeming-Notman agar (MLNA) were negative. In contrast to affected skin, biological material scraped from healthy skin around the neck and face contained M. restricta and M. sympodialis. The last mycological examination combined with consultation with a dermatologist, performed 2 months after completed therapy, has confirmed eradication of the infection evidenced both by microscopy and in cell culture. Some changes in skin pigmentation, what was anticipated, remained present mainly in the hypopigmented areas. However, 4 months after the end of the therapy, white discoloration was resolved, according to the patient’s feedback. Additionally, after this time, results of physical examination were normal and blood tests were within normal limits. Finally, the patient experienced no relapse on the day of publication, exactly during 8 months follow-up period . This led to the conclusion that treatment has been fully successful. On the other hand, direct examination and positive culture on MLNA, carried out for control purposes, revealed the presence of viable single budding cells of M. restricta and M. sympodialis in examined areas of patient’s healthy skin. For comparison (in accordance with the wishes of the patient and his wife), taking into account epidemiological dependencies and in the context of healthy skin mycobiome, diagnostic material was also collected from skin around the chest and neck of patient’s 49-year-old wife.
Methods and results of conventional and molecular mycological diagnostic procedures leading to unambiguous identification of both etiological factors of PV as lipid-dependent components of the skin mycobiome are included as an integral part of this study (see Additional file ).