A 36-year-old Javanese woman presented to our institution with hoarseness, frequent hiccups, and difficulty in swallowing. She complained of tingling in the neck and shoulder, anhidrosis in the left side of the head, and drooping of the upper left eyelid for the past 6 weeks. The patient had been diagnosed with tuberculosis laryngitis 6 months before the current visit according to positive interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA), although with negative sputum tests and negative biopsy. She had received a combination of tuberculosis drugs for 6 months. The patient had a previous history of invasive ductal carcinoma of the left breast 4 years before the current admission.
The diagnosis of breast cancer was confirmed at the age of 32 years after a 3-year period of delayed diagnosis because of the patient’s preference to receive traditional (alternative) medicine. At the time of diagnosis, the patient was an unmarried woman but she planned to have a family soon after breast cancer therapy. After a definitive diagnosis of breast cancer was established, the patient had a nipple and skin-sparing mastectomy with immediate reconstruction using a breast implant. Pathological evaluation of the specimen from the mastectomy revealed an invasive ductal carcinoma with negative expression of estrogen receptors (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR) and positive expression of HER2 receptors. The primary specimen measured 3 × 5.5 × 3 cm (pT3), with negative axillary lymph node (pN0) and without distant metastasis (M0). The tumor was poorly differentiated according to the Nottingham modified Scarff–Bloom–Richardson (SBR) classification. However, the patient had not continued further medical treatment for the breast cancer until the most recent presentation of hoarseness and difficulty in swallowing (43 months after the initial diagnosis). The hoarseness was previously suspected to be due to tuberculoid laryngitis according to IGRA, although with negative acid-fast bacilli sputum tests and negative biopsy. The dysphagia was managed with nasogastric tube insertion. Anti-tuberculosis treatment for the past 6 months did not improve the patient’s complaints of hoarseness and dysphagia. In addition, she complained of left-side facial anhidrosis, left ptosis, and myosis of the left eye, and accordingly a diagnosis of Horner’s syndrome was established. Laryngoscopy revealed bowing of the vocal cords, a residue of liquid and thick liquid in the epiglottic vallecula, with a slight improvement of food residue after chin tuck . In addition, the patient complained of tingling in the neck accompanied by a recurrent pain in the face. Cervical X-ray of the neck revealed a burst fracture of the sixth cervical vertebra . Chest X-ray indicated the disease was spreading into the left pleura and lung, which was confirmed by computed tomography (CT) scan . In addition, neck CT scan showed an intraluminal esophageal mass at the level of the sixth cervical to the first thoracic vertebrae and lytic destruction of the manubrium of the sternum, sixth and seventh cervical vertebrae, and first to third thoracic vertebrae . Endoscopy confirmed the thickening of the esophageal wall, and cytology swab showed ductal malignant cells suggesting distant metastasis of breast cancer into the intraluminal esophagus. A gastrostomy tube was inserted to maintain caloric and nutrition intake. The patient was then treated with capecitabine 1250 mg/m2 twice daily for 14 days, with 6 mg of trastuzumab and 4 mg of zoledronic acid in a 3-week cycle for eight cycles. After the treatment, the patient showed improvements in ingestion and swallowing and was able to drink and take soft food, although the signs of Horner’s syndrome did not improve.