A 44-year-old male presented with severe right sharp shooting pain in the buttock, thigh, leg, foot, and/or toes with numbness in the foot and toes (Visual Analog Scale [VAS] 8/10) for six months with an Oswestry disability index (ODI) score of 70%. Her pain aggravated when bending forward and performing daily routine activities. He also complained of exaggeration of pain in daily regular activities. On physical examination, power in the right lower limbs was 5/5 as per the Medical Research Council grading, and deep tendon reflexes were normal. Pre-operative Xray and CT scan showed no instability or calcified disc osteophyte, and magnetic resonance imaging showed extraforaminal stenosis due to disc herniation at L5–S1 (,). We performed UBE-L5-S1extraforaminal discectomy surgery to resolve his symptoms. The operative time was 68 min; blood loss was 30 mL. After surgery, the patient was followed up at one week, six weeks, three months, six months, 12 months, and two years. The pain and tingling sensation in the legs improved at the 1-week follow-up, with a VAS score of 0/10 and an ODI score of 10% at the 2-year follow-up. Patient satisfaction was surveyed using Macnab’s criteria at the final follow-up visit of 2 years and was found to be excellent. Post-operative imaging showed a good extraforaminal decompression at L5-S1 (,).
Stepw ise A pproach for UBE- L5- S1 ex traforaminal discectomy/decompression
1.Patient position and Anesthesia
The patient is positioned prone under general endotracheal anesthesia. However, surgeons can choose limited epidural anesthesia with sedation or their preferred choice of anesthesia.
It is essential for the surgeon to get the orientation of the anatomy before skin incision. Under C-arm fluoroscopic guidance, we marked the pedicle of L5 and S1, the L5-S1 disc space, the transverse process of L5, and the iliac crest. The target area of surgery is confirmed and marked as the superior sacral notch (the junction between the lateral aspect of the superior articular process [SAP] and sacral ala) on an anteroposterior view of the C-arm fluoroscopy. The authors suggest using the dominant hand for the working portal and the nondominant hand for the endoscopic portal. In the case of a left-sided disc approached by a right-handed surgeon, the cranial left portal should be planned as the endoscopic portal and the caudal right portal as a working portal. In the case of a right-side approach, the cranial right portal was usually planned as the working portal, and the caudal left portal was the endoscopic portal.
The incisions are approximately 2.5-3.5 cm apart, 1 cm above and 1 cm below the midpoint of the foramen in the C-arm fluoroscopic view and 1 cm lateral to the target L5-S1 foramen. When the caudal incision interferes from the iliac crest due to high riding iliac crest, a caudal incision can be made medially to avoid the iliac crest. The authors’ preferred incisions for the upper portal were about 1cm lateral to the border of the L5 pedicle, and the lower portal was made around the upper endplate of S1 to make sure the landing point and joining of the two portals was over the ipsilateral transverse process of L5.
After passing through the skin and fascia, tactile bony feedback is confirmed on the dorsal surface of the L5 lamina, SAP, and transverse process. The endoscopic irrigation system helps form a water chamber above the lamina, which helps to control bleeding with its hydrostatic pressure and provides clear vision over the surgical field. The periosteal dissection is continued to expose the transverse process, mamillary process, isthmus, lateral border of superior articular process, and sacral ala with the help of radiofrequency (RF) probes. The surgical target area of the caudal portion of the L5 transverse process, the lateral portion of the facet, and the sacral ala were identified and exposed with more precision.
The inferior aspect of TP of L5, the superomedial part of the sacral ala, and the lateral aspect of the SAP of S1 are removed with a high-speed diamond burr first, followed by Kerrison rongeur if necessary. The use of Kerrison rongeur should be very careful and delicate as dorsal root ganglion(DRG) is a highly sensitive and injury-prone structure due to its location and anatomy. The bony resection is considered adequate when the ligament is released from the bony structures. Any bony bleeding, if it occurred, can be encountered with RF or fibrin glue or, bone wax or fibrillar patch. Authors prefer to use RF and fibrin glue over bone wax or fibrillar patch as if these structures retained in the neuroforamen can possibly cause compression of the nerve in the limited space.
Once the bony resection is completed, the cranial portion of the ligament is detached and reflected from SAP and TP using a nerve hook/probe/freer/angled curette, followed by resection with Kerrison rongeur. Once the ligament is resected, the exiting nerve root is easily identified. The possible source of bleeding at this step comes from the complex plexus of veins and adhesion around neurovascular structures. The use of radiofrequency (RF) probes of various types, like 30°, 90°, and ball type, is highly suggested to prevent blood loss before cutting epidural veins.
The nerve root/DRG is handled gently with a nerve hook, and disc particles are freed with a nerve hook, followed by disc removal with pituitary forceps. The L5 exiting root was assessed from the foraminal to the extraforaminal with nerve hooks to test for residual compression.
The authors preferred to close the subcutaneous layer with absorbable suture after inserting a drain, followed by skin closure with glue materials.