A 63-year-old woman with an unremarkable medical history presented to our department to have her missing tooth 46 replaced. The right mandibular first molar had been extracted approximately one year previously due to extensive caries. Clinical examination revealed good oral hygiene and no evidence of periodontal disease. The neighboring teeth were intact and healthy, and the single-tooth gap was of sufficient size, so a dental implant was the preferred option for tooth replacement. Radiographic examination using cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) confirmed an extensive horizontal bone defect in the right posterior mandible, indicating the need for pre-implant alveolar ridge augmentation to restore both the height and width of the ridge. It was determined that patient-specific ridge augmentation with a resorbable scaffold would be a valid option for predictable three-dimensional bone regeneration in this case.
Based on the initial CBCT scan (3D Accuitomo 370, Morita, Dietzenbach, Germany) and an intraoral scan (3Shape TRIOS, Straumann, Basel, Switzerland), prosthetically driven implant planning was performed in SMOP (Swissmeda, Baar, Switzerland). A β-TCP scaffold was digitally designed by specialized engineers (KLS Martin Group, Tuttlingen, Germany) following the manufacturer’s certified and patented workflow to reconstruct the contour of the alveolar ridge and to meet both anatomical/esthetic and functional requirements. Holes for the fixation screws and a recess at the future implant position were left free in the scaffold. The design of the scaffold and the position of the screw holes were evaluated and approved by the oral surgeon in the design and communication software (IPS Gate®, KLS Martin). Matching drill guides were fabricated to facilitate surgery and ensure the correct positioning of both the scaffold and the dental implant. Figure shows the pre-operative clinical and radiologic findings and the digital planning.
The surgery was performed under local anesthesia as documented in Fig. . A mucoperiosteal flap was elevated in the right posterior mandible, exposing the bony defect. The drill guide was placed on the alveolar crest and two fixation holes were pre-drilled in the mandible. The custom β-TCP scaffold was then carefully positioned over the bony defect. The patient-specific design allowed unmistakable positioning of the scaffold according to the preoperative planning. The scaffold was secured with two resorbable poly-lactide pins (SonicWeld Rx®, KLS Martin Group). The gap between the scaffold and the mandible was loosely filled with autologous bone harvested locally with a bone scraper (Safescraper, Meta Biomed, Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany) and the scaffold was covered with a collagen membrane (Jason® membrane, Straumann) to support the barrier function. The surgical site was closed with interrupted non-resorbable sutures after irrigation and hemostasis. The patient was prescribed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and antibiotics for five days postoperatively and was encouraged to maintain excellent oral hygiene. Stitches were removed after ten days when complete wound healing was assured.
Follow-up visits were held at regular intervals and showed uneventful healing. CBCT scans were performed to evaluate the healing process and to assess the alveolar ridge augmentation outcome. The CBCT scan nine months after surgery showed successful augmentation with a well-integrated β-TCP scaffold and adjacent new bone formation, now allowing for dental implant placement .
In a second surgical procedure under local anesthesia, the dental implant (Straumann SP, Ø 4.1 mm RN, 10 mm length) was placed in the previously digitally defined position with a 3D-printed implant guide with good primary stability after re-exposure of the crest. The implant was covered with a healing abutment and left for transmucosal healing . The bone cylinder drilled out during implant placement was histologically examined and showed high-quality cancellous bone in the previously atrophied ridge, demonstrating the efficacy of the β-TCP scaffold for bone regeneration .
After complete bone integration 6 months post implant placement, the customized crown (milled zirconia framework veneered with aesthetic ceramic) was placed on the implant with a stock titanium abutment. Follow-up clinical examinations and radiographs showed good implant position with no evidence of peri-implant bone loss. The overlay of the recent CBCT with the digital planning showed a complete overlap of the contours, underlining the predictability of the technique. The patient was completely satisfied with the result and two years after the initial surgery now has excellent oral and peri-implant health .