An 18-d-old boy presented with cough for five days, fever for three days, and dyspnea for two days.
His body temperature peaked at 37.5 °C. Chest radiograph revealed high-density shadows in both lungs . Antibiotics (meropenem and vancomycin) and mechanical ventilation had been performed at the local hospital. For further treatment, the newborn was transferred to our neonatal intensive care unit through a vehicle-mounted ventilator by ambulance.
The boy, G3P2, was born to a 34-year-old woman at 38 wk 3 d of gestational age with a birth weight of 4.5 kg and an Apgar score of 9 points at 1 min after birth. His parents were not close relatives and were in good health. They lived in a rural area.
He had a fever of 38.2 °C, a heart rate of 210 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 100 breaths/min, a blood pressure of 95/65 mmHg, and a body weight of 4.75 kg. His oxygen saturation fluctuated around 90% under synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (FiO2 100%). He was unconscious, with dyspnea, weak heart sounds and hepatomegaly. Moist crackles were present throughout his left lung, while the breath sounds in the right lung were decreased.
Changes in leukocyte, erythrocyte, hemoglobin, platelet, neutrophil (%), C-reactive protein, creatine kinase-MB, lactate dehydrogenase, and hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase parameters indicated that the above items had increased to varying degrees, except for the decreases in erythrocytes, hemoglobin, and platelets. MRSA infection was confirmed by multiple cultures (sputum and pleural fluid) , while other pathogen tests, such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, rubella virus, Toxoplasma gondii, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, adenovirus, parainfluenza virus 2, parainfluenza virus 3, human coronavirus 229E/NL63, influenza virus A, rhinovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus, along with cerebrospinal fluid culture and blood cultures, were all negative.
Chest radiographs at the local hospital and in Taihe Hospital are shown in detail in the History of present illness and Treatment sections, respectively. The latter revealed recurrent bilateral pyopneumothorax, multiple high-density shadows and pneumatoceles in both lungs.