A 15-year-old male with a history of asthma presented to the Rush University Otorhinolaryngology clinic with a 1-year history of a painless, slowly enlarging left parotid gland mass and left-sided facial swelling. He denied dysphagia, difficulty breathing, or facial paresis. Physical examination was significant for a 4-cm spongy, non-fixed mass of the left parotid gland at the lobule of the ear.
Initial ultrasound demonstrated calcifications, and a fine needle aspiration was non-diagnostic. MRI soft tissue neck with and without contrast showed a 3.8 cm × 5.0 cm × 4.0 cm fatty lesion involving the superficial and deep lobes of the left parotid gland and masticator space with widening of the stylo-mandibular tunnel, with the tumor abutting the medial surface of ramus of the mandible . The patient underwent a preoperative CT soft tissue neck with contrast, showing a dumbbell-shaped hypodense lesion in the deep lobe of the parotid gland, with anterior displacement of the pterygoids and medial displacement of the parapharyngeal space, as well as mild bony remodeling of the mandibular ramus and thinning of the mandibular condyle .
The patient was taken to the operating room, and the mass was excised via a transcervical parotid approach under general anesthesia with facial nerve monitoring. The superficial aspect of the parotid bed was spared, and upper and lower divisions of the facial nerve were identified and preserved . The tumor, which primarily involved the deep lobe of the parotid gland, was entirely excised . Reactive level II nodes were identified preoperatively on imaging. Intraoperatively a 3cm × 1.6 cm level II node was identified and subsequently excised. Final pathology revealed a 5.2 cm × 4.3 cm × 3.5 cm lipoblastoma and one left cervical lymph node with reactive hyperplasia. The lipoblastoma was described as a well-defined mass composed predominantly of lobules of mature adipose tissue with fibrous septae . Areas of myxoid stroma were noted at the periphery of the mass with nodules and strands of fibrous tissue within the center of the mass . Rare lipoblasts were identified, with no evidence of cytologic atypia and no mitosis to suggest malignant transformation.
The patient recovered well post-operatively, aside from a brief spell of first bite syndrome that ultimately resolved. He has full function of the facial nerve, with intact upper and lower divisions, and 20 months of follow-up without evidence of recurrence .