A 43-year-old white European man was referred to our unit with an early end-stage renal failure disclosed by asthenia and malignant hypertension. At admission, laboratory tests showed: serum creatinine 7.0mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen 200mg/dL; proteinuria 1.5g/24 hours (albuminuria 75%); negativity of Bence-Jones proteinuria; microscopic hematuria; normal immunology tests; normal serum protein electrophoresis (absence of monoclonal gammopathy and no hypogammaglobulinemia). His renal arteries were normal at the Doppler ultrasound. We tried to perform a renal biopsy but we failed because we only got fat tissue. He required peritoneal dialysis.
Eleven months later, a cadaveric renal graft was transplanted (pediatric donor who died from hemorrhagic stroke; cytomegalovirus (CMV), status: donor+/recipient+). Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), herpes simplex virus, and toxoplasmosis serologies were positive; other serologies were negative. The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) compatibility was: A2-A29/B45-B51/DR1-DR14/DQ5-DQ5 (patient); A2-A24/B7-B60/DR13-DR15/DQ5-DQ6 (donor). A serum protein electrophoresis was performed in the patient at this time and was normal (absence of monoclonal gammopathy and no hypogammaglobulinemia).
The initial immunosuppressive treatment included antilymphocyte serum. The post-transplantation period was uneventful with diuresis on day 1 and serum creatinine 1.7mg/dL (Modification of Diet in Renal Disease, MDRD, formula: 48mL/minute/m2) at discharge. The immunosuppressive treatment at discharge was: prednisone (20mg daily); ciclosporin (175mg twice a day); mycophenolate (1000mg twice a day).
Two months after transplantation, CMV reactivation required oral treatment with valganciclovir and a decrease in the immunosuppressive doses: prednisone (5mg daily); ciclosporin 110mg twice a day; mycophenolate (1000mg twice a day).
Seven months after transplantation, he was hospitalized for renal function decline. A graft biopsy was performed and showed borderline acute rejection; immunofluorescence for light and heavy immunoglobulin chains was negative. Treatment with methylprednisolone (five intravenous boluses at decreasing doses) was followed by a decrease in serum creatinine which returned to its initial level (1.3mg/dL).
He was hospitalized for the same reasons 18 months after transplantation. The graft biopsy again showed borderline acute rejection; immunofluorescence for light and heavy immunoglobulin chains was again negative. Treatment was again methylprednisolone (five intravenous boluses at decreasing doses), with the same results.
His general status declined 22 months after transplantation. At admission, an examination revealed rapid weight loss, long-standing productive cough, and herpes zoster with a Ramsay Hunt syndrome. His renal function was altered: serum creatinine 2.4mg/dL (MDRD 31mL/minute/1.73m2); proteinuria 7g/24 hours (6g albumin). The three main hypotheses explaining this de novo nephrotic syndrome in this kidney transplant recipient were, by reported frequency [,]: allograft glomerulopathy; recurrent baseline nephropathy; and de novo glomerulopathy.
The immunosuppressive treatment was diminished because of a herpes zoster flare-up (prednisone 5mg twice a day, ciclosporin 100mg twice a day, mycophenolate 500mg twice a day). He also received oral valaciclovir.
A new graft biopsy was performed and revealed severe glomerular involvement with flocculocapsular synechiae, scleronodular mesangial thickenings involving 13 of 30 glomeruli analyzed, a few zones of segmental and focal hyalinosis, peritubular thickening and interstitial fibrosis with tubular atrophy estimated at 50%. The tubules were free of myelomatous casts. Immunofluorescence disclosed monotypic kappa light chain immunoglobulin deposits in the glomerular mesangium and peritubular spaces. Congo red staining was negative. However, electron microscopic examination was not performed because we did not expect to find monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits and thus we fixated no specific sample in glutaraldehyde. Considering this biopsy, the diagnosis of MIDD was retained . Serum protein electrophoresis revealed a monoclonal gammopathy with a kappa light chain monoclonal peak at 964mg/L (free light chains assay Freelite® produced by Binding Site®), kappa/lambda ratio at 102, hypogammaglobulinemia, and hypoalbuminemia at 25g/L related to the nephrotic syndrome. A bone marrow aspiration showed 16% atypical plasma cells (high nucleus to cytoplasm ratio, mature chromatin, nuclear inclusions) corresponding to a kappa monotypic clonal population. These results confirmed the diagnosis of MIDD secondary to kappa light chain multiple myeloma without extrarenal event. Polymerase chain reaction on total blood samples was positive for EBV at the time of diagnosis, signaling systemic EBV reactivation. However no direct EBV research was performed on the bone marrow examination at this moment. We considered that both myeloma and MIDD occurred de novo in this patient because there was no evidence of plasma cell dyscrasia before, and the two previous graft biopsies showed no immunoglobulin deposits.
He was transferred to the hematology unit and treated for this PTLD by chemotherapy (bortezomib plus dexamethasone). For the immunosuppressive treatment, mycophenolate was discontinued progressively and ciclosporin was pursued, as was prednisone on days without dexamethasone.
The treatment was followed by remission of his myeloma with a decrease in the serum light chains and a slight improvement in renal function; serum creatinine improved from 3.5 to 2.7mg/dL.
He had a relapse with an elevated light chains level 32 months after transplantation. A second chemotherapy regimen was given (bortezomib-cyclophosphamide-dexamethasone) with decreased immunosuppression (ciclosporin reduced to 75mg twice a day).
Nevertheless his renal function worsened rapidly and he required hemodialysis 3 years after transplantation. He received a third line of chemotherapy (lenalidomid plus dexamethasone) for a second relapse of his myeloma 54 months after transplantation.
It is important to notice that we performed a follow-up bone marrow aspiration at this period that confirmed the myeloma relapse and showed 10% of tumoral monoclonal plasmocytes. The in situ hybridization did not permit us to find EBV in these tumoral cells.He finally died from septic shock in a context of post-chemotherapy medullary aplasia at the age of 50, 4 years after myeloma diagnosis and approximately 6 years after transplantation .