A 63-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation of an asymptomatic pancreatic mass that was detected by computed tomography (CT) during a medical checkup. He had a medical history of hypertension and was treated with 20 mg of daily olmesartan medoxomil. Laboratory data showed a slightly elevated hemoglobin A1c of 6.8% and tumor markers were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 3.7 ng/mL; cancer antigen-19–9 (CA19-9), 147 U/mL; cancer antigen-125, 42 U/mL; DUPAN-2, 120 U/mL; and Span-1, 72 U/m. A CT scan revealed a 7.5-cm mass located in the pancreatic head and body that invaded the common hepatic artery (CHA), gastroduodenal artery (GDA), and proper hepatic artery (PHA). A tumor thrombus in the main portal vein (PV) was also detected. The celiac artery (CA) and superior mesenteric artery (SMA) were intact. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed main pancreatic duct (MPD) stenosis at the pancreatic head with distal dilatation of the MPD . Endoscopic ultrasonography-guided fine needle aspiration was performed, and UCOGC was suspected based on pathology. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with unresectable locally advanced UCOGC and conventional FOLFIRINOX (oxaliplatin, 85 mg per square meter of body-surface area; irinotecan, 180 mg per square meter; leucovorin, 400 mg per square meter; and fluorouracil, 400 mg per square meter given as a bolus followed by 2,400 mg per square meter given as a 46-h continuous infusion, every 2 weeks) was administered. After 10 cycles (20 weeks) of FOLFIRINOX, contrast-enhanced CT showed a significant response to chemotherapy. Although the tumor was still in contact with the CHA and GDA, the tumor diameter shrank to 3 cm and the portal vein thrombus had disappeared . The tumor markers were reduced as follows: CEA, 2.3 ng/mL; CA 19–9, 18 U/mL; DUPAN-2, 25 U/mL. Severe adverse drug reactions including neutropenia and liver dysfunction were also observed, and it was difficult to continue FOLFIRINOX therapy. Therefore, a conversion surgery was performed.
Intraoperative findings showed no peritoneal dissemination or liver metastasis. The tumor invaded the transverse mesocolon , but the SMA was not affected. Although tumor invasion to the neural plexus around the CHA and GDA was suspected , complete resection of these plexuses was achieved. After confirming no tumor invasion to the plexus by examining the intraoperative frozen section, the pancreatic parenchyma was dissected with a 3-cm tumor margin. Since PV invasion was strongly suspected, the PV/superior mesenteric vein (SMV) was resected 4 cm in length and reconstructed with end-to-end anastomosis. Finally, the pancreaticoduodenectomy with Child’s reconstruction was performed. The total operation time was 597 min, and the blood loss was 1,120 mL.
The excised tumor was 3.5 × 3.1 × 2.4 cm in size and was located across the pancreatic head and body. Histopathological findings showed that the tumor cells were pleomorphic, irregularly shaped to spindle-shaped, and surrounded by osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells, which was consistent with the diagnosis of UCOGC . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed positive tumor staining for programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) . Some adenocarcinoma components were also identified. Tumor cell clusters were found in the portal vein. Tumor metastasis was found in one of the #8 lymph nodes in the anterosuperior region along the CHA, out of all 26 dissected nodes. The UICC TNM classification (8th edition) was defined as ypT2N1M0, stage IIB. No tumor exposure of the margins was observed; therefore, histological R0 was achieved. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 16th postoperative day. He is now receiving adjuvant FOLFIRINOX without recurrence for more than 6 months after the operation.