In this report, we describe a retrospective, interventional case of a 54-year-old Caucasian woman who presented at our eye emergency department following a splash injury of the left eye with sodium hydroxide. This report was reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of the University of Rome “La Sapienza.”
At the first examination, her visual acuity (VA) was light perception in the left eye. Her eyelids and conjunctiva were congested. A slit-lamp examination showed a diffuse corneal epithelial defect, stromal edema, and localized Descemet’s folds. She was treated with 1% dexamethasone sodium phosphate drops six times daily, 1% atropine drops three times daily, and tobramycin six times daily. The corticosteroid prednisone 50mg was administered daily for the first 10 days, then the daily dose was gradually tapered by 5mg every 15 days. Three months later, despite the frequent use of topical steroids a symblepharon with superficial and deep corneal neovascularization was observed . The patient’s VA was 0.5 logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (LogMAR). We suggested administering a subconjunctival bevacizumab injection in the left eye with the aim of reducing corneal neovascularization. Written, informed consent was obtained from the patient after explaining the off-label use of bevacizumab on the basis of two case reports [,]. A subconjunctival injection of 0.05ml (1.25mg) of sterile, undiluted, commercially available bevacizumab (Avastin®; Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA) was administered with topical anesthesia in the subconjunctival space close to the corneal limbus and adjacent to the pathological blood vessels. After the procedure, the patient was advised to use 0.3% ofloxacin and 1% dexamethasone sodium phosphate drops three times daily for one week. One week after the subconjunctival bevacizumab injection, the vessels appeared thinner and the corneal opacity was clearer. The patient’s VA improved to 0.3LogMAR after one week. Three weeks later her VA had not changed, and the vessels started to perfuse again. A second subconjunctival bevacizumab injection was then given. Two weeks after the second injection her VA improved to 0.1LogMAR and corneal neovascularization was significantly reduced. Notably, three months later her vision was unchanged and the neovascularization remained stable . During the next months, the patient’s condition was well-controlled, and, at the end of follow-up 24 months later, her VA and clinical condition were unaltered.