In May 2008, a 71-year-old Caucasian, German woman was referred to our hospital presenting with weakness, somnolence, confusion and slurred speech. As reported by her family, her symptoms had slowly deteriorated within the previous three months. On physical examination, our patient had no edema and no evidence of dehydration or hyperhydration. Her initial laboratory evaluation, however, showed severe hyponatremia (107 mmol/L), low serum osmolality (227 mmol/kg), high urine sodium (86 mmol/L), and urine osmolality ranging above the normal serum osmolality (495 mmol/kg) . Her renal function was normal (creatinine = 0.48 mg/dL). Although unnecessary for the diagnosis, her ADH level was measured in the serum and found to be inappropriately high in relation to the respective serum osmolality. Cerebral MRI revealed no abnormalities, suggesting that hyponatremia had caused her neurological symptoms. As thyroid parameters and adrenal function tests were normal, endocrine dysfunction could be excluded.
Our patient's medical history revealed intermittent atrial fibrillation and hypertension for which she had been treated with metoprolol and ramipril for more than three years. A drug-induced SIAD was considered as very unlikely due to her long history of taking metoprolol and ramipril. The medication was maintained during her diagnosis and treatment. Her SIAD did not reappear after thyroidectomy. Neither the parameters investigated nor the medication given provided an alternative explanation for the presence of hyponatremia, thus establishing a diagnosis of SIAD.
Our patient was treated with a fluid restriction of 1.0 to 1.5 liters daily, which led to a continuous increase in her serum sodium levels. This was paralleled by her improved neurological status. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest and abdomen failed to detect a tumor mass, while both upper and lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopy yielded negative results. Gynecological investigation also produced no pathological findings. A thyroid nodule of her right lobe was diagnosed by ultrasonography and MRI of her neck . Although the nodule indicated the suspicion of thyroid cancer, a fine needle biopsy did not show malignant cells.
Since the diagnosis of SIAD suggested the presence of an occult tumor, our patient was referred to the surgery department and underwent total thyroidectomy without lymph node dissection. Her histological examination revealed a 1.5 cm sized differentiated papillary thyroid cancer (pT1 N0 M0) (complete resection with no microscopic residual tumor - RO) . A few days after surgery, she showed stable serum sodium levels without fluid restriction and a complete disappearance of neurological symptoms. Seven weeks after thyroidectomy, she underwent radioactive therapy with 5154MBq iodine-131 (I-131) and out-patient control of her serum sodium. Subsequent osmolality did not show any evidence of SIAD relapse.