The patient is a 75-year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension, chronic obstructive lung disease, and emphysema. She has a past surgical history of bilateral total knee replacements: the right knee was replaced two years ago, and the left knee was replaced one year ago. There were no complications with either procedure. She presented for her yearly follow-up complaining of new onset of 1 out of 10 left knee pain with mild weakness and difficulty climbing stairs. The patient stated that she fell 3 weeks prior to her visit, complaining of moderate pain and swelling for 1-2 weeks that subsided substantially. She did not seek immediate medical attention. Before her fall, she was functioning normally with no pain. On exam, she had a slightly antalgic gait, ambulating without any assistive devices. She had full range of motion and strength of both hips, knees, and ankles with mild swelling and ecchymosis over the left tibial tubercle and minimal tenderness (as seen in Figures -). She had full active extension of her left knee and straight leg raise was normal. Neurovascular exam was unremarkable. X-rays of her knees (as shown in Figures -) showed both prostheses in good alignment. There was a small avulsion fracture of the left tibia tubercle with a high-riding patella. The patient’s history and physical examination findings indicated a subacute patellar tendon rupture with a small tibial tubercle avulsion fracture. Since the patient experienced only mild limitations of daily activities and minimal left knee pain, conservative measures that included physical and occupational therapy were implemented.
A DEXA scan and bone health labs were ordered in consideration of osteoporosis being a contributory factor in this injury. Her t-score was 1.5 with a FRAX 10-year fracture risk of 14% for major osteoporotic fracture and 2.3% for a hip fracture. Her labs were normal except for a vitamin D level of 29. She was started on high dose vitamin D and encouraged to add more calcium to her diet as well as to perform weight bearing exercises.
After one month of physical therapy, the patient reported no pain and improvement going upstairs, but still some difficulty going downstairs. The patient was not interested in surgical correction and elected to continue with physical therapy.
On 2-month follow up, she had no complaints of knee pain or weakness and was climbing and descending stairs without difficulty. However, she did fall and suffer a minimally displaced Colle’s wrist fracture. She subsequently was started on denosumab every 6 months and continued with therapy for gait and balance training.