A 42-year-old woman with no significant past medical history or known cardiovascular risk factors, presented to the emergency department with asthenia, myalgia, fever, worsening dyspnoea and orthopnoea for the past week. No chest pain was reported. She was under no medication. No substance abuse was reported. Vital parameters: tympanic temperature 38.6°C, pulse 104 b.p.m., symmetrical blood pressure of 86/62 mmHg, respiratory rate 28/min, and peripheral oxygen saturation 94%. Physical examination: patient appearing in severe distress, peripheral skin mottling, and bi-basilar hypoventilation on lung auscultation. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a PaO2 of 7.8 kPa (normal value: 10.5–13.5 kPa) and a lactate level of 3.5 mmol/L (normal value: <2.3 mmol/L). Laboratory workup was relevant for: haemoglobin 112 g/L (normal value: 120–150 g/L), white cell count 17.2 G/L (normal value: 4–10 G/L), C-reactive protein 49 mg/L (normal value: <5 mg/L), creatinine 99 µmol/L (normal value: 52–92 µmol/L), aspartate transaminase 578 U/L (normal value: <30 U/L), alanine transaminase 1287 U/L (normal value: <30 U/L), total bilirubin 14 µmol/L (normal value: <20 µmol/L), NT-proBNP 39 997 ng/L (normal value: <300 ng/L), creatine kinase 500 U/L (normal value: <200 U/L), and high-sensitive cardiac Troponin T (cTnT) 2339 ng/L (normal value: <14 ng/L) without substantial increase on repeat measurement at 1 h. Two sets of blood cultures remained sterile. A nasopharyngeal swab with real-time reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction was positive for Influenza type A. The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with low QRS voltage, subtle ST-segment elevation in the inferior (II, III, aVF) and first precordial leads (V1, V2), as well as ST-segment depression in the lateral leads (I, aVL) . A contrast chest computed tomography revealed bilateral pleural effusions and the presence of a bulky oval-shaped hyperdensity in the left ventricular (LV) apex, as well as in the right ventricular (RV) apex . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) confirmed the presence of a 22 × 15 mm pedunculated intracavitary mass, suspect of a thrombus, in the LV apex , and additionally showed severe biventricular systolic dysfunction with an LV ejection fraction (EF) of 25%, severe right cardiac chamber dilatation with end-diastolic interventricular septal flattening and massive functional tricuspid regurgitation (Videos 1–3, ). Haemodynamic support with dobutamine and noradrenaline was initiated. Therapeutic anticoagulation with continuous intravenous Heparin was started and Oseltamivir 75 mg bi-daily given for 5 days. Diuretics were introduced once the perfusion status had improved.
On Day 1, three myocardial biopsies were taken from the RV septum via right femoral venous access. Histological examination confirmed areas of acute and subacute myocardial necrosis, with perinecrotic lymphocytic inflammation. Giant-cell and necrotizing eosinophilic myocarditis could be excluded.
On Day 5, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) revealed substantial improvement in biventricular systolic function (LV-EF 46%, RV-EF 46%) with persisting biventricular thrombi [7 mm (LV), 3 mm (RV)] (–C; ). T2-weighted sequences [T2 map, short-tau inversion recovery (STIR)] showed a diffuse increase in LV wall T2 myocardial relaxation time and inflammation/oedema prominent in the inferolateral wall (STIR). Native T1 mapping also revealed increased relaxation times of the LV myocardium, with increased myocardial extracellular volume (ECV). Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging showed subepicardial enhancement of the infero-lateral wall from base to apex.
After weaning from vasoactive drugs, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, and beta-blocker were introduced. Heparin was switched to Rivaroxaban 20 mg once daily (OD). On Day 8, pre-discharge TTE showed complete normalization of the biventricular systolic function and absence of intracavitary thrombi . The patient was discharged 10 days following admission under Rivaroxaban 20 mg OD, Lisinopril 7.5 mg OD, and Metoprolol 50 mg OD. Restriction of physical activity for 6 months was advised. At 6 months follow-up, the patient remained symptom-free with normal cardiac function.