A 58-year-old man presented with a 5-week progressive left shoulder pain and functional impairment. There was no history of trauma, fever, chills, night sweats, malaise, or injections. His medical history only included multiple myeloma, currently in partial remission. A 4-week empiric antibiotic course with oral flucloxacillin and then ciprofloxacin had been previously prescribed with no improvement. Physical examination showed an afebrile, well-nourished man with an erythematous, swollen and tender area over the left SCJ and medial clavicle . At the beginning no skin wound or fistulae were present. A fluctuating mass was palpable and left shoulder motion was painful. Despite the full passive range of motion, painful restriction of active movement was present: 120° of forward flexion, 90° of abduction, 20° of external rotation and limited internal rotation to the level of the 5th lumbar vertebra. 2 weeks later, a fistula with a purulent discharge was documented .
Laboratory findings included increased white blood cell count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 78 mm/1st h and C-reactive protein of 18.8 mg/dL. Blood culture was positive for methicillin-susceptible S. aureus. CT scan revealed a fluid collection in the left SCJ and bony erosions and a periosteal reaction of the clavicular head and sternal body . Retrosternal spread of infection was excluded from the study.
Surgical debridement of the septic left SCJ under general anesthesia was performed. Exposure was made through a linear incision of about 11 cm in length, starting over the medial aspect of the clavicle and extending over the sternal body, over the anterior region of the left SCJ. Fistulectomy, drainage of the abscess and thorough irrigation were undertaken. Resection of the intra-articular disc, debridement of all devitalized tissue and curettage of both the clavicle head and lateral sternal body to healthy bone were performed. At the end of the procedure, the residual bone defect was measured approximately 1 cm in width and 1 cm in depth . Resected tissue cultures were positive for MRSA. Postoperatively, antibacterial therapy with intravenous linezolid (600 mg every 12 h) was administered for 14 days and was continued orally with levofloxacin (500 mg every 12 h) for 12 weeks, due to linezolid-induced myelosuppression.
The surgical wounds healed completely. 2 weeks postoperatively, the patient was pain-free with full active range of motion of the shoulder . CT scan performed at 6-month follow-up showed no signs of recurrent infection . At 18-months follow-up, the patient maintained a full range of motion with symmetrical strength in his left upper limb with no pain or tenderness in the surgical site .