A 34-year-old woman, gravida 1, para 1, with 45 days of amenorrhea presented to our gynecological clinic with lower abdominal pain for 10 days, denying a history of vaginal bleeding. She underwent a lower segment caesarean section and B-Lynch uterine compression suture at 38 weeks for postpartum hemorrhage caused by refractory uterine atony about 8 years ago, oligomenorrhea occurred since then. Gynecological examination revealed a slightly enlarged uterus and mild tenderness on the right side of the fundus. The serum β-HCG concentration was 76947.29 m IU/ml.
We performed a transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) scan, which showed an irregular uterus, with no endometrial lining. A gestational sac with a yolk sac and an embryonic pole was located in the right cornu, with a thin myometrium (2 mm) in the anterior wall of the fundus . Colour Doppler imaging revealed increased blood flow around the trophoblast . The sonographer misdiagnosed it as a right cornual pregnancy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a deformed uterus, with incomplete endometrium and junctional zone. A cystic structure at the fundus was not clearly separated from the myometrium, which was thinned adjacent to the cyst . The cyst protruded outward from the right side of the fundus, with a markedly thinned myometrium .
Because the diagnosis of right cornual pregnancy or IUP was unclear, exploratory laparoscopy and hysteroscopy were performed to further confirm this diagnosis.
Surgical Steps
The surgery consisted of two main steps: laparoscopy and hysteroscopy. laparoscopy and hysteroscopy were performed to confirm the diagnosis of IUP and to remove the gestational sac from the myometrium. The surgical steps were as follows:
Step 1: hysteroscopy.
Hysteroscopy was performed to examine the uterine cavity and the ostia. No sign of a gestational sac was found in the uterine cavity. The right ostium from the right fallopian tube was seen, but the left ostium was covered with an adhesive band. The uterine cavity was very narrow and fibrotic, and had no overlying endometrium, indicating severe intrauterine adhesions .
Step 2: laparoscopy.
laparoscopy was performed to examine the uterus and the adnexa. The uterus was enlarged to the size of a 7-week gestation, with normal bilateral adnexa. The omentum and the entire anterior wall and fundus of the uterus were densely adherent . The posterior wall of the uterus showed two light blue longitudinal stripes with some vessels on the surface, indicating the postoperative changes after B-Lynch sutures .
Step 3: Removal of the adhesions and the gestational sac.
The adhesions between the omentum and the uterus were removed by using electrocautery and scissors. A bluish-purple mass suggestive of the conception was found embedded in the myometrium and protruding from the right side of the fundus. This confirmed that the conception was not connected to the endometrial cavity. The serosa and myometrium above the gestational sac were thinned but not ruptured .
Step 4: Resection of the lesion and pathological examination.
Diluted pituitrin hypophysin was injected into the myometrium around the mass to reduce bleeding. An incision was made over the bulging myometrium. The lesion was resected and sent for routine pathological examination, which confirmed the presence of chorionic villi and decidua.
Step 5: Suturing of the uterine defect.
The uterine defect was sutured with 1 − 0 Vicryl in two layers: the endometrial and myometrial layers were sutured with interrupted stitches, and the seromyometrial layer was sutured with continuous locking stitches.
Surgical Outcomes and follow-up.
The surgery was successful and the patient recovered well. The estimated blood loss during the operation was around 100 ml. The patient’s serum β-HCG level decreased to 8112.8 mIU/ml on the third postoperative day and was discharged in good condition. A follow-up pelvic ultrasound revealed no complications. The patient was instructed to monitor β-HCG levels regularly until they normalized, and to refrain from pregnancy for at least one year. Because of the desire for fertility, the patient underwent hysteroscopic adhesiolysis and estrogen replacement therapy in our hospital within one year after the surgery. The menstrual volume has increased compared to before, and the B-ultrasound showed that the endometrium was slightly thicker than before, but the patient still did not conceive or have an ectopic pregnancy so far.