A 51-year-old woman was referred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at Tokyo Medical University Hospital for a closer evaluation and treatment of an asymptomatic firm mass in the left posterior maxillary site. Intraoral examination revealed a palpable mass located in the posterior lateral region of the left maxilla . The overlying mucosa was intact and normal in color. The firm mass was not movable. Laboratory data were within the normal limits. Computed tomography (CT) scan of her head and neck showed a clear circumscribed solid mass measuring 28 × 23 mm in size between the lateral aspect of the posterior maxilla and the anterior region of the masseter muscle with no evidence of maxillary bone involvement . There was no lymphadenopathy in the cervical region. Magnetic resonance imaging scans revealed homogeneously enhanced signal intensity on T1-weighted images after gadolinium administration and high signal intensity on Short T1 Inversion Recovery images . Incisional biopsy demonstrated benign lymphoid tissue. CT examination was conducted in the chest and abdominal region taking into consideration Castleman’s disease as a differential diagnosis. However, systemic lymphadenopathy was not recognized. The submucosal mass was completely excised under general anesthesia. In the course of the surgical resection, the mass was observed to be adjacent to the buccal fat pad.
Gross examination showed a solid mass measuring 38 × 23 × 17 mm in size, which was encapsulated with fibrous tissue . Microscopic examination revealed lymphocytic tissue composed of scattered lymphoid follicles with germinal centers and predominant small well-differentiated lymphocytes in the parafollicular area . The follicles showed various sizes of the germinal centers surrounded by well-defined mantle zones consisting of small lymphocytes . The germinal center contained a mixture of centrocytes and centroblasts with occasional tingible body macrophages . The nuclei of the centrocytes exhibited the cleaved type. The centroblasts had relatively large nuclei with prominent nucleoli. Penetration of vessels similarly to the hyaline vascular type in Castleman’s disease was observed in one part of the germinal centers. Immunohistological analysis demonstrated the positivity of lymphoid follicles for CD20 and CD79a . In particular, there were expressions for CD10, Bcl6, and Ki67 only in the germinal centers, whereas there was no expression for Bcl2 . The immunostaining for CD21 was characteristic of a reticular pattern highlighting the follicular dendritic cell networks . The parafollicular areas expressed CD3 and CD5, and were weakly positive for Bcl2 . Both areas showed CD45RO staining, but conversely not CD15 expression. CD45RO and CD15 images were not shown. Based on these findings, a final diagnosis of FLH was made. The patient has been free of local recurrence 1 year postexcision.