A 43-year-old woman presented with a complaint of progressive increase in difficulty sitting due to swellings on each buttock. She has a history of a similar swelling on the right knee, which was diagnosed as fat necrosis histopathologically after excision of the mass 1 year ago. She complained about the gluteal swellings only 15 days back due to the embarrassing site of the lump and because she started facing discomfort while sitting. On further inquiry, she reported that both the knee and gluteal swellings appeared at the same time 3 years back and have been growing since. She has no history of any trauma, surgery, fever, or abdominal pain. On examination, both gluteal masses were non-warm, non-tender, and approximately 8 cm × 5.5 cm in size. The lumps were firm and fixed with the skin, but were mobile over the deeper tissues.
Ultrasonography of both gluteal masses was done. It showed mixed echogenic heterogeneous fatty tissue in the gluteal region in subcutaneous planes, which suggested fat necrosis-inflammation more likely over lipomatous tumor. The left gluteal mass was then excised through an incision made directly over the lump . The lump was found adhered to the skin. The lump was removed along with the adherent skin and histopathological investigation was done, which supported a diagnosis of subcutaneous fat necrosis. Blood reports of the patient were normal except for slight anemia. There was no evidence of a prior attack of pancreatitis.
After left mass excision, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done to supplement the diagnosis ( and ). A fairly well-circumscribed oval abnormal signal intensity area in the skin and subcutaneous soft tissue was seen in the posterior right gluteal region. The lesion measured 7.3 × 2.4 × 4.9 cm in size (RL × depth × height) and showed low signal on T1w, T2w, and STIR sequences indicative of necrosis. Mild surrounding edema was seen around the lesion.
The patient is scheduled for excision of the mass from the right gluteal region after 2 months.