An 18-year-old female long-distance runner who belonged to her university’s road running club presented to our institution with a half-year history of persistent left hindfoot pain when running. She was of Japanese ethnicity and her height and weight were 162 cm and 45.1 kg, respectively. Her body mass index was 17.2. She had no history of previous trauma. However, she had a medical history of amenorrhea and iron deficiency anemia, which responded to iron supplementation. Her weekly training regimen consisted of cross-country jogging for 120 km, track jogging for 200 min, and speed exercise for 200 min.
Physical examination revealed hindfoot valgus of both feet and swelling on the hindfoot region and tenderness in the area slightly lateral to the lateral border of the Achilles tendon at the level of the distal malleolus. When the left ankle joint was forced into plantarflexion, she complained of pain in the left hindfoot region. However, ankle and hindfoot motion were within the full range. Plain radiographs of the left ankle showed no abnormality. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed a fracture line in the lateral tubercle of the posterior talar process. The fracture line was located just lateral to the groove for the flexor hallucis longus (FHL) tendon in the axial plane and positioned just proximal to the subtalar joint in the sagittal plane . Dual-energy X-ray absorption revealed that the Z-score was less than − 1.0, which was diagnosed as low bone density based on the diagnostic criteria of the American College of Sports Medicine . Based on the physical examination, medical history, and radiological findings, the diagnosis was stress fracture in the lateral tubercle of the posterior talar process. Immediately after diagnosis, conservative therapy, including non-weightbearing using a patellar tendon-bearing brace and low-intensity pulsed ultrasound, was started to facilitate consolidation of the fracture. However, the fracture did not show any signs of healing 3 months after instituting conservative therapy, so we opted for surgical intervention via two-portal access hindfoot endoscopy.
The operation was performed using a pneumatic tourniquet (280 mmHg) and general anesthesia with the patient in the prone position. Based on the procedure reported by van Dijk et al., posterolateral and posteromedial portals were created at the level of the tip of the lateral malleolus, just medial and lateral to the Achilles tendon . A 4.0-mm arthroscope with a 30° angle was introduced through the posterolateral portal, while a 4.0-mm motorized shaver was introduced through the posteromedial portal. Adipose tissue was dissected with the motorized shaver exposing the subtalar joint and the FHL tendon, which were landmarks for the insertion point of the screw . These landmarks were exposed under endoscopy, and a guidewire was then inserted through a sleeve approximately 5 mm lateral to the FHL tendon at a level just above the subtalar joint through the posteromedial portal. This seemed to be an adequate position to penetrate the fracture line according to preoperative radiological evaluation. Through the guidewire, a cannulated 3-mm double-threaded screw was inserted to fix the fracture in the lateral tubercle of the posterior talar process . After irrigation of the hindfoot space, each portal was sutured.
Postoperatively, a short leg cast was applied for 4 weeks, and then walking using a patellar tendon-bearing brace was started. Active range of motion exercises were allowed 4 weeks postoperatively, and non-weightbearing was continued until 10 weeks postoperatively. Non-contrast CT at 10 weeks postoperatively revealed consolidation of the stress fracture , so the brace was removed and full weightbearing was started. At 15 weeks postoperatively, the patient was permitted to jog and return to athletic activity while wearing an orthosis. At that time, her running form was examined and she was found to have overpronation at heel strike when running without the orthosis. Her running coach and trainer worked with her to improve her running form, core strength, and static and dynamic alignment. She had no relevant symptoms 5 months postoperatively. As of this writing 2 years postoperative, she remains an active competitive runner.