A 28-year-old male presented to an emergency department with closed injury to the right knee and right leg; when the bike, he was riding collided with an oncoming truck. On admission, 3-h post-injury, physical examination revealed a painful, swollen right knee. The patient was unable to perform active straight movement of involved limb. No signs of acute ischemia of the lower limb or neurologic deficit were present. Standard anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs revealed distal end femur fracture with ipsilateral shaft tibia fracture (, ) but were inadequate to define the exact fracture pattern. Non-contrast computed tomographic (CT) scan was performed which established the diagnosis of Bicondylar Hoffa fracture with fracture ipsilateral tibia . Patient was operated in supine posture, with Swashbuckler approach exposing knee joint. After anatomical reduction, five 6.5 mm partly threaded cancellous lag screws were inserted into the non-articular section, two for lateral condyle, and three for medial condyle. Recon plate which was pre-contoured to match the curvature of the lateral condyle surface was applied in a buttress mode to prevent the proximal migration/displacement of the lateral condyle. The wound was closed in layers and post operatively above knee back slab with 30° of knee flexion was applied for 2 weeks. The key step during fixation was to maintain the knee in flexed position because it relaxed the posterior capsule and the gastrocnemius while also protecting the neurovascular structure.
After 2 weeks, knee mobilization started and partial weight bearing started 6-week postoperatively and full weight bearing by 3 and half month when the fracture had united radiographically . At 12-month follow-up, there is no signs of avascular necrosis, osteoarthritis, or implant breakage (, ) and patient had 20–120° range of motion without pain and deformity and functional assessment of patient score was excellent. Patient is able to squat, sit cross leg, climb stairs, and do all his activity of daily living in his latest follow-up . shows compiling previous reported Bicondylar Hoffa fracture, its management, and outcomes.