A 62-year-old woman was admitted to Onomichi General Hospital in 2017 with a suspected pancreatic tumor. Her medical history included hilar cholangiocarcinoma (poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, intermediate type, INFß, pat Bp, ly1, v0, pn0, hinf2, hm0, dm0, em2, 3 cm × 2 cm × 2 cm, T3N0M0 stage IIA, UICC version 6) at the age of 53 years and cervical cancer at the age of 55 years. Each of these was curatively resected. PJS was diagnosed by the presence of hamartomatous polyps in the gastrointestinal tract and melanin pigmentation on the hands 20 years ago . Family history revealed that her son was also diagnosed with PJS. There was no chief complaint. Level of the tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was elevated at 6.7 ng/ml; squamous cell carcinoma antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19–9, and laboratory data were within the normal limits. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a cystic tumor consisting of mural nodules at the pancreatic head; the maximal diameter was 15 mm. The tumor border was enhanced in the early phase, and the inner portion of the tumor showed low density . Tumor enhancement was prolonged in the delayed phase . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the tumor with low intensity on T1-weighted images, high intensity on T2-weighted images, and heterogeneously high intensity on diffusion-weighted images . Endoscopic ultrasound sonography (EUS) showed a high echoic tumor at the pancreatic head . Fine-needle aspiration biopsy confirmed adenocarcinoma. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showed no dilation of the papilla of Vater, or mucin production. There was no connection between the tumor and the main pancreatic duct . The preoperative diagnosis was intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma (IPMC; T1N0M0, stage IA). Subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy was duly performed (operation time, 697 min; bleeding volume, 1200 ml). The pathological diagnosis was IPMC, and the final tumor stage was TisN0M0, stage 0. The patient was subsequently discharged without any complications 20 days after the surgery. There was no recurrence over the 11 month follow-up period.