A 73-year old woman was referred to our surgical department from a breast out-patient clinic, with a 1-year history of observation for subareolar tumor of right breast. Her medical history included arterial hypertension and osteoporosis. On clinical examination the tumor was palpable, approximately 2 cm in diameter, movable in relation to surrounding breast tissue and chest wall, axillary lymph nodes were not involved. Control mammography confirmed subareolar localization of the tumor, ranging from 11 to 15 mm in diameter. Biopsy revealed infiltrating ductal carcinoma, ER-75%, PR (-). A modified right radical mastectomy with level I and II lymph node dissection was performed without any complications. The wound was drained with two 16Fr, low pressure suction, silicone drains. One of the drains was placed in the axilla, a second was placed along the wound between skin flaps and greater pectoral muscle. Additionally external compressive dressing was placed on the wound site. Drainage volume declined from 220 ml on first post operative day to 50 ml on the sixth postoperative day and drainage was removed, total drained volume was 780 ml. Postoperative shoulder movements were not restricted and rehabilitation exercises started on the third postoperative day. The patient was discharged on the 7-th postoperative day. On control visit, 4 days after discharge, for skin sutures removal, patient showed with a palpable and symptomatic seroma in the wound site. She has undergone puncture with evacuation of 240 ml of clear serous fluid. Since then punctures were performed 2–3 times a week. Indication for puncture was symptomatic seroma causing pain and impairment of shoulder movement. Volume of clear serous fluid evacuated from wound site ranged from 120 ml to 260 ml per puncture. Additionally compressive dressings with elastic bandage were applied on the wound site. During the time of postoperative chemotherapy, the patient developed deep veins thrombosis of the lower extremities. Treatment with low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin), increased the volume of evacuated fluid. On control USG there was no impairment of flow in axillary vessels, but USG of the wound showed spindle like container with thickened wall. Because volume of drainage didn't decline, after having finished chemotheraphy patient was qualified for operation as soon as symptoms of deep vein thrombosis diminished. Due to the large volume of drainage from the wound, we took into consideration not only inflammatory exudation as a cause, but also lymphatic origin of effusion. In this case surgical excision with closure of dead space may cause arm swelling in postoperative course. Because the patient didn't agree for lymphangiography, we decided to inject 2 ml of Patent Blue V dye subcutaneously in the right arm and fore arm 30 min before operation, in order to stain upper extremity lymph vessels confluence. The skin incision was done in the line of previous wound. The spindle-like serous pouch was located in the subcutaneous tissue on the greater pectoral muscle, with its lateral end forming vessel like structure and penetrating deep in to posterior site of axilla. . After opening the reservoir, since there was no sign of stain in the lumen and containing fluid was clear, we assumed that there is only a little risk of arm swelling and lymph edema after resection of reservoir and closing of supporting vessel. After resection of reservoir, we visualized the route of the vessel supplying the reservoir by injection of Patent Blue V dye in to its lumen. The stained vessel branched on the lateral side of trunk and penetrated deep into intercostals of chest. All branches of stained vessel were closed separately. The wound was closed without suturing the dead space between the skin and greater pectoral muscle. The low pressure suction drain 16Fr was placed into axilla. Volume of drainage declined from 150 ml on first postoperative day to 50 ml on the fourth postoperative day, and drainage was removed. The patient was discharged on sixth postoperative day. She required two more punctures of serous fluid of total volume 140 ml, collected in the wound site. On the postoperative histological examination the seroma wall appeared to be composed of fibrous tissue with marked eosinophilic hyaline degeneration of collagen and weak predominantly lymphocyte infiltration. No epithelium was present on the inner surface of the seroma capsule. Despite accurate examination of the seroma wall no evidence of connection to lymphatic vessels was found, either macro- or microscopically