A 59-year-old female was diagnosed in 2008 with stage I, grade 2, invasive ductal carcinoma, estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor positive, Her2/neu nonamplified, of the right breast. Sentinel lymph node biopsy was negative. She was treated with lumpectomy, adjuvant radiation with a brief course of tamoxifen, then anastrozole, with both medications self-discontinued due to toxicities.
In 2013, a screening mammogram revealed bilateral abnormalities, and bilateral biopsies revealed invasive ductal carcinoma, estrogen and progesterone receptor positive. She underwent bilateral mastectomy and was found to have extranodal disease. Positron emission tomography scan showed diffuse metastasis to the bones, spine, and scalp with biopsy confirmation of metastatic disease. She was treated with numerous chemotherapeutics and radiation therapy and enrolled in a clinical trial.
In November 2015, she noted a thickening of the right upper eyelid and missing eyelashes, and in February 2016, the patient was seen in the Oculoplastics Service. She denied any pain from the area and only noted it when she went to apply mascara.
Her examination at the time of consultation was best-corrected visual acuity of 20/40 in the right eye and 20/30 in the left eye. Pupils were without relative afferent pupillary defect. Her extraocular motility was full. Her examination was notable for an area of central madarosis and lid margin thickening of the right upper lid resulting in lid margin eversion; there was no ulceration of the lesion .
A biopsy was performed the same day under local anesthesia in the office. Biopsy of the right upper eyelid showed infiltrative aggregates of tumor cells with scant cytoplasm in the dermis, with limited involvement of the epidermis. Cytologic detail was obscured by crush artifact, but there was no visible cytoplasmic vacuolization to suggest sebaceous or other glandular differentiation . Single file growth was evident. The tumor cells were immunopositive for cytokeratin 7, Cam5.2 (contains cytokeratins 7/8), and epithelial membrane antigen .
After her positive eyelid biopsy, it was considered as evidence of disease progression. She discontinued the clinical trial and was started on fulvestrant with palbociclib. She has had mixed response by positron emission tomography and tumor markers but was overall stable.