The patient, a 68-year-old man, was admitted with a complaint of epigastralgia and anorexia. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 13.6-cm hypovascular tumor in his left hepatic lobe, and he was referred to our hospital. No notable abnormalities were observed in his physical examination nor in his blood examination, including hepatobiliary enzymes. His tumor marker levels were carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 81.5 ng/ml; carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, 28 U/ml; α-fetoprotein (AFP), 5.0 ng/ml; and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonists-II (PIVKA-II), 14 mAU/m. A CT scan showed a 13.6-cm hypovascular tumor in his left hepatic lobe . Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) demonstrated high FDG uptake (SUVmax 4.9) in the peripheral region of the mass . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large, irregular lobulated mass (major diameter 128 mm) in the lateral segment of the liver, with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high intensity on T2-weighted images. We observed no change in his preoperative esophagogastroduodenoscopy or colonofiberscopy; no evidence of intrahepatic metastasis, distant metastasis, or lymph node metastasis on systemic CT; and no abnormal uptake on FDG-PET.
From this investigation, we diagnosed this tumor as intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, mass-forming type. We performed a left lobe and caudate resection without major intraoperative complications (surgical time 379 min; total bleeding 306 g; resected liver weight: 821 g). This patient had no postoperative complication and was discharged home on postoperative day 9. He underwent adjuvant chemotherapy (TS-1™) and had no recurrence for 6 months.
Macroscopic pathological examination found a mucous lobulated tumor that occupied most of the resected left liver lobe . In microscopic examination, columnar tumor cells with abundant cytoplasmic mucus were arranged as tubular or low-papillary structures without delicate fibrovascular cores . Profuse extracellular mucus was also observed in the region, with tumor cells in mucus lakes . Although small areas of non-invasive growth were seen to line the luminal bile duct surface, most of the tumor cells infiltrated the liver parenchyma. Cancer cells were microscopically seen to have invaded the portal vein, but the resection margin was negative. These tumor cells produced abundant mucus; histological staining was positive for MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC6. Staining for cholangiocarcinoma marker (CK7) was positive, but colorectal carcinoma marker (CK20 and CDX2) and HCC marker (Hep-Par1, AFP, and Glypican3) were negative . Therefore, we classified this tumor as a cholangiocarcinoma rare variant, mucinous carcinoma.