A 52-year-old Japanese male had cough, dyspnea, and lower leg edema for a couple of weeks. At first, he visited a primary physician but after then he was referred and hospitalized in our institution. This subject did not have any pheochromocytoma-specific complains such as headache, palpitation, and perspiration. He had a health check every year but no abnormalities had been pointed out. He had no past history of hypertension; his blood pressure had been within normal range without any anti-hypertensive drugs. This subject had no family history about diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, or endocrine disorders except for stomach cancer in his father. On admission, his height, body weight, and body mass index were 178.0 cm, 66.0 kg, and 20.8 kg/m2. Blood pressure, heart rate, and body temperature were 110/78 mmHg, 118 beats/minute, and 37.0°C. shows clinical parameters on admission in this subject. Anemia and hypoalbuminemia were observed as follows: hemoglobin, 11.1g/dl; albumin, 2.6 g/dl. HbA1c was mildly higher, although fasting plasma glucose was within normal range. Moderate liver dysfunction was observed. In endocrinology markers, noradrenaline level was as high as 7,693 pg/ml (reference range: 100−450 pg/ml), whereas adrenaline level (40 pg/ml) was within normal range (reference range: 0−100 pg/ml). Dopamine level (29 pg/ml) was slightly higher compared to reference range (0−20 pg/ml). In urinalysis, similar results were obtained. Noradrenaline level in urine was as high as 2,946.6 µg/day (reference range: 48.6−168.4 µg/day), whereas adrenaline level (40 µg/day) was slightly higher compared to reference range (3.4−26.9 µg/day). Dopamine level in urine (1,175.9 µg/day) was slightly higher compared to reference range (365.0−961.5 µg/day). Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was markedly increased up to 943.7 pg/ml (reference range: 0−18.4 pg/ml). It has been reported that VEGF and its receptor are present in adrenal tissues in subjects with malignant pheochromocytoma and that the presence of them would be useful for differentiation between benign and malignant pheochromocytoma (–). In addition, it was reported that multi-kinase inhibitors such as sunitinib are effective especially in subjects with malignant pheochromocytoma producing VEGF . VEGF level was also as high as 116 pg/ml (reference range: 0−38.3 pg/ml).
In chest X-ray, permeability was reduced in bilateral lower lung field and butterfly shadow was observed. Cardio-thoracic ratio (CTR) was 59.8% and both costophrenic angles (CPA) were blunt . Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a 50-mm hyper-vascularized tumor with calcification in the right adrenal gland and multiple hyper-vascularized tumors in the liver . The right adrenal gland showed round shape and a mixture of high- and low-density area. In addition, since there was thin adipose tissue between the right adrenal gland and the kidney and inferior vena cava, there seemed to be no infiltration into surrounding organs. Similar findings were observed in the right adrenal gland and the liver in contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging. In 131I MIBG scintigraphy, there was high accumulation in the right adrenal gland and multiple accumulation in the liver, and there was small hot spot in the sternum and right rib . In echocardiography, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was as low as 14.3%, and left ventricular enlargement and diffuse wall motion abnormality were observed. In order to examine whether or not this subject had stenosis in the coronary arteries, coronary angiography was performed while blocking α-adrenergic pathway to secure circulating plasma volume. In coronary angiography, however, there was no significant stenosis in the coronary arteries. Based on various findings such as heart failure symptoms, increased catecholamine level, right adrenal tumor, accumulation in the adrenal gland, liver, and bone in 131I MIBG scintigraphy, we finally diagnosed him as malignant pheochromocytoma accompanied by multiple liver and bone metastases. Since there was no significant stenosis in the coronary arteries in coronary angiography, we thought that drastic reduction of cardiac function was brought about by catecholamine cardiomyopathy.
We started 20 mg of furosemide, 7.5 mg of tolvaptan for heart failure in this subject. Furthermore, we used 2,000 µg/day of carperitide for 1 week. BNP and CTR were gradually decreased by such treatment, and about 2 months later BNP and CTR were decreased to 262.8 pg/ml and 53.3%, respectively. LVEF was gradually increased by such treatment, and about 2 months later, LVEF was increased up to 23.7%. Although blood pressure was stable (approximately 100–120/60–80 mmHg), we started 4 mg of adrenergic α1 blocker doxazosin together with the above-mentioned furosemide or tolvaptan, and gradually increased its dose up to 16 mg before the operation in order to secure circulating plasma volume by blocking α1-receptor stimulation and to avoid excessive drop of blood pressure after the operation.
About 2 months later, right adrenal tumor resection was performed together with left hepatic lobectomy and cholecystectomy. As shown in , noradrenaline level was markedly decreased after the operation. VEGF level was as high as 144 pg/ml before the operation, but it was markedly decreased to <20 pg/ml after the operation (reference range: 0−38.3 pg/ml). These data clearly indicate that malignant pheochromocytoma in this subject actually secreted VEGF. In addition, parathyroid (PTH)-related protein level was also quite high before the operation (2.2 pmol/L), but it was markedly decreased to ≤1.0 pmol/L after the operation (reference range: 0−1.1 pmol/L), indicating that malignant pheochromocytoma in this subject secreted PTH-related protein as well. Calcium level and corrected calcium level were 8.5 and 9.9 mg/dl both of which were within reference range (8.5–10.4 mg/dl). In immunostaining of the resected adrenal gland, large alveolar structure, spindle-shaped cell pattern, vein invasion, and capsular invasion were observed. Thus, pheochromocytoma of adrenal gland scoring scale (PASS) was 7 points, indicating that pheochromocytoma in this subject was quite aggressive. In hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining of the resected left hepatic lobe, there was small solid alveolar structure with a lot of relatively small cells and spindle-shaped nuclei were observed in some of such cells . In addition, in chromogranin A staining, many chromogranin A-producing cells were observed. These data further strengthened the diagnosis that this subject had the metastasis of pheochromocytoma.
After the operation, radiation therapy (36Gy) was performed. In addition, chemotherapy was performed using cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine. Consequently, there was no recurrence for 2 years after the operation. Noradrenaline levels continued to be within normal range for 2 years. Furthermore, LVEF was increased up to around 40%, suggesting that that drastic reduction of cardiac function in this subject was brought about by catecholamine cardiomyopathy. It is noted, however, that MIBG therapy would have been more appropriate and have more favorable effects on this subject.