A 27-year-old primigravida patient, at 10 + 1 weeks of amenorrhea, with a spontaneously conceived pregnancy, was referred to the obstetrics and gynecology department, Aswan University Hospitals for assessment of the fetal location. The patient did not complain of any abdominal pain or abnormal vaginal bleeding. The vital signs of the patient were stable. The ultrasound machine used was Voluson S8, with a transvaginal ultrasound probe of 7 MHz (Voluson™, GE Healthcare Technologies Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA). The transvaginal ultrasound revealed an empty uterus, and the gestational sac was seen occupying the cervix with a characteristic barrel-shaped sign . The crown-rump length was 48.5 mm, corresponding to 11 + 5 weeks. The fetal heart rate was 160 beats/minute, and the fetal movements were appreciated at the time of the ultrasound examination. The placenta was seen at the caudal part of the cervix. A color Doppler ultrasound confirmed the placental location and showed a retroplacental line of high blood velocity. When applying gentle pressure using the transvaginal ultrasound probe, the gestational sac was not sliding against the cervical canal (negative sliding sign). There was no free fluid in the pouch of Douglas, and both adnexa were looking normal. The ß-human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-hCG) serum level was 108,730 IU/L on the day of presentation. The patient’s height was 1.6 m, and her weight was 60 kg. The patient was admitted to the inpatient ward and was counseled by two senior obstetricians about the administration of systemic plus intraamniotic methotrexate therapy.
The calculated dose of methotrexate was 60 mg (1 mg/kg). The plan was to inject 60 mg of methotrexate intra-amniotically via a suprapubic insertion of a spinal anesthesia cannula and to administer another dose of 60 mg of methotrexate intramuscularly after 24 h. The suprapubic route was agreed on rather than the transcervical route to avoid the transplacental insertion of the cannula and the resultant significant bleeding. An informed written consent was obtained from the patient after explaining the benefits and the risks of the procedure.
The day of the procedure (day 0) was on the day after the admission. The patient was transferred to the theater room and spinal anesthesia was administrated. After the effect of spinal anesthesia ensued, evacuation of the bladder was done using a metal urinary catheter, and the patient was put in a lithotomy position. A bimanual examination of the patient was done, and the cervical pregnancy could be palpated two-finger breadth above the symphysis pubis. Under the transvaginal ultrasound guidance, we inserted a 20-gauge spinal anesthesia cannula in the suprapubic region directed towards the cervical pregnancy to administer the intraamniotic methotrexate. Once the cannula was seen inside the amniotic cavity, 2 cm of amniotic fluid was aspirated to confirm the location of the cannula. Then 60 mg of methotrexate was injected slowly inside the amniotic cavity. The flush of the methotrexate solution was appreciated on the ultrasound machine.
The patient was transferred back to the inpatient ward. The pulse and blood pressure were closely monitored in the first 2 h, and they remained within the normal values. After 12 h, a transabdominal ultrasound showed that the fetal heartbeats were still visible at 150 beats/minute. There was no free fluid in the pouch of Douglas. The patient did not report any pain or vaginal bleeding on the day of the procedure.
On the day after the procedure (day 01), 60 mg of methotrexate was administered intramuscularly. On day 02, the patient reported minimal vaginal spotting; however, the fetal heartbeats were still visible at 155 beats/minute, but the fetal movements were significantly diminished. On day 03, a color Doppler ultrasound confirmed the absence of fetal cardiac activity, and the pregnancy was anhydramnios.
On day 07 after the procedure, the ß-hCG serum level was 37,397 IU/L. On day 13, the cervical pregnancy completely collapsed on ultrasound. We counseled the patient about suction and evacuation of the products of conception to expedite her recovery and shorten the duration of her hospital stay. The patient was transferred to the theatre on day 13 for suction evacuation of the products of conception. Mild bleeding was noted from the pregnancy site during the procedure, and an intracervical Foley catheter balloon was compressed against the pregnancy site and successfully controlled the bleeding. The patient’s pulse and blood pressure were within normal levels in the first 24 h after the suction evacuation procedure.
On day 15 after the procedure, the ß-hCG serum level was 239. The patient was then discharged and was asked to perform a serum ß-hCG level weekly. On day 34, the ß-hCG was negative .