The patient, a 3-year-old boy and the second child of Iranian non-consanguineous parents, presented with gross hematuria and edema. He had a history of lethargy, rhinorrhea and a mild fever 10 days before admission.
In the physical examination, the patient had normal growth (weight: 14.5 Kg (CDC percentile: 52%), height: 96 cm (CDC percentile: 59%)) and blood pressure (105/70 mmHg). Other physical examinations were normal. A summary of laboratory findings is presented in . In the laboratory evaluation, the urine volume was decreased to 1 cc/Kg/h. In the first urine analysis, many red blood cells (>60% dysmorphic red blood cell (RBCs)) and proteinuria (3+) were detected. The random urine protein/creatinine ratio was within the nephrotic range. The patient had anemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypertriglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia. The serum creatinine level was high but gradually normalized in the next few days. The serum complement 3 level was initially low (C3: 75 mg/dL) but then normalized (C3: 88 mg/dL).
The primary diagnosis was PIGN. Due to persistent proteinuria and gross hematuria with variable severity, he underwent a kidney biopsy 6 weeks later. The results showed mesangial hypercellularity in all glomeruli, segmental endocapillary proliferation with polymorphonuclear cell infiltration and rare foci of glomerular basement membrane (GBM) thickening . Immunofluorescence staining, scattered capillary and mesangial IgG and C3 deposits along GBM and mesangium. Based on these findings and the clinical course, a diagnosis of atypical PIGN was made.
Two months later, the UA showed mild proteinuria and 50–60 RBCs. The random urine protein/creatinine ratio was 6.0. The refractory form of PIGN was suspected and treatment with prednisolone 2 mg/kg was started. Within the first week of corticosteroid administration, the patient developed hypertension and epistaxis; therefore, captopril 1 mg/kg was added to the regimen. Two weeks later, hypoalbuminemia (Alb: 2.1 g/dL) following nephrotic-range proteinuria (U/A protein: +1 and urine protein 24 h: 1524 mg/dL) was detected. Five days later, proteinuria (U/A protein: +1 and urine protein 24 h: 770) and hematuria (U/A RBCs: 25–60) improved but persisted.
One month later, prednisolone was tapered to every other day. Captopril was later discontinued due to hypotension.
At the time, the serum C3 level was 183, serum albumin was 2.3 g/dL, and the random urine protein/creatinine ratio of 1.5.
The patient’s parents were medical nurses and evaluated him carefully using urine dipsticks every day. They noticed a relationship between the consumption of dairy products and the degree of proteinuria. When the patient received dairy products, the degree of proteinuria in the dipstick test increased from 1+ to 2+. Allergy consultation recommended food allergy-induced protein loss. Based on the prick test, the patient received a hypoallergic diet and prednisolone was discontinued. The patient’s anemia improved (Hb: 11 mg/dL), serum creatinine decreased (Cr: 0.4 mg/dL), and serum albumin increased (Alb: 2.8 g/dL). Two weeks later, the urine dysmorphic RBCs reduced to 15% and the 24 h protein level decreased to 198 mg/dL) (protein/Cr ratio: 0.8). Three weeks after commencing the hypoallergic regimen, the U/A showed 1+ proteinuria and 5% dysmorphic RBCs. Three weeks later, no further proteinuria was evident. In the last follow-up 1 year after starting a hypoallergic diet, the patient had no other manifestations, and the U/A was completely normal.