A 24-year-old South Asian man presented to our hospital with a progressively enlarging swelling that started on the left side of his neck and extended inferior to the clavicle increasing in size over a period of 6 months. His opposite upper limb and neck region were normal. He had no co-morbidities.
On examination a 10 × 12 cm globular, firm, non-pulsatile and immobile swelling was palpable on the left side of his neck. Tinel’s sign was negative on percussion. The lateral border of swelling was felt in the apex of axilla; it had smooth lobulated borders. He did not have any motor or sensory deficits. However, the brachial, radial, and ulnar artery pulses were absent. There was no locoregional lymphadenopathy and no metastasis. The clinical staging was stage 3 tumor (T3, N0, M0) according to the tumour, nodes and metastasis (TNM) classification.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-encapsulated 7.4 cm × 9.2 cm × 13.6 cm, ovoid-shaped, heterogeneous lesion in the left interscalene and posterior triangle, the costoclavicular space, and retropectoralis minor space with hypointense areas on T2/short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) and hyperintense with isointense areas on T1 with fluid levels . Arterial duplex showed monophasic flow in his distal subclavian artery and vein. An ultrasound-guided biopsy proved the swelling to be synovial sarcoma with positive TLE1, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), CD56 and CD57 with weak positive S100 and SYT-SSX1 translocation in immunohistopathology. At a multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting with medical oncology it was suggested that excision of the lesion be attempted (in view of size and possibility of partial debulking surgery only) followed by adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy (RT).
The mass was approached through a supraclavicular and infraclavicular approach to the brachial plexus with clavicle osteotomy. Immediately after the clavicle osteotomy the radial pulse was palpable. There was a good dissection plane between tumor and parts of the brachial plexus. The trunks, divisions, and cords of the brachial plexus were in contact with the superior and posterior borders of the mass. The mass arose from the C8 root and lower trunk; the tumor was successfully dissected out from the C8 root and lower trunk. The mass enveloped the mid and distal subclavian artery along its superior-posterior border . The mass was excised as a whole from the subclavian artery leaving no lesion behind, macroscopically. After the excision of the mass, the clavicle was fixed with a 6-hole dynamic compression plate (DCP). His postoperative period was uneventful. The postoperative volume of the brachial, radial, and ulnar pulses was better than intraoperative volume.
The histopathology was reported as intermediate grade synovial sarcoma with SYT-SSX1 translocation in immunohistopathology. Since it was near marginal excision and the lesion was of intermediate grade, the oncology MDT meeting decided on adjuvant RT based on the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines . He underwent a full course of RT that included cobalt-60 gamma rays with dose delivered at 66 Gy to mid-plane in 33 fractions. Field size reduction was done after 46 Gy. At 6-month follow-up there were no clinical or radiological signs of recurrence.