A 14-year-old male adolescent presented to the emergency department with subfebrile temperatures for 1 week and localized pain in his right popliteal fossa for 3 days. Prior to the onset of these symptoms, he had been immobilized for several days following a minor sports injury.
The adolescent had no permanent medication and no prior medical history except for an asymptomatic ATD diagnosed at the age of six by functional antithrombin assay (antithrombin activity of 57%, age adapted reference: 77–125%). Since at that time, there were no clinical signs of thrombosis, the diagnosis of ATD did not lead to any therapeutic consequences. Screening for ATD at this early age had been carried out on parental request, as his mother was diagnosed with ATD in her early adulthood. Interestingly, his mother now reported that she had very recently been diagnosed with IVCA (preexisting chromogenic test results showed an antithrombin activity of 50% for the mother, the age adjusted reference range being 80 to 130%).
The coexistence of other hereditary thrombophilic disorders in our patient and his mother (protein S deficiency, protein C deficiency, factor V Leiden mutation, prothrombin-mutation, antiphospholipid syndrome) was ruled out by respective laboratory analyses.
Laboratory blood analysis in the emergency department showed markedly elevated D-dimers of 25 mg/l FEU (reference: < 0.5 mg/l FEU) and of C-reactive protein (CrP) of 184 mg/l (reference < 5 mg/l). Antithrombin activity on admission was reduced to 61% (age adjusted reference 83–118%).
A vascular ultrasound examination upon admission confirmed the clinically suspected thrombosis of the right lower extremity involving the external iliac, common and superficial femoral as well as the popliteal vein. The ultrasound examination of the left lower extremity veins did not give evidence of thromboses upon admission. The patient was treated with continuous infusion of unfractionated heparin at a therapeutical dose including several bolus administrations and antithrombin (4000 IE within the first 36 h) was substituted reaching levels in the target range between 80 and 100%. Subsequent monitoring of the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) showed an insufficient response to heparin treatment (aPTT was 29 s before the administration of heparin and did not exceed a maximum value of 33.6 s during heparin treatment). The anticoagulative therapy was therefore switched to direct thrombin inhibition by argatroban at a dose of 1.5–2.0 μg/kg/min, which led to target aPTT values of 50–60s.
Due to the elevated CrP levels and subfebrile temperatures, empirical antibiotic treatment with intravenous cefuroxim was initiated.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan on day three confirmed a complete DVT of the right lower extremity, and now additionally extended thromboses of the left lower extremity and thrombosis of both iliac vessels. Furthermore, it revealed an occlusion of the inferior vena cava (IVC) with prominent venous lumbar collaterals, suggestive of IVCA. Surrounding the lumbar vertebrae, several of these collaterals appeared to be fully thrombotic, which was confirmed by angiography .
The following day, a catheter-directed local thrombolysis using recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) at a daily dose of 0.25 mg/kg was initiated in both extremities and carried out for a total of 48 h. For the right leg, an additional ultrasound-accelerated thrombolysis using the EKOS® system was performed.
During hospitalization, the anticoagulative therapy was switched from argatroban to the vitamin K antagonist phenprocoumon with a target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2.0–2.5. Oral anticoagulation will most likely be continued lifelong due to the combination of extended multilocal thromboses with underlying ATD, as well as IVCA, which in itself is a risk factor for thrombosis.
The patient was discharged on day eight after hospital admission. An ultrasound examination upon discharge showed full recanalization of the femoral and iliac veins of both legs.
During a routine follow-up 1 week later, the patient presented free of any clinical complaints. However, despite continued oral anticoagulation since hospital discharge, vascular ultrasound now revealed extended re-thrombosis of both the right and left pelvic axis and the right lower extremity, thus leading to a second hospital admission and re-induction of therapy with both intravenous antithrombin and catheter-directed thrombolysis.
Recanalization of the right lower extremity and pelvic axis was subsequently achieved, whereby IVC occlusion was confirmed . However, the left pelvic vessels remained thrombotic even after 5 days of catheter-directed thrombolysis.
Surprisingly, one of the angiographies allowed for location of the occluded area of the IVC by rendezvous-technique between the superior and inferior vena cava, which prior to this had been thought to be atretic . The vessel was successfully recanalized using balloon dilation and subsequent stenting .
Throughout the clinical stay, the patient’s oral anticoagulation with phenprocoumon was intensified to a new target INR of 2.5–3.0 in order to prevent re-thrombosis.
The patient was discharged from hospital on day seven after admission. Regular follow-up examinations at our outpatient clinic did not give evidence for any new thrombotic events to date (time since first occurrence of thrombosis was 9 months).
Concerning the thrombotic left iliac vessels, a follow-up angiographic intervention relying on special equipment was performed, but recanalization could not be achieved.
Fortunately, the IVC of the patient’s mother could also be recanalized by angiographic intervention.