This 44-year-old right-handed, previously healthy man was filing and carrying wooden crates of food items inside a warehouse in upstate New York when he was bitten by a cat-eyed snake (Leptodeira, of undetermined species). The crates originated from southern Texas. There were two puncture wounds in the distal third of the anterior aspect of the left forearm . The pain was agonizing and his left hand was quite stiff, erythematous, and swollen. He managed to take a photograph of the snake with his cell phone. The snake eventually escaped. Within a few hours, the skin over the bite site burst, followed by fever, chills, nausea, and light-headedness. A few hours later, he went to a local clinic where he underwent asepsis and antisepsis over the bite site along with the local application of steroid medication and analgesic. Antivenom was not given. He never developed respiratory difficulties, renal failure, oculo-visual symptoms, limb paralysis, bulbar muscle weakness, or hemorrhagic diathesis.
In subsequent months after the wound began to heal, a constellation of signs and symptoms consistent with CRPS—hyperalgesia, swelling, alternating cool and warm sensation, dermal changes (discoloration and smoothening of the skin), and mild flexion contractures of the fingers—evolved gradually . Sporadic, arrhythmic, brief and sudden involuntary movements that occurred during emotional tension and anxiety, and subsided when distracted, developed in the upper extremities and trunk.
Apart from the clinical signs of CRPS, the general physical and neurologic examination showed no findings that would correlate with the abnormalities in the left upper extremity.
Normal laboratory test procedures included a hemogram, metabolic profiles, a rheumatological screening, a conventional electroencephalogram (performed simultaneously with involuntary movements), a nerve conduction examination, and an electromyogram. Magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spine showed mild bulging discs and mild foraminal stenosis at the C6-7 level. The bone scan, which showed normal three-phase activity, was not deemed necessary to repeat, in view of clear signs of CRPS as the condition progressed.
Despite the intake of gabapentin, pregabalin, valproic acid, primidone and duloxetine, the pain and myoclonic movements did not subside significantly. Concerns about addiction and drug dependence precluded the use of narcotic analgesics and benzodiazepines. Physical therapy was also not helpful. Various bureaucratic issues prevented the institution of sympathetic nerve blocks and various alternative therapeutic modalities.