The chief complaints were menopause for 31 + 2 wk and an abnormal fetal heart rate (FHR) for 1 d.
This was a 29-year-old patient with a gravidity 1 parity 0 (G1P0). The patient had regular menstrual cycles, with the last menstrual period on July 11, 2022. The expected date of confinement was April 18, 2023. The patient had no apparent signs of early pregnancy complications. Also, she had no history of radiation exposure or adverse medication use during early pregnancy to protect the fetus. Throughout the pregnancy, no significant abnormalities were observed in nuchal translucency value measurements, Down’s screening results, or four-dimensional color ultrasounds. The oral glucose tolerance test results indicated higher fasting blood glucose levels than normal, leading to a diagnosis of gestational diabetes. Symptomatic treatment was provided through dietary adjustments and appropriate exercise; however, blood glucose monitoring in later stages was not reported. The patient had no complaints of dizziness, blurred vision, or palpitations during pregnancy. At 31 + 2 wk of gestation, the fluctuations in FHR were detected during an outpatient visit. The patient was mentally and emotionally stable throughout her pregnancy without any sleep disturbances or changes in appetite. She did not experience fever or chills nor exhibited symptoms such as coughing or production of sputum. The weight gain was approximately 20 kg while maintaining normal bowel movements and urine output without discomfort related to excessive drinking/eating/urination patterns observed by the patient herself. The blood pressure readings were within normal range throughout this period.
The patient was previously healthy. She had normal body temperature and no history of pregnancy anemia, abnormal thyroid function, or arrhythmia.
The patient denied any family history of malignancy.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature: 36 ℃; blood pressure: 152/88 mmHg; heart rate: 100 bpm; and respiratory rate: 20 breaths per minute. The other system examinations revealed no abnormalities.
No abnormality was detected in routine blood and urine analyses.
The obstetric ultrasound (February 25, 2023) revealed the following: (1) Intrauterine pregnancy single live fetus (cephalic, ultrasound gestational age about 32 WLD); (2) anterior placenta; (3) appropriate amniotic fluid; and (4) fetal tachycardia. Further examination was recommended. The obstetrical color ultrasound detected the FHR of 243 bpm. The fetal heart color ultrasound further confirmed the FHR of 243 bpm, and fetal cardiac structure showed no obvious abnormalities .