A 77-year-old woman with hypertension was admitted for aggravation of bilateral leg edema and diagnosed with type III URCS by TEE, cardiac computed tomography (CT) , and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Moderate tricuspid valve regurgitation was also detected by echocardiography. She had previously undergone endoscopic dissection for sigmoid cancer 9 years previously. Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm, and chest radiography showed a slight cardiomegaly. 3D TEE showed an unroofed portion (20 × 10 mm) at the atrial side between segments P2 and P3 of the posterior mitral leaflet . Color Doppler imaging revealed shunt flow from the left atrium to the right atrium though the unroofed portion with moderate tricuspid regurgitation. Cardiac CT and MRI also showed findings of URCS without persistent left superior vena cava (PLSVC) or other cardiac abnormalities. Cardiac catheterization revealed the left-to-right shunt with Qp/Qs ratio of 1.6:1, and selective coronary angiography verified normal coronary arteries.
An operation was performed using a right minithoracotomy at the fourth intercostal space, whereby a 6-cm-long skin incision in the anterior axillary line was made and a service port for the endoscope was opened through the same intercostal space at the mid-axillary line. We used a 3D full HD telescope (TIPCAM®1 S 3D, KARL STORZ SE & Co. KG, Tuttlingen, Germany) in the present case. Cardiopulmonary bypass was routinely established by right internal jugular vein and right femoral vessel cannulation, and right atriotomy and left atriotomy incisions were made under antegrade cardioplegic arrest. The unroofed portion, where the blood cardioplegia was leaking, was detected at the same location revealed by the preoperative 3D TEE . The lesion was clearly recognized only by the endoscope. In the surgical field obtained by use of a left atrium retractor for right mini-thoracotomy, the medial side of the left atrium is usually unfolded. As a result, it was difficult to recognize the unroofed coronary sinus directly in the present case, because it was parallel to the field of view. The unroofed portion could be clearly confirmed only by changing the angle of the thoracoscope. We couldn’t identify the unroofed portion through the CS on the right atrium. It was repaired by direct running suture using 4-0 polypropylene sutures from the top and bottom edges under endoscopic visualization . We confirmed that there was no blood cardioplegia leakage and mitral insufficiency, which was also verified by postoperative TEE. Operative findings showed that the tricuspid annulus was dilated and we finally performed a tricuspid annuloplasty with use of a 28-mm Carpentier-Edwards Physio tricuspid ring (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) with bicaval snaring. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged home 14 days after surgery without any residual shunt as confirmed by echocardiography and cardiac CT .