A 42-year-old man was referred to our hospital with 6 months history of lump on the right upper arm. Initially, the mass size is identical to a marble. The growth of the lump was progressive and became irregular. At this point, the patient experienced pain associated with movement. He had no significant past medical history. Upon physical examination, the lump was immovable, tender, and firm on palpation with irregular surface and borders. The lump's size was10 × 10 × 10 cm and it was located 1 cm above cubiti. The skin temperature above the lump is warmer than the surrounding area. The lump surface is red and dark blue colored with a shiny surface. MRI is then done on the right upper extremity and resulted in a soft tissue tumor with necrotic tissue at ventral side of right distal humerus involving biceps brachial and brachialis muscle. There is no involvement of neurovascular on the tumor's area. Thorax X-ray and abdominal USG shows no distant metastasis. The tumor was staged as T2N0M0 based on the TNM classification (, ).
Patient was admitted for wide excision surgery and reconstruction with Latissimus Dorsi (LD) Flap. Tumor borders were marked. Incision was made 2 cm lateral from tumor borders. Incision deepened through the fascia of biceps brachial muscle. Arteries, veins, median and radial nerve were identified and preserved. The tumor did not infiltrate neurovascular. Wide excision was done. Long and short head biceps brachial muscle, part of brachialis muscle, musculocutaneous nerve and cephalic venous were elevated. Frozen section was performed intra operatively to confirm the margins were negative. Incision was done according to design and deepened to fascia of latissimus dorsi muscle. Latissimus dorsi muscle was elevated while preserving arteries, veins and thoracodorsalis nerve. Flap was put into the defect area. Distal part of latissimus dorsi was sutured to biceps brachii tendon. Medial part was sutured to long and short head of biceps brachii muscle. Surgical wound was sutured layer by layer .
The histopathological examination revealed an undifferentiated high grade pleomorphic sarcoma with negative surgical margins (R0) .
Patient was discharged on the seventh post-operative day considering there was not any postoperative complication. Follow up examination revealed normal movement and function of the arm. The patient recovered with a full strength and range of motion of his elbow .
The patient then underwent radiation therapy (RT) with a dosage of 66 Gy in 33 fractions and chemotherapy with Ifosfamid, Doxorubicin and Mesna. The patient was in remission state during follow up that is done 2 years later, concluding there was no case of recurrence.