A 30-year-old female patient was referred to the rheumatological department due to L (grade 1) fever, chills and papular rash over the limbs and trunk lasting the previous two weeks. The patient was admitted to the Rheumatology Division of Internal Medicine Shere-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences with clinical suspicion of vasculitis. The patient had a history of hospital admission three weeks ago for hemorrhoidectomy and received ofloxacin ornidazole for five days in the post-operative period in addition to diclofenac for a few days. Investigations revealed a white blood count (WBC) of 21.7 × 109/l with 81% of neutrophils and 10.8% of lymphocytes, amount of platelets 339 × 109/l, hemoglobin concentration was 11.7 g/dl and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 60 mm/h, serum fasting and postprandial glucose was normal and urine test (overall and the sediment) was normal.
Blood culture showed growth of Aerococcus viridans sensitive to levofloxacin, imipenem, piperacillin/tazobactam and amoxicillin/clavulanate. Histopathological assessment of skin biopsy revealed thrombi occluding the lumen of small vessels and neutrophilic infiltrates, with scanty nuclear dust.
Additional laboratory tests were performed and the results were as follows: cANCA – negative, pANCA – negative, antinuclear antibodies (ANA) – negative, 24 hour urinary protein – 170 mg/day, kidney function tests and liver function tests were normal. There was not revealed infection of hepatotrophic viruses such as HCV or HBV. Also the HIV test was negative.
Transesophageal echocardiography was normal with no signs of infectious endocarditis. Chest X-ray and ultrasound of the abdomen were normal.
Diagnosis of cutaneous vasculitis associated with infection of Aerococcus viridans was established. The Chapel Hill Consensus Classification from 2012 did not clearly indicate such type of vasculitis; therefore it was considered single organ vasculitis – SOV (cutaneous vasculitis) or vasculitis associated with systemic disease or probable etiology indicating Aerococcus viridans infection as a potential causative agent.
The patient was managed with piperacillin with tazobactam for two weeks, the skin lesions disappeared, and the patient has stopped having a fever ( and ).