A 58-year old woman, of South Asian ethnicity, was referred with painful paraesthesiae in the right forearm, agitation, vomiting, and hydrophobia. During the 4 days prior to admission she attended her general practitioner (GP) and the local emergency department with painful paraesthesiae in her right hand. On the second occasion she was given tramadol; thereafter she began to vomit, refused water, and appeared fearful and agitated. A family member in India suggested that she may have rabies in view of a history of a bite to the right forearm from an ownerless puppy befriended by the patient during a trip to a town near Ludhiana, India, 9 weeks previously. The GP referred the patient to the local emergency department for further management (day 1). The case was discussed with the Health Protection Agency; after an initial blood sample was taken she received vaccine and human rabies immunoglobulin and was transferred to an isolation room in the University College London Hospital intensive care unit.
On arrival she demonstrated pronounced hydrophobia. Although the patient was able to suck on a moist sponge, she gagged and became agitated when water from the sponge dropped onto her bedclothes, or at sight of a cup of water. Initial examination showed dehydration, temperature of 37.9°C, heart rate 120 beats per minute, blood pressure 171/90 mmHg; she was fully conscious. There was no other abnormality on examination. Blood indices showed a mild neutrophilia, urea 7.9 mmol/L, creatinine 79 μmol/L, and normal C-reactive protein. Saliva and skin biopsies from nuchal and bite sites subsequently tested positive for lyssavirus ribonucleic acid (RNA). Over the next few hours the patient developed episodes of extreme agitation despite escalating doses of diazepam (2.5-7.5 mg iv - as frequently as every hour); when one episode became violent she was anaesthetized with standard doses of fentanyl, midazolam, propofol and rocuronium. The majority of elements of the Milwaukee Protocol were commenced. This included drug-induced coma (propofol 200 mg/hr, fentanyl 200 mcg/hr and midazolam 20 mg/hr), neurotransmitter substrate replenishment and antiviral therapy (amantadine 200 mg bd). In addition she received nimodipine 60 mg 4 hourly, sapropoetin 200 mg bd, vitamin C 500 mg and coenzyme Q10 100 mg bd. Continuous electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring was adopted.
On day 3 she became hypotensive and was commenced on noradrenaline (10-30 mcg/min to maintain a Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP) >80 mmHg). Urine output was responsive, however stroke volume and cardiac output measurements by oesophageal Doppler were not responsive, to fluid boluses. Ketamine sedation (45 mcg/kg/min) was introduced. Adrenaline was added to maintain MAP.
By day 4, passive body warming was required for hypothermia. Ventilatory requirements increased. Escalating doses of ketamine (60 mcg/kg/min), fentanyl (300 mcg/hr) and propofol (70 mg/hr) were required to maintain sedation. Antibiotics were commenced following the suctioning of offensive sputum and evolving radiographic infiltrates.
By day 5, progressive bilateral radiographic infiltrates accompanied worsening hypercapnia. Polyuria with an increasing serum Na+ was observed, and treated with oesophageal Doppler-guided fluid optimisation, nasogastric water and intravenous 5% dextrose. Glucose control was required.
On day 6, paralysis (previously avoided due to risk of masking seizures) was achieved with atracurium (10-20 mg/hr) and nitric oxide introduced for intractable hypoxaemia. Escalation of adrenaline (to 80 mcg/min) was required for hypotension, cardiac output started to fall and remained unresponsive. Pupils were dilated and demonstrated sluggish reflex to light. Acidosis and multi-organ failure ensued and haemofiltration was commenced.
On day 8, two episodes of bradycardia required atropine. As noradrenaline increased, hydrocortisone 50 mg qds and fludrocortisone 100 mcg od were started.
On day 9, she developed a junctional rhythm with bradycardic episodes requiring further sedation to ablate the dys-autonomia, atropine boluses, isoprenaline infusion and transvenous pacing.
On day 10, she developed refractory, profound lactic acidosis. Management included 8.4% sodium bicarbonate along with continuous veno-venous haemofiltration. Persistent hypotension was treated with more adrenaline (90 mcg/min) and noradrenaline (160 mcg/min) and addition of argipressin (0.01 u/min). Antimicrobials were escalated and suspected bowel ischaemia was treated supportively as she was unfit for imaging or surgery. The hypotension became refractory and temporary cessation of pacing demonstrated underlying asystole. Supportive treatment was withdrawn.
A lyssavirus differential TaqMan© reverse transcriptase(RT)-PCR was used to test for RABV RNA on nucleic acids extracted from tissues. A hemi-nested RT-PCR was used to confirm results and generate product for sequence analysis. The sequence derived was compared to a range of regionally appropriate lyssavirus sequences. Virus was isolated using a standard rabies tissue culture infection test (RTCIT) using neuroblastoma cells as described previously . Viral antigen was detected using the gold standard direct fluorescent antibody test (FAT) with FITC-conjugated antibody (Fujirebio diagnostics) on acetone fixed brain smears, as described previously .
Differential TaqMan © RT-PCR demonstrated RABV RNA in all three initial samples (wound biopsy, nuchal skin biopsy and saliva) within six hours of receipt of samples on day 1. Wound biopsy and saliva were strongly positive, with the nuchal biopsy showing lower levels of RNA. A subsequent hemi-nested RT-PCR was negative on nuchal biopsy but positive on wound biopsy and saliva. Subsequent saliva samples taken on day 1 were also positive by rabies TaqMan© and by nested PCR with identical sequences to those derived from initial samples.
Phylogenetic analysis of partial nucleoprotein sequence showed that the virus was a strain in the ‘arctic-like’ lineage 1 and most closely related to sequences derived from dogs in Pakistan in 1979 and 1989, and in another human case imported from India (RV61) .
Virus isolation, attempted on the first saliva sample, was negative. Serum from day 1, before administration of vaccine and immune globulin, was negative tested by the fluorescent antibody virus neutralization test (FAVN) for rabies antibodies, and negative for viral RNA by real-time Taqman PCR (data not shown).
There was a terminal bronchopneumonia. The heart had mild interstitial T-cell inflammation, and neuritis of vagus nerve branches, including a possible Negri body on Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain , but immunohistochemistry did not confirm this as rabies antigen. The tongue and parotid gland also had peri- and endoneural inflammation and ganglionitis.
The brain and meninges were grossly normal; there was no cerebral swelling. Histologically, there was mild encephalitis (T-cell infiltration, perivascular cuffing and microgliosis), most prominent in temporal lobes. Neuronal rabies infection with abundant Negri bodies (round/oval eosinophilic inclusions in the perikaryon) was present in all parts of cerebrum and sub-tentorial brain tissue, most prominently in the temporal lobe and hippocampus . No hypoxic-ischaemic neurone damage was identified; only rare neurones were undergoing necrosis with sattelitosis.
RABV antigen and nucleic acid were widely distributed in central nervous system (CNS) and non-CNS tissues post mortem . All brain regions were strongly positive for RABV antigen using FAT; live virus was isolated from brain and cerebrospinal fluid in tissue culture at first passage. No neutralizing antibodies were detected in CSF by FAVN. Although viral RNA was detected in tongue, parotid salivary gland and a mouth swab taken post mortem, live virus was not recovered from these samples. Viral RNA was not detected in heart tissue.
Immunohistochemical demonstration of RABV antigen in post-mortem samples from hippocampus, cerebellum, medulla, tongue, parotid gland and myocardium was performed as described previously . Profuse antigen was observed in the perikaryon and neuropil in all CNS regions, including all cranial nerve roots identified . Abundant antigen was observed in autonomic ganglia, muscle spindles and skeletal muscle fibres in the tongue . Limited amount of immunolabelling was observed in nerve axons in the parotid gland. No labelling was observed in lingual epithelium or parotid acinary cells (data not shown).