After being initially diagnosed with undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma in a different department, a 50-year-old female patient was referred to our Endocrinology Clinic for further investigation of an 18-month history of persistent dyspnea, dry cough, loss of weight, lack of appetite, and fatigue, associated with dysphagia and dysphonia. Family history of thyroid pathology was denied. Before the presentation, the patient noted a painless, growing cervical mass and accused dry cough, dysphonia, dysphagia, dyspnea, and fatigue.
Her medical history begins with a cervical ultrasound (US) that revealed a hypoechogenic, finely inhomogeneous right thyroid lobe, measuring 18.5/33/42.5 mm (AP/T/L) and the left thyroid lobe entirely occupied by a nodular lesion, with a hypoechoic and inhomogeneous echotexture, measuring 41.5/35/31 mm . The serum concentrations of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free-thyroxine-4 (FT4), thyroglobulin (TG), calcitonin, and antithyroid peroxidase antibodies (ATPO) were normal.
Total thyroidectomy was therefore recommended. Surgical resection was intended, but on exploration a 4 cm thyroid mass with macroscopically tumoral appearance, extensively invasive in the trachea, hyoid muscles, and left internal jugular vein was found. Surgical intervention was limited to biopsy. Pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma with squamous differentiation. Subsequent immunohistochemical staining showed positivity for tumor protein (p63), cytokeratin 19 (CK19), cytokeratin AE1/AE3 (CKAE1/AE3), and negativity for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) .
There was no cluster of differentiation (CD5). Computerized tomography (CT) of the neck and chest revealed the related lesion as a hypodense mass with irregular margins, completely invading the left thyroid lobe, compressing the trachea, and in close contact with the esophagus, measuring 3/3.5/3.7 cm .
The patient was referred to an oncology service with a poor prognosis and underwent both radiotherapy and chemotherapy. However, our patient considered it appropriate to request a second opinion and presented to our service. Moreover, the management of the case included a reassessment of the diagnosis and a surgical re-evaluation. A CT scan of the neck and chest was performed. The results revealed the same pattern, with the lesion occupying the lower left thyroid lobe, extending into the trachea, esophagus, and left inferior jugular vein, compressing the lumen of the trachea. The patient underwent a challenging radical surgery in which total thyroidectomy and cervical lymphadenectomy were performed. The procedure was quite radical with the removal of the tumor from the compression zone of the esophagus, with minimal reconstruction of the esophagus while an intragastric PEG probe was placed to feed the patient. This probe was left for 1 month and then removed with the restoration of digestive transit. Macroscopically, the lesion had irregular margins and was adherent to adjacent structures, but still without invasion into the trachea. Complete resection of the tumor was successfully performed.
After surgery, adjuvant radiotherapy was not required, and replacement therapy with Levothyroxine 75 mcg/day was initiated. No acute complications were reported. Metastatic follow-up was negative and there was no evidence of loco-regional recurrence after 6 months and 2 years of follow-up. Large areas of fibrosis, large, round, vesicular nuclei with small nucleoli, low cytoplasm, and peritumoral lymphoplasmacytic infiltration were revealed upon histopathological examination of the sample. CD5 immunostaining was positive .