A 43-year-old Caucasian man presented to our emergency room with frontal headache and blurred vision. He had a recent history of surgically excised malignant melanoma of the right cheek and right-sided Bells’ palsy treated with acyclovir and steroids. His vital signs on arrival were as follows: temperature 36.9 °C, blood pressure 129/79 mmHg, heart rate 68 beats per minute, respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, and arterial oxygen saturation of 93 % on room air. A neurological examination revealed weakness in adduction of his left eye with complete ptosis (likely due to left third nerve palsy), ipsilateral conjunctival injection and dilated pupil, a depressed nasolabial fold on the left side, and drooping of the angle of his mouth to the left with drooling (representing left seventh nerve palsy). His deep tendon reflexes were decreased to 1+ in his upper and lower extremities along with generalized decreased sensation to pin prick and light touch. Motor strength was preserved in all his extremities. The results of the rest of a physical examination were within normal limits.
Blood work showed that our patient had a white blood cell (WBC) count of 5.6 × 103 /μL, hemoglobin of 14.6 g/dL, and platelet count of 268 × 103 /μL, all within normal limits. His serum chemistry and results of a chest X-ray were also normal. However, a computed tomography (CT) scan of his head showed broad-based multiple bilateral retro-orbital masses along the medial side of the lateral rectus muscle, the largest one measuring 10 mm. No abnormalities were observed on magnetic resonance angiography or CT angiography of his head. We started our patient on vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and acyclovir while awaiting lumbar puncture results. Infectious and autoimmune analysis, including human immunodeficiency virus, Lyme’s disease, cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, West Nile virus, California encephalitis, St Louis encephalitis, eastern equine encephalitis, antinuclear antibodies and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, had negative results. A lumbar puncture showed clear fluid with glucose 108 mg/dL, total protein 95 mg/dL, 1 WBC/mm3, and 1 red blood cell/mm3. No malignant cells were seen in the cerebrospinal fluid.
Our patient complained of intractable headache and was started on intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g/day, which alleviated his symptoms. On day 8, a repeat CT scan of his head showed no changes compared to previous studies and our patient underwent a needle biopsy of the left orbital mass. The biopsy results were inconclusive because only adipose tissue could be sampled, without any evidence of malignant cells. A CT scan of his thorax and abdomen was done owing to the high suspicious of malignancy, and no signs of malignancy were appreciated. Our patient was transferred to a specialized cancer center for further evaluation, where he was treated with intravenous immunoglobulins and plasmapheresis for suspected atypical Guillain-Barré syndrome presentation.
Two months later, our patient’s symptoms persisted and he underwent another orbital biopsy that found atypical lymphocytes. These lymphocytes stained positive with Leder stain, indicating their origin to be myeloid. The next day our patient developed fever; a neurological examination showed no changes compared to his previous admission. A repeated complete blood count showed a WBC count of 1.1 × 103/μL [neutrophils 15 %, absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of 0.17 × 103/μL, monocytes 19.8 %, lymphocytes 63 %], hemoglobin 7.7 g/dL, and a platelet count of 66 × 103/μL. Our patient was started empirically on vancomycin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and levofloxacin. A CT scan of his head showed an increase in size of the orbital masses, measuring 3.7 cm on the left and 2.7 cm on the right, causing a mass effect on his optic nerves. Blood cultures remained negative for viral infections. On hospital day 8, our patient’s neutropenia worsened, his complete blood count showed a WBC count of 0.78 × 103/μL (neutrophils 9.4 % with ANC 0.07 × 103/μL, monocytes 40 %, lymphocytes 50 %), hemoglobin 7.4 g/dL, and a platelet count of 25 × 103/μL. A bone marrow biopsy was performed, which showed 79 % blast cells with almost no myeloid maturation present, consistent with AML. Flow-cytometry showed immune-reactivity for stem cell markers CD34 and CD117, a normal CD4 to CD8 ratio, and pan-T-cell antigens. A cytogenetic study using florescent in situ hybridization analysis revealed a rearrangement of chromosome 11q23 involving the MLL gene. The clinical course of this patient was complicated by Clostridium difficile colitis. It was decided to start the patient on induction chemotherapy once his infective status improves. In the meantime, a lower extremity ultrasound was done for his leg swelling and showed bilateral distal lower extremity deep venous thrombosis. Given our patient’s thrombocytopenia, an inferior vena cava filter was placed to prevent pulmonary embolism. On day 9, our patient developed ventricular fibrillation, and died after a cardiac arrest.