A 16-year-old girl presented to the emergency department with a 10-day history of nonacute headache and associated binocular visual blurring. There was no associated nausea, vomiting, fatigue, or menstrual irregularity. Her medical history was significant for spina bifida, a lumbosacral dermoid tumor which had been operated twice in another institution, most recently 2 years before her current presentation, and hydrocephalus treated by ventriculoperitoneal shunt (now redundant), and subsequent endoscopic third ventriculostomy.
Neurological examination revealed a Glasgow coma score of 15/15 without any cranial nerve deficits, and no limb deficits apart from a pre-existing left lower limb weakness related to her previous spinal surgery. Formal ophthalmological examination revealed markedly constricted visual fields . Visual acuity was 6/18 bilaterally. Fundoscopic examination revealed no evidence of papilloedema.
Serum investigations revealed a mildly elevated prolactin of 551 mU/L and an elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level to 24.4 pmol/L with an otherwise normal hormonal panel .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an enlarged pituitary gland measuring 11.5 mm (CC) × 7 mm (AP) × 13 mm (transverse) . Homogenous enhancement of the pituitary gland and infundibulum was noted post-administration of intravenous gadolinium, with no focal pituitary mass seen. The optic chiasm was seen to be displaced upwards. No features of intracranial hypotension were noted.
Following input from endocrinology and neurology, the patient was counseled regarding her options and debulking surgery was recommended with the aim of preserving vision. The patient and her guardian consented to surgery.
Following induction of general anesthesia, debulking of this lesion was undertaken through an endoscopic endonasal transphenoidal approach. Following septostomy and sphenoidotomy, the sellar floor was drilled and the dura opened. A firm lesion was noted and biopsies yielded an intraoperative pathological diagnosis of pituitary hyperplasia. The hyperplastic pituitary gland was dissected from the cavernous sinuses and suprasellar arachnoid mater to decompress the optic apparatus. Minimal cerebrospinal fluid leak was noted. The skull base was repaired using synthetic dural graft, autologous fat, and tissue glue.
Initial evaluation of tissue through frozen section during surgery did not identify adenoma.
Further examination of the paraffin embedded tissue identified pituitary tissue with preserved acinar architecture; acini containing admixed eosinophilic, basophilic, and chromophoric cells in varying proportions. Immunostaining, particularly with the pituitary nuclear transcription factors Pit-1, Tpit, and SF-1, reiterated the morphologic impression of admixed anterior lobe cell types. Reticulin histochemistry further highlighted expansion of acini without destruction of normal acinar architecture. These appearances were deemed in keeping with pituitary hyperplasia. A pituitary adenoma or other mass forming lesion was not identified.
Postoperative MRI revealed adequate decompression of the optic chiasm with residual normal pituitary gland . The patient noted an immediate subjective improvement in her vision. This was confirmed with formal ophthalmological testing .
She required treatment with desmopressin for diabetes insipidus. Following endocrinology input, she was discharged home on maintenance desmopressin and hydrocortisone.