A 70-year-old sexually active African American male with a past medical history of untreated hepatitis C, erectile dysfunction treated with vardenafil, hypothyroidism and hypertension presented to the Louis Stokes Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center emergency department with a 1 week history of dull, aching pain in the right testicle that had increased in severity the day prior to admission after doing yard work. He denied erythema or pain of the contralateral testicle or penile discharge. He reported haematospermia three times in the preceeding 4 weeks. He reported urinary urgency and frequency the night prior to admission, but had no dysuria, difficulty initiating a stream or haematuria. He also denied pelvic pain or rashes. He had protected intercourse regularly with a healthy single female partner. He reported a remote history of unspecified sexually transmitted infection (STI) that was treated.
On admission, vital signs were relevant for tachycardia to 107 beats min−1. On physical examination, his right testicle was swollen and tender, but non-erythematous with no abnormal masses. His prostate was non-tender and non-enlarged. He had no inguinal lymphadenopathy, no inguinal hernias and no penile discharge. His examination was otherwise unremarkable. His complete blood count was notable for a white blood cell (WBC) count of 40 000 with neutrophil predominance (89.5 %). Prostatic Specific Antigen (PSA) was 6.4 ng ml−1, elevated from 1.0 ng ml−1 1 year prior. Urine culture grew 10 000 c.f.u. normal urogenital flora, while urinalysis showed 13 WBCs per high power field small leukocyte esterase and negative nitrites. PCR identification tests for chlamydia and gonorrhoea from a first-voided urine specimen were negative. Testicular ultrasound showed right epididymitis and orchitis with bilateral hydroceles. The patient developed fever to 39 °C during the admission.
The patient received ceftriaxone, 1 g (to cover community acquired Gram-negative rods and Neisseria gonorrhoeae), and azithromycin, 1 g (to provide double coverage against N. gonorrhoeae as well as Chlamydia trachomatis). Coverage of STIs was given due to a higher STI risk in the veteran population . The antibiotic regimen was later changed to ciprofloxacin (400 mg iv every 12 h), assuming epididymo-orchitis secondary to enteric organisms. Despite antibiotics, the patient remained febrile. Blood cultures turned positive on hospital day 2, with both sets showing Gram-positive cocci in clusters on Gram staining. The antibiotics were changed to vancomycin (dose adjusted for trough level of 15 mg dl−1) and ceftriaxone (1 g every 12 h), and the fever resolved, while the testicular swelling persisted. A chest x-ray and computed tomographyscan of the abdomen and pelvis were unremarkable. Meanwhile, the WBC count down trended to 22 000 and resolved after 48 h antibiotic therapy. The final microbiology result was of S. haemolyticus sensitive to vancomycin. The patient received intravenous vancomycin for 2 weeks, followed by oral clindamycin (300 mg every 6 h) for 1 week. Repeat blood cultures were negative. A repeat testicular ultrasound prior to discharge demonstrated continued evidence of right epididymo-orchitis, which resolved on follow up ultrasound 3 weeks after discharge.