After suffering a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), a 33-year-old woman underwent a coil embolization at an outside hospital for rupture of a right internal carotid artery (ICA) aneurysm . At that time, cerebral angiography incidentally revealed an unruptured left PComA aneurysm that was deemed high risk for coiling. Following an excellent recovery from SAH, treatment of the unruptured aneurysm was recommended. Referred to our institution's cerebrovascular and stroke center for elective surgical repair, the patient underwent a left pterional craniotomy with anterior clinoidectomy and clipping of the unruptured aneurysm. With an uncomplicated initial postoperative course, she was discharged home the next day.
However, 11 days later, the patient was readmitted in the emergency department with decreased oral intake, fever, altered mental status, and aphasic speech. On readmission (day 1), findings on head computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies demonstrated a small, acute left frontal lobe infarction. A CT angiography (CTA) performed the following day, though limited by significant streak artifact, revealed a moderate narrowing of the left paraclinoid ICA and non-visualization of P1. On day 2, the patient suffered a seizure, which was both witnessed and confirmed on emergent electroencephalography (EEG) findings. With clinical status precipitously declining and quickly progressing to status epilepticus, the patient was intubated and placed in a pharmacologically induced coma with pentobarbital.
During the following 3 days, she was slowly weaned from the pentobarbital coma; her neurological status remained poor. On day 6, the patient had a fixed and dilated right pupil; repeat CT scanning then demonstrated an enlarging infarction of the left frontal lobe with 7 mm of left-to-right midline shift, and new infarctions in the bilateral frontal lobe, right Sylvian, and right insular regions. During placement of a ventricular catheter, the opening pressure exceeded 20 mm Hg. The patient then underwent emergent decompressive fronto-temporo-parietal craniectomy; biopsies of the dura and frontal cortex were performed to evaluate for possible infectious or inflammatory process.
Although her neurological exam slightly improved postoperatively while in the neuroscience intensive care unit, intracranial pressures continued to spike after decompression. Biopsy findings, from the frontal dural and cortex, revealed nonspecific lymphocytic cuffing in small vessel walls with few neutrophils and rare eosinophils. With these findings, though nonspecific, raising the possibility of a so-called lymphocytic vasculitis, a trial of hydrocortisone began. Within 48 h of intravenous steroid therapy, intracranial pressures normalized. When the patient suffered repeated seizures on day 16, an emergent head CT demonstrated a new infarction now in the left posterior cerebral artery (PCA) territory. The following day, cerebral angiography to further evaluate the now suspected vasculitis demonstrated diminished flow in the left PComA, high grade stenosis of the left PCA near the P1–P2 junction, and mild short segment stenosis involving several cortical branch vessels of the left middle cerebral artery.
In consulting with rheumatology, allergy, and immunology specialists, we confirmed the likelihood of a nickel allergy. Given a standard nickel-containing Yasargil clip had been used for clipping the unruptured PComA aneurysm 32 days earlier, we reoperated and replaced it with a titanium alloy clip (Aesculap). With an uncomplicated postoperative course, the patient was discharged 6 days later to a long-term acute care facility for rehabilitation.