A 24-year-old woman complained tears in right eye for 8 months after lateral canthoplasty. She revealed that she underwent the surgery of shortening of levator palpebrae superioris on her right eye and double-eyelid blepharoplasty because of the congenital ptosis of the right eye 4 years ago. She did not feel any discomfort after the surgery. Then she underwent bilateral canthoplasty and epicanthoplasty in another hospital 8 months ago. She presented to our copthalmic clinic for persistent tearing on her right eye. On examination, the best corrected vision was 1.0 in both eyes and the the intraocular pressure was normal. The eyelids of both eyes were symmetrical without malformation. The shin scar was obvious at inner and outer canthus. The lacrimal spots were in the right position and the lacrimal passages were unobstructed. Nevertheless, a skin fistula with transparent tears was seen 2 mm lateral to the outer canthus of right eye . On further examination, the liquid containing fluorescein came out from the fistula after dropping fluorescein sodium eye drops in conjunctival sac of right eye . When we try to explore the fistula, the No. 7 lacrimal duct probe was visible under the temporal conjunctiva and the fistula was about 4 mm in length .
The patient was mainly diagnosed with right lateral canthus-conjunctival sac fistula. The probe was inserted into the fistula and the fistula was excised under local anesthesia. During surgery, we confirmed that the fistula was connected to the temporal conjunctival sac. Besides, the lateral canthal tendon could be observed during exploring. We used the 6–0 absorbable suture (polyglactin 910) to suture the subcutaneous tissue and the 6–0 beauty suture (lingqiao) was used to suture the skin incision. The suture of shin incision was removed 10 days after the surgery. The patient did not tear abnormally after observation 3 months later and the incision healed well. We had obtained the written informed consent from the patient to report the case and adhered to the ethical principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki as amended in 2013.