One month of nausea and vomiting.
A 63-year-old female underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy at a local, grassroots hospital due to 1 mo of nausea and vomiting, and a large nipple was found in the descending part of the duodenum. The patient’s faecal occult blood test was positive. The patient had obvious symptoms of nausea and vomiting, often vomiting with no stomach contents and had lost 2 kg of weight within a month. Before the operation, we administered symptomatic treatment, such as replenishing gastric protective fluid. After excluding relevant surgical contraindications, endoscopic examination was performed on the patient in our hospital, and we found a protuberant mass above the nipple of the descending duodenum, with a smooth surface and a diameter of approximately 0.5 cm. A 12 MHz ultrasound probe showed that the tumour originated from the submucosa and showed low echo. We used a nylon noose to trap the tumour, cut the bottom of the base by snaring with an electrocurrent, and clamped the wound with a titanium clip to stop the bleeding . To confirm the diagnosis, the excised specimens were sent for pathological examination and immunohistochemistry. One week after the operation, the patient recovered smoothly and was discharged from the hospital. The pathological results showed that the tumour in the descending part of the duodenum was a NET (grade 1) with schwannoma, and the cutting edge was negative . The results of immunohistochemical staining indicated that the tumour cells were positive for antigen KI-67, broad-spectrum cytokeratin, CD56, synaptophysin (Syn), chromogranin A (CgA), S-100, nerve specific enolase, CD68, CD163, and myoglobin and were negative for CD34, succinate dehydrogenase B, CD117, DOG-1, smooth muscle actin, desmin, cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, and myogenic differentiation 1 .
The patient has a history of infection with tuberculosis 40 years ago. The history of surgical trauma was bronchiectasis in 2015, hysterectomy and minimally invasive hysteroptosis in 2020.
Parents have a history of hypertension.
Mild tenderness in the abdomen, no rebound pain.
Immunohistochemical results showed that the mass was a rare NET with neurilemmoma.
Mediastinal computed tomography (CT) showed no tumour metastasis.