A 78-year-old man with a history of myocardial infarction, diabetes mellitus (DM), chronic kidney disease, and arteriosclerosis obliterans was brought to the emergency room via ambulance. Upon arrival, he exhibited clear consciousness (JCS 0), with a blood pressure of 148/68 mm Hg, pulse rate of 92/min, and body temperature of 36.8°C. He presented with fever, chills, and right lower abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the right lower abdomen. Laboratory tests showed elevated inflammatory markers (white blood cell count: 111,100/μL; CRP: 31.1 mg/dL), as detailed in . Abdominal ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) revealed bowel wall thickening in the ascending colon, indicating panniculitis (shown in a, b).
Eight days earlier, he underwent colonoscopy to remove six polyps in the ascending colon using CSP, which were subsequently diagnosed as adenomas. Each polyp was approximately 7 mm in diameter and was sessile. The patient was taking two antithrombotic drugs (aspirin and clopidogrel). Following guidelines for gastrointestinal endoscopy in patients on antithrombotic medication, CSP was performed 5 days after discontinuing clopidogrel while continuing aspirin . Bowel preparation was performed with 2 L of polyethylene glycol, and the bowel preparation quality was “excellent” using the Aronchick scale . Post-resection mucosal defects were irrigated with tap water, and the resection site was secured with endoscopic clips (shown in ).
Following the initial assessments in the emergency room, we initiated antibiotic therapy with meropenem (0.5 g/day) due to the patient’s high inflammation levels and abdominal pain. This choice was made after considering his clinical symptoms and imaging findings. Six days post-admission, a repeat colonoscopy revealed multiple dirty ulcers with white granulation at the previous CSP site. Notably, the clips from the polypectomy/infection site were absent. We did not suspect deep mucosal injury from the post-polypectomy. These ulcers were much larger than those just after CSP and had swelled because of phlegmonous colitis. We incised the post-CSP ulcers using biopsy forceps and pus drainage was observed. This is likely due to the phlegmonous colitis (shown in a–c). Despite negative cultures from blood and pus samples, meropenem treatment was continued due to persistent symptoms and high inflammatory markers. The patient was started on a diet 9 days after admission once the fever had resolved, and the abdominal pain and inflammatory markers had improved and meropenem was discontinued.
A follow-up CT performed 2 weeks after admission revealed not only an improvement in the thickness of the panniculitis in the ascending colon but also a reduction in previously elevated CT values (shown in c). We further performed a follow-up colonoscopy 1 month after admission, which showed improvement in the ascending colon wall (shown in d, e). The patient’s inflammatory markers were improved (CRP was 3.97 mg/dL), and he was finally discharged 35 days after admission. During hospitalization, a significant increase in mononuclear cells was observed, and a bone marrow examination led to the diagnosis of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). As of December 2022, the patient is currently undergoing treatment by a hematology team.