A 36-year-old Caucasian male presented to the Emergency Department with acute onset of abdominal pain in the left upper quadrant in November 2012. He denied fever, nausea, or any trauma in the previous days. There were no gastrointestinal or urinary complaints. Abdominal tenderness in the left upper quadrant was noteworthy. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 16 × 11 × 24 cm splenic mass with signs of splenic rupture. Exploratory laparotomy was performed with an intraoperative finding of spontaneous splenic rupture and active subcapsular bleeding. A splenectomy was performed, and the patient was discharged without any additional complications. Initial external pathology assessment of the mass indicated a nonspecific vascular proliferation, and the patient started follow-up with his primary care physician.
Surveillance CT scans performed in January 2013 revealed enlarged cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes, lytic bone lesions in vertebral bodies, a 1.7-cm peritoneal node, and a punctate lesion in the skullcap. Short-interval imaging repeated in May 2013 detected additional vertebral lesions and multiple hepatic metastases. The initial recommendation included systemic treatment with gemcitabine and docetaxel, and treatment was started in July 2013, with significant hematological toxicity, leading to treatment discontinuation. The patient was then referred to our institution.
A pathology review showed endothelial cells with lobular-pattern proliferation; immunohistochemical staining revealed positivity for vimentin, CD34, and CD31 and negativity for HHV8, S-100, and smooth muscle actin. Ki-67 antigen was expressed in 5% of the cells ; the diagnosis was consistent with KHE. The decision was made to withhold the systemic treatment and periodically repeat the scans every 3 months, since there was no clear evidence of progression.
Although the patient remained asymptomatic for 6 months, CT scans showed an increase in the number and volume of hepatic lesions , and paclitaxel was started. After 18 weeks, restaging CT scans revealed stability of the vertebral lesions and reduction of the hepatic lesions , consistent with a 40% reduction based on investigator-assessed RECIST criteria. Paclitaxel was continued until October 2014 (total of 24 weeks), when restaging scans revealed disease progression. Table summarizes the treatment lines and table the sequence of imaging assessments.
Subsequent lines of treatment included oral prednisone, doxorubicin, interferon-α, gemcitabine, and ifosfamide, with no radiologic response or clinical benefit. Although the patient remained with mild to moderate symptoms and adequate performance status, the decision was made to offer best supportive care, and the patient was referred to a palliative care service. After 2 months, the patient had acute onset of thrombocytopenia, hypofibrinogenemia, petechiae, and epistaxis. One week after the presumptive diagnosis of KMP was made, the patient died due to a major episode of gastrointestinal bleeding.