A 40-yrs-old male came to the orthopaedic OPD holding his left arm with the right one and the arm and shoulder were covered with a cloth. When the cloth was removed, there showed a shockingly huge mass in the left arm and shoulder with veins prominent all over it and a small wound over its posterior aspect. The tumour was pressing into the chest wall on the left side, but without causing any dyspnoea. Vascular status was normal distal to the tumour mass, but there was complete motor deficit with no power in muscles on forearm and hand. On taking history, it was found that, patient had come 3 yrs. Back with a small swelling in left upper arm and was admitted for the excision of the mass, but the patient absconded due to fear of surgery and started receiving treatment from some bone setters. Present situation developed over a period of 3 years. Patent came back to the hospital as he could no longer manage with the tumor due to the large size and weight of the growth and also due to social queries directed at his condition.
On measurement, tumour was 32 cms long, 28Cms wide and the circumference was 87Cms . X-Ray of the area showed complete destruction of upper half of the humerus with central calcification of the tumour mass . CT Angiography showed extensive destruction of the osseous tissue with calcification and there appeared involvement of lateral aspect of scapula also . Blood flow in major vessels was normal without undue hyper vascularity in the tumour area & the tumour mass was pushing the thoracic cage inwards. A radiographic skeletal survey and bone scan did not reveal any other lesion. Biopsy of the tumour mass confirmed the diagnosis of Chondrosarcoma. It was decided to get rid of the bulky mass from the body, so as to make the patient comfortable and to clear the surrounding area of any suspected tumour mass. Forequarter amputation with adequate margins was performed.
Surgical Procedure : The patient was placed in a right lateral decubitus position to expose the thorax with the left upper extremity free. Anterior approach was used. An elliptical incision was made with the superior apex over the clavicle on one end and inferior apex was made at the mid axillary line and continued posterio superiorly over the scapula to join the superior apex. The clavicle was divided at the proximal third and carefully elevated to expose the subclavian artery, vein and brachial plexus (,). The subclavian artery was ligated and cut first, then the subclavian vein was tied. Branches of the brachial plexus were divided proximally. Next, the chest wall attachments of the pectoralis major and minor were divided. Posteriorly, fasciocutaneous skin flaps were developed and all periscapular muscles were released . This allowed the shoulder girdle to be freed and the whole extremity to fall away from the trunk along with the scapula . The anterior and posterior skin flaps were used to close the defect primarily over a corrugated drain ). Cautery was used extensively for cutting and patient required two blood transfusions. Removed limb weighed 16 Kgs along with the tumor At three years follow up the patient had no complains and had rejoined his work at a government office