On an unscheduled visit, an 81-year-old Korean male complained of a new symptom: a temporal C-shaped scotoma in the left eye that had commenced 2 months prior his fifth cycle of anti-PD-L1 treatment. He had been on regular follow-up in our outpatient clinic for 3 years after multiple anti-vascular endothelial growth factor injections to treat neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD) of his right eye. The last injection into the right eye was 9 months prior. He had a history of type 2 diabetes and hypothyroidism. He had been diagnosed with advanced SCLC (T2b/3, N3, M1a) 5 months ago and had received durvalumab (1,500 mg) chemotherapy at 3-week intervals. The visual acuity was 20/100 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left on the last regular follow-up of nAMD, thus before anti-cancer treatment. The nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy in both eyes and the nAMD in the right eye were under control.
At the time of the new complaint, the visual acuity had fallen to 20/200 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye, but with normal intraocular pressures. The anterior segment was clear. The right fundus photograph revealed an atrophic macula attributable to the nAMD, and there was no specific finding in the left eye other than mild pigmentary changes (a). On fundus autofluorescence (AF) examination, photoreceptor injuries evidenced by broad C-shaped hypo-AFs with hyperfluorescent margins explained the symptoms in both eyes (b). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed loss of the peripapillary retinal ellipsoid zones of the left eye, consistent with a visual field defect (, ). Fluorescein angiography revealed normal vascular perfusion.
The routine laboratory tests, including complete blood cell count and kidney function, were normal, except for a slight elevation of liver enzyme (AST/ALT). The abdominal ultrasound showed a moderate fatty liver. Thyroid function tests indicated subclinical hypothyroidism with normal T3 and T4, and TSH elevation. The infectious test results, including hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis, and human immunodeficiency virus, were negative. F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT revealed pleural seeding, multiple lymph node metastasis of both paratracheal, aortocaval, and Lt. neck level IV. On brain MRI, Lt. superior frontal gyrus metastasis was noted.
The oncology department was consulted because the bilateral vertical hemianopia raised a suspicion of a central nervous system abnormality such as a brain metastasis of lung cancer. Thorough brain magnetic resonance imaging did not explain the perimetric findings. During close follow-up, the symptoms worsened, and OCT revealed progressive photoreceptor atrophy approaching the fovea of the left eye and enlargement of the bilateral temporal scotomas on perimetric examinations (a). Electroretinograms revealed cone and rod cell dysfunctions of the right eye and cone cell dysfunction of the left eye .
The ellipsoid zone loss evident on OCT progressed rapidly after the lung cancer diagnosis and commencement of chemotherapy, implying that the loss was caused by either the tumor or chemotherapy (online suppl. Table S1). CAR attributable to durvalumab toxicity was suspected. The ocular immunology laboratory of the Casey Eye Institute of the Oregon Health & Science University (OR, USA) performed Ab tests for CAR based on the strong clinical suspicion of CAR or paraneoplastic syndrome. Ocular irAEs are usually treated with corticosteroids, either topically, intraocularly, or systemically, and as the patient was both diabetic and old, he was prescribed only subtenon injections of 4 mg triamcinolone (Dong Kwang Pharm Co. Ltd.).
The Rab6 and aldolase assays were positive, combined with moderate immunohistochemical staining of the retinal photoreceptor outer segment/inner segment, but all of the recoverin, carbonic anhydrase II, enolase, HSP60, TULP1, and GAPDH assays were negative (online suppl. Table S2). After consulting the oncology department, immunochemotherapy was discontinued. Four months after subtenon triamcinolone administration and durvalumab cessation, OCT revealed that the ellipsoid zone near the nasal retina had partially recovered in the left eye (b), and a visual field test revealed a slight decrease in the scotoma sizes of both eyes, associated with symptom improvement (b). However, the outer retinal atrophy re-progressed 6 months after the initial administration of triamcinolone and cessation of durvalumab. Subtenon injections of 4 mg triamcinolone were repeated for both eyes (c, c). After the second triamcinolone injection, there was no progression of outer retinal atrophy for 3 months. However, the malignancy worsened, and the patient was unable to visit the outpatient clinic for 5 months (d, d). Six months after the second triamcinolone treatment, he again presented with serious visual impairments in both eyes. Despite chemotherapy, the lung cancer had worsened, prompting the oncologist to prescribe nivolumab (OPDIVO, Ono Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.).
He experienced visual field constrictions in both eyes after 2 months on nivolumab. The visual field test revealed near-total defects in both eyes, and OCT revealed broad, outer retinal atrophy and extensive loss of the ellipsoid zones of both eyes. Only the foveal ellipsoid zone of the left eye was spared. Fundus AF revealed increased hypo-AF at the sites of the earlier C-shaped lesions . Thereafter, his health deteriorated further, rendering additional follow-up examinations impossible.