A 17-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the hospital following a seven-day history of malaise, with a temperature of 39°C, chills, anorexia, vomiting and scleral jaundice. Two days earlier she had discontinued treatment of norethisterone (Primolut-Nor), prescribed for polycystic ovaries. She was a resident of Athens, did not consume alcohol or take any illicit drugs and had not been exposed to rat excrement. Physical examination revealed a temperature of 38.8°C and mild epigastric tenderness on palpation without hepatosplenomegaly or mass. Apart from being jaundiced, there were no other signs of liver disease. Slurring of speech was evident on neurologic examination. There were no other clinical findings. White-cell count was 16,770/cm3, with 80% neutrophils; hemoglobin level was 9.4 g/dL, hematocrit 28.3%, with a normal mean corpuscular volume and 6% reticulocytes; platelet count was 240,000/cm3 and erythrocyte sedimentation rates 36 mm/h. Analysis of the peripheral-blood smear showed a normal differential count with no band forms, basophilic stippling, or schistocytes. Coagulation profile: international normalized ratio (INR) 2.76, activated partial-thromboplastin time (aPTT) 72.11 s. Biochemistry findings showed 49 mg/dL glucose, 0.79 mg/dL serum creatinine, 2.8 g/dL albumin, 32 IU/L alkaline phosphatase (normal range 35 to 104), 33 IU/L alanine aminotransferase (normal range 5 to 40), 140 IU/L aspartate aminotransferase (normal range 5 to 37), 27.79 mg/dL total serum bilirubin (normal value < 1), 16.44 mg/dL direct bilirubin (normal value < 0.25), and 184 IU/L γ-glutamyltransferase (normal range 7 to 32). Tests for hepatitis C virus antibody (anti-HCV), hepatitis B (HBsAg, HBeAg, anti-HBc and anti-HBs), and hepatitis A antibody were negative, as were tests for antibodies against cytomegavirus (CMV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) types 1 and 2, anti-nuclear (ANA) and anti-mitochondrial (AMA) antibodies. A serum acetaminophen level was undetectable. Blood cultures obtained at admission were negative. Serologic test for Leptospira interrogans was positive (IgM > 1:80). Treatment was initiated with penicillin G 40,000 units/kg/day for seven days. Although our patient became afebrile, her mental status deteriorated and she displayed drowsiness and flapping tremor. Total serum bilirubin increased further to 66.7 mg/dL, INR reached 7.7 and ammonia (NH3) rose to 95.7 μmol/L (normal range 11 to 51). Hemolysis caused the hematocrit (Ht) level to drop to 17.6%. A Coombs' test was negative. No signs of bleeding were present. Lactulose and neomycin was administered and our patient received a transfusion of packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma and glucose. She was also given vitamin K but her coagulopathy remained unresponsive. Our patient appeared to have fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) with a Nazer score of eight in accordance with the prognostic index . As the score was relatively high, she was referred to the National Transplant Organization for evaluation. It was decided that she was eligible for emergency liver transplantation and she was transferred abroad. However, within 20 days her clinical and biochemical condition showed signs of recovery and she was sent back to our department. A subsequent relapse prompted further investigation. Serologic test for Leptospira interrogans was repeated which showed lower levels of IgM antibodies (1/20). Having excluded the most common causes of acute liver failure, such as hepatitis A, B or drugs, it was reasonable to seek a less common etiology. In our young patient, the combination of neurological disorder, non autoimmune hemolytic anemia and unexplained liver disease along with negative Coombs, coagulopathy unresponsive to vitamin K, serum aminotransferases less than 2000 IU/L and normal or markedly subnormal alkaline phosphatase (< 40 IU/L), all suggested Wilson's disease. According to guidelines from the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) patients in whom Wilson's disease is suspected should undergo screening with serum ceruloplasmin, 24-hour basal urinary copper, and slit-lamp examination for Kayser-Fleischer rings . In our case, serum ceruloplasmin concentration was very low (7.0 mg/dL), and the 24-hour urinary copper excretion was 11,700 mcg (normal values ≤ 40 mcg). Slit-lamp examination detected Kayser-Fleischer rings . Given the deterioration in our patient's condition she was treated with a combination of zinc, which induces a negative copper balance by blocking intestinal absorption, and trientine, which acts as a potent copper chelator. Our patient showed gradual signs of improvement.