An 80-year-old Japanese woman with no significant comorbidities noticed a bilateral tingling sensation on the anterior surface of her lower limbs.
The sensation was localized below her thighs; however, she felt neither numbness nor weakness, and could walk and ride a bicycle without any problems. Her symptoms persisted for about one month, which resulted in a visit to a local outpatient clinic. Laboratory studies performed in the clinic showed pancytopenia. Although the patient was examined at another general hospital, the cause of her condition was unknown. Subsequently, she experienced a high fever (a temperature of 38°C - 39°C) daily. However, she did not have any other accompanying symptoms, such as chills, pain, and appetite loss, and her general state was relatively normal. Despite a more detailed evaluation, the patient’s diagnosis was inconclusive, and she was observed as an outpatient. Five months after her first visit, she was taken to the emergency department of the hospital at which she was previously treated, because of sudden loss of consciousness. Laboratory studies showed that she had lost consciousness because of hypoglycemia, and further evaluation revealed that hypoglycemia was one of the signs of hypopituitarism. She received glucocorticoid and replacement therapy. Whereas treatment resulted in blood glucose level control, the tingling sensation gradually progressed. Although seven months had elapsed since her first visit, the causes of her symptoms remained unknown. Therefore, she was admitted to the Department of Hematology of our hospital for further assessment.
Her past medical history was noncontributory.
Her family history was noncontributory.
On physical examination, we observed the presence of a tingling sensation on the anterior regions of the lower limbs, under the thighs, and on both palms of the patient. Decreased vibratory sensation on both sides of the lower extremities was also noticed. Hepatosplenomegaly, lymph node enlargement, and skin eruption were not observed.
Blood test results were as follows: White blood cell count, 300 cells/μL; Hemoglobin level, 9.0 g/dL; and Platelet count, 113000 platelets/μL, lactate dehydrogenase, 971 IU/L; Ferritin, 710 ng/mL; Soluble interleulin-2 receptor alpha, 3412 U/mL. No evidence of infection or solid tumor was observed on serum examination, culture, and imaging. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), however, showed enlargement of the pituitary gland . It did not appear to be a tumor as the entire pituitary gland was almost equally contrasted; no other abnormalities were present. We performed stimulating hormone tests, as the patient had been diagnosed with hypopituitarism in the previous hospital. The patient received an injection of four kinds of hormones [growth hormone (GH)-releasing hormone, corticotropin-releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone (LH)-releasing hormone, and thyrotropin-releasing hormone], and we monitored the levels of seven kinds of hormones [GH, LH, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and prolactin] produced in response. Low levels of six of the seven hormones were observed, with the exception of prolactin, which confirmed the diagnosis of hypopituitarism.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scans of the abdomen and pelvis showed a hepatic cyst and mild splenomegaly. There was no evidence of tumor and lymphadenopathy could not be seen. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, performed to evaluate pancytopenia, revealed the presence of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) . There was no evidence of tumor involvement. She met five of eight criteria of HLH (fever ≥ 38.5°C, splenomegaly, peripheral blood cytopenia, hemophagocytosis in bone marrow, ferritin > 500 ng/mL, elevated soluble IL-2 receptor alpha two standard deviations above age-adjusted laboratory-specific norms). We suspected lymphoma as a cause of HLH, as no evidence of infection or solid tumors were present. One of the most common causes of adult HLH is lymphoma. However, as the patient did not show lymphadenopathy, a random skin biopsy was performed, which showed that the tumor cells had proliferated predominantly within the small vessels of the dermis with no infiltration outside the vessels . Immunohistochemical staining revealed positivity for the B-cell markers CD20 and CD79a in the absence of staining for T-cell markers. These characteristics were consistent with those of intravascular large B-cell lymphoma.