A 24-year-old Chinese man presented to our hospital with the primary complaint of bilateral lumbago for 1 month. The patient had no hematuria, fever, or other obvious symptoms. Mild pain on percussion was observed at the bilateral costovertebral angles, but no other significant findings on physical examination were detected. The patient did not have metabolic syndromes, such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, or hypertension. Moreover, his family and psycho-social history showed no obvious abnormality.
Six months prior, the patient had developed scrotal pain after a strenuous activity. Ultrasonography revealed a left varicocele and compression of the left renal vein across the abdominal aorta. These findings were consistent with the nutcracker phenomenon . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) angiography further revealed that the angle between the left renal vein and the aorta had become smaller, showing compression of the left renal vein between the superior mesenteric artery and the aorta . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with nutcracker syndrome. Selective ligation of the left spermatic vein was performed. The operation was successful, and the varicocele was completely ligated.
When he was admitted into our hospital for bilateral lumbago this time, abdominal and pelvic CT scan revealed right upper ureteral dilatation with hydronephrosis and bilateral kidney stones . The left and right kidney stones were 1.1 and 1.6 cm in diameter, respectively, according to measurements on the CT scan. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) using diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid tagged with 99mTc (99mTc-DTPA) was performed to evaluate the split renal function in this patient. SPECT revealed that the glomerular filtration rates decreased slightly to 45.05 and 45.23 mL/min in the left and right kidneys, respectively . Routine laboratory tests such as routine blood tests showed no obvious abnormalities. Twenty-four-hours urine analysis showed high urine oxalate levels of 63 mg/day (normal < 40 mg/day), while the urine calcium, phosphate, citrate, and uric acid levels were within normal range. To determine the possible cause for the bilateral nephrolithiasis and high urine oxalate levels in this patient, a urine amino acid screen was performed, which revealed urine glycine levels of 2.38 µmol/mg creatinine (normal 0.38–1.59 µmol/mg creatinine).
To identify possible genetic mutations, molecular analyses using whole-exome sequencing were performed in this patient. After obtaining informed consent from the patient, genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood leukocytes by standard phenol-chloroform procedures. Whole-exome sequencing detected the SLC6A19 variant c.1278 C > T p. (Cys426), which was further confirmed using Sanger sequencing. Segregation analysis performed to detect mutations in his parents did not reveal the presence of the same variant.
To remove the bilateral nephrolithiasis, flexible ureteroscopy with holmium laser lithotripsy (f-URS) was successfully conducted twice. Abdominal X-ray of the kidney, ureter, and bladder (KUB) after the first and second f-URS showed no residual stones . The biochemical composition analysis of the stones was performed postoperatively using an LIIR-20 type infrared spectrum automatic analysis system (Tianjin Lanmod Scientific Instrument Co. Ltd, Tianjin, China), which revealed that the stones in this patient were composed of approximately 70% calcium oxalate monohydrate and 30% calcium oxalate dihydrate . This information was considered one of the significant pieces of evidence for the diagnosis of hyperglycinuria because glycine had played an important role in oxalate metabolism and could increase oxalate levels. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with hyperglycinuria based on the typical symptoms (nephrolithiasis), laboratory testing (high urine glycine and oxalate levels), stone biochemical composition analysis (calcium oxalate), and relevant gene mutation (SLC6A19). After discharge, the patient did not receive special drugs and he was required to avoid a high-oxalate diet. A metabolic evaluation was performed one month after the procedure by collecting and analyzing serum samples and 24-h urine sample. Results of the serological tests including serum ionized calcium, phosphate, creatinine, and uric acid were normal. The 24-h urine analysis results, including urine calcium, phosphate, oxalate, citrate, and uric acid levels, were also within normal range.
Three months following the nephrolithiasis surgery, one nodule under the right lobe of the thyroid was detected on ultrasonography during a health checkup of the patient. Neck ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic nodule under the right lobe of his thyroid with a size of approximately 16 × 9 mm . Neck SPECT revealed a round soft-tissue density shadow at the posterior radioactive concentration shadow of the lower right lobe of the thyroid, with a size of approximately 15.8 × 8.8 mm and a clear boundary . Furthermore, his serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels increased to 392.3 pg/mL (normal < 70 pg/mL), while calcium levels in the blood and urine were normal. Therefore, he was considered for a diagnosis of adenomatous hyperparathyroidism. Resection of the right parathyroid nodule was performed under general anesthesia. His PTH levels normalized on the first day postoperatively. Postoperative hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections of excised tissue samples showed typical pathological characteristics of parathyroid adenoma . During the 2-year follow-up period, the patient did not experience relapse of nephrolithiasis, and the levels of serum PTH, calcium, and phosphorus were maintained at the respective normal values. The patient was extremely satisfied with his entire treatment and follow-up process.