A 68-year-old man presented with a 1-month history of fatigue and hypotension. He underwent aortic root replacement for annuloaortic ectasia 9 years prior and underwent omentum patch repair for sternal osteomyelitis after sternotomy. He had a medical history of essential hypertension and pneumoconiosis. He took aspirin, warfarin, some hypertensive drugs, and proton pump inhibiter. He visited the outpatient clinic for a routine follow-up. Laboratory investigation showed a hemoglobin level of 8.7 g/dL, a significant decrease compared with the previous value of 15.2 g/dL. After he was documented anemia, he stopped to take warfarin and continued to take aspirin for antithrombotic drugs due to cardiac surgeon’s decision. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EDGS) revealed multiple duodenal lesions with raised red borders and central depressed areas. The anal side tumor was elevated lesions with central depressed area . The oral side tumor was ulcerative lesion with slightly elevated red border . Both tumors located in the second portion of the duodenum . An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed no intraluminal mass or wall thickening in the duodenum. Positron emission tomography–CT (PET–CT) demonstrated increased uptake in the duodenum . No evidence of lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis was observed. A biopsy showed a sheet-like arrangement of large round and spindle-shaped tumor cells, and the tumor cells were positive for CD31. Based on the histological and immunohistochemical staining findings, an epithelioid angiosarcoma was diagnosed. Surgical resection was performed.
Exploratory abdominal surgery revealed no peritoneal metastases. The omentum, which was patched to the sternum, was adherent to the liver. Adhesiolysis of the upper abdominal cavity was initially performed, followed by radical subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy with lymphadenectomy. We dissected no. 5, 6, 8a, 8p, 12a, 12p, 12b, 13a, 14p, 17a lymph nodes . After removing the specimen, reconstruction was performed using the Child procedure .
Grossly, two dark-red polypoid tumors were found in the second portion of the duodenum. The gross appearance was slightly different from EGDS findings. The anal side tumor, measuring 1.0 × 1.0 cm, showed erosion, and the oral side tumor, measuring 1.4 × 0.9 cm, was ulceration . The lesions appeared to be centered in the submucosal layer, with expansion up to the mucosa . No spatial continuity was found between the two tumors. Histological evaluation revealed proliferation of malignant round and polygonal cells arranged in sheets and spindle-like cells arranged in bundles. Vasoformative structures were recognized as slit-like spaces containing red blood cells . No lymphatic or venous invasions were detected in both tumors. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that the tumor cells were positive for CD31, CK (AE1/AE3), and CAM5.2, and negative for CD34 and EMA . The lymph nodes revealed no tumor metastasis. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of epithelioid angiosarcoma in the duodenum without lymph node metastasis. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 19 without any complications. At a follow-up examination in the outpatient clinic at postoperative 4 months, no evidence of recurrence was detected.