One 8-year-old boy from a non-consanguineous Chinese family was admitted to the hospital in September 2018 because of dizziness, vomiting, and convulsions. Dizziness occurred 1 day before admission, accompanied by blurred vision. The child had convulsions twice within 18 h and presented with generalized tonic–clonic seizures without fever. The development of the patient was delayed for more than 2 years. His height was 113 cm (−2 SD). He was born at term by cesarean section due to the scarred uterus of his mother, with a weight of 3,650 g (G3P2). No history of postnatal asphyxiation was reported. His father had hyperuricemia for more than 10 years. The height of his mother was 146 cm. The family had no history of genetic/metabolic diseases or congenital disorders.
The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results showed no specific findings. The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed occipital slowing during awake state. His serum level of lactate was 7.04 mmol/L (range: 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), and the cerebrospinal fluid level of lactate was 4.63 mmol/L. Increased pyrimidine and metabolite levels in urine were detected by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS), and β-ureidopropionase deficiency was suspected . The analyses of karyotype by G-banding showed a normal male 46, XY karyotype. The analysis of WES showed that the patient had a homozygous missense variant c.977G>A in exon 9 of UPB1 (NM_016327.3), leading to the amino acid substitution p.R326Q. Sanger sequencing showed that both of his parents carried a heterozygous variant of c.977G>A . The parents of the patient refused the whole-mitochondrial-genome sequencing.
In the following 2 months, convulsions occurred once for each of them, and the manifestations were hanging of eyes, cyanosis of the lips, head backward, and stiffness of limbs accompanied by rhythmic tremor, without fever. The IQ assessments suggested that his intelligence was below average. The level of serum lactate was 15.16 mmol/L. Blood–gas analysis indicated metabolic acidosis (decompensated). Because the patient had manifestations of developmental delay, poor academic performance, poor sports stamina, hyperlactacidemia, and metabolic acidosis, mitochondrial disease was further suspected. Whole-mitochondrial-genome (mtDNA; RefSeq NC_012920) sequencing (2019.8) of peripheral blood sample was performed. It revealed a variant m.3243A>G in MT-TL1 gene, and the proportion of sequences containing the variant was 65% in blood cells. The same variant was detected in his mother, with 17.8% heterogeneity in blood. The diagnosis of MELAS syndrome was established.
At 7 months later, the child developed paroxysmal visual impairment and was readmitted to the hospital in January 2021. At 3 days before admission, the child developed paroxysmal blurred vision, which lasted for several minutes each time. The vision was normal after spontaneous remission, accompanied by severe swelling and pain in the posterior occipital region, vomiting twice, and no ejection. The physical examination showed left central facial palsy. The right upper limb and lower limb muscle strength was level 4, and the left upper limb muscle strength was level 3. The muscle tension of the left ankle was slightly higher than that of the right. Bilateral Babinski signs were suspected positive.
A computed tomography of the head demonstrated a small, patchy, low-density shadow in the right occipital part and a slightly high-signal shadow in the left basal ganglia. On the day of admission, he had convulsions for 3 times, presenting as a left focal generalized systemic attack, which lasted for 5–10 s to relieve. The brain MRI revealed a high signal in the right parietooccipital cortex and subcortical region about T2WI and FLAIR sequence, in addition to widened bilateral cerebellar hemispheres and bilateral parietooccipital sulci. Ambulatory EEG showed abnormal EEG in children, with background slow-wave activity. The electrophysiologic study showed that there was no abnormality in the electroneurogram of both lower limbs, and myogenic damage was shown in electromyography. Brainstem auditory-evoked potential test indicated bilateral peripheral abnormalities with moderate hearing loss of his right ear and mild hearing loss on the left. The visual-evoked potential test indicated an abnormal bilateral visual pathway. The level of ammonia in blood was temporarily elevated with a value of 137 μg/dl. Hyperlactacidemia and metabolic acidosis persisted but improved.
He was treated with topiramate for seizure control, and his epilepsy was well controlled. Then, the patient received the cocktail therapy and supportive treatment for MELAS syndrome. What is more, he was not allowed to use drugs that can affect mitochondrial function. Later, the symptoms of the child improved, and he was followed up for 3 months after discharge.