In November 2018, a 32-year-old male was referred to a tertiary academic hospital in Pretoria, South Africa, with a non-resolving septic arthritis of his right knee. The patient presented to a secondary hospital 10 days prior with a tender, swollen right knee, with no history of trauma. He underwent an arthroscopy at that centre and received intravenous amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, with a suboptimal response. In addition, he developed symptoms suggestive of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), which included polyarthritis, xerostomia, Raynaud’s phenomenon, proteinuria and confusion. On examination he was haemodynamically stable with a pulse rate of 100 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 117/81 mmHg and a temperature of 36.5 °C. He had asymmetric polyarthritis, involving the right elbow, left wrist, right knee and both ankles. The right knee was the worst affected, with swelling, erythema and tenderness on examination. An emergency arthroscopy of the right knee was performed, revealing a purulent effusion. Intravenous ceftriaxone (1 g twice daily) was started empirically. X-rays of all affected joints revealed no accompanying osteomyelitis. No other imaging of the joints was done. The diagnosis of SLE was confirmed based on a Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics score of five (anti-nuclear antibody positive, lupus nephritis class 3, arthritis, low C3 and neurologic SLE).
Admission blood test revealed a white cell count of 8.04 × 109 cells/L with neutrophilia (73%), a C-reactive protein of 107 mg/L, a positive anti-nuclear antibody (titre 160) and a low C3 (0.50 g/L). In addition, an Epstein–Barr virus viraemia of 530 copies/mL was found. Admission blood cultures had no growth. A pus sample taken during arthroscopy showed numerous Gram-positive bacilli on the direct Gram stain. Culture revealed large, flat, grey, beta-haemolytic colonies on 5% horse blood agar , which also grew on chocolate agar and MacConkey agar. This isolate was identified as Bacillus species and reported as a possible contaminant. The patient had a poor clinical response to the empiric ceftriaxone after 6 days of treatment, and a request was made by the attending clinicians for antimicrobial susceptibility testing on the isolate. The isolate was therefore referred for further identification to species level using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation mass spectrometry by means of VITEK® MS (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France), instrument software version 1.5.0.4, MYLA® version 4.5.1 (bioMérieux), Knowledge Base (database) version 3.2. The isolate was identified as Bacillus cereus. Antibiotic susceptibilities were performed by ETEST® (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) and interpreted using the Clinical & Laboratory Standards Institute M45 (2015) breakpoints. The isolate was resistant to penicillin (minimum inhibitory concentration [MIC] 32 µg/mL), and cefotaxime (MIC 32 µg/mL), but susceptible to vancomycin (MIC 4 µg/mL) and imipenem (MIC 4 µg/mL).