A 62-year-old man without any past medical history of chronic illness, such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or dyslipidemia, was transferred from a primary health care clinic owing to progressive polyneuropathy, including right-sided otalgia with conductive hearing loss, dysarthria, pulsatile tinnitus, and right-sided dystonia, as noted during the clinical examination. Cross-sectional magnetic resonance imaging revealed a serpentine T2 signal void situated in the right parieto-occipital and anterior temporal regions ( and ). Susceptibility-weighted imaging revealed a multifocal blooming artifact in the right parieto-occipital area, representing intracranial bleeds. Furthermore, tortuous engorged vessels were observed in the right occipital and temporal lobes, which were related to venous congestion. Arterial spin labeling imaging demonstrated excessive blood pooling in the affected area, resembling venous congestion .
The diagnostic cerebral angiogram revealed a dAVF at the posterior condylar confluence (PCC), supplied by the proximal branches of the occipital artery and ascending pharyngeal artery . The suboccipital venous plexus and deep cervical veins provided the principal venous drainage.
Another fistula was identified in close proximity to the right transverse sinus-sigmoid sinus (TS-SS) junction, which was fed by the trans-osseous branches of the right occipital artery and petrosquamosal branch of the middle meningeal artery and drained through cortical temporal vein reflux toward the sphenopetrosal sinus and subsequently into the sylvian vein. Furthermore, another torcular dAVF was supplied by numerous fine trans-osseous branches of the distal occipital artery (left > right). Moreover, filling of the posterior superior sagittal sinus or right lateral sinus was not identified on the right internal carotid angiogram .
The multidisciplinary treatment plan prescribed endovascular treatment using the combined transarterial and venous approach, which was performed under general anesthesia, to occlude all fistulas. The procedure was initiated by administering an intravenous bolus dose of unfractionated heparin to achieve an activated clotting time of 1.5 to 2 times the baseline value, depending on the patient’s weight (as per the hospital’s protocol), after positioning the guiding catheter within the right proximal external carotid artery. We decided to embolize the right TS-SS junction dAVF first. First, we passed the right petrous branch of the middle meningeal artery, followed by injection of Onyx 18 (ev3, Plymouth, MN, USA) under continuous fluoroscopic guidance, to achieve complete occlusion of the fistula. Subsequently, we used the left transfemoral venous approach to gain access to the right innominate vein and traced a prominent cervical vein to the suboccipital venous plexus. We stretched the tortuosity of the venous plexus and supported the advanced stability catheter by employing a V-18 control wire (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA). The tip of the microcatheter was located within the posterior condylar sac. Complete occlusion was accomplished following the deployment of ORBIT GALAXY coils (Codman Neurovascular, Raynham, MA, USA) and HydroSoft coils (MicroVention Terumo, Tustin, CA, USA; ).
Finally, we accessed both external carotid arteries to approach the occipital artery, which contributed to the remaining torcular dAVF. A PROWLER SELECT Plus (Codman, Raynham, MA, USA) microcatheter was used to inject polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles of 150–250 μm (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) under continuous fluoroscopic guidance, following which complete embolization was achieved. We confirmed the presence of another shunt further along the fistula using a final control angiogram; however, we observed downstream flow in the right lateral sinus and superior sagittal sinus.
No complications were observed during or immediately after the procedure, and the patient’s symptoms were resolved. The patient was followed in routine basis with otolaryngology outpatient clinic for 3 months, without any complaints. The otolaryngology team recorded their observations with an overall improvement from a clinical point of view. The patient also confirmed that the symptoms did not reappear during the last follow-up visit and that he was satisfied with the management plan.