A 23-year-old man with two years history of primarily joint and cutaneous involvement of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE), presented with a one-month history of pedal oedema and frothy urine. 24-hour urine protein revealed 3.34g of protein in 2500ml urine. His biomarkers were; sodium 138mmol/L, potassium 4.5mmol/L, urea of 3.3mmol/L, creatinine 72umol/L, serum albumin of 34g/L and total cholesterol of 8.4 mmol/L. The connective tissue markers result was ANA positive at titre 1:320, anti-dsDNA 87.69IU/ml, C3 0.76g/L and C4 0.4g/L. He was diagnosed with active LN with nephrotic syndrome. We started him on oral prednisolone 1mg/kg and the percutaneous renal biopsy was done two weeks later by the intervention radiology team. The biopsy was uneventful, but the patient developed left leg deep vein thrombosis (DVT) one day after the procedure. The patient was clinically still nephrotic, with serum albumin of 26g/L, and 24-hour urine protein was 6.93g/L. The screening tests for antiphospholipid antibodies were negative. He was started on oral warfarin two days after the biopsy.
The renal biopsy sample, however, was suboptimal and contained only one glomerular, thus not suitable for interpretation. Based on his clinical pictures, we treated him as LN class III or IV and started him on oral Mycophenolate mofetil induction of 1500mg twice daily and continue oral prednisolone with a tempering dose. Despite 12 months of Mycophenolate mofetil, the patient has persistent heavy proteinuria and recurrent symptomatic nephrotic syndrome. The patient later developed a severe skin infection while on oral Mycophenolate mofetil, requiring cessation of the medication. He also suffered from steroid toxicity with significant facial swelling, body striate and weight gain while on 6 months of multiple courses of high-dose oral prednisolone. In addition. repeated bedside Doppler ultrasonography study shows persistent left leg DVT. Because of failing to achieve disease remission with 24-hour urine protein worsening to 12.61g/L, we reattempt the renal biopsy. Since the patient already withheld oral warfarin three days before the biopsy, bridging therapy of IV unfractionated heparin was initiated. We stopped IV unfractionated heparin 4 hours before the biopsy. The blood investigation prior to the procedure was recorded as urea 7.7mmol/L, creatinine 95umol/L, Albumin 22g/L, Hb 11.9g/dl, Platelet 158x10^9/l, PT 11.40, INR 0.84, and APTT 28.60.
The intervention radiology team performed the biopsy using a semiautomatic biopsy needle size 18G. Four passes cultivating two good 1cm core and two fragmented tissues were made to the right renal under ultrasound guidance. In the immediate post-procedure period, ultrasonography detected the hematoma at the right upper pole perinephric region and along the needle track which measures 3.4cm x 5.1cm. The hematoma was not expanding in the repeated scan done half an hour later. Clinically, the patient had minimal discomfort, his blood pressure and his heart rate were 135/75mmHg and 94bpm. He was sent to the ward for close observation and immediately developed frank haematuria on the first voiding post-procedure. An urgent computed tomography angiography (CTA) renal showed no evidence of active arterial bleeding, pseudoaneurysm, fistula or pooling of contrast from the right renal vessel. The repeated coagulation profile also was normal. Repeated antiphospholipid antibodies screening was also negative. Despite the CTA finding, the patient’s frank haematuria worsened, and he required bladder irrigation because of acute urinary retention from persistent blood clots in the urine. In response to these events, we did not restart any anticoagulation therapy post-procedure.
The patient’s frank haematuria and dull flank pain are persistent after three weeks post-event. Despite ongoing haematuria, the patient’s haemoglobin level remained within normal ranged, and he was hemodynamically stable. His creatinine level has been normal and stable throughout the event despite multiple exposures to contrast. Repeated ultrasonography of the kidney showed persistent non-expanding perinephric hematoma. We arranged another CTA renal, and the scan showed a stable right perinephric hematoma with no evidence of ongoing bleeding or vessel injury, but with a new bilateral renal veins’ thrombosis seen. Given the new finding, we decided to re-anticoagulated the patient despite the ongoing presence of hematoma and haematuria. We started him on 5mg oral warfarin with subcutaneous enoxaparin sodium (1mg/kg twice daily) as bridging therapy. Within two days after restarting anticoagulation therapy, the frank haematuria has resolved completely. Repeated ultrasonography a month later showed resolution of perinephric hematoma, renal vein thrombosis and left leg DVT. Histopathological analysis of biopsy tissue was consistent with LN class IV (Diffuse proliferative nephritis with Activity Index 10, Chronicity Index 3). He was started on IV Cyclophosphamide Euro-lupus and achieved partial remission with current treatments.