A 22-year-old woman with a history of thalassemia was referred to our clinic for decreased vision and ocular discomfort. She had received high-dose chemotherapy followed by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) and had been prescribed frequent lubricants as well as topical antibiotics at another center.
Upon admission, the patient complained of foreign body sensation and painful sore gritty eyes. Corrected visual acuity was 3/10 and 7/10 in the right and left eyes, respectively. The diagnosis was severe dry eye secondary to chronic GVHD. Despite aggressive medical and surgical interventions such as topical cyclosporine and steroids, blepharorrhaphy, and upper and lower punctal occlusion, she experienced worsening of the condition followed by further deterioration of vision in her right eye. A significant decrease in tear meniscus, blepharitis and development of superficial corneal vascularization were noted during follow-up. Corneal vascularization progressed and led to corneal perforation. Slit lamp examination revealed a small Seidel-positive corneal perforation approximately 1.5 mm × 1 mm in size in her right eye . Bandage contact lens (BCL) was applied as a temporary management and the patient was admitted. Cyanoacrylate glue was applied to seal the perforation site but was ineffective. Multilayer amniotic membrane transplantation (AMT) was performed to seal the corneal perforation . The corneal perforation was sealed for 3 weeks following resorption of the AMT . However, corneal perforation recurred six months later . Penetrating keratoplasty (PK) together with a deep subconjunctival and intrastromal bevacizumab injection in the donor cornea were performed simultaneously in the right eye . The corneal bottom was sent for histopathologic and bacteriologic evaluations which revealed corneal vascularization, inflammation, stromal edema and stromal degeneration . Bacteriologic evaluations were negative.
In subsequent examinations, despite full medical/surgical treatment such as frequent lubrication with preservative-free artificial tears, topical cyclosporine and steroids, autologous serum, lateral tarsorrhaphy, and punctual occlusion; deep corneal stromal vascularization and descemetocele developed in the fellow left eye and the patient underwent therapeutic lamellar keratoplasty.
At this stage, her hematologist was consulted and asked to intensify the immunosuppression. The dosage of systemic mycophenolate mofetil, prednisolone acetate, and cyclosporine were increased to 2 g daily, 50 mg daily, and 150 mg daily, respectively. After intensifying the systemic regimen, the dry eye improved significantly, and the dosage was gradually tapered to 1 g daily, 10 mg daily, and 50 mg daily for mycophenolate mofetil, prednisolone acetate, and cyclosporine A, respectively. With maximum ocular and systemic treatment, the graft remained clear during the subsequent three years .