A 61-year-old man was referred to our hospital after an incidental finding of renal cancer and metastasis to the fourth rib on computed tomography. Further evaluation revealed that the IVC tumor thrombus extended beyond the hepatic venous inflow site to immediately below the diaphragm. This was a Level IIIc thrombus based on Ciancio's classification . Cine MRI, an imaging method that specializes in capturing the motions of objects,, revealed some blood flow between the IVC wall and the body of the thrombus but no mobility or blood flow between the IVC wall and the advanced portion of the tumor, indicating the possibility of adhesion to or invasion of the IVC wall .
A pretreatment tumor biopsy revealed clear cell RCC with inflammatory cell infiltration on HE staining .
The patient was treated with pembrolizumab every 3 weeks and lenvatinib every day for 6 months, resulting in tumor shrinkage . The rib metastases shrank from 56 to 36 mm, and the main body of the renal tumor was reduced from 45 to 25 mm in the transverse section. The advanced portion of the IVC thrombus remained under the diaphragm, and its size was generally unchanged. The findings on preoperative cine MRI were similar to those before systemic therapy, including some blood flow between the IVC wall and the thrombus but no mobility or blood flow between the wall and advanced portion .
During the course of treatment, hypertension, diarrhea, and stomatitis were observed, requiring a dose reduction of lenvatinib from 20 to 14 mg on Day 11 of treatment. His number of risk factors improved from two before systemic therapy to one after 6 months from the initiation of therapy, based on the International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium risk classification . Given the improvement in metastatic site and IMDC risk, a decision was made to proceed with nephrectomy at this juncture.
The patient underwent open nephrectomy plus thrombectomy after the withdrawal of lenvatinib 7 days prior to surgery. Surgery was initiated through a midline abdominal incision. Perirenal adhesions were mild, with scant evidence of preoperative systemic therapy. The liver was completely mobilized to expose the hepatic vein via incision of the falciform, triangular, and coronary ligaments. Vascular cramps were made superior to the hepatic veins, the left renal vein, and the IVC immediately below it. Then the “Pringle maneuver” (temporarily clamping the portal vein and hepatic artery) was performed. Cavotomy and thrombectomy were then performed under direct vision. The tumor thrombus was found adherent to the IVC wall in multiple locations. A 6-cm cavotomy and thrombus removal were performed. In order to shorten the time of the Pringle maneuver, the cardiovascular surgeon simply performed a continuous suture of the IVC defect as planned preoperatively. The surgical time was 434 min, and the blood loss was 135 mL.
The pathological examination of the resected renal tumor and IVC thrombus revealed no viable tumor cells, indicative of a remarkable pCR .
He has undergone follow-up without further treatment on the fourth rib metastases for 5 months.