This case study was conducted according to the CARE guidelines .
A 56-year-old woman had SCA. After ROSC, the patient was transferred and admitted to our hospital for the management of post-cardiac arrest syndrome in the intensive care unit (ICU). The patient had no particular medical history.
The patient had experienced general weakness and edema in the bilateral lower extremities for a few years, but the patient did not visit any hospital regarding this issue. Recently, the patient experienced poor appetite and ate almost nothing. Several days before the admission, the patient still had a poor appetite and could not carry out daily activities. The patient was unconscious at home and was brought to the hospital by the ambulance crew. Cardiac pulmonary resuscitation was performed by the ambulance crew, and ROSC was achieved. The patient was intubated and transferred to our hospital.
Physical examination revealed a body mass index of 40.0 kg/m2. The initial vital signs on arrival at our hospital were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale score of 6 (E1VTM4); blood pressure, 86/51 mmHg; heart rate, 55 beats/min; SpO2, 100 %; and respiratory rate, 21 breaths/min. The patient had hypothermia (core body temperature, 32.4 °C). On physical examination, the patient was found to have a puffy face, thin eyebrows, and severe systemic non-pitting edema . Electrocardiography revealed low-voltage sinus bradycardia with an inverted T-wave in the anterior precordial leads . Troponin I and brain natriuretic peptide levels were 1159 pg/mL and 138 pg/mL, respectively. Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly and bilateral costophrenic angle blunting . Echocardiography, performed by a cardiologist, revealed hypokinesis of the inferior wall motion and a moderate amount of pericardial effusion . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed no evidence of pulmonary embolism, but there was a contrast-opaque area on the intimal side of the left ventricular inferior wall . Based on these findings, non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) was suspected. The patient’s laboratory test findings were as follows: sodium, 125 mmol/L; potassium, 2.8 mmol/L; total protein, 6.1 g/dL; and albumin, 3.3 g/dL. Serum muscle enzyme levels were elevated, with a creatine kinase level of 1649 U/L and a lactate dehydrogenase level of 483 IU/L. Serum-free triiodothyronine (T3) level was 0.39 pg/mL, free thyroxine (T4) level was 0.04 pg/dL, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level was 33.5 µIU/mL. The anti-thyroglobulin (Tg) antibody level was 3579 IU/mL, and the anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody level was 26.9 IU/mL. The serum cortisol level was 62.4 µg/dL, and the low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol level was 237 mg/dL.
First, hydrocortisone was administered at a dose of 200 mg/day, considering the risk of adrenal insufficiency. Then, levothyroxine and liothyronine sodium were administered at doses of 200 µg/day and 50 µg/day, respectively. On the 5th day, the patient experienced sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT). Electrolyte levels were in the normal range, and the cause of VT could not be identified. The patient was clinically diagnosed with myxedema coma, which was possibly caused by NSTEMI. The patient received amiodarone at a dose of 750 mg for 48 h. Further cardiological intervention was not performed because the neurological prognosis was poor. After amiodarone administration, VT was not observed. On the 12th day, laboratory test results showed that the serum TSH level was 15.1 µIU/mL, the free T4 level was 0.21 pg/dL, and the free T3 levels were normal. However, the patient did not recover from the coma, and the dysfunction of the central nervous system remained.
Renal replacement therapy for acute kidney injury and antibiotic therapy for ventilator-associated pneumonia were needed during the stay in the ICU. On the 7th day, tracheostomy was performed, and management with mechanical ventilation continued. The patient was discharged to the chronic care hospital on the 25th day.