A 20 year old man with chronic kidney disease stage 5 secondary to chronic interstitial nephritis had been performing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis for six months before having an inadvertent dialysis catheter disconnection.
As per unit protocol he underwent a set change with concurrent prophylactic IP vancomycin administration. A sample of peritoneal dialysis fluid was sent for microscopy and culture. Initial microscopy demonstrated a white cell count of only 10 × 106/l, this count was not raised therefore a differentiated cell count was not performed. No organisms were seen on Gram stain. He was clinically well with no abdominal pain, fevers or cloudy bags. The cultured peritoneal dialysis fluid grew Rhodotorula muciliginosa . A further two peritoneal fluid samples sent up to 7 days after the first sample also grew the same Rhodotorula spp. suggesting colonisation. Sensitivity tests were performed at the Mycology Reference Laboratory in Bristol using microtitre broth dilution according to CLSI M-27-A3 protocol. This test showed our isolate had MIC levels of 0.25 mg/L for amphotericin, 0.50 mg/L for posoconazole and 4 mg/L for voriconazole. Our isolate was considered sensitive to amphotericin only. The patient’s C-reactive protein peaked at 30 mg/l (normal range 0-5 mg/l) with a mildly elevated white cell count of 13.8 × 109/L comprised of 11.8 × 109/L neutrophils and 0.8 × 109/L lymphocytes. On microbiology advice, given the potential for the patient to develop fungal peritonitis, he was admitted for removal of his peritoneal dialysis catheter and commencement of IV amphotericin.
An investigation into the potential source of the Rhodotorula spp. colonisation was commenced. It was noted that he kept a Chilean rose tarantula , an Indian ornamental tarantula, and a bearded dragon, in the room where he performed his dialysis.
Samples were sent from the sand and soil environments within the animal habitats. Microbiological culture of the sand from the tarantula case grew Rhodotorula muciliginosa, identifying the likely source. Interestingly, Candida spp. was also isolated from sand from the bearded dragon case, which can also cause devastating peritonitis.
Given our patients preserved urine output, he was able to remain off renal replacement therapy for two months following completion of the Amphotericin course. The patient was pleased that dialysis could be held, and peritoneal dialysis recommenced now a source had been identified, as he wished to avoid haemodialysis. A further Tenchkoff catheter was inserted and dialysis resumed. In the interim, the cases housing the tarantulas and bearded dragon were moved to another area of the house, and a thorough deep clean of his room completed.