In 2021, a 67-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our outpatient cardiology clinic with worsening exertional breathlessness with no physical stigmata of heart failure. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated an aortic regurgitation (AR) with a pressure half-time of 597 ms, a vena contracta of 0.45, but visual assessment was graded as moderate to severe AR . A cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) with four-dimensional flow (4D flow) was done to better quantify the AR and the left ventricular (LV) volumes. CMR was performed on a 3-T Discovery 750w GE system (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA) equipped with an eight-channel cardiac coil. CMR cine images in two-, three-, and four-chamber views were obtained during end-expiratory breath-hold with a balanced steady-state free precession (bSSFP), single-slice breath-hold sequence. Images encompassed the entire heart, aortic valve, and ascending aorta using the following scan parameters: HyperKat acceleration with a factor of 2, field of view 340 mm × 340 mm, acquired voxel size 3 × 3 × 3 mm3, reconstructed voxel size 1.5 × 1.5 × 1.5 mm3, echo time (TE) 3.5 ms, repetition time (TR) 10 ms, flip angle 10°, and 30 cardiac phases. Four-dimensional flow analysis of peak mitral inflow velocity was performed using CAAS MR software (prototype version 5.2; Pie Medical Imaging, Maastricht, the Netherlands).
The LV was not dilated (indexed LV end-diastolic volume 84 ml/m2 and end-systolic volume 26 ml/m2) and had preserved function (ejection fraction 69%). CMR elucidated the AR severity to be mild to moderate (AR fraction 22% with no holo-diastolic reversal in descending aorta). We used novel three-dimensional peak velocity tracing of the transvalvular flow streamlines to investigate whether we could map out the mitral inflow peak diastolic early (E-wave) and late (A-wave) velocities, which were challenging to assess by pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography . The flow streamlines can track blood flow from the mitral annulus, and hence there is less chance of picking up the peak velocity of aortic regurgitation flow. Even though diastolic mitral flow is likely to be blunted by the AR, this method allows to at least assess peak velocity through the mitral valve leaflets . This case highlights that pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography has a limited role in the assessment of mitral inflow in the presence of AR, limiting its use in LV diastolic and mitral stenosis assessment when AR is present. Secondly, we show for the first time that 4D flow CMR plays a complementary role in teasing out the peak mitral inflow velocities in patients with AR.