A 68-year-old, right-handed, married White housewife presented with a complaint of failing memory in February 2010. According to her husband, over the previous 3 years his wife’s ability to retrieve the name of familiar objects (for example, scissors, spoon, watch) slowly declined, although she continued to use them normally. At the same time, she found it increasingly difficult to recall the names of friends and relatives that she met only occasionally. Paradoxically, she retained the ability to recall personal facts about people that she failed to recognize or name. For example, she knew that the husband of a friend whom she had not met for a while had recently died; yet she neither recognized her friend nor recalled her name.
Several months before her first appointment, the patient became overly concerned about cleanliness and orderliness. Initially, she swept the sidewalk in front of her house twice a day “to prevent the leaves from clogging the manhole.” In a few weeks, she began to set fire to the piles of leaves and trash that she collected and stacked along the sidewalk of her block several times a day. She would soon be spending most of the day cleaning the street. Attempts to block her way out to the sidewalk increased her level of anxiety and provoked angry protests, which were usually enough for her relatives to let her out. On one occasion, she got into the yard of a nearby house without permission and set fire to a pile of trash that the neighbor had collected the day before. At a friend’s house, she swept the leaves, cleaned the garden flowers, and tidied up the terrace. At her granddaughter’s first birthday party, she left the guests and went to sweep her daughter’s mother-in-law’s backyard. She also continuously searched for plastic bags, empty bottles, and small objects along the way, which she would pick up and bring home, finally throwing them in the trash can. She maintained her regular sleep schedule, with occasional night awakenings; at these times, she would get up to do the laundry. At odds with the patient’s pleasant, albeit reserved, nature, her manners became rude and inadequate. Unless she was closely surveilled, she would pick up food from strangers’ dishes in restaurants and other public places. She abandoned complex routines and hobbies, such as sewing, which she had always been fond of. She was still able to cook and handle cutlery, as well as to dress without help. The patient admitted to feeling sad and distressed but did not meet formal diagnostic criteria for major depression.
Since an early age, the patient strived to keep everything neat and clean, but tidiness was a chief concern. Everything had to be in the “right” place. A blanket on the couch had to be stretched out, and if anyone had a seat, she hurried to straighten up the blanket as soon as the person got up. However, she never missed appointments or got into trouble because of her concern with cleanliness and tidiness, which her relatives saw as a personal quality.
The patient was born in a small town in the northern part of the state of Rio de Janeiro. Although she came from a low-class family, she got married early in life and soon became pregnant with her son and daughter. Therefore, she spent her life taking care of her home and family. There was no history of hypertension, diabetes, tobacco smoking, or drinking. She had elevated serum cholesterol levels with normal triglycerides. Her mother left the family when she was 7 years old. Her father suffered from persecutory delusions since early adulthood. One brother died at age 60 with a diagnosis of alcoholism. Her only medication was simvastatin 20 mg at bedtime.
On her first appointment, her blood pressure was 135/83 mmHg, and her heart rate was regular at 60 beats per minute; her body temperature was likewise normal (36.7 °C). No abnormalities were found in the general examination. She was oriented to time and place and scored on the lower normal range on the Mini-Mental State Exam (26/30). Spontaneous speech was characterized by a slow rate owing to word-finding pauses, but there was no frank agrammatism. She could read and write, and draw a clock from memory with ease. She missed one out of five serial subtractions of 7 from 100. She could not name everyday objects (scissors, pen, cell phone), but correctly described and pantomimed their use and used them appropriately. She was unable to recall the name and recognize close relatives and friends but retained the ability to recall personal facts about them. She often interrupted the interview and spent several minutes eyeing up the drawers of the room cabinet. She often stopped talking to tidy up the books and documents on the examiner’s desk. She sat, stood up, and walked normally, but the associated movements of the arms were reduced in amplitude, especially on the right; rigidity, tremor, or fasciculations were not seen. Her balance was normal, both when she stood and walked; the pull test elicited normal righting reflexes. There was no Romberg sign.
Neuropsychological assessment (Additional file ) revealed a striking dissociation between the impairment of language and memory and the preservation of tool-use praxis and visuospatial and visuoconstructional skills; tests for visuospatial neglect were likewise normal . Naming was far more compromised than aural and written comprehension, as shown by her performance on the 15-object test (Additional file ) and on the Multilingual Aphasia Examination . Her memory disorder was due to an impairment of both encoding and recall.
A year and a half later, the patient had become abulic, and her cognitive impairment had evolved into overt dementia (Mini-Mental State Exam 17/30). She intermittently emerged from the abulic state with attempts to go out and clean the street. Despite the progression to dementia, she remained oriented even to new and unfamiliar places; likewise, she remained able to copy two intersecting pentagons and draw a clock from memory as accurately as she did on her first appointment.
A few trials of 2–3 months of serotonin followed by paroxetin associated with olanzapine early in the course of dementia were of no avail and were suspended. In her final years, her memory impairment, the difficulty in time and place orientation, and the recognition of familiar faces further declined, along with a steady decrease of the compulsions to clean and tidy up. Her cognitive status remained unchanged after a 6-month trial of rivastigmine 12 mg. She developed hyperorality, bringing to mouth inedible objects such as vinegar, liquid soap, skin lotions, and shaving cream. She developed urinary and fecal incontinence in the last 2 years of life. In her final months of life, she was severely abulic and her verbal output was reduced to just a few words. She passed away from acute myocardial infarction in November 2016, with an estimated length of disease of 8 years.