As the first infant living in the third pregnancy of a 23-year-old mother, born by cesarean section in the weight of 2280 gm and having asymmetric intrauterine growth retardation, the female baby was referred to our unit with the diagnosis of neonatal cholestasis on the postnatal day 10, due to having acholic stool since birth and development of hyperbilirubinemia on the postnatal day two. The body weight was 2275 gr (3-10%), the height was 48 cm (10%), the head circumference was 33 cm (10-50%), the vital findings were; heart rate was: 124/min, blood pressure was: 70/48 (58) mm Hg, fever was: 36.7° C (axillary), and respiratory rate was: 52/min, spO2: 98%. In the physical examination, sclera and skin of the case were icteric and dirty-yellow looking; the case had hypertelorism, slanted eyes, and discrete hand fingers; and cardiac 3°/6 systolic murmur was detected. During the abdominal examination of the case who had no respiratory complaints, the liver and the spleen were not palpable. Laboratory investigations showed that aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 35 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 10 IU/L, albumin 3,3 gr/dL, alkaline phosphates (ALP) :280 IU/L, lactate dehydrogenase: 854 IU/L, blood glucose : 80 mg/dL ammonia: 80 mcg/dL values were normal; total bilirubin(t bil): 8mg/dL, direct bilirubin(d bil): 4.05 mg/dL, gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT): 1185 IU/L values were high. Complete blood count, bleeding profile, blood gas, urinary examination were normal; infection criteria were negative. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed a cystic structure without a real wall structure with an irregular contour of about 3 cm on the gladder ball wall. The lesion was evaluated in accordance with the pseudo biliary, and there was no evidence of choledochus in the case who had a finding of triangular cord at the level of the right-left hepatic venous junction. These findings were evaluated as compatible with biliary atresia. However, besides biliary atresia, the portal venous whose diameter was getting thinner was seen to open to the VCI without forming an intrahepatic branch after a short follow-up of portal hilus. MR angiography confirmed the diagnosis of biliary atresia, and abdominal CT angiography confirmed Abernethy malformation type 2 ( and ). The case, whose acolic stools were continuing, was followed by total oral feeding, although hypoglycemia was not observed, by pausing breastfeeding, and lactose-free formulas were used until galactosemia was excluded. A, D, E, and K vitamin supplements were increased due to cholestasis, and ursodeoxycholic acid treatment was started. In the echocardiography (ECO) of the case with cardiac murmur, whose peripheral pulses are open, and whose pre-postductal saturations and 4 extremity blood pressures showed no difference, inlet VSD was measured as 4 mm, secundumatriyoseptal defect (ASD) was 3 mm, and the stenosis gradient was measured as 40 mm Hg; and pulmonary stenosis and poststenotic dilatation were detected at valvular level. Spironolactone treatment for heart failure was initiated in the case. In the diagnosis of neonatal cholestasis separator, sepsis, viral infections, and hereditary metabolic diseases were excluded. Pheno-typic appearance was also evaluated in terms of Allagille Syndrome due to laboratory findings and ECO findings. Due to normal intrahepatic bile ducts in the abdominal US and no visible colloid, no posterior embryotoxic in the eye, no butterfly vertebrae in the vertebrae graphics, and because pulmonary stenosis was valvular but not peripheral in the ECO, the possibility of this diagnosis was excluded.
Exploration was performed to the case on the postnatal day 35. During the intraoperative follow-up, the gallbladder was atrophic, the liver did not have a cirrhotic appearance, but the main hepatic ducts were fibrotic, and portal vein was getting thinner at the hepatic hilus level and continued as an obliteration structure and also showed a slight extension to the VCI. Tip-to-tip anastomosis was performed between the portal vein and the umbilical vein by planning recanalization of the portal vein into the rex area of the left portal vein into which the umbilical vein flowed so that the portal vein could provide adequate blood supply. Intraoperative Doppler US showed that there was a slight flow in the umbilical vein; however, it was determined that sufficient revascularization could not be achieved because the segmented portal branches extending from the rex region into the liver were flebo-obliterated. The operation was completed with hepatic portoenterostomy (Kasai procedure) (-).
The two-month-old case who was re-hospitalized due to weight loss; had a body weight of 2950 gr (<3%) and a height of 50 cm, the infection criteria were negative, AST/ ALT: 325/144 IU/L, GGT: 102 IU/L, T bil/D bil: 1,44/ 8.9 mg/dL, bleeding profile was usual, nutrition was re-regulated by increasing calorie support.
The five-month-old case which applied to the emergency service due to bloody stool, bloody vomiting, the tendency to sleep had tachycardia, tachypnea, and abdominal distension. A patient with massive upper-lower GIS bleeding due to portal hypertension and hemorrhagic shock had hemoglobin: 5 gr/dL, INR:> 2,5, AST/ALT: 1202/544 IU/L, ALP: 677 IU/L, GGT: 43 IU/L, TIV/DIV: 15/7 mg/dL. Treatment for hypovolemic shock was performed and hemorrhage control was provided at the end of the second day.
Correspondingly, preparations were started for the case of a liver transplant candidate at postnatal month six due to the progression of chronic venous occlusion related to accompanying Abernethy malformation type 2 despite Kasai operation, and because the liver became fibrotic at the infantile stage and liver failure developed.