A 36-year-old married female with no comorbidities presented with a history of abnormal behaviour of five weeks which included mood liability (laughing/crying spells), delusions of persecution (feeling that other people were trying to harm her), irritability and occasions of talking to herself. She also had urinary and fecal incontinence. For these complaints, she was shown to a psychiatrist, who evaluated her and started her on anti-psychotic drugs. However, even with adequate doses of medications, the symptoms worsened. An organic brain pathology was therefore suspected, and she was referred to a neurologist. Blood tests, which included tests for serum electrolytes, viral markers, thyroid profile and anti-phospholipid antibodies (APLA), anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were normal. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scan and an electroencephalogram (EEG) were also normal. However, anti-NMDA antibody titers were strongly positive.
Thus, a diagnosis of anti-NMDA autoimmune encephalitis was made. She was started on steroids at a dose of 1 g/day. However, symptomatic improvement was minimal. A paraneoplastic association was suspected, and a computerized tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen was done which showed a 8.3 × 6.9 × 5.3 cm heterodense lesion arising from her right ovary with calcification suggestive of a dermoid cyst. She was then referred to us for surgical management of the adnexal lesion. On examination, our patient was fidgety and restless with poor word output. There was no eye-to-eye contact during conversations. A mini mental status examination (MMSE) showed a score of 4 out of 30. She was not even able to walk or to write legibly. Our patient underwent a right oophorectomy under general anesthesia . The tumor grossly measured 8.5 cm in the largest dimension . On sectioning, sebaceous material and hair were seen , suggesting an ovarian teratoma.
Post-operatively, our patient was on a ventilator for two days. Later she was transferred to ward and managed with anti-epileptics and steroids. By the end of the first week, she was able to talk with her family members and ask for food and water; by the 10th day, she was making eye-to-eye contact during conversations with good word output; by the 20th day, she was able to climb four flights of stairs and write legibly; by the end of one month, she was doing her household chores and office work; her MMSE score had improved to 26 out of 30.