A 40-year-old male motorcyclist was involved in a high-speed road traffic collision. He was hit by a car and fell onto a flexed right knee. He was unable to bear weight and presented to the emergency department the following day where he was immobilized in an above knee backslab. Radiographs of the right knee confirmed a displaced unicondylar fracture of the lateral femoral condyle . Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a sagittal split in the Hoffa fragment and intra-articular comminution . A subsequent MRI scan showed partial rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL).
The patient was placed in a supine position under general anesthesia. An anterior midline skin incision over the knee was made followed by a lateral parapatellar approach. The fracture was exposed where a small amount of comminution was visible . A central die-punch defect at the site of fracture line convergence was noted and deemed to be non-reconstructable. The fracture was reduced and held with a bone reduction clamp. Two K-wires were used to secure the fragments. Two headless compression screws were inserted from lateral to medial through the base of the lateral femoral condyle. A further two guidewires were passed from the anterior aspect of the femur to the main fracture fragment to allow two 7.5 mm × 60 mm cannulated screws to be inserted. A distal radius plate was used as a buttress plate over the lateral aspect of the femoral condyle and secured with screws . Intraoperative fluoroscopy confirmed anatomical reduction.
Postoperatively, the patient was instructed to remain strictly non-weight-bearing for 6 weeks in a hinged knee brace (0–60°). Range of movement was planned to increase by 20° every 2 weeks.
By 3 weeks after surgery, the patient reported no problems. Post-operative pain and swelling had settled, his range of motion (ROM) was increased to 0–90°, but he was advised to continue his non-weight-bearing status. Eight weeks postoperatively, the patient described a reduced range of active movement (0–45°), this was due to compliance difficulties with physiotherapy. As a natural consequence of not bearing weight and wearing a knee brace, he demonstrated quadriceps and gastrocnemius muscle wasting. At this point, the patient was encouraged to begin full weight-bearing through the knee, to discard the brace, and continue physiotherapy to regain muscle strength.
At the 5-month consultation, examination revealed independent motion of the right knee. The patient was able to fully bear weight through the knee but walked with a limp due to knee stiffness. His ROM had plateaued at a range of 5–45°. Despite this, functionally, the patient was back to normal duties. Radiographically , there was evidence of heterotrophic ossification around the lateral femoral condyle. Apart from this, the metal work was in situ and the fracture was healing in a satisfactory position. The patient was therefore offered a manipulation under anesthesia and arthroscopy to assess the status of articular cartilage in his knee.
During arthroscopy, the medial meniscus was found to be intact and the die-punch defect still visible. Significant adhesions were seen , and therefore, adhesiolysis and microfracture treatment to the affected cartilage area were carried out. The patient was advised not to bear weight through the knee for 4 weeks but to commence full ROM with physiotherapy immediately.
At the 6-month consultation after his original surgery, and 3 weeks post-adhesiolysis, the patient demonstrated pain-free range of movement of 5° flexion to 90° flexion. He was discharged from both orthopedic and physiotherapy care at just under 1-year post-surgery when he was pain free and undertaking his usual activities. He had a mild fixed flexion deformity of 10° but was content with his knee and overall treatment.