An 11-year-old female child, presented at our hospital with pain in the right lower abdominal pain for the past ten days. She was from a rural part of Nepal and was in her usual state of health until four weeks before when she presented with a history of abdominal pain, low grade fever with chills accompanied by vomiting and loose stool. The abdominal pain was located in the right lower quadrant, progressive in nature and moderate in severity. She was initially treated in a local hospital near her hometown. As her pain worsened and her symptoms did not improve after repeated treatment, she visited our hospital for further medical management. Her past medical and surgical history, family history, personal history and allergic history were insignificant.
On arrival at the emergency via ambulance, she presented with persistent fever and right lower abdominal pain. She was ill-appearing, cachectic girl with a temperature of 101 °F, blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg and heart rate of 110 beats/minute. She was in tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 28 per minute. Her initial abdominal examination demonstrated tenderness in the right iliac fossa with positive rebound tenderness with normal bowel sounds but the remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable. Her laboratory values on admission showed a leukocyte count of 28,000/mm3, hematocrit of 30.5%, prothrombin time of 14.2 seconds, fibrinogen of 497 mg/dL, ALT (U/L)of 97, AST of 91 IU/L, and albumin of 2.98 g/dL (.).
Since the patient was hemodynamically unstable, she was admitted to the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) for further workup. Our differential diagnosis included appendicular abscess and mesenteric lymphadenitis which were subsequently ruled out by imaging. She underwent Ultrasonography (USG) abdomen and pelvis which showed an ill-defined heteroechoic lesion with anechoic component measuring 2.7 X 3.1 × 3.3 cm in left lobe of liver with feature suggestive of hepatomegaly with liver abscess. There was a cavernous transformation of portal vein at intrahepatic part and collaterals at periportal region with intraluminal echogenic contrast suggestive of portal vein thrombosis at mid part suggestive of portal hypertension with minimal ascites. She further underwent Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography (CECT) abdominal pelvis which confirmed hepatomegaly with multiple coalescing hypodense lesion diffusely scattered in liver parenchyma largest measuring (6.5X7.5 × 7.2 cm) in segment VII and enhancing internal septations within suggestive of lesion of infective etiology with multiple liver abscess. Portal vein thrombosis with periportal collaterals, mild ascites was also confirmed. The scan also showed wall enhancing collection in Right Iliac fossa (RIF) in close proximity to the appendix likely to be appendicular perforation with an abscess formation. (. A, B).
Based on the history, physical examination, and radiographic findings, a presumptive diagnosis of pylephlebitis secondary to a perforated appendix was made. She was started on broad spectrum antibiotics. An emergency open appendectomy was performed. Intraoperatively, significant abdominal ascitic fluid was noted. An appendiceal remnant in a retrocecal position with perforation on the tip of appendix was found. A periappendiceal abscess of around 10ml was found with extensive serosal fibrous adhesions consistent with perforated appendicitis. The base of the appendix was healthy and was tied and the abdomen was closed by the placement of subphrenic drain.
Postoperatively, the patient continued to have fever for the first day. On the second postoperative day, her leukocyte count significantly decreased to 11,000/mm3 day with resolution of abdominal symptoms. During her stay in the hospital she was prescribed an anticoagulant for portal vein thrombosis for the duration of three months. Histopathology of the appendectomy specimen confirmed perforated appendicitis. A computed tomography (CT) scan on postoperative day five showed significant reduction in the right hepatic abscesses, persistent left hepatic abscesses, and persistence without progression of the portal venous thrombosis. She then underwent ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage of about 40 mL of pus from the left lobe of the liver. Antibiotics were continued for a total duration of 6 weeks. At 6 weeks follow up, she was asymptomatic and doing well.