A 41-year-old white woman presented in July 2003 with two nodules in the upper quadrants of the left breast and underwent radical mastectomy according to Madden and removal of 18 axillary lymph nodes for a multicentric infiltrating moderately differentiated ductal carcinoma (2 cm maximum diameter); lymphovascular space invasion was positive, and 8 lymph nodes were shown to contain malignant cells.
The tumor was positive for both estrogen receptors (ER) (90%) and progesterone receptors (PR) (70%), negative for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (c-erbB-2), and positive for Ki-67 (15%). The tumor was pathologically staged as pT2N2M0.
Postoperatively, the patient received 8 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with Epirubicin (4 cycles) and Cyclophosphamide, Methotrexate, Fluorouracil (CMF) protocol (4 cycles) plus radiotherapy (44 Gy) to the left hemithorax and left supraclavicular fossa. Treatment continued with Leuprolide in a monthly dose of 3.75 mg for two years, and Tamoxifen in a daily dose of 20 mg.
In March 2007, an increase in CA15-3 levels (54.9 U/mL; reference level, < 30) was documented in the absence of any sign of recurrence as assessed by imaging. Thoracic computed tomographic (CT) scan demonstrated a solitary small soft tissue mass of approximately 10 mm of diameter located in the middle lobe of the right lung attached to the mediastinal pleura. A total body CT-PET was positive.
She underwent surgical resection of the nodule and of the visceral pleura of upper lobe. Histology examinations showed the presence of metastatic breast carcinoma both in the middle lobe and visceral pleura of upper lobe. The tumor was positive for both ER and PR, and negative for c-erbB-2. Postoperatively, she received 6 cycles of chemotherapy with Docetaxel and hormone therapy with Letrozole.
Follow-up was negative until March 2009, when a novel increase of CA 15.3 (59.8 U/mL) was demonstrated. Ultrasonography of the liver showed, at the level of pancreatic head, a cystic lesion approximately 14 × 13 mm in diameter, with internal septa with features suggestive of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm. Pancreatic magnetic resonance confirmed this suspicion. Even if CT guided biopsy and a total body CT-PET were negative, the patient was strongly motivated to take away the pancreatic lesion, and a month later pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed; the postoperative course was uneventful. Pathological examination revealed a mucinous cystoadenoma of the pancreatic (1 cm maximum diameter) with negative resection margins. Surprisingly and fortunately, a peripancreatic lymph node removed during surgery (0.7 cm maximum diameter) was shown to contain tumour cells of the same histotype of primitive breast cancer and showing both ER and PR positivity, apparently stronger membrane signal for HER-2 , CK7 and 19 positivity (data not shown). Tumor cells resulted consistently negative for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (data not shown) and for breast tissue marker gross cyctic disease fluid protein (GCDFP) (data not shown). Immunoreaction for CDX-2 antigen used to discriminate tumors of gastroenteric origin was negative (data not shown).
A re-joint evaluation of the slides was planned with two independent pathologists who confirmed the diagnosis.
Consequently, surgery tumour markers returned quickly within the reference range. After a careful counseling hormone therapy with Exemestane was begun which is currently ongoing. At 16 months of follow-up, the patient is free of disease.