A 47-year-old healthy man consulted a local hospital with complaints of unsteadiness and dizziness. Despite magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealing a cystic lesion in the third ventricle, he presented with no neurological abnormalities and his symptoms disappeared shortly. One year later, he was referred to the hospital again with complaints of headache. MRI revealed unilateral obstructive hydrocephalus with enlargement of the cyst, which occluded the foramen of Monro and protruded into the left lateral ventricle . He was referred to our hospital for the surgery of cyst fenestration, and his headache resolved spontaneously. Endoscopic biopsy of the cyst wall was scheduled for the relief of headache and histological confirmation was obtained one month later. Upon admission for operation, MRI revealed that the cyst drew back in the third ventricle, and the shape of the ventricles turned out to be symmetrical. However, the ventricles still remained enlarged . The sequential MRI findings demonstrated that the cyst at the third ventricle was flexible in its location and induced noncommunicative hydrocephalus with different obstructive points. He complained of different types of headaches, and finally we decided to perform endoscopic surgery to eliminate the symptom and normalize CSF flow in the ventricles.
The patient underwent endoscopic cyst fenestration at the third ventricle via the left lateral ventricle with a fiberscope (VEF-V, Olympus, Japan). The cystic lesion occupied the enlarged foramen of Monro . There was a slight gap around the cyst wall at the foramen of Monro and the cyst wall, and some granular tissue could be found through the cyst wall. The cyst wall was connected to the choroid plexus behind the foramen of Monro . Most of the cyst wall could be easily removed using endoscopic forceps, but the small part of the cyst wall was tightly adhered to the choroid plexus and was left untouched . Finally, near-total resection was achieved to recover the physiological CSF flow through the foramen of Monro .
Upon pathological examination of the surgical specimen, cuboidal epithelia lined with connective tissue were found in papillary patterns with some calcification and no malignant appearances . Immunoreactivity for epithelial membrane antigen and glial fibrillary acidic protein were positive in cuboidal epithelia, and these findings are consistent with CPCs.
The postoperative course was excellent, and his symptoms disappeared completely. MRI revealed the ventricles were reduced in size compared to preoperatively . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 10 without any complications. He presented no complications for 6 months postoperatively.