A 56-year-old Hispanic male with no comorbid conditions presented to our emergency department with a 2-day history of fever, generalized weakness, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. He had no hemoptysis, hematemesis, arthralgia, or headache. He denied recent contact with sick humans, exposure to pets or birds, or travel. He smoked 5 cigarettes per day for over 20 years but denied using alcohol or recreational drugs.
On physical examination, the patient was in respiratory distress, with a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute and pulse oxygen saturation of 90% on 2 liters per minute oxygen via a nasal cannula. His temperature was 101.5°F, heart rate was 68 beats per minute, and blood pressure was 80/50 mm·Hg. On lung examination, bilateral rales were noted. His heart sounds were normal. His abdomen was soft upon palpation, with slight tenderness in the right upper quadrant; no organomegaly was noted. Neurologic examination was unremarkable. The patient was intubated immediately because of his respiratory distress, and an intravenous infusion of norepinephrine was begun for the presumptive diagnosis of septic shock.
Relevant laboratory results on the day of admission were as follows: leukocytosis (white blood cell count: 20 × 103 cells/µL), lactic acidosis (serum lactate: 17.5 mmol/L), pH of 7.15, bicarbonate of 15 mEq/L, blood urea nitrogen of 37 mg/dL, serum creatinine of 4.5 mg/dL, and increased serum aspartate transaminase (1532 unit/L), alanine aminotransferase (683 unit/L), and alkaline phosphatase (149 unit/L). Chest X-ray showed bilateral diffuse alveolar infiltrates .
The patient underwent fiberoptic bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage; diffuse alveolar hemorrhage was excluded, and cultures from the lavage samples were negative. Bedside ultrasound of the abdomen revealed acalculous acute cholecystitis, and a percutaneous cholecystostomy tube was placed. Blood cultures from admission grew P. multocida, and gram-negative Pasteurella rods were seen on gram stain during examination via light microscopy. Cultures from the gallbladder fluid were negative. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 74% and no vegetations.
The patient was diagnosed with multiorgan failure, septic shock with severe lactic acidosis, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and renal failure requiring hemodialysis. Broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics were begun. His condition rapidly deteriorated, and his clinical course was further complicated by disseminated intravascular coagulation, gastrointestinal bleeding, and refractory shock requiring multiple vasopressor medications. He subsequently died of a cardiopulmonary arrest. Despite all measures, the serum lactic acid at the time of his death was 12 mmol/L.