A 16-year-old Malay boy first presented with a history of non-productive cough and persistent fever for the past month. There was no associated weight loss, loss of appetite or other significant clinical findings at initial presentation. The family history was unremarkable. The fever was resistant to conventional therapies, and serial investigations could not determine the source of the suspected infection. He was hospitalized at three different governmental and private hospitals during the first three months and eventually, when a computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax was performed, a solitary nodule at the base of left lung, measuring 12×11mm, was detected.
He was empirically treated for tuberculosis (ethambutol, isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide) but showed no sign of improvement after one month. He declined a CT-guided biopsy of the lung nodule and tuberculosis treatment was continued for three months. After one month of treatment he developed pancytopenia but declined a bone marrow biopsy. A subsequent CT scan of the thorax and abdomen (four months after the first admission) showed further enlargement of the lung nodule (32×31mm) with multiple new lesions appearing in both lungs, measuring between 5 and 11mm in diameter. In addition, there was an anterior mediastinal mass measuring 26×46×40mm. At this point a hematological malignancy or severe fungal infection was suspected.
He refused medical advice and discharged himself from the hospital with no further treatment. Two months later he was readmitted with persistent fever and diarrhea, at which point he was referred to our institution for further management. He was found to be dehydrated and cachectic. His lung sounds were reduced basally on auscultation with bilateral crepitations. A hepatosplenomegaly was observed in the physical examination but no lymphadenopathy was found. A full blood picture showed severe pancytopenia with a hemoglobin level of 5.1g/dL, a total white blood cell count of 0.6×109/L (neutrophils 0.1×109/L and lymphocytes 0.5×109/L) and platelet count of 57×109/L. His lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was elevated (550U/mg) and his blood culture, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, leptospirosis serology, blood film for malaria parasite and Monospot tests were negative for EBV. A repeat CT scan revealed similar lung and mediastinal lesions as well as hepatosplenomegaly and right iliac lymphadenopathy.
A bone marrow biopsy was performed. The aspirate showed several clusters of abnormal lymphoid cells and hemophagocytic activity but assessment was limited due to hemodilution. Accordingly, he underwent treatment for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) (with unknown cause) based on the HLH-2004 protocol. This protocole was developed by the treatment protocol of the second international HLH study 2004 . Immunophenotyping of the atypical lymphoid cells by flow cytometry was inconclusive due to suboptimum aspirate sampling. The trephine biopsy was hypocellular with a marked reduction of normal hematopoietic elements. This was replaced by scattered medium- to large-sized malignant lymphoid cells. The cells were moderately pleomorphic with a kidney-shaped nuclei, irregular nuclear membrane and prominent nucleoli . Occasional mitotic figures, including abnormal forms and hemophagocytosis, were also noted. It was revealed upon immunohistochemistry that the atypical lymphoid cells expressed CD3, CD2 and CD4 positivity . A few atypical cells were also positive for CD8. The malignant cells were negative for CD20, CD56 and ALK1 . Ki-67 immunostaining highlighted an increased proliferative rate in the malignant cells. In situ hybridization for EBV encoded RNA (EBER) demonstrated EBV-positive atypical lymphoid cells . Therefore a diagnosis of systemic EBV-positive T-cell lymphoproliferative childhood disease was made.
Unfortunately his health status rapidly deteriorated and he developed multiorgan failure, including oliguric acute renal failure, pericarditis, acute hepatitis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. He subsequently presented with generalized tonic-clonic seizures and a further CT scan revealed an acute left frontal subarachnoid haemorrhage. He died 15 days after admission to our center.