An 82-year-old man (weight, 55 kg; height, 160 cm) in previously good health who was involved in a motor vehicle collision had left diaphragmatic injury with hernia , and underwent urgent surgical diaphragm closure. The diaphragm had a laceration of approximately 15 cm, but no damage was detected in the abdominal organs or thoracic cavity other than the diaphragm. Oxygenation was maintained in controlled ventilation during surgery. Considering the possibility of respiratory failure after surgery, ventilation was controlled postoperatively in the ICU.
Because of atelectasis in the left lower lung field and poor oxygenation, airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) was performed from day 3 and bronchoscopic aspiration was performed, but the atelectasis did not improve ; the patient had difficulty weaning from mechanical ventilatory support.
On day 15, IPV was delivered through the tracheal tube to treat persistent atelectasis of the left lower lung field due to left diaphragm elevation caused by diaphragmatic dysfunction. He received 15-min sessions of IPV daily in three different modes [easy (higher frequency), average, and hard (lower frequency)] for 5 min each with IPV (IPV-1c; Percussionaire Corp., Sandpoint, ID, USA). The nebulizer solution was composed of bromhexine hydrochloride and saline, and the working pressure was 30 psi.
After the start of IPV therapy, atelectasis of the left lower lung field improved. On day 18, atelectasis of the left lower lung field improved to the extent that he was extubated, but he was still coughing thick secretions. To facilitate endotracheal suctioning, he subsequently underwent cricothyroidotomy with Mini-Trach II. On the following day, chest radiograph revealed atelectasis of the same left lower lung field , and it was necessary to resume IPV to facilitate the clearance of secretions. Nevertheless, due to the large amount of air leakage from the corner of the mouth, a mouthpiece or face mask could not be successfully used as delivery interfaces for IPV. We decided to connect the IPV circuit to the already inserted Mini-Trach II because IPV delivered via an endotracheal tube or tracheostomy was thought to be invasive for him at that time. After connecting the IPV circuit to the Mini-Trach II, the amount of air leakage decreased, and auscultation and palpation confirmed that percussion flow had reached the peripheral lungs. Furthermore, the working pressure had increased to an effective level while performing IPV via Mini-Trach II. Accordingly, 15-min IPV sessions using Mini-Trach II were successfully conducted. Serial chest radiographs showed that the atelectasis of the left lower lung field resolved over the following 12 days , and he was discharged from the ICU on day 32. The clinical course of the patient is described in Fig. .