An 80-year-old man came to our hospital with chief complaints of low back pain and leg pain. He had no muscle weakness in his lower extremities. He was diagnosed with lumbar spinal canal stenosis after various examinations including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) .
One month after the initial visit, he was admitted for an examination and underwent myelography and root block. As the pain improvement was temporary, the patient requested surgery for the improvement of symptoms. He had a history of a right capsular hemorrhage treated conservatively 9 years earlier; however, there were no sequelae. There was no subsequent episode of falls. In addition, there was no history of heavy alcohol consumption. Before lumbar spine surgery, the patient was in a normal state of consciousness and was able to communicate normally. Lumbar posterior slow pressure fusion (L4/5 transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion) was performed 2.5 months after the initial diagnosis .
The procedure was performed under general anesthesia in a prone position with an anesthesia time of 4 h 18 min and an operation time lasting 2 h 50 min. The associated blood loss was 34 mL and the operation was completed without complications such as an intraoperative dural tear. There were no significant changes in vital signs perioperatively. After surgery, he was unable to move his limbs according to the instructions, although he was able to open his eyes due to pain stimulation.
However, there were no abnormalities in his respiration or vital signs, and he was extubated. He was considered to be poorly awake due to anesthesia, and he was shifted to the ward. However, several hours post-surgery, his state of consciousness did not improve from the very low Glasgow coma scale (GCS) (E4V1M1). Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head taken to identify the cause of prolonged loss of consciousness showed a chronic subdural hematoma with some fresh hemorrhage . The patient developed generalized tonic chronic convulsions and anticonvulsant drugs were administered and the seizures stopped. The patient consulted a neurosurgeon and underwent emergency perforator drainage under local anesthesia on the same day. The drained blood also contained fresh hemorrhage .
The day after surgery, he was still unconscious with GCS 6 (E4V1M1), therefore, head MRI and an electroencephalogram (EEG) were performed. MRI showed a small hemorrhage on the surface of the brain, but there was no evidence of a cerebral aneurysm or cerebral infarction .
The EEG revealed that he was in a state of epileptic agglutination, which was the likely cause of unconsciousness. No cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage was observed from the lumbar spine surgical drain; hence, it was removed 2-day postoperatively. Despite the adjustment of anticonvulsant medications, the patient continued to suffer from prolonged loss of consciousness. A multifocal subdural hematoma that could not be removed during initial surgery was considered the cause of prolonged epileptic convulsions. A craniotomy was performed 14 days after the initial surgery to remove the hematoma . The day after the craniotomy, he was able to speak. His consciousness gradually improved, and 3 months after the surgery, his speech improved. In addition, he was able to walk on parallel bars and was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital .