A 12-years-old female child was admitted to our hospital with complaints of fever, headache, and pain in the right hip joint since past 5 days from admission. She could stand and walk without support, but had difficulty doing her activities of daily living. Subsequent elaboration revealed a past history of fever, headache, and myalgia for around 5–7 days around a week before the present complaints, which subsided on taking oral medications. She was of rural origin and there was rat infestation near her house and her father was working as sewage cleaner. She was otherwise previously apparently healthy. She had an antalgic gait.
On clinical examination, the patient was febrile with 101° Fahrenheit, tachycardia was noted, and inguinal lymph nodes were palpable and tender. Local examination of right hip revealed warmth, fullness, tenderness, and global restriction of movements . Left hip examination was normal. Patient was started on intravenous antibiotic ceftriaxone on an empirical basis along with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and skin traction.
The initial laboratory work-up showed anemia with hemoglobin of 6.4 mg/dL, leukocyte count of 9.04 × 103 cells/µL, and neutrophilia of 74.9%. C-reactive protein was markedly elevated with 93.7 mg/dL, and other biochemical parameters were normal. Chest X-ray and electrocardiogram were normal.
USG of abdomen was normal; blood culture was negative for any growth. Urine examination was normal. USG of the right hip showed synovial proliferation suggestive of synovitis.
MRI of both hips revealed right hip synovial thickening with enhancement on post-contrast studies, femoral head and acetabulum erosion and irregularity of right hip with joint space reduction, and bone marrow and muscle edema; suggestive of hip joint arthritis of infective or inflammatory origin (, , , ).
On 7th day of admission, diagnostic hip aspiration was performed. The synovial fluid analysis showed clear straw color fluid with 30–50 polymorphonuclear leukocytes per high power field with no other abnormality. Fluid was negative for any infectious organism.
On 10th day, patient started developing icterus with yellowish discoloration of urine. Total bilirubin was 6.16 mg/dL, conjugated bilirubin 5.14 mg/dL, unconjugated bilirubin 1.02 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 93.5 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 149.4 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 186.1 U/L, and gamma-glutamyl transferase 77.4 U/L. Serum total protein was 8.22 g/dL, and serumalbumin was low with 2.83 g/dL. Prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was slightly deranged with PT-INR of 1.35. Patient was shifted from intravenous ceftriaxone to cefotaxime, NSAIDs were stopped and symptomatic and nutritional management was done.
Screening for bacterial and viral causes of hepatitis was negative. Screening for Leptospira was positive. Patient was continued on intravenous cefotaxime and synovial biopsy was performed for confirming the diagnosis and ruling out any infective pathology. The biopsy was done through a posterior approach . After skin incision and subcutaneous tissue dissection, the gluteus muscle fibers were split to reach the short external rotators of the hip. The piriformis muscle was retracted to gain access to the capsule of the hip. Appropriate synovial biopsy samples were obtained. There was no evidence of any pus or infected tissue. The synovium or articular cartilage did not show pannus or any evidence of gross destruction, thus ruling out infective arthritis. Synovial biopsy analysis showed no growth of any microorganism and histopathological examination showed fibrocollagenous band infiltrated with mixed inflammatory cells with no other specific pathology (, ).
In addition, Leptospira IgM MAC ELISA test was done which was positive. Patient was thus diagnosed to be having leptospirosis and reactive arthritis secondary to it. She was discharged with oral doxycycline for 10 days.
Subsequent follow-up of the patient showed complete healing of the operated site and follow-up at 6 months showed disappearance of symptoms and near normal restoration of normal hip range of movements. The follow-up roentgenogram of the patient at 6 months shows sclerosis of the acetabular margin .