A 40-year-old North Indian, unmarried, nulliparous woman came to gynecology Out Patient Department (OPD) with a swelling on the left labium majora for 7 years, slowly growing in size. There was ulceration over the mass associated with serosanguinous discharge. Past medical and family history was unremarkable. On general examination, the patient was moderately built and afebrile. There was no evidence of jaundice, anemia, cyanosis, lymphadenopathy, clubbing, weight loss, or any bowel and bladder function alterations. Her menstrual cycles were regular with normal flow. She was a known case of epilepsy and was on tablet levetiracetam 500 mg once daily. She had a history of hemithyroidectomy 6 years back and was on thyroxine tablet 50 μg once daily. Her abdomen was soft and nontender. On local examination, a well-circumscribed, 8 × 8 cm pedunculated mass arose from left labium majora lateral to introitus at five o’clock position. On palpation, the mass was nontender, nonreducible, and soft in consistency. There was an overlying ulcer measuring 6 cm × 4 cm, and the floor was covered with unhealthy pale granulation tissue. There was mild serosanguinous discharge from the ulcer . No inguinal lymphadenopathy was seen. On gynecological examination, the uterus was normal in size with a healthy cervix and vagina. Her baseline investigations were normal. Ultrasonography (USG) of the abdomen and pelvis was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could not be done due to financial constraints on the part of the patient. After taking informed written consent, wide local excision of the mass and surrounding margins was done under anesthesia. There was a moderate amount of bleeding during the surgery. The specimen was sent for histopathological examination. On histopathology, the tumor was composed of spindle and stellate-shaped cells in a myxoid matrix suggestive of aggressive angiomyxoma with tumor free margins . Immunohistochemistry was done, which was positive for estrogen and progesterone receptors. Her postoperative recovery was uneventful. On the third day post-surgery, the patient was sent home in good general condition, with hemoglobin of 10 gm%. Due to the high propensity of the tumor for local recurrences, the patient was given three doses of GnRH agonist (injection, leuprolide 3.75 mg) once a month. No recurrence has been reported so far on follow-up visits for 1 year.