A 65-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Cardiology of Qilu Hospital of Shandong University because of exertional dyspnoea for 1 month. The New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class was III. Two months prior, she was admitted into a rural hospital with a 2-day history of severe chest pain and a diagnosis of late presentation inferior STEMI was established. Unfortunately, due to the time delay since her onset of chest pain and her refusal to receive invasive angiography, reperfusion therapy was not performed and only oral aspirin, clopidogrel, simvastatin, isosorbide dinitrate, and gliclazide were prescribed at the local hospital. She was a non-smoker but had a history of hypertension, diabetes, cerebral infarction, and angina pectoris.
On current admission, her heart rate and blood pressure were 82 b.p.m. and 99/60 mmHg, respectively, and her body mass index was 24 kg/m2. Physical examination revealed a distension of the jugular veins, moist rales at the basal lungs, and a harsh pansystolic murmur at the parasternal left fourth intercostal space. No oedema of the lower extremities was noted.
Laboratory tests revealed normal levels of creatine kinase isoenzyme MB (16 U/L, normal range 0–25 U/L) and cardiac troponin I (0.02 ng/mL, normal range 0–0.06 ng/mL). Serum low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (90 mg/dL) and glycosylated haemoglobin (11.1%) levels were not satisfactorily controlled, which should be lower than 70 mg/dL and 7% respectively, according to international guidelines on blood cholesterol and diabetes management for patients with clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The level of N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide was 7421 pg/mL (<125 pg/mL to rule out heart failure) and hypersensitive C-reactive protein level was 1.53 mg/L (normal range 0–3 mg/L). Results of routine tests of blood, urine and stool samples were normal. Hepatic and renal functions were not affected.
Electrocardiography showed abnormal Q waves and inverted T waves in leads III and aVF , suggesting an inferior myocardial infarction (MI). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated that all four cardiac chambers were slightly enlarged. A giant (47 × 38 mm in diameter) and thin-walled (4 mm in thickness) inferoposterior LVA with a wide neck (25 mm in diameter) was observed in the oblique parasternal short-axis view (, ).The Gatewood and Nanda index was > 0.5. Although the aneurysmal wall was akinetic, the remaining left ventricular segments were hyperkinetic, resulting in an ejection fraction of 41% as measured by the modified biplane Simpson’s algorithm. There were also mild pericardial effusion, moderate tricuspid and mitral valve regurgitation, and an abnormal left ventricular (LV) filling pattern. The pulmonary systolic pressure estimated from the tricuspid regurgitant peak flow velocity was 53 mmHg. Colour Doppler imaging showed laminar flow between the aneurysm and the left ventricular cavity but a systolic shunt flow between the aneurysm and the right ventricle was identified, with a peak pressure gradient of 63 mmHg estimated by the simplified Bernoulli equation.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) revealed a large inferoposterior aneurysm (54 × 40 mm in diameter) connected to the LV cavity via a wide neck (25 mm in diameter), and a systolic shunt flow originated from the disrupted aperture (8 mm in diameter) of the aneurysm near the right ventricular apex ( and D, ).
Coronary angiography performed 5 days after admission showed multivessel severe stenosis, especially a total occlusion in the proximal segment of the right coronary artery ( and B). On three-dimensional computed tomography, the LVA was confirmed to extrude to the inferior and right of the left ventricle and cannulated with the right ventricle through a VSR near the apex. Viewed from the diaphragmatic surface, the LVA occupied the whole atrioventricular crux, bridging the inferior left and right ventricular walls, extending upward to the coronary sulcus and downward to the middle part of the interventricularis posterior sulcus. The whirl-shaped aneurysm arose from the infero-basal segment of left ventricle, extended to the mid-septal level, and leaked into the right ventricle though an orifice near the apex ( and D).
The patient was transferred to the Department of Cardiac Surgery, where coronary bypass surgery and left ventriculoplasty were performed. During surgery, no pericardial adhesion or haemorrhage was found after opening the pericardial sac, excluding the possibility of pseudo-aneurysm. A large aneurysm was detected at the left ventricular inferior wall, extending to the left of the posterior descending artery, with a size of 40 × 60 mm. Ischaemic regions were observed around the aneurysm, and the myocardial continuity between the ventricles and the aneurismal body was confirmed. A diagnosis of true LVA was established. After the left anterior descending artery and the second obtuse marginal artery were bypassed with two saphenous vein grafts, the aneurysm was incised. No mural thrombus was found. A disrupted aperture (10 mm in diameter) was observed near the right ventricular apex. Ventriculoplasty was performed by placing a 40 × 60 mm bovine epicardial patch inside the aneurysm and suturing the patch to the nearby left ventricular wall along the border of the aneurysm, in an attempt to segregate the aneurysm from the left ventricle and preserve effective left ventricular volume .
The patient was transferred to the cardiac care unit after the surgery where she received 1:1 intra-aortic balloon pump assistance in sinus rhythm. A 3.4-mm residual ventricular septal shunt was found with early bedside echocardiography, but the haemodynamic status was stable and the patient recovered quickly. There was no difficulty in weaning the intra-aortic balloon pump at the second day after the surgery and the patient was discharged from the cardiac care unit.
Echocardiography 1 week after surgery revealed the aneurysm was segregated from the left ventricle which resumed a normal shape, and the left ventricular ejection fraction increased to 57% with a normal left ventricular filling pattern. The right ventricular anterior–posterior dimension at end-diastole decreased to 21 mm from 25 mm pre-operatively. The E/A ratio of tricuspid flow, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion and right ventricular fractional area change were 1.3, 2.3 cm, and 53%, respectively, which were comparable to those measured pre-operatively (1.2, 2.1 cm, and 51%, respectively). The pulmonary systolic pressure estimated from the tricuspid regurgitant peak flow velocity dropped to 38 mmHg. There was no flow inside the segregated aneurysm, but a residual shunt flow of 4 mm in diameter was detected along the inferior border of the patch . The patient recovered from surgery successfully and was discharged from hospital. Oral aspirin, clopidogrel, atorvastatin, valsartan, metoprolol, spirolactone, metformin, acarbose, and trimetazidine were prescribed before discharge. One month after discharge, the NYHA functional class improved to II as confirmed by a telephone follow-up.