The patient was a 37-year-old woman. She was admitted to our hospital for hypertension and bilateral limb weakness on December 10, 2014. She had begun to take oral antihypertensive drugs 2 years earlier. The blood pressure was well controlled initially. Since October, 2014, she had felt bilateral limb weakness. Biochemical tests in a local hospital showed a significant decrease in serum potassium levels. She came to our hospital’s endocrinology department for further diagnosis and treatment. During hospitalization, her fasting blood glucose, cortisol, and aldosterone were found to be higher than normal levels. Catecholamine levels were normal. Serum potassium levels were significantly lower than normal level. Physical examination was normal. No symptoms of virilization were observed. Computed tomography (CT) of the adrenal area showed a right retroperitoneal mass (about 3.4*3.0 cm2) compressing the renal pelvis. The native adrenals appeared normal on the imaging. Then she was transferred to our department. Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) showed the mass to be located in the right renal sinus. It had clear margins and obvious enhancement. The mass was about 2.99*2.88*2.23 cm3 in size. The right renal vessel, renal pelvis and ureter were compressed by the mass . A preliminary diagnosis of ectopic adrenal cortical adenoma was considered.
After adequate blood pressure control and serum potassium supplement, the patient underwent the laparoscopic resection of retroperitoneal tumor. During the operation, a mass 3.4*3.0 cm2 in size of medium density was found in the right renal sinus. It was tightly surrounded by the renal artery, renal vein, renal pelvis, and ureter . The tumor was completely resected without conversion to open surgery. No complications were observed. The operation took about 100 min. Blood loss was about 90 ml. The blood pressure and heart rate remained stable during operation. Peri-operative vital signs and related biochemical indicators were closely monitored and remained normal. The Foley catheter was removed 1 day after the operation and the drainage tube was removed 3 days after the operation. The postoperative hospital stay lasted 4 days. Pathologic examination showed ectopic adrenal tissue with adrenocortical adenoma. Further immunohistochemistry showed the tissue to be positive for synaptophysin , CD56 , vimentin , Ki-67(2 %) , calretinin, and inhibin-α and negative for chromogranin A, CD117, CD10, CK7, EMA, CK-pan, and melan-A. However, the concentration of pax-8 was ± . Using the results and HE staining, the tumor was diagnosed as an ectopic adreocortical adenoma of the right renal sinus. The patient was followed up for 1 month after the operation. Her blood pressure was normal. The bilateral limb weakness was significantly reduced. Abdominal CT showed native adrenals and no obvious mass in the renal sinus.