A 60-year-old moderately-built male presented to the emergency department of our tertiary care centre with complaints of headache and decreased level of consciousness for 5 days. It was associated with loss of appetite. He had no history of trauma, abnormal body movement, and bowel incontinence. He had a Foley’s catheter in situ.
He had visited a health centre previously where he was diagnosed with diffuse subarachnoid haemorrhage Fisher grade 4 by non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) of the head and had anterior communicating (ACoM) aneurysm on computed tomography angiogram (CTA). He also gave a past medical history of clipping of the ACoM aneurysm twelve years back. He was hypertensive and was under medications. He didn’t smoke or consume alcohol. He had no known history of food and drug allergies. There was no other medical and surgical history.
On examination, the patient was moderate-built. He was not well-oriented to time, place, and person. His body temperature was 98°F, blood pressure 148/92 mmHg, respiratory rate 20/min, pulse 80 beats per min, oxygen saturation 96% under room air, and general random blood sugar (GRBS) 187 mg/dl.
On neurological examination, he had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 14/15 with verbal confusion present. Motor Power grade was 5/5 in all four limbs with normal bulk and tone. The bilateral plantar reflex was normal. He had a normal bilateral pupil size of 2 mm. Cranial nerves were intact with the absence of focal deficit and signs of meningism.
The patient was sent for digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the cerebral vessel which showed a small residual outpouching at the region of the anterior communicating artery measuring 2.6×1.8 mm with a neck measuring 1.3 mm Outpouching was located adjacent to the site of the previous clipping.
The patient underwent endovascular coiling of the aneurysmal sac. This resulted in clinical improvement. He was clinically and hemodynamically stable during the postoperative period and hospital stay for 5 days. However, we could not do a long-term follow-up with the patient after he was discharged from the hospital.