A 56-year-old Caucasian male was found unresponsive while going for an outdoor run. On emergency medical service arrival, he was found to be in ventricular fibrillation. He was DC cardioverted into sinus rhythm in the field and was admitted to the hospital. He was a non-smoker, without any significant medical disorders and he did not have any family history of cardiac diseases including early onset heart failure, coronary artery diseases, or SCDs. At admission, his blood pressure was 130/90 mmHg, cardiac auscultation revealed normal S1 and S2 without any murmurs. The patient was having agonal respirations and was intubated for airway protection. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed 1st degree heart block with epsilon waves in v1–v3 leads and heart rate of 96 beats/minute. Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography showed normal left and right ventricular (RV) function, mildly dilated right ventricle, and concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. Left heart catheterization was unremarkable. A computed tomography (CT) imaging of the chest was obtained which did not reveal any pulmonary embolism or lymph node enlargement. He did not require any ionotropes and was extubated on the second day as his mentation improved significantly. During the hospital stay, intermittent bradycardia and complete heart block were observed. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed late gadolinium enhancement in the RV free wall as well as septum (, ). There was inferoseptal and inferior wall delayed myocardial enhancement of the left ventricle which. The RV inferior wall and right anterolateral free wall were dyskinetic with RV ejection fraction of 31%. The RV end-diastolic volume (RVEDV) was noted to be 222 mL and the RVEDV to body surface area ratio was 113 mL/m2. Diagnosis of ARVC was made, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was placed and he was discharged home with sotalol (80 mg twice daily). Genetic testing was negative. At 6-month follow-up visit, his device interrogation showed 13% atrial fibrillation burden, however with CHA2DS2-Vasc score of 0, he was not anticoagulated. He developed progressive dyspnoea on exertion and decreased exercise capacity over a period of 1 year. A chest radiograph done at this time showed a small smoothly marginated opacity within the left upper lung zone. Due to the worsening symptoms and signs, alternative diagnoses including CS were considered and hence a cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) scan was obtained which showed marked active inflammation of the right ventricle, septum, inferior, apical, and anterior walls ( and ). Hilar lymphadenopathy was also noted. Biopsy of the lymph node showed non-necrotizing granulomas and diagnosis of sarcoidosis was made . He was treated with methotrexate (20 mg/week) with significant symptom improvement. Follow-up PET scan after 1 year showed good response to therapy ( and ).