A 21-year-old Thai woman was evaluated for a lesion in her right tibial diaphysis. The mass exhibited slow, progressive enlargement over a one-year period, and she experienced occasional pain. Her physical examination revealed a hard-consistency mass at the anteromedial aspect of the right tibia affixed to the bone. The area was mildly tender, but there was no inflammation. A bone scan showed an increased uptake of radionuclide at the site of the lesion. Her chest roentgenogram, complete blood count, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, liver function test and serum alkaline phosphatase were within normal limits.
X-rays demonstrated an oval intra-cortical lytic bone lesion located at the diaphysis. It had an irregular endosteal border and sclerotic density that appeared to surround the osteolytic lesion. Multiple radiodense speckles were seen within the lytic area, suggesting the presence of an osteoid matrix . An open incisional biopsy suggested a low-grade malignant lesion. Since surgery had been planned on the basis of X-rays, a wide margin was chosen to ensure complete excision. The patient underwent resection of the tumor (7 cm above and 3 cm below the tumor) . A longitudinal section showed a 3.8 cm × 3.2 cm × 3.5 cm well-circumscribed intra-cortical mass with a 1.5 cm × 0.7 cm × 0.7 cm focus of intra-medullary extension. The tumor was grayish-white with a dull, firmly cut surface . A histological section from the specimen revealed that the tumor cells had round or oval-shaped nuclei with a mild degree of nuclear atypia, a vesicular chromatin pattern and prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures were scant . No area of hemorrhage or necrosis was seen, and the surgical margin was free from malignancy tissue. The macroscopic and microscopic diagnoses were compatible with an intra-cortical osteosarcoma.
Although free fibular graft has been reported as the suitable technique for large defect reconstruction , in some institutions bone transportation with an Ilizarov frame currently plays an increased role in the management of large bony defects. It provides several advantages, including large bone size of new bone formation, avoidance of the risk of vascular complications, avoidance of a long period of fibular hypertrophy to obtain adequate stability and less donor site morbidity . Tibial bone transportation was performed with an Ilizarov external fixator in our patient. Three rings were applied at the proximal tibia. Two rings were placed above and one was placed below the corticotomy site, and another was applied at the distal fragment. The stability of the distal part was maintained by a distal ring and an intact tibiofibular joint and distal fibular bone . The bone was distracted for 450 days until the distracted fragment contacted the distal tibia (total of 14 cm long). After the ring external fixator was removed, a patellar tendon-bearing cast was applied for an additional six months to ensure the consolidation of bone . The patient was finally able to walk with an almost normal range of motion of knee and ankle .
Five years later the patient felt pain in her right tibia at the same site as the primary tumor. Radiography revealed an abnormal osteolytic lesion at the lateral side of the distal tibia. Coronal T1-weighted and short-tau inversion remedy (STIR) images showed a recurrent tumor mass in the lateral portion of the right distal tibial metaphysis. The tumor showed hypointensity on T1-weighted images and mixed signal intensity on T2-weighted images with invasion into the surrounding soft tissue. Diffuse cortical thickening of the distal tibia and marrow edema was also evident . A computed tomographic chest and bone scan showed no distant metastasis, and the basic laboratory findings were normal. An open biopsy indicated a low-grade malignancy . A compartmental resection was performed for a slow, progressive, recurrent low-grade malignancy with limb salvage with the agreement of the patient and close long-term follow-up. The distal tibia, distal fibular joint and distal tibiofibular joint were removed 8 cm above the ankle joint, and reconstruction was performed by ankle arthrodesis using a T-plate, screws and an autologous ipsilateral strut tibial graft . Neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy were administered. A review of the tumor pathology confirmed the histological finding of a low-grade osteosarcoma similar to the primary lesion with a 50% necrotic area as a result of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and the surgical margin was free from tumor. Seven years later the patient had a painless fused ankle and was free from disease.