A 52-year-old man was referred to our hospital for detailed evaluation of renal dysfunction. The patient had been evaluated at another medical institution for edema in both lower limbs a few months before admittance to our hospital. At that time, he had a urine protein level exceeding 1 g/gCr and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 40 mL/min/1.73 m2.
The patient’s medical history and family history were unremarkable. He had no history of infection, drug therapy, or other potential causative factors for renal dysfunction or proteinuria. Physical examination on admission revealed a body weight of 69.8 kg (a 2-kg increase from his usual weight) and symmetrical pitting edema in both lower limbs. Blood pressure was 166/88 mmHg. Initial laboratory evaluation revealed elevated serum creatinine (1.65 mg/dL) and an eGFR of 36.1 mL/min/1.73 m2. The patient’s complement activity was high at 12.6 U/mL as determined with the total complement activity (CH50) test. Hypocomplementemia was noted, with low C3 and C4 levels (43 and 6 mg/dL, respectively). Urinalysis revealed 3+ proteinuria, 20 to 29 red blood cells per high-power field, and 5 to 9 fatty/waxy casts per whole field. Urine protein/creatinine ratio was 1.61 g/gCr with a spot measurement. Furthermore, M protein was detected on urinalysis; a separate blood test revealed the presence of λ light chains. The plasma cell count in the bone marrow was 2.4%, which excluded the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. The chromosomal pattern in the bone marrow was normal. Bone positron emission tomography revealed no abnormal uptake. Although the patient was diagnosed with MGUS, marked organ dysfunction localized to the kidneys was determined to reflect a pathological diagnosis of MGRS.
Global sclerosis was observed in six glomeruli among a total of 71 glomeruli collected at biopsy. The remaining glomeruli were lobulated, showing a marked increase in mesangial matrix and mesangial cell proliferation. Nodular lesions were also observed, accompanied by mild intracapillary hypercellularity. Tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were distributed in a patchy pattern. Lymphocytic infiltration was localized, surrounding the sclerotic glomeruli. Direct fast scarlet staining was negative, indicating the absence of amyloid deposition. Immunostaining of paraffin sections was negative for κ and λ light chains. Immunofluorescence examination of frozen sections revealed marked deposition of C3 in the mesangial region and weak C4 staining; no immunoglobulin deposition was identified. Electron microscopy revealed linear band-like electron densities within the lamina densa, with alternating thinner segments. Similar dense deposits were observed along the basement membrane of Bowman’s capsule and the renal tubules, in addition to the mesangial matrix. At higher magnification, the electron-dense deposits showed a fine granular pattern and lacked tubular or fibrillary substructures. On the basis of the collective clinical and pathological presentation, the patient was diagnosed with DDD (Fig. , , , , , ).
Because M protein was detected in both the serum and urine, the patient’s pathological diagnosis was MGRS. The serum level of anti-factor H antibody was markedly elevated at 111.1 AU/mL, an elevation attributed to the presence of nephritogenic monoclonal λ light chains . The C5b-9 complex level remained within the normal range. With a diagnosis of MGUS as the underlying cause of DDD, BD therapy (bortezomib, 1.3 mg/m2, 2.0 mg/body and dexamethasone, 20 mg) was initiated based on the established treatment protocol for multiple myeloma. In addition, we used atorvastatin, vitamin D, and irbesartan to decrease the patient’s urine protein. As shown in Fig. , the patient’s CH50 level gradually increased during treatment, eventually reaching the normal range. His urine protein level decreased to less than 0.5 g/gCr after eight courses of BD therapy. Although not fully normalized, the patient’s eGFR level gradually increased to 49.6 mL/min/1.73 m2 after 13 courses of BD therapy.
A second renal biopsy was performed after 13 courses of BD therapy (18 months after the first course) to evaluate the therapeutic effects histologically. Light microscopy revealed an apparent decrease in the mesangial matrix and lobular accentuation of the glomeruli (Fig. , , , , , and ). No nodular lesions or mesangiolysis was observed. All immunofluorescence staining was negative. Electron microscopy revealed a decrease in the amount of dense deposits within the basement membrane as well as in the mesangial area. The anti-factor H antibody level had decreased to less than 3.9 AU/mL. These results suggest that treatment of MGUS with BD therapy contributed to the histological resolution of DDD and the serological improvement in complement activation.