A 46-year-old male from Togo with HIV-1 and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) presented with confusion despite receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART) for more than a decade. AIDS was due to previous cerebral toxoplasmosis complicated with epilepsy and a chronic hepatitis B virus co-infection. ART was initiated at a baseline cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4) count of 330 cells/mm3. During the first years, ART consisted of two nucleoside(tide) reverse-transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase (NNRTI). The HIV-1 pol gene genotypic resistance analysis showed development of the NRTI M184V mutation, and NNRTI K103N and E138EK mutations in plasma, respectively. Poor compliance, increasing viral loads, falling CD4 cell count levels, and mutation development led to therapy changes. The lowest nadir CD4 count was zero cells/mm3. The NRTI M184V mutation results in high-level in vitro resistance to lamivudine (3TC) . As the mutation increases susceptibility to zidovudine (AZT) and tenofovir (TDF), combined treatment with 3TC was continued. The nonpolymorphic NNRTI K103N mutation causes high-level resistance to efavirenz (EFV), and E138K mutation causes potential low-level cross-resistance to EFV, which was discontinued together with 3TC. Therapy now consisted of two to four of the newer potent NRTIs with addition of a protease inhibitor (PI) first alone and later boosted .
During subsequent years, the plasma resistance pattern reverted to susceptible for the NRTI/NNRTIs; however the PI mutation L89V appeared, only later to revert to fully susceptible again. The PI L89V mutation may contribute to reduced PI susceptibility. Strengthened therapy included an integrase inhibitor (INI).
After more than a decade on ART therapy, HIV RNA levels and CD4 cell counts deteriorated and the condition was complicated by unspecific neurological symptoms and convulsions. The CSF cell count was increased with 99 (>5) cells per mm3 (98% mononuclear), with an elevated protein level (1.96, 0.4–0.7 g/L), no erythrocytes present, and a normal glucose level (2.5 mmol/l). Cerebrospinal fluid was negative for bacterial culture, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) diagnostics for John Cunningham (JC) polyomavirus, enterovirus, herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, and cytomegalovirus. The CSF Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) level was 11,871 copies per ml. The HIV viral load in CSF and plasma were 1.2 million and 10,874 HIV RNA copies per ml, respectively. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed toxoplasmosis sequelae and unspecific changes in the white matter. A brain biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of HIV encephalopathy with cerebral toxoplasmosis sequelae.
At the point of CSF escape diagnosis, the CD4 cell count was 180 cells/mm3, and both plasma and CSF harbored the same NRTI M184V mutation. However, discordantly, the accessory nonpolymorphic PI T74TP mutation mixed with wild type appeared only in the plasma but not CSF. Intensified therapy included changing raltegravir with the more potent integrase inhibitor dolutegravir, which resulted in a marked improvement of CD4 cell counts and suppression of viral levels.