A 27-year-old man was introduced to our hospital with a 1-year history of gait disturbance. On admission, he had mild left hemiparesis, transcortical motor aphasia, and amnesia, with 80% of Karnofsky Index of Performance Status (KPS). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed an intraparenchymal mass lesion near the left ventricular trigone . Computed tomography (CT) revealed a slightly high density mass with punctuate calcification. The serum levels of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) and alpha-fetoprotein (α-FP) were within normal range. Cytology of the cerebrospinal fluid did not reveal any abnormalities. In the preoperative differential diagnosis, germinoma was highly suspected rather than high-grade glioma or malignant lymphoma, as there were atrophic changes in the left thalamus near the lesion.
Navigation-guided endoscopic biopsy was performed for differential diagnosis. First, the patient's head was fixed with a Mayfield frame under general anesthesia. A transparent sheath was inserted into the front of the target lesion via the burr hole under the control of the navigation system (StealthStation®; Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) . After the front of the lesion was observed with the rigid endoscope (EndoArm®; Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan), the lesion was removed partially with 30% of removal rate because a rapid diagnosis of probable germinoma was made by intraoperative pathology (IOP), made from a part of the photodynamic diagnosis (PDD)-positive specimen using 5-aminolevulinic acid in the targeted tissue. On histopathology, the tumor tissue contained a lot of large neoplastic cells, some of which had mitosis. Immunohistochemical examination showed the tumor cells were immunoreactive for placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) and c-kit, and negative for leukocyte common antigen and CD30. Syncytiotrophoblastic giant cells (STGC), which are positive for β-HCG, were not observed. The histological diagnosis was pure germinoma with a concentration of large neoplastic cells, although a typical two-cell pattern was not observed.
Totally four cycles of carboplatin and etoposide (CarE) therapy were performed. Concurrent with third cycle of the CarE therapy, 30.6 Gy of whole-brain radiotherapy was also performed. MR imaging just after the initial cycle of the CarE showed that the tumor disappeared . The patient's neurological symptoms did not change during these therapies. One month after the initial therapy, he was able to walk without any assistance and had no deterioration of transcortical motor aphasia or amnesia (80% of KPS). Follow-up MR imaging and Thallium 201 single-photon emission CT 1 year after the initial therapy showed no evidence of recurrence or dissemination.