A 77-year-old female was referred to our hospital with a 1-month history of right wrist pain after housework. She had a medical history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and no particular notable family history. During physical examination, she reported a slight pain and tenderness in the ulnar side of her right wrist. The swelling or mass were not palpable. Range of motion of the right wrist was slightly disturbed. Plain radiography revealed a comparatively well-outlined osteolytic lesion in the distal end of the ulna . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also demonstrated a bone tumor in the distal end of the ulna. The mass showed iso-intensity on T1-weighted images (T1-WI), high intensity on T2-weighted images (T2-WI), and was heterogeneously enhanced by gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Gd.-DTPA) . No extraosseous masses were observed. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed no abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the lesion . No distant lesions, including lung lesions were noted. Clinical and imaging findings suggested a benign bone tumor that was enhanced by Gd.-DTPA. It was thought that the tumor was possibly an enchondroma. Initially, we planned to evaluate the benignancy of the tumor with intraoperative frozen section, followed by curettage and bone graft at one stage. However, when considering carefully, characteristics of the tumor did not perfectly match those of any diagnostic categories including enchondroma. In the case of enchondroma, it usually shows no significant enhancement or only marginal enhancement by Gd.-DTPA, however, the whole lesion was heterogeneously enhanced in this case. Therefore, an incisional biopsy was performed.
Incisional biopsy revealed that the tumor comprised atypical spindle cells with hyper-cellularity . The tumor cells were partially positive for epithelial membrane antigen and positive for B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) protein. Thus, synovial sarcoma was diagnosed based on histologic features and immunohistochemical results, though fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) examination filed to detect a rearrangement of SYT from the biopsy specimen.
Following an elaborate plan, the patient underwent a wide resection of the tumor at the distal part of the right ulna with biopsy tract. Any reconstructive soft tissue procedure was not performed. Histopathologically, the tumor occupied the distal end of the ulna, and demonstrated similar characteristics as the specimen obtained from the biopsy . Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) from the resected specimen and sequencing of RT-PCR products demonstrated a chimeric SYT-SSX1 transcript , confirming the diagnosis of synovial sarcoma.
At the 2-year follow-up, the patient is progressing favorably with 25 points on the Disability and Symptom section of Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand outcome measure and 93 points on the Toronto Extremity Salvage Score, with no evidence of local recurrence, distant metastasis or lung metastasis.