A 33-year-old British Caucasian woman, para 2, with a long standing history of menorrhagia, dysmenorrhoea and tiredness was referred by her general practitioner (GP) to the hospital in 2002. Her GP had treated for anaemia and tiredness. Her periods had been regular although in the previous few months she had bled continuously. Her periods had become heavy after tubal sterilisation in 1996. Cervical cytology had always been normal. In the past she was diagnosed with duodenal ulcer in 1996, underwent a laparoscopy for pelvic pain for suspected endometriosis in 1997 and had an appendicectomy in 1997. On investigation she was anaemic with low iron and ferritin levels. Pelvic ultrasound scan was normal. For management of her menorrhagia, she opted for Microwave Endometrial Ablation which was performed in August 2002. Upon review after four months, she complained of erratic bleeding but no pain. An ultrasound scan showed irregular endometrium. The patient was booked for hysteroscopy under general anaesthesia. The procedure was attempted in September 2003 and was abandoned due to difficulties passing the hysteroscope through the endocervical canal. The hysteroscopy was repeated in January 2004 and a few intrauterine adhesions were reported. An endometrial biopsy was done just before the insertion of a Mirena IUS under the same general anaesthetic. The results of the biopsy were normal. It was not recorded if the sitting of the IUS was checked post insertion hysteroscopically. Her GP was asked to check the threads in four to six weeks time.
A month later, she was admitted to the hospital with right upper quadrant pain and a problematic bleeding pattern. Ultrasound at this stage showed a normal size uterus but the Mirena IUS was not in situ. It was assumed the Mirena IUS had fallen out. The patient elected to have a vaginal hysterectomy to solve her bleeding problems, which was performed in September 2005.
In January 2007, she was admitted to the hospital with right upper quadrant pain again and all investigations including chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasound scan and blood tests were normal. She had an upper GI endoscopy, which showed a gastric ulcer.
She was admitted again in April 2008 with pelvic pain. An abdominal X-ray showed the lost IUS and a CT scan showed the IUS lying anteriorly under the rectus muscles and adjacent to the dome of the bladder. In April 2008 the IUS was retrieved laparoscopically. The omentum was adherent to the anterior abdominal wall and the Mirena IUS was found in the omentum, . The IUS was removed easily from the abdominal cavity laparoscopically. The right tube and ovary were adherent to the right pelvic wall and they were freed up. The procedure was uneventful and the patient was discharged the same day. The most likely cause of the abdominal pain in this patient was the adhesions. The patient had no complaints of abdominal pain in the 6 months of follow-up.