A 51-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the University of Creteil Eye Hospital complaining of lack of improvement in visual acuity two months after cataract surgery in both eyes. The patient had a medical history of auto-immune cholangiopathy, Berger’s IgA nephropathy and a family history of an unspecified eye tumor in her father. No consanguinity was reported in the family. Berger’s IgAN has been diagnosed 24 years ago, following pregnancy and it has been previously treated with corticosteroids. Patient is under angiotensin receptor blockers (Irbesartan) successfully controlling her blood pressure for the last 24 years.
Auto-immune cholangiopathy was diagnosed 10 years ago and it is currently under control, treated with ursodeoxycholic acid (Delursan).
Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/63 on the right eye (RE) and 20/40 on the left eye (LE). Slit-lamp examination did not show any sign of anterior segment inflammation, pupillary light reflex was preserved and intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes.
Fundus examination and colour fundus photography (CFP) (Clarus 500, Zeiss, Germany) revealed a preserved foveal reflex and a normal aspect of the optic nerve head. However, sectorial vascular attenuation and perivascular sheathing affecting the peripapillary retinal arterioles has been noted in both eyes. Bilateral multiple telangiectatic lesions were present around the fovea, without retinal hemorrhage or any other associated lesion. UWF fundus imaging (Optomap, Optos California, USA) did not reveal any peripheral lesion .
Blue-light fundus autofluorescence (FAF) (Spectralis-HRA2, Heidelberg, Germany) of the posterior pole showed heterogenous autofluorescence of the perimacular area and a flair attenuation of some peripapillary arterioles. UWF green-light FAF (Optomap, Optos California, USA) highlighted the presence of hyper-autofluorescent spots in the extreme periphery, while the mid-periphery was normal .
Goldmann visual field (GVF) (MT-325UD, Takagi, Japan) showed an absolute superior paracentral scotoma with an enlarged blind spot in the RE and a sectorial inferior nasal defect in the LE .
On the full-field electroretinogram (ff-ERG) (Metrovision, France), a significant decrease in oscillatory potentials in both eyes, which were barely discernible from the background noise, was identifiable. Otherwise, the scotopic and photopic ERG responses were normal in appearance with amplitude asymmetry, being diminished in the RE .
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) (Spectralis-HRA2, Heidelberg, Germany) passing through the macula showed multiple focal areas of ganglion cell layer (GCL), inner nuclear layer (INL) and outer plexiform layer (OPL) thinning, associated to corresponding outer nuclear layer (ONL) relative thickening, in both eyes; the presence of intraretinal hypo-reflective degenerative cavities was also highlighted .
Fluorescein angiography (FA) (Spectralis-HRA2, Heidelberg, Germany / Optomap, Optos California, USA) showed bilateral retinal vasculitis with multiple focal areas of perivascular dye leakage and diffuse capillary leakage extending from the posterior pole to the periphery. FA showed the presence of bilateral macular ischemia with capillary occlusions and telangiectasia. The macular lesions were mainly central in the RE, with significant enlargement of the foveal avascular zone (FAZ), while ischemic lesion had an arched appearance in the LE. .
Infracyanine green angiography (ICGA) (Spectralis-HRA2, Heidelberg, Germany / Optomap, Optos California, USA) was unremarkable in both eyes .
En face SS-OCT-A 12 × 12 mm (PlexElite, Zeiss, Germany) showed the superior arched area of macular ischemia detected on FA in the LE, with a well-delineated arched capillary drop-out in both superficial capillary plexus (SCP) and deep capillary plexus (DCP). Shunt vessels and telangiectatic capillaries were observed at the borders of the ischemic area. A nasal inferior area of capillary drop-out was also noted in the SCP and DCP slabs. Outer retinal, choriocapillaris (CC) and choroidal slabs analysis were unremarkable. SS-OCTA acquisition in the RE was laborious due to poor fixation of the patient, with low resolution barely interpretable images .
Blood pressure measured during the visit was within the normal range. The patient was referred to her nephrologist for a general evaluation to eventually initiate immunosuppressive therapy.
According to her physician, blood pressure was under control and her blood work was unremarkable. The patient was put on oral corticosteroids (Prednisolone) 0.5 mg/kg per day (30 mg daily), followed by progressive reduction in corticosteroids doses. At her last control, 4 months following initial assessment, patient was on Prednisolone 2.5 mg daily. BCVA improved to 20/40 in RE following laser capsulotomy and was maintained 20/40 in LE. However, retinal vasculitis was still active on FA, especially on the LE. The patient was referred back to her physician to eventually put her back on high doses of corticosteroids.