A five-year-old boy with a history of sickle cell disease was admitted to the hospital due to sudden left-side weakness, after an episode of severe abdominal pain and vomiting 8 days before admission. He also experienced a few attacks of a focal seizure characterized by rolling of the eye associated with facial twitching but the loss of consciousness, frothing and jerky movements were not observed. At the admission, the patient was crying, irritable, sick looking, but with no photophobia, neck stiffness or rigidity, no pallor, no jaundice. Laboratory findings: Hemoglobin 12.3; White blood cells (WBC) 10.3,plt; Neutrophil count 6.7. He received diazepam, exchange transfusion, and was referred to the teaching hospital in the capital city for further treatment and examination. In the referred hospital, the patient obtained three more transfusions and levetiracetam. The child recovered well in the next few days. The Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (MAGNETOM AERA 1.5 T SIEMENS) revealed acute watershed infarcts involving the right frontal and both parietal lobes . Time of flight MR angiography (MRA-3D TOF) did not detect blood flow in both internal carotid arteries . The additional evaluation continued with cerebral Computed tomography angiography (CTA) (SOMATOM SENSATION 64 slice SIEMENS) that showed established infarcts in corresponding arterial watershed territories of the middle cerebral artery and anterior cerebral artery. The origin of the large vessels of the neck from the aortic arch was of the standard size; however, common carotid arteries (CCA) were less than expected with no CCA bifurcation on either side. The absence of all segments of the internal carotid arteries (ICA) on both sides together with the absent bony carotid canals in the petrous bones confirmed the diagnosis of the agenesis of both internal carotid arteries. The anatomical parts of the circle of Willis had almost the same diameters and had no visible stenotic lesions on them .
On the day of discharge from the hospital, the child was conscious, understood verbal commands but was unable to carry verbal communication. He had spastic left side weakness (the leg is more involved than the arm); the gait was hemiparetic with circumduction.
He was undergoing regular transfusion therapy per month, and the antiepileptic medication (levetiracetam 270 mg BID stopped in October 2018 as he had not experienced a recurrence of seizure.
A month later, a neurological examination showed spastic left-sided hemiparesis with brisk, polykinetic reflexes, a permanent clonus, and a positive Babinski sign. The speech was preserved. A year later, spastic left hemiparesis is visible.
The patient is under the constant care of a hematologist (repeated blood transfusions for secondary prevention of stroke) and periodic checks by a neurologist (assessment of the patient’s neurological deficits and cognitive abilities). A new MRI / MRA is scheduled after 6 months (possible silent or open infarction and detection of new stenotic lesions in the main cerebral arteries).
Further monitoring was followed by certain difficulties. The patient lives in a rural area 15–20 km away from the local hospital. He gave up physical therapy because the father has no available time to take his son to therapeutic exercises every week. The patient did not show up for the scheduled MRI appointment.
The medical report 3 years later is as follows: The patient is on a regular transfusion, monitored by the hematology team. He is awake, alert, communicates well. There is spastic left hemiparesis with brisk deep tendon reflexes and Babinski’s sign. The gait is hemiparetic with circumduction. It has been suggested that the child receive ankle-foot orthosis. The attending doctor emphasized the importance of having physical therapy and an MRI.
The possibility of surgical revascularization has been considered and could be useful if the child experiences recurrent strokes (stroke or silent infarction) despite optimal blood transfusion therapy or episodes of TIA resistant to aspirin treatment.