Here, we present a 26-year-old male with junctional epidermolysis bullosa (generalized, intermediate form) who suffered from a skin lump on his neck, which surprisingly turned out to be a dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Informed consent was obtained from the patient prior to data acquisition.
Two years before presenting to our outpatient clinic, the patient noticed a skin lesion and subcutaneous swelling on the neck. The lump was neither painful nor tender or noticeable growing. The patient denied any previous trauma or inflammation. After first noticing the skin lesion, an MRI of the neck revealed an encapsulated tumor that was not at high risk of being a malignant process. Therefore, the primary institution did not initiate any therapy at this point. Due to further growth, the patient then underwent primary resection of the tumor without a prior biopsy. The histopathological evaluation revealed malignant skin sarcoma and inadequate safety margins. With the diagnosis of DFSP, the primary institution presented the patient to our interdisciplinary tumor conference for sarcoma. As shown previously for soft tissue sarcomas, revision surgery is mandatory for unexpected sarcoma diagnosis following primary surgery . Two weeks after the first resection, the patient presented at the Department of Plastic and Hand Surgery for secondary resection and subsequent reconstruction. We then initiated an MRI to assess tumor infiltration preoperatively and performed a two-staged procedure with wide resection of the tumor one week after the initial presentation at our outpatient clinic. The extended safety margins needed for the resection are shown in Fig. . The resulting defect was closed temporarily with synthetic wound dressing (Epigard®). The histopathological examination showed a dermal infiltration of the classical DFSP and postoperative alterations in the deep dermal compartment with uninvolved epidermis and the complete removal of the DFSP with small residues (< 1 cm) of vital tumor cells and satisfying safety margins. In the histological workup, tumor-free margins were > 1 cm to all sides and 0.3 cm to the depth (R-classification: R0). The tumor consists of uniform spindle cells with minimal cytological atypia and woven nuclei arranged in a whorled growth pattern .
These safety margins were sufficient considering the initial resection, the complete removal, the small residues of vital tumor cells, and the immunohistochemical workup. Two weeks after the secondary resection, we addressed the remaining wound defect by utilizing a rhomboid skin flap (Limberg-Flap, Fig. ) . A superficial wound healing disorder prolonged the postoperative course but eventually resolved with non-surgical wound therapy. After discharge, the patient followed up with his general practitioner and dermatologist. Besides oral pain relievers, the patient did not receive any particular medication postoperatively. The localization of the skin tumor and an overall prolonged wound healing resulted in an unsatisfying scar deformity. A secondary revision of the scar, performed by another physician at the patient’s place of residence, led to the visible alteration of the flap geometry . The recommended after-care included MRI imaging for local recurrence, clinical examination, and regional lymph node ultrasound every 3 months for the first postoperative year. At the last follow-up one year after resecting the DFSP, we did not observe any sign of recurrent tumor growth. Thus, the after-care interval extended to 6 months.