A 75-year-old woman complained of sharp and shooting pain in the right frontal region for one month.
The patient had received a cervical epidural block twice at an orthopedic clinic because of sudden shoulder pain in the C4/5 dermatome and atypical headache. However, she still had sharp and shooting pain in the right frontal region. The pain was so severe that she could not sleep at night and touch her hair. Eighteen days after the symptoms occurred, she collapsed due to dizziness. One month after initial onset of symptoms, the patient was admitted to the otolaryngology department of our hospital and received steroid pulse therapy for sudden left hearing loss. In addition, the patient was referred to a pain clinic. When the pain physician asked the patient about her symptoms, she said that the right forehead hurt the most. No typical rash was observed in the patient's ear or the area of pain. There was no history of a rash or trauma .
The patient had no previous diagnosis.
The patient had no significant family history.
No neurological abnormalities were observed. The patient’s symptoms were not provoked by neck movement or pressure over tender points in the neck and did not worsen with the Spurling’s test.
The result for varicella-zoster virus (VZV)-IgM (titer 2.7) was positive in a test conducted to determine the cause of sudden hearing loss. The test was performed 23 days after the onset of pain. When she was referred to the pain clinic one month after the occurrence of symptoms, VZV-IgG and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests were performed to precisely determine the patient’s condition. Serum VZV-IgG (titer, 4.26) finding was positive. However, DNA in the serum was not detected by PCR testing.
Brain computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed to diagnose central origin lesions, but no abnormalities were observed. MRI of the cervical spine was performed under the suspicion of cervicogenic headache and cervical radiculopathy, and C3/4 central disc protrusion, C4/5 disc protrusion, right neural foramina stenosis at C4/5, focal compression of the spinal cord at C4/5, and C5/6 disc protrusion were observed .