A 70-year-old Caucasian man (weight: 75kg; height: 165cm) with T2DM, hypertension and prostatic hypertrophy was referred to our unit for CRC treatment. His usual medications included metformin (3000mg/day), irbesartan/hydrochlorothiazide 150mg/12.5mg/day and tamsulosin (0.4mg/day).
Ten weeks after receiving pre-operative chemoradiotherapy, the patient underwent a low anterior rectal resection with a diverting ileostomy. Metformin treatment was suspended 3 days before the operation.
The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful. His renal function was normal; his blood glucose was between 150mg/dl and 200mg/dl after a meal; and his stoma output was approximately 600ml/day.
Metformin therapy was resumed 5 days after surgery, when the patient returned to a normal diet. He was discharged to home in good condition on the ninth post-operative day.
Two weeks later, he returned to our department because of nausea, vomiting and diffuse abdominal pain. In the preceding days, he had noticed an increased stoma output that required him to empty the stoma bag four or five times per day. He also referred to being anuric for the preceding 24 hours.
During his examination, the patient appeared dehydrated and had tachypnea and a reduced level of consciousness. His blood pressure was 90/60mmHg, and his pulse rate was 90/min. His laboratory tests showed acute kidney injury (AKI) (creatinine, 8.94mg/dl; blood urea nitrogen, 324mg/dl) with severe lactic acidosis (pH, 6.99; partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 12mmHg; base excess, -26.9 mM).
Aggressive hydration with crystalloids and intravenous bicarbonate infusion was initiated. The patient’s internal jugular vein was cannulated, and he was promptly transferred to the hemodialysis unit. Hemodialysis was performed for 6 hours and repeated 12 hours later for 3 hours using bicarbonate-buffered dialysate. His chemical profile and clinical condition then improved dramatically. His acidosis resolved over the course of 24 hours; his spontaneous diuresis resumed after 48 hours; and his renal function recovered. The patient was discharged 8 days after admission with a serum creatinine level of 2.5mg/dl and a blood urea nitrogen concentration of 50mg/dl. His ileostomy was closed about 1 month later, and he did not experience any further similar episodes. At a follow-up examination almost 1 year later, he was well and disease-free.