A previously healthy 55-year-old Japanese man became aware of flashing lights in his visual field. A month later he visited a doctor with a complaint of sudden visual field constriction. Magnetic resonance images (MRI) revealed abnormal signals in the bilateral occipital lobe, and he was transferred to our hospital. At the time of admission, the height of the patient was 167 cm and his weight was 57 kg. His blood pressure was 158/70 mmHg, and his heart rate was 72 beats per minute and regular. His body temperature was 36.8 °C. Although his vision was slightly misty, he was well orientated and his higher brain function was normal. He had afferent tunnel vision, but no other obvious neurological deficits. Blood tests, including serum autoantibodies and soluble IL-2 receptor antibody, indicated no apparent abnormalities except that the ratio of lactate (47.5 mg/dl) to pyruvate (2.09 mg/dl) was significantly increased (L/P ratio 22.7). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed a normal cell count (1/μl) and a slightly elevated protein concentration (55 mg/dl). His CSF L/P ratio was also increased (lactate 27.6 mg/dl, pyruvate 1.30 mg/dl and L/P ratio 21.2). Levels of adenosine deaminase and 14–3-3 protein in CSF were within normal limits. Both fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and diffusion-weighted images (DWI) revealed multiple high-intensity signals in the cortical and subcortical areas of the bilateral occipital lobe, the mesial temporal lobes, and the left frontal lobe . Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) images showed normal- to slightly low-intensity signals in the areas with the abnormal signals shown by FLAIR and DWI . Magnetic resonance angiography and venography (MRA and MRV) showed no abnormalities . Furthermore, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) demonstrated elevated lactate concentrations in the bilateral occipital lesion . Electroencephalography showed periodic slow waves and sharp waves bilaterally, but no periodic synchronous discharge was detected. No abnormalities were revealed by ophthalmological examinations, audiography, echocardiography, electromyography, or glucose tolerance tests. Histopathological studies of biopsied right biceps brachii muscle showed no mitochondrial myopathic features, including ragged-red fibers or intense succinate dehydrogenase activity. However, genetic analysis of the biopsied muscle by complete sequencing of mtDNA revealed a T10158C missense mutation in the ND3 gene . Pyrosequence analysis, a method used to quantify heteroplasmy , showed that 76% of the mtDNA in the biopsied muscle of the patient had the mutation . The mutation was not found in DNA obtained from his peripheral white blood cells.
After the first episode, he had repeated stroke-like episodes accompanied by abnormal MRI signals in various areas, mainly in the occipital lobes. Within 6 months he manifested cortical blindness, recurrent epilepsy and severe cognitive impairment .