A previously healthy 8-month-old female presented with three days of vomiting without diarrhea or an antecedent illness. At presentation she was severely hypertensive, volume overloaded, and oliguric. Laboratory workup revealed the triad of hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and AKI, consistent with TMA. Urinalysis was significant for 3+ hematuria and 4+ proteinuria. Serum chemistry was notable for hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and metabolic acidosis. Serum complement C3 was decreased (52 mg/dL; normal value: 86–179 mg/dL), but C4 was normal (17 mg/dL; normal value: 14–45 mg/dL). Platelet activation studies demonstrated increased ATP secretion in response to adenosine diphosphate and arachidonic acid, but were otherwise normal. ADAMST13 activity was 59%, and therefore the diagnosis of atypical HUS was made.
Management included renal replacement therapy, plasma infusions/exchange, and eculizumab infusions. Figure shows the timing of infusions and eculizumab dosing relative to lab trends used to monitor disease activity. During the first week of admission the patient was treated with continuous renal replacement therapy and received daily plasma infusions. On hospital day 8, she was transitioned to intermittent hemodialysis and began a regimen of weekly eculizumab infusions, with all doses administered during the last hour of dialysis, as previously described. After the third eculizumab dose, renal biopsy was performed. Three of eight glomeruli present in the specimen were globally sclerotic. Non-globally sclerotic glomeruli showed mild mesangial cellularity with increased matrix and numerous platelet thrombi visualized within glomerular capillary loops, consistent with active TMA . Electron microscopy demonstrated podocyte foot process effacement . Due to continued evidence of hemolysis (anemia and thrombocytopenia in the setting of low haptoglobin and elevated LDH; Fig. ) and biopsy-proven active TMA, the patient underwent daily plasma exchange and post-exchange eculizumab redosing for three consecutive days, after which she was started on a regimen of twice weekly intradialytic plasma and eculizumab infusions. Six days after the initiation of combined therapy, hemolysis began to resolve, and complement C3 levels increased to the normal range . Therefore, the frequency of eculizumab dosing was reduced to every 14 days. However, the patient did not recover renal function, and she was eventually transitioned to chronic peritoneal dialysis .
We performed extensive diagnostic testing to identify the cause of our patient’s HUS. Workup for complement factor H autoantibodies was negative. Neutrophil and lymphocyte expression of membrane cofactor protein, the second most frequently mutated gene associated with atypical HUS, was at the lower limit of normal. [, ] We used a commercially available next generation sequencing assay (Machaon Diagnostics, Inc.) to test for mutations in the following twelve genes with known pathogenic mutations associated with atypical HUS: CFH, MCP, CFI, CFB, C3, CFHR1, CFHR3, CFHR4, CFHR5, thrombomodulin, plasminogen, and DGKE. DGKE sequencing included all exons plus 25 bp of flanking intronic DNA, as well as the previously reported c.888 + 40A > G intronic mutation. The patient was homozygous for the H3 haplotype, which comprises three non-pathogenic SNPs in the CFH gene that are associated with predisposition to atypical HUS: (i) c.1–332 C > T in the promoter; (ii) a silent mutation at Q672, and (iii) a E936D substitution. [, ] Additionally, our patient was heterozygous for a rare missense SNP in DGKE (c.1679A > G; p.Q560R) in the c-terminal low complexity region, which was not thought to be pathogenic since all reported cases of atypical HUS associated with DGKE mutations follow a recessive inheritance pattern. [, ] Finally, we performed whole exome sequencing using blood samples from the patient and her parents (Baylor Miraca Genetics Laboratories), which identified a de novo heterozygous c.1384C > T missense mutation in exon 9 of the WT1 gene, which was subsequently confirmed by Sanger sequencing. This mutation results in a p.R394W substitution in the third Zinc finger of WT1 protein , and it is the classic mutation associated with DDS. [, ].
DDS is characterized by abnormal genitourinary development in males, Wilms tumor, and diffuse mesangial sclerosis. Karyotyping confirmed that the patient was 46, XX. However, no ovaries were visualized on pelvic ultrasound. Due to the patient’s high risk of developing Wilms tumor, she underwent bilateral nephrectomy five months after initial presentation. Gross examination revealed small, sclerotic kidneys that weighed a combined 30.6 g (average combined weight for age is 71 g; Fig. ). Histologic lesions ranged from moderate to severe mesangial hypercellularity with mesangial sclerosis to global glomerulosclerosis . Arterioles had an “onion skin” appearance with intimal and mural thickening . There was no evidence of lesions associated with TMA. The histopathologic features were entirely consistent with the diagnosis of diffuse mesangial sclerosis, the glomerulopathy classically associated with DDS. As there was no evidence of diffuse mesangial sclerosis on the initial renal biopsy, these findings show that HUS manifested prior to the development of glomerulopathy in this patient.