A 54-year-old man was transferred from the local hospital to our hospital's chest pain center in the emergency department due to suspected AMI. The ECG obtained at the local hospital showed ST-segment elevation in the inferior wall leads (II, III, and aVF), indicating possible damage to the heart muscle in that area and a complete atrioventricular block . When the patient arrived at our emergency department, another ECG was performed, which showed a sinus rhythm with ST-segment elevation in the inferior wall leads . The patient did not exhibit obvious difficulty in breathing. The laboratory results showed a high percentage of neutrophils (84.3%), indicating an inflammatory response in the body. Furthermore, the results of biomarker analysis were as follows: cardiac troponin-T (cTnT) level, 474.4 ng/L; myoglobin (Mb) level, 565.30 ng/ml; creatine kinase MB (CK-MB) level, 108.00 ng/ml; and brain natriuretic peptide level, 264 pg/ml. Moreover, the patient underwent general cranial computed tomography (CT) scans (–) and chest CT scans (–) to assess any further complications or conditions.
Six days prior to admission to our hospital, the patient was admitted to the local hospital with symptoms of headache, right limb immobility, unclear speech, nausea, and vomiting. His blood pressure was measured at 180/120 mmHg and a cranial CT scan revealed intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) in the thalamus. As a result, the patient was diagnosed with ICH. During his hospital stay, he experienced precordial squeezing chest pain, which lasted for approximately 1.5 h. This chest pain was accompanied by diaphoresis, palpitations, dyspnea, nausea, and vomiting. Given the symptoms and ECG changes indicating inferior wall involvement, acute inferior myocardial infarction were suspected.
Furthermore, the patient was transferred to the Cardiology Department, where an emergency bedside echocardiography was performed. The echocardiogram showed that the diameters of the aorta and pulmonary arteries were within the normal range. Additionally, in the resting state, there were no definite segmental motion abnormalities observed in the left ventricular (LV) wall. Furthermore, there was no presence of pericardial effusion. The systolic function of the LV was found to be normal. At this point, ST segments of the inferior wall leads displayed resolution , and the patient stated that the chest pain had subsided. Due to the presence of ICH, the Department of Neurosurgery suggested that anticoagulants should not be given for two weeks As a result, instead of performing a coronary angiography (CAG), we decided to proceed with a computed tomography coronary angiography (CTCA) to assess if there was any stenosis in the coronary artery. Surprisingly, the CTCA scan showed no signs of coronary artery occlusion or severe stenosis (–). In addition, there were no identifiable factors present in the patient that could have caused coronary artery spasm. Furthermore, conditions such as AMI resulting from inadequate blood supply to the heart due to hypotension or anemia were ruled out.
However, a coagulation function test revealed a D-dimer level of 22.48 mg/L in the patient's blood. During the patient's hospitalization, the presence of hemoptysis and deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in their lower extremity were observed. Based on these symptoms, a possible diagnosis of PE was considered. To confirm this diagnosis, a computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) was performed (–), and the diagnosis of PE was confirmed.
After successfully managing the ICH, the patient's condition stabilized, and he was discharged. He was prescribed oral warfarin for approximately 6 months, which gradually relieved his tightness in breathing symptoms. During his second hospitalization, a series of tests were conducted including biomarkers for myocardial injury, coagulation function assessment, echocardiography, CTPA and CAG. Importantly, the CTPA scan showed no abnormalities, indicating the absence of PE. Furthermore, the CAG results revealed no significant stenosis in the coronary arteries (–).