A 75-year-old man with a diagnosis of cutaneous nodular ulcerated melanoma of the left arm that measured 6.8 mm was referred to our oncology outpatient in October 2018. The tumor infiltrated the papillary/reticular dermal interface (Clark’s level III) and the side margins of the excision. The histological examination showed features of Breslow’s high-risk (thickness 2.7 mm) and the presence of inflammatory infiltrate. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed pathological uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18-FDG) in the liver . The mutational status of BRAF was wild type. The patient was treated with a flat dose of intravenous Pembrolizumab (200 mg every 3 weeks). Moreover, he had no history of autoimmune disease. After the 10th cycle, he developed psoriasis with itchy, multiple, well-marked, and raised, red plaque spread on >30% of the body surface [12.3 Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score] . This irAE had a significant negative impact on the patient’s quality of life and on his compliance with immunotherapy.
Due to the severity of psoriasis, following a multidisciplinary discussion of the clinical case, the patient underwent treatment with Apremilast at an initial 5-day titration dose of 10 mg and then at a maintenance dose of 30 mg twice daily. In order to obtain an immediate response, corticosteroid therapy was prescribed with immunosuppressive methylprednisolone at a dose of 16 mg/die for 5 days, followed by progressive dose reduction until discontinuation 15 days later. Furthermore, Pembrolizumab was interrupted for 4 weeks until the improvement of skin manifestations and disappearance of itching . After 10 months of treatment with Apremilast and Pembrolizumab, the patient had a good clinical condition and acceptable quality of life, with no relapse of the psoriasis plaques. Moreover, PET and computed tomography (CT) scans showed no evidence of previously described melanoma lesions (complete response as per iRECIST) . A chronological summary of the case report is shown in .