We report a 62-year-old black female with known ESRD on MHDx for eight years. Other co-morbidities include hypertension, bronchial asthma, coronary artery disease, and recurrent transient ischemic attacks. She was admitted to the hospital after sustaining right-sided hip fracture related to an accidental fall. Review of systems was positive for fatigue, generalized weakness, constipation, and cold intolerance. Vitals signs: pulse rate 54/bpm, BP 117/69 mmHg, and respiratory rate 16/minute.
On physical exam, patient seemed very slow in response and was quite bradykinetic. Face was puffy with cold, dry skin and coarse hair. Her right leg was externally rotated. Neck examination revealed a homogenous, firm mass (4 × 4 cm) which moved with swallowing and was not tethered to the skin .
Neurological exam revealed delayed relaxation phase of ankle jerk. Laboratory values: serum calcium 8.4 mg/dL, serum albumin 2.5 gm/dL, serum magnesium 1.5 mg/dL, serum phosphorous 3.9 mg/dL, intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH) 6619 pg/mL, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) 454 IU/mL, free thyroxin 0.2 ng/dL, and 25 hydroxyvitamin D level 12 ng/mL. Her serum inorganic iodide level was undetectable. X-ray of right hip revealed femoral neck fracture. Ultrasound of the neck showed diffuse heterogeneous and nodular enlargement of the entire thyroid with multiple tiny cysts and nodular changes with a complex hypo echoic nodule in the isthmus measuring (2.1 × 1.2 × 1.2 cm). Following a diagnosis of tertiary hyperparathyroidism and severe hypothyroidism, associated with a right-sided femoral neck fracture, she underwent a total hip arthroplasty followed the next day by subtotal parathyroidectomy and right thyroid lobectomy. Due to concerns for hungry bone syndrome and her significant hypothyroid state postoperatively, she was closely monitored in intensive care with an endocrinology consultation on board.
Post operatively, her labs revealed iPTH 112 pg/mL and calcium 5.9 mg/dL. But she remained asymptomatic. She was treated with intravenous (IV) calcium gluconate in combination with Calcitriol 5 micrograms (mcg) IV twice a day for two days and then switched to oral Calcitriol 0.5 mcg daily. She also started on 25 mcg of IV levothyroxine, initially for four days, and then switched to levothyroxine 75 mcg daily, orally.
Her thyroid histology was consistent with Hashimoto thyroiditis with diffuse infiltration by lymphocytes; plasma cells; and multiple lymphoid follicles, some with germinal centers; along with atrophic follicles with sparse colloid and lined by flattened epithelium or oncocytic (Hürthle cell) change. In addition, some areas of the thyroid parenchyma were replaced by fibrous tissue. Her parathyroid histology showed hyperplastic parathyroid tissues.