A 63-year-old woman presented to her family doctor with a complaint of asymptomatic gross hematuria. Cystoscopy showed hematuria originating from the left ureteral orifice, and CT showed a left renal mass. The patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation. At the time of the initial examination, the patient had no clinical symptoms. All laboratory analyses were normal, and urine occult blood test results were negative. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a slowly and weakly enhancing mass 39 × 17 mm in diameter in the left kidney . Based on the imaging findings, we suspected papillary RCC or metanephric adenoma.
We performed percutaneous renal tumor biopsy because the imaging findings were not typical for clear cell RCC. On hematoxylin-eosin staining, small-to-medium-sized lymphocytes were densely congregated, but cellular atypia was not observed . Immunohistochemical staining was partially positive for B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL-6), octamer-binding transcription factor 2 (OCT-2), and programmed cell death 1 and negative for terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase, CD10, CD21, and CD30. Clonality analysis revealed no monoclonal rearrangements. EBER-ISH was negative. Since a lymphoid malignancy could not be ruled out and the tumor was thought to be of renal origin on imaging, we decided to perform a robot-assisted partial nephrectomy. soluble interleukin-2 receptor was not measured.
The surgery was performed transperitoneally, with an operative time of 223 min, a console time of 96 min, and a blood loss of 20 mL. The mass was bluntly dissected from the renal capsule without renal artery clamping. There were no perioperative complications. Gross pathology revealed a well-circumscribed and uniform yellowish-white mass 3 cm in diameter . Microscopically, secondary lymphoid follicles were conspicuous, and the basic structure of the lymphoid tissue was generally preserved . There were no caseating granulomas. A characteristic finding was the presence of large multinucleated cells, suggestive of viral infection . However, virus infection markers, including HHV8, HSV, CMV, and EBER-ISH, were negative. Immunohistochemical staining was partially positive for BCL-6 and negative for OCT-2, PAX5, STAT6, multiple myeloma oncogene 1, B cell OCT binding protein 1, CD3, CD15, CD20, CD30, CD56, CD79a, TCRβF1, TCRδ, programmed-death ligand 1 (PD-L1), and leukocyte common antigen. Clonality analysis did not reveal any monoclonal rearrangements. Based on these results, we diagnosed the patient with non-specific lymphadenitis. Seven months after surgery, no recurrence has been observed.