A 78-year-old hypertensive and diabetic man had a history of coronary artery disease with percutaneous coronary intervention in 1997. Chest X-ray was normal 11 months ago. He denied major chest trauma recently. He suffered from intermittent low grade fever, dull and tingled pain over left flank region and progressive dyspnea for 1 week. He was brought to our emergency department. On arrival, vital signs were a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per min, a heart rate of 125 beats per min, a blood pressure of 158/79 mmHg and a body temperature of 36.6 °C. Physical examination revealed a pale conjunctiva, no heart murmur, absent breathing sound of left lower lung, and knocking pain over left costovertebral angle. Significant laboratory evaluation revealed white blood cell counts (WBCs) of 13,700/mm3 with 76.3% of segmented neutrophils, hemoglobin of 7.8 g/dl, red blood cell counts (RBCs) of 4.26 × 106/mm3, platelet counts of 634 × 103/mm3, creatinine 1.5 mg/dl, albumin 2.6 g/dl, protein 7.8 g/dl, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 384 U/l, glucose of 257 mg/dl, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) of 18.6 mg/dl. Chest X-ray showed left pleural effusion and mild widening of upper descending aorta . Blood-tinged pleural effusion was confirmed via a fine-needle aspiration under sono-guide after informed consent of patient. Analysis of pleural effusion were exudative and infection of pleural effusion should be considered, including WBCs of 1625/mm3, with neutrophils of 62% and lymphocytes of 31%, RBCs of 12,500/mm3, protein of 4.5 g/dl, LDH of 266 U/l, glucose of 201 mg/dl and specific gravity of 1.030. Fever, flank pain, leukocytosis, elevated hs-CRP and hemothorax were clinical clues for high suspicion of ruptured infectious aorta. Computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast media depicted ruptured multiple thoracic aortic aneurysms at the level of between 8th and 11th thoracic spines with atelectasis of left lung and massive hemothorax , so emergency surgical intervention with resection of fragile aorta, debridement of involved periaortic soft tissue, and reconstruction for descending aorta with Dacron graft of 20 mm was performed. Although the cultures of blood, pleural fluid, and resected aortic tissue showed no growth of bacteria or mycobacterium tuberculosis, the pathological findings demonstrated injury of vascular wall with acute and chronic inflammatory cells infiltration, fibrinous material coated on the internal luminal surface, focal abscess formation in vascular wall and no malignancy cells or granulation tissue. The serological screen for syphilis was non-reactive. The patient recovered gradually after surgical aortic repair, intensive care and adequate intravenous antibiotics for cover Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria with prostaphlin 2 g per 6 h and ceftriaxone 2 g per day for 4 weeks despite of negative-culture result. He was discharged under an uneventful condition with a regular follow-up of cardiovascular out-patient department for 2 years.