A 55-year-old Japanese man presented with excessive anxiety about kidney cancer recurrence. The patient was married with two sons—the first son with severe mental retardation and the second son with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. However, the patient's own history contained no evidence suggesting an intellectual disability.
The patient underwent surgery for cancer of the left kidney at 47 years of age, and the postoperative course was uneventful. At 55 years of age, a health check-up revealed hematuria, which increased his anxiety about recurrence. One month after the checkup, the patient gradually became less energetic. Although a detailed examination revealed no recurrence, his anxiety persisted. Three months after the check-up, the patient was diagnosed with depression in a psychiatric clinic and was started on pharmacological treatment. However, owing to his mental illness, the patient was obsessed with the fear that he might be dismissed from his job. The next day, the patient attempted suicide by hanging. The patient's younger son foiled the attempt and brought him to our hospital. The patient did not respond to calls on arrival at our hospital but resisted medical procedures with his eyes closed, and a dissociative stupor was suspected. The patient soon awoke and was able to speak, and a psychiatric evaluation was performed. Although the patient described vague anxiety, a depressive mood was not evident even after this serious suicide attempt. No significant physical abnormalities were observed, and the patient was admitted to the psychiatric department for examination and treatment of psychiatric symptoms. Bilateral calcifications of the basal ganglia, thalamus, and dentate nucleus were noted for the first time on head computed tomography (CT) . To manage the patient's severe anxiety and confusion, antidepressant and antipsychotic treatment was initiated, and his mental condition improved. Finally, he was diagnosed with depression, and 2 months after admission, he was discharged from the hospital and returned to work. Olanzapine (2.5 mg), sulpiride (100 mg), aripiprazole (3 mg), and valproic acid (200 mg) administration was continued for treating depression; however, the antipsychotics caused drug-induced parkinsonism, with symptoms such as tremors and brachybasia. Additionally, the patient often complained of other physical anxieties and continued to experience emotional instability.
At the age of 63, a change in the name of the company he worked for triggered new anxiety about his future, believing that he would be laid off. Additionally, the patient gradually became more confused and obsessive, and wondered if his smartphone used for work had been infected with a virus or if he might be infected by the coronavirus. Although the patient purchased a new smartphone, he could not sleep at night because he panicked that the screen would change on its own. The patient subsequently wrote a suicide note to his wife and attempted suicide by overdosing on sleeping pills. The family found him lying unconscious in bed and admitted him to our hospital. The patient unemotionally informed us that he had taken an overdose of pills because of confusion and denied the current presence of suicidal ideation. As in the previous admission, the depressive mood was not apparent; however, the patient requested hospitalization for rest and was admitted to the psychiatric department. Before admission, the patient had been taking aripiprazole (0.75 mg), valproic acid (200 mg), biperiden (2.5 mg), flunitrazepam (2 mg), and brotizolam (0.25 mg). All medications were temporarily discontinued after this episode of overdosing, and the patient was followed up.
Neurological examination findings on admission were normal, except for a slight bilateral tremor in the hands and a masked face. On mental status examination, the patient was oriented and cooperative; however, he spoke without much emotional expression. A brain CT scan revealed symmetrical calcification in the basal ganglia, thalamus, and dentate nucleus, with the extent of calcification slightly larger than before . After hospitalization, the patient did not exhibit any notable psychiatric symptoms; however, on the ninth day of hospitalization, he suddenly became agitated and began screaming that he had been deceived and admitted to the hospital. The next day, however, the patient fell into a stupor with his eyes closed. Eventually, these symptoms spontaneously disappeared, and the patient apologized for having been distraught. Subsequent tests indicated no cognitive dysfunction (Mini-Mental State Examination score 29/30). To thoroughly examine the patient's psychiatric symptoms and parkinsonism, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and dopamine transporter (DAT) imaging were performed. MRI showed calcification in the same areas as did the CT scan; however, no other abnormal findings were observed . DAT scans showed decreased bilateral putaminal specific binding ratios (4.43 and 4.22 for the right and left sides, respectively) . Laboratory values of parathyroid hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone, T3, and T4 were within normal reference limits. Therefore, the possibility of secondary calcification caused by metabolic or endocrinological disorders was excluded. Genetic analysis revealed a heterozygous SLC20A2 nonsense mutation (c.514A>T, p.Lys172Ter in exon 4), whose pathogenesis has been previously reported, confirming the clinical diagnosis of IBGC. The previously recognized obsessive-compulsive symptoms and anxiety were considered concomitant symptoms of IBGC. The patient's psychiatric symptoms spontaneously improved, and valproic acid (200 mg) was resumed to prevent mood instability. No adverse effects, such as worsening of parkinsonism, were observed, and the patient was discharged from the hospital within a month. A head CT scan performed on the 28-year-old second son revealed calcification of the basal ganglia, confirming that the disease was familial in origin.