A 29-year-old man was diagnosed with cervical dystonia at the age of 27 years after developing symptoms of cervical rotation to the right and consulted a neurologist. He received medications (baclofen 15 mg, trihexyphenidyl 6 mg), but his symptoms were not improved. In addition, he was treated several times with botulinum toxin injections with no response. He was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment. The patient had right cervical rotation of 45–60°, associated neck pain, and elevation of the right shoulder: dystonic symptoms were alleviated by holding the posterior neck with the hand (sensory tricks). On awakening, dystonia symptoms were relatively mild, but gradually worsened from noon to evening (early morning effect). No other movement disorders were observed. Based on the characteristic findings of dystonia, such as sensory tricks and early morning effect, cervical dystonia was diagnosed [ and ]. The preoperative TWSTRS score was 39 points.
As the patient’s cervical dystonia symptoms were accompanied by symptoms of the right shoulder elevation, selective peripheral denervation was not a treatment option. The patient strongly rejected implantation of the instrument and preferred to undergo RF surgery. As the affected area of dystonia was the right shoulder and right cervical rotation, we decided to perform left pallidotomy based on the symptomatic predominance of involuntary motor output from the left hemisphere. Under local anesthesia, a head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; T1-axial/T2-coronal image) examination was performed with a Leksell frame, and a surgical plan was made using a Leksell surgiplan (Elekta AB; Stockholm, Sweden). The left GPi was set 19.5 mm to the left lateral, 3.0 mm inferior, and 2.0 mm anterior to the midpoint of the anterior commissure and posterior commissure. A coagulation probe with a heat-conducting part of 1 mm in diameter and 4 mm in length was used, and a Leksell Neurogenerator (Elekta AB) was used for electrical stimulation and thermal coagulation. Before thermal coagulation, electrical stimulation (130 µs/100 Hz/2–5 mA) was performed to confirm that there was no proximity to the optic tract or internal capsule. Thermal coagulation was performed at 70°C for 40 s. Then, the electrode was withdrawn in 3-mm increments to increase the lesion size, producing two contiguous lesions. Electrical stimulation and thermal coagulation were also performed 3 mm postero-laterally from the target. Therefore, in total, four lesions were made using two trajectories. The volume of the lesions was measured using a 3D slicer on a T1-weighted MRI performed immediately postoperatively. The measured volume was 99.3 mm3. The first trajectory lesion was confirmed at 19.7 mm lateral, 2.3 mm anterior, and 3.0 mm inferior to the midpoint of AC-PC. The second trajectory lesion was confirmed at 20.5 mm lateral, 0.3 mm posterior, and 2.0 mm inferior to the midpoint of AC-PC.
From the day after surgery, the neck was maintained in the midline position, and right shoulder elevation was improved to the point where there was no difference between the left and right sides . The only remaining symptom was neck pain with a TWSTRS score of 4 points at 1 week postoperatively. There was no postoperative complication. At 3 months postoperatively, neck pain had also improved, and the TWSTRS score was 0 points . 123I-IMP-SPECT showed reduced cerebral blood flow of extensive bilateral hemispheres from preoperative to 3 months postoperatively . Post-operative T1-weighted MRI images showed coagulated lesion in the left GPi on the day of the surgery and old scar in the left GPi 3 months after the surgery . During the 7-year postoperative follow-up, there was no recurrence of cervical dystonia without medications (TWSTRS = 0), and the patient, who had to quit his job due to the impact of his condition, was able to return to work and has a normal social life .