A well trained 73-year-old man with certified medical fitness for scuba diving participated in a rescue diver course at Lake Garda/Italy. The patient did not take any regular medication and had no history or symptoms of cardio- or cerebrovascular disease. Specifically, he did not suffer from prodromes, chest pain, or palpitations and there was no history of sudden cardiac death or unexplained collapses in his family. During scuba training different rescue techniques, such as salvage of a non-responsive diver from depth to surface, in water resuscitation and regular CPR techniques were trained. Due to the low water temperature, the diver was equipped with an additional ice vest with a neoprene hood that was exceptionally narrow at the neck. At the final dive of the course, he suddenly lost consciousness during the ascent at 6 m depth. The diver was immediately brought to surface and transported to the lakeshore by his dive buddies. At land, 5 min after the incident, CPR according to ERC guidelines (30:2 compression/ventilation ratio) was performed by the dive buddies after checking his vital signs (due to intense CPR training at the whole weekend a high quality CPR could be assumed). An AED was attached and a non-shockable rhythm was documented. After about 10 min, the paramedic team arrived and the first documented rhythm was asystole. Return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was achieved after administration of epinephrine and another 5 min of CPR. Further results of the paramedic team such as evidence of aspiration, vital signs, initial ECG after ROSC are unknown. The transport to the regional hospital by helicopter was without any abnormalities according to the medical report. In the ER cardiac examination showed an unremarkable 12-lead ECG (normofrequent sinus rhythm, no AV block or BBB, normal repolarization, no ventricular, or supraventricular extrasystoly), normal vital signs (RR, HR, respiratory rate, and SO2) and echocardiography without abnormalities [normal left ventricular function and right ventricular (RV) function, no signs of structural damage or cardiomyopathy, and minimal MR]. The patient was extubated without neurological deficit. During the following hospital stay ECG, echocardiography, computed tomography scans (to exclude a pulmonary embolism and lung injuries), and even coronary angiography did not show any pathological findings. The patient was subsequently repatriated to our tertiary care centre. The origin or cause of the cardiac arrest remained unclear according to the discharging physicians.
In our centre, the examination of the patient’s history and thorough reconstruction of events during the dive led to the conclusion that the patient passed out under water while turning his head left and upwards, possibly irritating his carotid sinus.
To confirm this hypothesis, CSM with the patient in upright position was performed, while monitoring blood pressure and heart rate. Immediately after massage, sinus arrest for more than 6 s on the monitor in line with instantaneous syncope was documented. Importantly, blood pressure before and immediately after syncope remained unchanged. Thus, cardio-inhibitory CSH was diagnosed and asystole due to the tight-fitting ice vest was assumed. Based on the diagnostic findings and the results of the CSM, neither electrophysiological studies nor cardiac magnetic resonance imaging where considered necessary. Accordingly, implantation of a pacemaker was recommended. Due to the patient’s intense sports activities (diving, golf, and climbing) and a low expected ventricular pacing rate, a single chamber leadless pacing system was implanted.
Specifically, a MICRA TPS system (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was delivered to the septum of the right ventricle under radiologic guidance using a deflectable catheter via right femoral access. In the first position, excellent pacing parameters and adequate fixation by the four tines was achieved and the system was programmed in a VVI 40 b.p.m. mode.
In a follow-up visit 4 weeks after the incident, repeated carotid manipulations could neither provoke asystole nor syncope or other symptoms. Also, blood pressure was normal and not supressed during the test. Twelve weeks after device implantation a test-dive in confined water (24°C, pool 5 m depth) under CPR standby was performed. During the dive, CSM did not provoke any symptoms, whereas drops of the heart rate were documented on pacemaker telemetry . Furthermore, no arrhythmias could be detected during ECG monitoring in an escorted cold-water scuba dive (8°C, 12 m depth). Finally, regular pacemaker follow-ups showed 1% ventricular pacing without causing any symptoms in the patient. Thus, the patient’s medical fitness for scuba diving was recertified and he did not experience any problems in his further dive or sports activities.