We present the case of a 26-year-old male clinical engineer working in our hospital who came to our hospital complaining of acute substernal chest pain on 21 May 2021, 4 days after his second dose of BNT162b2 vaccine. The patient was an Asians of Mongoloid descent and had no previous medical history. The patient gave informed consent for the write-up and publication of this clinical case. The electrocardiogram (ECG) on arrival showed small Q waves in II, III, aVF, ST elevation with upward concavity in I, II, aVL, aVF and V4–V6, and ST depression and deep negative T wave in aVR . Laboratory studies revealed elevated markers of myocardial damage such as high-sensitivity troponin I [5362.4 pg/mL, referential range (RR) 0–26.2 pg/mL], creatine kinase (332 U/L, RR 59–248 U/L), C-reactive protein (7.57 mg/dL, RR 0–0.14 mg/dL), and a negative polymerase chain reaction test for COVID-19. The plasma electrolytes such as sodium and potassium were within normal limits. Viral studies including coxsackie group B viruses and echoviruses were all negative. Autoimmune studies such as antinuclear antibodies and thyroid hormones were within normal limits. There were no significant findings on chest X-ray. On admission, transthoracic echocardiography revealed good left ventricular function, no regional wall motion abnormalities, no significant valvular disease, and no pericardial effusion , his left ventricular ejection fraction was 53%, within normal limits, and further improved to 65% during his hospitalization. Acute aortic dissection and pulmonary thromboembolism were ruled out by contrast-enhanced thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT). Thoracic CT showed no pericardial effusion or ventricular wall thickening . An urgent coronary angiogram was performed because an acute coronary syndrome was suspected, but no significant stenosis of the coronary arteries was found except for an incidental finding of coronary artery (left anterior descending artery) to pulmonary artery fistula . The patient was admitted to the high care unit, although he remained haemodynamically stable and asymptomatic. Subsequent ECGs showed partial resolution of the ST changes and a trend towards improvement . No endocardial biopsy was performed because of the patient’s low risk and good course. The patient was discharged after 4 days with resolution of symptoms and improvement in inflammatory response and myocardial injury markers . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination, which was obtained on discharge 6 days after second dose of vaccination, showed maintained systolic function, increased myocardial and pericardial signal intensity on short T1 inversion recovery sequences and slight elevated signals of the myocardium on dynamic contrast-enhanced sequences, suggesting increased vascular flow. Fast imaging employing steady state acquisition (FIESTA) sequences, which were performed 15 min after intravenous administration of gadolinium, demonstrated sub-epicardial enhancement of the myocardium, which was considered consistent with acute myocarditis. T1-weighted (T1WI) sequences also showed late subepicardial enhancement in the anterior wall and interventricular septum near the apex . These findings were considered consistent with acute myocarditis. The patient was initially treated with oral acetaminophen, antitussives and no steroids, with progressive resolution of his symptoms. The patient has scheduled outpatient cardiology follow-up. On the 4th day after discharge, the patient presented to the outpatient clinic with only mild general malaise and returned to work 3 days later. However, despite no deterioration in cardiac function, the patient complained of appetite loss and fatigue on exertion, was diagnosed as post-vaccination syndrome and was absent from work for a month. The patient recovered to some extent and returned to work, but 2 weeks later, he complained of general malaise and sleep disturbance, was diagnosed with situational depression and is currently on leave to see a psychotherapist.