A 26-year-old woman had small-incision lenticule extraction in both eyes on January 26, 2022. The preoperative uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) was 20/333 and 20/250 in the right eye and left eye, the preoperative refraction was −4.75 sphere and −4.00 sphere, respectively, and the corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) was 20/16 in both eyes. Slit-lamp and dilated fundus examinations were unremarkable, with no signs of dryness or superficial punctate keratopathy. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 16.6 mmHg OD and 15.3 mmHg OS. The cornea thickness was 504 mm in the right eye and 499 mm in the left eye. The SMILE procedure was done using the Visumax femtosecond laser (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG). The cap diameter was 8.0 mm, with an intended thickness of 97 μm OD and 92 μm OS, and the optical zone in both eyes was 6.5 mm. No intraoperative complications were reported. 0.5% Levofloxacin drops (Santen pharmaceutical Co, Japan) were used for the first 7 days and 0.1% Tobramycin dexamethasone, Alcon, Belgium) were used for the first 7 days, 4 times a day, then tapering the dose during the next 3 weeks.
On the first post-operative day, the patient's cornea was in good condition without any complications. The patient underwent the second reexamination in our department 15 days after surgery. What we saw under the slit lamp was grayish white fine dust similar to keratic precipitates (KP) . At first, we all thought it was KP, but there was no aqueous flare, inflammation, corneal edema or interface debris. No other abnormalities were observed in the anterior and posterior segments of patient's eyes with ophthalmic examination instrument. Moreover, her visual acuity remained unchanged. She was prescribed a week-long tapering dose of Tobramycin and Dexamethasone Eye Drops (s.a. Alcon-Couvreur n.v.) beginning at qid for the first week. At 1-week follow-up, her ocular examination showed no obvious change, and there were still a large number of scattered blotchy deposits of material without improvement, but her reported no loss of vision or any discomfort. It's worth noting that the patient had a sister who had undergone the same procedure a year earlier without any complications. After careful questioning, we learned that the patient received the 9-valent human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine on the third post-operative day without any other special experiences. Confocal microscopy performed for both eyes revealed the presence of hyper-reflective deposits that appeared as irregular snowflake-like images between the Descemet memberane and the corneal endothelial layer , with normal endothelial morphology and quantity .
Absolute count examination of T cell, B cell and NK cell, quantitative detection of immunoglobulin, complement, prolactin factor B (PFB) and C-reactive protein (CRP), and detection of extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) and antinuclear antibody (ANA) were performed on patient. The results showed no obvious abnormality, which was consistent with the routine trend of immunological examination after vaccination.
We also performed trio-Whole-exome sequencing (WES) on the patient. A homozygous variation of [c. 280 (exon3) G > A (NM_001267727)] of the ARSG gene was found in the WES data of the patient. According to the ACMG mutation rating guidelines, the variation is rated as uncertain significance (VUS), and it was predicted to be harmful by a number of software. So is her sister.
The patient was reexamined in our department about 6 months after surgery. However, her ocular examination showed no obvious change compared with the previous one, and there were still a large number of scattered blotchy deposits of material without significant reduction.