A 16-year old female presented to the orthopedics outpatient department with complain of inability to squat, sit cross-legged and painless awkward gait for about last six years. Detailed birth history could only reveal that she was delivered through normal vaginal route at home and cried immediately after birth. She was normal at birth but when she started walking at the age of 15 months, there was a waddle. She had difficulty in walking and running since early childhood because of the need to abduct and externally rotate the limb in every step. The patient could not sit comfortably except in a high chair position. No history of repeated intramuscular injections in the buttocks was forthcoming. There was no history or signs suggestive of post-polio residual paralysis.
On examination she had an abnormal gait with lower limb kept in the attitude of external rotation and abduction while taking each step. Inspection showed a depressed groove over the skin of the buttock running along the course of the gluteus maximus muscle bilaterally, and no skin puckering was observed There was a typical restriction of movement, so that both hips could not be flexed or extended in the usual saggital plane (between 30° to 90°) with the hip in neutral position, adduction was limited and squatting was possible in typical frog leg position . In 0-30° both hips could be flexed in saggital plane but while attempting more flexion there was external rotation and abduction. On flexion of the hip the knee was going to the ipsilateral axilla. However the hip joint could be flexed to 110° in wide abduction (Video 1). Hip rotations were full and free. According to GMC (Gluteal muscle contracture) classification the patient belonged to severe/level III type. Radiographic findings were within normal limit no iliac hyperdense line was seen and fibrosis of postero-inferior fibers of gluteal maximus was seen in MRI.
There was no other associated abnormal contracture of deltoid or quadriceps. No abnormality was detected during spine examination.
Surgical release of bilateral contracture was planned in two separate identical operations for each side with a gap of one week to reduce the operative trauma. The procedures were done through postero-lateral approach with incision extending over the visible skin groove. The skin and subcutaneous tissues are reflected to expose gluteal aponeurosis at its attachment to iliotibial band. A dense fibrotic band extending from the gluteal fascia into the gluteus maximus muscle in the postero-inferior part of the muscle was found. The band was divided after visualization of the sciatic nerve. The hip was progressively flexed in saggital plane intraoperatively to ascertain the effectiveness of release.
No immobilization or traction is given in immediate postoperative period. Patient was encouraged to sit on bed from second postoperative day. The patient was hospitalised till stitch removal (11th post op day) and graduated exercise was begun. There was remarkable recovery with patient able to squat and sit cross-legged within 4 weeks of surgery with hip flexion of 120° and hip adduction being 10° . There was no loss in gained movement till 12 months postoperatively after which the patient was lost to follow up.