Clinical presentation: A 17-year-old boy was reported with a history of persistent headache and recent onset of visual disturbances. Examination revealed bitemporal heteronymous hemianopsia and swelling of the left optic papilla. The remaining neurological exam was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a contrast-enhancing, expansive solid sellar and suprasellar mass with an intermediate signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images, measuring about 2.6 cm × 1.6 cm × 1.5 cm . The mass occupied the sella turcica, extending from the suprasellar cisterna and compressing optic chiasm and chiasmatic recess of the third ventricle. Endocrinological analysis demonstrated mild hyperprolactinemia (31.75 ng/ml, reference: 2.1–17.7 ng/ml), with the other pituitary hormones being normal.
Surgery: The patient was submitted to partial transphenoidal resection of the tumor. The surgical aspect did not differ from that found in a pituitary adenoma, both in consistency, color, as well as in bleeding. The cavity was filled with autologous fat.
Postoperative period: The patient presented no major complications, except for diabetes insipidus detected during the early postoperative period which was completely controlled. Residual tumor was identified, but no tumor recurrence was observed after a follow-up period of 24 months.
Pathological anatomy: Microscopy showed a predominantly fusocellular tumor consisting of pleomorphic cells with a fascicular growth pattern. The cells were characterized by abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, vesiculous nucleo with mild atipia and clearly visible nucleoli. Mitotic figures were occasionally observed .
The material was analyzed by immunohistochemical study. Antibodies against several antigens were tested and are shown in . Most tumor cells were reactive to the cell proliferation antigen Ki-67 and to protein S-100. There was no reaction to the other antigens tested, including glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). According to the criteria proposed by Brat et al., the diagnosis of pituicytoma was thus confirmed.