The patient is a 5-year-old male diagnosed in the first months of life with HGP disease. He was born at 34 + 6 weeks of gestational age but during neonatal period he did not present any pathological feature. Around two months of age, dermatological abnormalities consisting of sclerotic skin and alopecia appeared. A skin biopsy was performed, histopathological findings suggested a progeroid syndrome. The genetic study found a pathogenic mutation in LMNA gene (missense mutation—de novo—c.1822G > A in heterozygosis), as previously reported and described.
He developed phenotypical characteristics of HGP with micrognathia, prominent forehead and thin lips, loss of subcutaneous fat tissue and prominent abdomen, among others. During follow-up, at one year of life he was diagnosed with mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with asymmetric septal hypertrophy, currently asymptomatic. He has subclinical hypothyroidism, and his neurological development is in accordance with his chronological age. He receives Levothyroxine and Fluticasone.
The patient was admitted to the Emergency Department for right hemiparesis of at least 4 h' evolution. Physical examination confirmed limitation to abduction of the right arm without counter-resistance. The right hand shows flexed fingers without opening and the leg claudicates in less than 5 s. Together with a slight decrease in the level of consciousness, these data would configure a pedNIHSS 5–6. The remaining neurological examination and vital signs are normal.
Less than 1 h after arrival, a cranial-CT scan was performed which showed no ischaemic signs (Online resource ) and an angio-CT scan from the neck to the vertex, after conscious sedation with iv Propofol and Iohexol 350 mg l/ml adjusted for age and weight as the contrast medium.
An occlusion is identified in the petrous segment up to the cavernous segment of the left internal carotid artery preceded by a pre-occlusive stenosis in the sub-petrous segment with higher contrast density describing a coiling morphology. Immediately superior to the carotid bulb, a significant stenosis is observed followed by post-stenotic dilatation . No intracranial thrombus or significant atheromatous plaques are identified. (Online resource ).
The overall radiological findings are indicative of carotid artery dissection without associated intracranial thrombus.
The patient was admitted from the Emergency Department and conservative medical treatment with Enoxaparin (dose 1 mg/kg/12 h) and acetylsalicylic acid (5 mg/kg/day) was agreed. Complete blood count, biochemical profile and a basic coagulation study showed no relevant findings. Minimal levels of anti-Xa factor (0.18) were found.
He progressed favorably, with no additional neurological deficits indicative of a new stroke. In the first hours of admission, he recovered mobility of the lower limb, allowing him to stand upright.
Recovery of the right upper limb was more progressive, with resolution of the hand paresis approximately one month after admission. Currently, acetylsalicylic acid is maintained at an antiplatelet dose (40 mg/24 h). At an external center, 2 months after the neurological event, treatment was started on a compassionate use basis with oral Lorafenib.