A six-month-old boy was admitted to the emergency department (ED) at Children’s Hospital in Taif due to vomiting and increased urine output for 3 days. His mother was 23 years of age when he was born, and he was considered healthy at birth. He was full-term born by Lower Segment Cesarian Section to consanguineous parents (second-degree). The birth weight was borderline normal, 2.5 Kg. The postnatal period was uneventful, and the parents did not observe any conditions that occurred among patients with neonatal diabetes.
At the examination, the child showed signs of severe dehydration and had Kussmaul breathing. His temperature was 37.6 °C, heart rate was 155 bpm, respiratory rate was 60 rpm, and blood pressure was 88/57 mmHg. His weight was 7 kg (10-25th percentile) and length 64 cm (third percentile). He had no dysmorphic features. His abdomen was soft, not distended, and he had no organomegaly. The genitourinary examination showed bilateral descended testicles.
Ultrasound revealed structurally normal pancreas and kidneys. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurologic examinations were unremarkable.
Laboratory investigations revealed severe metabolic acidosis with a high anion gap. Venous blood gas was PH 7.0, HCO3 6.6, and base deficit was 24. Complete blood counts were normal, and renal panel and liver function tests were normal in . Urinary ketones and glucose were positive +3, Random Blood Sugar was 30 mmol/L, and hemoglobin A1C was 16.3% (reference range: below 5.7%). Glutamic acid decarboxylase-65 antibody and insulinoma-associated antibody were negative; the fasting C-peptide was 0.7 ng/mL (reference range: 1-3 ng/mL) .
The patient was diagnosed with DKA. The treatment was initiated according to DKA protocol which aim to normalize fluid-volume status, hyperglycemia, electrolytes, and ketoacidosis. Subsequently, intravenous insulin was changed to subcutaneous insulin.
The pedigree of the neonate is shown in , the mother had a twin sister, and both she and her twin sister developed diabetes mellitus at 3 months of age and are on insulin. The twin sister was thought to be identical, but no studies relating to this were performed.
However, the father had normal fasting blood glucose levels.
The genetic test Whole exome sequencing (WES) was carried out by blood sample at research lab and revealed a heterozygous mutation in INS 326G>A (p.C109Y) and a heterozygous mutation in PKHD1 which was reported at the same moment. Efforts to obtain genetic tests of the neonates’ parents and aunt were made but were not successful.
Presently, the patient is on long-acting insulin and short-acting insulin. His most recent HbA1c level is 9.4%, and his current weight is 9.5 kg.