A 57-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with lower abdominal pain in June 2007. Barium enema and colonoscopy revealed an ulcerative tumor in the rectum , which, after biopsy, was diagnosed as a well differentiated adenocarcinoma. Physical examination showed no remarkable abnormalities. Neither hepatomegaly nor splenomegaly was apparent. Serum was negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C antibodies, and the patient had no history of alcohol intake or blood transfusion. Laboratory data on admission, including liver function tests, were unremarkable. The white blood cell (WBC) count was 8,000 cells/μL (neutrophil: 80.7%). Levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), and α-fetoprotein (AFP) were within normal ranges. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a multiple hypoechoic, 1.5-cm diameter mass in the liver. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) were performed, and the results suggested multiple liver metastases. The patient underwent low anterior resection on 25 July 2007.
An ulcerated hard tumor was present in the rectum . Histopathological examination revealed that the tumor consisted of large abnormal cells without gland formation and mucin production . Immunohistochemical studies were positive for cytokeratin and vimentin; however, they were negative for CD45 and PAS. In addition, they were negative for both neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and synaptophysin, and histologic staining with alcian blue was also negative. Therefore, we diagnosed this case to be an undifferentiated carcinoma of the rectum. A small component of well-differentiated adenocarcinoma was also seen on the surface of the tumor . Thus, we thought that we diagnosed this tumor as well-differentiated adenocarcinoma at biopsy. Advanced lymphatic vessel and venous invasion were observed. Lymph node metastasis was also detected near the tumor, but peritoneal dissemination was not detected. After the operation, the WBC count gradually increased. Modified-FOLFOX6 (mFOLFOX6) therapy was initiated to treat the liver metastases, but it had no effect, and peritoneal dissemination occurred. Along with the growth of the tumor, the WBC count increased to 81,000 cells/μL (neutrophil: 87%). On the other hand, in comparison to the grade of leukocytosis, CRP level was not so high (6.5 mg/dl), and there were not any obvious signs of infection, so we suspected that this tumor produced G-CSF, and we measured serum G-CSF using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The serum level of G-CSF was elevated to 840 pg/mL (normal range, <18.1 pg/mL). Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining with a specific monoclonal antibody against human G-CSF (11041, IBL, Gunma, Japan) was performed. G-CSF was positive in the cytoplasm of undifferentiated carcinoma cells , but negative in the non-cancerous lesion and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma cells . Unfortunately, we couldn't obtain biopsy specimens from the liver tumor. But, G-CSF was positive in metastatic lymph nodes, so we thought that G-CSF was also positive in the liver tumor. Therefore, we concluded that this tumor was a G-CSF-producing cancer. The patient died from rapid growth of the liver metastases and peritoneal dissemination 2 months after surgery.