We describe the case of a 54 year old, non-smoker, Caucasian woman, a computer programmer, who was admitted to the General Hospital in June 2003, following an episode of overdose with Citalopram and alcohol. At the time of her admission, she gave a history of depression and suicidal ideation for six months. She was not known to the local psychiatric service.
The patient was discovered by her twin sister soon after the overdose. Initially, she had disclosed to the medical doctor admitting her that she had taken approximately 14 tablets of 20 mgs of Citalopram along with 2 bottles of red wine. However, later on she informed us that she might have taken up to 30 tablets of 20 mgs Citalopram. The actual amount ingested remains unclear.
Soon after her admission, she complained of painful left eye with blurred vision, and was seen by the Ophthalmologist, who found that our patient had an intra-ocular pressure of 23 mmHg in the right eye and 60 mmHg of mercury in the left eye (Normal IOP-10–20 mm Hg), with left corneal edema, and fixed dilated pupils. She was not hypermetripic and had averaged sized eyes. She was noted to have shallow anterior chambers (central and peripheral depth not available) in both of her eyes. A diagnosis of left angle-closure glaucoma was made and medications were commenced to reduce the elevated IOP. Further investigations including routine blood investigations revealed no abnormalities. Her pulse rate and blood pressure were normal. She had a blood alcohol level of 85 mgs/dl (Less than 10 indicates safe levels and 50–100 indicates toxic levels). Her blood test did not reveal any detectable levels paracetamol or salicylates.
With regard to her background history, there was previous episode of overdose with paracetamol tablets in 1978. There was no history suggestive of physical illness, and specifically, no history of previous eye problems. There was no family history of eye related conditions. In December 2002, her general practitioner had diagnosed her to be suffering from depression with harmful misuse of alcohol, and commenced her on Citalopram 20 mgs daily. Later, she informed us that she had not taken any of this prescribed medication prior to her overdose and had only been taking Estrogens, given for hormone replacement (Prempak-C).
Approximately 48 hours after the overdose, on examination of her eyes, she was found to have left subhyaloid and retinal hemorrhages. After 72 hours, the visual acuity in the right eye was 6/9 and hand movements in the left eye. The intraocular pressures were reasonably controlled and she had bilateral Yag laser iridotomies. Subsequently, she was discharged to the local psychiatric unit as she continued to express suicidal thoughts and was low in mood. Apart from receiving treatment for her eye problems at the general hospital, she was commenced on a reducing regime of chlordiazepoxide for her alcohol dependence. On discharge from the general hospital, she was advised to continue on Timolol, pilocarpine and dexamethasone eye drops for further 14 days.
She remained free of anti-depressants and her mood improved gradually in the absence of alcohol. After 14 days, her visual acuity was noted to be 6/18 in the left eye, which improved to 6/12 on pinhole. Her ocular condition was noted to be stable. Her ocular pressures were 14 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye, but still had retinal hemorrhages on the left eye, with a clearing vitreous hemorrhage.
She was followed-up by the Ophthalmologists and discharged from the psychiatric hospital after 4 weeks with further community support.
In August 2004, her right eye visual acuity was noted to be 6/9, which improved to 6/6 with pinhole and her left eye vision was 6/24, which did not improve with pinhole. She had a left afferent papillary deficit. The pre-retinal and retinal hemorrhages had cleared, but she still had some residual vitreous hemorrhage. Her right eye Intra-ocular pressure was 18 mmHg and left was 19 mmHg without any treatment. She is reviewed by the local eye clinic every six months.