A 42-year-old female with breast cancer had a chemo-port inserted in June 2022. This was used for 6 cycles of chemotherapy, after which the port could not be flushed. A chest radiograph revealed that the chemo-port catheter tubing had displaced with one end in the hepatic vein and the other end in the right side of the heart. She presented to our institution for removal of the catheter fragment and was otherwise asymptomatic. A contrast enhanced CT chest and abdomen was carried out demonstrating the displaced catheter fragment with one end in the middle hepatic vein and the other end in the right atrial appendage .
Percutaneous retrieval was performed as follows: under local anesthesia and ultrasound guidance, the right common femoral vein was punctured and a 12 Fr 28 cm sheath (Sentrant introducer sheath, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) inserted into the inferior vena cava. A 20 mm Gooseneck snare (Amplatz Gooseneck snare, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was inserted and a 5 Fr angled pigtail catheter (Alvision, Alvimedica, Istanbul, Turkey) inserted through this, using the previously described “pigtail through snare” technique. Attempts were made to free an end of the displaced catheter fragment, however, the pigtail catheter kept unfolding over the displaced catheter fragment. The pigtail catheter was then removed and placed side by side with the snare catheter. With the pigtail catheter in place over the displaced catheter fragment , a hydrophilic glidewire (Blackeel hydrophilic glidewire, APT Medical, P. R. China) was advanced through the pigtail catheter and the free end of the wire snared . Since the wire could not be very firmly grasped and pulled by the snare because of its hydrophilic coating, it was held in place by the snare and the pigtail catheter and snare catheter pulled to create a free end of the displaced catheter fragment . The end of the displaced catheter fragment that was in the right atrium was freed and dropped into the inferior vena cava . The snare that was used to hold the wire was released and used to snare the free end of the displaced catheter fragment . The pigtail catheter was then removed from the sheath followed by the snare catheter with the catheter fragment . Haemostasis was achieved by manual compression.