A 55-year-old Chinese male was referred to the urology department of our hospital with a six months’ history of right testis enlargement, which had worsened in the past few days. There were no specific symptoms of fever, dysuria, osphyalgia, hematuria and impotence. He denied history of cryptorchidism, testicular traumas, varicocele, or prior scrotal surgery. On physical examination, there were no lymphadenopathy, anaemia, or gynaecomastia except for the swelling in the right testis. Swelling was non-tender and hard. However, admission laboratory investigations were entirely normal, including tumor markers, such as eta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) and alpha fetoprotein (AFP).
A scrotal ultrasound (US) examination revealed bilateral testicular hydrocele and a well-defined 4.9 × 3.0 × 4.1 cm hypoechoic, heterogeneous mass in the middle of right testicle with internal rich flow on color Doppler . The left testicle, as well as the bilateral epididymis were normal. Given the large size, heterogeneous echo and abundant blood supply, the nodule was suspected to be malignant. Thus, the patient was sent for further work-up and evaluation with abdominal US and computed tomography (CT) scan. The results of chest CT and abdominal US were normal. On the pelvic CT images, there was a right testicular mass with heterogeneous density and enhancement, without pelvic lymphadenopathy or other sites of metastasis .
The patient underwent a right radical orchiectomy and the tumor measured 4.2 × 3.1 × 2.7 cm, without involvement of the adjacent spermatic cord or epididymis. The cut section was an intratesticular whitish-red firm nodule, mixed with hemorrhage and liquefactive necrosis. Microscopically, the neoplasm presented a tubular pattern with regular nuclei and embedded in a densely collagenous stroma . No mitosis, or vascular invasion was detected to suggest malignant biological behavior. Immunohistochemical staining revealed the tumor cells are positive with vimentin, PCK, CD117, β-catenin, synaptophysin, S-100, P53 , while negative with PLAP, Her-2, CD99, EMA, CR, α-inhibin, chromogranin A, Melan A. Ki-67 was 10%. The histomorphology and immunstains results favor the diagnosis of SSCT. The post-operative condition was stable. After 7 months of follow up, no evidence of local recurrence and metastasis has been observed by US and laboratory examination.