In mid-August 2013, a 58-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to our medical unit because of a hemorrhagic stroke with right-sided hemiparesis and fever. He was married and had two sons, had been employed at an electrical company, and had recently retired. He was an amateur marathon runner, covering about 5000km annually. The previous April he had taken part in a half-marathon, finishing fifth. His medical history was negative for cardiac symptoms or metabolic diseases. He had undergone a nasal polypectomy 7 years earlier and occasionally suffered from rhinitis and mild asthma, using low to middle doses of corticosteroids (prednisone 12.5 to 25mg per day) in periods of exacerbation on a self-prescribed basis. A neurological examination showed right-sided hemiparesis, particularly of his lower limb. He complained of tension headaches and an inability to maintain a standing posture. In the emergency area, a head computed tomography (CT) scan showed spontaneous hyperdensity of a hemorrhagic nature within his cisternal space adjacent to his medulla and the interpeduncular cistern; small hypoxic areas in his left corona radiata and insula were also reported . A chest CT scan also revealed multiple bilateral pulmonary infiltrates with ground-glass appearance localized in the apex of both upper lobes, in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe, and in the posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe. Surprisingly, calcifications in his coronary artery, and his carotid and left vertebral arteries, were also observed. On admission, laboratory tests revealed the presence of increased serum concentrations of inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein 7.85mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 35mm/hour) and leukocytosis (13.84103μL white blood cells, WBC) with neutrophilia (9.62×103μL, 80.5%). Because of the pulmonary framework, empiric antimicrobial therapy with cephalosporins (ceftazidime 6g/day intravenous) was promptly undertaken. Given the immobilization, and as prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) was introduced. Over the following days, several head CT scans showed a regression of the hemorrhagic framework, and confirmed the hypoxic areas in his left corona radiata and insula consistent with acute ischemic lesion . The latter finding was confirmed by head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Figure D) and magnetic resonance angiography, showing a hematic effusion within the lateral ventricles on a fluid attenuated inversion recovery sequence and, moreover, several punctiform ischemic lesions predominantly sided in the subcortical areas of his cerebral hemispheres, and another ischemic lesion in correspondence to the corona radiata and the insula. Intracranial vascular malformations and other abnormalities were excluded. Subsequently, a chest CT scan showed a worsening of the pulmonary framework. As a result, antimicrobial therapy was modified with the introduction of teicoplanin plus levofloxacin and corticosteroids (betamethasone 4mg/day intravenous). A new blood cell count revealed increased values of inflammatory markers with leukocytosis (17.49×103μL WBC), characterized by a surprising rise in eosinophilic cells to 5.7×103μL (32.8%). Furthermore, high levels of serum immunoglobulin E (3721mg/dL) were found. Because of the minute ischemic lesions revealed by head MRI, and to rule out a cardiogenic thromboembolism, on the 6th day ultrasonic cardiography was done, but was negative. The day after, angiography was performed in order to exclude supra-aortic vessels thrombosis and coronary disease because the previous chest CT scan had revealed the presence of coronary calcifications (the electrocardiogram was normal). The supra-aortic vessels were free of relevant lesions but, surprisingly, the coronary arteries had diffuse dilatations and stenosis with severe signs of endothelial damage. In particular, angiography demonstrated extensive and severe parietal alterations throughout the course of the left coronary artery, obstructed at the end of the second section, extensive and severe parietal alterations of the left circumflex artery with moderate distal stenosis. and right coronary artery critical stenosis with diffuse and severe alterations throughout its course . Such an unexpected framework of endothelial damage induced a strong suspicion that the stroke was the expression of a systemic vasculitis, which had triggered the cerebral, coronary, and pulmonary frameworks. The further increase in circulating eosinophil cells (42.6%, 7.4×103μL) led us to search for ANCA, which was positive for perinuclear-ANCA (p-ANCA; 1:200; reference value <1:20). A peripheral blood smear showed no presence of circulating blast cells.
A bone marrow aspiration was done to exclude a lymphoproliferative disorder, and revealed an increase in eosinophilic granulocytic series, with normal morphology in all stages of growth . A search for the Abr/Bcl gene was negative. A nasal mucus membrane biopsy showed no significant alterations. Urinary sediment analysis resulted in no relevant findings, nor did a renal artery ultrasonography examination or the indirect evaluation of intrarenal resistances (intrarenal resistance index and pulsatility index).
With reference to the American College of Rheumatology criteria , and because of the concomitance of pulmonary infiltrates, central nervous system involvement, blood eosinophilia, prior history of pulmonary asthma and nasal polyposis, and p-ANCA positivity, EGPA was diagnosed. Explaining to the patient the rarity of his disease, and what the most typical presentations of EGPA were, he revealed that because of the onset of scalp injuries in the nuchal region he had taken prednisone 12.5mg as self-medication for the 5 days preceding admission, with the disappearance of the lesions. Therefore, high-dose corticosteroid treatment was started (prednisone 1mg/kg per day), with a prompt regression of blood eosinophilia and respiratory symptoms, another factor supporting our diagnosis. He was discharged after 22 days of hospitalization, in good clinical condition, able to ambulate, and with a slight right-sided hyposthenia. As regards his follow-up, it was done on an out-patient basis at our department, with the aim of gradually reducing the corticosteroid dose, and tapering it to the maintenance dose. Two months after discharge, he was still in good clinical condition: the neurological impairment was greatly reduced and consisted only of a slight right-sided hyposthenia of his lower limb. There were no respiratory or cardiovascular symptoms, his WBC count was normal, and our advice was to remain under our observation for at least 2 years.