A 39-year-old otherwise healthy woman was diagnosed with breast cancer by mammography and underwent breast-conserving surgery and axillary lymph node biopsy for node-negative breast cancer in December 2011. The patient recovered without postoperative sequelae via conventional treatment, including antibiotics and exercise, during the postoperative period.
During the breast-conserving surgery, we performed cavity margin assessments to achieve margin clearance . However, on the 17th day after the first surgery, the patient had to undergo secondary breast surgery on only the breast, without lymph-node dissection, to achieve negative margins by excising seven margins. This was because the postoperative pathology report indicated a diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in situ; however, only two of the five margins excised in the first surgery were diagnosed with ductal carcinoma in situ, whereas two were diagnosed with severe atypical hyperplasia. Three days after the secondary breast surgery, the patient complained of severe pain in the ipsilateral axilla and interior aspect of the arm after shoulder abduction and a subcutaneous cord-like structure in the axilla.
A physical examination found visible and palpable cords (string-like) extending from the axilla to the medial arm on ipsilateral shoulder abduction . No erythema, warmth or any other inflammatory signs were observed in the patient. The patient complained of severe pain when abducting her left shoulder and her shoulder ROM was reduced from 175° (preoperative) to 90°, as measured by a goniometer. She gave her pain a score of 7 using the Visual Analogue Scale, which is quick, reliable and valid for measuring pain and pain relief [,]. During follow-up, the patient complained that the cords had extended to the elbow and the ipsilateral upper outer quadrant of the breast, and her thoracoabdominal wall was also involved . Numbness and tightness were present during the entire follow-up. B-type ultrasonography indicated that the subcutaneous cords that radiated from the axilla to the medial arm presented an obvious blood flow signal on color Doppler flow imaging, which proved that the cord-like structure was a blood vessel , whereas the cords that radiated to the breast and thoracoabdominal wall presented the same echo of subcutaneous tissue as the contralateral thoracoabdominal wall without cords.
Because the patient complained of severe pain and limited shoulder ROM, we treated her with 300 mg of Aescuven Forte twice a day for one week and advised her to perform shoulder exercises, including abducting the shoulder and massaging the cord-like structure for 30 minutes every day in the morning and at bedtime as soon as the AWS occurred. After two weeks of follow-up, the patient presented with pain-free shoulder abduction, a ROM of 150°, and cords that had become smaller and not as significant. Three weeks later, the patient returned for a physical examination and could abduct her shoulder, with a ROM of 170°, without any pain. However, numbness and tightness were still present but somewhat diminished. The cords were invisible and non-palpable.