The patient is a 36-year-old Hispanic man, originally from Cuba and now residing in the USA, with hypertension and ESRD secondary to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis who had been undergoing hemodialysis for the past two years using a right radiocephalic fistula. He presented to a community hospital complaining of excruciating, constant, bilateral pain in both legs below the knees and the left forearm. He described the pain as dull and aching with periods of sharp non-radiating pain that required treatment with high dose narcotics. A 99mTc bone scan performed on initial presentation showed bilateral symmetric uptake in the proximal tibia and distal femur, increased uptake in the metacarpophalangeal joints of the left hand, and bilateral radial and ulnar uptake. The axial skeleton and ribs were not involved. Although these findings were consistent with a metabolic rather than an inflammatory or infectious process and all blood cultures were negative, he received intravenous vancomycin and gentamycin for presumed osteomyelitis because he had undergone laparascopic cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitits and gram-negative sepsis four weeks prior to this admission. After 12 days of treatment our patient's pain had progressed in intensity and he transferred his care to our facility.
Our patient's past medical history was significant for focal segmental glomerulosclerosis leading to ESRD, hypertension, a seizure disorder, anemia of chronic disease, and SHPT. His medications included nifedipine, metoprolol, levetiracetam, cetirizine, calcium acetate, and cinacalcet; the latter had been started four weeks prior to the admission when our patient's intact PTH concentration in the serum was 750 pg/ml. The patient was now taking 30 mg daily.
At the time he presented to our institution our patient's pain continued. It was associated with fasciculations of the face and extremities, intermittent fevers, generalized weakness, and diarrhea. Physical examination showed a blood pressure of 170/95, heart rate of 105 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 per minute, temperature of 38.4°C, and 99% oxygen saturation on room air. Otherwise, his examination was only remarkable for muscle fasciculations in the face and upper extremities and a functioning right radiocephalic fistula.
Laboratory data revealed a white blood cell count of 5.8 × 103/μL (6 × 109/L) with normal differential, hemoglobin 11.6 g/dL (116 g/L), and platelets 267 × 103/μL (267 × 109/L). Serum chemistries were significant for blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 60 mg/dL (21.4 mmol/L), creatinine 11.1 mg/dL (846 μmol/L), calcium 8.7 mg/dL (2.17 mmol/L), ionized calcium 1.06 mEq/L (0.53 mmol/L), phosphorus 6.8 mg/dL (2.2 mmol/L), albumin 3.3 g/dL (33 g/L), alkaline phosphatase 465IU/L, PTH 659 pg/ml (659 ng/L). A Doppler ultrasound of the upper extremity did not reveal a deep venous thrombosis. X-rays of our patient's legs and left arm did not reveal any pathology.
Pain control was attempted with intravenous morphine but remained suboptimal. Given his intermittent fevers, blood cultures and stool studies were requested, and a bone scan was ordered to evaluate for osteomyelitis. All blood cultures remained negative, but stool studies were positive for Clostridium difficile toxin. Based on the clinical picture, a presumptive diagnosis of pseudomembranous colitis due to use of broad-spectrum antibiotics was made, and he was subsequently treated with oral metronidazole leading to resolution of his fevers. The 99mTc bone-scan again showed an abnormal pattern of uptake involving symmetric bilateral upper and lower extremities with no involvement of the axial skeleton . With the intent to perform a bone biopsy a computed tomography scan of our patient's lower extremities was performed, which did not reveal any focal findings. Similarly, magnetic resonance imaging of his lower extremities showed a preserved bony cortex with no focal findings.
Several metabolic conditions were considered to explain the 99mTc uptake pattern . However, the clinical presentation of our patient was inconsistent with any of the most plausible diagnoses, such as Paget's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, hypervitaminosis D, or osteomalacia. Our patient underwent hemodialysis three times weekly using a bicarbonate-based dialysate with a calcium concentration of 1.25 mmol/L. He achieved an adequate clearance, as measured by a Kt/V of 1.2 or greater, making uremic neuropathy an unlikely explanation, and his neurological examination did not suggest a neuropathic picture, which is why nerve conduction studies were not performed. Similarly, renal osteodystrophy appeared unlikely given the very symmetrical uptake. Given that calcium-sensing receptors have been reported to be present in bone, we hypothesized that cinacalcet may have caused increased osteoblastic activity, and consequently cinacalcet was stopped on day eight of hospitalization. Two days after discontinuation our patient's pain resolved and he was weaned off all analgesia. Muscle fasciculation also resolved in the absence of any change in ionized calcium, which had remained normal. Vitamin D analogues were prescribed for the management of his secondary hyperparathyroidism at discharge. A repeat bone scan six weeks later showed none of the abnormalities seen on the previous studies . His PTH had decreased and the serum calcium stayed normal. At his six-week follow-up visit after discharge, he remained pain free.