A sixty-five year old female patient was admitted to the outpatient clinic with a lesion on her tongue, which had been present for 1 year but had enlarged in the last 3-4 months. During her physical examination, a cauliflower shaped mass with a 1 cm diameter was observed in the midline of the tongue. Due to suspected malignancy, large total excision was performed on the mass. During microscopic evaluation, well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma was diagnosed, which was superficially acantho- tic, hyperkeratotic, and papilloma- tosis. In addition, it was invading the dermis in some places and consisted of atypical squamous cells in a few areas where it was invading the dermis as free squamous islands .
Inside the connective tissue under the squamous cell carcinoma, a different infiltration consisting of polygonal cells with oval-spherical small nuclei and large granular cytoplasms, forming solid layers was observed .
During immunohistochemical evaluation of these cells, it was observed that they were diffuse and strongly positive with S-100 and neuron-specific enolase (NSE), but only faintly positive with CD68.
During histochemical evaluation, the cytoplasmic granules of these cells were positive for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and resistant to diastase. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 1% in GCT, although nuclear positive staining was observed on all epithelial thickness of in situ and invasive foci of squamous cell carcinoma .
However, a limited Ki-67 staining was observed only on the basal-parabasal layers of the pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia foci around the squamous cell carcinoma. During immunohistochemical evaluation of squamous cell carcinoma using P63, a similar staining pattern was observed with Ki-67 .
In GCT neither pleomorphism, nor mitosis, nor increase in cellularity or necrosis were determined. According to both morphological and immunohistochemical findings, the case was diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma developing on a granular cell tumor. Cervical lymph node was not detected by physical examination and ultrasonographic examination.
The chest X-ray was reported as normal. The patient underwent operation in the clinical stage of T1N0M0. The tumor close to the surgical margins was receding. Surgical intervention was performed under general anesthesia.
The tumor was re-excised; leaving a surgical safety margin of 1 cm from all directions to the previous surgical area . After a 3-month follow-up of the patient, no recurrence was observed.