A three-month old female baby of Yoruba ethnicity presented to our Eye Clinic with gradually progressive left proptosis and a white spot noticed in her left eye from birth. She was the product of full-term pregnancy and normal vaginal delivery. She had no significant family history and an examination revealed an infant in good general health condition. She had left non-axial proptosis; a tense orbit; keratinized, hazy cornea; and inadequate lid closure. There were no masses palpable in her orbit. Ultrasonography revealed a 23mm superotemporal cystic mass with membranous speckled content in her left orbit, with a 9mm retro-ocular extension. Her left globe was distorted and irregular, but no intra-ocular mass was seen. Ocular axial length measurement with an amplitude modulation scan and computed tomography were not done due to financial constraints. She was scheduled for a detailed examination including intra-ocular pressure measurement, exophthalmometry and simple tumor excision under general anesthesia. The parents, however, defaulted.
Our patient re-presented two years later with continued slowly progressive non-axial proptosis, worsening inadequate lid closure, corneal opacity and a keratinized ocular surface. A computed tomographic scan done at this time showed a huge, non-enhancing mixed density mass with areas of calcification. Her orbit was enlarged, with thinned walls, but no bone destruction was seen (Figure a,b). She subsequently underwent lid-sparing orbital exenteration, with dissection up to the periosteum, thereby preventing disruption of the sac of the cyst.
On gross pathologic examination her eyeball was surrounded by fibroadipose tissue and an extra-ocular tumor located posteriorly, measuring about 3×2×2cm in size. A cut section of the tumor revealed a cystic cavity containing hair shaft admixed with thick yellowish material and firm to hard tissue. Microscopic examination showed a cyst containing keratin material in the lumen, lined by keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Sebaceous and sweat glands and hair follicles were associated with the wall (Figure a). The cell wall also had dystrophic calcification with ossification and included adipocytic cells (Figure b).