A 46 year-old female of Cantonese (Southern Chinese) descent presented with a four-month history of left sided hearing loss and non-pulsatile tinnitus without vertigo, associated with progressive ipsilateral facial weakness. Left ear otoscopy revealed a red-hued mass replacing the tympanic membrane . She had a left facial palsy, initially House-Brackmann (HB) 2 which deteriorated rapidly to HB 6 over 2 weeks. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy nor other neurological deficits. Fibreoptic nasoendoscopy was unremarkable. Pure tone audiometry revealed profound mixed left hearing loss with type B tympanogram.
Computed tomography (CT) of the temporal bone showed a left middle ear mass with partial erosion of the malleus, incus, tegmen tympani and facial canal . The involved tegmen showed permeative changes. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed an avidly enhancing lesion (2.0 cm × 2.7 cm) extending into the left middle cranial fossa with involvement of the dura. This mass also extended into the left internal acoustic canal (IAC) apex and basal turn of the cochlea, with further involvement of the geniculate ganglion, tympanic and labyrinthine portions of the facial nerve. . A PET-CT further confirmed primary tumor centered in the left middle ear, without FDG-avidity in the nasopharynx or distant sites.
The patient underwent a transcanal biopsy and histopathology is shown in Fig. . Histopathology revealed nests of large cohesive epithelioid tumor associated with dense lymphocytic infiltrate and marked nuclear atypia, consistent with undifferentiated/poorly differentiated lymphoepithelial-like carcinoma . On immunohistochemistry, EBV-encoded RNAs (EBER) was diffusely expressed . Given the rarity of primary middle ear LEC, a post-nasal space biopsy was performed to exclude a nasopharyngeal primary, which returned negative for malignancy.
Correlating imaging features illustrating middle ear tumor epicentre, a diagnosis of primary middle ear LEC was made. Multidisciplinary head and neck tumor board review recommended for CCRT in view of anticipated radio-sensitivity and locally advanced disease with intracranial involvement. This is in line with treatment guidelines for nasopharyngeal carcinoma, where locally advanced disease is treated with a combination of chemotherapy and radiation . Our patient underwent intensity modulated RT (70Gy over 33 fractions) and 3 cycles of concurrent cisplatin, which was well tolerated. Serum EBV DNA decreased from < 265 copies/ml at diagnosis to undetectable levels following treatment. At 7 weeks post-treatment, there was otoscopic resolution of the tumor . Follow up imaging was consistent with treatment effect . At latest follow up (18-months post-treatment), facial nerve function has partially recovered to HB 4, and the patient remains disease-free.