A 3 year old boy presented with oral discomfort that developed almost immediately after he ate sunflower seeds for the first time. He was given a dose of diphenhydramine. Subsequently he vomited, and his symptoms gradually resolved.
Some weeks later he was given a snack bar made with sunflower seed “butter”, and after a small bite, vomited, complained of discomfort of his mouth and tongue, and seemed sleepier than usual. Parents monitored him at home and no medication was given. They sought an allergy consultation to assess for possibility of sunflower seed allergy.
This child has an older sibling with confirmed peanut allergy (PNA). After the PNA diagnosis was made, the family home became peanut-free. In lieu of peanut butter, sunflower butter was purchased and eaten frequently by family members, but not by the child reported herein. However, he had been consuming sunflower oil for several years without incident. He had also eaten whole sesame seeds and flaxseed. He had a history of mild infantile atopic dermatitis, which had improved over time.
Subsequent to the episodes above, the child ate a bread roll with visible poppy seeds and developed itchy throat and dyspnea. Parents administered an epinephrine auto-injector and brought him to the emergency department, where he developed facial urticaria. He was monitored and discharged home after an uneventful period of observation.
Epicutaneous skin (prick) testing demonstrated a large positive (10 mm wheal) wheal-and-flare response to a slurry of fresh sunflower seed within 3–4 minutes associated with severe pruritus. A diagnosis was made of sunflower seed allergy and recommendations given for strict avoidance and availability of an epinephrine auto-injector at all times. A similar reaction (>10 mm wheal size within 3–4 minutes) was observed in response to epicutaneous testing with a slurry of whole poppy seeds. A smaller reaction (8 mm wheal size) was observed to fresh pumpkin seed, which had never been consumed. Parents were counseled with regards to avoidance of all seeds, and declined skin testing with mustard seed.