A 69-year-old Mexican male was referred to the Maxillofacial Surgery Department of the "Hospital Regional Primero de Octubre (ISSSTE)" in Mexico City. The patient had pain in the maxillar right-canine region and a three-day swelling of the submental and submandibular regions. The clinical examination showed pain during palpation, tachycardia, and hyperthermia (39°C). The bilateral submental and submandibular regions had a 10-cm diameter swelling and well-delimitated erythematous, hyperthermia, crepitant sound, and a positive Godet sign. After a three-hour evolution, a blister surrounded by a 4-cm diameter necrotic area could be detected . After an eight-hour evolution, the original diameter of the necrotic area had doubled . An intraoral examination showed mobility and third-degree caries of the mandibular right canine. The patient had a history of diabetes mellitus type II, moderate malnutrition, chronic alcoholism, and hepatic disease. Laboratory studies provided the following relevant results: hemoglobin, 11.1 g/dL; hematocrit, 31.4%; leukocytes, 15 × 103/dL of blood, whose differential count was as follows, (neutrophils, 12.72 × 103; lymphocytes, 0.85 × 103; monocytes, 0.83 × 103; eosinophils, 0.45 × 103; basophils, 0.14 × 103; platelets, 78 × 103); glycemia, 185 mg/dL; calcium, 6.49 mg/dL; phosphorus, 2.68 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.76 mg/dL; total protein, 5.2 mg/dL; albumin, 2.4 mg/dL; total bilirubin, 7.3 mg/dL; prothrombin time (PT), 17.2 sec. A bacteriological culture isolated streptococcus pyogenes and staphylococcus aureus. The final diagnosis was odontogenic necrotizing fasciitis of the submental and submandibular regions, which was corroborated by a trans-surgical biopsy of the affected area.
Aggressive surgical debridement was made 8 hours and 24 hours after the patient's admission. Both submandibular glandules and the suprahyoideus and infrahyoideus muscles were exposed. At this time, the dimensions of the postsurgical wound were 10.5 × 7.3 cm (area = 76.7 cm2). The antibiotics administered were ceftriaxone (2 g, IV, every 24 h), clindamycin (600 mg, IV, every 6 h), and amikacin (500 mg, IV, every 12 h). Consecutive bacteriological cultures were made until the results were negative. The decision for the treatment of the surgical wound with GF-enriched autologous plasma to promote tissue regeneration was made considering the systemic condition of the patient (diabetes, liver failure, normocytic anemia, hypocalcaemia, malnutrition, hyperbilirubinemia, decompensate respiratory alkalosis, and confusional syndrome).
The GF-enriched plasma was obtained from 15 mL of the patient's peripheral blood as described elsewere [,]. This volume was divided equally into 5 sterile tubes containing 0.5 mL of 3.8% sodium citrate as an anticoagulant. After centrifugation at 1800 rpm for 8 minutes at room temperature, the plasma had divided into three fractions of about equal volume. The upper fraction is plasma poor in GFs, the middle fraction is plasma with a medium concentration of GFs, and the lower portion is plasma rich in platelets and GFs . The lower portion was collected from all 5 tubes and pooled into one sterile tube. To induce platelet degranulation, fifty μL of 10% CaCl2 solution was added for each mL of platelets and GFs enriched plasma and the mixture was gently stirred to allow it to gel [,]. Finally, a total volume of 2 × mL of the gel fraction containing GF-enriched plasma, with pink-yellow color, was separated from the fraction of platelet rich plasma (translucent color) . Approximately 1.5 mL of the gel fraction was directly applied in the center of the wound and then manually spread to cover the total area of the surgical wound. This procedure was repeated every third day until the completion of the wound healing . The local application of GF-enriched autologous plasma caused tissue repair in a considerably reduced time . The nonlinear analysis of the temporal course of wound healing determined the concentric regeneration period was within weeks 0 to 3 and the healing process period was within weeks 4 to 6. A mixed period of regeneration and healing extended from 15 to 25 days. The time required to achieve 50% closing of the surgical wound was 12 days and the total closure was reached at week 6 after the onset of the GF-enriched autologous plasma treatment .