Repeated vaginal leakage was found for 6 years.
On June 10, 2018, a 6-year-old girl was admitted to our Hospital due to prolonged vaginal leakage since birth. The girl was previously treated in several hospitals. Considering that the child was young, no further definite diagnosis was made.
The history of chronic diseases, myocardial infarction, cerebral infarction, stroke and mental illness, and infectious diseases were denied. The history of surgery, trauma and blood transfusion were also denied.
The history of family special diseases were denied.
No morphological abnormality of the vulva, no obvious redness in the external orifice of the urethra, and no obvious secretion in vagina and urethra were observed. The vaginal orifice was moist, and a small amount of liquid, which was clear and accompanied by urine odor, flew out every minute.
Blood routine examination, liver and kidney function and coagulation function were basically within the normal range. Serum infectious disease antigen test result was negative. Urine routine examination showed leukocyte 2 +, occult blood +, and nitrite -.
Intravenous: pyelography (IVP) suggested a bilateral duplex kidney . Magnetic resonance urography (MRU) indicated multiple lesions in the upper pole of the right kidney, pelvic effusion, double pelvis, and double ureter duplication . Moreover, abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) combined with CT urethrography (64 slices) suggested the presence of bilateral duplex kidneys (double pelvis, ureter). A right upper duplication of ureteropelvic malformation with full course of dilatation (cystic dilatation of the pelvic segment) was shown, and the end of the malformed pelvic ureter leaked into the vagina . Urocystoscopy (7.5 Fr) revealed that the only ureteral opening was on both sides of the urethral crest and normal urine spurted from both sides of the opening. A catheter was indwelled and 300 mL methylene blue diluted solution were then injected into the bladder. No obvious blue staining was observed in vaginal leakage within 30 min.