A 48-year-old woman presented to the gynecology clinic with irregular vaginal bleeding that started one month ago (in November 2020). Her regular period had stopped in 2016 after adding cyclophosphamide to treat iRPF, and this completely stopped her menstrual cycle until irregular vaginal bleeding was observed after the removal of tamoxifen from her treatment in 2020. The patient reported no abdominal pain, bloating, discomfort, or other urologic manifestations such as frequency urination, hematuria, and dysuria. She also had no history of obesity (body mass index with 20.7 kg/m2), diabetes, hypertension, or family history of cancer, but a long-term use of tamoxifen for almost 11 years. The patient had a 13-year history of iRPF which was diagnosed in Peking Union Medical College Hospital after splenectomy, which was performed following symptoms of fever, increased abdominal pain accompanied by anemia, splenomegaly, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in abdominal cavity and retroperitoneum. Her right kidney atrophied and presented with hydronephrosis in unison. Laboratory tests showed hemoglobin (Hb) 87 g/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 57 mm/h, and antinuclear antibody (ANA) positive 1:160. After surgery, she began taking prednisone and tamoxifen on doctor’s advice. During the period of using prednisone, the patient received regular monitoring follow-ups including inflammatory indicators including ESR and C-reactive protein (CRP) and imaging (ultrasound). These indicators were stable thus the dosage of prednisone was gradually reduced and stopped after 2 years in order to avoid side effects (in 2010). Since 2011, the patient was prescribed tamoxifen alone for maintenance treatment of iRPF. In 2016, her imaging showed multiple retroperitoneal lymph node enlargement and the inflammatory indicators (ESR and CRP) were elevated. In addition to tamoxifen, cyclophosphamide was added to prevent the progression of iRPF. She stopped taking her medication all together from October 2019 to May 2020 as a personal choice. Then she started taking tamoxifen again until November 2020 when the endometrium was found thick. Two weeks later she stopped taking tamoxifen, she presented with irregular vaginal bleeding for 20 days without abdominal pain. Physical examination of the uterus and bilateral appendages was unremarkable. Transvaginal gynecological ultrasound revealed a thick endometrium (11 mm) with uneven echo enhancement and some blood flow signals, and there was no clear boundary between the endometrium and myometrium. Multiple fibroids with clear borders were detected in the uterus, and the blood flow signal was not rich. No ascites, pelvic fluid or other imaging abnormalities were found. Additionally, the levels of tumor markers such as CA125, CA199, CEA, and NSE were all within the normal range. Therefore, diagnostic curettage was performed, and pathological examination of endometrium showed well-moderately differentiated endometroid carcinoma and it could be classified in POLE hypermutation subgroup based on the TCGA molecular classification. Also, the immunohistochemistry (IHC) results showed P53 (wild type), MLH1-positive, MSH2-positive, MSH6-positive and PMS2-positive. Later, the patient was admitted to Peking University Third Hospital for surgery.
The results of preoperative laboratory tests are presented below . Both CT and MRI revealed thickened endometrium and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the pelvis, which suggested great possibilities of endometrial cancer with lymph node metastasis . Abdominal ultrasound showed severe right hydronephrosis and right ureter dilatation. CT urography (CTU) enhancement demonstrated right urinary tract dilatation, right hydronephrosis and hydroureter, right kidney atrophy and stenosis of the right lower ureteral lumen. Her right kidney function was severely impaired, but the left kidney compensated enough so her renal function was normal seen under the renal dynamic imaging. PET/CT revealed increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the uterine cavity and there were multiple lymph nodes present in the retroperitoneal and bilateral iliac vascular areas . After consultation, radiologists and gynecological oncologists all suspected the enlargement of lymph nodes were due to tumor cell infiltration based on the diagnosis of endometrial carcinoma.
The patient was recommended for laparoscopic surgical staging including total hysterectomy/ bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with lymph node dissection. During the operation, as shown in Fig. , thickened fibrotic peritoneum, dilated right ureter, and enlarged lymph nodes could be observed clearly. Notably, because of severe peritoneal fibrosis, the surgery became very difficult, and the risks of bleeding and damage to the surrounding organs were increased, especially when removing the lymph nodes. As a result, we had to perform excision of suspicious and enlarged lymph nodes in the pelvic and aortic regions to verity nodal metastasis. Biopsy samples were taken from the thickened fibrotic retroperitoneum during surgery.
Postoperative pathology revealed high-moderately differentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma, with a size of 1.7 × 1.5 × 1.2 cm, invading the superficial muscle layer (< 1/2 muscle layer) with no vascular invasion. All lymph nodes removed including obviously enlarged lymph nodes showed no evidence of metastasis (left pelvic 0/3, right pelvic 0/4, para-aortic 0/3), but fibrosis was visible. The biopsy of the retroperitoneum showed fibrosis, scattered and focal lymphocytes, monocytes, and plasma cells infiltration . IHC of IgG4 was negative. According to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics surgical staging systems for endometrial cancer, this patient was surgically staged as stage IA without adverse risk factors (i.e. age, positive LVSI, tumor size, depth of invasion, and lower uterine [cervical/glandular] segment involvement). After the discussion by multi-disciplinary team, this patient was not recommended to have adjuvant therapy, but close follow-up should be done at regular intervals and simultaneously she was referred to the rheumatology for further maintenance treatment for iRPF. At 3-month and 6-month follow-up in gynecology clinic, no disease recurrence was found. In addition, half a year after the gynecologic surgery, the patient was prescribed prednisone and cyclophosphamide for the treatment of iRPF because of her elevated ESR and CRP. At the time of drafting this paper, the patient was in good condition .