A 39-year-old Black African woman presented to the gynaecological clinic with symptoms of an acute abdomen. Five days earlier, the patient had given birth via caesarean section in another hospital. This was her third caesarean section. At the time of admission, the patient had severe lower abdominal pain with mild signs of peritonitis. Sutures appeared normal. C-reactive protein was elevated at 313 mg/L, while procalcitonin and leucocyte levels were within normal range. An ultrasound examination revealed some free intraperitoneal fluid. The subsequent abdominal CT scan showed a considerably enlarged uterus with postoperative changes and a few air pockets in the area of the incision, as well as diffuse free intraperitoneal fluid . Empiric anti-infective therapy with cefuroxime (3 × 1.5 g) and metronidazole (3 × 500 mg) was initiated.
Multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (3-MRGN) was found in a vaginal smear taken from the patient, and the effective spectrum was thus expanded by meropenem (3 × 1 g). After administration of a laxative, the patient’s abdominal symptoms improved, and inflammation markers stagnated. When her condition deteriorated once more, ultrasound-guided paracentesis was performed, providing evidence of enterococci and thus the indication for diagnostic laparoscopy on the 15th day after caesarean section.
A longitudinal laparotomy was performed, as peritonitis was apparent across all four quadrants. Intestinal organ perforation initially could not be confirmed as the cause of the sepsis signs and symptoms. The uterine suture in particular initially appeared to be intact. Following extensive lavage, we initiated intra-abdominal negative-pressure therapy (A-NPT) to treat the patient’s peritonitis. We used an open-pore, double-layered, large-area drainage film (oF) developed specifically for this purpose (Suprasorb® CNP Drainage Film, Lohmann & Rauscher, Germany). The film was spread across the entire abdomen to drain the abdominal cavity completely. The abdominal wall was temporarily adapted with fascial retraction sutures, leaving a fascial gap of 3 cm in diameter. Suction was applied along a polyurethane foam (PU) strip (V.A.C.® GranuFoam™, Kinetic Concepts, Inc., San Antonio, USA) connected to the film, which was guided through the gap from the abdominal to the subcutaneous region. After film sealing, negative pressure (−75 mm Hg) was applied with an electronic vacuum pump (ActiV.A.C, setting: −75 mm Hg, continuous, high intensity; KCI, San Antonio, Texas, USA) , , , .
The planned relaparotomy three days later revealed a 3 cm-wide uterine scar dehiscence connected to the abdominal cavity as the septic focus. Just like the vaginal smears taken previously, intra-abdominal smears contained K. pneumoniae (3-MRGN). The patient had previously refused a hysterectomy for cultural reasons, which is why, following debridement, the dehiscence was closed with absorbable suture material, using simple interrupted suture technique. A temporary abdominal wall closure was performed. The planned relaparotomy another three days later showed a regression of peritonitis but also a recurrence of the previous suture failure.
Drawing on our experience with using E-NPT to close intestinal defects, we decided by interdisciplinary consensus to treat the uterine defect not only from the outside but to also apply intrauterine suction. An intraoperative vaginal examination confirmed a suspected complete cervical stenosis. Drainage from the uterus was therefore obstructed. The first attempt at intraoperative cervical dilatation was unsuccessful. We then performed the first cycle of IU-NPT. Suction was guided directly along the gaping defect in the uterine wall.
For this purpose, we constructed a single short drainage element (xOFD) with a 20 cm-long distal end of a gastric tube (t) (Ventrol, 18-French, 120 cm, Mallinckrodt Medical, Ireland) with lateral perforations. Half of the xOFD was wrapped with an open-pore PU and then all of it was wrapped with the same thin double-layered drainage film that was used for A-NPT . The half of the xOFD that consisted of film-wrapped PU was inserted into the uterine cavity through the uterine wall defect . The other half of the drainage remained exposed in the lower abdomen. Via this end, the xOFD remained in direct contact with the abdominal drainage film to conduct fluid and negative pressure. The film was connected to an electronic pump (KCI V.A.C.®, KCI USA Inc., San Antonio, Texas, USA, setting: −75 mm Hg, continuous, high intensity). The abdomen was temporarily closed once more with fascial retraction sutures and the foam-film system.
The planned relaparotomy after a further four days revealed no remaining signs of peritonitis. The transmission of negative pressure into the uterine cavity by means of the xOFD was sufficiently successful. The xOFD had attached itself to the uterine wall and could be removed with a slight tug . The uterine wound did not show any signs of inflammation. The film left a characteristic imprint where it had been in direct contact with the tissue. Subsequent intraoperative dilation of the cervix uteri with Hegar dilators was successful.
We performed the next negative pressure cycle with a vOFD placed via the vagina ( and 00:23 min). This drainage type was constructed by wrapping the distal end of an 18-French gastric tube with a layer of the thin open-pore drainage film over a length of 10 cm. This small-bore drainage type has already been used for various new indications in E-NPT . The vOFD was inserted through the vagina and the previously dilated cervix into the uterine cavity, using the pull-through technique. For this purpose, a soft catheter was first guided through the uterine wall defect and the uterus through the cervix and then out via the vagina. The distal end of the vOFD was then sutured to the tip of the catheter. By pulling on the catheter, we were able to pull the vOFD through to the abdomen ( 1:41 min). The vOFD was disconnected from the catheter and then digitally pushed into the uterine cavity . The uterine defect was closed over the vOFD inside the uterus, using absorbable simple interrupted sutures. We also applied negative pressure (−75 mm Hg) via the vOFD. To prevent accidental displacement, the vOFD was sutured to the vaginal wall. The fascia was definitively closed since signs and symptoms of peritonitis had improved. After adaptation of the wound edges, an external negative pressure film dressing was applied to the skin and subcutaneous connective tissue.
After eight days, the vOFD was removed by simply pulling on the drainage, Therefore the patient was sedated (02:06 min ) and the process was endoscopically monitored. The uterine cavity was then examined with a small endoscope (5 mm in diameter, Olympus N 180). The vOFD had maintained suction over the entire length of the film section in the uterine cavity. The uterine cavity had contracted except for a canal approximately 5–8 mm wide. The characteristic nubby pattern imprint left by the film was apparent on the surface ( and :36 min ). The suture material used to close the defect was visible from the inside, and the uterine defect was completely adapted. All in all, the wound appeared similar to the findings we know from E-NPT of the gastrointestinal tract.
The total duration of IU-NPT was 11 days. Four days after the end of treatment, the patient was no longer experiencing symptoms and was discharged. An outpatient clinical follow-up examination conducted four weeks after discharge showed normal external wound conditions and no recurrence of symptoms.