A 63-year-old man with history of coronary artery disease treated by coronary artery bypass graft was admitted for recent onset left lower limb pain at rest with severe activity restriction (Leriche-Fontaine Class III and Rutherford Class III–IV). He had already undergone PTA with stent implantation on the left superficial femoral artery several years before.
An angio-computed tomography was performed showing highly calcific stenotic left CFA, . Despite the high calcium burden no severe calcific stenosis was found on the right side. After in-depth discussion with the patient and upon his strong preference, a decision to attempt endovascular treatment was taken. Patient gave inform consent.
Shockwave balloons from 3.5 to 6 mm are 6-Fr introducer sheath-compatible with 110 cm length so a right femoral approach with crossover technique was selected.
In order to increase precision, ultrasonographic guidance was adopted for the right common femoral puncture. A 6-Fr sheath was placed and left common iliac artery access was obtained through a Judkins right guiding catheter. A subtraction angiography of the left iliac-femoral axis was then performed confirming highly calcific stenosis of the CFA .
Severely calcific stenosis was crossed with 300 cm Choice PT Extra-Support guidewire (Boston Scientific). Lithotripsy catheter (Shockwave Medical Inc.) was advanced to the lesion site, so the manufacturer’s instructions were followed:
lithoplasty balloon (6 × 60 mm) inflation to 4 atm . Shockwave treatment (30 pulses). Lithoplasty balloon deflation in order to re-establish blood flow (30 s). Further lithoplasty balloon inflation to 6 atm (30 s). The same sequence was repeated for six times for a total of 180 pulses in the same segment.
After the entire shockwave treatment was completed an angiogram was performed in order to assess post-intervention result . After calcifications disruption, the lesion was finally dilated with a 7 × 60 mm DEB and the final arteriogram showed a good angiographic final result with completely restored flow and no residual vascular calcium.
The patient was discharged the day after the procedure and after 9-month follow-up, no symptoms/activity restriction were reported.