A 68-year-old man was referred to our department with infraclavicular lymphadenopathy and an endobronchial tumor that was incidentally discovered on computed tomography (CT) at another hospital. An excision of the left infraclavicular nodes was performed, but no malignant findings were observed. A chest CT revealed a 10-mm endobronchial mass that was clearly visible as a high-attenuation area of contrast enhancement . An 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomographic whole-body scan revealed no significant uptake in the lesion. Bronchoscopy revealed a submucosal tumor on the anterior wall of the entrance to the right bronchus intermedius that was constricting the airway lumen . The tumor surface was covered with numerous engorged blood vessels, and the middle and inferior pulmonary lobes were intact. Although a biopsy of the mass was performed, no definitive diagnosis was achieved.
A posterolateral thoracotomy was performed through the fifth intercostal space under general anesthesia. The bronchus intermedius was dissected, and the membranous portion was opened to expose the lumen. The distal end of the tumor was transected first followed by the proximal end, providing adequate tumor-free margins. Because the tumor had clearly defined borders, the resection line was determined by macroscopically securing the margin from the tumor. Subsequently, the tumor and bronchus intermedius were removed en bloc. The tumor measured 13 × 6 mm in size and was hemispherical in morphology. Examination of frozen tumor sections suggested angioma with no malignant findings. The presence of tumor-free margins at both the proximal and distal ends of the bronchus was also confirmed by examination of frozen sections. The excised segment of the bronchus measured 1 cm in length; thus, the bronchus was reconstructed by end-to-end anastomosis using 3–0 PDS (polydioxanone) sutures without excessive tension. The anastomosis was then wrapped in a pedicled intercostal muscle flap to isolate it from the pulmonary artery.
Histologically, a mixture of proliferating blood vessels and adipocytes were observed within the bronchus wall . Therefore, the pathological diagnosis was angiolipoma. The patient experienced no postoperative complications and was discharged on postoperative day 15. Two years and 7 months postsurgery, the patient has experienced no recurrence.