A 50-year-old man visited our hospital with pain in his neck that had lasted for 6 months. The patient felt pain with paraesthesia in both his shoulders that radiated to his fingers. The pain occurred intermittently and mostly during activities. There was no prior history of trauma. For 5 months, the pain and paraesthesia worsened, and he complained of weakness in both lower extremities. The patient then sought medical advice from a neurosurgeon who said that there was nerve entrapment and advised him to undergo laminoplasty. At that time, he refused to undergo surgery because he was unable to make a decision. For 4 months, the patient underwent physiotherapy; however, there was no improvement. The patient subsequently visited our hospital where he was advised to undergo laminoplasty. He worked as a contractor and mostly sat behind a desk. He had no history of diabetes or hypertension. He denied any decrease in body weight or appetite, and there was no history of chronic cough.
On physical examination, his general condition was unremarkable . There was no tenderness on palpation along the midline. Examination of the cervical spine showed positive L'hermitte test, finger-escape test, grip-and-release test, Hoffman-Trommer sign and Spurling sign. The patient was able to move his neck normally. Further examination revealed diminished motoric strength in all extremities with positive Babinski reflex and clonus with normal patellar and Achilles tendon reflexes. He had urinary retention and faecal incontinence.
The patient underwent radiographic examination that showed straight cervical with mid-sagittal diameter of 10 mm and a Torg ratio of 0.37 . There was osteophyte, endplate irregularity and disc-space narrowing at C4-C5 levels with spur formation at C3 through C5. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination showed cervical canal stenosis at C4-C5 levels and spinal cord compression . Laboratory findings were unremarkable except for leukocytosis.
The patient was diagnosed with cervical canal stenosis due to cervical spondylotic myelopathy at C4-C5 vertebrae, with a Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) Score of 11. He underwent decompression and posterior stabilisation with open-door laminoplasty under general anaesthesia. Two months after the operation, the patient felt no pain in his neck or fingers. He was able to function normally, and the weakness disappeared. The patient was able to defecate and urinate normally. The JOA score after surgery improved to 17.