A 44-year-old woman with a two-year history of ulcerative colitis was admitted to our hospital with complaints of lower abdominal pain and hematochezia. The patient had previously been treated with oral mesalazine and intermittent corticosteroids at another hospital, and the disease extent was the extensive colitis involved to the transverse colon. The patient had no other medical history, including hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease or abdominal surgery.
Three months prior to admission, she independently stopped taking her medication for ulcerative colitis and started taking self-purchased oral indigo naturalis twice a day (daily dose, 2 g). She had no history of taking other medication. After 2 months of taking the oral indigo naturalis, she developed intermittent hematochezia. Two weeks later, she exhibited lower abdominal pain. The patient’s vital signs were stable on admission. Her physical examination revealed tenderness on lower abdomen, but not rebound tenderness. Laboratory examination on admission showed a white blood cell count of 9.4 × 103/μL (reference, 4000-10,000/μL), hemoglobin level of 13.2 g/dL (reference, 12–16 g/dL for female), and C-reactive protein concentration of 0.45 mg/dL (reference, < 0.3 mg/dL). A stool culture and Clostridium difficile toxin study were both negative. Computed tomography of abdomen and pelvis showed segmental edematous wall thickening of the descending and sigmoid colon, and no abnormal finding of mesenteric vessels . Colonoscopy findings revealed erythema, edema, and submucosal hemorrhage, the surface of which presented a dark blue pigmentation with the same color as the original indigo naturalis in the descending and sigmoid colon, but a relatively non-inflamed finding in the rectum . Biopsy specimens from the descending and sigmoid colon showed erosion and loss of superficial epithelium with few inflammatory infiltrations, which is histologically consistent with ischemic colitis rather than a flare-up of ulcerative colitis or other colitis such as infectious colitis . Based on these findings, we considered the patient to have ischemic colitis induced by indigo naturalis. Supportive care with bowel rest, intravenous hydration, empirical antibiotics, and discontinuation of indigo naturalis resulted in improvement within a week. She then agreed to be treated with prednisolone and mesalazine for ulcerative colitis, and a follow-up colonoscopy 2 months later showed an improved state with some scar changes and an indigo blue pigmentation still remaining on the colon .