We present a case report of a 28-year old male who presented to our clinic for evaluation and treatment for a segmental bone defect secondary to a right femur fracture with non-union after infection. The patient had been in a motor vehicle collision in his home country of Uganda approximately two years prior to presentation at our clinic. He had sustained an isolated, closed, mid-shaft right femur fracture and was treated at the time of injury with an intramedullary (IM) femoral nail. Unfortunately, his medical records, injury, and initial post-operative radiographs from Uganda were unavailable for this report. The patient was in good health at the time of injury and was employed as an attorney.
Approximately three months after his initial surgery, he was noted to have signs and symptoms of an infected non-union, and underwent irrigation & debridement (I&D) in Uganda. The patient subsequently immigrated to the United States and presented at another institution with a draining sinus tract at his fracture site. He was placed on multiple antibiotics and underwent an additional I&D. His original IM nail was left in place at that time . The patient's intraoperative cultures grew a multi-drug resistant species of enterococcus and a methicillin-sensitive staphylococcus. Over the next twelve months, the patient was treated with multiple antibiotics and underwent five additional I&Ds, the latter four including additional bone excision and attempts at induced membrane technique with intramedullary nail exchanges and antibiotic cement spacer placement. Prior to his final surgery, skin wound cultures grew a multi-drug resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis species.
At the time of presentation to our clinic, the patient was three months post-operative from his last antibiotic nail exchange, with an eight mm antibiotic coated intramedullary nail (Smith and Nephew; London, UK) in place, and was no longer taking antibiotics. Radiographs showed a 20 cm bone defect at the mid-shaft of the right femur, as well as a 3 cm leg length discrepancy [, ].
After consultation with our infectious disease specialist, along with a thorough laboratory infection workup, it was presumed that the infection had been eradicated. The patient also underwent a thorough medical, endocrine and metabolic workup to ensure no other conditions contributed to the non-union. He was optimized for surgical treatment of his bone defect.
His prior Masquelet attempt was three months prior, beyond the four-week time point when the pseudomembrane's biologic activity was at its highest . We determined that repeating the first stage of the Masquelet procedure would optimize the chances of success and allow for confirmation through cultures and tissue specimens that there was no residual infection. A thorough discussion took place with the patient regarding treatment options, and he opted to proceed with surgical treatment utilizing the induced membrane technique.
The first stage of his Masquelet operation was then performed. The patient was placed on a fracture table, and a lateral incision was carried out through the patient's old scar to access the femoral bone defect as well as his cement spacer. The patient had abundant scar tissue, and large full-thickness flaps were elevated to expose the spacer. Because of the patient's multiple attempts at previous Masquelet procedures, he had a robust membrane already formed that was incised to gain access to this space. The previously placed antibiotic cement spacer, followed by the intramedullary nail, was removed. Multiple tissue samples were sent for frozen section and culture, which were found to be without evidence of infection (<5 WBC/HPF). The membrane cavity was then debrided of all scar and fibrinous tissue, and proximal and distal bone ends were bleeding and appeared healthy. Next, the Reamer Irrigator Aspirator (RIA; DepuySynthes; Johnson & Johnson Co. Inc., NJ) was used to debride the femoral canal using 3 l of normal saline (NS) with bacitracin, followed by 3 l of NS. Given the patient had a leg length discrepancy and a mild external rotational deformity, traction and five degrees of internal rotation were applied to attempt to improve limb length and rotational alignment.
A new lateral entry antegrade femoral intramedullary nail (12x440mm; DePuy Synthes, Raynham, Massachusetts) with one proximal and three distal interlocking screws was placed. Next, a temporary PMMA (Palacos; Zimmer, Warsaw, IN) antibiotic cement spacer was made by mixing three bags (40 g per bag) of cement, 7 g vancomycin, and 5 g of meropenem. These antibiotics were chosen based on the patient's known pathogen history. The cement was placed around the femoral nail during the later stages of polymerization to better shape the cement and prevent interdigitation of the cement to adjacent bone. Once the cement hardened, the entire wound was copiously irrigated, and the membrane and soft tissues were closed in a layered fashion. A hemovac drain was placed superficial to the fascia.
Post-operatively, the patient remained on intravenous antibiotics until post-operative day 4, when intraoperative cultures remained without growth. He was placed on 81 mg of Aspirin twice daily for deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis. Radiographs were obtained prior to hospital discharge, demonstrating the cement spacer's satisfactory position and the intramedullary nail . His drain was removed when wound drainage decreased to <30 cc/24 h on post-operative day 7. He was instructed to be toe-touch weight bearing with crutches until the second stage of his procedure. However, the patient was able to weight-bear with a single crutch within the first two weeks after surgery.
Five weeks after the first stage, there was still no clinical or laboratory evidence of infection, and the second stage of his Masquelet operation was performed. He was placed on a fracture table with both legs prepped and draped. An incision was made through the previous scar, and the membrane chamber was accessed . New cultures were obtained, and the antibiotic cement spacer was removed while the prior intramedullary nail was left in place . The membrane chamber was thoroughly debrided of all scar, and fibrinous tissue and curretes were used to stimulate bleeding bone at the defect's proximal and distal ends. Next, 75 cc of autologous bone graft was taken from the contralateral femur with the RIA, and 60 cc of bone marrow aspirate was taken from the contralateral iliac crest. This was combined with 45 cc of allograft cancellous chips and 50 cc of ViviGen Cellular Bone Matrix (DepuySynthes; Johnson & Johnson Co. Inc., NJ). The autograft and allograft were loosely packed into the membrane chamber . Recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (INFUSE; medium pack; Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Minneapolis, MN) was then placed over the graft. The membrane was then tightly closed around the graft. Additional remaining bone marrow aspirate was injected with a needle through the membrane. No leakage was observed after injection, indicating a tight closure. The remaining wound was copiously irrigated and closed in a layered fashion.
Post-operatively, the patient was admitted to the hospital for observation and 48 h of prophylactic antibiotics. He was made non-weight bearing to his affected lower extremity, and a bone stimulator was started immediately. The intraoperative cultures from his second stage operation remained without growth.
The patient was followed clinically and radiographically throughout the next year to monitor his progress . Two weeks after his second stage Masquelet operation, he begun to weight-bear fully without crutches. At one year follow-up, the patient demonstrated clinical and radiographic union of his bone defect with a residual 2 cm leg length discrepancy [, ]. At his two-year follow-up, radiographs continued to have a satisfactory appearance, and the patient endorsed overall significant improvement in quality of life and functionality. After the second stage of his operation, he returned to school, earned his paralegal certificate, and was the valedictorian of his class. He was noted to have continued right patellofemoral knee pain and required a shoe lift for his leg length discrepancy, which he did not routinely wear. Pain management was consulted. He underwent an inferior-medial genicular nerve block and nerve blocks of the sciatic and femoral nerves' sensory branches, which did not help. Two years after the second stage of his operation, his pain was well managed with 400 mg of Gabapentin 3 times daily and two tabs of 5/325 mg oxycodone-acetaminophen per day. Ultimately, his goal was to stop narcotics completely.