We report a case of a 22-year-old female who came to us with sudden onset painless blurring of vision in her right eye, with a persistent positive scotoma in the center of the visual field. There was no history of recent fever or any other significant history. Right eye vision was 6/7.5, N8, and left eye was 6/6, N6. Color vision was normal. Anterior segment was normal in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in both eyes. Fundus examination in the right eye revealed an area 1/3 disc diameter in size superotemporal to the fovea with retinal pigment epithelial stippling and surrounding pale halo. The left eye showed a linear whitish scar above the fovea [Figure 1]. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) through the lesion showed abnormal reflectivity of the retinal pigmentary epithelium (RPE), disruption of the ellipsoid zone, and external limiting membrane and hyper-reflectivity of the outer nuclear layer. Left eye scan through the lesion above fovea revealed an area of focal choroidal excavation [Figure 2]. Fundus autofluorescence of the right eye showed increased fluorescence at the area of the lesion [Figure 3]. Fundus fluorescein angiogram (FFA) of the right eye showed transmitted patchy hyperfluorescence, which increased in later phases without leaking of the dye in the surrounding tissue [Figure 4]. Based on these typical findings, we made a diagnosis of right eye ARPE. We discussed the treatment option with steroids and explained the possibility of spontaneous resolution of the disease over a few months. However, she was keen on rapid resolution of symptoms, and hence we advised Intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) 1 gr daily for three days followed by tapering doses of oral steroids. After the first injection, the patient developed gastrointestinal symptoms and discontinued the treatment on her own.
On follow-up, the SD-OCT showed a reduction in the hyperreflectivity and the height of lesion at day 3 and almost complete resolution by day 5 [Figure 5]. The vision had improved to 6/6, N6 and there was a significant subjective reduction in scotoma size. At one month, she was completely asymptomatic and maintained her vision.