A 21-year-old man presented to our institution with sudden onset pain in the left trapezius and shoulder.
At the time of symptom onset he was engaged at work driving heavy machinery, but denied any recent history of injury or trauma. He had not been recently unwell and denied any constitutional symptoms such as weight loss or fever. Over the following five hours his pain began to also affect his right shoulder and there was associated generalised abdominal pain of increasing severity, most marked in the left and right upper quadrants.
The patient had no significant past medical history, specifically never having had an episode of pancreatitis before. He was not taking any regular prescription medications but upon closer questioning admitted to occasional recreational cocaine use, the most recent ingestion of which was within 24 h of hospital admission.
The patient had no significant family history of medical illness.
Clinical examination revealed a well-looking man in no obvious distress. Although he was mildly tachypnoeic (20 breaths/min) his other vital signs were normal (heart rate 78 beats/min, blood pressure 129/84 mmHg, temperature 36.9 ºC and oxygen saturations 99% on room air). His abdomen was not distended but there was generalised percussion tenderness most profound in the left and right upper quadrants. Examination of his shoulders revealed no focal tenderness and full active and passive ranges of motion with preserved motor and sensory function.
Initial biochemical findings included a haemoglobin of 138 g/L, leucocyte count 4.74 × 109/L, platelets 197 × 109/L and international normalised ratio of 1.1. Plain chest X-ray was unremarkable. Repeat blood tests were performed after five hours due to the increasing severity of his symptoms which revealed a haemoglobin of 99 g/L, indicating a significant decrease from the initial value.
The combination of worsening abdominal pain and a falling haemoglobin prompted a computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen and pelvis which was conducted with both oral and IV contrast in the portal venous phase. It revealed a large amount of high-density fluid within the abdominal cavity, consistent with haemoperitoneum. Moderate splenomegaly (16.4 cm × 9.9 cm × 7.4 cm) and an overlying Grade 3 subcapsular splenic haematoma were also noted .
A repeat CT with IV contrast in the arterial phase (CT angiogram) was then performed to exclude the presence of active arterial bleeding. Although no active extravasation was observed on this study, an incidental splenic artery pseudo-aneurysm measuring 9.1 mm × 8.3 mm × 8.1 mm was discovered near the superolateral aspect of the spleen .
In the search for an underlying precipitant, viral serological testing was ordered despite the absence of typical prodromal symptoms. Both IgM and IgG antibodies against EBV viral capsid antigen were detected 24 h later.