A 24-year-old nulliparous primigravida woman was referred to our department in 40 + 3 weeks’ gestation for delivery with history of regular uterine contractions and fetal breech presentation (cervix dilated to 6 cm, presenting part above the interspinal line). She underwent uncomplicated cesarean section (operative technique sec. Pfannenstiel-Geppert, uterus closed by double-layer interlocking separate resorbable sutures, followed by continuous suture of the visceral peritoneum) because of arrest of descent and signs of fetal intrauterine hypoxia. The estimated blood loss was 500 ml, and a prophylactic dose of the first-generation cephalosporin was administered intravenously. Antenatal course was uneventful, except untreated mild pregnancy anemia (hemoglobin (Hb): 102 g/L). Patient was discharged home on the 5th day postpartum with Hb level of 91 g/L, normal coagulation parameters, and a recommendation for iron supplementation and follow-up of blood count. On the 27th day postpartum, she experienced profuse vaginal bleeding with drop in the hemoglobin level (70 g/L), but physical and transvaginal uterine ultrasound examinations failed to reveal the cause (regular uterine involution, no signs of the retained placental tissue, or a visible anomaly of the cesarean scar). Conservative management with blood transfusion units (total volume 670 ml) and uterotonics (oxytocin, methylergometrine) was helpful to stabilize the patient, and she was discharged home within 4 days. Vaginal and cervical microbiological culture has showed disturbed vaginal flora with bacterial colonization of species: Escherichia coli, Corynebacterium species, Candida species, and Streptococcus agalactiae group B. However, recommended antibiotics therapy was not administered because of patient carelessness. On the 43rd day after delivery, she was readmitted with recurrent severe vaginal bleeding (Hb 86 g/L). After initial blood transfusions (680 ml in total), the patient underwent hysteroscopy with curettage, showing no retained products of placental tissue or cesarean scar dehiscence. She was discharged home with blood count of 118 g/L, normal systemic coagulation parameters, and the recommendation of combined estrogen-progestin therapy (estrophem/2 mg/+ duphaston/dydrogesterone/10 mg daily) for early endometrium recovery. Despite this, on the 63rd day following delivery, the patient came back to the hospital with heavy life-threatening vaginal bleeding, signs of hemorrhagic shock (Hb level 61 g/L), and symptoms of hemodynamic instability (sweaty, pale looking, hypotension 90/50 mmHg, and tachycardia 110 b.p.m.). She underwent emergency abdominal supravaginal hysterectomy. Macroscopic examination of the lower uterine segment showed no signs of hysterorrhaphy dehiscence during explorative laparotomy. Similarly, microscopic examination of the uterus and placental implantation site did not confirm the scare dehiscence but revealed large, dilated arteries containing partially occluding thrombi; trophoblastic cells within and surrounding the spiral arteries confirmed by immunohistochemistry; endometrial simplex hyperplasia; and infection (diffuse lymphomonocyte infiltrate) of the implantation site demonstrated by the presence of Escherichia coli, Corynebacterium species, Candida species, and Streptococcus agalactiae group B . Additionally, microscopic sections of the blood clot attached to the placental implantation site contained inflamed necrotizing decidua. No retained placenta or placenta accrete was noted on multiple sections. Moreover, the local intravascular coagulation disturbance confined to the uterus was suggested. The postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after 11 days. One and four months later, she came for follow-up and was healthy.