A 67-year-old female with a history of hypothyroidism and pyoderma gangrenosum presented to the emergency department due to 1 day of jaundice. She denied any other symptoms. She had no history of liver- or immune-related disease, and her medications included dapsone, used to treat pyoderma gangrenosum, and levothyroxine. She did not take any supplements. Four days prior to presentation, she had completed a 6-week taper of prednisone (60 mg during first week, with 10 mg reduction each week), which, along with dapsone (100 mg daily), had been used to treat pyoderma gangrenosum. She had been on dapsone for 7 weeks before she noticed jaundice, which started 1 day prior to presentation.
Her vitals on admission were stable; she was afebrile. She was noted to have scleral icterus. Laboratory results revealed elevated alkaline phosphatase (756 U/L), gamma-glutamyl transferase (904 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (199 U/L), and alanine aminotransferase (273 U/L). Her total bilirubin was 12.6 mg/dL, and direct bilirubin was 9.9 mg/dL. The R ratio was 1.1. These laboratories, 7 weeks prior to admission (when dapsone and prednisone had been started concurrently), were normal. Aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase remained at normal levels when checked both 2 and 4 weeks before admission.
On presentation, complete blood count, blood smear, international normalized ratio, and creatinine were within normal limits. Viral serologies for hepatitis (hepatitis A IgM, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B core antibodies [both IgM and total], hepatitis C antibody, hepatitis E IgM) were all negative. Computed tomography of the abdomen and right upper quadrant ultrasound did not show biliary obstruction or vascular abnormalities.
The patient was admitted, and the hepatology service was consulted. It was suspected that the patient might have had DILI, so dapsone was held. In the meantime, other potential viral etiologies of liver disease, including herpes simplex virus, Epstein-Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus, were excluded by negative polymerase chain reaction tests. Further infectious work-up demonstrated no growth on fungal cultures, and the interferon-gamma release assay was also unrevealing. Autoimmune-related work-up was negative for anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-mitochondrial antibody, and anti-LKM antibody; the level of anti-nuclear antibody was 1:320. There was no radiographic or clinical evidence of sarcoidosis.
Without a clear cause to explain the severity of her liver disease, an ultrasound-guided liver biopsy was performed. Core biopsies demonstrated well-formed, non-necrotizing granulomas centered around portal tracts, without involvement of the bile ducts . Grocott methenamine silver and acid-fast bacilli stains were both negative.
Meanwhile, the patient’s alkaline phosphatase and aminotransferase levels steadily decreased over the course of the next 4 weeks. Dapsone was determined to be the most likely cause of her hepatic granulomas and liver injury, and she was advised to stop dapsone permanently. Her clinical course is summarized in .