An 18-year-old Caucasian male was transferred to our tertiary care centre due to suspected fulminant myocarditis. He exhibited profound cardiogenic shock associated with acute kidney failure (creatinine on admission 2.17 mg/dL, urine output 230 mL/24 h) and ischaemic hepatitis (peak aspartate aminotransferase 2267 U/L, bilirubin 1.8 mg/dL). Despite receiving levosimendan, dobutamine, and norepinephrine, the patient further deteriorated, with serum lactate levels increasing steadily to 6.8 mmol/L. Consequently, the patient was put on venoarterial ECMO only hours after admission. In the 3 weeks leading up to the event, the patient had experienced fever, fatigue, and mild respiratory symptoms, and his previous medical history was otherwise unremarkable. Upon admission, his right and left ventricular function was found to be severely depressed, and there were two left-sided intraventricular thrombi measuring 31 × 14 and 24 × 10 mm, respectively. In the days ensuing, elevated D-dimer levels were found peaking at 100.4 µg/mL along with a drop in fibrinogen levels (with a minimum of 94 mg/dL), a drop in platelet count to 25 G/L, and the haemolysis index dramatically increased (corresponding to a free haemoglobin level of 63.3 mg/dL). Multiple thrombi were visible in the ECMO circuit, primarily located in the venous ECMO cannula. While the laboratory results were suggestive of severe disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), antibodies against platelet-factor-4–heparin complexes turned out to be highly positive, indicating an additional occurrence of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). In the presence of multiple thrombi, ongoing DIC, haemolysis, and slightly improved haemodynamics, an urgent decision was required and venoarterial ECMO treatment was discontinued on Day 8. This decision was supported by the absence of vasopressors, recovering hypoxic hepatitis, and normal urine output. The anticoagulation regimen was switched to argatroban. Subsequently, the patient was stable on dobutamine (1.5 µg/kg/min) and norepinephrine (0.120 µg/kg/min) for the ensuing 3 days.
On Day 12 of his intensive care unit (ICU) stay, the patient presented septic, with mental confusion, tachypnoea, and a sharp rise in leukocytes to 28.3 G/L and CRP 24.3 mg/dL. Up to this point, multiple blood cultures turned out negative (one was found positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis with a very low bacterial count and considered the result of contamination). The patient already received a combination of daptomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam for 7 days while under ECMO treatment. This treatment was continued, and the rise in inflammatory markers occurred despite an adequate dosage of both antimicrobial agents. In the absence of a biopsy result, the possibility of mycoplasma-induced myocarditis was considered. Therefore, a single 1500 mg dose of azithromycin was prescribed by the infectiologist. The patient showed some improvement through the use of crystalloids and vasopressors with a minimum lactate of 4.5 mmol/L. However, immediately after starting the azithromycin infusion, the patient developed profound hypotension and signs of cardiogenic shock. Serum lactate levels rose again, and catecholamine doses had to be increased drastically. Azithromycin and intravenous fluid therapy were stopped due to haemodynamic deterioration and pulmonary oedema. The patient did not show any signs of bronchospasm, skin rash, or angioedema. His condition worsened continuously, and following a rise of lactate to 9.3 mmol/L, the decision was made for intubation and re-implantation of venoarterial ECMO. With re-established extracorporeal haemodynamic support, stabilization was achieved, and lactate levels fell to 3.2 mmol/L with continuous reduction of vasopressors. Because azithromycin had been stopped earlier, the patient did not receive the full dose, and the compound was re-administered later the same day. After starting the infusion for the second time, pulsatility on invasive blood pressure monitoring (i.e. intrinsic cardiac activity) was promptly lost. A second arterial line confirmed a pulseless blood pressure curve. Continuous electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring revealed no arrhythmic events as a potential cause of haemodynamic compromise. Again, the patient developed fulminant cardiogenic shock characterized by rapidly increasing lactate levels and significantly reduced mean arterial pressure despite a high ECMO flow of 5.4 L per minute. The patient required peak doses of 0.9 µg/kg/min norepinephrine, 4 IE/h vasopressin, 8.4 mg/h hydrocortisone, and 8.0 µg/kg/min dobutamine. In this situation, the infusion of azithromycin was recognized as the triggering factor and stopped subsequently. Over the next 12 h, catecholamines could be reduced to a minimum, and lactate levels were found below 2.0 mmol/L. After discontinuing azithromycin, there were no further sudden hypotensive episodes.
A myocardial biopsy of the left ventricle revealed moderate lymphocytic infiltration without evidence of giant cell myocarditis, sarcoidosis, or any other specific origin. Therefore, viral myocarditis was assumed as the most probable underlying cause. In view of his young age and the critical situation, the patient was primarily listed for urgent cardiac transplant. However, because of the lack of available donor organs within a reasonable time frame (the patient’s blood type being O), a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) had to be implanted. Finally, on Day 49 of his ICU stay, the patient was transferred to an intermediate care unit for further rehabilitation. From there, the patient was discharged with the LVAD system as bridge to recovery or transplant.