A 53-year-old man with a largely unremarkable past medical history was hospitalized with worsening diarrhea, hematochezia, weight loss, abdominal pain, and petechial rash of the trunk, arms, neck, and face including eyelids . The patient reported 6 mo of chronic diarrhea with intermittent hematochezia and an associated 13.5-18 kg weight loss.
Two weeks prior to his presentation at our institution, the patient presented to an outside community hospital’s emergency department with the above symptoms. At this community hospital, the patient underwent colonoscopy to the proximal colon with three biopsies by a general surgeon. Colonoscopy showed edematous, friable mucosa from the rectum to cecum. The pathology report noted acute and chronic inflammation with preserved glandular architecture, suspicious for Crohn disease. The patient was discharged from this outside hospital in stable condition and scheduled follow-up for presumed Crohn disease. Due to worsening symptoms of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dyspnea, and rash, he presented to the emergency department at our institution.
On initial examination, he was ill-appearing with a diffusely tender abdomen and a new petechial rash over the face and areas of pressure on his neck, arms, and abdomen. His lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally without wheezing. His heart was in regular rhythm with increased rate and without murmur. In the emergency department, his vitals showed he was hypotensive, tachycardic, afebrile, and non-hypoxic on room air. His blood pressure dropped to 87/50 mmHg requiring intravenous (IV) fluid resuscitation, but did not require vasopressors.
Initial labs revealed anemia (Hgb 9.1 g/dL, Hct 27.9%, RDW 15.4%, MCV 80.9 fL) and platelet count within normal limits at 233 k/μL. Chemistry panel showed acute kidney injury with Cr 1.57 mg/dL as well as low calcium of Ca 7.7mg/dL, elevated BUN of 21 mg/dL, and low albumin of 1.9 g/dL. C-reactive protein within normal limits at 0.80 mg/dL. Labs showed high stool lactoferrin of 332.15 μg/mL (normal range 0-7.24 μg/mL) and high pro-BNP of 10212 pg/mL (normal range < 125 pg/mL). Folate and thiamine labs were low. Urinalysis was remarkable for proteinuria of 100 mg/dL and the presence of numerous hyaline casts and coarse granular casts.
Imaging studies were performed including computer tomography (CT) chest, abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast. CT chest showed a moderate pericardial effusion and trace pleural effusions. CT abdomen/pelvis showed moderate wall thickening of the small bowel loops and colon extending from the cecum to the transverse colon , concerning for enterocolitis of infectious vs inflammatory etiology. No bone fractures or suspicious osseous abnormalities seen on any imaging. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction and small to moderate sized circumferential pericardial effusion without evidence of tamponade.
The initial multidisciplinary work up was based on the suspected diagnosis of Crohn disease. Upon dermatology evaluation of a petechial skin rash, a fat pad biopsy was performed to rule out possible amyloidosis or the unlikely possibility of metastatic cutaneous Crohn disease. Gastroenterology performed esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies from the esophagus, stomach, duodenum, terminal ileum, and colon . Both the fat pad biopsy and all biopsies from the gastrointestinal tract showed pink amorphous material. Interestingly, the pink amorphous material in the abdominal fat pad biopsy was only found just below the epidermis in the papillary dermis and in the upper periadenexal dermis of pilosebaceous units . This pattern of amyloid deposition is typically seen in primary cutaneous amyloidosis of macular or lichen subtype, or rarely in lipoid proteinosis[,]. Cytokeratin 5/6 was only blush positive and thus interpreted as negative, helping to exclude macular or lichen amyloidosis. Periodic Acid-Schiff with and without digestion was negative for lipoid proteinosis, which can also have perivascular dermal and mucosal deposits of eosinophil amorphous material.
Ongoing work up further revealed the following: elevated immunoglobulin G (3412 mg/dL; normal range 600-1640), low immunoglobulin A (33 mg/dL; normal range 47-310) quantitative kappa and quantitative lambda of 1090 mg/dL and 22 mg/dL, respectively, with a kappa/lambda ration of 49.55 (normal range 1.29-2.55). Serum protein electrophoresis showed a restricted band (M-spike) migrating in the gamma globulin region; subsequent immunofixation showed an IgG kappa monoclonal gammopathy with an additional abnormal kappa free light chain present. No abnormal peaks were found on urine protein electrophoresis, although 24-h urine protein was elevated at 745 mg/d. The patient underwent a left iliac bone marrow biopsy for evaluation, which identified a kappa-restricted plasma cell neoplasm, constituting 30%-40% of cellularity, and negative for amyloid. Plasma cell FISH detected duplication of chromosome 1q and gain of chromosomes 5, 9, 15. Peripheral blood smear identified early rouleaux formation.