A 7-year-old Middle Eastern girl presented with acute vomiting, upper abdominal pain of 2 days’ duration, which started after she fell out of bed while sleeping, and left-sided chest pain of 2 weeks’ duration, radiating to her left shoulder, aggravated by deep breathing and relieved with sleeping on two pillows at night; she had even gradually lost weight over the last few weeks. Two of her siblings had had pneumonia during this month. On physical examination, she appeared in respiratory distress, tachypneic, maintaining an oxygen saturation of 90 % on room air with markedly reduced air entry and chest movements over the left side. A small bruise was noted on the left side of her chest. Her abdomen was soft to palpation with no peritoneal signs and no epigastric mass. An initial chest radiograph showed an air-fluid level occupying her entire left chest so a chest tube was inserted on suspicion of hydropneumothorax. A chest radiograph following the chest tube insertion showed the tube positioned between the chest wall and the air collection and not draining any fluid, which raised the suspicion of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. After nasogastric (NG) tube insertion, the chest radiograph showed the tip of the NG tube positioned in the left side of her chest. A retrospective analysis of the abdominal X-ray showed a triangular lucent area in her upper abdomen connected to her left chest cavity indicating a missed diaphragmatic hernia.
Our patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), intubated, ventilated and nasogastric fluid was aspirated, she was then transferred under pediatric surgery care to the operating theater. Our patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy with a left-sided subcostal incision; the operative findings revealed a very small posterior rim of the diaphragm and a hypoplastic left lung. Her stomach, spleen, and left colon with the omentum were in the left side of her chest. Her stomach and, left colon and the omentum were reduced easily but there was some difficulty reducing her spleen back into her abdomen. Our patient tolerated the entire procedure fairly well. The postoperative chest radiograph showed the normal appearance of the left diaphragm with normal lung expansion and the stomach shadow below the diaphragm. She made an uneventful recovery postoperatively and was discharged after 1 week. Her follow-up visits were unremarkable.