A 7-year-old male (25 kg) with a history of Attention-Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) presented to an outside hospital emergency department (ED) around 8:00 p.m. after his mother noticed he was lethargic 3–4 h after accidental ingestion of five 15 mg (total of 75 mg) Δ8-THC edible gummies . Of note, there were no other accessible medicines or illicit drugs in the house. He was on guanfacine 1 mg daily for ADHD. His vital signs on presentation to the ED were unremarkable: heart rate 91 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure 85/50 mmHg, respiratory rate 13 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. Baseline labs were obtained: comprehensive metabolic panel was notable only for glucose of 181 mg/dL (normal: 70–99 mg/dL). Magnesium level was 1.9 mg/dL (normal 1.7–2.1 mg/dL). Creatine Kinase was not elevated, 77 U/L (normal: 20–200 U/L). Alcohol, aspirin, and acetaminophen levels were undetectable. Electrocardiogram (EKG) showed normal sinus rhythm with incomplete right bundle-branch block, normal intervals (QTC 420 ms), and no significant ST-segment elevation or depression. Incomplete right bundle-branch block is not an uncommon finding in a healthy school-aged child .
He received maintenance IV fluids but no additional intervention. Around 11:00 p.m., approximately 7 hours after initial ingestion, the patient remained sleeping but was easily arousable with no additional signs of toxicity. When awakened, he was alert and oriented. He ambulated without difficulty to urinate then returned back to bed and fell asleep. About 5 minutes after that event, the telemetry alarm went off, indicating >15-s episode of asystole and apnea . The patient did not awaken to regular stimulation and required a sternal rub that led to return of respiration and increase in heart rate. No associated seizure activity was observed. After the episode, the patient returned back to sleep. His heart rate was noted to be bradycardic in the 60-bpm range, so he received one dose of glycopyrrolate 0.1 mg, which resolved the bradycardia. He was then transferred to our PICU for further monitoring.
When he arrived to the PICU, he was alert and oriented, although slightly slow in his thoughts. Vital signs were stable: heart rate 72 bpm, blood pressure 120/69 mmHg, normal respiratory effort, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. The physical exam was unremarkable with no focal neurological deficits and no evidence of respiratory depression or apnea. He continued to progress well clinically and hemodynamically with no recurrence of asystole. After an uneventful period of observation in the PICU, he was discharged home approximately 24 h after ingestion with recommendation to follow up with his primary care physician in 2 days and sooner if there were any changes in his physiological and/or behavioral baseline. He did well at follow up and family had no concerns.
Given the clear history, no quantitative THC blood tests were performed. His urine drug screen (UDS) obtained 24 h after ingestion was positive for THC and negative for other illicit substances.