A 50-year-old Caucasian woman presented with generalized bone pain and weakness. She reported a subtotal thyroidectomy operation for her multinodular goiter 20 years before admission. Her medical history included hypertension, for which she was taking amlodipine 10 mg daily, and recurrent nephrolithiasis. Her physical examination was normal, and she seemed to be euthyroid at presentation.
Her biochemical findings were suggestive of PHPT . Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrated bilateral pelvicaliectasis and microcalculi of the right kidney. Bone mineral density was osteopenic at her spine and hip. Neck ultrasonography showed heterogeneous thyroid parenchyma and a hypoechoic lesion at the inferior region of her right thyroid lobe compatible with a parathyroid adenoma.
Under a presumptive diagnosis of PHPT, she underwent excision of the enlarged right inferior parathyroid adenoma. The excised mass was well defined with a yellow-pink cut surface and was measured as 20 mm × 15 mm × 10 mm on gross examination. Histopathological examination revealed a parathyroid adenoma with foci of epithelioid granuloma representing non-caseating granulomas . There were epithelioid histiocytes and multinuclear giant cells tending to come together, with lenfoid cells surrounding the granulomas . Two of her lymph nodes were compatible with reactive hyperplasia.
Possible underlying pathophysiological disorders for non-caseating granuloma formation were sought thoroughly. She was completely asymptomatic for tuberculosis, and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis of the homogenates of the parathyroid tumor was found to be negative. QuantiFERON tuberculosis testing was reactive; her tuberculin skin test was 15 mm, which was considered normal in our country. Computed tomographic scans of the neck and chest did not exhibit any abnormality. To exclude sarcoidosis, her serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level was measured and was detected as normal. Her fundus examination was also normal. Her medical history and clinical findings for berylliosis, coccidioidomycosis, and histoplasmosis were all negative.
Nine months following the operation, the patient's serum calcium level remained within the normal range . She is still asymptomatic and has no complaints in terms of any disease. The etiology of the non-caseating granulomas has not been determined yet. The patient is keen on attending regular visits, so we choose to follow her only with watchful waiting rather than perform additional tests.