A forty three years old, wheelchair-bound female presented to the metabolic bone clinic of Aga Khan University Hospital with short stature and grossly deformed bones of limbs and vertebrae. She achieved all milestones on time in childhood. She belonged to a financially sound family. The patient successfully passed her middle school and could not continue further studies because of her illness. There was no family history of having similar disorder and all of her siblings were in good state of health.
She developed low trauma fracture for the first time at eight years of age and was treated surgically. She had multiple low trauma fractures since childhood and surgical corrections with placement of rods were performed on multiple occasions. Her disability continued to increase with time and she was unable to walk and became wheelchair-bound. She lost all her teeth and was wearing dental prosthesis when examined in clinic. She also had a history of low trauma hip fracture one year back. She developed hypertension at the age of forty one years for which she was taking the combination of valsartan/hydrochlorothiazide 160/25mg.
On examination, the patient was short in height 4ft, with extreme bowing deformities involving leg, arms and back. She has light blue sclera, artificial teeth with clear oral hygiene. She had multiple scars of previous surgeries on arms and legs.
Results of the few biochemical investigations available with the patient included a normal complete blood count and lipid profile, serum calcium of 9.4 mg/dl, a serum 25 hydroxy vitamin D (25OHD) of 21.9 ng/ml, blood urea nitrogen and creatinine of 16 mg/dl and 0.8 mg/dl respectively. She was prescribed calcium supplements, and injection zoledronic acid. On her inquiry from physician, she was told that she had low bone mineral density (BMD) on DXA and was also provided with the diagnosis of Osteogenesis imperfecta few years back.
We advised for a complete metabolic workup. Her biochemical investigation showed serum calcium 9.1 mg/dl (while on calcium supplement), serum phosphorus 2.2 mg/dl, serum 25OHD 27 ng/dl,1,25(OH)D 54pg/dl, iPTH 176pg/dl. 24 hours urinary chemistry showed the following: protein 78.4 mg/dl, phosphorus 275.5, potassium 18.26, sodium 69.49, creatinine 0.34mmol/24hrs and creatinine clearance 73.7ml/min. The patient was identified to have low phosphorus and high PTH with optimal vitamin D levels. A preliminary diagnosis of hypophosphatemic osteomalacia was made and genetic consult was sought. Sample for genetic testing of the following hypophosphatemic gene panel ALPL, CLCNS, CYP2787, CYP2R1, DMPI, ENPPI, FAH, FAM20C, FGF23, FGFR1, PHEX, SLC34A3, VDR was sent to Invitae Medical Genetic Testing Expert Trust in Sanfransisco California. A pathogenic variant c.871C > T ((p. Arg291) was identified on PHEX gene confirming the diagnosis of X linked hypophosphatemic rickets.
She was started with potassium phosphate in divided doses and alfacalcidiol once daily. She has been counseled for XLH in detail about the disease and its inheritance, she was provided with instructions to avoid fall. On follow up after four weeks time, her pain greatly improved and she was advised to repeat serum calcium, serum phosphate and plasma PTH.