A 50-year-old male patient, without any background of chronic or infectious diseases, urinary stones, or anatomical abnormalities, came to the hospital’s emergency room with pelvic pain but no fever, vomiting or chills. Reported symptoms included dysuria, polaquiuria, hematuria and foul smelling urine.
A 64-year-old patient, with a background of diabetes mellitus, hypertension and hyperthyroidism, came to the bacteriological service area of the hospital’s emergency room for controlling a recurrent UTI. No additional symptoms were reported. During the follow up, the patient showed a few episodes of healing and relapse.
For urinalysis, 10 mL of urine were aliquoted in a 16 × 150 mm tube. Chemical tests were performed using test strips (SPINREACT URIN-10). After chemical testing, urine was centrifuged for 5 min at 450 g, supernatant was aspirated using a pipette until 0.5 mL was left and 50 μL of Sternheimer-Malbin dye was added. The Sternheimer-Malbin stain is a supravital dye composed by safranin O and cristal violet, is used to contrast the formed elements and to stain structures that have lost their vitality. Finally, sediments were examined under a brightfield microscope at 40× magnification.
Nitrites and hematuria (> 100 erythrocytes/field) were confirmed by chemical and microscopic analyses of the patient’s urine sample. In the sediments, superficial urothelial cells, along with scarce squamous cells, monohydrate calcium oxalate, and moderate bacteriuria including two bacterial morphotypes (short rods and filamentous forms) were observed, whereas no-leukocytes were found. In the interior of an endosome from a superficial urothelial cell, we observed the presence of moving short rod bacteria (supplementary material 1).
Nitrites and glycosuria were confirmed by chemical analysis of the patient’s urine sample. In the sediment test, we observed bacteriuria, leukocyturia (5–10/field), and squamous cells with endosome-containing bacteria. Moving along different focus planes in the microscope, we were able to determine that short rods were in the interior of the cells and not in their surface. This location was confirmed in at least ten squamous cells along the sediment preparation .
For both cases, we isolated E. coli with colony counts greater that > 100,000 UFC/mL.