In January of 2022, a 58-year-old female with no relevant past medical or ocular history began experiencing bilateral eye pain within two hours after receiving her Pfizer COVID booster vaccine. Three weeks prior, she had contracted a mild case of COVID-19, confirmed by a rapid COVID-19 antigen test, and by the time of her booster, had fully recovered. In addition to eye pain, the patient began experiencing flu-like symptoms the following day along with a right sided pressure-like headache. The pain resolved in the left eye after one day, but persisted in the right eye, and was characterised by severe pressure-like pain worsened by eye movement. She denied changes in visual acuity. After one week of no improvement, she presented to an ophthalmology clinic and was noted to have a mild left hypertropia on right gaze, a -3 deficit in supraduction on the right, and right eye pain, especially with upgaze. She otherwise had a visual acuity of 20/20 in both eyes, no afferent pupillary defect (APD), full colour vision, and a normal slit lamp examination. Corneal sensation was not assessed, but facial sensation (CNV1-V3) was grossly intact. On dilated fundus exam, the patient was noted to have mild nasal and inferior optic nerve rim elevation, but without disc swelling in the right eye. Optic coherence tomography (OCT) was obtained with normal thickness in both eyes, and a Humphrey visual field test (HVF) showed full visual fields bilaterally.
At this point, a mild inflammatory process of the optic nerve was suspected, and the patient was sent to the emergency room to obtain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, orbits, and spine with contrast for further work-up. The MRI orbits revealed right optic nerve enhancement . In addition, there were several nonspecific foci of high intensity in the periventricular and centrum semiovale regions of the brain that were suspected to be due to microvascular ischemic changes. MRI of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine showed no evidence of abnormal cord signal or spinal canal enhancement. The patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital for further work-up and management, and she was started on a three-day course of intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg every six hours for right mild optic neuritis. Her eye pain and motility deficits quickly improved on the steroid course, and she was discharged on an 11-day oral steroid taper. While the pain in the right eye resolved shortly after beginning her steroid course, the patient continued to endorse right eye discomfort for several weeks, which resolved over the next month.
A full laboratory work-up for the patient’s optic neuritis was also obtained, including antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), antinuclear antibody (ANA), syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Lyme disease, tuberculosis, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). In addition, she was also tested for neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies by cell-based assay, all of which were unremarkable. By the time of hospitalization, she was COVID-19 seronegative. After discharge from the hospital, the patient followed up outpatient with a neurologist at a specialised multiple sclerosis centre in the end of March 2022. Neurological exam was completely normal, and it was suspected that her optic neuritis was due to a post-vaccine or COVID-19-related demyelinating attack.
The patient followed up in an ophthalmology clinic in the beginning of May. At that time, she had no ocular complaints and her eye discomfort had completely resolved. On exam, her vision was stable at 20/25 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, she had no APD, and her visual fields and extraocular movements were full. A repeat OCT and HVF were ordered and were found to be normal. The patient has repeat MRI brain and orbits scheduled in the upcoming months.