A 37-year-old ADPKD female patient with positive family history was admitted in this hospital for repeatedly urinary tract infection for 3 years. Three years ago, the patient was admitted in community hospital for urinary tract irritation with right flank pain and fever for 2 days, and right upper urinary tract infection was considered. After admission, bilateral enlarged kidneys full of fluid-filled cysts were detected by type-B ultrasound examination, and there were no calculus or crystals in the kidneys detected at that time. ADPKD was diagnosed considering her family history. Since then, she suffered from urinary tract infection every 3–4 months, and urine cultures were negative. Symptoms usually were relieved within a week with antibiotics therapy, but the infections relapsed easily.
One week before admission, this patient’s urinary irritation relapsed with high fever. As oral antibiotics were not responsive, she was admitted in this hospital for further treatment. On admission, her temperature was 39.0°C, blood pressure 110/82 mmHg. Physical examination revealed the bilateral enlarged kidneys that were palpable, tenderness existed in right flank area. Full blood cell count showed white blood cell count 11.1 × 109/l, hemoglobin 12.3 g/dl and platelets 157 × 109/l. A serum biochemical profile showed her renal function was normal with serum creatinine 0.74 mg/dl. Liver function and electrolytes were unremarkable. Urinalysis revealed +3 leukocytes, +2 blood, and +1 albumin. Chest radiology and electrocardiography were reported to be normal. Abdominal CT scan showed enlarged cystic kidneys and a complete staghorn calculus in the right kidney with no obvious signs of urinary tract obstruction . Wide spectrum antibiotics was administered intravenously and the symptoms relieved in 3 days.
Percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PNL) was suggested,but the patient refused surgery as she felt well after the symptom relieved and worried about the surgical risks. To reduce the urinary tract infection and calculus formation, big volume of water intake was suggested to keep urinary output more than 2 L a day.
One month after discharge, the patient reported a “tiny stone” passed with urine, and the urinary stone component analysis showed the composition of calculus was magnesium ammonium phosphate. Considering the calculus component and the rapid formation of the staghorn calculus accompanied by the repeated upper urinary tract infections, the main cause of the staghorn calculus was determined as the repeated upper urinary tract infection in ADPKD.