A 15-month old boy, without significant medical history, was presented at the Burn Centre after a scald burn from hot milk, with mixed deep second degree burns to lips and chin, neck, chest, left arm and left foot covering 12% total body surface area (TBSA; burns to neck (1%); chest (4%); face (3%); foot (1%); left arm 3%) as assessed by palmar method. The mechanism of injury was submersion by just-boiled milk falling off the table, after he pulled the tablecloth the mug was standing on. There was no history of ingestion and no scalding or swelling of tongue or nostrils. He was cooled at the place of injury and assessed by the Helicopter Emergency Medical Services (HEMS). Intravenous rehydration according to Parkland formula (lactated ringers: 4 ml/kg/% TBSA of which half in the first 8 h, the remaining volume in the subsequent 16 h, with a maintenance of 2 ml/kg/h NaCl 0.9%/glucose 5%) was initiated and intravenous analgesics were given (fentanyl 1.5 mcg/kg and paracetamol 15 mg/kg). He had a progressive stridor with laboured breathing which the HEMS-physician ascribed to sputum stasis. With supplemental oxygen (non-rebreathing mask 12 L/min) his oxygen saturation was more than 95%. Hence he was considered medically stable during transport by the HEMS-physician. Upon first presentation at the Burn Centre he had deteriorated, his oxygen saturation was 80% despite maximal supplemental oxygen via a non-rebreathing mask. Inspection showed blistering off the lower lip concomitant with his burn injuries, without intra-oral redness or swelling .
His circulation was not compromised. Despite airway opening manoeuvres and sputum evacuation, the stridor persisted. Due to persistent respiratory distress the decision was made to intubate. Pre-oxygenation took place by non-rebreathing bag (already in situ) and bag-mask ventilation after induction. Due to vomiting a rapid sequence induction was performed. Induction of anaesthesia was obtained with propofol 2.5 mg/kg, ketamine 1 mg/kg, fentanyl 3 mcg/kg and rocuroniumbromide 1 mg/kg. Bag-mask ventilation proved impossible due to airway obstruction. Classic airway opening manoeuvres and a guedell were ineffective. Direct laryngoscopy revealed a considerably enlarged and oedematous epiglottis without visible vocal cords. Blind intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube (4,5 mm) was successful with help of a malleable stylet. Afterwards, ventilation was achieved with low pressure and bilateral air entry. The algorithm for difficult airway management would have been pursued in case of intubation failure by attempting videolaryngoscopy, emergency needle cricothyrotomy or a surgical airway. This algorithm was discussed with the entire emergency team prior to first intubation. All equipment, as well as expertise, necessary for a management of a difficult airway is present in the emergency room of the Burn Centre. After securing the airway, the burn injuries were debrided and dressed in silver sulfadiazine gauze. Rehydration in accordance with Parkland formula was maintained. Subsequently, he was transported to a paediatric intensive care unit in an academic paediatric hospital for continuation of mechanical ventilation.
The otorhinolaryngologist performed a direct laryngoscopy, demonstrating a fibrinous coating around the evidently oedematous epiglottis.
Three days after initial intubation, the patient extubated himself. Because of a manifest inspiratory stridor and increased respiratory labour, he was reintubated via rigid fiberscopy in the operating theatre by an experienced otorhinolaryngologist. Rigid fiberscopy was his preferred method since he lacked experience with videolaryngoscopy. There was still evident swelling of the epiglottis . Five days after intubation, fiberoptic laryngoscopy demonstrated a restored airway with a thin epiglottis, pale arytenoid cartilage (post-burn injury) and residual fibrinous coating in the postcricoid region, upon which the patient was successfully extubated .
For an overview of this case’s timeline, see Fig. .