A 79-year-old female with no medical history complained of left hip pain. She under went a primary THA in 1986(Charnley cemented monoblock stem and cup; DePuy Synthes, Johnson and Johnson, Warsaw, IN, US)for dysplastic osteoarthritis, and the revision THA (Secure-Fit PSL cup and Omnifit Specialty Stem, Stryker Orthopaedics, Mahwah, NJ, US)was performed at another hospital due to loosening of the cup and stem in 1997. Due to the loosening of the stem again, the patient was brought to our hospital for revision THA in 2011. A metal shell had achieved good fixation to the iliac bone with osseointegration; however, the pelvic discontinuity was seen on the radiograph. Hence, we performed a revision surgery which exchanged the PE liner alone on the acetabular side and stem, without replacing the metal shell. Since there was a moderate bone defect in the proximal part of the femur, we used the bioabsorbable plates used in this study, which were formed from 50×50-mmmesh sheets made from HA (40% w/w) and PLLA (60% w/w) composites Super Fixsorb MX40 mesh; Johnson and Johnson, Tokyo, Japan, and Takiron, Osaka, Japan) and ultrahigh molecular weight PE fiber cable (Nesplon tape; Alfresa, Osaka, Japan). Atwo Nesplon tapes with 3mm width was used to make a paling, which was prepared by transplantation with morcellized frozen allogeneic bone using an impaction bone grafting(IBG) technique. An 80 g of Simplex bone cement (Stryker Orthopaedics) was injected under compression using a cement gun, and a 200-mm long Exeter stem(Stryker Orthopaedics)was fixed. The diameter and neck length of cobalt-chromium metal ball head was 32 and 4 mm, respectively. She was able to leave the hospital without any complications during the perioperative period. Thereafter, there was no obvious abnormal finding on the X-ray and on laboratory investigations until 2014. In 2015, she complained of left hip pain even at rest, without a rise in body temperature. On X-ray, an osteolytic image around the left hip prosthesis was visible, and there was a possibility of urgency fracture at the base of the greater trochanter. She was hospitalized again for examination and treatment. There was no feeling of heat, swelling, or redness around the surgical wound. The range of motion of the left hip joint was as follows: Flexion,90°; extension, 0°; adduction, 20°; abduction, 20°; internal rotation, 10°; and external rotation, 10°. Blood biochemistry showed a white blood cell(WBC) count of 6,040/µL, hemoglobin level of 10.8 g/dL, platelet count of 24,000/µL, C-reaction protein(CRP) level of 0.55 mg/dL, activated partial thromboplastin time of 28.1 s, and prothrombin time international normalized ratio of 1.02. Although there was a mild rise in CRP, the WBC count and fractionation were within normal limits. The harvested synovial fluid was dark red, and the culture was negative. She did not have a history of any oral medications, such as anticoagulants, that could cause easy bleeding. Compared to the X-ray images in 2014, those of 2015 showed an osteolytic image at the distal cortical and cancellous bone of the greater and lesser trochanters, and there was a possibility of imminent fracture at the base of the greater trochanter. Wreckage of HA mesh was found medial to the lesser trochanter . Onmagnetic resonance imaging (MRI), there was a cystic mass surrounding the prosthesis, which showed a low density on both T1- and T2-weighted images. The inside of the cystic lesion exhibited a mosaic pattern with low- and high-density regions, which spread in a multidirectional manner . We performed surgery for debridement of the cystic mass and imminent fracture at the base of the greater trochanter. During surgery, a cystic mass with a size of 86 mm×65 mm×58 mm was noted, which was covered with a thick membrane around the hip joint. We punctured it with a syringe, which revealed a reddish brown joint fluid, presumed to be a hematoma. Granulation tissue was observed in the area of osteolysis on the radiograph, and it was confirmed macroscopically that the granules probably generated from the HA mesh were scattered inside. We analyzed the granulation tissue through a rapid pathological examination and did not find any pathological findings of infection or tumor. The pelvis showed discontinuity; however, there was no bleeding source. There was no macroscopic damage of implants, such as wear or corrosion of the stem neck, ball head, and PE liner. Hence, the liner, metal shell, and stem were preserved and thoroughly washed after the removal of hematoma, capsule, HA debris, and granulation tissue as much as possible. Only the ball head was replaced. Since a pathological fracture had already occurred distal to the greater trochanter, we performed osteosynthesis with an Accord cable (Smith and Nephew Inc., Memphis, TN, US) after grafting the allograft bone. Pathological examination under hematoxylin and eosin (HE; pH 2.5) staining for the specimen of granulation tissue retrieved during surgery was performed. The mass was covered with a fibrous capsule, with a high infiltration of histiocytes. Partial invasion of plasma cells was also observed with fibrin deposition. The interior of the tumor had a mix of old and fresh bleeding and some tissue balls phagocytizing hemosiderin were observed. Granulation tissue was infiltrated by giant cells and surrounded the transparent substance. When observed with a polarizing microscope, HA was clearly visible . At present, 2 years after surgery, there is no sign of infection in the laboratory data and no recurrence of osteolysis on the radiograph. This case report was approved by the Ethical Committee of Oita University, Faculty of Medicine, and the patient gave her written informed consent.
HA mesh were scattered inside. We analyzed the granulation tissue through a rapid pathological examination and did not find any pathological findings of infection or tumor. The pelvis showed discontinuity; however, there was no bleeding source. There was no macroscopic damage of implants, such as wear or corrosion of the stem neck, ball head, and PE liner. Hence, the liner, metal shell, and stem were preserved and thoroughly washed after the removal of hematoma, capsule, HA debris, and granulation tissue as much as possible. Only the ball head was replaced. Since a pathological fracture had already occurred distal to the greater trochanter, we performed osteosynthesis with an Accord cable (Smith and Nephew Inc., Memphis, TN, US) after grafting the allograft bone. Pathological examination under hematoxylin and eosin (HE; pH 2.5) staining for the specimen of granulation tissue retrieved during surgery was performed. The mass was covered with a fibrous capsule, with a high infiltration of histiocytes. Partial invasion of plasma cells was also observed with fibrin deposition. The interior of the tumor had a mix of old and fresh bleeding and some tissue balls phagocytizing hemosiderin were observed. Granulation tissue was infiltrated by giant cells and surrounded the transparent substance. When observed with a polarizing microscope, HA was clearly visible . At present, 2 years after surgery, there is no sign of infection in the laboratory data and no recurrence of osteolysis on the radiograph. This case report was approved by the Ethical Committee of Oita University, Faculty of Medicine, and the patient gave her written informed consent.