A 42-year-old man who had been treated for depression for 3 years visited our clinic because of right motor weakness and aphasia that had worsened progressively over 1 month. Manual muscle testing (MMT) revealed right motor weakness of 3/5 in the upper limb and 4/5 in the lower limb and he had total aphasia. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated multiple cystic lesions in the left temporal lobe. These cysts had low signals in T1-weighted (T1WI) and diffusion-weighted images (DWI), and high signals in T2WI. The parenchymal components around the cysts showed slightly high signals in DWI. The parenchymal portions and cyst walls were enhanced by gadolinium dimeglumine. A pronounced left to right midline shift caused by the mass effect of the cysts and brain edema was evident. Neuroradiologists commented that the most possible diagnosis was GBM and malignant oligodendroglioma should be a differential diagnosis considering the patient’s age.
The tumor was partially removed and the largest cyst opened under general anesthesia (the white arrows in Fig. indicate the resected portion.). The tumor was yellowish and soft and the fluid in the cyst was weakly xanthochromic. Histological examination of the resected tissue resulted in a diagnosis of GBM .
One month after surgery, radiation of 60 Gy (2 Gy × 30 times) and oral temozolomide (TMZ) treatment (75 mg/m2) for 42 days were initiated . After this treatment, the right lower extremity’s motor function recovered to 5/5 on MMT; however, the right upper limb motor weakness and aphasia did not improve with the treatment. One week after completion of irradiation and TMZ treatment, the patient was discharged to home and continued to take TMZ treatment for 5 days every 4 weeks. Three months later, he was brought to our emergency room because of deterioration in consciousness. His Glasgow coma scale was 4 (E1M1M2), and MRI demonstrated enlargement of several of his cysts, causing uncal herniation . The patient’s parents refused further treatment on his behalf and he died 5 days after this admission. An autopsy was performed 6 h after his death with the permission of the patient’s parents.
Histological examination of the operative specimen resulted in a diagnosis of GBM, and this diagnosis was based on the following characteristic features; high cellularity, pleomorphism with giant cells, endothelial proliferation, pseudo-rosette formation, necrosis , and a high Ki-67 index of 20 % .
On gross morphological examination, the cysts in the tumor shrank after formaldehyde fixation and the parenchymal portion of the tumor was clearly identified. An absence of destructive tumor invasion of the white matter indicated it was not aggressive . On low magnification of hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained sections, tumor necrosis was evident but the boundary between the tumor and normal surrounding tissue was well-defined . Examination under higher magnification confirmed well-defined tumor boundaries . The histologic appearance was heterogenous and pleomorphic giant cells were readily identified . Clear xanthomatous cells with foamy cytoplasm were apparent and were strongly positive on silver staining . The tumor was strongly glial fibrillary acidic protein positive and Ki-67 index was extremely low as 1 % .