A previously healthy 37-year-old Caucasian female presented to our institution with a two-month history of jaundice, pruritus and generalized fatigued; having already presented to a different institution for acute hepatitis months prior. Figure highlights a rough timeline of her clinical presentation.
Approximately 1 month prior to her presentation at the first institution, she had treated non-specific abdominal discomfort with various formulations of NHPs through the advice of her naturopathic doctors. Some of her NHPs are summarized in Table . She denied any other accompanying symptoms with her prior abdominal discomfort. She noted that 1 day after taking an increasing number of NHPs, she had sudden right upper quadrant pain and dark urine. Notably, this was a different pain than her pre-existing abdominal discomfort. She had a long clinical course at the first institution; she was given a full work up. She was followed in the community on discharge and unfortunately did not have significant improvements in her liver enzymes and clinical status, which led to a first biopsy. She came to us for further management.
On presentation to us, the patient was vitally stable and had no evidence of hepatic encephalopathy. She was visibly jaundiced. Abdominal exam was negative for ascites, jugular venous pressure was not elevated but there was mild bilateral pitting pedal edema. There were no stigmata of chronic liver disease. There was no hepatosplenomegaly on exam.
Her past medical history was significant only for homozygous Factor V Leiden deficiency, discovered after an isolated deep vein thrombosis (DVT) diagnosis during pregnancy. For DVT prophylaxis, she was prescribed Rivaroxaban and was taking this medication correctly for years as prescribed. She had no significant travel history, no previous blood transfusion, nor ingestion of undercooked meat to suggest acquisition of hepatitis E. There was no family history of liver disease.
All relevant laboratory findings are summarized in Table . Initial laboratory investigations revealed significant transaminitis and decreased synthetic liver function. Her complete blood count was within normal limits. Her viral hepatitis workup was negative; this was inclusive of serology for hepatitis A/B/C/E, EBV and immunoglobulins for CMV infection and HIV antibody/antigen screen was negative. In addition, she had tests for Bartonella, Syphilis, and Malaria smears; ova and parasites tested at the previous institution that were negative. Her metabolic workup was also negative for Hemochromatosis, Wilson’s disease (WD), and alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency. In addition, she also had a negative antinuclear antibody panel. Other relevant tests included normal an alcohol level and non-detectable acetaminophen level.
Ultrasound showed a liver with nodularity, with no evidence of hepatic vein or inferior vena cava thrombosis. However, an ultrasound completed months prior in February showed normal hepatic architecture without evidence of cirrhosis. A follow up ultrasound in March revealed a thin rim of fluid around the liver and gallbladder, favoring a reactive cause and interval liver parenchymal edema, consistent with acute hepatitis. She also had a magnetic resonance cholangiography (MRCP) in March, which was also unremarkable. Computed Tomography (CT) studies revealed a lobulated liver contour and lobar redistribution. There was also evidence of portal hypertension with splenomegaly. The liver parenchyma had a nodular morphology, suggestive of regeneration, seen in Fig. . The pattern of disease on CT is often seen in Budd Chiari syndrome, but can also be consistent with liver necrosis and regeneration after fulminant hepatitis due to drug toxicity. A biopsy was completed at another institution in April, a month prior to our admission and revealed subacute severe hepatitis with areas of confluent panacinar dropout (about 50% of specimen area affected) with no pathological features of Budd-Chiari. There was also no evidence of fibrosis or cirrhosis from this biopsy. The pathologist’s report suggested drug induced liver injury as a possible diagnosis. Portal hypertension was confirmed by measuring the wedge pressure in the right hepatic vein, showing an elevated hepatic-venous pressure gradient of approximately 14 mmHg (normal is < 5 mmHg).
At our institution, the patient was treated with oral N-acetylcysteine and oral vitamin K 5 mg daily for 3 days and daily ursodiol acids at 13 mg/kg. After 1 week, her synthetic liver function marginally improved but she also developed new clinically relevant ascites. It was revealed that the patient was still taking multiple naturopathic medications including alpha-lipoic acid and magnesium (MgS) and it was recommended that she discontinue these immediately.
During her admission, she was worked up by hepatology for liver transplant candidacy. Fortunately, a repeat trans-jugular core liver biopsy revealed minimal necrosis (less than 5%), with evidence of significant regeneration. Rhodamine staining for copper detected an abnormally high deposition. Again, no evidence of fibrosis or cirrhosis was seen. A diagnosis of drug induced liver injury from NHPs was favored, after she disclosed a significant history of NHPs usage, that had been on-going from her earliest clinical issues until early in her admission to us. She had not disclosed this ongoing usage until the second day of admission to us. She agreed to completely stop taking them.
WD was also considered due the abnormally high level of copper found on the first pathological specimens. However, a 24-h urinary copper and hepatic copper content from her second liver biopsy were subsequently done and were both negative for WD. She also had a negative slip lamp test for Kayser Fleischer rings on last follow up.
She was discharged home with hepatology follow up. In the next 2 months, her liver enzymes and synthetic function progressively normalized and she reports not continuing with any NHPs. The most recent follow up ultrasound reveals a liver with a coarsened echotexture.