A 22-year-old nulligravid Ethiopian woman came to the Jimma University Medical Center (JUMC) outpatient department with a complaint of continuous wetting of her underwear since childhood, but she had normal voiding pattern. She visited our hospital twice, 6 years ago for the same complaint, but she was sent home with reassurance and advice to do Kegel exercises. She had no any previous history of pelvic surgery, trauma, lower urinary tract symptoms, or treatment for urinary tract infections. She had no history of previous known chronic medical illness. On physical examination of the genitourinary system, she had no costovertebral angle tenderness, her perineum was wet, and there was pooling of urine in her vagina. A small pinpointed hole was seen on the right anterolateral aspect of vaginal wall, with spurting of urine upon catheterization with a 6 Fr pediatric nasogastric tube NGT) . We inserted a foley catheter into the bladder and instilled with 60 cc methylene blue dye to rule out congenital vesicovaginal fistula, and the dye test was negative. Pelvic ultrasound localized the left normal kidney in place and the right atrophic kidney in the pelvis . The bladder had normal capacity. Uterus and ovaries appear normal. With a suspicion of ectopic ureter, a CT scan with contrast was done and revealed right ectopic ureter and atrophied right pelvic kidney with intermittent ureteral stricture, whereas the contralateral kidney and ureter appear normal . MRI and renal scintigraphy are not available in our institution. Complete blood count, renal function test, and urinalysis were all normal.
Because the right kidney is pelvic with a good function, we decided to approach the surgery through the vagina. The patient was given spinal anesthesia and put in a dorsal lithotomy position. After making a circumscribing incision around the ectopic ureter, the ureter was mobilized from the bladder and vagina, and catheterized with Fr 6 pediatric NGT. Cystotomy was done at mid-vagina close to the ectopic ureter, and the ureter was re-implanted to the bladder at the trigone without tension using Vicryl # 3-0. After the ureteric catheter was exteriorized through the urethra, the bladder was closed in two layers using Vicryl # 3-0. Finally, the dye (methylene blue) test was repeated intraoperatively to check for water tightness and when it became negative the vaginal mucosa was closed . The patient was transferred to the gynecology ward with the plan of keeping the ureteric catheter for 2 weeks and the bladder catheter for 7 days.
After 7 days of surgery, the bladder catheter was removed and the patient was continent. Then, the ureteric catheter was also removed after 2 weeks. The ultrasound of the right kidney was normal and the patient was discharged with an appointment. She had two follow-ups at 1 and 3 months after surgery. All follow-up imaging and renal function tests showed normal findings. Figure 7 shows the ultrasound image of the kidneys 1 month after surgery . She reported no difficulty in voiding, or pain or recurrent urinary tract infections until her last visit.