A 47-year-old Caucasian woman presented to local hospital’s Emergency Department with retrosternal acute burning pain, diffuse abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and fatigue. At physical examination, right hypochondriac tenderness on deep palpation was revealed. Blood pressure was 200/100 mmHg; heart rate was regular at 88 b.p.m., with no heart murmurs, no distension of neck veins or peripheral oedemas. Lung auscultation did not reveal any pathological findings. Respiratory rate was 18 b.p.m., oxygen saturation 94%. Fundoscopy for determination of papillary oedema was not performed. Laboratory tests revealed elevated white blood cell count 18 × 103 units/L (ref. range: 4–9 × 103 units/L) and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 46 mm/h (ref. range: 0–20 mm/h).
Electrolytes, cardiac biomarkers (Troponin I test strip), renal function (serum creatinine, glomerular filtration rate, blood urea nitrogen), and complete blood count were normal. Brain Natriuretic Peptide blood test was not performed at the Emergency Department at the local hospital. Electrocardiogram (ECG) examination showed ST depression about 1.0–2.5 mm in lead II, V2–V6; ST elevation >0.5 mm in aVR lead . The patient’s chest X-ray was normal with clear lung fields and no other abnormality detected. Abdominal ultrasound exam detected cystic masses in right liver lobe and multiple cysts within the both kidneys; adrenal glands were not visualized.
When detailed history was taken, the patient mentioned often episodes of headache that she linked to her daily job as a teacher. The patient did not mention any history of haematuria or prominent flank pain. Detailed analysis of patient’s family history did not reveal information about neuroendocrine tumours. The patient said that her mother had suffered from polycystic kidney disease (without liver cysts) and that she had an aunt with polycystic kidney disease who, unfortunately, had died at the age of 40 years because of renal insufficiency.
The patient’s prior treatment plan included amlodipine 10 mg po qd, indapamide 1.5 mg po qd, but she was not perfectly adherent to treatment.
Half a year before, the patient was admitted to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) centre, due to similar acute burning chest pain, sweating, and fatigue. Blood pressure was 210/105 mmHg, heart rate was regular 93 b.p.m. Then, her ECG showed ST depression <2 mm in leads II, V2–V5. Her laboratory results included: Troponin T HS 1200 ng/mL (ref. range: 0–50 ng/mL), creatine-kinase MB 44 IU/L (ref. range: 0–24 IU/L), D-dimers 1600 ng/mL (ref. range: <500 ng/mL), C-reactive protein 12.2 U/L (ref. range: 0–5 U/L), creatinine 64.66 mcmol/L (ref. range: 53–97 mcmol/L). Echocardiography showed moderately reduced ejection fraction (EF) of the left ventricle (∼36%) due to global hypokinesia, tricuspid valve regurgitation was moderate-to-severe; pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 42 mmHg. Coronary angiography was performed immediately and revealed no atherosclerotic lesions. Due to detection of fall of cardiac enzymes values, positive dynamic on ECG and clinical amelioration the patient was discharged after a couple of hours. The final diagnosis at that moment was: acute myocarditis, simple form (probably of viral aetiology).
From the local hospital Emergency Room (first-level hospital), the patient was redirected for the admission to the Institute of Cardiology (third-level hospital). Echocardiography revealed global hypokinesia with severely reduced left ventricular EF (∼28%), mild aortic, mitral and pulmonary regurgitation, and moderate-to-severe tricuspid regurgitation. Pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 49 mmHg. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was not performed. Repeated abdominal ultrasound examination determined a vascularized semiliquid mass (7.0 × 6.7 cm) with multiple membranes in the right lobe of the liver (segment 8 by Couinaud’s classification). Moreover, another avascularized semiliquid mass (8.9 × 8.3 cm) was found in the right liver lobe (segment 7 by Couinaud’s classification). Kidney ultrasound exam showed multiple bilateral cysts with average diameter of 4–5 cm. However, the adrenal glands were not visualized. The patient’s treatment plan was lisinopril 10 mg po qd, indapamide 1.5 mg po qd, and bisoprolol 2.5 mg po qd. During the whole period of admission to the Institute of Cardiology, the patient had several transient states of sudden sweating, pale skin, nausea, and vomiting, accompanied by hypertensive crisis with blood pressure values above 200/100 mmHg. Based on specific clinical features of the patient and her previous instrumental examinations we decided to evaluate urinary fractioned metanephrines. These biochemical markers were collected according to the Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline on PCC in order to avoid misdiagnosis. The results were: 397 μg/24 h/L (ref. range: 0.0–350 μg/24 h). The aldosterone level was normal. Contrasted computed tomography of abdominal cavity and pelvis was performed immediately. It revealed in both hepatic lobes multiple cysts, the biggest one being of 21 mm. Both kidneys showed multiple cysts, the biggest one of 90 mm in the upper pole of right kidney. Also, in the right adrenal gland was determined a filling defect of 71 × 89 × 20 mm. Computed tomography findings in common with urinary fractioned metanephrines, helped to establish the diagnosis of PCC of right adrenal gland associated with liver and kidney polycystic disease. The final diagnosis was: Catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy due to the presence of PCC, secondary arterial hypertension, polycystic kidney and liver disease.
The treatment plan was changed to: terazosin 2 mg po qd, amlodipine 5 mg po qd, high-sodium diet, and surgery for PCC and cysts.
Four days following discharge the patient underwent adrenal mass, kidney and liver cysts removal.
Firstly, minimally invasive laparoscopic approach for the surgery was selected. The persistent bleeding occurred during the surgery that determined transition to xifo-umbilical median laparotomy. No reactive tachycardia or sustained postoperative hypotension were observed.
Histopathology revealed PCC with predisposition to growing in diffuse pattern, tumoural necrosis, and marked pleomorphism (LVI-0); T1, Nx, Mx. Due to suggested potential malignancy because of remarkable pleomorphism and tumoural necrosis, it was decided to perform complex morphohistopathological examination at the National Cancer Centre. This did not reveal any evidence of malignancy.
After discharge, the patient displayed good control of blood pressure. Her treatment plan included lisinopril 20 mg po qd and indapamid 1.5 mg po qd. During outpatient follow-up 1 month post-operative, clinical improvement was substantial. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed prominent increase in left ventricular EF (up to 58%) and resolution of all wall motion abnormalities with mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation; pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 24 mmHg. No hypertensive crises or unexplained sweating were reported. The quality of patient’s life was much better. Because of concomitant polycystic kidney and liver disease, the patient remains at risk for renal insufficiency and poor control of blood pressure. At 6-month follow-up, visit an abdominal ultrasound exam with blood control for renal function are planned at the local medical centre.