The female proband was the fifth child of non-consanguineous parents of Han Chinese descentand was born at 38 weeks gestation by Cesarean section delivery due to a uterine scar to a 30-year-old woman following an uneventful pregnancy. The first child of the parents was an unexplained spontaneous abortion, and the second child was an abortion due to a heterotopic pregnancy. The third child died soon after birth with an unknown diagnosis in a grass-roots hospital. The fourth child had a normal phenotype . The family had no metabolic disorders. The proband had no postnatal adaptation, and the Apgar score was 10 at 1 min. Her birth weight was 2.64 kg (between the 3rd and 10th percentiles). Her head and abdominal circumferences were 32 cm (10th percentile). Her length was 49 cm (50th percentile).
The newborn presented with poor sucking at birth and was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit due to poor vigor, groaning, shortness of breath and cyanosis, and shock at the sixth day of life. Laboratory analyses found metabolic acidosis and severe lactic acidosis based on the arterial blood gas results, including pH 7.167, pCO2 16.9 mmHg, pO2 50.4 mmHg, HCO3–6.2 mmol/L, BE − 22.6 mmol/L, and lactate 13.7 mmol/L (reference ranges: arterial pH 7.35–7.45, pCO2 35–45 mmHg, pO2 60–90 mmHg, HCO3–21-24 mmol/L, BE − 3-3 mmol/L, and lactate ≤2.5 mmol/L). Albumin, normal saline and vasoactive agents (dopamine and dobutamine) were used to improve circulation. The acidosis was treated with sodium bicarbonate, but the plasma lactate acid was still 15.6 mmol/L. Coenzyme A and adenosine triphosphate were used to improve the acidosis, but the plasma lactate acid fluctuated between 3.0 and 10.9 mmol/L. She did not present pronounced urinary lactate. Further metabolic work-up revealed an abnormal increase in N-acetyl tyrosine-2 in the urinary organic acid test, but no abnormal acylcarnitine profiles and amino acids were detected.
Echocardiography revealed the presence of right atrial and ventricular expansion, right ventricular hypertrophy, a normal ventricular ejection function, interventricular septum thickening, tricuspid regurgitation and severe pulmonary hypertension at admission. The percutaneous blood saturation revealed 15% variation before and after the catheter. The PPHN was treated with sidenafil. The electrocardiograph showed nodal tachycardia, right ventricular hypertrophy and movement of the ST segment down 0.1 mv at V1 and V2. The Non-Invasive Cardiac System showed tachycardia, a high cardiac output, a reduction in left ventricle systolic function, and high total peripheral resistance at admission. The chest CT scan and three-dimensional reconstruction displayed coarctation of the aorta and right lung pneumonia. The renal and hepatic function tests, creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, ammonia and total homocysteine were normal. The abdominal ultrasound was also normal.
On the physical examination, there were some signs of shock and mild dehydration. The neurological examination revealed poor reactivity, bregma depression with normal size, hyporeflexia and mild hypermyotonia. No seizures, nystagmus, laryngeal stridor or apnea were present in the neurological signs. The amplitude-integrated electroencephalogram (aEEG) indicted a mild abnormality (she showed no obvious sleep-wake cycles). The brain ultrasonic examination revealed mild echo enhancement on the side of the bilateral paraventricular parenchyma, a left-ependymal cyst and a right-choroid plexus cyst. The laboratory investigations showed that she had mild anemia. The child died on the sixteenth day of life due to cardiac arrest.