A 30-year-old male with no medical or surgical history presented to our hospital six months ago with complaints of left neck swelling for the last five years. This cervical lymph node was investigated through a trucut Biopsy in his hometown that showed a Metastatic Paraganglioma (PG). He came to our hospital to seek further treatment. This gentleman was otherwise asymptomatic, and his clinical examination was unremarkable. PET-CT scan done at that point revealed a hypermetabolic soft tissue mass (3.5 × 1.7 cm) in the left parapharyngeal space and one (4.0 × 4.4 cm) in the right precarinal region along with hypermetabolic left cervical lymph nodes (Level II and III). He was diagnosed with a left carotid body (non-functional) tumor with normal urinary normetanephrine and metanephrine levels. He underwent pre-op angioembolization of his carotid body tumor that showed blood supply from branches of the left external carotid artery (ECA) embolized with PVA particles, thus, reducing 60–70 % of its blood supply. The vascular surgery department at our hospital excised the carotid body tumor and performed left cervical lymph node dissection (, , , ).
Intra-operatively, a firm 5.0 × 5.0 cm mass was seen encasing the left internal carotid artery (ICA) entirely up to the base of the skull. Hence, both the left ICA and ECA were excised along with the tumor, and the ICA was reconstructed using a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) vascular graft. His postoperative course was complicated by a Left Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA) territory infarct leading to right-sided hemiparesis. He made a gradual recovery from his surgery and was eventually discharged home.
Following the patient's successful surgery for the carotid body tumor and left cervical lymph node dissection, he consulted with an oncologist for further evaluation. After a thorough review of the scan by the oncologist, it was determined that no adjuvant treatment was necessary. This decision was based on several factors, including the size and location of the mediastinal mass and the absence of any signs of metastasis. The oncologist also considered the patient's medical history, including previous cancer treatments, and concluded that surgery to remove the tumor would be the most appropriate course of action. The decision to forgo adjuvant therapy was discussed with the patient, who was informed of the risks and benefits of the treatment options and agreed with the oncologist's recommendation. Six months later, the patient returned to our clinic for an assessment of his thoracic disease. The oncologist was consulted again and participated in the decision-making process for the patient's subsequent treatment plan. He remained healthy and asymptomatic throughout his postoperative period, with an 80 % recovery in his right-sided weakness on motor exam. PET-CT scan was repeated that redemonstrated a hypermetabolic mass (4.7 × 4.6 cm) in the right precarinal region, closely related to the Ascending Aorta and Superior Vena Cava (SVC) anteriorly, right pulmonary artery (PA) inferiorly and Right Main stem bronchus posteriorly. However, no residual disease was seen in the left parapharyngeal region, cervical lymph nodes, or distant metastasis. The patient was diagnosed with a Mediastinal Paraganglionoma and underwent a median sternotomy under general anesthesia for a complete resection of the mass. After pericardiotomy and excising the right peri-aortic tissue between the SVC and ascending aorta, a firm, well-encapsulated, lobulated (5.5 × 4.5 × 3.5 cm) mass was seen occupying the space behind the ascending aorta and overlying the right PA. A similar, smaller (3.5 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm) nodal mass was posterior to the central mass. These were highly vascular structures deriving their feeding and draining vessels from the aorta and Right PA, respectively, which were ligated. Considering the complex location of the mass and its proximity to major vascular structures, the Cardiopulmonary Bypass (CPB) was kept on standby. However, we performed a complete resection of the tumor of the CPB without suffering any major intraoperative hemorrhage or hemodynamic compromise. 32fr chest drains were placed in the mediastinum, and the chest was closed in a standard technique using sternal wires. The patient had an uneventful recovery postoperatively and was discharged home on the 4th Postop day. Histopathology showed tumor cells arranged in nests separated by fibrous connective tissue septae and a Zellballen pattern with faint cytoplasm and prominent nuclei. The immunohistochemical profile of tumor cells was positive for synaptophysin and S100 in the sustentacular cell, thus, confirming the diagnosis of clinically recurrent paraganglioma.