A 20-year-old man receiving home care with a long-term central venous catheter (CVC) was referred to our hospital with fever and dyspnea (day 0). Central parenteral nutrition through the CVC was started 2 years prior. His medical history included severe neurological disabilities due to cerebral injury after influenza encephalopathy, cardioplasty, esophagogastric disconnection, and small bowel resection due to postoperative ileus 3 years ago. His medications included lansoprazole, carbamazepine, triclofos sodium, baclofen, and daikenchuto.
On admission, he had a high-grade fever of 38.6 °C and chills. Physical examination revealed no significant abnormalities, except for scattered erythema. Laboratory data were as follows: white blood cell count 5700/μL; hemoglobin 11.8 g /dL; platelet count 243,000/μL; albumin 3.5 g/dL; total bilirubin 0.3 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase 20 U/L; alanine aminotransferase 33 U/L; γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 178 U/L; serum creatinine 0.44 mg/dL; C-reactive protein 4.97 mg/dL; and procalcitonin 0.30 ng/mL. Cefazolin was started at a dosage of 0.5 g every 12 h due to a suspected CRBSI following collection of one set of blood cultures from the CVC. He still had fever between 38.1 and 39.3 °C and chills during cefazolin administration.
On day 3, yeast-like cells grew in an aerobic blood culture bottle obtained on admission . The serum beta-D glucan measured was 10.8 pg/mL (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan; cut-off value, < 11 pg/mL). Retinal examination revealed no evidence of endophthalmitis. Micafungin was added at a dose of 100 mg every 24 h against suspected candidemia after an additional set of blood cultures, and the CVC was removed. The patient became afebrile after initiating systemic antifungal therapy. The colony appeared rough and pale orange in color. The colony’s India ink stain did not show a zone of clearance of ink particles, like Cryptococcus. Colonies were tested on CHROMagar Candida medium (Kanto Chemical Co., Inc., Tokyo, Japan) using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS, the MALDI Biotyper Reference Library Ver.4.0.0.1, Filamentous Fungi Library Ver.1.0; Bruker Daltoniks, Germany), identifying them as Aureobasidium pullulans (score 1.919). On day 6, the high fever recurred. Micafungin was stopped and liposomal-amphotericin B (L-AMB) was started (3 mg/kg/day) for Cryptococcus albidus owing to a 90% probability of identification using the VITEK2 COMPACT Microbial Detection System (version 8.01 database: SYSMEX bioMerieux Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).
The treatment was subsequently stopped because urticaria appeared after the 3-day use of L-AMB. After the discontinuation of L-AMB, no additional systemic antibiotics were administered. The patient remained afebrile. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) according to the reference method for broth dilution antifungal susceptibility testing of yeasts were as follows: micafungin 0.25 μg/mL; caspofungin 0.5 μg/mL; AMPH-B 1 μg/mL; 5-flucytosine 0.25 μg/mL; fluconazole 8 μg/mL; itraconazole 0.06 μg/mL; and voriconazole 0.03 μg/mL.
The fungus was identified as Aureobasidium; however, it was impossible to differentiate between A. pullulans and A. melanigenum by sequencing the internal transcribed spacer regions. Comparison of the sequence from the isolate to sequences in the MYCOBANK database revealed 99.82% similarity of the sequence with A. pullulans CBS 110.67 strain and 99.83% similarity with A. melanigenum CBS 123.37 strain. Next, the other two regions, β-tubulin and elongase, were compared using the BLAST database . The sequence of the isolate showed 88.5% similarity with A. pullulans CBS 584.75 strain and 94.20% similarity with A. melanigenum CBS 105.22 strain in the β-tubulin gene region respectively, and in the elongase gene region, the sequence of the isolate showed 92.37% similarity with A. pullulans CBS 584.75 strain and 95.22% similarity with A. melanigenum CBS 109800 strain.
Therefore, the fungus was identified based on clustering in the phylogenetic analysis of β-tubulin and elongase genes with representative strains . A phylogenetic tree was constructed by the neighbor-joining method using the MEGA X program from the distance data generated by multi-alignment of the nucleotide sequence. A bootstrap value of 70% or more was considered as moderate support for the identification of clades. This fungus was placed in the A. melanogenum clade in the phylogenetic tree. Thus, the fungus was identified as A. melanogenum. The colonies were black , and conidiogenous cells were also detected . Fungemia was dismissed after day 7. The patient was discharged on day 27 without complications. There was no recurrence of A. melanigenum bloodstream infection.