The index patient is a 55-year-old Caucasian male, height 160cm, weight 72kg, with a multisystem MID diagnosed upon clinical presentation, immune-histo-chemical, and biochemical investigations of a muscle biopsy at age 34. His history was noteworthy for mental retardation, epilepsy since age 12, cataract surgery, hypoacusis, vitamin D deficiency, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (hCMP), left ventricular hypertrabeculation (LVHT)/noncompaction , QT-prolongation , left anterior hemiblock (LAH), anemia, cholecystolithiasis, sleep disorder, hepatopathy, hyperlipidemia, benzodiazepine misuse, myopathy, prostate hyperplasia, right total hip endoprosthesis, and iron deficiency . Since at least age 47 camptocormia became apparent. At age 48 he experienced a deep venous thrombosis after left tibial fracture. At age 51 he had undergone surgery for right-sided scrotal hernia. Seizures were well controlled with a seizure frequency of about two generalised tonic-clonic seizures per year and several focal seizures.
Clinical neurologic exam revealed short stature, hypertelorism, myopia, bilateral ptosis (left > right), signe des cils bilaterally, bulb protrusion bilaterally, upslanting palpebral fissures, positional nystagmus when looking in any direction, cognitive impairment, hypoacusis, a barrel thorax, gibbus, camptocormia, generally reduced tendon reflexes on the upper and lower limbs, diffuse wasting, dysdiadochokinesia, mild postural tremor, mild weakness for foot extension bilaterally (M5-), ataxia of the lower limbs, genu valga, outwardly rotated feet, and flexion contractures of the knees with right-sided predominance.
Creatine-kinase (CK) was repeatedly elevated. Serum lactate was elevated to 2.5 mmol/l (n, <2.2 mmol/l). The lactate stress test was abnormal. Nerve conduction studies were indicative of axonal polyneuropathy. MRI of the lumbar spine revealed a wedge vortex L3, vertebral stenosis L2/3, and lumbar osteochondrosis. Muscle biopsy from the right gastrocnemius muscle revealed subsarcolemmal accumulation of mitochondria, ragged red fibers, tubular-shaped mitochondria, and bizarre cristae proliferation. Biochemical investigations of the muscle homogenate revealed a combined complex-I and complex-IV defect. His last medication included lamotrigine 400 mg/d, levetiracetam 1000 mg/d, lacosamide 250 mg/d, and vitamin D.
The 78-year-old mother of the index patient had a history of arterial hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, polyarthralgias due to polyarthrosis, deep venous thrombosis, recurrent leg edema, phlebitis, hyperuricemia, and listhesis L3/4. She had surgery of the right shoulder after a trauma, cataract surgery bilaterally, surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome bilaterally, and veins tripping four times. She refrained from being investigated neurologically during years despite frequently accompanying her son to his regular neurological visits. At the age of 74 she sought neurological advice for the first time after nerve conduction studies, carried out for sensory disturbances of the feet, had revealed sensori-motor polyneuropathy.
Clinical exam of the mother revealed short stature (164 cm), alopecia, madarosis, dysarthria, diffuse weakness of the left upper limb, hypoesthesia of the left upper limb, reduced triceps tendon reflexes bilaterally, dysdiadochokinesia, dysmetria bilaterally, reduced tendon reflexes on the lower limbs, and discrete wasting of the thighs. The hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) value was 7.3 % (n, 4-6%). Triglycerides were 313 mg/dL (n, <150 mg/dL). Serum iron was elevated to 187mg/dl (n, 27-145 mg/dl), the CK was 224 U/L (n, <170 U/L). There was mild lactic acidosis. Cerebral MRI showed gliotic spots bilaterally including the basal ganglia and diffuse atrophy. Nerve conduction studies revealed a sensori-motor polyneuropathy. Her last medication included simvastatin, enalapril, acetyl-salicylic acid, vitamins, and antidiabetics. She refused to undergo muscle biopsy. Phenotypic features the index patient and his mother had in common included cerebral atrophy, myopathy, neuropathy, cataract, hyperlipidemia, short stature, disturbed iron metabolism, and deep venous thrombosis . Other family members had anginal chest pain (brother, father, mother), subarachnoidal bleeding (father), and cholecystolithiasis (grandmother from the mother's side).