A 64-year-old man with a history of headache for 4 months, dull responses, and gait disturbance for 3 months was admitted to our hospital. At admission, the patient had low-grade fever and replied very slowly (sometimes incorrectly) to questions. However, he was able to follow simple orders. The patient had symmetrical paralysis of both lower limbs, leaving him unable to walk without assistance. In addition, auricular swelling was observed upon physical examination. Bilateral Kernig’s sign was positive and ankle clonus was present. Assessment with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) yielded a score of 20/30, indicating impaired cognitive function. It was noteworthy that the patient had difficulty performing simple mathematical tasks as he had been an accountant for decades.
We reviewed the patient’s history and found that he had been in good health before the onset of symptoms. In particular, the patient had no history of trauma, smoking, alcohol abuse, allergy, recent vaccination, or hereditary factors. Headache and intermittent fever occurred after travelling, which led him to seek medical advice 4 months prior to his admission. At that time, TBM was suspected based on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests, which revealed pleocytosis with a predominance of lymphocytes . However, after a few weeks of antituberculous therapy, the patient developed several new symptoms, including ear swelling, tinnitus, dizziness, and gait disturbance.
Subsequently, the patient was hospitalized three times with complaints of recurrent headaches, worsening gait disturbance, and other new symptoms including eyelid swelling and arthralgia. Two months after his first admission, the patient was diagnosed as having RP based on the Damiani and Levine criteria , and was treated with low-dose steroids. Antituberculous therapy was continued simultaneously. However, he showed little symptomatic improvement with treatment.
At the time of admission to our hospital, the patient’s CSF was assayed again. We detected pleocytosis and increased immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels (125 mg/L). CSF pathogen cultures and serologic tests for bacteria, viruses (such as human immunodeficiency virus, herpes simplex virus, Epstein-Barr virus, varicella-zoster virus, hepatitis viruses, and enteroviruses), fungi, parasites, and Treponema yielded negative results. The results of assays for tumor markers and paraneoplastic-related antibodies were also negative. In addition, assays for CNS vasculitis and autoimmune encephalitis yielded negative results.
Between the patient’s first clinical visit and admission to our hospital, his erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) increased from 40 mm/h to 111 mm/h. An anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) test indicated a particle pattern with a titer of 1:100. The level of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP) was 10 U/ml. The results of tests for other immune and rheumatoid biomarkers, such as anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, lupus anticoagulant, anti-phospholipid antibodies, and rheumatoid factors, were all negative or within the normal range. A Gene X-pert mycobacterium tuberculosis/rifampin detection test eliminated the possibility of a rifampin-resistant gene locus. Other indices were negative or within the normal ranges.
Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were normal. However, brain MRI indicated brain atrophy, hydrocephalus, and abnormal signals in periventricular white matter. Brain MRI with gadolinium enhancement showed leptomeningeal enhancement mainly in the right occipitotemporal and posterior cingulate gyri , but not in the basal cisternal area, which is often indicative of typical tubercular meningitis.
Based on the aforementioned examinations, we suspected that the patient had RP with meningoencephalitis. Subsequently, intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy (500 mg for 3 days) with methotrexate (MTX, 12.5 mg, once per week) was administered. Supportive and symptomatic treatments were also provided. Three weeks after treatment initiation, the patient’s symptoms dramatically improved. We also observed a decrease in the ESR (20 mm/h), normalization of CSF assay results , and an improved MMSE score of 28/30. Upon discharge, the patient had normal responses and was able to walk for 1000 m without help. No flare-up was reported at the 6-month follow-up visit.