Our case involves a 4-year-old patient assigned as female at birth who visited the genetic outpatient clinic for ambiguous genitalia and skeletal dysplasia. She was born via cesarean delivery from non-consanguineous parents and had a cleft palate, which was corrected at 4 months. The girl had a moderate developmental delay characterized by being able to stand at 1 year of age and walk at 3 years of age after constant physiotherapy. Physical examination of the head revealed trigonocephaly, a protruding frontal region, almond-shaped eyes with antimongoloid deviation, a flat nasal bridge, a long philtrum, retromicrognathia, and a short neck. Radiography of the head revealed a vertebral fusion between C5 and C6 . We observed limb malformations, including prominent hips, shortening of the right lower limb, valgus knees, and rhizomelic arms . Radiography of the limbs revealed femur bowing, an underdeveloped acetabulum, and a femoral head. At birth, the physicians described the appearance of external female genitalia. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed ovaries, a small uterus, and shortened vagina. Hormone analysis showed increased testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone levels. A peripheral blood karyotype reported a 46XY with a positive SRY gene. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed Arnold–Chiari malformation type 1 . Moreover, she had moderate conductive bilateral hearing loss, which was corrected with hearing aids . Written informed consent was obtained from the parents to perform WES given that this analysis is not covered by the public health system.
We used a capture of target regions using probes, followed by next-generation sequencing with Illumina technology. The total number of reads was 41,660,733, whereas that of the mapped reads was 41,603,016 (99.86%). We aligned the raw data using the Burrows–Wheeler Aligner software, sorted and merged the data using the Picard tools software, and identified the nucleotide variants (SNV) and insertions or deletions (indel) using GATK. The GRCh37 version of the human genome was taken as reference.
After performing WES on the mother, father, and patient, we identified 1,582 variants causing non-synonymous, stop-gain, and frameshift changes; selected those with minor allele frequency (<0.01) in various databases; filtered variants unique to the daughter and absent in the parents; and detected one nonsense heterozygote variant in the SOX9 gene of the patient. We sequenced only the SOX9 gene and confirmed the variant. The pathogenic variant was caused by a guanine to adenine change at the 344 bp (c.G344A), resulting in a tryptophan to a premature stop codon change at position 115 (p.Trp115*) of the HMG domain. The frequency of this variant was 0 in the Genome Aggregation Database and Exome Aggregation Consortium databases and was not reported in the Ensembl genome and ClinVar databases. The parents did not have the nonsense variant and were homozygous for the reference allele (G). To the best of our knowledge, no genes have been previously associated with Arnold–Chiari malformation type I.
We subsequently performed a literature review on CD and found 115 reported cases. Thereafter, we filtered the cases with nonsense and missense variants and excluded translocations and papers that did not include the description of the mutation. The results after correlating the variant location with the domains along the gene are shown in and . The final number of research articles included 18 nonsense and 20 missense cases. Although variants p.Asn147Thr, p.Arg121*, and p.Glu134* were mentioned in review articles, no clinical description was provided.
Our literature review revealed that missense variants were located at the beginning of SOX9, with 4 located in the DIM and 12 in the HMG domains. There was no missense variant in the K2, PQA, and PQS domains. There were no reported cases of sex reversal with mutations in the DIM domain, but three cases with mutations in the HMG domains exhibited sex reversal. The reported missense cases shared facial features and bone malformations. Three of these patients had cardiovascular malformations. Premature death did not occur in patients with DIM mutations, unlike those with HMG mutations who died during the first months of life. The oldest reported individual was a 21-year-old woman.
Nonsense variants were located along the whole SOX9 gene, with three in the DIM, four in the HMG, one in the PQA, and four in the PQS domain. The mutation in our patient was localized in the HMG domain. Four mutations (Tyr319*, Gln391*, Arg394*, and Glu400*) did not occur on a functional domain and could alter the protein structure. There was no nonsense variant in the K2 domain. The reported nonsense cases shared facial features and bone malformations. Our patient, along with two others, had neurological malformations. Most patients died during gestation or the postnatal period or were aborted by the mothers. The oldest reported individual was an 18-year-old woman. There were no reported cases of sex reversal with mutations in the DIM, whereas two cases with mutations in the HMG, one with mutations in the PQA, and one with mutations in the PQS domains exhibited sex reversal. From the information provided in the reported cases, respiratory and cardiovascular malformations were more common in missense than in nonsense variants.
We considered that the variant causing CD develops only in humans given that SOX9 alters essential functions during development. There were no reported cases of primates with phenotypes such as CD. We compared and aligned a normal human sequence and all missense variants with SOX9 from chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes NC_036896.1), orangutans (Pongo abelii NC_036920.1), gorillas (Gorilla NC_044619.1), rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta NC_041770.1), and house mice (Mus musculus NC_000083.7). The protein alignment confirmed that the SOX gene was highly preserved between species (similarity between 96.45% and 100%, as described in ) and that no other species had the missense or nonsense variants (, ).