On November 7, 2020, a previously-healthy 25 years old delivery man was sent to the emergency room with hyperpyrexia and chest tightness for about 22 h, accompanied by cough and expectoration. Through case history inquiry, we known that he applied a homebred waterproofing spray (about 100 mL) to his shoes in a bathroom 6 h prior to symptom onset, being exposed to terrible smells and poor ventilation room. He smelt pungent odor when inhaled directly some of the spray. Additionally, he smoked 10 cigarettes a day for 5 years. He had no history of drinking and neurological or psychiatric disorders. Family members of the patient were in good health. There was no history of hereditary diseases, preexisting sensitivity or pulmonary disease, such as asthma, pneumonia, tuberculosis, cardiovascular diseases, infectious diseases, and surgical interventions. The patient with low flow oxygen presented stable vital signs by a bedside ECG monitor [heart rate (HR) 71/min, blood pressure 126/69 mmHg, SpO2 97% (91% in room air), respiratory rate (RR) 22/min]. General physical examination and specific check-up for the rest body system revealed no abnormality. Listening to the chest with a stethoscope revealed diminished respiration of bilateral lung.
On admission, the routine blood test revealed total leucocyte count of 32.35 × 109/L, of which neutrophile granulocyte count of 29.25 × 109/L (90.4%), and procalcitonin (PCT) level of 8.66 ng/ml. C-reaction protein (CRP) level of 12.3 mg/L. There is no obvious abnormality of his blood serum chemistries and fibrin d-dimmer test, shown in . Blood gas analysis revealed PH 7.4, pO2 66 mmHg, pCO2 34 mmHg, HCO3− 20 mmol/L, BE −1 mmol/L. PaO2/FIO2 = 220 . His lung CT scan images revealed diffuse ground glass and infiltrative shadows . But there were no evidences of immunosuppression and pathogens with sputum culture and blood serum test, such as bacteria, fungus, EB virus, CMV virus and so on. His antinuclear and vasculitis antibodies tests were normal. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm. Admission chest x-ray of the patient demonstrated a decreased transparency in both lung field, and there were no signs of cardiomegaly and pleural effusion . We also used fluorescence bronchoscope to obtain bronchoalveolar alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) for mNGS. The results of the mNGS were compared with four microbial genome reference sequence databases downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information, which included the whole genome sequence of 1,798 DNA viruses, 6,350 bacteria, and 1,604 fungi and 234 parasites genome sequences associated with human infection. The results of mNGS exhibited Dialister pneumosintes (sequence number 46) and Dialister invisus (sequence number 36) which can often isolate from the mouths of animals and even humans (, ). They are usually considered as conditional pathogens of immunocompromised individuals and rarely seen in immunocompetent patients, so these pathogens were considered to be contaminating or colonizing bacteria .
Immediately on admission, based on the present and past history, age, clinical manifestations, physical examination and comprehensive auxiliary examinations, such as arterial blood gas analysis, a cardiogenic pulmonary edema was excluded and a preliminary diagnosis of mild ARDS was established. The patient was treated with moxifloxacin (400 mg given intravenously once a day), Cotrimoxazole (1,440 mg given orally every 8 h), oseltamivir (75 mg given orally twice a day), and terbutaline 1 mg (oxygen atomizing inhalation twice a day). We stopped anti-infective therapy after mNGS test, on account of lacking of etiological evidence. The recommendations from evidence-based medicine point out that a low dose of methylprednisolone 0.5–1 mg/kg body weight/d for mild ARDS . The total dosages of methylprednisolone were calculated based on the bodyweight of the patient (54 kg). And then the dosage of methylprednisolone (0.5 mg/kg body weight/d × 54 kg = 27 mg/d) was converted into the equivalent dosage of prednisone (27/4 × 5 = 33.75 mg/d). Subsequently, prednisone acetate (10 mg given orally three times a day) were started. The patient was afebrile and felt better after corticosteroid therapy. After 3 days of using prednisone acetate, the chest HRCT revealed a marked decrease of diffuse ground-glass opacity and infiltrative shadows . The changes of neutrophil count, neutrophil proportion and white blood cell count had a continuously declining trend, which finally were close to normal. We decided to discharge the patient, and continued prednisone acetate for 10 days (10 mg given orally twice a day for 5 days and then 10 mg given orally once a day for 5 days). The patient treatment process is shown in . During 12 weeks of follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic and was doing well. CT scans showed normal parenchyma of the lungs. Further follow-up observation is underway to research long term prognosis of ARDS patients involved in toxic inhalation.