The proband was an 8-year-old boy born to second-degree consanguineous parents. He had a history of recurrent infections during infancy, including herpetic whitlow, pansinusitis, urticarial vasculitis, mastoiditis, purulent otitis, and recurrent pneumonia associated with peri-bronchial thickening in central areas of both lungs. There was a significant family history involving the deaths of three parental uncles of the patient without specific diagnoses at the ages of 3 months, six months, and five years. On physical examination, submandibular lymphadenopathy and a Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine scar were noted, which was injected at his birth based on national vaccination protocol. The patient did not exhibit any syndromic facial features or organomegaly, and the results of other clinical assessments were normal. Skin biopsy from the persisting skin lesions in the thighs, buttocks, hands and face were performed and indicated perivascular and perifollicular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with vague granulomatous lesion.
Initially, based on the patient’s symptoms and the results of immunoglobulin and flow cytometry.
tests, which revealed a low serum total and the specific antibody, decreased isohemagglutinin titer, and severe reduction of CD20 + B cells; the patient was diagnosed with agammaglobulinemia. He was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), but not only did some symptoms persist, but new symptoms, such as muscle weakness, failure to thrive (FTT), and chronic bloody diarrhea also emerged. At first, these new findings were attributed to concomitant dermatomyositis and B cell deficiency; however, after considering the patient’s clinical course, consulting with several immunologists, and conducting an immunological workup , the diagnosis of combined immunodeficiency (CID) was established. Serial immunologic tests of the patient revealed a progressive complex profile of inborn errors of immunity, which encompasses a slight decline in the count of white blood cells (WBC), accompanied by lymphopenia, below-average levels of CD3 and CD4 cells, and abnormalities in B cell indices. Molecular diagnosis was conducted using whole exome sequencing and analyzed based on a previously published method , and the results confirmed the presence of two novel VUS mutations in RAG2 (homozygous c.1241G > T, p.G414V) and BTK (hemizygous c.1064 A > G, p.D355G) genes, both with low minor allele frequency in the population and predicted high damaging scores on the protein .
The segregation analysis of the parents unveiled that both parents carried the heterozygous RAG2 variant. Additionally, the mother exhibited an additional genetic characteristic; she was found to be a carrier of the BTK variant. Taken together, these findings indicated the compromised development of both B and T cells, was likely attributed to the RAG2 mutation. Furthermore, early reduced levels of CD19 and CD20 compared to T cells, along with decreased levels of immunoglobulins, underscore a significant deficiency in B cells, which can be assigned to the presence of the BTK mutation. Moreover, the progressive unbalanced distribution of cellular immunity observed in the patient, potentially influenced by the effects of both mutations, as recent study indicated the impaired cellular immunity in BTK deficiency, including abnormal memory T cells, T regulatory cells, delayed cell-mediated immune responses, defective T helper cell polarization and impaired T cell receptor diversity .
Meanwhile the patient was candidate for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), he received prophylactic therapy with antiviral, antifungal, and antibiotic medications, and the administration of IVIg was maintained. Consequently, in June 2020, he underwent HSCT with his mother as the donor; however, unfortunately, 1-month post-transplantation, the patient became infected with cytomegalovirus (CMV) and passed away at 8 years.