A 24-year-old male was admitted with a progressively enlarged black grape-shaped cyst protruding from the upper temporal region of the right eyeball and foreign body sensation for 9 years. He had a glass crush contusion in the right eye 9 years ago. Additionally, the glass panel slid towards his head during the process of handling, resulting in a laceration and blunt contusion to the upper eyelid of the right eye. The ophthalmic examination revealed that the Best-Corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA) measured 20/25 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. The IOP was 20.6 mmHg in the right eye and 14.0 mmHg in the left eye. There was a strip of scar tissue about 10 mm in length at 12 o’clock on the right upper eyelid. Anterior segment examination revealed a giant staphyloma, which was approximately 7 mm in diameter and located at the 10–12 o’clock of the corneoscleral limbus. The staphyloma had a vague and thin layer of fibrous tissue, and was covered by a bulbar conjunctiva. The rest of the sclera and cornea were normal without obvious traces of previous injuries. Intraocular examination showed that the pupil was not round and was eccentric toward the staphyloma. A clear lens was observed without obvious signs of traumatic cataracts. Fundus examination of the posterior segment revealed no retinal anomalies or retinal detachment. The ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) examination showed that the left eye was completely normal, but there were two cysts in the right eye. The larger cyst was about 5.92 mm*4.69 mm in size, with the scleral laceration (about 1.9 mm and 0.39 mm) connecting to the posterior chamber below the cyst . Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with anterior scleral staphyloma preoperatively. Considerating the patient’s history of progressive enlargement of the staphyloma and the psychological distress caused by its visible protrusion, particularly when he looks downward, surgical intervention has been recommended.
On August 16, 2022, the patient received resection of the anterior scleral staphyloma and allograft scleral graft transplantation under retrobulbar anesthesia. The staphyloma was injected with viscoelastic material to maintain IOP before its resection . The resected cystic tissue was pathologically examined. After resection of the staphyloma, the scleral laceration was observed , which was then covered with the scleral patch that had been well rinsed with 0.1% amikacin-prepared saline . Postoperatively, tobramycin dexamethasone drops and levofloxacin drops were given four times a day for anti-inflammatory and anti-infective treatment. IOP was monitored three times a day during hospitalization.
One week after the surgery, the BCVA of the right eye was 20/20, and the IOP was 8 mmHg. Postoperative pathological examination of the staphyloma showed fibrous tissues and blood vessels. Pigment cells were attached to the inner layer and there was no obvious epithelial tissue , which confirmed the diagnosis of scleral staphyloma. Postoperatively, the anterior segment examination showed the anterior chamber, the pupil, and the iris were consistent with those before . One month after surgery, the IOP of the right eye was 12.3 mmHg. The UBM examination showed that the sclera graft covered the laceration, which was obviously smaller than before . The other clinical findings were consistent to those at one week after surgery. Three months after surgery, the IOP of the right eye was 14.5 mmHg. The UBM examination showed that the sclera graft fits the lacerations better than that before, and no obvious graft thinning was observed .