A 54-year-old man presented to the neurology department with a headache and fever for 5 d.
The symptoms started 3 mo before the presentation and included headaches while bowing his head, which started 19 d before the presentation with double vision while viewing distant objects, and fevers during the headaches started 5 d before presentation.
Seven years prior, the patient underwent surgery for appendicitis in a local hospital. Moreover, he was diagnosed with chronic severe periodontitis for 5 years, type 2 diabetes for 2 years, and an allergic reaction to aminotriol keto chromate injection. Ten days prior, the patient was admitted to a local hospital complaining of headaches for three months, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple signal abnormalities in the left cerebellum and abnormal signal foci in the cavernous sinus region. Laboratory examinations showed that the C-reactive protein (CRP) was 44.91 mg/L (normal 0-10), and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 45 mm/h (normal 0-15). cyfra21-1 (CF21-1) was 3.5 ng/mL (normal 0-3), neuron-specific enolase (NSE) was 22.8 ng/mL (normal 0.6-5.4), and the levels of immune markers were normal. No abnormalities were found in the electrolyte test, kidney function test, liver renal function test, or routine blood and urine analyses. Therefore, the local hospital’s staff considered that the patient could have metastases or inflammatory lesions. Five days prior, the treatment showed no avail, and the patient presented with an aggravated headache and pyrexia. The patient was admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient denied any family history of genetic disorders.
Thyroid and abdominal ultrasound, chest computed tomography (CT), and abdominal CT did not reveal any tumor lesions, and lymph node biopsy showed no significant abnormalities. Brain CT showed abnormal signal foci in the cavernous sinus region. Brain MRI showed irregular patchy long T1 and long T2 signal shadows in the left cerebellar hemisphere, with blurred borders, and patchy low signal shadows within them. Enhancement scanning of the lesion area showed a multiventricular ring-like enhancement .
The serum sodium was 133.6 mmol/L (normal 135-145), the serum chlorine was 92.6 mmol/L (normal 95-100), the blood glucose was 8.68 mmol/L (normal 3.9-6.1), the glycated hemoglobin was 11.3% (normal 4%-6%), the CRP was 11.00 mg/L (normal 0-10), and the ESR was 23 mm/h (normal 0-15). The cytomegalovirus IgG was 92.2 U/mL (normal 0-4), and the rubella virus IgG was 24.5 IU/mL (normal 0 < 10). The antinuclear extract antibody profile (Anti-Sm antibody, anti-Scl-70 antibody, anti-RNP antibody, anti-Jo-1 antibody, anti-SSA antibody and anti-SSB antibody), tumor anti-nervous system antibody profile (anti-hu, anti-Ri, anti-Yo, anti-Amphiphysin), and tumor marker (CA125, CA199, CA72-4, CY21-1, CEA, NSE, SCC, AFP, TPSA, FPSA and ProGRP), all of which were normal. No abnormalities were found in the eight tests for infectious diseases, tuberculosis T-cell test, G test, GM test, kidney function, liver renal function test, or routine blood and urine analyses.
The vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 36.5 °C; blood pressure, 105/70 mmHg; heart rate, 70 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 16 breaths per min. Furthermore, the patient had the following: clear mind, clear language, normal emotions; orientation, understanding, memory, computing power were all normal; stable vitals; gums with residual crowns and roots; reduced tendon reflexes in the extremities; no obvious abnormality in cardiopulmonary and abdominal physical examination; and no edema in the lower limbs. Moreover, nonpersistent horizontal nystagmus was observed in both eyeballs, especially in left eye fixation. The tongue was centered, the right pharyngeal reflex was slightly diminished, the left finger nose test and heel knee tibial test were slightly less accurate, and other physical examinations showed no obvious abnormalities.
On day 7 of admission, mNGS was used to detect pathogenic microorganisms in the CSF, and the results showed that the pathogens were two oral bacteria, Tannerella forsythensis and Campylobacter rectus . Moreover, the intracranial lesions were preliminarily considered inflammatory tissue, which may have been secondary to oral bacteria. On day 10 of admission, these lesion tissues were extracted. Intraoperatively, three flexible, light yellow lesion tissues with a normal blood supply were found in the left cerebellum. We used a syringe to puncture the abscess and aspirate it and found yellow, sticky, foul-smelling pus. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen (size, 1 cm × 0.6 cm × 0.3 cm) confirmed that the abscess originated from a bacterial infection . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that inflammation was positive for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20, CD56, CD68, CD138, and MPO and negative for PAS .