The patient is a 41-year-old male firefighter who in 2001 sustained a burn injury encompassing the total face, bilateral superior and inferior eyelids, bilateral external ears, lips, and the entire scalp. The patient underwent over 70 autologous reconstructive procedures. Diffuse scar contracture to the periorbital, perioral, and cervical regions resulted in poor facial function, including eyelid apposition for volitional and reflective blink, mastication, phonation, and facial expression. The patient was evaluated by a multidisciplinary team, and voluntarily enrolled in the face transplantation clinical trial at the NYU Langone Medical Center (clinicaltrials.gov number ; Institutional Review Board protocol # I14-00550).
On August 12, 2015, the donor family granted permission for a face transplantation evaluation. The donor, an otherwise healthy 26-year-old male who suffered irreversible traumatic brain injury, met preset criteria based on age, sex, general health, skin color match, and craniofacial dimensions. Serology was positive for cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus for both donor and recipient; recipient panel reactive antibody (PRA) score was 0. The donor was ABO identical to the recipient, and HLA antigen mismatch was 2-2-2 for A, B, and DR (Donor: A3, 30; B13, 47; C6; DR4, 13, 52, 53; Recipient: A1, 11; B8, 44; C5, 7; DR13, 17, 52; and DQ2, 6). Complement-dependent cytotoxicity crossmatch (CDCXM) was negative for T and B cells. FCXM was negative for T cells but repeatedly positive for donor B cells. Median channel displacement (MChD) was 110, with positivity defined as MChD ≥ 50 at our HLA laboratory. Presence of a class II DSA was ruled out with high resolution allele subtyping. Minor antigen HLA and endothelial cross matching was not performed.
Based on FCXM results, an induction regimen was designed consisting of rATG 6 mg/kg (575 mg total dose), methylprednisolone taper, and the anti-CD20 agent rituximab (1 g) . The patient also received intraoperative tacrolimus (5 mg) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (1000 mg). Total face, scalp, eyelid, ears, and skeletal subunit allotransplantation was performed on August 14, 2015; surgical and technical details have been described . Infection prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160 mg/day), valganciclovir (450 mg/day), and micafungin (100 mg/day) was administered; piperacillin/tazobactam and clindamycin were also given for oral infection prophylaxis. Maintenance immunosuppression consists of tacrolimus, MMF, and prednisone. Immunosuppression, renal function, and lymphocyte subset counts (CD3+, CD19+) were recorded. For biopsies of allograft skin taken on POD 410 and POD 711, tissue hematoxylin and eosin stains and C4d immunohistochemistry staining were performed by the histology laboratory of the Department of Surgical Pathology at Tisch Hospital of the NYU Langone Medical Center. Rabbit polyclonal C4d anti-human antibody (Cell Margue) was used. The Ultraview Universal DAB Detection Kit (Ventana Medical Systems, Inc.) was used for identification.
In the first 24 months after transplant, the patient has not presented acute rejection episodes , infectious, metabolic, or other immunologic complications. Planned secondary surgeries were performed, which have optimized aesthetic and functional improvements . After steady state tacrolimus levels were achieved, micafungin was replaced with fluconazole (200 mg/day) on postoperative day (POD) 25.
Maintenance immunosuppression has remained stable, with progressive decreases in tacrolimus trough target levels as well as MMF and prednisone doses . As of postoperative month 24, tacrolimus target levels are 5–7 ng/mL; the patient is receiving, 250 mg BID of MMF and 5 mg/day prednisone.
The patient's renal function has remained stable throughout the first 24 months after transplant .
Lymphocyte subset studies show reestablishment of the T lymphocyte (CD3+) population on approximately POD 25, soon after completion of induction regimen. The B lymphocyte (CD19+) population reappeared in laboratory studies after approximately POD 200 and has undergone gradual reconstitution. The patient has presented with prolonged neutropenia, treated with filgrastim regimen as needed .
Histopathology analysis of allograft skin biopsy performed on POD 410 showed sparse perivascular dermatitis with eosinophils , consistent with Banff grade 0-1; C4d immunohistochemistry staining was negative . Histopathology of allograft skin biopsy performed on POD 711 showed focal perivascular lymphocytic dermatitis , consistent with Banff grade 0; C4d immunostain showed focal positivity in the superficial dermis .