An 18-year-old primigravida, with a fetus of 16 weeks of gestational age, presented to the obstetrics emergency department with a condition of intense weakness, followed by diarrhea, that she had had for 15 days. She said that she did not have any fever, headache, bleeding, seizures, neurological abnormalities, urinary abnormalities, rash or shortness of breath, and that she was not using any medications.
She reported that she had had a condition of “low platelets” since childhood (but without any bleeding and with regular menstrual cycle and flow), and that she had been admitted to this hospital (without remembering any details), where she was followed up by the hematology and nephrology departments, with discharge from the hospital three years before the present case.
In the medical files relating to this patient, we found two previous admissions to the emergency department of this hospital. At the first admission, when she was nine years old, she presented with acute hemolysis, uremia and ascites, which progressed to urosepsis and seizures. She was then kept in hospital for treatment with steroids, antibiotic therapy and peritoneal dialysis. Subsequently, she was followed up as an outpatient by the hematology department and she evolved with spontaneous and sustained normalization of platelets and hemoglobin, upon which she was discharged with orientations.
At the second admission, she was 16 years old and presented with abdominal pain, vomiting and hematuria. In the investigation, Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia with thrombocytopenia and elevated blood urea nitrogen were found. An abdominal ultrasound showed mild alteration of renal texture. She was kept in hospital to receive a methylprednisolone pulse because of the suspicion of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. Presence of schistocytes in blood smears suggested a diagnosis of TTP or HUS. Plasmapheresis was performed and steroids were administered, without further investigations. Because her condition evolved with clinical and laboratory improvement, she was discharged with a prescription for prednisone 40 mg/day and was given generic follow-up orientations.
On physical examination in the present case, she had an axillary temperature of 37.9 °C (100.22 °F), oxygen saturation of 96% in room air, blood pressure of 110 x 80 mmHg, slight jaundice and pallor. Fetal heartbeats were present and normal.
Laboratory tests showed hemoglobin of 4.2 g/dl, 13,000 platelets/mm³, hematuria, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 2,014 U/l, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 135 mm/h, and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 62.4 mg/l. Prothrombin and activated thromboplastin time were normal. Thus, we ordered the tests summarized in . This investigation showed presence of anemia with reticulocytosis, schistocytes in blood smears, hypohaptoglobulinemia, left-shift leukocytosis, secondary iron overload due to hemolysis and elevation of D-dimer and antiphospholipid antibodies .
Red blood cell and platelet transfusions were performed. The hypothesis of TTP or HUS was suggested and we requested an analysis on ADAMTS13 activity. Increasing platelet levels and normalization of hemoglobin were observed, even without specific treatment. The patient was instructed to continue treatments as an outpatient of the nephrology department. Evaluation of prothrombin and activated thromboplastin time was requested and both of these were normal.
One month after having been discharged, she returned to this hospital complaining of weakness, with swollen face and legs that had developed one day earlier. She was in a good general condition, with presence of normal fetal heartbeats. At this new admission, she had the same laboratory abnormalities, but this time her creatinine was 1.6 mg/dl. A hematological assessment was requested: the results from the ADAMTS13 activity analysis had just been received. The analysis showed that the activity level was less than 5%, without any presence of anti-ADAMTS13 autoantibodies. After this confirmation of the presence of congenital TTP, plasmapheresis was scheduled and plasma infusion was implemented at a dose of 10 ml/kg every 8 hours while waiting for the plasmapheresis.
However, plasmapheresis was delayed because of the high risk of bleeding. During this period, she developed paresthesia in the face and limbs and became fatigued. The fetal heartbeats became inaudible and fetal death was confirmed by means of ultrasound. Delivery was induced using misoprostol, which led to expulsion of the conceptus after 15 hours. Histopathological examination on the fetus showed that it weighed 318 grams and had a gestational age compatible with 16-17 weeks of pregnancy, with a second-trimester hyalinized placenta.
The feasibility of plasmapheresis was confirmed four days after confirmation of the diagnosis and indication of the procedure. Plasma exchange was performed using 16 fresh frozen plasma units, with a good response, and the patient was returned to a plasma infusion regimen two days later. Because she responded to maintenance therapy, we then discharged her for outpatient treatment.