A 61-year-old female presented to the emergency room with a 6-month history of progressive chest congestion and shortage of liberties with no abnormal medical history. During the last 3 days, the patient experienced orthopnoea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. On admission, physical examination revealed body temperature of 37.6 °C, heart rate 120 beats/min, respiratory rate 35 per minute, blood pressure 122/75 mmHg and right lung respiratory sound was reduced. Laboratory examinations demonstrated mild leukocytosis (leukocyte count 10.5 × 109/L). Thoracic CT scan revealed occupying lesion in left atrium, accompanied with massive hydropericardium and pleural effusion. Simultaneously right pleural puncture and chest drainage was done to relieve the patient’s symptoms. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed an irregular left atrial mass (measuring 5.0*5.2 cm), limiting the mitral valve inflow and covering the ostia of the left-side pulmonary veins. The patient was referred for a PET/CT for further evaluation. Maximum intensity projection images revealed high grade fluorodeoxyglucose uptake only in the intracavitary mass which near the mitral valve. .
The patient received emergency surgical intervention under cardiopulmonary bypass since her clinical status deteriorated quickly. The pericardium effusion was drained firstly after pericardiotomy. Operative exploration confirmed complete resection could not be achieved, since the broad intracavitary mass surrounded with fibrotic density had invaded the mitral annulus and posterior wall of left ventricle . The intraoperative impression of the frozen section revealed that the lesion was predominantly composed of hyperchromatic spindled cells, and was highly suspicious for spindle cell malignancy. Based on these results, we did merely partial surgical resection only for the protrusive part of the intracavitary mass to minimize the restriction to the pulmonary venous blood reflux and mitral valve flow as much as possible.
After the surgery, the removed left atrium mass was sent for further histopathological examination. Hematoxylin–eosin staining showed the mass was composed of markedly atypical cells which lack specific morphological features of differentiation . Immunohistochemical stain revealed malignant cells strongly positive for MDM2 and CDK4 , supporting the diagnosis of DDLPS. Postoperative CT scan confirmed the mitral obstruction was totally relieved. The patient was then transferred to the oncology department for further molecular targeting therapy. Unfortunately, the patient was detected with brain metastasis 1 month later and died within 5 months after the surgery.