A 39-year-old male patient was referred to the surgery department of Shahid Madani Hospital in Alborz province in Iran via ambulance due to an un-reduceable rectal projection. The patient had a history of chronic constipation and opium addiction. Also, he noted previous episodes of rectal projection which were reduced to their origin via manipulation. The patient had a negative drug and other medical histories. The current state has been initiated a week ago and progressed till referring. Physical examination revealed an awake and oriented patient, which was not ill or toxic. He was not feverish and did not note any nausea or vomiting. The gas pass and defecation were not impaired. Full-thickness projection of the rectum, with an ulcerative surface and purulent secretions, was notable . The primary endeavor for reduction of the projection under sedation and after local mannitol treatment at the operation room was unsuccessful, so surgical resection and reduction were planned for the patient. Before surgery, the patient underwent a total colonoscopy, which was normal. In the operation room with the patient in lithotomy position and under general anesthesia, a circumferential incision was made with electrocautery on the entire rectal wall two cm from the dentate line (, ). Following ligature of the mesorectum and the mesosigmoid, the prolapsed rectosigmoid was resected and an anastomosis, interrupted by hand in two planes, was created . Then in the supine position with an incision in the RLQ, an area double ileostomy ostomy was constructed by the attending surgeon to protect the anastomosis. The post-operative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged 5 days after surgery. The pathological examination of the resected segments revealed no abnormalities but local inflammation. Manometry of the anal sphincter showed decreased pressure at rest. The patient underwent six biofeedback sessions after which anal manometry showed that the anal sphincter had a normal tone at rest. The patient was hospitalized 6 months after surgery and the ileostomy was closed without complication. During an outpatient follow-up visit for 6 months, there was no problem and was satisfied with the type of treatment he received.