Our patient was a female infant who was born to a 27-year-old Japanese nulliparous woman. The mother had been diagnosed with infantile epilepsy at 1 year of age. Her antiepileptic therapy was discontinued at the age of 7 years because she had no symptoms, but she had an epileptic seizure at the age of 17 years, and treatment with the antiepileptic drugs was resumed. She married at the age of 25 years; however, she did not receive preconceptional consultation. Because she had slight mental retardation, she did not report her wish for a pregnancy to her physician. At the age of 27 years, she was referred to our hospital from a primary obstetrical clinic at 13 weeks of gestation. She was obese, with a body mass index of 30 kg/m2. The antiepileptic drugs she was taking included 1400 mg/day of VPA, 140 mg/day of phenobarbital (PB), and 1200 mg/day of carbamazepine (CBZ). The blood concentrations of the drugs were 80 μg/ml VPA (effective blood range is from 40 to 100 μg/ml), 26.1 μg/ml PB (10–30 μg/ml), and 10.5 μg/ml CBZ (4–12 μg/ml). Despite the mother’s use of three antiepileptic drugs, she had convulsions about three times per week. Therefore, reduction or alteration of the drugs was difficult. She was informed of her epileptic status and the teratogenic effects of VPA, but her wish to have a baby was so strong that she continued her pregnancy with oral folic acid of 5 mg/day.
Although second-trimester transabdominal ultrasonography was performed at 20 weeks of gestation, fetal malformation was not detected because of a poor ultrasound image due to maternal obesity. At 25 weeks of gestation, contracture of the fetal right wrist joint suggestive of a radial ray defect was detected by ultrasonography . The fetus demonstrated growth retardation starting from 32 weeks of gestation. After that, fetal ultrasonography was performed weekly until delivery. At 34 weeks of gestation, the estimated fetal weight was 1660 g (−2.5 SD: standard deviation), the biparietal diameter was 74.9 mm (−2.8 SD), mother’s abdominal circumference was 261.7 mm (−1.5 SD), and the femur length was 58 mm (−1.3 SD). The right ulna was shorter than the left ulna; the right was 35 mm (−8.4 SD), and the left was 53 mm (−1.1 SD). The right radial ray was not detected. At 37 weeks of gestation, saddle nose as a facial anomaly was observed on a three-dimensional ultrasound . Therefore, right radial ray defect and saddle nose caused by FVS were suspected.
The serum levels of antiepileptic drugs were within effective ranges; however, multiple syncopes occurred. Fetal growth retardation was not improved, but growth arrest was not observed. The mother went into active labor at 39 weeks and 2 days of gestation and delivered a female infant weighing 2056 g with Apgar scores of 8 and 8 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. The neonate showed slight muscular hypotonia of the whole body and respiratory distress. The neonate’s physical examination revealed bend and contracture of the right wrist joint , right radial ray defect , a ventricular septal defect (VSD), an atrial septal defect (ASD), and a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) in addition to characteristic facial configurations such as euryopia, broad nasal root, saddle nose, shallow philtrum, and low-set ears. The neonate’s features were compatible with FVS. PDA ligation was performed when she was 13 days old, and cast immobilization of the right forward arm was started when she was 89 days old. A follow-up examination at age 12 months demonstrated developmental and growth retardation.