This patient is a 59-year-old male. Three years ago, the patient was diagnosed with papillary thyroid cancer pT3bN1aM0 and underwent total thyroidectomy and cervical lymphadenectomy, followed by I131 treatment. Additionally, the patient has had persistent otitis media for 5 years and has received many antibiotic rounds. Additionally, the patient had a painless red-pink congenital capillary malformation of 8 × 10 cm in the right parotid region that had been stable for many years. This patient was not followed up with regular routine visits.
The patient was taken to the hospital due to a dull right ear discomfort that worsened gradually over 3 months and was accompanied by purulent discharge from the right ear. The patient was diagnosed with otitis media and given medications, but the infection did not respond well. At the same time, the patient developed a tumour in the external ear canal and was experiencing hearing loss, ear pain and right parotid gland swelling. Clinical examination indicated a large tumour in the right outer ear canal, a darkened surface and warts obstructing the external ear canals. Otolaryngology confirmed the presence of a tumour that covered the whole external ear canal. Histopathological examination of the lesion revealed invasive SCC.
The results of maxillofacial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 37 × 31 mm blockage of the right external ear canal, decreased signal on T1, elevated signal on T2W and STIR. The tumour infiltrated the right parotid gland, causing it to enlarge and infiltrated the inner ear canal, but did not invade the brain parenchyma. The neighbouring lymph nodes are 18 mm in diameter and are augmented unevenly upon injection (See ). Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) imaging revealed tumour infiltrating the right parotid tissue. The demarcation is ambiguous. The diameter is 30 mm. 15.7-inch standardized uptake value max (SUVmax). Large lymph node 20 mm in diameter at the right jaw angle enhanced metabolism with SUVmax 13.3. No more abnormalities were discovered. The patient was diagnosed with carcinoma of the right external ear canal (cT4N1M0 according to the Pittsburgh classification).
The patient underwent significant surgery to remove the external ear canal, middle ear and a portion of the stony bone, as well as the entire right parotid gland, while preserving nerve VII and the right cervical lymph node group I–IV. The patient was then treated with plastic surgery using a free thigh flap (Please refer to ). The plastic surgery was performed immediately after the tumour resection and regional lymphadenectomy. Postoperative specimen size is 20 × 18 × 5 cm, in which the tumor size is 4.5 × 4 cm. Microscopic examination showed SCC with invasion of nerve fibres, lymphatic infiltration and metastasis to 3/26 lymph nodes. SCC of the right external ear canal pT4N2M0 was diagnosed postoperatively. The postoperative period was stable and chemoradiotherapy was started 8 weeks after surgery. Chemoradiotherapy was used in conjunction with cisplatin on days 1, 22 and 43. The patient received 60 Gy of adjuvant radiation in 30 fractions (volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) technique). The chemoradiotherapy treatment went smoothly. The patient did not interrupt treatment and experienced no serious side effects. The patient is currently stable with no symptoms of recurrence after 28 months of follow-up.