A 58-year-old Caucasian man who developed a persistent dry cough and hemoptysis presented to our hospital. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a large, pleural-based mass in the left lung . A needle biopsy showed a spindle-cell neoplasm which was immunoreactive with CD34 and thus mostly consistent with a solitary fibrous tumor. The patient underwent further radiological work-up. Whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) showed diffuse, low-level fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) uptake of the large, biopsy-proven, solitary fibrous tumor of pleura in the left hemithorax. However, there was a focus of moderate 18F-FDG uptake in the superior aspect of the lesion, which was worrisome for malignancy . In addition, subcarinal necrotic lymphadenopathy was noted, which raised suspicions of metastasis. Multiple non-18F-FDG-avid large bilateral renal cysts were evident. The evaluation of other organ systems was unrevealing.
The patient underwent surgical excision of the tumor, including left thoracotomy, partial pleurectomy, wedge resection of left upper and lower lobes and thoracic lymphadenectomy. Grossly, the tumor was homogeneously tannish-white and solid, measuring 13.0 cm × 9.0 cm × 6.0 cm. Microscopic examination revealed a cellular mesenchymal neoplasm composed of bland spindled cells with a patternless architecture. The lesion possessed "staghorn" vessels and a hyalinized stroma, especially in the peri-vascular regions . The lesional cells were strongly immunoreactive with CD34 . Thus, the features were characteristic of a solitary fibrous tumor.
Within the solitary fibrous tumor, there were two microscopic foci of nested epithelioid cells with clear cell features in the background of a delicate vascular network . To further explore the nature of these cells, a battery of immunohistochemical staining was performed. The cells of interest were positive for broad-spectrum cytokeratin and vimentin and were also immunoreactive with CD10 and paired box gene 2 (PAX2) . Thus, these cells most likely represented metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma. One lymph node showed necrotizing granulomata, but all thoracic nodes were negative for malignancy.
Post-operatively, a multidisciplinary team weighed the treatment options. However, in the coming months, further imaging analysis revealed additional metastases to the liver, spine and brain. The patient underwent chemotherapy, spinal radiation therapy and gamma knife radiosurgery for brain metastasis. With metastatic disease causing increased morbidity and no further treatment options available, the patient was placed in hospice care and died within six months of the initial diagnosis.