A 35-year-old male patient presented with persistent severe epigastric pain lasting 8 h. The complaints had developed after severe alcohol-induced vomiting with symptoms of reflux. During the physical examination, it was possible to elicit peritonitic tenderness throughout the entire abdomen. The laboratory inflammation parameters were significantly elevated. Since the perforation of a hollow organ was clinically suspected, we immediately performed an abdominal CT. This showed inflammatory wall-thickening with free intra-abdominal air and air inclusions at the gastroesophageal junction. Consistent with the present findings and under the suspicion of a Boerhaave’s syndrome, we intended to perform oesophagogastroscopy with CO2 insufflation under anaesthesia in the operation room. The endoscopy was expected to precisely locate the perforation site with a description of the local conditions (size, perfusion). An indication for endoscopic treatment was also to be evaluated. After this, laparoscopy was planned for evaluation of the abdominal cavity.
Flexible endoscopy detected a blackish, cloudy secretion in the stomach which extended into the distal oesophagus. Erosive oedematous swelling could be seen in the distal oesophagus with an associated hiatal hernia and hiatal insufficiency. The deep and approximately 5 cm long by 2 cm wide, profoundly gaping rupture was found at the distal gastroesophageal junction . The blackish coated muscle fibres were exposed extensively. The visible transmural defect in the abdominal cavity could not be imaged endoscopically. Perfusion in the margins of the defect was normal. We intentionally did not perform endoscopic manipulation at the perforation, such as probing with an instrument.
In accordance with our algorithm for treating oesophageal defects , we decided that initiating intraluminal endoscopic negative pressure therapy (ENPT) was indicated. This should cover the defect and initiate long-term emptying of the stomach.
Treatment of the Boerhaave defect with endoscopic negative pressure therapy (ENPT).