A 27-month-old girl with trisomy 13 presented with OSA. She was born at 38 weeks’ gestational age and hospitalized because of low birth weight. She was deaf and had been diagnosed with mosaic-type trisomy 13. Tracheomalacia and central apnea required ventilation support, but tracheomalacia had resolved 3 months after the birth with her growth, and central apnea had shown gradual improvement. She had been discharged without respiratory support at 8 months old. OSA had appeared at 2 years old due to increasing adenoid hypertrophy. Her parents reported snoring and apnea at night. She was on the monitor of peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) at home, and home oxygen therapy started after identifying SpO2 ≤ 80% on room air. Tonsillectomy under general anesthesia was scheduled for OSA and repeated otitis media.
At the time of hospitalization for surgery, her height was 76 cm, and her weight was 10 kg. Growth and development were equivalent to a child of about 18 months old. Preoperative chest X-ray and electrocardiogram examinations were normal. She had a patent ductus arteriosus that had been followed-up until this hospitalization. The latest transthoracic cardiac ultrasonography showed that the shunt flow was left-to-right, with a maximum velocity of 4.30 m/s, a maximum pressure gradient of 74.0 mmHg, and a pulmonary/systemic blood flow ratio of 1.1. Microcephaly and retrognathia were apparent . Intermittent central apnea was present as one of the central nervous system complications of trisomy 13.
We did not provide her premedication before the induction of general anesthesia. General anesthesia was induced with sevoflurane up to 5% and 33% nitrous oxide in oxygen . OSA made mask ventilation difficult even though two anesthesiologists were involved in positioning the head, moving the mandible forward, and opening the mouth to facilitate ventilation. She was placed in a lateral position and administered 100% oxygen immediately after SpO2 began to decrease. Spontaneous respiration resumed in the lateral position, and SpO2 improved. She became apneic intermittently with 100% oxygen and 5% sevoflurane, but assisted mask ventilation was easy in the lateral position. Then, we inserted a peripheral venous line. We administered 0.01 mg/kg of atropine and 1 mg/kg of rocuronium intravenously. We performed tracheal intubation easily using a Macintosh-type laryngoscope. Two percent sevoflurane and 33% nitrous oxide in oxygen remained throughout the rest of the case. Vital signs remained stable during the procedure without opioids and benzodiazepines. We administered 10 mg/kg of acetaminophen suppository for postoperative analgesia.
The operation took 36 min, and spontaneous breathing resumed 10 min after discounting inhalational anesthetics. We administered 4 mg/kg of sugammadex sodium before extubation in the operating room. Her respiratory condition was monitored postoperatively in a high-care room with a stand-by ventilator for the rest of the day. It was because congenital central apnea due to trisomy 13 is prone to happen even with inhalational anesthetics. No apnea or desaturation was apparent. She was transferred to the general pediatric ward on postoperative day 2 and went home on postoperative day 4. Radiographs confirmed that the nasopharyngeal airway was open following the tonsillectomy . Home nasal oxygen was no longer needed postoperatively.
Two years later, we reapplied the same anesthetic protocol successfully during tube insertion into both eardrums for repeated otitis media. At this time, she had grown to 88 cm in height, and weight had increased to 13 kg. Growth and development were equivalent to a child of about 30 months old. We did not provide her premedication. General anesthesia was introduced and maintained only with 2–5% sevoflurane and 33% nitrous oxide in oxygen. We initially tried to maintain her spontaneous breathing effort during surgery. However, we noticed mild OSA and intermittent apnea. Therefore, we intubated the patient and controlled her ventilation, given the previous experience of easy tracheal intubation. The operation took 20 min, and we extubated the patient under a stable breathing pattern in the operating room. The patient was fully awake and was, therefore, moved directly to a general pediatric ward with SpO2 monitor only at that time. No postoperative analgesics were needed.