A 62-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital because of “Pain in the right upper abdomen”. Through CT upper abdominal plain scan, a mass in the hilar region could be seen clearly. Thus, further examination was recommended.
The patient had no medical history of other blood diseases, no low fever, no night sweats, and no significant weight loss. In 2015, he underwent cerebrovascular stenting for basilar artery stenosis, and recovered well after surgery. Rosuvastatin, Clopidogrel and Aspirin were taken orally to control the disease. In 2016, he underwent cholecystectomy due to gallstones, and no abdominal discomfort occurred after the operation. He had a history of hypertension for more than 20 years, and his blood pressure was well controlled without other chronic diseases at ordinary times.
The patient smoked for more than 20 years and quit smoking for more than 10 years. Denied any history of alcohol use. No history of drug or food allergy.
There was a palpable mass in the anterior sacral area, which was hard and slightly tender. No tenderness, rebound pain, muscle tension in the rest of the place. All other vital signs were stable, blood pressure was not high, and no positive signs were detected.
The patient’s serum β2 microglobulin was 2.58mg/L at admission, which was higher than the normal value (0.7-1.8mg/L). Urinary β2 microglobulin 0.762 mg/L, higher than the normal value (&lt; 0.24mg/L) thymidine kinase (TK1)0.33pmol/L, still in the normal range. Serum CA125 was 10.58U/mL, and there was no obvious abnormality.
Because a hilar mass was showed after scanning the upper abdomen through CT, the patient was scheduled for further examination through contrast-enhanced ultrasound . The ultrasound examination on abdomen was performed using a Resona9 ultrasound system (Mindray Medical International, China) equipped with an SC6-1U (1-6 MHZ) transducer. Conventional ultrasound examination showed a hypoechoic mass in the hilar region, the size of the mass was 4.65x5.33x3.91cm, the boundary was clear, the shape was irregular, and CDFI could detect blood flow signals. Another nearly-circular hypoechoic mass was found in the spleen. The size of the mass was 4.96x4.74x5.19cm, the boundary was clear, and the blood flow signal could be detected by CDFI. Another hypoechoic mass was seen in the anterior sacral area, with a size of 5.84x5.20x4.68cm, located below the bifurcation of the abdominal aorta, with clear boundary and irregular shape. There was no adhesion with the surrounding intestine. Blood flow signals could be detected by CDFI. Further CEUS diagnosis was recommended by the patient’s physician and informed consent was obtained. Depth, gain, and focus are thoroughly adjusted to achieve optimal visualization according to the radiologist’s habits. The timer was activated after a high-dose injection of 1.5 mL of Sonovue (Bracco, Italy) suspension (an ultrasound contrast agent) and 5 mL of saline (Bracco, Italy). CEUS examination was performed on all three masses. After conducting contrast-enhanced ultrasound, it showed that the blood vessels were thickened at the edge of the tumor in the hilar region, which were enhanced earlier than the surrounding tissues. The tumor showed diffusing snowflake enhancement inside, and showed uneven hypoenhancement after reaching the peak (compared with the liver tissue), and was rapid wash-out compared to that of the liver tissue. The splenic mass showed a peripheral enhancement pattern to the center, with uneven hypoenhancement. The enhancement was later than that of the normal spleen tissue, and rapid wash-out compared to normal spleen. There was no significant change in the lesion range after CEUS compared with the two-dimensional ultrasound. In the presacral mass, the central vessels of the mass were enhanced first, and the enhancement began later than the peripheral tissues, with uneven hypoenhancement. And there were obvious filling defects, and the clearance was earlier than that of the peripheral tissues. The boundary between the three masses and surrounding tissues was obvious . The time-intensity curve (TIC) showed that the ascending slope of the lesion was higher than that of the surrounding tissue, although the lesion was delayed hypoperfusion, which also suggested that the lesion area had more blood vessels and less resistance. The clearance time of the lesion was significantly earlier than that of the surrounding tissue, which was consistent with the characteristics of malignancy. The three masses did not have the same pattern of enhancement, and there were obvious filling defect areas in the presacral mass, while the enhancement was more uniform in the hilar region and the splenic mass. Although the enhancement patterns of the three masses were different, they all showed rapid wash-out, which was consistent with the characteristics of malignant masses. Among them, the thickened vessels at the edge of the tumor in the hilar region were consistent with the CEUS features of lymphoma in previous studies . The CEUS pattern of splenic mass was basically consistent with the characteristics of nodular splenic infiltration of malignant lymphoma mentioned in the literature. The CEUS pattern of central vessel enhancement first in the presacral mass has not been confirmed in the literature in lymphoma, but considering that the patient had no medical history of other malignant tumors and considering homology with other masses. Finally, the patient was diagnosed lymphoma under the CEUS pattern combined with the patient’s medical history.
Puncture biopsy was performed on the patient’s anterior sacral mass, and 16G automatic puncture biopsy needle (Bard, America) was used. The final pathological results suggested non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, and non-germinal center origin. Immunohistochemical results showed that CD20, CD21, CD19 were positive, Ki-67>90%, Bcl-2>90%, Bcl-6>80%.
Through flow cytometry, the results showed double clonal B mature lymphocytes.