A 70-year-old male presented with an eight month history of looser stools. His medical history included a right lung lobectomy for tuberculosis aged 20, chronic obstructive airways disease and ischaemic heart disease. He was a long-term smoker.
General examination showed him to be well with no lymphadenopathy. No mass was palpable on digital rectal examination. Full blood count, urea and electrolytes and liver function tests were all within normal limits.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy and biopsy identified a rectal adenocarcinoma at 8 cm from the anal margin. MRI showed a normal liver and no para-aortic lymphadenopathy. A moderately bulky tumour was identifiable in the mid/low rectum, 5 cm in length. Local staging with MRI was T2 although the tumour was noted to be very close to the levator plate especially on the left. Perirectal and presacral lymph nodes were seen, the largest of which was 1 cm in short axis. CT scan of the chest did not identify any metastatic disease.
At laparotomy no peritoneal disease, liver metastases or abnormal lymph nodes were seen. A low anterior resection with total mesorectal excision was performed. Recovery was complicated by chest sepsis and prolonged ileus and the patient was fit for discharge on day 14 post surgery.
Microscopic examination showed complete resection margins of a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma extending through the muscularis propria. Metastatic adenocarcinoma was also identified in one of the twenty one lymph nodes. By UICC staging this was therefore pT3 N1 MX. There was no evidence of extramural vascular invasion. Several lymph nodes showed partial effacement of the normal lymphoid architecture by an infiltrate of small lymphoid cells in which many pseudoproliferation centres were evident.
Immunohistochemical studies confirmed the presence of CD20 positive B lymphoid infiltrate that co-expressed CD5, CD23 and BCL2 and was negative for cyclin D1, CD10 and BCL6 (DakoCytomation, Ely, UK).
This overall picture was considered consistent with a low grade B cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.