A 59-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital in June 2019, with chief complaints of constipation for 30 years and recurrent abdominal discomfort for 3 years.
The patient presented with constipation 30 years before her admission. Symptomatic treatments for constipation were given, while symptoms became progressive and severe during these years. In 2016, for no apparent reason, she started to have abdominal discomfort, which was described as ‘gurgling’. She denied having fever or vomiting. She was admitted to a local hospital for further examination. Subdiaphragmatic free-air was shown in the upright conventional abdominal radiography, and free-air in the peritoneal cavity was presented in the computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen . As gastrointestinal injury was reported as the most common cause of free-air in the peritoneal cavity, laparoscopic exploration was performed immediately. During the surgery, no sign of gastrointestinal perforation was detected, although luminal dilatation of colons was apparent. Then subtotal colectomy was conducted, with no specific findings in the pathological specimens of the colon. Constipation was improved, and the subdiaphragmatic free-air disappeared in X-Ray via gastrointestinal decompression after the surgery. The same ‘gurgling’ recurred in 2017. The CT scan showed free-air in the peritoneal cavity again with a small amount of perihepatic and perisplenic effusion , while upper gastrointestinal radiography revealed no contrast agent leakage in the abdominal cavity. Symptomatic treatments, including gastrointestinal decompression, and ultrasound-guided abdominocentesis and catheter drainage were performed. The peritoneal drainage fluid was clear with a total volume of 900 ml, and symptoms were alleviated after treatment. However, in June 2019, similar symptoms and free-air in the abdominal cavity on the CT scan appeared again. She was admitted to our hospital, in order to further investigate the cause of recurrent spontaneous pneumoperitoneum.
Regarding the patient’s past medical history, she had asymptomatic pancytopenia for five years, and she was diagnosed with megaloblastic anemia. Chronic kidney disease (stage 3b) and hepatic hemangioma were also diagnosed. There was no remarkable family history for similar conditions.
Physical examination at the time of admission revealed that the body mass index was 15.6 kg/m2. Superficial lymph nodes were not palpable. The examination of lung and heart showed no abnormality. The abdomen was distended, tympanitic, and tender. The liver dullness boundary disappeared, and the shifting dullness was negative. Bowel sounds were active with no abnormality in the rectal examination.
After admission, blood test revealed that pre-existing renal dysfunction was worsened with an increase in creatinine level from 127 to 161 μmol/L (reference range, 45–80 μmol/L) due to insufficient intake. The blood routine test showed no significant differences in data measured before and after admission, and the liver function showed no abnormality. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level were normal. The autoantibody and M protein was negative. Meanwhile, no sign of tumor or inflammation, gastrointestinal perforation, peptic ulcer or pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis was found in the imaging data . In addition, no obvious abnormality in the gastrointestinal tract mucosa was detected by the endoscopy.
However, the upright conventional abdominal radiography showed the presence of intestinal dilatation, air-fluid level formation, and the absence of mechanical obstruction . The gastrointestinal transit test showed that the transition of intestinal content during 72 h was 0%, indicating gastrointestinal motility disorder. Anorectal manometry indicated the presence of rectal anus-suppressing reflex, and the sensory threshold of rectus was high. As the immunostaining for neurons was not involved in the pathological examination in 2016, we added it and reviewed the colonic pathological specimens during hospitalization in 2019, which demonstrated proliferation of nerve fibers and hyperplasia of myenteric plexuses, as well as a relatively scarcity of ganglion cells in the myenteric plexus .
Based on the presentations and the postoperative pathology, she was diagnosed with ADHD. According to the multiple-discipline discussion, the recurrent spontaneous pneumoperitoneum was resulted from gas escaped from the dilated intestines under high pressure. The patient was treated with gastrointestinal decompression for several days and received enteral nutrition with the gradually increased intake. Finally, the symptoms of abdominal distention and her mental state were noticeably improved, and subdiaphragmatic free-air disappeared in the upright abdominal radiography . The patient’s intake of liquids reached about 2 L/day. Pneumoperitoneum disappeared in imaging findings, the creatinine level was reduced to 121 μmol/L after treatment, and she was discharged in a good clinical condition. During follow-up visits, the patient insisted on enteral nutrition. The abdominal distention was relieved, and she had a relatively stable condition. However, due to the intestinal distention and gastrointestinal motility disorder, the ability of intestinal absorption was poor and she was weak since the disease onset. Regrettably, she had an intestinal infection, leading to severe diarrhea. Due to intestinal malabsorption, the severe dehydration and water-electrolyte imbalance developed, which directly caused the patient’s death at 17 months after the diagnosis. The timeline of disease is shown in Additional file .