A 5-year-old boy was identified with proteinuria by a urinary screening program for school children. At that time his medical history was marked by recurrent otitis and tonsillitis, and an episode of bronchopneumonia. Parents were healthy, non-consanguineous and of Caucasian origin. His older brother presented an hypoplasia of the left ear pinna, an atresia of the left external ear canal with a hearing loss. The brother presented no proteinuria, and all the renal investigations resulted as normal. Physical examination of our patient revealed no edema, normal male external genitalia, dysplastic ears with abnormal folded pinna, a short uvula, normal filtrum, a thin superior lip, with normal body weight and height for chronological age. A moderate hearing loss was initially present, but it disappeared after myringotomy, and insertion of ventilation tube was performed.
Blood pressure was normal, no hematuria was observed. Laboratory investigations revealed no hypoalbuminemia (41 g/L), and urine contained nephrotic-range glomerular proteins (proteins/creatinine: 2.6 g/g). All the other biochemical investigations (viral serology and immunological analyses) were normal, and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) measured by creatinine clearance was within the normal range (100 ml/min/1.73 m2). Renal ultrasound showed enlarged kidneys and perimedullary hyperechogenicity. A treatment by an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor was started with no improvement of the proteinuria.
Confronted with this clinical picture of external ear malformations and renal anomalies complicated by heavy proteinuria, a first genetic test was performed few weeks after his first nephrology consultation in order to exclude a branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome. The NPHS2 podocine gene was also tested, but these first genetic investigations were negative. Renal biopsy showed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) with signs of severe sclerosis in 65% of glomeruli. At age of 8 years, proteinuria increased (proteins/creatinine ratio: 5.4 g/g), renal function deteriorated (plasma creatinine: 0.8 mg/dL), but plasma albumin remained within normal values. At the age of 9 years, he developed a nephrotic syndrome (plasma albumin: 29 g/L) responding neither to a 4 weeks steroid treatment, nor to other immunosuppressive agents (cyclosporine A and mycophenolate mofetil) introduced successively. At the age of 10 years, the child was admitted in the intensive care unit for a 1st and unique non-febrile episode of seizure, in a context of high steroid dosage and hypertension. Five years after his first presentation, he evolved towards an ESRF, and hemodialysis was started. He was eventually transplanted without incidents few months later with his mother’s kidney.
All suspected genes implicated in SRNS have been investigated (NPHS1, CD2AP, PLCE1, ACTN4, TRPC6, INF2, and COQ genes) using a combination of custom designed multi-gene NGS panel for FSGS and related glomerulopathies . High-throughput sequencing was performed on the MiSeq/HiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA). All findings were confirmed by Sanger sequencing, which was also used to family carrier screening.
Mutational analysis revealed a previously reported missense mutation (c.748G > T, residue change p. Asp250Tyr) and a novel sequence variant (c.649G > A, residue change p.Ala217Thr) within the aarF domain containing kinase 4 (ADCK4) gene inherited from both parents . The c.649G > A change corresponds to a very rare single-nucleotide variant reported in the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) database with an allele frequency of 0.00015 (18 alleles count/1190492 alleles), mainly observed in the European non-Finnish population (12/18 alleles). It involves a highly conserved residue within the kinase (ABC1 subdomain) and all mutation software’s prediction concluded to a pathogenic effect (, Fig. ).