A 40-year-old male presented for a routine outpatient checkup. His medical history included rickets during childhood treated with calcium and vitamin D. He had no prior personal or family history of cardiovascular disease. The patient was asymptomatic. Physical examination showed blood pressure (120/70 mmHg) and heart rate (65 b.p.m.) within a normal range, no heart murmurs, and a normal respiratory examination. The electrocardiogram (EKG) presented a QRS axis between 90° and 120° and a PR segment of 120 ms; the rest of the tracing was within normal limits . Laboratory findings were within a normal range, including calcium and phosphate plasma levels. Data regarding vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH) plasma levels were not available.
An echocardiogram, done as part of a routine checkup, revealed marked calcification of the heart’s fibrous skeleton, including the mitral annulus, the mitro-aortic junction and the aortic valve ( and Video 1). Both mitral leaflets were preserved, maintaining normal functioning, with only a minimal regurgitation towards the posterior wall of the left atrium (Video 2). The aortic valve had a normal opening and closing movements, with no regurgitation. Right valves were preserved. Anterograde velocities were normal. Both right and left ventricles had preserved systodiastolic functions. The left atrium was moderately dilated, while the right atrium was in a normal range. The pericardium did not show any abnormalities, and there were no signs of constriction physiology.
Computed tomography (CT) exhibited vast calcifications with irregular borders and a glomerular distribution along with the fibrous skeleton. The main areas involved were the proximal interventricular septum, the mitro-aortic junction, the mitral annulus, and the atrioventricular groove. The aortic valve also displayed calcification nodules in the aortic commissures: between the non-coronary and the left coronary cusps, and between the non-coronary and the right coronary cusps .
A CT coronary angiography revealed no significant lesions, presenting with a calcium coronary score of 0 Agatston units (AU). No extracardiac metastatic calcifications were observed.
It was decided that no intervention would be required. The patient remained asymptomatic and was referred to the Cardiology Department for outpatient follow-up. At the most recent follow-up, 4 months after admission, the patient remained asymptomatic.