The patient was an 81-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of persistent right-sided flank pain with no associated symptoms including dysuria, hematuria, frequency, or urinary retention. She had no history of prior abdominal surgery, trauma, or congenital defects. Given the unclear etiology, we obtained cross-sectional imaging which demonstrated a right-sided Bochdalek diaphragmatic hernia incarcerating her proximal ureteral segment . Initially, she was managed conservatively with surveillance monitoring since her pain was tolerable and her renal function was preserved. Although her kidney function remained unchanged, follow-up imaging at the next visit surprisingly demonstrated an interval increase in hydroureteronephrosis . Additionally, the entrapped ureteral portion had progressed with now obvious hydronephrosis of the renal pelvis. A Tc-99m MAG-3 nuclear medicine renal scan with furosemide confirmed our suspicion – she had moderate obstruction of the right kidney. This study also demonstrated an asymmetric split function with 64% left and 36% right in the setting of a stable baseline creatinine (0.7mg/dL).
In attempt to reduce the entrapped ureter and unobstruct the right kidney, a double-pigtail ureteral stent was endoscopically placed. We were able to reduce the herniation with the use of a super stiff wire and a standard soft stent was placed in the usual retrograde fashion. During her stent exchanges, it became apparent that the herniated ureteral segment was enlarging as the curl of the double-J stent retracted into the distal ureter requiring ureteroscopy to visualize and engage. Longer stents were used to ensure that the distal curl remained in the bladder lumen despite recurrent herniation. Stiffer stents were also used however these maneuvers eventually were no longer able to straighten and reduce the ureter, leaving it entrapped in the thoracic cavity. After several stent exchanges were completed, the patient became symptomatic with ureteral stent discomfort including flank pain, urinary frequency and urgency. Due to concern that her diaphragmatic defect was enlarging, we discussed definitive surgical options with her; nephrectomy versus resection and anastomoses of her right ureter with diaphragmatic hernia repair. She ultimately opted to preserve her right kidney and proceed with open-resection reduction and repair.
We approached her open surgical repair through a standard supra-11 incision carried down through her flank muscles where we entered the retroperitoneal space. First, we freed her affected kidney from the surrounding tissue and then identified the incarcerated ureteral segment using our previously placed stent. The redundant ureter was mobilized out of the diaphragmatic defect and returned to the retroperitoneal abdominal cavity. We closed her diaphragmatic defect using interrupted 0 silk sutures, and then excised the redundant proximal ureteral segment where we spatulated and reapproximated the proximal and distal ends. Last, we replaced the patient’s ureteral stent and completed the anastomosis over a 7-French x 26 cm double-J ureteral stent. Due to the dissection of the renal hilum and perinephric tissue, the kidney appeared to have more mobility. To help maintain proper drainage and reduce tension on the anastomosis, we performed a nephropexy, securing the posterior aspect of the kidney to the flank muscles with a 0 silk. From there, we performed the standard two-layered incision closure.
The patient had an uncomplicated post-operative course and was discharged home after regaining bowel function and returning to her baseline physical activity on post-operative day three. There were no complications during surgery or recovery. Two months later, we removed her ureteral stent and obtained follow-up imaging which demonstrated repair of the diaphragmatic defect without hernia recurrence . We also repeated the Tc-99m MAG-3 nuclear medicine renal scan, which now demonstrated normal clearance of the previously obstructed right kidney. Post operative creatinine was 0.7 mg/dL with no obstruction detected. Split cortical function was 54% left and 46% right; an improvement the patient’s preoperative findings.