A 62-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital due to a 50-year history of intermittent pain and limited activity of the right hip that had been aggravated for 1 month. A radiograph of the pelvis showed high dislocation of the right hip , and the patient was diagnosed with right Crowe type IV DDH. The patient’s visual analogue scale (VAS) score was 8, and his Harris score was 21. A physical examination showed that the right lower extremity was shortened by 5.3 cm, and the patient had a limp, local tenderness of the right hip, and aggravated pain upon internal and external rotation of the hip. The degrees of right hip joint motion were as follows: flexion, 90°; outreach, 12°; adduction, 14°; internal rotation 10°; and external rotation, 5°. The patient reported no other disease history.
The patient was treated with right THA and femoral subtrochanteric shortening transverse osteotomy. The osteotomy was located 1.6 cm below the lesser trochanter, the length of the osteotomy was 2.7 cm, and steel wires were attached at both ends of the osteotomy to prevent fracture. The intraoperative characteristics of the Johnson company S-ROM prosthesis are as follows: bio-type, 44 mm acetabular cup, 28 mm polyethylene liner, 28 mm ceramic head, and standard shank. The patient was treated postoperatively with antibiotics, analgesics, anticoagulants, and gastroprotectants. A radiograph of both lower extremities and the right hip showed satisfactory positioning of the prosthesis after the operation . One day after surgery, the patient could walk in the ward with the help of a walker. One week after surgery, the patient could walk freely but limped because of an evidently tilted pelvis. The patient’s VAS score was 3, and his Harris score was 60. At 40 days after surgery, the patient could put on his socks by himself, and the limp and pelvic tilt were significantly corrected after following the training regimen of the rehabilitation plan. The patient was instructed to practice squatting to facilitate using the toilet. The two ends of osteotomy were in good contact with each other . The patient’s VAS score was 2, and his Harris score was 79. Three and a half months after the operation, the patient reported a slight sensation of bone rubbing and mild pain in the operated hip. The patient’s VAS score was 3, and his Harris score was 70. The ends of the osteotomy had rotated and united poorly . We recommended that the patient undergo hospitalization to receive internal fixation, but the patient requested to continue observation. Five months after the operation, the patient had obvious sensations of bone rubbing, and his right hip pain was significantly worse. The patient’s VAS score was 5, and his Harris score was 52. The ends of the osteotomy had rotated and exhibited nonunion . The patient had obvious symptoms of pain, and hospitalization for surgery was recommended.
The patient was diagnosed with nonunion of the osteotomy and was again admitted for plate and screw internal fixation with bone morphogenetic protein (BMP). The patient was treated postoperatively with antibiotics, analgesics, anticoagulants, and gastroprotectants. Three days after surgery, the patient reported a significant reduction in pain, and the sensation of bone rubbing was absent. The patient’s VAS score was 3, and his Harris score was 60. A radiograph of the right hip and both lower extremities showed that the plate and screw was well fixed . One month after internal fixation was applied, the patient reported that his situation was good. The patient’s VAS score was 2, and his Harris score was 78. The ends of the osteotomy had not rotated and had begun to exhibit union . Two and a half months after internal fixation was applied, the patient’s VAS score was 2, and his Harris score was 85. The ends of the osteotomy were firmly fixed, and the union was progressing satisfactorily . Five months after internal fixation was applied, the patient had only occasional slight pain that did not affect his life. The patient’s VAS score was 1, and his Harris score was 87. Bone scabs had formed at the ends of the osteotomy . Eight months after internal fixation was applied, the patient reported no problems with normal activities. His VAS score was 0, and his Harris score was 90. The ends of the osteotomy had united .