A previously healthy 32-year-old man was referred to the emergency department of orthopedics with traumatic injuries of the index, middle and ring fingers of the left hand. The injury happened at work while he was operating a machine of cotton elaboration.
On admission, routine laboratory investigations showed only elevated white blood cell count (12,400/mm3), while red blood cell count, haemoglobin, chemistry and urine analysis were within normal limits. Radiography of the bones of his left hand revealed fractures of the nail bones of the middle and the ring finger. Surgical debridement of the damaged soft tissue was undertaken with amputation of these two nail bones. The patient was hospitalized and intravenous therapy with ceforanide (1 g/12 h), ofloxacin (200 mg/12 h) and metronidazole (500 mg/8 h) was initiated.
Four days after his admission the injury of the hand became tender, erythematous, swelling and began to drain. The purulent material expressed from the hand was sent for culture. Three days later the lesion worsened and was complicated with lymphangitis. The patient was noted to be febrile (38.5°C) without any other systemic symptoms.
Physical examination revealed multiple erythematous subcutaneous nodules along the lymphatics extending up the patient's left forearm. These nodules were tender and painful. There was no regional lymphadenopathy. Debridement of the lesions was performed and the tissue was submitted for bacterial and fungal cultures. The Gram-stained smear showed polymorphonuclear leucocytes and Gram-positive fine, branching filaments, partially acid-fast, with a tendency to fragment into coccoid and bacillary forms.
Laboratory tests showed: white blood cell count (18,000/mm3), absolute neutrophil count, 12,780/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 75 mm/h; and C-reactive protein, 14.2 mg/dl (normal < 0.8 mg/dl).
After 5 days of incubation cultures of the pus and the tissue on Columbia blood agar grew white colonies adherent to the agar, rough with a velvety surface, having a characteristic mouldy odor . Colonial characteristics, physiological properties and biochemical tests performed identified the isolate as Nocardia brasiliensis . Susceptibility to the antibiotics by the determination of the MICs using the E-test method (AB Biodisk, Solna, Sweden), showed that the isolate was sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin, and minocycline, intermediate to ciprofloxacin and resistant to ampicillin, second and third generation cephalosporins, erythromycin, clindamycin, ofloxacin and pefloxacin. The patient's antimicrobial therapy was changed to intravenous trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg b.i.d). The patient responded to therapy. Following 2 weeks of treatment the patient improved and all laboratory tests returned to normal. He was discharged 3 weeks after his admission on oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg b.i.d). The antibiotic therapy was continued for a total of 3 months. His hand and arm lesions were healing well and 6 months later revealed complete resolution of the infection without signs of recurrence.