A 54-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with nausea, vomiting, and upper abdominal pain of a 10-day duration. He was diagnosed with chronic viral hepatitis B for more than 20 years and was treated with oral entecavir and diagnosed with primary liver cancer 2 years ago. After transcatheter arterial chemoembolization, he received lenvatinib for 20 months (8 mg/d) since April 7, 2020, and immunotherapy with a 3-week cycle of camrelizumab (200 mg/d) for 10 cycles since March 7, 2021, until admission. Before the onset of nausea and vomiting, analgesics, aspirin, alcohol, and other drugs and food that can damage gastric mucosa were not used. Abdominal CT scan 10 days before admission indicated gastric mucosa thickening (a, the blue arrow indicates a liver cancer lesion with iodide deposits, and the white arrow indicates a thickened gastric mucosa). Before the patient stopped lenvatinib and camrelizumab treatment, repeated CT scans showed no expansion of the liver lesion and found metastasis. His vital signs were stable when he was admitted; liver and kidney function, blood routine, coagulation and blood gas analysis showed no obvious abnormalities. Gastroscopy on December 22, 2021, showed that the gastric mucosa from the cardia to the pylorus was exfoliated (b, c). The exfoliated mucosa prolapsed into the duodenum (d). During the gastroscopy, a biopsy was not performed due to the patient’s severe reaction and intolerance (timeline of patient treatment and examination showed in ). After excluding infectious diseases such as cytomegalovirus infection and autoimmune diseases, hemorrhagic exudative gastritis caused by targeted drugs for primary liver cancer was considered. Then given the fasting and water prohibition, anti-vomiting, inhibition of gastric acid, hemostasis, maintain water and electrolyte balance, and other treatments, the symptoms of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting were gradually relieved after discontinuation of lenvatinib and camrelizumab. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient did not have gastrointestinal bleeding and mucosal exfoliation. The patient was not subsequently treated with lenvatinib or camrelizumab but underwent multiple hepatic arterial perfusion embolizations.