A 23-year-old male with pain at the lateral side of the fifth toe of his right foot was seen at an outpatient clinic. He presented with the complaint of a swelling and deformity over the fifth toe of his left foot which was progressively increasing from the past 3 years. It recently advanced in size in the past 7–8 months. It was never associated with pain during course of time. Due to swelling, patient was unable to wear shoes. Physical examination revealed lateralization of the fifth toe with a palpable mass at the lateral aspect of five toe . On palpating swelling, it was hard in consistency with smooth skin. There was no local rise of temperature or any tenderness. There were no discoloration or secondary changes of skin. However, radiographs showed a bony growth involving proximal, middle and distal phalanx of the fifth toe with cortical breach in proximal phalanx . Magnetic resonance imaging done using spin echo, turbo spin echo, gradient recalled echo, and dual echo steady state techniques and multiplanar multi echo sequences were obtained using dedicated CP array extermity coil which showed a large corticated exophytic bony growth arising from dorsal aspect of fifth proximal phalanx of right foot (size of lesion approx. 2.03 × 3.6 × 2.6 cm AP × TR × CC cm). The medullary cavity and cortex of bony outgrowth were continuous with that of phalanx. There was evidence of linear T1 hypointensity along the waist of bony outgrowth (? Fracture). T2 hyperintensity tissue was seen surrounding the bony growth likely cartilaginous cap or less likely bursa with fluid (max. thickness of approx. 0.57 cm) . There was no vascular and neurologic deficiency due to compression of the mass. Excision was done with incision on the lateral aspect of fifth toe . The mass measured 4 × 2 × 2 cm macroscopically . It was grossly well circumscribed, lobulated mass with a cartilaginous cap. When the specimen was cut along its long axis, it reveals the cortico-medullary differentiation with areas of cortical thickening with areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. Histopathological examination showed lobules, cartilage along with numerous bony trabeculae, and adjoining fibro-collagenous areas which appears to be locally cellular with characteristic blue tinctorial quality in the osteochondroid interface zone with typical binucleated chondrocytes . Few congested blood vessels were also seen. Both radiological and histological findings were consistent with the diagnosis of BPOP which was made. No recurrence was seen clinically or radiologically at follow-up 2 years after surgery .