Our patient was a 56-year-old male with a history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, gastric ulcer and long-time smoking. He was admitted to a local hospital’s emergency department with abrupt onset of excruciating substernal pain, dyspnea, and diaphoresis at midnight. His serum troponin I level was 2.4 ng/ml (< 0.04 ng/ml). The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with horizontal ST-segment depression in leads V2 to V5 while his previous ECG 1 year ago was normal. Transthoracic Echocardiography (TTE) revealed hypokinesia in the posterior-inferior wall of the left ventricle. Local physicians diagnosed AMI presumptively and introduced oral medications, including dual antiplatelet, beta-blockers, and statin. However, the patient unfortunately developed ventricular fibrillation before coronary catheterization and became unconscious. After 30 minutes’ successful resuscitation, markedly decreased platelet level of 18*10^9/l (100–400*10^9/l) and significantly elevated D-dimer of 43,460 ng/ml (< 2000 ng/ml) were noted. His second ECG discovered new ST-segment elevation in Lead II, III, and aVF. The physicians in the local hospital did not consider him suitable for coronary catheterization for fear of bleeding and commenced platelet transfusions. His symptoms resolved in 5 days, and he was subsequently referred to our center for further evaluation. He was also noted to have a history of intermittent claudication accompanied by occasional amaurosis for 13 years without erectile dysfunction. Furthermore, he complained of transient left calf pain during the initial chest pain episode. Family history did not reveal anything significant.
On admission, his height was 183 cm, and his weight was 80 kg with a body mass index of 23.89. Blood pressure in the upper extremities was 110/60 mmHg, while the number in the lower extremities could not be interpreted. He had a regular heart rate of 83 beats per minute. Oxygen saturation was 96% on room air. Physical examination was remarkable for absent pulsations of bilateral dorsalis pedis arteries. Blood panel showed significantly elevated D-dimer of more than 20.00μg/ml (< 0.5μg/ml), high erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 51 mm/h (< 20 ml/h) and raised sensitivity C reactive protein of 10.87 mg/L (< 5 mg/L). Cardiac enzymes were unremarkable. Lupus anticoagulant increased slightly while antinuclear antibodies and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies remained negative. ECG recorded Q wave in Lead III, aVF, and V7-V9. TTE showed the left ventricle’s ejection fraction of 52% and non-distended left ventricle with posterior-inferior wall hypokinesia. His bilateral Ankle-Brachial-Index were 0, while lower limb arterial ultrasound revealed only plaques and decreased blood flow. With sharp suspicion of pulmonary embolism or aortic dissection, we conducted Computed Tomography Angiogram (CTA) of the entire aorta: multiple newly-formed emboli scattered in main and distal branches of pulmonary arteries . Diffuse occlusions affecting infrarenal abdominal aorta and bilateral common iliac arteries together with collateral vessels were also noted . The diagnosis of APE was established based on pulmonary CTA’s findings. His intermittent claudication symptom could be attributed to the diffuse vascular occlusions, which strongly suggested the diagnosis of aortoiliac occlusive disease (Leriche syndrome) [, ]. Rivaroxaban 15 mg were given twice per day as anticoagulation. Secondary prevention of coronary heart disease was also implemented, including Aspirin, Clopidogrel, Atorvastatin, and Metoprolol. His D-dimer level resumed within normal range after 17 days. Neither pulmonary CTA nor radionuclide pulmonary perfusion imaging disclosed any thrombus left after 21 days’ treatment. However, Q waves and negative T waves in the Lead III, aVF and V7-V9 persisted on ECG. Hypokinesia in the inferior and posterior walls also remained on echocardiography. Coronary CTA found only calcification and plaques without significant stenosis, while myocardial perfusion Positron Emission Tomography (PET) detected decreased viable myocardium in the inferior wall of the left ventricle . Multidisciplinary discussion consented to the diagnosis of concomitant AMI and APE. Anticoagulation regimen continued, and vascular bypass surgery was not regarded as a suitable option at that time since the patient was asymptomatic and still in the acute phase of myocardial infarction. His condition was stable at 6, 12, and 18 months’ follow-up at our outpatient clinic after discharge.