We present a case of successfully treated vasopressin induced hyponatremia in normotensive patient.
A 39-year-old previously healthy male presented as a high acuity trauma after falling off a forklift, sustaining an axial load injury on his cranium. He was evaluated in the emergency department and workup was negative for neurologic findings. His initial vital signs in the emergency department were normal and the patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15. He was protecting his airway and had bilaterally clear lung sounds without chest wall trauma. He was noted to have a scalp laceration with no active bleeding.
He has no known prior history of trauma and illness.
He has no known prior personal and family history.
The patient had a loss of sensation below the level of the nipples, loss of motor function of his lower extremities, and no rectal tone. In terms of upper extremity motor function, he had good power and grip strength in right hand but decreased on the left hand. No thoracic or lumbar spine step-off nor back trauma stigmata were noted.
To rule out hyperglycemia-induced hyponatremia, we measured serum glucose and calculated corrected sodium. In order to rule out pseudohyponatremia, we measured serum protein and lipid profiles. We also performed a complete blood count and measured urinary osmolarity, plasma osmolarity, random urine sodium level, serum cortisol level, serum adrenocorticotropic hormone level, and serum thyroid-stimulating hormone level to rule out differential diagnosis of hypoosmotic hyponatremia.
On imaging in the emergency department, a focused assessment with sonography in trauma exam was done and was negative. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the head was negative for acute intracranial processes, as well as negative CT scans of the thoracic and lumbar spines. CT scan of the cervical spine revealed a superior endplate fracture at C7, and an magnetic resonance imaging revealed what appeared to be an acute traumatic disc at the C7 Level with cortical degeneration. Subsequent CT angiogram of the neck revealed no acute vascular injuries.