We report the case of a 68-year-old female with an “eggshell” calcified anterior mediastinal tumor. In 2014, the anterior mediastinal tumor was discovered on a chest X-ray taken at the previous doctor. She had no symptoms. She had hypertension and chronic renal failure, but she did not undergo a detailed examination. Chest computed tomography showed a round shape; the 20-mm tumor was located in her anterior mediastinum, which was completely covered with calcification . Multiple small lymph nodes in the mediastinum and a few tiny lung nodules were also noted. Initially, the anterior mediastinal tumor was suspected as calcified lymph node swelling due to tuberculosis or silicosis. She did not undergo biopsy. By the 6-month follow-up with computed tomography, the shape and the size of the tumor did not change. She stopped visiting the clinic for examinations. Four years later, an abnormality was noted again on a chest X-ray during an annual health check-up, so she was referred to our hospital. A 63-mm, irregularly shaped anterior mediastinal tumor surrounded outside of the “eggshell” calcified lesion . The tumor showed a monotonous signal on T1- and T2-weighted magnetic resonance images. However, diffusion suppression was evident mainly outside the calcification on diffusion-weighted imaging . 2-Deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose (18FDG) positron emission tomography also showed glucose uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value of 6.28 only in the tumor located outside of the calcification. Middle mediastinal lymph nodes were positive for 18FDG uptake, but their size had not changed since 2014. Endobronchial ultrasonography-guided transbronchial needle biopsy of the pretracheal lymph nodes was performed, but the result was negative for tumor cells or granuloma.
Preoperative risk evaluation revealed that she had systemic extensive arterial sclerosis. Her right carotid artery and right femoral artery were completely obstructed due to sclerosis. The left anterior descending artery was also narrowed, and the right coronary artery was completely occluded as well. Ischemic renal dysfunction was identified. Arteriosclerotic obstruction of the lower limbs was also observed. After the risk assessment, she underwent resection of the anterior mediastinal tumor via left anterior thoracotomy. Her left lung was adhered to the tumor, so wedge resection was performed for this lesion. The postoperative course was uneventful. The tumor was diagnosed as B1-type thymoma . She is followed up with no additional treatment in our hospital.
Interestingly, the tumor inside and outside the calcification showed similar histology, suggesting that the tumor originated from inside the eggshell calcification. The surgical margin was negative for tumor cells. The lungs were not invaded. The final staging diagnosis of the tumor was pT1aN0M0 pStage I. Multiple epithelioid cell granulomas were identified in the resected lymph nodes and lung parenchyma. There was no evidence of either mycobacterial infection or fungus by histology, suggesting the copresence of sarcoidosis.