A 48-year-old gentleman presented as an emergency to our institute with left-sided hemiparesis and aphasia. He had no prior co-morbidities, and the family history was insignificant. On examination, he was found to have a power of 0/5 in all muscle groups, according to the medical research council (MRC) muscle grading system, on the left side along with complete aphasia. However, the function of cranial nerve XII was intact. However, the examination was the neck was unremarkable; there was no palpable mass or skin changes in the neck region. The carotid pulses were palpable bilaterally.
On initial workup, Magnetic resonance imaging with angiogram was done, which showed a right middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory infarct and a heterogenous lesion within the neck just above the level of the carotid bifurcation. Subsequently, post-contrast images from the head and neck region were also acquired . The lesion's appearance and characteristics suggested a glomus tumor of the neck. Further evaluation with an ECG and cardiac echo was performed to rule out the cause of an infarct. ECG and cardiac echo were found to be normal. Computed tomography angiogram of the neck was done , which showed a highly vascular mass, 2.8 x 3.4 x 6.0 cm in size, arising above the carotid bifurcation with its feeding vessel arising from the right external carotid artery. It was splaying the right internal carotid artery anteriorly and medially and extending up to the hypoglossal canal.
The radiologist suggested it as an atypical glomus tumor or a rare peripheral nerve sheath tumor. With consideration of the location, clinical presentation, and imaging features, a working diagnosis of glomus tumor of the neck was made.
Based on our working diagnosis of Glomus tumor, surgical excision was planned. In order to control hemorrhage intra-operatively, angioembolisation of the tumor was done before surgery, and approximately 90% embolization was achieved .
Under general anesthesia, surgical excision was started using the vertical right anterior cervical approach . Upon exposure to the carotids, the tumor was found to be away and not compressing the internal carotid artery.
In further dissection, it was revealed that the tumor was originating from the right hypoglossal nerve, completely encasing it, with some of its portion lying intracranially, and only the distal end was visible just below the angle of the mandible. Unsure about the further step, a literature search was done, and it was found that there were only a few cases reports regarding such tumors with at least two reports suggesting radiosurgery as an alternative to surgical management .
Hence, with no possibility of tumor resection without sacrificing the hypoglossal nerve, the procedure was abandoned, and the patient was planned for cyberknife therapy. No immediate post-operative complications were noted, and the patient underwent five cycles of radiosurgery (cyberknife). Three months' post-treatment MRI was done, which showed a 45% reduction in the size of the tumor with significant improvement in symptoms and complete resolution of aphasia.