An 81-year-old diabetic man with asthenia and no known cardiac disease was admitted for a chronic fever persisting for over a month. Additionally, he reported pain in his left hypochondrium and presented with an altered general condition. Upon the physical examination, the patient was found to be awake, febrile (38.3 °C), and hemodynamically stable. According to the New York Heart Association, he had dyspnea stage II. During the cardiovascular assessment, a 3/6th systolic murmur at the mitral focus was detected. Neurological testing revealed left hemiparesis. Abdominal examination was normal, with no evidence of hepatosplenomegaly. Blood work showed a hemoglobin level of 135 g/L, a white blood cell count of 14.45 × 109/L, with a predominance of neutrophils (10.92 × 109/L), and a platelet count of 252 × 109/L. The C-reactive protein level was elevated at 116.3 mg/L. Serum electrolytes, creatinine levels, liver enzyme levels, and the coagulation profile were all within normal ranges. On echocardiography, two vegetations were discovered, one measuring 11*10 mm on the anterior mitral leaflet and another measuring 14*12 mm on the posterior mitral leaflet. These vegetations had thickened the mitral valve seating, resulting in severe mitral regurgitation (Jet area/Left atrium area ratio = 45%, vena contracta = 9 mm, EROA by PISA = 40 mm2) (In video, severe mitral regurgitation and vegetations are provided in additional files and ). Three sets of blood cultures were conducted as follows: three pairs of bottles (one aerobic and one anaerobic) for each set, with each bottle containing 10 ml of blood drawn from a peripheral vein under strict aseptic conditions. These sets were spaced at least 1 h apart and taken at the time of the thermal peak. Two distinct sets of blood cultures grew Aerococcus Viridans, which was susceptible to: penicillin (MIC = 0.009 mg/l), vancomycin (MIC = 0.25 mg/l), and ceftriaxone (MIC = 0.5mg/l). Additionally, no source of infection or portal of entry was identified. A thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT scan revealed hypodense splenic lesions with thick fluid density associated with an older infarction . Brain MRI showed bilateral ischemic lesions, with a right frontal lesion suggesting a cerebral abscess and a left parietal lesion consistent with a subacute ischemic stroke . Cervico-dorso-lumbar MRI revealed lesions on the two sacral fins and the iliac wings, predominantly on the left, without spinal cord discomfort, as well as hyperintense signals in the dorsal cervical vertebral bodies, indicative of vertebral osteomyelitis . No Roth spot was observed in the fundus. The diagnosis of infective endocarditis on the native mitral valve was maintained, complicated by several septic emboli. The initial treatment involved a dual-antibiotic therapy based on ceftriaxone 2 g/day and gentamicin 120 mg/day chosen based on the antibiogram and antibiotic availability in the hospital at that time. After one week of antibiotic therapy, the clinical and biological evolution was favorable, with a normal and stable temperature curve (37.1 °C), a C-reactive protein that dropped to 30 mg/L, and a negative blood culture. Given the persistence of the vegetation with a size > 10mm on echocardiography and the embolic nature, the surgical indication for replacement of the mitral valve was made.
On the eighth day of antimicrobial treatment, the patient underwent mitral valve replacement with a double-winged mechanical prosthesis, specifically the ON-X prosthesis. A direct view of the mitral valve through a left atriotomy revealed significant anatomical damage to the valve, accompanied by notable vegetations on the anterior and posterior leaflets. The procedure and the postoperative period proceeded without complications. Subsequently, the patient received gentamicin for an additional week, totaling two weeks, and ceftriaxone for a duration of six weeks after the first negative blood culture. The postoperative course was uneventful. Control echocardiography demonstrated a functioning prosthesis with good wing clearance, an average gradient of 4 mmHg, and a mitral surface area of 2.3 cm2, without any pathological leaks. The patient was placed on curative anticoagulation with acenocoumarol and received education on preventing endocarditis, emphasizing strict hygiene and asepsis. During the six months of outpatient follow-up, the patient remained in good health. Regarding extracardiac lesions, the treatment for splenic infarction involved only analgesics with monitoring, as long as there were no complications such as abscess formation or splenic rupture. For brain abscess and vertebral osteomyelitis, the treatment was solely medical, based on antibiotic therapy, as long as there was no evidence of mass effect or involvement. The clinical evolution was favorable, with recovery from hemiparesis, and radiological assessments showed positive progress.