The patient, a 40-year-old male, was admitted to the hospital on March 28, 2020, due to dizziness and double vision for 2 months. Two months before admission, the patient had dizziness, headache, and double vision, accompanied by slow responses and somnolence. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the local hospital revealed diffuse abnormalities in the basal ganglia, thalamus, and brainstem. The patient was diagnosed with viral encephalitis. The patient’s condition worsened after discharge, with significant loss of memory and ability to walk. The patient returned to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. The patient had no seizures, fever, or urinary incontinence and normal bowel movements throughout the disease. Since disease onset, the patient had poor spirits, average food intake, and no significant weight loss. The patient was previously in good health, reported no history of hypertension, diabetes, hepatitis, tuberculosis, and food and drug allergies, history of exposure to toxic substances and vaccinations, and family history of similar symptoms. No relevant past interventions were performed before admission.
The results of the physical examination were as follows: body temperature, 36.7 °C; blood pressure, 138/86 mmHg; respiration, 20 beats/min; and pulse, 82 beats/min. An examination of the nervous system indicated that the patient had the following symptoms: confusion of consciousness, occasional ability to respond to questions, lack of cooperation during the physical examination, decreased memory and calculation abilities, poor orientation (time and place), large bilateral pupils (diameter, approximately 3 mm), sensitivity to light, and limited left eye abduction. Extremity muscle strength was grade 4, muscle tension was normal, tendon reflexes of the extremities were normal, and bilateral Barth syndrome and meningeal irritation signs were negative. The patient did not cooperate during the physical examination of sensory and coordinated movement.
After the patient was admitted to our department, MRI revealed diffuse abnormal signals in the bilateral basal nucleus, thalamus, brain stem, hippocampus, temporal lobe, and left insula. Inflammatory lesions were considered, and neoplastic lesions can not be excluded . The hydrogen proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy showed a decreased N-acetyl -aspartate (NAA) peak, increased choline (Cho) peak, and the presence of lipid/lactate peaks in the left caudate nucleus . An electroencephalogram (EEG) suggested mild abnormality with predominantly slow waves. Chest computed tomography (CT) indicated no abnormalities. There were no abnormalities in complete blood count, blood biochemistry, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), rheumatoid factor (RF), C-reactive protein (CRP), anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies anti-streptolysin O (ASO) antibodies, thyroid function, and tumor markers. Based on a lumbar puncture, the cerebrospinal fluid pressure was 160 mmH2O, the white blood cell count was 16 × 106/l, the protein concentration was 0.58 g/l, and acid-fast staining was negative. Serum and cerebrospinal fluid autoimmune encephalitis antibody test results (commercial cell-based assay (CBA)) indicated anti-NMDAR antibody positivity (serum anti-NMDAR antibody, 1:32; and cerebrospinal fluid anti-NMDAR antibody, 1:1). A stereotactic brain biopsy was performed, and the pathological results indicated normal brain tissue.
Based on the pathological results, tumors were excluded, and the diagnostic criteria for anti-NMDR receptor encephalitis, based on the clinical manifestations, imaging examination results, and EEG, were met.
The dose of methylprednisolone was gradually reduced after initial treatment with 1000 mg of methylprednisolone and intravenous gamma globulin (0.4 g/kg/d) for 5 days. After 25 days of treatment, the size range of the cranial lesions identified on MRI was smaller than that at admission , and the patient was recommended for discharge.
One month after discharge, the patient's condition worsened, and the MRI revealed that the lesion in the head of the left caudate nucleus was significantly enlarged . A second stereotactic brain biopsy was performed, and the pathological results indicated the proliferation of atypical B lymphocytes in tissues expressing cluster of differentiation 20 (CD20), CD79α, and paired box 5 (PAX5), mainly medium-large cells, accompanied by necrosis and very few T cells; 85% of cells expressed Ki67. The patient was suspected of having primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the CNS . Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT revealed the following: 1. multiple intracranial high metabolic shadows; and 2. hypermetabolic lymph nodes in the right cervical region. Pathological results of lymph node biopsy suggest reactive hyperplasia in lymph nodes, all of the images were captured by using OLYMPUS (CKX53, PLCN40X,CACHN40XIPC) in a resolution of 4032 × 3024 pixels . A further request for a bone marrow biopsy was rejected by the patient. The patient was transferred to the Department of Hematology to receive chemotherapy combined with rituximab. The patient was followed up 1 month after discharge. The patient was in stable condition and was followed up regularly. Up to the last follow-up (26 months), the patient was regularly treated with chemotherapy and was in stable condition.