A 62-year-old Caucasian male was referred to the NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program (UDP) by his nephrologist in January 2018 and enrolled in protocol 15-HG-0130, “Clinical and Genetic Evaluation of Individuals With Undiagnosed Disorders Through the Undiagnosed Diseases Network” .
The patient’s hypomagnesemia came to clinical attention at age 45. One week after starting triamterene-hydrochlorothiazide for hypertension, he complained of profound malaise, myalgia, and arthralgia and was found to have severe electrolyte abnormalities: hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia, and hypokalemia . Aside from his 1 week trial of triamterene-hydrochlorothiazide, the patient had not taken any other diuretics. The patient was hospitalized for electrolyte repletion and evaluation. Since then, he required aggressive oral and intravenous magnesium supplementation daily (magnesium lactate, 504 mg p.o., magnesium sulfate, 5 g i.v.), along with amiloride 10 mg tid for magnesium sparing. Laboratory monitoring has been consistently notable for renal magnesium wasting and hyperparathyroidism, but otherwise normal renal function.
At age 61 he developed unstable angina and was treated with a coronary artery bypass graft in 2016. At that time, diabetes mellitus type 2 and hyperlipidemia were also noted and well-controlled with medication. In addition to magnesium supplementation, the patient’s medications were aspirin (81 mg qd), amiloride (10 mg tid), furosemide (40 mg qd), amlodipine (10 mg qd), carvedilol (6.25 mg bid), metformin (500 mg bid), glimepiride (4 mg qam), ezetimibe (10 mg qd), and simvastatin (40 mg qd). He did not take any proton-pump inhibitors.
Family history was significant for sudden cardiac death (maternal grandfather, deceased, age 40), ruptured aortic aneurysm (father, deceased, age 79), pancreatic cancer (mother, deceased, age 77), and mild intellectual disability with speech delay (son, age 28). There was no family history of hypomagnesemia. There was no cosangunity.
The patient appeared well but obese (BMI 35.2). Mental status was suspicious for subtle cognitive and social deficits. The remainder of the physical exam, including vital signs, cardiopulmonary exam, and reflexes, were normal.
Laboratory evaluation at the NIH in January 2018 was significant for hyperparathyroidism and increased urinary magnesium excretion with an inappropriately high fractional excretion of magnesium of 23% based on 24-h urine collection (normal < 4%), and slightly increased urinary calcium excretion. Serum electrolytes were normal while receiving oral and intravenous magnesium repletion at the time of NIH evaluation. Aside from magnesium, urine electrolytes were normal . A comprehensive metabolic panel including liver and lipid studies was unremarkable.
Renal ultrasound showed multiple cortical cysts, bilaterally. Bone density scan showed osteopenia at the left forearm (T = − 2.0) and lumbar spine (T = − 1.9). CT scan showed vascular calcifications of the anterior and posterior cerebral arteries, bilateral carotid arteries, and calcific spots along the descending aorta and iliac arteries. Notably, there was extensive calcification of the coronary arteries , with a coronary artery calcium (CAC) score of 12,427 by the Agatston scoring method . Echocardiogram was normal. Neuropsychiatric testing revealed significant abnormalities in short term memory despite adequate attention, language and reasoning skills. The patient also had a deficit in fine motor speed but not in processing speed. Prior to referral to the NIH, the patient received genetic testing and was found to have a 17q12 deletion of 1.5 megabases via chromosomal microarray. Whole genome sequencing confirmed a 17q21 deletion (ch17:34,815,551-36,223,325) involving 15 genes including HNF1B, and did not reveal any variants known to be associated with vascular calcification. Genetic counseling was offered, and family members did not elect for genetic testing at the time of evaluation.