A 66-year-old female with a medical history of hypertension and depression presented with a 10-month history of progressive generalized weakness, fatigability, mild nonspecific headaches, and penultimately confusion. Her symptoms significantly worsened the week before her presentation, suffering multiple falls as a result. In the emergency department, she did not endorse any visual changes, seizures or seizure-like activity, any specific pattern to her headaches, nausea or vomiting, or any other constitutional symptoms. Her neurological examination was within the normal limits with no apparent focal neurological deficits.
Computed tomography scan of the head showed an intraventricular mass lesion with associated obstructive hydrocephalus . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with gadolinium, time-of-flight angiogram, and magnetic resonance spectroscopy sequences was obtained for further delineation of the lesion and operative planning. The lesion was approximately 2.8 × 4.1 × 3.9 cm in maximal transverse by anterior posterior by craniocaudal dimensions. It was localized to the inferior aspect of the right lateral ventricle, contacting the septum pellucidum, and extending through the right foramen of Monro into the third ventricle. It expanded the ventricle without evidence of parenchymal invasion. It also appeared to come into contact with the inner surface of the body of corpus callosum . The lesion appeared to have a diffuse pattern of enhancement on T1 + Gd sequences . It seemed of intermediate intensity on T2-weighted sequences . It had uniformly low-grade restricted diffusion . There was no calcification or evidence of hemorrhage. MR angiogram showed small branching vessels within and along the margin of the mass. MR spectroscopy showed markedly elevated choline peak and diminished but preserved N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) peak. .
Shortly after presentation, she underwent a craniotomy; interhemispheric dissection and anterior callosotomy allowed entry into the lateral ventricle. The tumor was immediately identifiable by its tan color and lobulated appearance. It had two consistencies with one part being easily aspirated and a second firmer part that required ultrasonic aspiration. The inside of the tumor contained numerous blood vessels with pronounced veins. Of note, hemostasis was easily achievable with electrocautery. Anteriorly and medially, it had some obvious attachments that required microsurgical dissection primarily from the septum pellucidum. Eventually, the dissection led down to the ipsilateral foramen of Monro and into the third ventricle. Once the tumor was freed from its attachment points, complete removal was achieved. The patient recovered well from her surgery and was neurologically intact without any focal deficits. Postoperative MRI showed gross total resection of the lesion with improving ventriculomegaly . She was placed on a 7-day course of phenytoin. She required short-term rehabilitation with physiotherapy given the degree of deconditioning in her preoperative status and was discharged home 2 weeks later. On follow-up, she continues to do well from neurological standpoint. A follow-up MRI [ and ] done 12 months postoperatively shows no signs of tumor recurrence.
Intraoperative evaluation of smeared and frozen samples showed a pleomorphic neoplasm, without clear high-grade or papillary features. The remaining tumor specimens were fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin. Sections were stained for hematoxylin and eosin, and a broad panel of immunohistochemical stains to determine glial and neuronal lineage. Histologically the superficial aspects of the tumor had a smooth surface . Neuronal lineage markers synaptophysin, CD56, non-phosphorylated neurofilament, and Pgp9.5 were all uniformly strong positive in most of the tumor [, , and ]. GFAP was positive in reactive appearing, stellate astrocytes only in superficial areas of the tumor but was absent in the core [ and ]. The neoplasm appeared vaguely lobulated with intervening vascular structures . Many were very large with bizarre or multiple nuclei. There were a few small foci of necrosis and microvascular proliferation, but only rare mitotic figures. There was no inflammatory cellular infiltrate and no significant reticulin network within the tumor. NeuN was focally and weakly positive in scattered cells. NF stained positively in axon-like processes throughout lobules in most of the tumor . Calretinin staining showed scattered clusters of neuron-like cells, usually at edges of lobules . The neoplasm was composed of highly pleomorphic medium-size to large neuron-like cells . S100 was strong in astrocytes and weakly seen in patchy neuronal populations. SOX10 showed nuclear positivity in a similar distribution to GFAP. CD34 was present in blood vessels only. ATRX had retained nuclear positivity. Other immunostains (alpha-synuclein, hyperphosphorylated tau, IDH1R132H, BRAF V600E, P53, EMA, and cytokeratin AE1/AE3) were negative. Ki-67 positive cells were scattered, estimated at <2% overall . Within the ultrasonic aspirate, a few foci had a glial appearance but lacked the large gangliocytoid cells and thus was thought to represent the attachment base of the tumor . There were more GFAP positive cells in the regions thought to be transitional .