A 44-year-old caucasian man underwent his second kidney transplantation. His induction regimen included thymoglobulin, methilprednisolone and rituximab. Because of increased risk of humoral rejection he underwent 5 plasmapheresis sessions before transplant. He was 1.6 m tall, and weighted 70 kg.
The maintenance immunosuppressive regimen included methilprednisolone, tacrolimus and micophenolate. Delayed graft function occurred and a renal biopsy done in the first week after transplant showed signs of probable humoral rejection. Gammaglobulin and plasmapheresis were started with mild improvement of renal function.
His medical history includes chronic renal failure secondary to focal and segmental glomerulonephritis, first renal transplantation 23 years before the present admission and on dialysis for the last 10 years, hepatitis C and left eye blindness of unknown etiology. He had no relevant family history and did not smoke or drink alcohol.
During first two months his post-transplant course was complicated by surgical wound infection, urinary fistula, nosocomial pneumonia due to Haemophilus influenzae, and abdominal wall abscess due to Acinetobacter baumanii.
One month after transplant the patient developed severe left sided headaches and blurred vision. He was hypertensive (150/90 mmHg with a usual blood pressure between 90-60 and 70-50) and a right temporal visual field deficit was detected. Computed Tomography (CT) showed a left occipital cortico-subcortical hypodense area. Serum creatinine was 3,79 mg/dl, tacrolimus level was 6.8 (normal 5-20), platelets were 137.000/ml. Other laboratory test results are shown in table .
A Neurology consultant suggested ischemic stroke as the cause, aspirin was started and permissive hypertension was allowed.
Twelve hours later he had an episode of left-sided motor focal seizures followed by left hemiparesis and was admitted to the intensive care unit. He was alert and oriented. Blood pressure was 165/71, temperature 36.3°C, heart rate 88, pulse oximetry 100% on room air, respiratory rate 18. The neurological exam showed left arm and left leg weakness and bilateral amaurosis. A new CT scan showed bilateral occipital hypodensities and hemorrhagic foci. Diphenilhydantoin was started. Brain Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) showed bilateral occipital hyperintese lesions in Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) and T2, a small area of cortical left occipital lobe restricted diffusion on Diffusion Weighted Image (DWI) and GRE sequence compatible with hemorrhage. MRI venous and arterial angiography showed no abnormalities. With a diagnosis of Reversible Posterior Leukoencephalopathy Syndrome (RPLS) blood pressure was controlled with intravenous labetalol (2 doses of 10 mg). Neurologic findings including cortical blindness returned to normal within 48 hs.
A follow-up CT 17 days later showed decreasing hypodensity in left occipital and parietal lobes with improvement of the hemorrhagic foci and almost complete resolution of the right occipital lesions.