A 41-year-old man had been diagnosed as having a middle esophageal diverticulum based on an upper gastrointestinal contrast examination performed when he was 30 years old. He had not received treatment because he was asymptomatic. Eight months earlier, he experienced chest discomfort after eating and visited our hospital. His past history is pediatric asthma. The diameter of his middle esophageal diverticulum was 47 mm, and the accumulation of contrast medium was observed in the diverticulum. A gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a diverticulum in the right wall located 30 cm from the incisor row , and the diverticulum mucous membrane was partially covered by adherent white matter that was unstained with iodine , and narrowband imaging which revealed type A. We performed a biopsy, and the pathological findings of the endoscopic biopsy were atypical epithelium and no malignant findings. We confirmed the function of the lower esophageal sphincter, and the esophageal body peristaltic wave was observed to be normal using high-resolution manometry. We decided to perform a thoracoscopic diverticulectomy based on his symptoms and the possibility of malignancy suggested by the atypical epithelium. Surgery was performed with the patient placed in the prone position and four trocars inserted into the right thoracic cavity. A 12-mm trocar was inserted into the fifth intercostal space on the posterior axillary line. Only the left lung was ventilated, and a pneumothorax in the right chest was created using CO2 gas at 6 mm. Twelve-mm trocars were inserted into the seventh and ninth intercostal spaces at the level of the inferior scapular angle. A 5-mm trocar was then inserted into the seventh intercostal space on the posterior axillary line. The thoracoscope was inserted via the 12-mm port in the ninth intercostal space at the level of the inferior scapular angle. The operator used the 12-mm port in the seventh intercostal space on the inferior scapular angle line and the 5 mm port in the seventh intercostal space on the posterior axillary line. The assistant used the 12-mm port in the fifth intercostal space on the posterior axillary line. The endoscope was inserted into the lumen of the upper thoracic esophagus before the patient was placed in the prone position and kept in the esophagus throughout the surgery. Confirmation of the middle esophageal diverticulum was easily achieved, but the area was difficult to exfoliate because the diverticular wall had adhered to the lymph nodes of the trachea bifurcation. To achieve a complete resection of the diverticulum, threads were placed on the oral and anal sides of the diverticulum, the threads were pulled. A thoracoscope was inserted via the 12-mm port in the fifth intercostal space on the posterior axillary line and the surgical stapler was inserted via the 12-mm port placed in the ninth intercostal spaces at the level of the inferior scapular angle, and the diverticulum was resected using two sets of the Tri-Stapler . A postoperative upper gastrointestinal contrast examination revealed no abnormalities . Oral intake was initiated on postoperative day 7, and he was discharged on postoperative day 12. The histopathological findings were a true diverticulum with a muscular layer and a highly inflamed mucosa. No malignant findings were seen . Postoperatively, the patient visited the hospital at 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year after the surgery. He underwent gastrointestinal endoscopy and upper gastrointestinal contrast examination 1 year after the surgery. We found no evidence of recurrence of the esophageal diverticulum. We are planning to repeat the upper gastrointestinal endoscopy at 2 years after the surgery.