The patient is a 13-year-old Igbo boy from the South-Eastern region of Nigeria in Sub-Saharan Africa. He had been a resident of a destitute home managed by a Catholic Reverend Sister in Enugu, Nigeria. The destitute home provides habitation for mainly abandoned children and vagrant psychotic patients. The first psychiatric service contact with the patient had been during a community mental health service sponsored by the Rotary Club of Independence Layout, Enugu, Nigeria in which the authors volunteered. The patient was abandoned in a refuse dump a few days after delivery and he had grown up with other abandoned children who found habitation in the destitute home because his parents could not be traced.
The patient was born with oculocutaneous albinism and on growing up he had been a child in a world of his own. He rarely played with other children in the destitute home and failed to develop like other children of his age. He was unable to develop speech and incapable of verbal communication; he only screamed sharply if in distress or in need of attention. He avoided eye to eye contact and he often appeared to be looking into space focusing on an unseen object. He failed to reciprocate any social gestures extended to him by his multiple care-givers over the years. He did not turn around if his name was called and he was most of the time preoccupied with playing with his fingers. He often snatched away other children's meal and snacks after finishing his own. Presently at the age of 13 years the patient could not utter a word, only shouting and screaming sometimes without apparent reason. He did not respond to instructions and appeared distant when attempts were made to interact with him. He however often responded to the word 'take', especially if the individual interacting with him was holding a biscuit or any other snacks, which he usually snatched away forcefully and ate voraciously. Associated behavioral problems included destructive tendencies, screaming without apparent reason and running around the destitute home in a circle, which gave him delight as he almost always resisted any attempt to stop him and often required forceful intervention to redirect him.
There was no history of any major medical illness that could influence normal neurological development in the patient during childhood and throughout the period of his stay at the destitute home.
Gross motor development was said to have been normal when compared to other children in the destitute home. Developmental impairments were restricted to the areas of communication, cognition and social interaction. The patient had not been exposed to any form of schooling and he had had no social interaction outside the destitute home where he had lived for thirteen years.
No information is available about family history.
He appeared to be oblivious of his environment and was staring into space, focusing on an unseen object. He did not respond to any questions or instructions during interaction and made no speech of his own. His attention and concentration were impaired during interaction. His attention was however drawn with the word 'take' to which he snatched away forcefully the biscuit from the examiner's hand and ate voraciously as if the biscuit would be taken away from him if he was not fast enough. After this, he was once again in his own world. There was no abnormal motor activity.
Physical examination revealed a young boy with features of oculocutaneous albinism . There were no other specific skin lesions. He was small in stature for his age. Gross examination of the Central Nervous System (CNS) revealed no hearing or vision impairment. There was no motor abnormality or sensory deficit. Examinations of other systems were essentially normal.
Formal Intelligent Quotient (I.Q) test was not carried out on this patient because of the confounding variation that socio-cultural influences have on standardized I.Q tests. However, empirical judgment based on interaction with the patient in the milieu of his socio-cultural environment showed that he was severely retarded with mental age estimated at around 3 to 4 years.
Based on the history, physical examination and clinical interaction with the patient, co-morbid diagnoses of oculocutaneous albinism (E 70.3) and childhood autism (F 84.0) with severe mental retardation (F 72) were made based on World Health Organization (W.H.O) International Classification of Diseases, 10th Edition (ICD – 10) . Identified problems in the patient were communication impairment, poor social interaction, and behavioral problems characterized by unwarranted screaming, unruly behavior of snatching away other children's snacks, hyperactivity that was often displayed by running around the destitute home in a circle and destructive tendencies. He was referred to the Child and Adolescent Psychiatry unit of Federal Neuro-Psychiatric Hospital, New Haven, Enugu, Nigeria for further evaluation and management.
A multi-disciplinary approach to the management of children with autism is desirable, however there are limited facilities for children with autism in a third world country like Nigeria.
However, the behavioral problems were managed with oral Haloperidol 2.5 mg daily on which the patient had been on for three weeks with reduction in hyperactivity and unruly behavior toward other children.