A 79-year-old female presented to the emergency department following a road traffic accident. She described feeling weak while driving before the collision. She was wearing a seatbelt and was uninjured.
Her medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, dyslipidaemia, constipation, hypertension and she was an ex-smoker as she quit smoking two months earlier. Her medications included Lercanidipine 10 mg, Aspirin 75 mg, Ezetimibe/Simvastatin 10 mg/20 mg, Lactulose as required, and Indacaterol/Glycopyrronium 85mcg/43mcg.
She had attended her GP on multiple occasions over the previous two months feeling generally weak and lethargic. She was noted to be hypertensive, requiring increasing doses of her antihypertensive medications. Laboratory tests with her GP showed hypokalaemia and she was commenced on oral potassium supplements.
On our initial assessment she was hypertensive, blood pressure 180/69. She was of slim build (body mass index(BMI) of 20.2 kg/m2) with no cushingoid features, clinical examination was unremarkable and there was no traumatic injury. ECG at presentation showed sinus rhythm with left axis deviation, left bundle-branch block, and QT prolongation of 502 ms. Labs revealed severe hypokalaemia (K 2.2 mmol/l), normal renal function (Urea 3.4 mmol/L, Creatinine 54ummol/L, Na 143 mmol/L), normal serum magnesium (Mg 0.79 mmol/L) with metabolic alkalosis (pH 7.53, PCO2 5.4 (40.3mmhg), PO2 7.1 (53.3mmhg), HCO3 34). Spot urinary potassium was 22 mmol/l. Chest x-ray on admission showed mild cardiomegaly, and there was no active lung disease . CT Brain reported no acute findings.
Our impression was severe hypokalaemia and hypertension with metabolic alkalosis secondary to hyperaldosteronism. Differential diagnoses included primary hyperaldosteronism, secondary hyperaldosteronism, or due to medications/food. Further workup was sent including; plasma renin, serum aldosterone, urinary electrolytes. She was managed with aggressive potassium replacement, requiring 80 mmol i.v. potassium chloride (KCl) daily for four days (total 240 mmol i.v. KCl) to achieve a serum potassium level above 3.5 mmol/L. Her systolic blood pressure settled below 150mmhg.
On day five of her admission, our patient developed a hypertensive emergency (BP 239/114 mmHg) with acute pulmonary oedema requiring admission to the intensive care unit (ICU). Chest X-ray demonstrated bilateral air space opacifications and perihilar haze, with bilateral pleural effusions in keeping with pulmonary oedema . She was managed with i.v. Furosemide 160 mg/24 h, Isosorbide dinitrate infusion 2.5 mg/hr for 8 h, and oral spironolactone 50 mg once daily. Pulmonary oedema resolved within 24 h and blood pressure improved to 130/55 mmHg. She was changed from i.v. furosemide to oral Furosemide/Amiloride 40/5 mg. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricle size and function, paradoxical septal motion consistent with left bundle branch block, mildly dilated left atrium, and right ventricular systolic pressure less than 35 mmHg. On review of her imaging, a recent CT thorax was noted to include the adrenal glands. This was reviewed and reported no evidence of adrenal adenomas or hyperplasia Fig. .
We revisited the clinical history. On further questioning, she reported struggling with nicotine cravings since quitting smoking two months earlier. She began eating excessive amounts of liquorice sweets to satisfy her nicotine cravings. The liquorice sweets she was eating contained 4% liquorice root extract. The estimated intake was 1.14gm-2.28gm liquorice extract per day for the previous two months. She continued to eat liquorice while in hospital until admission to the ICU. She was advised to stop consuming liquorice once the medical team became aware.
Further investigations returned. Her urinary potassium was noted to be inappropriately normal [24 h Urinary Potassium: 57.3 (25–125) mmol/24 h] in the setting of severe hypokalaemia with high urinary sodium [24 h Urinary Sodium: 353.4 pg/ml(40-220 pg/ml)]. Elevated urinary sodium excretion was likely due to diuretic therapy and the production of natriuretic peptides in response to hypervolemia. Plasma renin and serum aldosterone taken day three of admission were both suppressed [Plasma renin 4.4 pg/ml(< 20 pg/ml), Serum Aldosterone < 26 pg/ml (42–209 pg/ml)] suggestive of an extra-adrenal mimic causing a pseudo-aldosteronism. This was in keeping with a diagnosis of acquired apparent mineralocorticoid excess secondary to excessive Liquorice ingestion. Her serum potassium and systolic blood pressure began to normalise following the cessation of Liquorice. Furosemide/Amiloride was reduced to 20 mg/5 mg during admission and was discontinued 10 days after discharge. Her serum potassium remained within the normal range in the following weeks and her blood pressure normalised. Her follow-up ECG demonstrated sinus rhythm with left axis deviation and left bundle-branch block, and QTc improved to 458 ms.