In 2020, a 50-year-old female was admitted to our hospital because of pain due to a popliteal cyst on her left knee, which was detected 6 years ago. She has no notable pathological history other than Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, with the treatment of consists in daily assumption of synthetic levothyroxine. The level of anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (ATG) was 347.6IU/mL. Physical examination did not reveal any apparent focus of infection before surgery. The total leucocyte and neutrophil counts were 4.2 × 109/L and 1.84 × 109/L, respectively, and the platelet count was 203 × 109/L. Two hours after receiving resection for the popliteal cyst, she developed a fever of 41 °C with chills and skin flushing throughout the body. Her blood pressure was 88/47 mmHg; the total leucocyte and neutrophil counts were 0.49 × 109/L and 0.24 × 109/L, respectively, and the platelet count was 130 × 109/L. Procalcitonin level was 30 ng/mL. On the basis of the symptoms, the patient was considered to have septic shock, and the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score was 20.She was transferred to the intensive care unit immediately, received a fluid replacement and was administered epinephrine and dopamine through a micropump. Imipenem (500 mg) was infused intravenously every 6 h, following which the total leukocyte count increased to 18 × 109/L. Two sample bottles of blood collected 2 h after the operation were cultured aerobically, and the rapid antimicrobial susceptibility test was performed as per Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI)guidelines by Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method on Muller Hilton agar, on the basis of a positive test result after 28 h of incubation. The bacterial pathogen was identified as Ralstonia pickettii by the Vitek 2 Gram-negative identification card(GN), According to the results of the antimicrobial susceptibility test provided by the Vitek 2 AST-GN335 card, the antibacterial therapy was changed to cefoperazone-sulbactam (3 g every 8 h). Following the treatment, the body temperature initially decreased to 37 °C and later again increased to 39 °C during 2 days after surgery. The leukocyte count also initially decreased and then gradually increased from 13.2 × 109/L to 25.8 × 109/L. Procalcitonin level was 12.07 ng/mL. The disease progressed rapidly, and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (mods), renal insufficiency, liver dysfunction followed. Hemodialysis was performed. The blood pressure dropped to 40/21 mmHg, and electric defibrillation was given due to the frequent ventricular tachycardia. Subsequently, we found the growth of other fewer white colonies on the culture plate of the positive blood culture bottle along with the colonies of R. pickettii , which showed yellow after purification and incubation in blood agar plates after 48 h . The organism appeared as a gram-positive coryneform on smear; this finding was consistent with the colonies obtained from the other three positive blood cultures in succession. These blood cultures were performed 2 days after surgery and included 2 bottles cultured aerobically and 1 bottle cultured anaerobically, which showed bacterial growth at 62 h, 55 h, and 97 h, respectively. Bacterial DNA extraction, PCR amplification and DNA sequencing of the 16 S rRNA genes were performed. The sequences of the PCR products were compared with known 16 S rRNA gene sequences in the GenBank database. The analysis revealed 99.7% similarity between the isolate and Microbacterium laevaniformans(GenBank sequence ID:NZ SKYO000021.1). The patient was placed on a combination treatment of intravenous cefoperazone-sulbactam (3 g every 8 h) and levofloxacin (500 mg once daily) immediately after the identification of Microbacterium in blood culture. The patient remained stable after completing her 2-week course of antibiotics and was transferred to the general ward, with ATG level reduced to 211 IU/mL 13days later. The changes of infection index during the treatment of septic shock were shown in Fig. and Table .