A 7.5-year-old boy was born at term via normal vaginal delivery following an uncomplicated pregnancy. His birth growth parameters were normal and he had normal newborn physical examination. He developed urinary tract infection at the age of 40 days and was found to have bilateral hydronephrosis and vesicoureteric reflux. Prophylactic antibiotics were given during the first 2 years of life after which hydronephrosis and reflux resolved. During early childhood, his parents were concerned as he had delayed speech. He started his first words at the age of 3 years. His speech improved but remains impaired and not fully intelligible. He had good communication and social interaction including non-verbal communication. His receptive language was better than the expressive language; however he had difficulty with comprehension of complex commands or conversations. His early motor development was normal. At the time of this report he was able to run; however, he trips and falls frequently. He was unable to skip or jump, and needed to hold onto the rail while going up and down stairs. In addition, he had difficulties with fine motor skills including writing. These symptoms likely caused by incoordination. He had reasonable self-care skills including dressing and feeding and was toilet trained by age 3.5 years. The boy had behavior disturbances in the form of mild self-inflicted injuries (scratching his skin and attempting to peel his nails), and hyperactivity-inattention that had improved with atomoxetine. The child attended school and had difficulties in learning including reading and writing. A formal IQ test was performed at 7 years of age using Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scales Fifth Edition (SB5) and revealed low-average scales (85–93). The child had one brief generalized tonic-clonic seizure at the age of 6.5 years, and no antiepileptic medications were initiated. He remained free of seizures after that. Family history was notable of parental consanguinity. The child had a brother and a sister who had been healthy.
Physical examination revealed normal growth parameters including head circumference and distinctive facial features including thick eyebrows, down-slanted palpebral fissures, low-set posteriorly rotated ears, and thick lower lip. He was able to follow simple commands and to engage in simple conversation. His speech was largely non-intelligible. Stereotyped repetitive hand movements were noted. Cranial nerve examination was normal. His muscle tone and power, deep tendon reflexes, and sensory exam were normal. He had difficulties with fine finger movements and writing. In addition, he had difficulties with balancing on one foot and with tandem walking.
An electroencephalogram (EEG) at age 6.5 years following the single seizure episode showed relatively slow background (theta range) and no epileptiform discharges, a repeat EEG at 7 years showed posterior dominant rhythm of mixed alpha and theta activity with superimposed fast beta in the frontal regions, normal sleep architecture, and infrequent high amplitude epileptic discharges in right frontocentral area during sleep.
Inborn errors of metabolism and chromosomal abnormalities were considered. Metabolic work up (ammonia, lactate, plasma amino acids, urine organic acids, homocysteine, and acylcarnitine profile), thyroid function, karyotype, hearing assessment, cardiac echocardiogram, renal ultrasound (at the age of 2 years), and cranial MRI (at the age of 7 years) were all normal.
Chromosomal microarray revealed a 2-Mb duplication of chromosome 17q23.2q23.3 encompassing Ch17:59,678,856–61,679,670 (hg19). Chromosomal microarray for both parents did not reveal the duplication indicating that this duplication is de novo in the child. The chromosomal microarray (CentoArrayCyto™- HD) was performed at Centogene AG, Schillingallee, Rostock, Germany. DNA was fragmented, amplified and hybridized to the array according to manufacturer’s guidelines. The Cytoscan HD array (Affymetrix) contains 2.7 million markers, including 750,000 SNP markers, across the whole genome covering 96% of the genes. It enables the detection of copy number variations and/or large deletions/duplications. The results were analyzed with the Chromosome Analysis suite (ChAS, Affymetrix). Copy number variations with a minimum of 25 markers and a size of more than 50 kb (deletions) and 200 kb (duplications) were considered. The results were interpreted using the DGV and Decipher databases and additional available databases.
The duplicated region encompasses the BRIP1 gene at the proximal end and the TACO1 gene at the distal end. To confirm the duplication with orthogonal methods, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and quantitative PCR assay (qPCR) were used. MLPA analyses were performed using SALSA MLPA P240 BRIP1/CHEK1 provided by MRC-Holland to test for deletions or duplications within or including the BRIP1 gene. This probemix, which contains probes for each 20 exons of BRIP1, demonstrated duplication of all probes against the BRIP1 gene, suggesting the breakpoint is located proximal to the BRIP1 gene. For the TACO1 gene, qPCR assay was performed using VeriQuest Fast SYBR Green (Affymetrix). Three gene specific amplicons targeting exon 1, intron 1 and exon 2 of TACO1 were used to determine the regions duplicated within the gene. Only probes against exon 1 and intron 1 showed duplication suggesting that exon 2 was not a part of the duplicated region and the duplication breakpoint is located in intron 1. The CARE guidelines were followed in reporting this case.