A 70-year-old female patient was admitted to our unit due to a three-year history of low back pain and one month of dark urine, accompanied by fatigue and fever.
Over the past three years, the patient presented with low back pain and discontinuously underwent therapy with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs without significant improvement. After taking health care products for one month, the pain scale score increased, and the patient developed limb claudication and dark urine.
The patient suffered from hypertension and cerebral infarction one year prior and underwent treatment with Lipitor 20 mg once a day and aspirin 100 mg once a day.
The patient drank occasionally. She had no family history of disease.
The patient had a fever of 38.1 °C, and other vital signs were within the normal range. Pulse inequality, bruits and reduced blood pressure/pulses were not found.
The laboratory findings were as follows: total protein (58.3 g/L), serum albumin (ALB, 27.7 g/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT, 211.5 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST, 389.3 U/L), creatine kinase (CK, 11668 U/L), haemoglobin (Hb, 93 g/L), CRP (129.2 mg/L), ESR (100 mm/h), and procalcitonin (PCT, 0.55 µg/L). Antinuclear antibody (ANA), myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA), and proteinase-3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (PR3-ANCA) tests were negative.
Chest computed tomography showed bilateral hydrothorax. Brain magnetic resonance images showed mild focal stenosis of the cerebral artery. Carotid artery ultrasound revealed atherosclerotic plaque. Other findings, including electromyography and abdomen ultrasound, were not obviously abnormal.
After an initial diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis, the patient was prescribed fluid therapy and hepatoprotective agents. Although CK and hepatic enzymes decreased 10 d later, the patient continued to experience fatigue and developed fever, with the highest temperature reaching 38.1 °C despite administration of various antibiotic regimens. The results of the follow-up work-up were as follows: ALT 107 U/L, AST 31 U/L, CK 54 U/L, Hb 90 g/L, CRP 164 mg/L, and ESR 101 mm/h.
Vasculitis was suspected given her clinical signs and symptoms, especially fever of unknown origin, and isolated, elevated inflammatory markers and vascular imaging were ordered for further evaluation.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed an aneurysm of the aortic arch . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed a thickened artery wall combined with increased FDG uptake in both the aorta and its major branches .