A 63-year-old Chinese male underwent a laparoscopic radical right hemicolectomy for an adenocarcinoma of the ascending colon (pT4N0M0, Stage II) in June 2020. The CT scan and colonoscopy before surgery were shown in . Pathology showed an invasive, moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with infiltration beyond serosal tissue. There were no lymphovascular and perineural invasion and no lymph node metastasis out of seventeen lymph nodes harvested. Lynch syndrome screen by immunohistochemistry (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 proteins) showed normal expression in pathological tissue. There were no reportable alterations in KRAS, NRAS, and BRAF. The patient was considered as high risk stage II colon cancer, and therefore, adjuvant chemotherapy with XELOX regimen was started 4 weeks after surgery. The XELOX regimen consisted of a 2-h intravenous infusion of oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 on day 1 and oral capecitabine (trade name: Xeloda) 1000 mg/m2 twice daily given for 14 days of a 3-week cycle . On day 2 after finishing capecitabine administration, the patient presented with skin rash, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and vomiting. The symptoms were abated following treatment with dexamethasone, loperamide, and antispasmodic. The following day, the patient developed small amounts of bloody stools 4–5 times per day with occasional fever and abdominal pain. After supportive therapy (antidiarrheal therapy, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and dietary modifications) for 10 days, the bloody stools persist.
He presented to the gastrointestinal surgery department with anemic appearance, fatigue, and bloody diarrhea. The patient was a nonsmoker and drank alcohol occasionally. There was no relevant medication history or family history. His abdomen was not distended. There was no tenderness or rebound tenderness upon palpation. Bowel sounds were hyperactive. After admission, the patient excreted about 400 ml of crimson colored stools on 2 occasions. The patient developed shock, with a blood pressure of 65/35 mmHg, a temperature of 38.3 °C, tachycardia at 106 beats/min, and hemoglobin of 7.6 g/dl. His white cell count (WCC) was 4.5 × 109/L (normal 3.5–9.0 × 109/L), neutrophils were 2.3 × 109/L (normal 1.5–8 × 109/L) , and the serum albumin was 19.8 g/L. Stool culture for Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) was negative. The patient was treated with fluid replacement, blood transfusion, octreotide, losec, hemostatic, and antibiotics. The patient’s condition was stabilized, and a digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed. However, no obvious signs of arterial bleeding were found. On day 2 after admission, the patient again excreted 400 ml of crimson colored stools. An emergency colonoscopy was conducted with no obvious abnormalities observed in the colon or anastomosis except a large amount of bloody fluid at the end of ileum indicating the possibility of small bowel hemorrhage . Abdomen and pelvis CT with contrast revealed edema and thickening of the distal ileum wall .
Because of the persistent bloody diarrhea and negative findings of active bleeding points by DSA and colonoscopy, an emergency laparotomy was performed. No diverticulum, arteriovenous malformation, or ischemic necrosis was observed in the whole small intestine and colon except a dilation and thickening in about 40 cm of the terminal ileum. Intraoperative colonoscopy found diffuse inflammatory changes in about 30 cm long of terminal ileum with cobble-like signs and scattered superficial ulcerations as well as bleeding points on the ulcer surface . The abnormal segment of ileum including a 5-cm proximal segment and including the previous ileo-colic anastomosis was removed. A new ileo-colic end-to-end manual anastomosis was performed. The pathological examination of the surgery specimen showed an active stage of chronic inflammatory changes. Diffuse ulceration and erosions in the mucosa with moderate eosinophilic and neutrophil infiltrates were observed. Signs of pseudomembrane formation and necrosis were absent . The bloody diarrhea resolved after surgery and stools were improved in frequency. Given the severity of his life-threatening symptoms, the patient decided not to receive additional adjuvant chemotherapy. As of this writing, 1 year has passed from the ileal resection, and fortunately, the patient has no signs of cancer relapse. The authors are closely monitoring the progress of the patient and preparing to give further treatment advice as needed.
Written informed consent for publication of clinical details and clinical images were obtained from the patient.