We report a 15-month-old female child from Dire-Dawa, eastern part of Ethiopia, first child from non-consanguineous parents who presented with regression of developmental milestones and truncal ataxia since the age of 11 months following a febrile illness that occurred one month earlier. During the initial episode of her febrile illness she was diagnosed to have pneumonia and treated improved. After one month she developed weakness of upper extremity associated with truncal ataxia and difficulty to reach out to objects which was gradually increasing. Up to age of 10 months she had normal growth and development and then she progressively regressed in her developmental milestones. She has no history of seizure, loss of consciousness and prior neurologic illness.
She was born after uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery. She had normal neonatal period and she is immunized according to the EPI schedule.
On physical examination, her vital signs and anthropometric measurements were within normal limit. Head circumference was 48 cm which was within normal limit. She had no Dysmorphic features. On neurologic examination, she was conscious; pupils were midsized and reactive to light bilaterally. Assessment of the optic disc and retina bilaterally had done which was normal. She can move her eyes in all directions. Observed power in all limbs was 3/5. She had bilateral hyperreflexia, truncal ataxia and dysmetria. There is no sensory loss. The laboratory blood work up results was in normal range.
MRI of her brain revealed diffuse white matter abnormality . Considering history, clinical examinations and investigation reports this case was diagnosed as a case of Vanishing white matter (VWMD) disease.
There is no specific treatment for VWMD; counseling was done with the parents regarding the etiology, progression and outcome of the disease. Advice was given to avoid stressful situations and head trauma and also to take antipyretics and vaccination. She was also advised to have regular follow-up for progression of the condition.