An 83-year-old woman was admitted to another hospital due to acute heart failure secondary to severe AS. Her initial condition was improved by medical treatment, however, dyspnoea on exertion (New York Heart Association functional Class II) was still observed. Therefore, she was referred to our hospital in consideration of intervention to AS. At the time of admission, she was haemodinamically stable. She had a systolic murmur of Levine IV/VI at the second left sternal border, clear lung sounds, and no oedema of the lower extremities. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a peak velocity of 6.3 m/s, a peak pressure gradient of 158.8 mmHg, and a mean gradient of 97.1 mmHg. Blood flow acceleration (peak velocity: 2.6 m/s) at the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) due to septal bulge was also seen. However, systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve was not observed, and mitral regurgitation (MR) was mild (, Videos S1 and S2). The left ventricular wall was concentrically hypertrophied with both the septum and posterior wall measured 19 mm. The LV cavity was relatively small, measuring 42 mm at end-diastole, and the ejection fraction was 66%. Electrocardiography showed 58 b.p.m. under normal sinus rhythm . Computed tomography showed the annular perimeter at 75.3 mm and an annular area at 424 mm2. The basal septum was bulged and led to narrowing of the LVOT . Coronary angiography revealed no obstruction. We decided to perform TAVI due to the patient’s age and frailty (Society of Thoracic Surgeons score of 4.34%, clinical frailty scale of 6). Owing to severe calcification leading to LVOT, a self-expanding valve was selected. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation was performed using a transfemoral approach under general anaesthesia, and a 29-mm Evolut PRO (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was implanted after balloon dilatation. Immediately after implantation, a complete atrioventricular (AV) block with junctional rhythm (over 60 b.p.m.) developed . Shortly after, her haemodynamics collapsed and refractory hypotension occurred. Fluid infusion (over 500 ml) and intravenous administration of dopamine (5 μg/kg/min) were not effective. Bolus infusion of norepinephrine and phenylephrine slightly increased the patient’s blood pressure only temporarily. Transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated normal functioning of the implanted valve and revealed LVOT obstruction attributable to SAM of the mitral valve associated with severe MR (, , Videos S3 and S4). However, after performing temporary pacing from the RV apex at 80 b.p.m., which was higher than the junctional rhythm, the LVOT obstruction and MR decreased. Thereafter, the haemodynamics stabilized. The patient was successfully extubated and transferred to the intensive care unit.
There, hypotension was reproducibly induced by interrupting the pacing. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed SAM of the mitral valve under junctional own beat, which was improved by RV pacing (, , Videos S5 and S6). When accidental self-removal of the pacing lead due to delirium occurred, the haemodynamics deteriorated, although junctional rhythm was observed and led to cardiopulmonary arrest. A temporal pacing lead was reinserted emergently while performing resuscitation; thereafter, a return of spontaneous circulation was achieved.
Since severe obstruction was still observed (peak velocity 6.8 m/s) under RV pacing, a beta-blocker (bisoprolol) was administered. However, significant acceleration (peak velocity 3.5 m/s) remained, and the complete AV block was persistent. Therefore, a dual-chamber permanent pacemaker was implanted. The permanent RV lead was placed at the apex because it showed better haemodynamic effects than those of septal pacing (, S7). After adjustment of AV synchrony and medication (bisoprolol: 5 mg, enalapril: 5 mg, and amlodipine: 2.5 mg), TTE revealed mild MR with no evidence of SAM, and the LVOT obstruction was almost resolved. The patient developed post-resuscitation encephalopathy, therefore she was finally discharged to a rehabilitation hospital 34 days after TAVI. At the 9-month follow-up, she had no cardiac symptoms although she was in the nursing home because of the progression of cognitive decline and frailty.