A 34-year-old woman, 20 weeks pregnant, hypothyroid, and on hormone replacement treatment, was admitted to our hospital. The patient had been previously subjected to three different ablation procedures for right atrial tachycardia and a slow nodal pathway in 1999, 2008, and 2014. Furthermore, she reported a history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. The woman, during pregnancy, presented a recurrence of palpitations, with an electrocardiographic finding of right atrial tachycardia at a ventricular frequency of 200 bpm, unresponsive to vagal maneuvers or to the administration of antiarrhythmic therapy (adenosine, flecainide, metoprolol, and digoxin). When the patient arrived at our department, she presented with symptoms (palpitations and asthenia) and persistent arrhythmia with a high ventricular response , leading to hemodynamic instability.
This atrial tachycardia was refractory to antiarrhythmic therapies; as such, it was decided to subject the woman to radiofrequency catheter ablation. The procedure was performed without the use of ionizing radiation (“zero-fluoroscopy” approach). Two right femoral venous accesses were obtained with an ultrasound-guided technique, and the electrophysiological study was based on the analysis of the intracavity traces integrated with an electroanatomical mapping system (CARTO 3). Two catheters were used: a mapping catheter and an ablation catheter. The Octaray mapping catheter (Biosense Webster, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) highlighted a focal right atrial tachycardia with evidence of maximum precociousness in the right appendage; as such, radiofrequency application was started on the appendage ostium . A Q-DOT ablation catheter (Biosense Webster, Inc., CA, USA) was used with a maximum power of 40 watts, with an automatic control of the power based on the temperature; the contact force remained between 5 and 10 g (A,B).
Unfortunately, during the radiofrequency applications, there was a sudden onset of marked hypotension with echocardiogram evidence of pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade. After prompt antagonization of the 5000 IU of sodium heparin administered during the procedure with protamine sulphate, pericardiocentesis was performed with drainage of 450 mL of venous blood. The ablation procedure was halted halfway. After hemodynamic stabilization and a gynecological consultation, which documented that the fetus remained in good condition, the patient was taken to intensive care for continuous monitoring. In the following days, she underwent serial echocardiograms with evidence of stability of the pericardial effusion; a right femoral echo color Doppler documented a non-occlusive thrombosis of the common femoral vein (at the catheter insertion site). For this reason, after gynecological consent, therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin was started; serial gynecological consultations were performed, determining good fetal conditions. After 5 days, in consideration of the persistence of atrial tachycardia with high ventricular response (160 bpm), hemodynamic instability (arterial pressure of <90/65 mmHg), symptoms, and refractoriness to antiarrhythmic therapy (metoprolol and digoxin), the patient underwent another catheter ablation procedure.
The new ablation procedure was performed with an ultrasound-guided technique through two left venous accesses because of the non-occlusive thrombosis on the right femoral vein. The zero-fluoroscopy approach was based on the intracavity traces and the electroanatomical mapping system, with the support of intracardiac echocardiography, which documented the absence of thrombotic formations in the right atrium and highlighted the presence of a right appendage with very thick trabeculae.
During the intracavitary electrophysiological study, the “Coherent Algorithm” of the CARTO system confirmed an atrial activation originating from the right appendage (A,B). Radiofrequency applications in this area under intracardiac echocardiography guide led to the interruption of the circuit and the restoration of sinus rhythm, without further complications .
In the following days, sinus rhythm persisted, along with the recovery of hemodynamic stability and the disappearance of symptoms, always with good fetal conditions at gynecological checkups. After one week of clinical and instrumental intensive monitoring, the woman was discharged to her home in sinus rhythm and with a pharmacological prescription of low-molecular-weight heparin therapy. An ultrasound control 20 days after discharge showed the disappearance of both the pericardial effusion and femoral thrombosis, with persistence of the sinus rhythm. At 37 weeks of pregnancy, the patient gave birth to a healthy baby weighing 3.75 Kg.