The patient was a 70-year-old man who was presented with a large hepatic nodule on computed tomography (CT) during a medical checkup. He was referred to our hospital for further examination in October 2017. He had neither clinical symptoms nor a past medical history. Laboratory tests showed normal levels of albumin (4.5 g/dL), total bilirubin (0.6 mg/dL), indocyanine green retention at 15 min (7.1%), and alpha-fetoprotein (6.3 ng/mL) and an elevation in protein induced by vitamin K absence-II (3517 mAU/mL). Contrast-enhanced multi-detector CT (MDCT) and magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of a large hepatic tumor, 10 cm in diameter, with arterial enhancement and washout, which was consistent with the characteristics of HCC . There were no ascites, extrahepatic invasion, intrahepatic metastasis, or remote metastasis. He was diagnosed with HCC, T2N0M0, stage III, but the etiology was unclear.
He was classified with Child–Pugh grade A disease, and right hepatectomy was first considered; however, MDCT also revealed a large IRHV draining segment 6 directly into the inferior vena cava . Preoperative simulation using 3D CT confirmed that almost all of segments 5 and 6 were drained by the IRHV , suggesting the possibility of decongestion of the segments after division of the RHV . The calculated future remnant liver volumes were 382 mL (26.1% of the total volume) after right hepatectomy and 755 mL (51.7% of the total volume) after anatomical bisegmentectomy 7 and 8. Right hepatectomy was considered to be over-resection for the patient, and we scheduled anatomical bisegmentectomy 7 and 8 .
The operation was performed with a J-shaped incision with left thoracotomy. Mobilization of the right side of the liver was carefully performed to prevent IRHV injury. The RHV and IRHV were then isolated and looped. IOUS revealed a tumor compressing the middle hepatic vein (MHV) without any apparent invasion. Although the tumor was attached to the portal branches of segments 7 and 8 (P7 and P8), the roots of the portal veins were intact. We then attempted staining of the territories of segments 7 and 8 using indigo carmine to determine the liver transection line . P5 branched from the ventral branch of P8; therefore, the ventral and dorsal P8 were separately stained to demarcate between segments 5 and 8 . The approach to P7 was difficult due to its anatomically deep position; therefore, P6 was punctured as counter staining to reveal the border between segments 6 and 7 . The pre-marked liver transection line was consistent with the boundary simulated in the preoperative 3D imaging .
After occlusion of the hepatoduodenal ligament through the intermittent Pringle maneuver, anatomical bisegmentectomy 7 and 8 was conducted using the crush clamping method. First, liver transection was conducted along the Rex–Cantlie line, and the MHV was identified. The MHV was intact from tumor invasion and was successfully preserved. Glisson’s pedicles of segment 7 were then exposed and divided. For segment 8, the dorsal and ventral branches were separately divided to preserve the branch for segment 5. Finally, the RHV was divided and closed with a running suture, and the specimen was removed. The resection surface of the liver is shown in Fig. d. The resected specimen showed the complete resection of the tumor (Additional file : Figure S1b). The pathological findings were consistent with those of HCC without lymphatic or venous invasion. The background liver was not cirrhotic. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 16. The patient is alive with no recurrence of HCC 30 months after hepatectomy.