A 70-year-old man with a past medical history of hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and castrate-resistant metastatic prostate cancer, presented to the emergency room with recurrent syncope episodes without prodrome, with some episodes occurring in the decubitus position. Medications included abiraterone acetate 1000 mg BID, monthly 7.5 mg injection of leuprolide, losartan 50 mg BID, and metoprolol succinate 12.5 mg QD. Of note, the patient was not receiving prednisone and did not report any chest pain, palpitations, dyspnea, or any other associated symptoms.
Physical exam was notable for a blood pressure of 148/92 mmHg, cardiac auscultation with irregular beats. Presentation ECG showed sinus rhythm with a QTc interval of 580 ms (calculated with Bazett’s formula), frequent premature ventricular beats, and short runs of non-sustained TdP. . Laboratory results showed severe hypokalemia 2.4 mEq/L (reference range 3.5–5.0 mEq/L), severe hypomagnesemia 0.8 mg/dl (Reference range 1.6–2.6 mg/dl), and preserved renal function (creatinine 0.6 mg/dL and blood urea nitrogen was 10 mg/dL) for an estimated GFR of 102/mL/min/1.73 m2 (calculated by CKD-EPI formula).
The patient was admitted to the coronary care unit for continuous telemetry, electrolyte repletion, and temporary transvenous atrial pacing to suppress ectopy and prevent polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed a moderate depressed left ventricular ejection fraction of 38% with global hypokinesis . Coronary angiography revealed mild lesions in the left anterior descending and the right coronary artery. The ventricular dysfunction was thought to be secondary to arrhythmia induced cardiomyopathy rather than the primary cause of the arrhythmia. After a thorough review of causes of hypokalemia (including medication review, metabolic alkalosis, and gastrointestinal losses), abiraterone acetate was suspected to be the cause and was suspended; this was particularly high on the differential given that the patient was not taking prednisone and the use of abiraterone acetate alone can result in a clinical picture similar to hyperaldosteronism. As potassium and magnesium levels normalized, the QTc interval shortened, the ventricular ectopy and runs of non-sustained episodes of TdP were entirely resolved. The patient was eventually transferred to the general ward and was later discharged after three days of being asymptomatic with no telemetry abnormalities.
The patient stopped taking abiraterone acetate and no further electrolyte disturbances were presented, suggesting no underlying genetic abnormalities were the main cause of the arrythmia, such as is the case of Gitelman syndrome, which could have explained the severe hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia (least likely because of the absence of metabolic alkalosis and hypertension medical history).