Two years ago the patient, a 79-year-old woman, had complained of frequent urination and urodynia for which there was no obvious cause. The painful urination resulted in continuous severe pain behind the pubic bone after urination, forcing the patient to tilt forward with flexion and not dare to straighten-up. The pain was relieved gradually after about 15 min, but reoccurred at the next urination. Bladder color ultrasound revealed a bladder mass, but there was no gross hematuria. One year ago, the patient was treated in our hospital, with a urinary CT and pelvic MRI identifying an anterior calcified bladder nodule, adjacent to the pubic symphysis. The nodule was considered to be a lesion occupying the pelvic space, although gynecological examination showed no abnormality. Accordingly, the patient was referred to the orthopedic department for further treatment. However, due to the close proximity of the nodule with the bladder and its special anatomical position, the patient was not treated in the orthopedic department, and was requested to attend regular rechecks. Because the above symptoms became aggravated the patient attended our hospital for further treatment. Bimanual diagnosis: Tenderness in the posterior area of the pubic symphysis was obvious. A pelvic separation test was negative. Reexamination of the pelvic CT and a cystoscopy showed nodular bony processes in the posterior part of the pubic symphysis, which were more obvious than before, with compression of the adjacent anterior wall of the bladder. However, no clear foreign body was observed in the bladder cavity and the mucosa of the protuberant part of the bladder was normal . The patient was asked about her medical history and described no history of either transurethral foreign body implantation, pelvic surgery, or trauma. She described a history of tuberculosis, although current examinations showed no evidence of the disease. The patient had complained of osteoporosis for 10 years and had received bone peptide injections every year. No abnormality was found in her calcium and phosphorus metabolism and serum PTH level. An orthopedic consultation was arranged to consider the possibility of hyperosteogeny.
We finally decided to perform open pelvic surgery. During the operation, nodular bone tissue from the pubic symphysis was seen to be obviously oppressing the anterior wall of the bladder, surrounded by inflammatory changes that adhered to the serosa layer of the bladder with no clear boundaries . The local bladder serosa layer was cut with an electric knife and after the nodule was completely exposed, a bone biting forceps was used to snip it from the basin wall of the pubic symphysis. The rough surface of the nodule was polished with a bone file until it was flush with the basin wall and then sealed with bone wax. No damage was found in the muscular layer of the bladder. The cut tissue was sent for pathological examination . The discomfort symptoms of the patient such as frequent and painful micturition were significantly relieved after the operation. The international prostate symptom score (IPSS) score was used as the template to evaluate the symptoms of frequent, painful, and laborious micturition . Before the operation the patient’s score was 34 points (i.e., severe symptoms) and 4 days after the operation was 12 points (i.e., moderate symptoms).