A 17-year-old Caucasian female patient presented oppressive chest pain and dyspnoea during physical activity.
The onset of symptoms occurred in December 2016, when the patient started practicing competitive basketball in youth tournament, involving a substantial increase in workload. Since then, for a period of 24 months, the patient underwent several clinical and instrumental exams there were not considered conclusive.
Therefore, the patient was referred to another centre with a suspicion of pericarditis and subsequently exercise-induced asthma. Unfortunately, both treatment with high-dose non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and therapy with long-acting beta-agonist and steroids did not induce any clinical and symptomatic improvement. Therefore, a psychogenic aetiology was also considered.
Progressively, the chest pain threshold decreased and pain appeared during low-intensity effort. So, in April 2019, she was referred to the Sports Medicine Unit at our institution.
The baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) documented sinus bradycardia (56 b.p.m.) without atrioventricular conduction irregularity nor repolarization abnormalities .
A 24-hour ECG monitoring evidenced uncommon sinus tachycardia phases, two supraventricular extrasystoles, one ventricular extrasystole but no anomaly of ST-segment, despite the patient experienced chest pain during physical activity .
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal systolic and diastolic function, normal origins of coronary arteries, normal size of atrial and ventricular chambers, with mild prolapse of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve .
During cardiopulmonary exercise test, chest pain and dyspnoea arose at 60 W load [Heart rate (HR 123 b.p.m.)], forcing her to stop at 120 W work load (HR 171 b.p.m.). Concurrently, the oxygen consumption was blunted as peak Vo2 amounted to 27.1 mL pro kg (82% of theoretical), thus representing an impairment in aerobic exercise capacity. Mild repolarization abnormalities to ECG were recorded during this phase .
Considering the mismatch between symptoms and non-invasive diagnostic findings, a coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) was performed and revealed a segmental (34 mm) intra-septal course anomaly of the proximal-mid portion of LAD, mainly arranged along the epicardial portion of interventricular septum, with maximum depth of 17 mm .
Therefore, in order to verify whether the computed tomography scan findings could be responsible for symptoms and exercise limitation, she was hospitalized for the invasive functional assessment of the MB.
The coronary angiography confirmed the MB on LAD. As such, the patient underwent functional intracoronary evaluation through pressure guidewire, with instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) assessment both at baseline and after dobutamine infusion (5 µg/kg/min). Fractional flow reverse (FFR) at rest and after dobutamine and atropine intravenous infusion was also recorded.
At baseline (HR 86 b.p.m.), iFR value was 0.89 (normal range: iFR ≥0.90), whereas after 5 min of dobutamine infusion it was 0.82 (HR 111 b.p.m.) and the patient experienced chest pain . After 9 min, iFR values reached 0.77 (HR 140 b.p.m.) with persistence of angor . Thus, the functional assessment at maximal flow and higher HR was indicative of haemodynamic significance of MB.
Similarly, FFR at rest was 0.92 (normal range: FFR > 0.80), while after dobutamine and atropine infusion it was 0.79 with patient reporting angor . Moreover, the iFR pullback demonstrated a remarkable drop upstream the MB, so that iFR value was 0.53 .
In conclusion, the patient was discharged from the hospital in good general conditions and a choice was made to proceed with a medical treatment strategy with low-dose β-blockers (i.e. bisoprolol 1.25 mg qd). The compliance to therapy was optimal and the patient did not suffer from any side effect. To date, at 12 months of follow-up visit, the patient reports a partial clinical benefit, as the increase in anginal threshold allows her to carry out daily activities, though being forced to detraining.
Recently, an accurate cardiosurgical assessment was carried out to evaluate the feasibility of surgical unroofing of the MB. The severity of MB phenotype, in terms of length and depth, implies a complex unroofing procedure. However, it is reasonable to assume that surgical treatment is the only option that may allow our patient to grab the basketball again.