The proband is a 14 month-old girl with short stature and mental retardation. This was the first child from healthy unrelated parents. The pregnancy was uneventful; the baby was delivered naturally at 40 weeks of gestation, measuring 2,400 g and 45 cm at birth (small for gestational age). After the delivery generalized hypotonia and a poor sucking reflex were noticed, therefore the baby was fed through a nasogastric tube during the first weeks. During infancy, the growth was continuously under the 3rd percentile; failure to thrive and developmental delay were also noticed. Facial dysmorphic features were present, including: a coarse face, a prominent forehead, bitemporally sparse hair, narrow and upslanted palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, a short and upturned nose with anteverted nares, full cheeks, a long philtrum and protruding lips .
Standard chromosome analysis of blood lymphocytes was performed, with 3-day cultivation using phytohaemagglutinin and standard harvesting, followed by G-banding . A total of 50 metaphases were analysed using Microscope Olympus BX51 and standard Metasystems karyotyper. The results revealed a normal karyotype in all analysed cells.
Buccal smear was dissolved in 2 ml 1xPBS solution, centrifuged and put into fixative (3:1 acetic acid-methanol solution). After centrifugation and supernatant disposal, solution of 0,075 M KCL on 37 °C temperature was added to the sediment. The fixing procedure was repeated two times successively; afterwards the sediment was transferred on the slide. The dried slide was placed in solution of 0,001 N HCL and 100 μl pepsin for 10 min in water tub on 37 °C. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed using the centromeric probe (red signal) for chromosome 12 (12p, Vysis, CEP 12 spectrum orange, cat. No 30–160012). The standard FISH protocol was used . The fluorescent light microscope analysis (Olympus BX51) was performed both on blood leukocytes and buccal smear. Adjacent filters were used – 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for the counterstaining, and tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC) for the visualization of red colour. Computer analysis was done with Metasystems-FISH software, version 5.5. At least 200 nuclei from each tissue were analysed. The extra 12p signal was detected in 30 % of the analysed buccal smear cells, but not in the blood leukocyte culture . The fibroblast culture was not performed due to the parental denial and condition of the patient.
At the age of 2.5 years the short stature became more evident - it was 3.5 SDS below the mean . GH stimulation tests were performed, with a peak value of 4.9 ng/ml; insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) was also below the expected values - under 10 ng/ml (ref. value 24–152 ng/ml for the age). MRI of the pituitary showed normal structure . The other pituitary hormone levels were normal.
At the age of 4 years the child developed clonic-tonic seizures and her motor and mental abilities started to deteriorate - she lost some of her previously acquired achievements. She developed profound mental retardation and incontinence. The seizures were resistant to anticonvulsive therapy . Due to the presence of intractable epilepsy and mental deterioration, GH replacement therapy was not initiated. Puberty had an early onset - at the age of 8.5 years, leading to further growth delay.