A 3-year-old boy was transported to hospital by ambulance with the chief complaint of abdominal pain and vomiting. Vital signs at the time of emergency transportation showed that the patient had alert consciousness, oxygen saturation 99% under 3 L of O2, respiratory rate 32 breaths/min, pulse 147 b.p.m., blood pressure 133/83 mmHg, and fever (38.4°C). Physical examination showed several old bruises on the patient’s cheeks and back . There was abdominal distention and tenderness of the entire abdomen. Blood gas analysis and blood chemistry tests showed metabolic acidosis and high value of inflammatory response . Computed tomography (CT) showed discontinuity in the wall structure at the horizontal part of the duodenum, with extraintestinal air in the retroperitoneal and abdominal cavity. The patient was diagnosed with duodenal perforation . Paternal remarks about the injury mechanism were contradictory to bruit findings. Maternal remarks eventually revealed a pattern of daily paternal domestic violence against the patient, the injuries were therefore strongly suspected to be the result of paternal abuse. The patient’s general condition was severe, so emergency surgery was essential.
The procedure was carried out with a midline incision in the upper abdomen; turbid ascites persisted in the abdominal cavity. The transverse mesocolon was damaged, and there was complete transection at the horizontal part of the duodenum . There was no significant damage to the Vater ampulla, pancreas, or biliary tract. Undertaking primary anastomosis was difficult due to severe damage of the duodenal stump. The duodenal anal-side stump was closed, and end-to-side anastomosis by the Albert–Lambert method was carried out between the duodenal oral side and the upper jejunum . Gastrostomy by Stamm–Senn method was carried out, and an elemental diet (ED) tube was placed in the jejunum through the anastomotic site, and a nasogastric tube was placed in the stomach through the nose. Our hospital did not have a specialist protection team for abused children, but the father was prohibited from visiting the patient after the operation, and the police and child guidance center informed.
The ED tube was clamped on the 4th postoperative day; the nasogastric tube was removed on the 7th postoperative day, and meals were started. The postoperative course was uneventful. The ED tube was removed on the 25th postoperative day, and the patient was discharged on the 31st postoperative day.