A 66-year-old man with general fatigue and abdominal distention came to our hospital. His vital signs were stable, but physical examination showed tenderness of the right upper abdomen. Laboratory data showed severe anemia (Hb 8.1 g/dl) and a low albumin level (Alb 2.1 g/dl). Tumor markers were markedly elevated, including CEA 114.0 ng/ml and CA 19-9 7.8 U/ml. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed a 80-mm bulky mass with markedly swollen regional lymph nodes . The tumor had created a fistula to the second portion of the duodenum and invaded the right ureter. There were no distant metastases. Colonoscopy showed a circumferential type 2 tumor at the ascending colon, and the colonoscope could not pass through to the oral side. The biopsy showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, and the RAS status was mutant. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a colo-duodenal fistula at the second portion of the duodenum . PET–CT showed that there was strong uptake to main tumor and surrounding lymph nodes . The diagnosis was ascending colon cancer cT4bN2bM0StageIIIC. Gastro-jejunal bypass and ileostomy were performed to prevent bowel obstruction, followed by systemic chemotherapy (FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab). After two courses of systemic chemotherapy, MSI-H was diagnosed from biopsy specimen examination. The systemic chemotherapy was then changed to immunotherapy with pembrolizumab. After six courses of immunotherapy, the tumor markers were markedly decreased to within normal ranges, but the main tumor increased in size . Then, radiation therapy, 5 × 5 Gy, was then given to main tumor for the purpose of both tumor shrinkage and palliative setting including pain control. After the radiation therapy, CT showed that all of the tumor, including the main tumor, lymph node metastases in short axis to < 10 mm, and the colo-duodenal fistula had gradually shrunk. Follow-up upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed that the colo-duodenal fistula had closed . PET–CT showed that there was no abnormal uptake in all tumors . According to these imaging findings, we determined the patients as cCR. Now, 21 months after the first diagnosis, the tumor is well controlled without evidence of regrowth.