A 67-year-old Japanese woman, taking daily oral cyclophosphamide against lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma for 4 years, was referred to the nephrology department because of recently developed nephrotic syndrome. The patient showed bilateral leg edema and weight gain. Laboratory data showed preserved kidney function (serum creatinine, 0.61 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate, 73.7 ml/min/1.73m2) and hypoalbuminemia (2.2 g/dL). The urinalysis was negative for occult blood and revealed a urinary total protein-to-creatinine ratio (UPCR) of 9.7 g/gCr. Serum immunoglobulin levels were IgG 466 mg/dL, IgA 74 mg/dL, and IgM 2789 mg/dL, serum free light-chain levels were kappa-light chain 24.4 mg/L and lambda-light chain 15.8 mg/L (kappa-to-lambda serum free light-chain ratio of 1.54) and plasma electrophoresis revealed IgM-kappa monoclonal gammopathy. Renal biopsy was performed under suspicion of monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance .
The renal biopsy specimens contained 12 glomeruli without proliferative features, and the glomeruli revealed slight mesangial widening with amorphous deposits . Congo-red staining was positive in the mesangial area and electron microscopic analysis showed non-branched fibrils indicating renal amyloidosis. Electron microscopic analysis was negative for granular and amorphous deposits on the endothelial aspect of the glomerular basement membrane and outer aspect of the tubular basement membrane. Immunofluorescence staining was equally positive for IgM (mu heavy-chain, Fig. ) and kappa light-chains and was negative for linear staining of tubular basement membrane. The immunostaining for the other immunoglobulins , complements, serum amyloid A, transthyretin, and fibrinogen yielded negative results. Therefore, IgM-kappa type renal AHL amyloidosis due to lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma was suspected . Smears and flow cytometry of bone marrow aspirate were consistent with previous diagnosis of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. After the diagnosis, weekly oral fludarabine was initiated. The proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia gradually improved to UPCR of 2.5 g/gCr and serum albumin level of 3.6 g/dL in one-and-a-half years.
In order to confirm the monotypic IgM-kappa deposition and the diagnosis of AHL amyloidosis, we performed LMD-LC-MS/MS of the glomerular amyloid depositions. The LMD-LC-MS/MS identified mu heavy-chain and kappa light-chain with mu heavy-chain predominance consistent with the diagnosis of IgM-kappa type renal AHL amyloidosis . We next performed LC-MS/MS of renal amyloid fibrils isolated by the traditional amyloid purification method to confirm that both the identified immunoglobulins compose amyloid fibrils. The additional LC-MS/MS only identified kappa light-chains without any heavy-chain component . All together, we eventually diagnosed the case as “kappa type renal AL amyloidosis with non-amyloid forming monoclonal IgM-kappa deposition”.