A 52-year-old female visited the emergency room of our hospital (Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital) due to abdominal pain nausea and vomiting.
Five weeks before visiting the emergency room, she visited our outpatient clinic of gastroenterology department due to an increased level of liver enzyme alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (at 320 U/mL) that was accidentally found at a health screening test. Blood test showed positive autoimmune antibody (anti-nuclear antibody 1:1280 and anti-mitochondrial antibody positive). Her immunoglobulin G was elevated to 1577 mg/dL. Abdominal ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) showed coarse liver surface, indicating that she had chronic liver disease . Therefore, a liver biopsy was performed and the patient was finally diagnosed with an overlap syndrome predominantly with features of an autoimmune hepatitis. After the biopsy, the patient started to take high dose of ursodeoxycholic acid (15 mg/kg) plus prednisolone 40 mg daily for two weeks. After two weeks from the initial treatment, the dose of ursodeoxycholic acid was maintained and prednisolone was reduced by 10 mg every week. Six days before the emergency room visit, prednisolone was reduced to 5 mg and azathioprine 50 mg was maintained.
From two days before visiting the emergency room, the patient had symptoms of mild heartburn and abdominal pain. One day before the emergency room visit, her abdominal pain worsened to the point that it interfered with her sleep. In addition, she had more symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Thus, she finally visited the emergency room.
The patient had an unremarkable past medical history except for an overlap syndrome described above.
At the time of the emergency room visit, her blood pressure was normal with a systolic blood pressure of 130 mmHg and a diastolic blood pressure of 80 mmHg. She had a mild fever (37.6 °C) and tachycardia (heart rate of 110 beats/min). She also had tachypnea at 30 breaths per minute. She had abdominal tenderness in the epigastric to the left upper quadrant area. Her abdomen was a little hard. However, no rebound tenderness was observed.
During the outpatient treatment period, her counts of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets were all normal. However, at the time of the emergency room visit, her counts of white blood cells and platelets were reduced to 700/µL and 61000/µL, respectively. Since her neutrophil level was decreased to 5% and C-reactive protein level was elevated to 14.35 mg/dL, systemic infection was strongly suspected. Test results for liver enzymes were: aspartate aminotransferase, 347 U/L; ALT, 52 U/L; and gamma glutamyl transferase, 458 U/L. Her prothrombin time international normalized ratio was 1.2.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed a huge stomach with layered wall thickening in the fundus and upper body , which was not found before she received treatment . Air in the stomach wall was observed in some areas. Decrease of mucosal enhancement was also detected.