A 44-year-old right-handed man experienced a sudden onset of vertigo and nausea while washing his face. The patient had experienced a stroke 3 months previously that had been diagnosed as a left posterior cerebral artery (PCA) infarction . The only risk factor he possessed was hyperlipidemia, and his current medications included statin and aspirin. The patient visited the stroke center of a local hospital where a brain magnetic resonance (MR) imaging (MRI) scan revealed diffusion restriction in the left posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) territory but normal-appearing vessels on MR angiography (MRA) . A diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke in the left PICA territory was made, and clopidogrel plus aspirin were administered to the patient.
On day 3 the patient was referred to our hospital for further etiological workups. The findings of a neurologic examination performed on arrival were normal except for a mild gait imbalance. The patient had no constitutional symptoms including fever, night sweats, fatigue, anorexia, or weight loss. The results of vascular studies, including MRA and computed tomography (CT) angiography, were unremarkable. Electrocardiography, 24-hr telemonitoring, transcranial Doppler shunt test, and coronary CT angiography revealed no abnormalities. The results of laboratory tests, including routine blood tests, inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein), thyroid function test, and autoantibodies, were normal. Hemostatic markers of prothrombotic tendency, including antiphospholipid antibodies (anticardiolipid antibody, lupus anticoagulant, dilute Russell's viper venom time, and β2-glycoprotein-1 antibody), functional activity of antithrombin III, and proteins C and S, were unremarkable, as were serological tests for autoimmune diseases, except for a mildly increased rheumatoid factor (53.2 IU/mL, reference range 0-14 IU/mL). A provisional etiological diagnosis of 'stroke of undetermined etiology' was made, and the patient was treated using dual antiplatelet (aspirin and clopidogrel) and atorvastatin (20 mg) therapy.
On day 6 the patient complained about a visual-field abnormality. A neurologic examination revealed right-lower quadrantanopia. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and the apparent diffusion coefficient revealed a newly developed focal ischemic lesion in the left PCA territory . The results of follow-up MRA and perfusion-weighted imaging were normal. In addition to antiplatelet treatment, dose-adjusted warfarin was started to prevent further embolic stroke. On day 7 the patient experienced a sudden exacerbation of vertigo and walking difficulty. A neurologic examination revealed ataxia of the right arm and leg, and DWI revealed a new ischemic lesion in the right superior cerebellar artery territory . Transfemoral cerebral angiography (TFCA) was performed, which revealed no arterial abnormalities, including in the vertebrobasilar system. On day 10 the patient presented with dysarthria and binocular diplopia, and exhibited medial gaze limitation of his right eye. Another DWI scan demonstrated a new ischemic lesion in the right pons involving the medial longitudinal fasciculus , and his prothrombin-time international normalized ratio was 2.29.
Intracranial arterial wall imaging of the vertebral artery and basilar artery (BA) was performed using a high-resolution, 3-tesla, contrast-enhanced MRI apparatus (Achieva, Philips Medical System, Best, The Netherlands). The arterial wall imaging protocol consisted of precontrast axial T1-, T2-, and proton-density-weighted (PD) images, and postcontrast axial and three-dimensional T1-weighted images. T1-weighted MRI was performed using a three-dimensional spin echo sequence with the following parameters: repetition time (TR)/echo time (TE)=450 ms/18 ms, field of view=170 mm, matrix size=704×704, voxel size=0.241×0.241 mm2, echo train length=10, number of signal averages=1, and slice thickness=0.5 mm. The parameters used for the PD images were TR/TE=2000 ms/32 ms, field of view=100 mm, matrix size=200×200, number of signal averages=2, and slice thickness=1 mm. The black-blood technique with preregional 80-mm-thick saturation pulses to saturate the incoming arterial flow was used to visualize the vessel walls. Imaging analysis was performed by a neuroradiologist (J.W.C.) who was blinded to the clinical information. Axial PD and enhanced T1-weighted images demonstrated eccentric vessel-wall thickness with enhancement of the proximal BA .
An examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed mild inflammation: white blood cell=5/µL, lymphocytes=74%, red blood cell=10/µL, protein=80.3 mg/dL, and CSF glucose=88 mg/dL (s-glucose=147 mg/dL). The patient was diagnosed as having recurrent ischemic stroke due to PACNS. High-dose intravenous steroid therapy (1 g/day for 3 days) was started followed by oral prednisolone. After starting the high-dose steroid therapy there was no stroke recurrence, and the patient gradually improved.
Repeated intracranial arterial wall imaging with high-resolution, 3-tesla, contrast-enhanced MRI performed 1 month after steroid therapy revealed decreased wall thickness and the nearly complete disappearance of contrast enhancement in the proximal BA . The patient's overall condition had improved relative to his last recurrent ischemic stroke. His residual deficits consisted of mild medial gaze limitation of the right eye, dysarthria, and ataxia of the right limbs. The patient was discharged and there was no recurrence while tapering oral steroid therapy.