A 69-year-old female diagnosed with c-T3N0M0 stage II squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in the lower thoracic esophagus underwent thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy with 2-field lymph node dissection after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The pathological diagnosis was advanced esophageal cancer after induction therapy: cT grade 1a, LtAe, 25 × 25 mm, Type 2, SCC, moderately differentiated, ypT3, INFb, ly0, v3, pIM0, pPM0, pDM, ypN0, cM0, ypStage II. After that, she was followed up at our hospital. A cavitary lesion appeared in the lower lobe of the right lung 12 months after surgery . This lesion was not found 6 months after surgery. We decided to follow up strictly because this lesion was suspected to be an inflammatory change rather than a tumor. Chest X-ray was planned for follow-up 3 months later, but the patient did not come to the hospital. On computed tomography (CT) images 3 months later (18 months after surgery), the cavitary lesion slightly increased in size, showing wall thickening (3.0 mm) and fluid inside (a,b). Infections such as tuberculosis, aspergillosis, cryptococcosis, mycosis and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated pulmonary disease were strongly suspected on imaging, although a malignancy was also considered.
Regarding blood examinations, serological surrogate diagnostic markers (T-SPOT®. TB, Aspergillus antigen, Cryptococcus antigen, β-d-glucan, MPO-ANCA and PR3-ANCA) and tumor markers (SCC, CEA) were normal. Inflammatory markers (WBC and CRP) were slightly elevated. Comprehensively, bacterial infection was most suspected, and antibiotic treatment with amoxicillin (AMPC) and amoxicillin/clavulanate (AMPC/CVA) was started. Chest X-ray 10 days after medication revealed that the size of the cavitary lesion did not change and the fluid disappeared (a). Inflammatory markers were also normal on the blood examination. Therefore, the patient was followed without antibiotics for 4 weeks. However, the liquid in the cavity reappeared (b). The size of the cavitary lesion did not decrease, and malignancy could not certainly be excluded. Cavitary lesion resection for the purpose of diagnosis was planned, although the readministration of antibiotics was also considered.
Thoracoscopic partial resection of the right lower lobe of the lung was performed. Preoperatively, a point marker needle was placed near the cavitary lesion under fluoroscopy, and partial lung (S8) resection was performed using a linear stapler.
Histopathological examination showed a grayish white tumor 30 × 30 × 11 mm in size with a cavitary lesion and moderately differentiated SCC, which was similar in morphology to esophageal cancer (a–d). The final diagnosis was lung metastasis of esophageal cancer.
At 6 months after the operation, there were no new recurrences.