An 85-year-old man with uncontrolled primary open-angle glaucoma, despite maximally tolerated medical therapy, was referred to our glaucoma clinic. The patient had no past history of ocular trauma, other eye disease, and intraocular surgery except for uncomplicated cataract surgery about ten years ago. He had a medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and chronic kidney disease. Routine laboratory tests performed before surgery showed electrolyte imbalance with hyperkalemia 5.7 mEq/L (normal range; 3.5–5.0 mEq/L), increased creatinine level of 1.5 mg/dL (normal range; 0.5–1.3 mg/dL), and anemia with a hemoglobin value of 10.2 g/dL. Other laboratory test results including liver function test, sodium and chloride levels, blood glucose, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), white blood cell (WBC) and platelet counts were not remarkable. Hypertension was well-controlled. Preoperative BCVA was 0.2 logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR) in the right eye. The patient had been blinded to the left eye for the last 8 years because of uncontrolled IOP elevation and had negative light perception in the left eye. Goldmann applanation tonometry revealed that the IOP was 27 mmHg in the right eye and 40 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment revealed pseudophakia in the right eye, with no other notable abnormal findings. The anterior chamber was deep, and the angle was open to grade 4. Fundus examination of the right eye revealed optic disc pallor with large cupping and nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy. The visual field (VF) was severely constricted, with small central and temporal islands .
The patient underwent an uneventful Ahmed glaucoma valve implantation and was prescribed topical antibiotic drops and corticosteroids, with instructions to discontinue prior ocular hypotensive medications. On the first operative day, the IOP decreased to 10 mmHg, with a well-maintained anterior chamber and mild inflammation. On postoperative 8 days, the anterior chamber became shallower with peripheral iridocorneal touch. The BCVA in the right eye was 1.39 logMAR with an IOP of 6 mmHg. Fundus examination revealed large peripheral choroidal detachments measuring 360°. Viscoelastic material was injected through a corneal paracentesis site to deepen the anterior chamber and increase the IOP. Topical atropine was then administered. On postoperative day 15, the IOP increased to 18 mmHg, and the anterior chamber deepened; however, the choroidal effusion did not resolve. The BCVA in the right eye was 1.22 logMAR. For the next 8 months, the IOP in the right eye was well controlled between 14 and 18 mmHg without ocular hypotensive medication, and he had no recorded episodes of anterior chamber shallowing, hypotony, or ocular inflammation; however, fundus examinations over 8 months showed that the large choroidal effusion was persistent . During this period, the visual acuity slightly improved to 0.69 logMAR. However, it was still worse than the preoperative BCVA. Owing to the deterioration of the patient’s general condition, he became dependent on wheelchair and needed significant postural support during the period of choroidal effusions. Laboratory test at follow-up still revealed elevated potassium and creatinine levels and persistent anemia (potassium level of 6.0 mEq/L, creatinine level of 1.5 mg/dL, and hemoglobin value of 10.0 g/dL). There were no clinically significant changes in other laboratory parameters. He did not want any further surgical procedures, thus, additional interventions, such as drainage of the effusion, could not be performed.
On postoperative 9 months, spontaneous improvement of choroidal effusion was noted. The patient said that his systemic medical condition had markedly improved and did not need the wheelchair anymore. Follow-up laboratory tests revealed that his electrolyte imbalance was corrected and serum creatinine level was normalized (potassium level of 4.5 mEq/L and creatinine level of 1.24 mg/dL). On postoperative 10 months, the patient returned to a visual acuity of 0.2 logMAR, with a fundus examination showing near-complete resolution of the choroidal detachment. On the last visit, 1-year after the Ahmed glaucoma valve implantation, the BCVA was 0.15 logMAR, the IOP was 16 mmHg without any topical hypotensive medication, and the implant was still well functioning . A follow-up VF test revealed a well-preserved residual central island with loss of the previously remaining temporal vision .