We present a case of a 64-year-old male, diagnosed in August 2020 with stage 3A left non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A positron emission tomography (PET) scan at diagnosis showed a large left hilar mass, with small mediastinal nodes. Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) guided biopsy confirmed carcinoma for which immunohistochemistry (IHC) was positive for P40 and negative for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), consistent with squamous cell carcinoma. Programmed death-ligand 1 (PDL1) was low at 20%. He received 6 weeks of definitive concurrent chemo-radiotherapy with weekly carboplatin and paclitaxel. He developed a mild infusion reaction to the last two doses of paclitaxel which required steroid pre-medications. Pathology workup including eosinophil count was normal at this point. A PET scan and brain magnetic resonance imaging scan at completion of chemo-radiotherapy showed good response to treatment. He then commenced two weekly maintenance therapy with durvalumab, an ICI, in October 2020, as per the PACIFIC trial.
After the first dose of durvalumab, he was noted to have eosinophilia of 5.4 × 109/L (<0.5) on routine blood work-up. He was well, and asymptomatic. Specifically there were no symptoms to suggest toxicities from durvalumab. Therefore, he proceeded to cycles 2 and 3 of durvalumab. The eosinophil count continued to rise, and 4 weeks later, post cycle 3 of durvalumab, peaked at 12.0 × 109/L. He remained clinically well. Further investigations were undertaken to determine the cause for eosinophilia. Immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels were markedly elevated at 4573 IU/ml (<100) and tryptase levels were also elevated at 24.3 ug/L (<11). An important differential of systemic mastocytosis was thought to be less likely as the associated proto-oncogene c-KIT mutation was negative. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) testing to look for mutations associated with hypereosinophilic syndromes were negative. Haematology opinion was sought and the eosinophilia was initially thought to be related to durvalumab.
On closer review, the patient disclosed that following the third cycle of durvalumab he had developed diarrhoea associated with crampy abdominal pains. However, his diarrhoea settled rapidly with loperamide (standard therapy in grade 1 durvalumab-induced diarrhoea); in view of this, ICI enterocolitis was felt to be unlikely.
Strongyloides serology was done as part of the workup for eosinophilia. Surprisingly, the results were strongly positive at 1.74 (<0.80). The patient lived on a farm and worked as a painter in a rural town in New South Wales, Australia. He had no previous history of a known Strongyloides infection and had no known risk factors. He was not of Indigenous background and had not lived in or travelled to an endemic area. Stool microscopy and culture (MCS) as well as polymerase reaction testing was negative for parasites, including Strongyloides. An opinion from infectious diseases team was sought, and he was commenced on the antiparasitic agent ivermectin 200 mcg/kg on days 1, 2, 15 and 16. After two doses of ivermectin, the eosinophil count dropped rapidly to 1.2 × 109/L (<0.5) and to 0.9 × 109 (<0.5) after completion of the ivermectin course. IgE levels remained elevated at 3991 kU/L (<214).
Discussions were held with the patient regarding continuing durvalumab checkpoint inhibitor treatment, as the diagnosis of strongyloidiasis did not completely exclude the co-existence of eosinophilia secondary to ICI use. There was also uncertainty regarding the potential increased risk of hypersensitivity reactions to durvalumab given the eosinophilia and elevated IgE. After much consideration, he consented to receive the fourth dose of durvalumab whilst an inpatient to allow for close observation in the intensive care unit afterwards. The treatment was completed without adverse events. He has since received durvalumab safely in the outpatient setting without any issues. Recent progress CT scans show stability of the lung malignancy.