An 80-year-old women, Jehovah’s witness, affected by hepatitis C virus related liver cirrhosis, paroxysmal AF on NOAC, partially occluded right carotid siphon aneurysm, and primary mitral regurgitation (MR) was admitted to our department because of worsening dyspnoea. At presentation, physical examination revealed systemic congestion, with a respiratory rate of 23/min, normal blood pressure values and sinus tachycardia at electrocardiogram examination. The transthoracic and transoesophageal (TEE) echocardiographic evaluation showed a normal left ventricle with preserved ejection fraction (EF 58%), mild left atrium enlargement (left atrial volume index of 36 mL/m2), normal right ventricle, and mild tricuspid regurgitation with mild pulmonary hypertension. Mitral valve presented leaflets thickening, diffuse annular calcification, and posterior leaflet prolapse, with loss of coaptation due to chordal rupture, determining a severe eccentric jet (effective regurgitant orifice area of 50 mm2, vena contracta width of 0.7 cm, E-wave peak of 1.4 m/s). After multidisciplinary discussion and considering the patient’s high cardioembolic and bleeding risk (HAS-BLED score 3 and CHA2DS2VASc score 5), multiple comorbidity (Society of Thoracic Surgeon score 2,9%), and blood transfusion refusal, we decided to perform a combined percutaneous intervention of M-TEER and LAAO, after an Angio-CT scan to better study LAA morphology. The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia, under fluoroscopic and TEE guidance, via the right femoral vein (25 Fr introducer). Through a BRK™ transseptal needle (Abbott, IL, USA), the supero-posterior positioning in the fossa ovalis was evaluated in TEE short-axis, bicaval, and four-chamber view, and the site of crossing was marked in the angiogram using the EchoNavigator technology (EN, Philips Healthcare, Amsterdam, Netherlands). After transseptal puncture (TSP), we achieved a correct positioning of the MitraClip G4 XTW (Abbott, IL, USA), and we grasped the leaflets, assessed a major reduction of MR, and released the clip . Then we performed the LAAO procedure by advancing a pigtail marker catheter into the LAA for selective injection in two projections . We measured the LAA landing zone to confirm intraoperatively the device size. In order to overcome the suboptimal position of the puncture, selected to perform the MitraClip procedure, we planned to use the Amplatzer steerable delivery sheath (Abbott, IL, USA). Thanks to its steerability, we reached a distal deflection of ∼45° towards the LAA neck. Then we deployed the 22 Amplatzer Amulet (Abbott, IL, USA) achieving an optimal positioning with a single attempt. The optimal device position was checked in multiple TEE views. Colour Doppler and 3D TEE confirmed the absence of peri-device leak and a good coverage of the LAA ostium. After the tug tests, the device was released and the last angiogram demonstrated successful LAAO. The patient was discharged home 3 days after, with recommendation to dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and a P2Y12 ADP receptor antagonist) for three months and then single antiplatelet therapy with aspirin sine die.