A 16-year old boy was admitted to the Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), for the management of recurrent episodes of UGI bleeding. He had the first episode of hematemesis and melena at the age of 11 years. He was managed elsewhere with 3 units of blood transfusion and endoscopic sclerotherapy for esophageal varices. He had his esophageal varices obliterated with 10 sessions of endoscopic sclerotherapy. He had an episode of recurrent UGI bleeding 9 months before presentation that was associated with hemodynamic instability, for which he received 4 units of blood transfusion and was subsequently referred to our centre. Additionally, he complained of a progressively growing lump in the left upper abdomen since the age of 3 years. He never had jaundice, ascites or encephalopathy. There was no history of any gum bleed, epistaxis, ecchymosis or prolonged bleeding from minor cuts. His general physical examination was normal; abdominal examination revealed a 6 cm non-tender smooth splenomegaly and a normal liver span. UGI endoscopy at AIIMS revealed 3 columns of grade II esophageal varices and gastric fundal varices. Duplex ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed a normal liver, splenomegaly and obliterated portal vein with multiple collaterals (portal cavernoma) in the hilum of the liver. Splenic vein calibre was 12 mm. Although his hemoglobin was normal (13 gm/dl) the hemogram revealed features of hypersplenism (low total leukocyte count: 2300/mm3 and low platelets: 70,000/mm3). Liver function tests, other than a prolonged prothrombin time (PT), were within normal limits (viz., serum bilirubin: 0.7 mg/dl, serum alkaline phosphatase: 190 U/dl, serum aspartate transaminase: 32 U/dl, serum alanine transaminase: 28 U/dl). PT, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), and thromboelastogram (TEG) were significantly deranged . Assay for clotting factors revealed factor V deficiency (activity less than 20% of normal). Other clotting factor concentrations were normal and the screening for factor inhibitors was negative.
The possible problems during surgery with regard to excessive bleeding were explained to the parents and an informed written consent was obtained. A clinical haematologist saw the patient and a plan for pre and peri-operative FFP infusions with coagulation monitoring was decided upon. The patient was transfused 1500 ml of FFP the day before operation. Following transfusion the PT, APTT and TEG significantly improved , although they did not normalize. He was transfused 900 ml of FFP over 3 hours just before the start of the operation. He underwent splenectomy and proximal lieno-renal shunt (PLRS) through a left thoraco-abdominal incision (8th intercostal space) using a standardized surgical technique described by us previously . The intra-operative blood loss was 1000 ml. During the operation he received two units of packed cells and 750 ml of FFP. The operative time was 4 hours and the patient remained hemodynamically stable throughout the procedure. Postoperatively he received 600 ml of FFP every 12 hours for the first 48 hours followed by 450 ml of FFP every 12 hours for the next 48 hours. There was no bleeding from the drain sites and the wounds healed well without haematoma formation. Abdominal drain and chest tube were removed on 3rd and 8th postoperative days, respectively. Patient had high spiking fever ranging between 39°C–40°C in the initial postoperative period. Although the patient was initially started on i.v. amoxicillin with clavulinic acid and amikacin as per our protocol, antibiotics were changed to teicoplanin and piperacillin-tazobactam on the 3rd postoperative day. He became afebrile on the 6th postoperative day and intravenous antibiotics were continued till 10th postoperative day. Cultures from blood, urine and drain fluids were repeatedly sterile. An ultrasound evaluation did not reveal any subphrenic or intra-abdominal collection. He was discharged on the 12th postoperative day. Following discharge, at 4 months follow-up, the patient has had no recurrence of variceal bleeding and no evidence of hypersplenism (hemoglobin- 11 gm/dl, total leukocyte count- 6600/mm3, platelets- 325,000/mm33). A Doppler ultrasound study showed a patent lieno-renal shunt.