The male infant weighing 2.980 Kg was born trans-vaginally to a 27-year-old, primigravida, primipara mother (G1+P1) following at 40-week gestation. It was uncomplicated delivery except the prolonged second stage and third stage of labour. His Apgar score was 4 in the first minute after birth. Following the birth, the infant developed perinatal asphyxia for which he was actively resuscitated using the non-invasive ventilation, but did not improved. As his oxygen saturation was 80%, he was immediately intubated. His Apgar score improved to 7 and 10 in the fifth and tenth minutes, respectively. He was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). His blood pressure was 70/50 mm Hg in the left arm as measured by the neonatal cuff. His heart rate and breathing rate were 144 beats/min and 66/min, respectively.
On the second day, he developed respiratory distress. He was afebrile and tachypnic. There was no history of aspiration, lethargy, and rash. His blood pressure was 52/38 mm Hg and his pulse rate was 186/min and regular. S1 and S2 were muffled. Both lungs were clear on auscultation. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed low voltage QRS complex with non-specific ST-T wave changes. The haematological parameters were normal except mild leucocytosis (13800/mm3). The cardiac troponin (I and T) and myocardial enzymes - creatine kinase [CK], and its MB isoenzymes (CK-MB) were normal. Immediate bed side chest X-ray revealed continuous radiolucent band of air that was conformed to cardiac silhouette and not extending beyond the level of great vessels which is known as halo sign, a pathognomonic of PPC . The distal end of the endotracheal tube was lying deep in the right main bronchus .
Transrthoracic echocardiography (VIVID 7TM, GE, Germany) was performed through sub-costal route, which revealed air bubbles in the pericardial sac and diastolic collapse of the right atrium and right ventricular outflow tract PPC with cardiac tamponade . His bi-ventricular functions were normal. Infection (viral, bacterial, tubercular) and sepsis were ruled out on the basis of age, absence of fever, normal blood count, and temporal course of events. Similarly, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) was ruled out on the basis of the clear lung fields on auscultation and chest x-ray. Normal cardiac enzymes, ECG, and normal biventricular functions also ruled out myocarditis. In view of hemodynamic instability and tamponade physiology, pericardiocentesis was planned under echocardiographic guidance after obtaining informed consent from his parents.
Intravenous fluid (normal saline) was started. Ceftriaxone- 250 mg was administered intravenously. The sub-costal area was aseptically prepared and the skin was infiltrated with 2% xylocaine. A 21-G needle on a 2 ml syringe was carefully entered into the pericardial cavity. A successful entry was confirmed by the presence of air bubbles in the syringe when it was little sucked. 0.021" guide wires (Cordis, USA) were inserted into the cavity through the needle. 4F radial angiographic sheath (Cook Medical, USA) was inserted over the wire with its side arm connected to the underwater seal. The wire and dilator were removed subsequently, thus leaving sheath in situ . 40-50 ml of air was aspirated with the help of a 5-ml syringe from the underwater sealto relieve him from haemodynamic instability.
It restored hemodynamic stability as the blood pressure rose to 66/42 mm Hg. The endotracheal tube was repositioned by pulling it to bring its distal tip into the main bronchus. Repeated ECG revealed minimal amount of air on anterior cardiac surface (A). On the next day, the pericardial sheath was removed as the repeated ECG showed further resolution of air from the cavity. Repeated chest x-ray on the next day showed complete resolution of PPC (B). He was gradually weaned off from the mechanical ventilation over one week and discharged on the tenth day with a stable condition.