A 34-year-old apparently immunocompetent Chinese man presented for general health examination. On routine CT, multiple pulmonary nodules and a mass were incidentally found.
The patient reported having had no symptoms of discomfort prior to presentation, including cough, sputum, chest pain, chills, or fever. He also denied tiring easily, having night sweats, and rapid weight loss.
The patient reported occupation as an engineer, smoking ten cigarettes a day for the past 3 years, and having no pets. He also had no history of allergies, hepatitis B, or diabetes mellitus, or any other significant medical history.
Physical examination upon admission found bilateral lungs to be clear, with no wheezing, rales, or rhonchi detected by auscultation. Temperature was 36.5 °C. Heart rate was 95 beats/min. Respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min. Blood pressure was 104/71 mmHg. There were no other remarkable findings.
Test findings for liver function, renal function, and electrolytes were normal. The values of fasting blood glucose were within the normal range twice during hospitalization. All inflammatory biomarkers were also within the normal range. The result of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology test was negative. Tumor markers in blood, including carcinoembryonic antigen, progastrin-releasing peptide, neuron-specific enolase, and cytokeratin 19-fragments (CYFRA 21.1), were all normal. Serology test for Cryptococcus antigen also gave negative results.
Due to the pulmonary lesions of unknown cause, PET/CT was arranged. The imaging showed multiple nodules in both lungs, enlarged right hilar lymph nodes, and an elliptic mass lesion without clear margin in the right lower lobe . The mass showed higher uptake values of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and SUVmax of 16.4 in normal scans and 19.1 in delayed scans. The SUVmax for FDG uptake of those nodules was 6.8 in normal scans and 10.2 in delayed scans. The two enlarged lymph nodes in the right hilum gave 4.8 in normal scans and 6.9 in delayed scans.
Subsequently, the patient underwent CT-guided percutaneous core needle biopsy of the right lower-lobe mass. No fungi or remarkable bacteria were found in the puncture fluid smear.