A 75-year-old woman was referred to our center from local hospital with a history of a retropubic TVT sling (TVT-Exact; Gynecare) procedure performed 4 months ago due to SUI. The procedure was smooth. The patient began to complain of fever (with body temperature from 37.8~38.6 °C) and bloody, purulent discharge from left suprapubic skin wound 2 weeks after the TVT surgery. No nausea and vomiting. No peritoneal irritation sign. The volume of purulent discharge from skin fistula was 5-10 ml per day. Laboratory data showed elevated levels of white blood cells of 1.2 × 109/L and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 20.85 mg/L. The patient had been admitted to the local hospital 4 times because of similar symptoms in those 4 months after surgery. After the administration of kanamycin or quinolones antibiotics for about 3–7 days, the patient’s symptoms were resolved completely between episodes. The left suprapubic infection and the tape exit wound purulent discharge was recurrent and could be temporarily controlled after antibiotic administration. Cystoscopy showed no bladder injury. The reason for recurrent left suprapubic wound infection was finally identified by a colonoscopy in local hospital, which showed a foreign TVT tape mesh in the sigmoid colon cavity approximately 30 cm from the anal orifice . The patient was then transferred to our center for further treatment. The patient denied urinary symptoms and was continent. She had no abdominal surgery history before this TVT procedure. Her medical history was significant for diabetes mellitus II, and the blood glucose levels were well controlled with insulin and acarbose. Upon physical examination, the patient’s vital signs were normal. The abdomen was flat with no signs of peritonitis. There was a 1 × 1-cm red swollen area at the left suprapubic skin with purulent secretion. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a thickened left bladder wall and internal iliac muscle. No abscess was found in the pelvic cavity . We diagnosed that the TVT mesh caused a sigmoid colon perforation that led to colocutaneous fistula. An exploratory laparotomy was performed through an incision in the midline of the lower abdomen. The TVT tape was found to have perforated the sigmoid bowel in an in-and-out fashion before exiting at the suprapubic skin incision. The sigmoid colon was fixed to the abdominal wall by the tape. After the two sides of the tape were mobilized and cut, an 8 cm-long whole left part of the mesh was entirely removed from the sigmoid colon and the retropubic space . The two ruptures of the sigmoid colon were mended with intermittent sutures. No resection of the bowel was needed. The patient recovered well from the procedure and was discharge 2 weeks after the surgery. Four years following the laparotomy and partial tape removal, the patient was doing well and still continent.