A 28-year-old obese male with no prior illness presented with a generalized skin eruption for three days. He initially experienced fever, cough, nasal congestion, and headache, followed by the appearance of a crop of asymptomatic purpura in the lower right limb. The patient was taken to the doctor and given antipyretic and antihistamine drugs. He denied any episodes of nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain. A day before admission, the patient complained of a progressing skin rash in the lower and upper extremities, including the palms and soles. On admission, fever persisted despite antipyretic consumption, and a generalized, confluent rash was observed. The patient also complained of abdominal discomfort, arthralgia in both knees and ankles, and neck stiffness. He denied dysuria, blood-stained urine, and colicky abdominal pain. The patient had no prior medication use.
Clinical examination revealed a fever of 39,6°C, and other vital signs were normal. Skin inspection revealed palpable, erythematous, purpuric, non-blanching eruptions with various sizes over the body . Cutaneous manifestation of the lower extremities showed the lesions had coalesced to form ecchymoses, with non-pitting pedal edema. Abdominal examination revealed no tenderness on palpation and the liver was not felt. There were no oral lesions, conjunctival injection, or any restriction of joint movements. Blood profile revealed leukocytosis (43.1 x 109/L) with predominant granulocytes (39.2 x 109/L), thrombocytosis (550 x 109/L), and elevated transaminases (AST 125 U/L, ALT 131 U/L). Blood urea, creatinine levels, and urinalysis were normal.
Microscopic examination of the skin biopsy revealed the presence of a perivascular inflammatory infiltrate in the superficial dermal blood vessels, predominantly lymphocytes and a few neutrophils. A focal aggregate of inflammatory cells in the corneal skin layer was observed. Serum IgA level was not measured in this case.
The patient was given a high-calorie and high-protein diet, also rehydrated with normal saline. He was administered Cefuroxime dosed at 750mg twice daily for possible bacterial co-infection, along with intravenous pantoprazole and paracetamol for symptomatic treatment. He was initially started on intravenous methylprednisolone at 62.5 mg twice daily, but on the third day, it was escalated to 125mg twice daily due to increased purpuric rashes. On the fifth day, there was a resolution of symptoms with stable vital signs, and laboratory examinations returned to a normal range. The patient was then discharged and was switched to oral 16mg methylprednisolone twice daily and omeprazole tablets for stress ulcer prophylaxis for five days. The follow-up a week later showed no visible scars remained.