We report the case of a 20-year-old Somalian man, who presented with an inversion injury of his ankle, sustained during a fall downstairs. He had subsequent pain in the foot and difficulty walking. The history on admission was limited due to language difficulties, but he felt otherwise generally well.
Examination demonstrated tenderness over the base of the 1st and 5th metatarsals, cuboid and navicular, with swelling of the dorsal lateral aspect of the right foot. Ankle movements were normal, although limited by pain. There was warmth of the overlying skin, but no rash was seen. No abnormalities were detected in other joints, and systemic examination was normal with no lymphadenopathy or fever and unremarkable respiratory, cardiovascular and abdominal examinations. He had a slightly raised CRP of 10, normal ESR of 10, and an x-ray of the right foot and ankle showed abnormal lucent lesions at the base of the 3rd, 4th and 5th metatarsals but no recent fracture .
Further history was finally obtained through an interpreter. The patient had come to the UK 2 years previously, but had sustained trauma to his foot during a road traffic accident in Somalia about 4 years previously. Following this he had persistent foot pain and a non-healing wound. He had not sought medical attention until 2 years later when he had presented to an orthopaedic outpatient clinic. An x-ray performed on this occasion demonstrated deformities at the bases of the lateral four metatarsal bones and of the lateral cuneiform bone. These deformities were well corticated and attributed to old fractures. He reported no contacts with TB and on direct questioning had no respiratory symptoms, fevers, night sweats or weight loss, and no other past medical history. Although bloods revealed a concomitant hepatitis B infection, an HIV test was negative.
An MRI scan showed prominent bone marrow oedema with destruction of the navicular, medial and lateral and cuneiform bones . Marked degenerative changes were seen in the naviculo-cuneiform joint with associated joint effusion extending to dorsal aspect of mid foot causing a prominent localised teno-synovitis around the anterior tibialis tendon. The overall appearances were suggestive of either osteomyelitis with associated septic arthritis, bony tumour or neuropathic joint. There was insufficient fluid to aspirate under ultrasound guidance, and the patient underwent a bone biopsy. Histology of the bone core demonstrated multiple granulomas, some of which showed ‘a hint of caseation’. Although ZN and fungal stains were negative, subsequent tissue culture grew mycobacterium tuberculosis.
The patient was started on quadruple anti-tuberculous therapy for 2 months: rifampicin 720 mg, isoniazid 300 mg, pyrizinamide 1800 mg (in combination as ‘Rifater’), and ethambutol 300 mg. He was given prophylactic vitamin B6 (pyridoxine 10 mg), and after 2 months ethambutol and pyrizinamide were discontinued in line with the standard treatment regime. Within 4 months of starting treatment the patient was pain free, fully weight bearing on the affected foot, and x-rays showed no further bony destruction.