A 58-year-old man presented to the emergency department with a 3-day history of lower back pain radiating to the back associated with fever (39.7 °C). The physical examination was unremarkable. He has a medical history of diabetes and current cigarette smoking. On admission, enhanced computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a moderate atherosclerotic infrarenal abdominal aorta with thickened aortic wall and periaortic fat stranding . A laboratory investigation showed that leukocyte count was normal, while the ration of lymphocytes decreased to 18.2% and eosinophil count was 0. The erythrocyte sedimentation rateand C-reactive peptide were elevated (34 mm/h and 138 mg/L). The serum IgG4 level was within the normal range. The standard bacterial and mycobacterial blood cultures were negative. Nevertheless, infectious abdominal aortic disease was suspected, and intravenous Ciprofloxacin Lactate (0.4 g/d) was administered empirically.
The persistence of back pain and biological inflammation led to of a CTA on day 5. It revealed an enlargement of periaortic infiltration with a hypo-attenuating rim . A magnetic resonance angiography of abdominal aorta showed thickened and enhanced aortic wall, and multiple inflammatory retroperitoneal small lymph nodes consistent with the diagnosis of aortitis . The abdominal ultrasound revealed uneven thickening of the aortic wall and paraaortic soft-tissue mass with vague margin. The procalcitonin value was 0.446 ng/mL, while the second time standard bacterial and mycobacterial blood cultures were still negative. On day 21, lower back pain got even worse with severe fever (40 °C). CTA showed a saccular aneurysm of 23.6 mm . The ultrasound images of abdominal aorta showed that the aortic wall locally bulged outward along with a thickened discontinuous aortic wall. Biological investigations revealed a high level of leukocyte count, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and procalcitonin (1.1 ng/mL). CTA on day 40 showed a lobulated pseudoaneurysm surrounded by enlarged mass with a left psoas muscle abscess . Considering the risk of rupture, we performed an emergency endovascular aortic repair (EVAR) and successfully excluded the aneurysm.
Fourteen days after EVAR, excision and drainage were performed for left psoas muscle abscess and periaortic abscess with gas collection . The Salmonella enteritidis was found in the bacterial culture, which confirmed the diagnosis. Based on bacterial sensitivity tests, intravenous Panipenem/Betamipron was administrated for 2 weeks. The patient recovered with normal imaging and discharged uneventfully. The patient was regularly followed up annually, and the CTA at 2 years was normal.