A 13-year-old Hindu school-going Nepali boy presented to our emergency room with acute onset of bilateral lower extremity weakness and unsteady gait. The patient was in his normal state of health until 5 days before, but recently he complained about weakness of the lower limb that was insidious in onset. The symptoms initially started as an inability to stand properly with pain in a limb while standing. The symptoms gradually progressed and the child was completely bedridden, which prompted a visit to our emergency department from where he was shifted to the pediatric high-dependency unit (HDU). Past history revealed an excessive intake of water with the inability to hold urine during day and night time for the last 4 months but no history of urgency, burning micturition, fever, or passage of red-colored urine. The patient was taking no medications. He did not have any other constitutional symptoms, including fever, rash, myalgias, diarrhea, or seizures. There was no significant family history of any chronic illness. Past medical history of the patient revealed no tuberculosis, recent vaccination, meningitis, or head trauma. However, he had a history of weakness of the lower limb since birth in the form of limping gait. He was not able to walk until the third year of life, and there was halt in his growth (height and weight) since he was 6 years old.
On the day of admission to our hospital, a physical examination revealed a temperature of 98 °F, a heart rate of 94 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 32 breaths per minute, SpO2 of 98%, and a blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg. Though he was a healthy term infant at birth, his current height and weight were 115 cm and 20 kg, respectively. Further analysis revealed his weight-to-age ratio, height-to-age ratio, and body mass index all to be < 3rd percentile of the age-matched normal reference range. He had not developed secondary sexual characteristics. Examination revealed small soft testes and penis, no male body hair, hydrocephalic head configuration, and ataxic gait. Physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. Neurological examination showed child to be drowsy with a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score of 12/15, had brisk knee jerk reflex with downward plantar reflex, bilateral lower limb strength of 1/5, and 2+ pupillary light reflex. No signs of meningeal irritation and cerebellar sign were seen. Sensory examination was unremarkable. There was polyuria with urine output of 9 ml/kg/hour and specific gravity of 1.010.
A complete blood count revealed a hemoglobin concentration of 12.8 g/dL, hematocrit of 39.7%, a mean corpuscular volume of 66.50 fL, and a white cell count of 11,100/cumm (normal range, 4000–11,000/cumm) with 53% neutrophils, 37% lymphocytes, and 8% monocytes. Further investigation showed a high serum sodium of 181 mEq/L, rising to a maximum of 190 mEq/L (normal range, 135–146 mEq/L) at 2 days following admission. Potassium, which was initially toward the lower range (2.7 mEq/L) (normal range, 3.5–5.2 mEq/L) during the time of admission was brought to normal after the correction by normal saline with potassium chloride (KCl) within 1 day of admission (4.0 mEq/L). Later, N/2 normal saline with 5% dextrose was also added. Urea, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) were normal as were serum protein and calcium levels. Random glucose was 7.9 mmol/L (normal, 3.8–7.8 mmol/L) with increased serum creatinine and uric acid up to 78 μmol/L (normal, 23–68 μmol/L) and 560 μmol/L (normal, 208–428 μmol/L), respectively.
On the second day of admission, the child was transferred to pediatric intensive care unit (ICU) for falling GCS (from 12/15 in the morning to 8/15 in the evening) and severe hypernatremia (Na+ 180 mEq/L). A microbiological investigation of urine was sent and showed a white cell count of 1–2 cells/high-power field (HPF), a trace amount of albumin, and a 0–1 granular cast/HPF. Serum and urine osmolarity tests were performed to identify the cause of polyuria and polydipsia, which showed increased serum osmolarity (393.6 mOsm/kg) (normal, 285–295 mOsm/kg) with decreased urine osmolarity (222.7 mOsm/kg) (normal, 500–800 mOsm/kg). Psychogenic polydipsia (PPD) was ruled out in the instance of elevated serum sodium level and osmolarity. To support this, contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed , which showed a thick-walled third ventricular cyst with bilateral foramen obstruction, the thin membrane-like structure at top of aqueduct of Sylvius with gross obstructive hydrocephalus (inactive), and compressed and thinned pituitary gland with no bright spot suggesting a diagnosis of CDI. We were not able to perform a water deprivation test. Pansinusitis and bilateral otomastoiditis were also observed on MRI. In children, the aforementioned condition is more likely to be associated with clinical symptoms and endocrinopathies, particularly growth hormone deficiency, hypogonadotropism, or multiple pituitary hormone deficiencies . To further assess pituitary function, endocrine examinations were requested that showed free thyroxine (fT4) and free tri-iodothyronine (fT3) levels to be decreased with elevated prolactin level, with values of 7.31 pmol//L (normal, 9.0–19.0 pmol//L), 1.99 pmol/L (normal, 2.4–6.0 pmol//L), and 76.3 ng/mL (normal, 3.4–19.4 ng/mL), respectively. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (2.50 μIU/mL) (Normal, 0.35–4.94 µIU/ml), serum cortisol (14.6 μg/dL) (Normal, Morning: 3.7–19.4 µg/dl), luteinizing hormone (LH) (3.03 μIU/mL)(Normal, 1.1–8.2 µIU/ml), and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) (2.81 μIU/mL) (Normal, 1.5–11.5 µIU/ml) were within normal range. A diagnosis was made of CDI secondary to the third ventricular cyst with inactive hydrocephalus based on MRI findings.
Treatment with a desmopressin tablet (0.05 mg) resulted in the resolution of his polydipsia and polyuria and the serum electrolytes were restored to normal. Endoscopic fenestration with endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) was done to remove the cyst and treat obstructive hydrocephalus. A biopsy was taken from the cyst wall, which was found to be normal. The patient recovered from symptoms of polyuria and polydipsia with desmopressin therapy, until the tenth month of discharge, when he was presented to pediatric emergency room again with the complain of seizure and polyuria, which was later diagnosed to be due to CDI-induced hypernatremia and obstructive hydrocephalus. The patient was stabilized by desmopressin nasal spray and injectable Levera for seizure, which was later changed to oral. No intervention was needed for obstructive hydrocephalus on discussion with the neurosurgical team.