A previously healthy 34-year-old G2P1 at 30 weeks gestation presented to the emergency department (ED) with shortness of breath and chest pain. She was diagnosed with large burden pulmonary embolism (PE) on Ventilation/Perfusion Scan (V/Q scan). Her first pregnancy had been uncomplicated, with no previous history of venous thromboembolic events (VTE). She had received the mRNA COVID vaccine one day prior to presenting to hospital. Ultrasound (US) with Dopplers of the lower extremities revealed an indeterminate hypoechoic solid appearing avascular 5 cm lesion in the left distal thigh that was inseparable from the distal femoral vein (FV) and popliteal vein (PV). The patient was subsequently admitted and initiated on anticoagulation for her PE.
Two days later, the patient became unresponsive and hemodynamically unstable with blood pressure of 70/30, tachycardia with heart rate 150 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation of 85%, was transferred to the ICU, and was treated with thrombolysis for massive PE. Repeat echocardiogram showed left ventricular (LV) systolic flattening, moderately reduced RV function, and severely increased right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP), which had been normal on the initial echocardiogram. Repeat US of the lower extremities was unchanged. MRI of the hip confirmed the same complex lesion that was inseparable from the distal FV, and it was ultimately suspected to be a venous aneurysm with a partially thrombolysed internal thrombus.
One week after admission, the patient was discharged on enoxaparin 135 mg subcutaneously every 12 h. In outpatient follow-up at 36 weeks gestation, she had factor Xa levels that were within the therapeutic range (0.4–1.2 u/mL). At nearly 38 weeks gestation, the patient had an uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal delivery and was discharged on therapeutic tinzaparin with a plan for 6 months of therapeutic anticoagulation. Four weeks post-partum she reported left calf pain, but was otherwise doing well.
Shortly prior to the completion of 6 months of therapeutic anticoagulation, the patient presented to the ED with dyspnea, palpitations, and presyncope. V/Q scan showed extensive PE but did not differentiate between new and chronic embolism. A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) was performed and confirmed acute PE with evidence of RV strain. Due to recurrent PE on therapeutic tinzaparin, a thrombophilia work-up was completed, which was negative, and tinzaparin dosing was increased to 115% of the weight-based dose. A repeat US with Doppler revealed the known duplicated FV with a large varix and suspicion of a new non-obstructing acute thrombus within the varix. Thrombosis experts were consulted, and the patient was maintained on supratherapeutic tinzaparin dosing and urgently referred to Vascular Surgery for consideration of surgical correction. A repeat MRI demonstrated saccular aneurysmal dilation measuring 43 × 31 × 68 mm , increased in size from previous, and demonstrated progression of thrombus within the aneurysm sac. There was also non-occlusive thrombus within the profunda femoris vein .
A pre-operative venogram demonstrated that the patient had a duplicated PV and a hypertrophied profunda vein branch feeding collaterals circumventing the aneurysm to the FV. The options of both aneurysmorrhaphy and venous ligation were discussed in detail with the patient in light of the duplicated PV and collateral circuit. The risk of post thrombotic syndrome with ligation was discussed, but given her life-threatening presentation, the patient favoured complete ligation. Intraoperatively, she was found to have a 6.5 cm aneurysm of the PV, with normal vein segments proximally and distally. The PV was ligated proximally and distally to the aneurysmal segment. Following surgery, the patient was discharged home on tinzaparin. She was transitioned to warfarin instead of a direct oral anticoagulant as she was breastfeeding, and the plan was for post-operative anticoagulation for a total of 6 months. A repeat V/Q scan revealed residual unmatched perfusion defect but no features of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH). Given the evidence of residual clot burden, the decision was made to extend anticoagulation to one year post-operatively and then consider low-dose Aspirin for secondary prevention of VTE.