A 68-year-old Japanese woman had been diagnosed with superficial elevated (0-IIa) type adenocarcinoma in the background of LSBE , measuring at 23 cm and 20 cm from the incisor teeth, respectively, 45 months earlier (in February 2017), at age 65. The TNM stage diagnosis of cT1N0M0, Stage I, was made using endoscopic ultrasonography and systemic computed tomography (CT). She underwent endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) at Saitama Medical University International Medical Center and the pathological diagnosis was tubular adenocarcinoma, well differentiated, 30 × 25 mm in size, with submucosal invasion (maximal depth: 133 μm, pT1b). There was no lymphovascular invasion and the margins were intact. Additional treatments, such as surgery and/or chemoradiotherapy, were recommended in accordance with the established guidelines. The patient was provided with fully informed consent regarding these options, but declined all procedures.
The upper esophagogastroduodenoscopy conducted the year after ESD showed no residual, recurrent, or new primary malignancies. The patient was subsequently followed up at another hospital, but endoscopy was not performed in the second and third years. She was brought to the emergency room by ambulance due to pain in the right hip after a fall, in November 2020. CT revealed a right femoral fracture. One day after emergent hospitalization, she developed seizures. A CT scan of the head revealed multiple brain metastases and positron emission tomography–CT showed numerous bone and nodal involvements . We performed upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and detected an infiltrative ulcerative (Type 3) esophageal cancer at 35 cm from the incisors .
Multiple biopsy specimens histopathologically contained invasive neoplasm composed of neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) and adenocarcinoma, moderately to poorly differentiated, accompanied by non-neoplastic stomach-like mucosa with intestinal metaplasia . The NEC element showed diffuse proliferation of primitive cancer cells possessing fine-granular cytoplasm and nuclei with prominent nucleoli, whereas the adenocarcinoma component had tubules or nested growth of basophilic cells due to a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and hyperchromatic nuclei. On immunohistochemical examinations, the NEC cells were diffusely positive for synaptophysin, with focal expressions of insulinoma-associated protein 1, chromogranin A, and CD56 (neural cell adhesion molecule), whereas the adenocarcinoma cells were mostly negative for these NE markers . The Ki67 (MIB-1) labeling index was very high (90% at the hot spots in both types). Based on these pathological features, this neoplasm was suggested to be an esophageal MiNEN (MANEC).
Radiotherapy (30 Gy/10 Fr) was subsequently administered for multiple cerebral metastases. The patient was transferred to a hospital for recommended palliative care and died 3.5 months after the biopsy-based histological diagnosis.