A 57-year-old Japanese man with a chief complaint of hoarseness visited the Otolaryngology Department at our hospital. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed a tumor, with its major axis measuring approximately 40 mm in the left upper lobe of the lung. The hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes were also swollen . Primary lung cancer was suspected, and the patient was directed to the Department of Respiratory Medicine on the same day that he was admitted to the Otolaryngology Department. He was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma, which was confirmed by bronchoscopy. We performed transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) for the primary lesion in the left upper lobe and endobronchial ultrasonography-guided transbronchial needle aspiration in the mediastinal lymph nodes 1 week after the first visit. Genetic mutation testing was not performed because the sample was insufficient. Subsequently, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) was performed, and abnormal accumulation was observed in the longitudinal hilar lymph nodes (#4L, #5, #10L), vertebral body, and left pleura. The results of the 18F-FDG PET/CT and other findings led to the diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma [cT2bN2M1c (PUL, OSS); stage IVB]. We recommended rebiopsy considering the possibility of a genetic mutation, but the patient refused the examination because of strong coughing during the first bronchoscopy and progressive symptoms of hoarseness. The patient strongly desired an early treatment, so we initiated first-line therapy with cisplatin (75 mg/m2) and pemetrexed (500 mg/m2) 3 weeks after the first visit. However, the patient developed grade 2 renal dysfunction [creatinine, 1.83 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), 31.23 mL/min/1.73 m2], making it difficult to continue the therapy . We informed the patient about the need for a second bronchoscopy for consideration of further treatment and obtained his consent. Bronchoscopy was performed again, and the patient was diagnosed with ALK-positive NSCLC (immunohistochemistry, 3+; fluorescence in situ hybridization, 56%). In addition, progressive disease was noted . Development of progressive disease required approximately 9 months, and cisplatin and pemetrexed were administered over four cycles, after which pemetrexed alone was administered over five cycles. Thereafter, second-line therapy with alectinib (300 mg/day) was initiated. Three months after starting alectinib, chest CT showed that the primary lesion had shrunk, and we judged it to be a partial response, but the ground-glass opacities and infiltration continued to spread on both sides . At this time, the patient complained of dyspnea on exertion, and his saturation of percutaneous oxygen was approximately 82% in room air. Blood gas analysis showed that the partial pressure of arterial oxygen was 58.2 torr, indicating respiratory failure. A pulmonary function test revealed restrictive ventilatory impairment, with a vital capacity (VC) of 2.11 L and a %VC of 57.1%. A diffuse lung capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 4.84 mL/min/mmHg and a %DLCO of 22.8% indicated diffusion disorder. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and TBLB samples were obtained at this time. The BALF showed an increased lymphocyte ratio (34.4%), and pathological analysis of the TBLB specimen revealed an organizing pneumonia (OP)/nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) overlapping pattern. On the basis of the chest CT results, we suspected alectinib-induced DILD. However, we also considered respiratory infection or cancerous lymphangiopathy with cancer progression in the differential diagnoses. Laboratory testing revealed a white blood cell count of 9300/µL and a C-reactive protein level of 1.41 mg/dL. The BALF culture results were negative. The BALF was lymphocyte dominant, and no findings suggestive of cancer infiltration were observed in the TBLB specimen. On the basis of these results, we excluded the other conditions evaluated in the differential diagnosis. Our final diagnosis was alectinib-induced DILD. On the basis of the results of chest CT and bronchoscopic pathology, methylprednisolone was prescribed (1 g/day for 3 days). The patient then received oral prednisolone (0.8 mg/kg/day), which was gradually reduced, and he was administered steroids for about 3 months. Third-line therapy with nanoparticle albumin bound paclitaxel (nab-paclitaxel) (100 mg/m2) was initiated after treatment with steroids. However, 3 months later, obstructive pneumonia associated with an increase in the size of the primary lesion was observed . Moreover, mild renal dysfunction persisted (creatinine, 1.63 mg/dL; eGFR, 35.45 mL/min/1.73 m2). Because of this complication and upon the patient’s request for oral medication, lorlatinib (100 mg/day) was administered as fourth-line therapy. Treatment with antibiotics and lorlatinib reduced the lesion’s shadow, and no recurrence of DILD was observed. Thirty-three months after the start of treatment, stable disease has been maintained, and lorlatinib has been continued .