The proband was a 57-year-old woman who has experienced paroxysmal chest tightness and shortness of breath for 7 years.
A 57-year-old woman was diagnosed with left ventricular hypertrophy and atrial fibrillation 7 years ago. Echocardiography showed an end-diastolic diameter of the interventricular septum of 19.9 mm, left ventricular end-diastolic diameter of 63.1 mm, moderate-to-severe mitral regurgitation, and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 45%. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) indicated an enlarged left heart and right atrium, decreased left ventricular systolic and diastolic function, an LVEF of about 20%, and thickening of the left ventricular septum. In March 2019, gene and enzyme activity tests confirmed the diagnosis of FD. Her son was diagnosed with FD after gene and enzyme activity assay, and was prescribed agalsidase-β for enzyme replacement therapy in July 2020. Two sisters of the proband were also diagnosed with FD by genetic testing. Both of them had a history of atrial fibrillation.
The proband had a history of hypertension for more than 20 years.
The proband did not have any significant personal history. Her father died of cardiomyopathy, while her mother died of colon cancer. Her son and two sisters were diagnosed with FD.
At the last admission, the proband’s blood pressure was 99/65 mmHg. She was conscious, but presented with an appearance of weakness. Her tongue stuck out to the right. Her jugular vein was filling. Rales could be heard widely over both lung fields. The heart rate was 96 bpm. The intensity of the first heart sound was unequal. Systolic murmur (III/6) was identified in the apex of the heart. There was no edema in her lower limbs.
Enzymatic measurement of α-GLA: The enzyme activity of α-GLA was reduced to only 1.0 nmol/h/mg protein in the son of the proband, while a normal range was observed in all other family members .
Clinical and biochemical studies: All of the patients in this family, whether hemizygous or heterozygote, had left ventricular hypertrophy. All female family members (II3, II5, and II7) had atrial fibrillation, except the propositus granddaughter (IV-1), who did not undergo inspection due to being only 2 years old. The levels of troponin I were all increased, and the ejection fraction was generally lower in female than male patients (III-2). Female heterozygotes suffered more severe cardiovascular damage while the kidney damage occurred earlier in males than in female family members. Stroke was more common in women, possibly due to atrial fibrillation and older age. At the same time, cutaneous and neuralgia manifestations were present in males of the same lineage, suggesting a wider range of glycosphingolipid deposition in the hemizygote and more involved organs .
Gene expression: (1) Whole exome sequencing results: In this family, we found a frameshift mutation (348delG:p.G116fs) according to the guidelines for mutation nomenclature recommended by the Human Genome Variation Society . The mutation occurred in the guanine deletion at position 348 of the GLA gene, resulting in a series of changes in the code of the 116th amino acid and its downstream . This mutation causes a change in the GLA protein domain [,]; and (2) Conventional sequencing results: Sanger sequencing confirmed that the mutation occurred due to the guanine deletion in exon 2. Figure shows the gene sequencing results of the proband (II-3). Adenine takes the place of guanine, thus causing a rearrangement of the subsequent amino acid sequence. The son of the proband (III-2) and the two sisters showed the same mutation .
CMR showed patchy enhancement of interventricular septum and left ventricular anterior wall hypertrophy. Delayed enhancement suggested the formation of a large number of fibrous scars in left ventricular hypertrophy .