A 50-year-old woman presented with a lesion in the left lung for 20 months on routine examination. Computed tomography (CT) at a local hospital showed that there was an irregular mass in the upper lobe of her left lung, about 2.8 × 1.9 cm in size, with a clear boundary, peripheral spiculation, and stretched adjacent pleura. The patient had no symptoms such as cough, sputum, dyspnea, fever, and hemoptysis. One month ago, she underwent surgery for the left breast cancer in the local hospital. A second chest CT showed no significant changes in the mass. Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) revealed an irregular high-density mass in the left lung with increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake, no significant abnormal FDG metabolism in the rest of the body, multiple small lymph nodes in the left axilla, and slightly increased FDG uptake in some lymph nodes.
For further treatment, the patient was admitted to our department. There was no obvious abnormality on physical examination. The chest CT showed an irregular soft tissue mass in the anterior segment of the upper lobe of the left lung, and the border was not clear. The cross-sectional area was about 3.2 × 2.2 cm, and the spiculation sign could be seen. The plain CT value was 30 HU. Calcification of the patch was obvious after enhanced scanning, and the CT value was 98 HU. The mediastinal structure was clear, and no obvious enlarged lymph nodes were seen . There were no significant abnormalities in blood sample tests, including tumor markers. The patient had suffered from tetralogy of Fallot and underwent surgery for a ventricular septal repair35 years ago. Breast-conserving surgery was performed for her left breast cancer 1 month ago, and the pathological report confirmed a lobular carcinoma in situ. She had a family history of lung cancer (grandfather) and no smoking history.
According to the patient’s medical history and imaging findings, this mass was highly suspected to be malignant. The patient underwent video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) instantly without preoperative CT-guided percutaneous needle lung biopsy. The intraoperative palpation of the lesion suggested that the lesion was too close to the hilum to receive limited resection. So we performed the lobectomy of left upper lobe directly. The procedure was successful and the mass was completely removed.
The dissected mass was gray-yellow, and a blue medical suture was visible inside . The surrounding tissue showed inflammatory changes, and local necrosis was found. The suture is about 15 cm in total length. The pathology report suggested that the mass tended to be an inflammatory pseudotumor, and no malignant cell component was seen. The structure of the lung tissue in the lesion area was damaged. The proliferative vascular components were visible, the wall thickness was accompanied by hyaloid and mucus degeneration, and fibrous tissue hyperplasia with hyaloid. Lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils infiltrated in the lesion area, and the remaining alveolar epithelium showed reactive hyperplasia. The submitted lymph nodes also showed reactive hyperplasia. Immunohistochemical staining results: CD38 (+), IgG (+), IgG4 (focal +), IgG4 / IgG less than 40% +. Special staining results: silver hexamine (−), Congo red (−).
The patient recovered well and discharged on the 3rd day after operation. Follow-up after 3 months showed no special abnormalities.