A 2-year-old female child presented with a history of vomiting, headache, and seizures. A brain imaging (computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] scans) discovered a large-sized lesion in the left lateral ventricle with infiltration to surrounding brain parenchyma suggestive of aggressive choroid plexus neoplasm [-]. Her only sibling (sister) died of CPC within 1 year of diagnosis, despite gross total excision and adjuvant therapy, suggesting the very aggressive nature of the tumor. Her parents are apparently healthy with no significant illnesses; there is no history of the central nervous system (CNS) malignancies in the maternal and paternal sides. Since the lesion was very vascular, preoperative embolization of the posterior choroidal artery was done to make the tumor less vascular and this was followed by gross total excision. The child withstood the surgery well and had no fresh neurological deficits. The histopathological examination reported it as CPC (WHO Grade III) . A postoperative MRI scan revealed no significant residual lesion. The child received adjuvant chemotherapy as per our institutional tumor board discussion (12 cycles of cyclophosphamide, carboplatin, and etoposide). Since two children in a family were affected with CPC and the tumor was very aggressive in one child, it was decided to do a genomic study of the patient and the parents. Singleton exome sequencing was done using the TWIST capture kit. Validation and segregation analysis of the variant were done by Sanger sequencing.
A novel frameshift variant c.72dupA,p. (Leu25Thrfs Ter4) was observed in exon 2 of TP53 in the heterozygous state in the proband; this variant was observed in her father in the heterozygous state. This was not observed in the mother and in the Genome Aggregation Database. It is noteworthy that the MRI or histopathological report of the elderly sibling was not available, and the parents had document about the CPC diagnosed and managed at some other hospital. Due to lack of availability of the tissue of elderly sibling, its genomic analysis could not be performed. Considering the Chompret criteria (2015), Li-Fraumeni syndrome is the likely cause for CPC in our cases.[,] Accordingly, the family was advocated with screening of related cancers and genetic counseling.