Our patient, a 23-year-old woman, was the second child born to nonconsanguineous healthy parents without any family history of intellectual disability or epilepsy. Her older sister is healthy. She was born spontaneously at full term without dystocia and had no history of carbon monoxide exposure, brain trauma, or encephalitis.
At the age of 6 years, it was noticed that she was intellectual disability, although her physical development (weight and height) was normal. She could walk and speak, and was not receive any medical intervention. At the age of 8 years, she presented with involuntary shaking and tremors of the head and neck, which spread to all her limbs, and were accompanied by an involuntary nod. The symptoms worsened during mood fluctuations. During this period, the patient was conscious with no binocular upward gaze, perioral bruising, or limb stiffness. She underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalography (EEG). Brain MRI showed a left choroidal cyst and compression of the hippocampus.
On the basis of extensive slow waves of two–7 Hz, spike waves, sharp waves, and sharp-and-slow waves were observed in the bilateral temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes. Routine blood tests revealed no significant abnormalities. The possibility of epilepsy could not be excluded. The patient was treated with levetiracetam (500 mg, twice daily) and sodium valproate (500 mg, twice daily), which resulted in a slight improvement in the limb tremors. During this period, the patient experienced convulsions four times during quiet sleep; however, her family was unable to describe the symptoms in detail. Subsequently, it was decided to maintain the patient’s current treatment with only a dose adjustment.
When the patient was 22 years old, she developed a generalized tremor due to fever, which could not be well controlled with the previous medications. She also walked unsteadily, sometimes stood unsteadily, and had intermittent blurred vision. Complete neurological examination showed generalized tremors, especially in the head and neck region, which were aggravated during activity but decreased at rest. Her limb muscle tone was increased, and ataxia was present. Intellectual disability was also observed. The brain MRI epilepsy sequence showed an abnormal signal near the temporal horn of the left lateral ventricle. A choroid plexus cyst and compression of the left hippocampus were considered . This was similar to the MRI findings obtained 8 years before. EEG revealed fast waves and low-to-moderate amplitude slow waves during wakefulness, poor regulation of the amplitude and wave rate, but with abnormal patterns during sleep. Blood and urine tests revealed no lactic acid, pyruvic acid, vitamin B12, thyroid function, ceruloplasmin, copper, or lipoprotein abnormalities. Trio whole-exome sequencing (WES) and mitochondrial gene sequencing were performed, and a novel NUS1 variant, c.750del (p.Leu251*), was identified. Clonazepam (0.25mg, twice daily) and levetiracetam (500 mg, twice daily) were remarkably effective in controlling the patient’s tremors and unsteady gait.
About 6 months later, the patient presented with whole-body tremors. She was unable to stand upright or walk. Before symptom development, she reported experiencing fatigue for several days. The physical examination results were comparable to those of the previous examinations. Haloperidol (1 mg, twice daily) and levodopa/benserazide (0.0625g, three times a day) were prescribed, which reduced the whole-body tremors. However, 5 months later, the body tremors recurred, sodium valproate and arotinolol hydrochloride were added to the regimen to control the tremors. Unfortunately, the patient continued to exhibit an unsteady gait, slow and slurred communication, and poor numeracy skills, along with deficiencies in logic and comprehension.
Peripheral blood samples from the patient and her parents were collected for WES and mitochondrial genetic tests to identify the causal gene. WES results revealed a de novo variant of NUS1 (c.750del) and a novel variant of UBTF (c.2026-3A>G) . Mitochondrial gene testing yielded negative results. The c.750del variant of NUS1 gene was an exon-deletion variant, and was not documented in the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project, 1000G, and Exome Aggregation Consortium databases. Family-based WES confirmed that the c.750del variant was a de novo variant in this case. So according to the pathogenicity classification guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), the c.750del variant of NUS1 gene is classified as likely pathogenic (very strong evidence of pathogenicity [PVS1], strong evidence of pathogenicity [PS2] and moderate evidence of pathogenicity [PM2]). Moreover, a novel variant (c.2026-3A>G) of the UBTF gene on chromosome chr17:42284968 was also identified in our patient. Sequence reads were aligned against the HGMD Pro, PubMed, and ClinVar databases, and this variant had not yet been reported in the medical literature. The UBTF gene also revealed a heterozygous variant in the patient’s father. According to the pathogenicity classification guidelines of the ACMG, there is uncertain significance. Although the clinical features (epilepsy and intellectual disability) of our patient matched the phenotype of UBTF gene-related diseases, it is noteworthy that her father also carries the same variant without exhibiting any associated phenotype. This observation suggests that either the variant does not have significant clinical implications or that there may be a reduced penetrance of this variant in the family.