A 67-year-old male presented with complaint of severe pain in the left ear along with decreased hearing for few months. Examination revealed a bulge in the external auditory canal making the tympanic membrane visualization impossible. The patient had nonserviceable conductive and sensorineural hearing loss in the left ear. His systemic and other neurological examination was nonremarkable. CT scan revealed poorly defined heterogeneous enhancing soft-tissue mass involving external auditory canal, pterygoid space, masticator space, nasopharynx, and infratemporal fossa. CT scan of skull base revealed polypoidal soft tissue occluding the left external auditory canal having contiguous extension inferiorly and medially along nasopharynx and infratemporal fossa. The muscles of mastication showed heterogeneous enhancement with diffuse increase in bulk . There was associated erosion of the bones forming the base of skull [ and ].
The positron emission tomography scan neither revealed any other pathology nor showed any metabolic activity. Considering clinical and radiologic considerations, the possibilities of skull base osteomyelitis or a neoplastic lesion were considered. Biopsy from nasopharynx was inconclusive while CT-guided FNAC from skull base was sent for bacterial culture. The sample was inoculated on blood agar and MacConkey agar and incubated at 37°C overnight under aerobic conditions as a part of routine processing for aerobic isolates. The culture revealed monomicrobial growth of a nonlactose fermenting colony on MacConkey agar which was identified as Pandoraea apista on matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF, MS, Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany) using the MALDI BioTyper database. The patient was then kept on ciprofloxacin 750 mg twice a day for 1-month duration. This led to relief from pain and subsequent imaging showed gradual resolution of lesion over many moths with disappearance of the bulge of the ear canal. Follow-up CT and MRI performed after 1 year showed near-complete resolution of the lesion .