Here we present a 44-year-old female with a history of developmental delay, localization-related epilepsy diagnosed at age 16, VNS placement at age 38, and status post-head injury with intracranial bleed that required craniotomy 1 year prior who presents with daily prolonged periods of generalized seizures lasting up to 20 min that had increased from her baseline of one seizure per day previously controlled by her home regimen of topiramate 200 mg TID and lamotrigine 400 mg BID . Upon admission, she was experiencing progressive aphasia and declining mental status. Lumbar puncture revealed HHV-6 encephalitis for which she was started on foscarnet. She was subsequently intubated and due to medication refractory SE, started on an increasingly large antiepileptic regimen including lamotrigine, levetiracetam, topiramate, Perampanel, clobazam, pregabalin, cannabidiol, phenobarbital, propofol drip, and ketamine drip.
She was determined to not be a candidate for a ketogenic diet. Ultimately, the multidisciplinary team decided to attempt ECT to terminate the SRSE. The VNS remained on throughout the three-session ECT treatment course, with parameters set at 1.75 mA, 250 μs pulse width, 30 s on, and 1.1 min off time. The risk of concurrent treatment in patients with a VNS implant arises from the use of strong electromagnetic fields such as seen with diathermy (i.e., short-wave diathermy, microwave diathermy, or therapeutic ultrasound diathermy), where such treatment anywhere in the body could potentially lead to injury via heating or damage the implanted VNS stimulator, even when the VNS is turned off . This includes electromagnetic fields seen with transcranial magnetic stimulation. Even so, the VNS Therapy System is safe for use in 1.5 and 3 T MRI scanners . However, ECT creates an electrical field within the brain, and heating via diathermy would not be expected. The VNS uses an implanted pulse generator in the chest connected to an electrode in the neck outside the ECT electrical field. Similarly, numerous case reports have shown the safe use of ECT in those with deep brain stimulation implants that are within the electrical field produced with ECT . Given that the VNS impulses that reach the tractus solitarius arise from the implanted pulse generator in the periphery, the creation of thermal injury was not expected (, ). Although turning the VNS device current to zero during ECT is the most customary practice , we were constrained to proceed with VNS on given intensive care unit (ICU) concerns of worsening the seizure burden in a SRSE patient should the device be turned off.
Due to the patient’s prior right craniotomy and subsequent right hygroma , initial ECT sessions were performed with a right anterior, left temporal (RALT) lead placement using a MECTA spECTrum 5000Q ECT Device . To maximize cortical recruitment and depolarization to break the SRSE, with or without induction of a seizure, ECT session 1 (total charge dose: 2.0 ms, 3 s, 120 Hz, 800 mA) was performed on day 17 with propofol and ketamine drips paused 30 min before treatment. SE continued so an attempt to induce a seizure with more contemporary parameter settings as seen in psychiatric ECT was utilized. Here the patient was restimulated twice at 60-s intervals using more efficient settings for seizure induction with an ultra-brief pulse width and longer stimulus train to induce a seizure (0.37 ms, 6 s, 120 Hz, 800 mA). ECT session 1 was unable to induce seizures nor halt her baseline seizure activity, and seizure burden continued to increase from 11 to 20% burden over the next 24 h. ECT session 2 was performed with the intensivist team finally agreeing on day 18 to pause ketamine and propofol infusions 2 h prior to the session, having previously been reluctant to do so for fear of worsening SE. Session 2 consisted of four stimulations each separated by 60 s, with the first two using 1 ms, 6 s, 60 Hz, 800 mA and the latter two stimulations using 2 ms, 3 s, 60 Hz, 800 mA. Shorter pulse widths were not used as these settings would have prevented 100% of the total device energy that was to be used. ECT session 2 induced transient epileptiform activity with burst suppression but was then followed by an almost immediate return to baseline SE. Seizure burden continued to increase to 30% despite a combination of treatments. ECT session 3 was performed on day 19, now with ketamine and propofol infusions paused 3 h before the session. It consisted of one stimulus at 0.5 ms, 3 s, 60 Hz, 800 mA with a 3-min hiatus followed by 1 ms, 3 s, 60 Hz, 800 mA. The final stimulus attempted to maximize interelectrode distance with bitemporal lead configurations . ECT session 3 again induced mild epileptiform activity with subsequent return to baseline without meaningful change in seizure burden post-ECT stimulus. The VNS remained on during ECT as the primary team was reluctant to turn the device off; VNS interrogation following ECT treatments showed its proper functioning. In discussion with the epileptologist and neurologic critical care team, as the seizure burden had continued to steadily worsen over the course of the patient’s illness, and with only mild transient encephalographic (EEG) changes from ECT treatment, the decision was made to discontinue ECT treatment. The patient’s family opted for comfort care measures, and the patient died on day 24.