A 68-year-old man visited our hospital for crown restoration because of root canal treatment of the upper right posterior teeth 2 wk previously.
The patient’s teeth were worn to varying degrees. One month prior, the patient's upper right posterior teeth developed symptoms of pulpitis due to severe enamel wear and dentin exposure for a long time. He was treated with root canal therapy. He returned to see a dentist for crown restoration.
The patient denied a history of systemic diseases, such as hypertension, coronary heart disease, and diabetes. He reported no history of food or drug allergy, trauma, surgery, or blood transfusion, and his vaccination history was unknown.
No individual or family history of mental illness was reported.
The patient's facial morphology was left-right symmetrical, the lower 1/3 height of the face was shorter, the jaw space at rest was normal, the degree of opening was normal, the opening type was biased at the initial stage of closure, and there was no clicking or tenderness in either joint. The impact force of the bilateral condyles was large, according to the external auditory canal digital examination. All the teeth were worn to varying degrees, overbite and overjet were normal, and the incisal edge was slightly worn. The enamel of 15-17, 26, 27, 36, 37, and 44-47 was worn in large areas, the mesial lingual tips of 16 and 26 were worn to 1 mm below the gum, and most teeth were probe examined (+/-), cold stimulated (-), and percussed (-). Dental plaque 1°, dental calculus (+), pigment segment (+), and localized gingival congestion and swelling were observed. There were no loose teeth, and the periodontal probing depth was 2-4 mm .
Initial temporomandibular joint CBCT: The posterior space of both temporomandibular joints was narrow, the anterior space increased, the upper space increased slightly, and the condyle moved backward and upward .
CBCT of the temporomandibular joint when wearing the occlusal pad: The anterior space of the joint decreased, the posterior space increased, the upper space slightly increased, and the condyle moved forward and downward. The left joint space was normal, and the right posterior joint space improved compared with when not wearing the occlusal pad .
CBCT of the temporomandibular joint 1 mo after wearing the temporary crowns: The left joint space was normal, and the right posterior joint space was slightly wider than when wearing the jaw pad .
CBCT of the temporomandibular joint after bonding the final denture: The left joint space was normal, the right posterior joint space was wider than before, and the bilateral temporomandibular joint space was improved .