A 78-year-old Japanese man presented to the emergency department with a 2-day history of exertional dyspnoea and orthopnoea. He underwent aortic and mitral bioprosthetic valve replacement [Perimount Magna-Ease™ 21 mm (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) and Epic™ 29 mm (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA), respectively] for IE caused by methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus six years prior to his presentation. Three months previously, transthoracic echocardiography revealed no prosthetic valve dysfunction. A prostate biopsy was performed with antibiotic prophylaxis (single dose of piperacillin–tazobactam 4.5 g) two months prior to his presentation, and hormone therapy for prostate cancer (degarelix plus estramustine) was initiated three weeks prior to his presentation. At the time of the visit, the patient’s blood pressure was 151/100 mmHg, pulse rate was 110 beats/min, respiratory rate was 29 breaths/min, temperature was 36.4°C, SpO2 was 78% on room air, and 94% with non-invasive ventilation (NIV; 8 cm H2O, fraction of inspired oxygen 0.5). On physical examination, a diastolic murmur (Levine grade II/Ⅵ) was auscultated at the apex of the heart, and wet lung sounds were heard. There were no embolic or petechial haemorrhagic findings suggestive of IE. A chest radiograph revealed pulmonary congestion. Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia . Blood tests showed elevated NT-proBNP levels (3460 pg/mL), a white blood cell count of 20 800/µL, and a C-reactive protein level of 5.33 mg/dL. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed thickening of the mitral valve leaflets with a transmitral blood flow velocity of 2.9 m/s and a mean pressure gradient of 20 mmHg, indicating severe mitral stenosis ( and ). Furthermore, there was mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation with elevated pulmonary artery systolic pressure ( and ). Non-invasive ventilation and intravenous furosemide were administered to treat the decompensated heart failure. The aetiology of the heart failure was identified as rapidly-progressing mitral stenosis, either due to thrombosed valves secondary to hormone therapy or PVE. The patient was administered heparin and empiric antimicrobial therapy (ceftriaxone, 2 g once a day; vancomycin, 1 g once a day; and cefazolin, 2 g three times a day) after three sets of blood cultures in both aerobic and anaerobic atmospheres were obtained from three different peripheral veins.
Initially, the patient responded well to the diuretic treatment; however, his urine output decreased. The patient did not compensate properly and his tolerance to NIV decreased. Mechanical ventilation was initiated, and emergency transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed thickening of the prosthetic mitral valve, slightly increased in echogenicity, and reduced mobility with a mitral valve mean pressure gradient of 18.4 mmHg (, , ). No evidence of a mitral annular abscess was observed. The prosthetic aortic valve exhibited reduced mobility of the right coronary/non-coronary cusp (, , ). No aortic regurgitation was observed. The severity of tricuspid regurgitation was moderate (, , ). Despite negative blood cultures, the TEE findings strongly indicated IE, leading to a decision to proceed with urgent surgery. On the third day of hospitalization, the patient underwent revision of the aortic and mitral valve prostheses [Avalus™ 21 mm (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and Epic™ 27 mm (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA), respectively], along with tricuspid valve annuloplasty using a Tailorband™ 29 mm (St. Jude Medical, St Paul, MN, USA). The excised mitral valve prosthesis had vegetations on all three leaflets, and the right coronary/non-coronary cusp of the excised aortic valve was also covered in vegetations . Cutibacterium acnes was identified in the surgical specimen, leading to a definitive diagnosis of PVE.
The patient was administered ceftriaxone (2 g twice daily) for two weeks and ampicillin (2 g six times daily) for four weeks post-operatively. The patient’s post-operative recovery was uneventful. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed good haemodynamics , and there was no recurrence of infection following the discontinuation of antibiotic therapy. The patient subsequently transferred for rehabilitation.