A 36-year-old Maldivian female was evaluated under the Department of Internal Medicine for heartburn, bloating and abdominal pain. She claimed to have occasional epigastric pain which was presumed to be gastritis and hence was managed with medication. The bloating sensation had started a few months prior and occasionally was associated with vague crampy abdominal pain. There was no specific aggravating or relieving factors. She had early satiety for the past few weeks. There were no altered bowel habits and constitutional symptoms. She had no family history of malignancy.
She has an underlying ESRF on regular dialysis. There was no history of previous surgery except for arteriovenous fistula. However, on further probing, she revealed that she always felt stressed, and had a history of depressive symptoms which had not been properly diagnosed or treated. She further admitted to having a tendency of pulling out (trichotillomania) and eating her own hair (trichophagia). General examination was unremarkable. She was well built with no signs of dehydration or anaemia. Abdominal examination revealed a hard, well defined and mobile epigastric mass. There was tenderness but no guarding or rigidity elicited. The succussion splash was negative. The bowel sounds were audible.
Laboratory investigations were within normal limits except for raised urea and creatinine owing to the ESRF. Her renal profile was elevated with serum urea was 72.76 (normal: 15.0–40 mg/dL) and creatinine was 6.38 (normal: 0.57–1.11 mg/dL). Plain abdominal radiograph showed a sizable soft tissue density with prominent stomach outline at the left hypochondrium. Contrasted computed tomography (CT) scan (A and B) was done which revealed a dilated, distended stomach with the intraluminal mass taking the shape of the stomach and extending up to the 2nd part of duodenum. The mass had a hyperdense outline with heterogeneous texture which mixed with air. The radiologic features were suggestive of intragastric foreign body ingestion.
She was preceded for exploratory laparotomy with gastrotomy and removal of the trichobezoar. The mass was removed en bloc. It weighed 720 gm . Postoperatively, patient recovery was uneventful and she was discharged well after consultation with psychiatry team and series of haemodialysis.