The patient is a 52-year-old man who presented to our division after six months of deteriorating vision associated with metamorphopsia. On physical examination, visual acuity of the left eye was found to be 20/20, whereas vision in the right eye was limited to detection of horizontal motion of the examiner's hand. The anterior and posterior segments of the left eye were normal. The movement of the right eye was smooth, and the anterior segment was normal, but an irregularly shaped solid mass was found in the anterior temporal vitreous cavity, coupled with a localized concave surface in the adjacent retina. B-mode ultrasound examination revealed a mass-like echo of medium intensity roughly distributed within the echo representing the right anterior vitreous cavity. The posterior portion of the vitreous produced a "v"-shaped echo with its cutting-edge connecting to that of the optic disk . Color Doppler ultrasonic examination showed a mass-like echo having a clear boundary and a smooth surface of approximately 1.7 cm × 1.0 cm on the temporal side of the right eye. The structure forming the echo extended to the ciliary process and included a small, irregular anechoic area. A Computed tomography scan revealed an approximately semi-circular, non-homogeneous, high-density area in the right eye extending from the vitreous cavity to the concave surface of the outer ring: The scope of infringement consisted of the area between the retina and the ciliary body. A visible crescent-shaped shadow having a clear border was found in the posterior vitreous . Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a block having irregular and unclear edges with a long T1 and short T2 signal area in the lateral ciliary body. A crescent-shaped signal with shorter T1 and short T2 was found in the retinal area. The optic nerve signal in the right eye was normal . The patient was given a preliminary diagnosis of oligodendroglioma of the ciliary body with secondary retinal detachment of the right eye. Using local anesthesia, enucleation was followed by implantation of an artificial right eye. The integrity of the excised eye was preserved; the optic nerve was intact. The temporal side of the sclera was thinning locally and had turned black. Specimens were sent for histopathological examination. HE staining revealed single, small, round tumor cells having few processes, darkly-stained round nuclei, rare mitotic figures, and finely-stained chromatin in scattered distribution patterns. Cytoplasm was sparse and perinuclear halos appeared empty . Immunohistochemistry results were as follows: OLIGO-2 (+), GFAP (-), NF (-), CD57 (focal +), CGA (-), CK (-), S-100 (scattered +), NSE (+/-), D34 (-), HMB45 (-), KI67 (+, <2%). The pathological diagnosis was oligodendroglioma of the ciliary body in the right eye (WHO grade II).