A 60-year-old Chinese male visiting from Australia presented to our hospital with syncope. He had been having cough, fever, myalgia, and malaise for the past 4–5 days. Past medical history included atrial fibrillation (AF) and hypertension. Drug history includes aspirin, perindopril, and atenolol. No history of illicit drug use. He reported contact with water from his outdoor inflatable pool 2 weeks ago in Australia.
Patient was hypotensive on arrival at the emergency department and required fluid resuscitation with improvement in blood pressure. He had Type 1 respiratory failure requiring non-rebreathable mask. Pulse was irregularly irregular, heart rate was 100 b .p.m. There were no audible murmurs. Coarse crepitations were heard in the left lung.
Laboratory investigations on admission were notable for elevated transaminases and elevated troponin T levels. Serum troponin T was 1041 ng/L. Serum alanine transaminase was 181 U/L while aspartate transaminase was 137 U/L. Chest radiograph showed cardiomegaly with bilateral infiltrates and a right pleural effusion. Ultrasound-guided pleural aspiration revealed haemorrhagic contents. Electrocardiogram showed AF with a right bundle branch block pattern .
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) on admission showed moderately depressed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 42%.
Patient was initially treated as for respiratory tract infection and possible Type 2 myocardial infarction with intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone and doxycycline.
On Day 2 of admission, the patient’s rhythm was noted to be in alternating right and left bundle branch block . He then developed a transient episode of pulseless electrical activity. There was return of spontaneous circulation within seconds after resuscitation with a bolus dose of IV adrenaline 1 mg and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) followed. This was terminated within a minute with a bolus dose of IV amiodarone 150 mg. He subsequently developed recurrent runs of non-sustained VT (NSVT) and was given 100 mg of IV lignocaine.
Dual inotropes were required to maintain blood pressure. Patient was in bradycardia with ventricular escape rhythm and had recurrent runs of NSVT. Temporary pacing wire was inserted. Coronary angiogram showed minor coronary artery disease. Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenator was implanted for refractory cardiogenic shock. A centrifugal ECMO pump system was used with cannulation of the right femoral artery and left femoral vein. A distal perfusion cannula was inserted at the right proximal superficial femoral artery to reduce risk of right lower limb ischaemia. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation flow was maintained between 3 to 4 L per minute.
Urgent endomyocardial biopsy was performed to confirm the clinical diagnosis of fulminant myocarditis and to determine the underlying aetiology. Endomyocardial histology demonstrated features consistent with myocarditis with predominantly lymphocytic infiltrates.
After ECMO implantation, patient continued to have runs of monomorphic VT of varying morphologies. The recurrent runs of VT were not amenable to chemical and electrical cardioversion or overdrive pacing. Ablation was not considered in view of varying morphologies of VT and underlying aetiology was deemed secondary to myocardial inflammation.
Repeat TTE showed severely depressed LVEF of <10%. There was subsequently no pulse pressure or cardiac rhythm while patient was on VA-ECMO support. Continuous renal replacement therapy was commenced for acute kidney injury. Decision was made to empirically pulse high -dose IV methylprednisolone as endomyocardial histology confirmed acute myocarditis without obvious pathogens or viral cytopathic features present. One gram of IV methylprednisolone was given, then 500 mg per day over the next 2 days, followed by tapering doses of prednisolone, 30 mg b.i.d. for 2 days, 25 mg b.i.d. for 2 days, 20 mg b.i.d. for 2 days, and then 15 mg b.i.d. for 2 days. Haemodynamic status improved over the following week. Inotropes were weaned off by Day 6 of admission. Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenator was successfully explanted after ten days of support. A total of 14 days of IV ceftriaxone and oral doxycycline was given.
He was extensively evaluated for an underlying infective aetiology. Multiple blood cultures were negative. Respiratory virus polymerase chain reaction test was negative. A search for evidence of parvovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, dengue virus, Zika virus, chikungunya virus, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B/C virus, toxoplasma, rickettsia from blood, serum, and urine did not yield any positive results except for a paired convalescent leptospira enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The initial leptospira IgM at admission was negative, but a convalescent repeat 2 weeks later returned positive, supporting the diagnosis of acute leptospirosis.
After recovery of haemodynamics, patient was started on heart failure treatment, including bisoprolol and hydralazine, isosorbide dinitrate combination. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors were not started, while renal function was recovering.
There were no further episodes of malignant arrhythmia. Transthoracic echocardiogram done before discharge showed normal LV cavity size and LVEF of 65%. He was discharged stable 3 weeks after admission.