One 80-year-old, male ADPKD patient with leg edema and pedal edema presented at China-Japan Friendship Hospital in November 2020.
The patient had a distended abdomen accompanied by leg edema and pedal edema. He had CKD.
This patient had 14 years of a cerebral infarction, 30 years of PKD, and 20 years of hypertension. In addition, this patient had other clinical disorders such as renal anemia, hyperlipidemia, arteriosclerosis obliterans, lacunar infarction and type 2 diabetes.
This patient had ADPKD. One family member, the patient’s daughter, was included in this case report study for the whole exome sequencing in order to screen the ADPKD genetic variants.
This patient’s body weight was 62.5 kg and his height was 170 cm. Blood pressure was 140/80 mmHg. The distended abdomen was observed and both leg edema and pedal edema were also found.
Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was calculated according to the CKD-EPI creatinine (CR) equation. Hemoglobin (HGB), albumin and total protein were examined. Liver function and kidney function were evaluated by measuring alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), CR and uric acid (UA). Coagulation-associated molecules, such as fibrinogen, D-dimer, fibrin degradation product were also measured. All clinical laboratory examinations were performed and data were recorded before the start of treatment and in every month after the treatment.
Computed tomography and abdominal ultrasound were performed on this patient and the kidney size and multiple cysts were measured . Venous thrombosis of the lower extremities was also examined by ultrasound .
The peripheral blood of this patient and one family member was collected for the whole exome sequencing analysis to screen ADPKD associated single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), insertion/deletion (InDel) and copy number variation. Genomic DNA was extracted using a DNA extraction kit. The sequencing library was prepared by using reagents from KAPA Biosystems Inc. (Wilmington, MA, United States). Hybridization capture was completed by using the IDT whole exome capture kit by Fulgent Company (Beijing, China). The whole exome sequencing was run on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 sequencer (San Diego, CA, United States). FastQ data were processed and sequencing reads were aligned to human genome hg19/GRCh37 using BWA (Burrow-Wheeler Aligner). Then, variants SNP/InDel were identified with SAMtools. Candidate SNP/InDel was further screened. The genetic mutations (SNP/InDel) were predicted as harmful by SIFT, Polyphen-2_HVAR, and MutationTaster, and referring to HGMD, OMIM, ClnVar, UCSC, Ensembl and RefGene database as well. SNP/InDel variants were classified into pathogenic and likely pathogenic ones according to the criteria and guidelines of American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (commonly known as the ACMG).