A 14-year-old boy presented to the emergency room with a 1-week history of sore throat, fever and malaise. He had been diagnosed with ocular toxoplasmosis 3 months before presentation and treated with sulfadiazine (4 g/day), pyrimethamine (25 mg/day) and folinic acid (7.5 mg/day). To note, even though folinic acid was prescribed, the patient was taking folic acid instead because the latter is much less expensive. He had been using the medication for two and a half months, until 15 days before coming to the emergency room. Personal and familial past medical history were unremarkable. As the blood work revealed anemia and leucopenia (Hb: 4.2 gm/dL; 2100 leukocytes/μL [300 neutrophils]; 348,000 platelets/mL), the boy was admitted for further hematologic investigation.
The patient presented with an intense anemia and severe neutropenia. Bone marrow aspirate was normocellular with hyperplasia of the erythrocytic lineage, with megaloblastic and dysplasic elements. The granulocytic lineage showed hypocellularity and dysgranulopoiesis with maturation asynchronism. The megakaryocytic lineage was preserved and there was a low-grade plasmacytosis of 6.2% of the total cells. These findings were compatible with drug-induced bone marrow toxicity in response to pyrimethamine or sulfur.
Four days after admission, the patient complained of poor vision in the left eye. Visual acuity was 20/30 in the right eye and counting fingers (CF) at 1 meter in the left. Pupillary reaction, ocular motility, intra-ocular pressure (12 mmHg AO), and anterior segment were normal. Fundus exam of the right eye revealed sub-retinal hemorrhages, intra-retinal hemorrhages with a white center and a retinochoroidal scar inferior to the optic nerve head. This retinal scar was compatible with the toxoplasmic infection 3 months before. Fundus exam of the left eye showed a macular hemorrhage. It was decided to observe and elevated decubitus was recommended so that the blood could sediment and clear the visual axis.
Two days later, his visual acuity dropped to CF at 1 m in the right eye, without anterior segment abnormalities. Visual acuity in the left eye had improved to 20/60 at that time. Fundus exam revealed bilateral macular hemorrhages and some small preretinal hemorrhages in the mid-periphery of the right eye . At that point, the patient's blood work revealed an improvement in the anemia and leucopenia (Hb: 10.8 gm/dL; 3600 leucocytes/μL; 268,000 platelets/mL).
Again elevated decubitus was recommended. After 4 days, the visual acuity was 20/200 in the right eye and 20/30 in the left eye, with improvement in the retinal hemorrhages and inferior deposition of the preretinal blood in both eyes, clearing the visual axis. After 4 weeks of follow-up, visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes.