A 68-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to a tertiary care centre for acute decompensated heart failure after recurrent hospitalizations elsewhere for the same issue. She had a history of hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and coronary artery disease that required percutaneous coronary intervention of the proximal left anterior descending artery in the remote past. On presentation, the patient reported worsening dyspnoea, weight gain, bilateral lower extremity oedema, orthopnoea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. Initial vital signs included an oral temperature of 36.9°C, heart rate of 87 b.p.m. with a blood pressure of 101/75 mmHg, and a respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min with an oxygen saturation of 97% while on byway positive airway pressure. Physical exam was significant for a S3 gallop, markedly elevated jugular venous pressure, and bibasilar crackles. Chest X-ray revealed pulmonary oedema, and B-type natriuretic peptide level was elevated to 3206 pg/mL. High-sensitive cardiac troponin T levels were persistently elevated (without a significant rise or fall) in the range of 400 ng/L. Her serum creatinine was slightly elevated (1.29 mg/dL) as was her BUN (45 mg/dL), and the complete blood count was significant for an iron-deficiency anaemia with a haemoglobin of 10.8 g/dL and mean corpuscular value of 81.8 fL (white blood cell count 8.6 K/mm3, platelet count 253 × 103/µL). The hepatic function panel revealed hypoalbuminaemia (2.2 g/dL), but otherwise did not show any significant abnormality (total protein 6.2 g/dL, alkaline phosphatase 150 U/L, aspartate transaminase 29 U/L, alanine transferase 23 U/L, and total bilirubin 0.9 g/dL). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed grade III diastolic dysfunction with biatrial enlargement and severe concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (17.8 mm in thickness). Left ventricular systolic function was normal with a calculated ejection fraction of 55%. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was notable for normal QRS voltage. Two months prior at another hospital, the patient underwent placement of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) due to recurrent episodes of non-sustained (monomorphic) ventricular tachycardia. Per chart review, the patient had no history of sudden cardiac death or sustained ventricular tachycardia. She also had not undergone an electrophysiology study to induce ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation prior to ICD implantation. Recent coronary angiography demonstrated no significant progression in coronary artery disease, and no family history of heart failure or sudden cardiac death was identified. Indeed, the indication for ICD was certainly in question based on available medical records.
With the above information in mind for this patient, the differential diagnosis for heart failure with concentric left ventricular hypertrophy focused on genetic and acquired primary cardiomyopathies. Genetic considerations included neutral septum hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, mitochondrial myopathies, and glycogen storage diseases (e.g. Fabry disease, Danon disease). Given the patient’s age, acquired primary cardiomyopathies seemed more likely. Her recent history of ICD implantation due to recurrent non-sustained ventricular tachycardia raised concern for an infiltrative process, such as light chain amyloid or ATTR-CM. Additionally, the voltage on her 12-lead ECG was discordant with the degree of left ventricular hypertrophy seen by TTE . Hypertensive heart disease seemed less likely as well, given the patient had well-controlled blood pressure without anti-hypertensive therapy throughout her hospitalization.
Initially, the primary focus in patient management was to promptly address her acute decompensated heart failure. As her physical exam was consistent with a low-output cardiac state with fluid overload, she was placed on a low-dose dopamine infusion (5 μg/kg/min) prior to TTE to help augment diuresis. However, in the setting of a small left ventricular cavity (as discovered later by cardiac imaging), the patient became hypotensive with the resulting decrease in stroke volume from the calcitropic properties of dopamine that increase contractile function. Dopamine was subsequently discontinued, and the patient underwent aggressive intravenous diuresis with loop diuretics alone directed by a Swan-Ganz pulmonary artery catheter. On right heart catheterization, the patient was found to have elevated right- and left-sided filling pressures with a mean right atrial pressure of 11–13 mmHg and a mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 25 mmHg (respectively), in addition to mild pulmonary hypertension (40/22/30 mmHg). Her cardiac output and index (3.43 L/min; 1.72 L/min/m2) were diminished as well.
After undergoing appropriate reduction in left ventricular preload, the patient completed cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) imaging with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE). This study revealed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (measuring up to 2.3 cm in the inferoseptum) as well as right ventricular hypertrophy, biatrial enlargement, and a diffuse pattern of patchy mid-myocardial delayed enhancement within the left ventricle; findings all consistent with cardiac amyloidosis. Other supporting evidence of cardiac amyloidosis by cardiac MR included a small pericardial effusion, bilateral pleural effusions, and—most importantly—reverse nulling of the myocardium with inability to fully null the myocardium. To differentiate between TTR cardiac amyloidosis and the light chain type, serum and urine protein electrophoresis with associated immunofixation were obtained. Subsequent results did not reveal a monoclonal protein consistent with light chain amyloidosis. Therefore, the patient underwent technetium-99m pyrophosphate (Tc-99m-PYP) scintigraphy to confirm ATTR-CM. This evaluation demonstrated mild diffuse radiotracer uptake in the myocardium with additional focal elevated activity worse in the anterolateral wall of the left ventricle . The heart to contralateral chest wall uptake ratio was >1.5, which has a specificity of 99% for ATTR-CM.
Following hospital discharge, arrangements were made for the patient to establish care in the Cardiomyopathy Clinic, where she was to initiate tafamidis after genetic testing. Genetic testing was negative for a TTR gene mutation and so the wild-type form of ATTR-CM was confirmed. Due to a late presentation in the patient’s disease course, orthotopic heart transplant was considered as well.