A 29-year-old woman without past medical history received the first dose of BBIBP-CorV (Sinopharm), whole-cell inactivated virus vaccine (IVV), in early July 2021 without immediate complication. Eight days later after the vaccination, she was found stuporous with fecal and urinary incontinence. Her initial vital signs showed body temperature of 37 °C, blood pressure 42/31 mmHg, heart rate 130 bpm, respiratory rate 20 per minute, and oxygen saturation 98%. Respiratory examination was unremarkable. Neurological examination revealed stupor (Glasgow coma scale was E2V1M4), but preserved brainstem reflexes and myoclonus at the left shoulder.
Upon arrival, the patient received intubation, fluid resuscitation, a vasopressor along with levetiracetam to control myoclonus. Non-contrast computerized tomography (CT) of the brain showed symmetrical hypodense lesions involving bilateral thalami and bilateral cerebellar hemispheres , causing effacement of cerebellar folia. Another isolated hypodense lesion was observed at the left high frontal area .
The initial blood count revealed normal red blood cell count, normal white blood cell count with neutrophil predominance, thrombocytopenia (122,000 cell/uL), and coagulopathy; INR 2·44; aPTT 75·1/24·4 s; and low fibrinogen 1·34 g/L. d-dimer was markedly elevated (> 10,000 ng/mL). The initial blood chemistry showed acute kidney injury and elevated liver enzymes. In addition, markedly elevated inflammatory biomarkers were observed; serum IL-6 7390 pg/mL; ferritin 14,752 ng/mL; procalcitonin 63.05 ng/mL; and high sensitivity C-reactive protein 89·68. Comprehensive 48 cytokines panel was obtained on the fourth day of admission .
Urinalysis found pyuria and bacteriuria. Urine culture was positive for Escherichia coli. Stool culture and hemoculture were unremarkable. SARS-CoV-2 was detected by PCR from nasopharyngeal and throat swab and was later confirmed by whole genome sequencing to be the Delta variant. RANBP2 gene analysis was sent out to search for a possible explanation of the cause of ANE and found the heterozygous Thr585Met mutation.
Chest radiography revealed no infiltration . Non-contrast CT of the whole abdomen found A 0·6 × 0·8 cm left distal ureteric stone situating just above the left ureterovesicular junction, causing upstream dilatation.
The final diagnoses were COVID-19, ANE, acute cerebral infarction, septic shock from urinary tract infection (UTI), and multiorgan failure. Remdesivir 100 mg intravenous (IV) once daily and dexamethasone 6 mg IV once daily were given as well as ceftriaxone 2 g IV once daily. Urinary diversion was not performed.
On the second day of admission, myoclonus was controlled but the patient deteriorated into comatose state. Blood tests revealed further worsening of renal and liver status. She was palliated due to multiorgan failure with no response to treatment. Upon the patient’s relatives will, invasive investigations including further extensive blood tests including the neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 and serum IgG against spike proteins, as well as lumbar puncture were not done as it would be unlikely to affect management and due to the limited resource situation in Thailand during the delta outbreak. She passed away on the sixth day of admission.