A 34-year-old, primigravid woman presented at 28 + 1/7 weeks of gestation. She conceived dichorionic diamniotic twins following in vitro fertilization via an intracytoplasmic sperm injection in the setting of severe adenomyosis. Routine pregnancy examinations were performed from early gestation, and clinical findings were normal. She was diagnosed with hypertension 2 years prior to the pregnancy and was treated with 30 mg nifedipine twice daily. Her blood pressure was controllable during first and second trimester; systolic (120-140 mmHg) and diastolic (70-90 mmHg). She was admitted to our department due to superimposed preeclampsia on chronic hypertension and preterm labour.
At admission, she had a BP of 160/100 mmHg and urinary protein concentration of 2.5 g/L. No headache, epigastric pain, visual disturbance, or hyperreflexia were complained. Her platelet count and liver enzyme levels were normal. An ultrasound scan showed appropriate-for-gestational-age foetuses (estimated foetal weight of the 15th and 50th centiles), with normal amniotic fluid volume.
Throughout her hospital stay, hypertension was stabilized with hydralazine 15 mg. The use of nifedipine was continued till admission and then stopped in order to allow the safe use of magnesium sulfate as an anticonvulsant. During sleep, she snored loudly. Repeated drop in peripheral oxygen saturation to a nominal value of 70% was revealed in pulse oximetry. She told that she felt tired during daytime and would wake up every hour during the night. Physical examination revealed a body mass index of 40 kg/m2, a large neck, and a low soft palate. Level III polysomnography (PSG) confirmed the presence of severe obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) with an apnoea–hypopnea index (AHI) of 67.5 (number of apnoeic plus hypopneic episodes per hour; normal range, < 5) and severe airflow limitation . The nadir oxygen desaturation was at 71.0%. The oxygen saturation dropped below 90 and 80% for 20.2 and 2.5% of the total sleep time, respectively. Treatment with nocturnal nasal automatic CPAP at 8–12 cmH2O resulted in a significant reduction in the peripheral desaturation and BP. After receiving CPAP, she didn’t require any hypertensive drug such as hydralazine until discharge. She was discharged after 4 days of the CPAP treatment with a BP of 130/80 mmHg and an absence of protein in urine analysis. After discharge, she continued to take 30 mg nifedipine twice daily as usual with CPAP use at night, and her BP remained stable throughout the pregnancy .
The mother proceeded to have a caesarean section at 35 weeks of gestation due to uncontrolled preterm labour and transverse-lie foetal presentation. Both her babies were healthy, with birth weights of 1700 g (5th percentile by normogram in twin gestation) and 2335 g (40th percentile). Apgar scores were 5 and 9 for infant one and 8 and 9 for infant two, at 1 and 5 min respectively.