In september2017, an 18-month-old male admitted in endocrine department with symptoms of moon face, general weakness, central obesity, growth arrest and short stature of 5 months duration. On physical exam, the patient was noted to have 1 + pitting edema on his lower extremities bilaterally and hirsutism in back of trunk. At the time of presentation, he did not appear severely cushingoid appearance and his blood pressure was (115/61 mm Hg). Laboratory results revealed highly elevated ACTH and cortisol levels (ACTH = 731 pg/mL; AM cortisol = 142.8 μg/dL; 24-h urine cortisol 12743.5μg/24 hours total volume). In addition, the patient was also hypokalemic (3.0 mEq/L) and had a metabolic alkalosis (pH = 7.89, HCO3 = 41 mEq/L). Dexamethasone suppression test was considered: however, in the presence of very high ACTH and cortisol levels, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis, as well as clinical findings, a primary pituitary tumor or an ectopic ACTH syndrome was suspected. Brain MRI was negative for primary pituitary tumor. Abdominal ultrasonography (USG) showed a solid, calcified heterogeneous mass measuring 57 × 46 × 36 mm in front of anteromedial of right kidney near to inferior pole. A Doppler ultrasound test showed the blood flow through inferior vena cava (IVC) restricted by pressure effect of tumor. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography abdomen showed large lobulated, necrotic and calcified hypodense enhancing mass measuring 47.6 × 44.3 mm in the largest diameters that extending from anterior of right kidney to retroperitoneum and involving retroperitoneal space. The lesion was abutting the IVC, displacing it laterally The USG/CT appearance of the mass, in combination with the clinical and laboratory findings, was suspicious for neuroblastoma or pPNET. Informed consent was obtained from parents prior to surgery. Total resection of mass was performed by laparoscopic abdominal surgery. After surgery, his metabolic abnormalities were controlled. Grossly, the tumor was brownish, soft and multilobulated. Gross examination of the specimen sent to us revealed a soft tissue mass measuring about 47 × 42 × 37 mm, cut surface of which revealed an encapsulated creamy to brownish mass with lobulated and variegated appearance with solid and necrotic areas with foci of calcification . On microscopic examination, there were lobules of tumor cells separated by fibrous septa. The tumor cells comprised of small cells with round vesicular nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, scanty eosinophilic cytoplasm with frequent homer wright rosettes and pseudorosettes . The immunohistochemical evaluation revealed a diffuse CD99 and vimentin positivity in the cytoplasm of the neoplastic cells. Pan keratin, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, myogenin and CD45 were negative. The S-100 protein was weakly positive in tumor cells. Ki67 immunostain shows about 65% immunoreactivity. Also, there were focal expression of synaptophysin and ACTH . These findings represent an ACTH-secreting PNET. Following the operation, his ACTH level decreased to 22 pg/mL. Ki67 immunostain shows about 65% immunoreactivity. He was discharged on hydrocortisone 5 mg in the morning and 5mg in the evening for secondary glucocorticoid deficiency because of prolonged ectopic ACTH secretion. When the patient finished the hydrocortisone course, he maintained a normal ACTH, morning plasma cortisol, and urine cortisol levels. Furthermore, his Cushing's syndrome symptoms completely resolved.