A 62-year-old man presented to the emergency department complaining of worsening diarrhea, body aches, restlessness, dry eyes, and thirst that began immediately after consuming homemade jojoba seed butter. The patient had handpicked jojoba seeds from local shrubs and, with a clean grain mill, used them to make butter. He then consumed 5 tablespoons of the freshly made butter in a single sitting at 1700 and denied any coingestion. He claims to have made and used jojoba butter in the past, but never consumed this large a quantity in such a short period of time. He reported experiencing symptoms immediately after ingesting the seed butter. His condition gradually worsened over the course of the evening, and he was triaged in our emergency department at 0600, the following morning.
At presentation, he appeared anxious but was alert and oriented. He was tachypneic, breathing 24 respirations per minute; otherwise he was afebrile and all other vitals were within reference range. During interview, he reported being in his usual state of good health until he consumed the jojoba seed butter. He denied any associated pain, emesis, vision changes, auditory or visual hallucinations, suicidal or homicidal ideation, or any symptoms prior to ingestion. The patient denied any past medical problems, and he did not take any prescription medications or over the counter supplements. On examination, the patient was found to be diaphoretic and tremulous with dry mucous membranes. Neurologic, cardiovascular, and abdominal examinations were otherwise non-remarkable.
Laboratory work consisting of a venous blood gas, complete blood count, lactate, creatine kinase, lipase, comprehensive metabolic panel, and thyroid stimulating hormone were all within normal limits. The patient’s electrocardiogram showed no evidence of ischemia or arrhythmia. He was treated symptomatically with a bolus of normal saline, lorazepam, and diphenhydramine. He was observed in the emergency department and discharged later that day after his symptoms resolved.