A 5-year-old, female neutered, domestic shorthair cat (weight 4.65 kg; body condition score [BCS] 6/9) presented to a general practice for routine immunisation. A cough (2 weeks’ duration) was reported, with an in-clinic respiratory rate of 36 breaths/min and increased expiratory effort. One week later, thoracic radiography and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL; blind technique) were performed. Radiography showed evidence of a soft-tissue mass, cranial and dorsal to the cardiac silhouette, deviating the carina sternally . A patchy alveolar pattern was present in the right middle and accessory lung lobes. There was no evidence of cardiomegaly or vascular distension. BAL yielded a profuse growth of Pasteurella species, with cytology supportive of neutrophilic inflammation.
Upon referral, clinical findings were similar to those at initial assessment. Body weight had reduced to 4.29 kg (8% reduction over 14 days) with a BCS of 5/9. Rectal temperature was normal (38.6ºC). Complete blood count and serum biochemical profile showed no significant abnormalities; venous blood gas and electrolytes were within reference intervals. Serological tests for feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukaemia virus (FeLV), and FeLV PCR were negative. A thoracic CT study (GE LightSpeed 16; GE Medical Systems) was elected and performed using helical acquisition, pre- and post-intravenous contrast medium administration. Images showed a large, contrast-enhancing mass at the heart base, which deviated the oesophagus dorsally and compressed the lumen of both principal bronchi, entirely obliterating the lumen of the left . The left caudal lung was reduced in size with diffuse soft tissue attenuation. The cranial mediastinal lymph nodes were enlarged. Ultrasound-guided needle aspirates of the mass yielded moderate numbers of cells with round nuclei, high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, highly stippled chromatin and a single, prominent nucleolus. There was no evidence of an infectious process. The most likely differentials were considered to be a mesothelioma or neuroendocrine tumour (chemodectoma most probable, given the location). CT findings of pulmonary infiltrates were considered likely to represent lobar consolidation with possible secondary infection, caused by bronchial obstruction and a lack of normal mucociliary clearance.
After consultation with the owners, palliative bronchial stenting was elected as the best option, owing to its minimally invasive nature and possibility of reducing the severity of dyspnoea. Radiation therapy was declined. Stent selection was based upon CT-acquired measurements of the bronchi: the length of the left principal bronchial compression was approximately 27.5 mm, the right 15.1 mm; diameter of the left bronchus prior to compression was 4.4 mm; comparable to the right side, which measured 4.6 mm. Two laser-cut self-expanding metallic stents were selected, measuring 5 mm diameter × 30 mm length, and were planned for deployment using a ‘kissing stents’ technique where the bronchial stents were deployed partially side by side in the trachea, to reduce the risk or rate of re-occlusion. Although commonly used in humans undergoing vascular interventions, this technique has also been performed for minimally invasive, palliative treatment for malignant bronchial obstruction in people.
One week later, after intravenous premedication with butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg, dexamethasone 0.1 mg/kg and terbutaline 0.01 mg/kg (to reduce the risk of airway spasm and swelling during manipulations), the cat was induced using 0.5 mg/kg midazolam and 10 mg/kg ketamine (given slowly to effect) and intubated with a 4.5 mm endotracheal tube. Anaesthesia was maintained using a continuous rate infusion of alfaxalone (0.16 mg/kg/min) and manual intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) of 100% oxygen, using an Ayre’s T-piece. Perioperative antibiotics were administered (cefuroxime 20 mg/kg IV). Bronchoscopy (Olympus BF-P240 flexible video bronchoscope; Olympus Medical Systems) was performed in combination with fluoroscopic imaging (Arcadis Avantic C-arm; Siemens) to define the location of the carina (meeting point of the stents) and the location of the right middle and accessory lobar bronchi (RB2 and RB3) and the left caudal lobar bronchus (LB2). Complete occlusion of the left principal bronchus and compression of the right side were confirmed. Once these landmarks had been mapped on fluoroscopy, the cat was allowed a period of 5 mins pre-oxygenation (breathing 100% oxygen; Ayres’ T-piece, manual IPPV) before extubation for stenting, during which time SpO2 was consistently recorded at 92%, with arterial blood gas analysis measuring a PaO2 of only 100 mmHg, presumably associated with significant pulmonary compromise. Next, a 4 F Berenstein vascular catheter (4 F Berenstein 1 catheter 65 cm; Infiniti Medical) was advanced over a 0.035” angle-tipped hydrophilic ‘weasel’ guidewire (Infiniti Medical) into each of the principal bronchi. The weasel wires were removed and exchanged for more rigid 0.035” Rosen guidewires (0.035” 180 cm J-tip Rosen wire; Infiniti Medical), over which the Berenstein catheters were removed, leaving the guidewires in situ. Over each wire, the 5 mm × 30 mm self-expanding metallic stents (VetStent Uretha; Infiniti Medical) were simultaneously advanced within their deployment systems, and positioned so that the distal tips did not extend beyond the entrances to RB3/RB4 or LB2, but the proximal tips were located alongside one another, at the carina. Simultaneous deployment of the stents by two operators was performed, the delivery systems removed and the cat re-intubated. From extubation to re-intubation lasted 8 mins 47 s. Pulse oximetry readings reduced steadily; SpO2 of 49% was recorded at re-intubation. This increased to 90% within 5 mins. Arterial blood gas analysis was not performed at this point, so the accuracy of the pulse oximetry reading could not be confirmed.
Post-deployment bronchoscopy suggested appropriate stent position, confirmed by thoracic radiography. A small-volume pneumothorax was present: 60 ml of air was drained by needle thoracocentesis. Repeat radiographs showed resolution of pneumothorax and persistence of alveolar infiltrates, predominantly in the left lung . No recurrence of pneumothorax was present within 10 mins, so the cat was recovered in an oxygen-rich environment. Antibiotic treatment (cefuroxime 20 mg/kg IV q8h) was continued.
Six hours postoperatively, increased respiratory rate and effort were noted, and thoracic percussion suggested recurrence of pneumothorax. A further 100 ml of air was drained. No recurrence was noted overnight or the following morning, but coughing had worsened compared with preoperatively and appeared productive. Radiographs were not taken at this point. Nebulisation was performed every 4 h and oral antibiotics were administered: cephalexin 75 mg and clindamycin 25 mg q12hly. Improvement in demeanour and reduction in cough frequency were noted, and the cat was discharged 8 days post-procedure.
After discharge, the owner reported that the cat could not be medicated and would not eat tablets/capsules in food. However, at 14 days postoperatively the cat was well. Twenty-six days post-procedure, respiratory signs had worsened, with respiratory distress and coughing, in addition to reduced appetite and depressed demeanour. The cat returned for repeat thoracic radiography and bronchoscopy to exclude stent complications and perform BAL.
Radiography confirmed no stent migration or fracture. There was no evidence of pneumothorax or pleural effusion, but a bronchointerstitial pattern was present throughout the lungs, worst caudodorsally on the right . Bronchoscopy showed no evidence of stent occlusion , but excessive mucus production was evident, especially on the right. A neutrophilic exudate was present on BAL, with growth of a Pasteurella species, expressing the same resistance profile as previously. The cat was discharged the following day on oral pradofloxacin syrup (5 mg/kg PO q24h), which was tolerated well. Five days later, the cat had a normal demeanour and appetite. Cough was ongoing but less frequent (once or twice daily); respiratory rate had reduced to 30 breaths/min. Antibiotic treatment was discontinued after 30 days, with no respiratory signs aside from an intermittent, low-grade cough (two or three episodes of coughing per week, lasting <30 s each). At 27 weeks after the stent procedure, the cat was reported to have a good quality of life and normal activity levels. On examination, respiratory effort was normal with a mild increase in bronchovesicular sounds over the dorsal, left hemithorax. By 34 weeks postoperatively, regurgitation was evident 20–30 mins after eating, with an estimated frequency of one in three meals. The cat’s owner reported an otherwise bright demeanour but some loss of body condition (BCS 4/9). Repeat CT showed that the stents remained in an appropriate position, but an area of hyperintensity was visible in the wall of the oesophagus caudal to the heart base tumour, presumed to represent neoplastic infiltration. The cat was managed with postural feeding and dietary manipulation to reduce regurgitation frequency and severity. Owing to worsening clinical signs, the cat was euthanased 44 weeks post-stent, having exhibited no recurrence of dyspnoea or coughing.