A 60-year-old diabetic man, with a history of regular medical follow-up, was admitted to the hospital by the beginning of March 2020. Mild fever, malaise, and weight loss occurred about 3 weeks before hospitalization without any other symptoms. As the patient was an anesthetist working in an Italian COVID-19 ward, and complying with a strict testing protocol, he had two negative COVID-19 swabs in the last weeks. However, due to the persistence of general malaise and one episode of fever, he had a third swab that demonstrated positive results for COVID-19. A chest CT scan showed left basal interstitial pneumonia , so the patient was hospitalized with COVID-19 diagnosis. At admission his vital signs were stable. On physical examination there was abdominal distension and rebounding pain on the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. Laboratory tests are summarized in . Being labeled as “COVID-19 positive” patient, he received intravenous ceftriaxone and clarithromycin, hydroxychloroquine, enoxaparin, vitamin D and tocilizumab for 2 weeks. During the hospital stay the patient remained stable showing no exacerbation of respiratory symptoms (minimum O2ps 94%) but only mild fever for three consecutive days. No further medications were administered nor support with oxygen was needed. After 15 days and two consecutive negative swabs the patient was discharged. The last blood tests are showed in the . A CT scan was performed 2 days after discharge showed persistent interstitial pneumonia and also an incidental unclear shape of the left kidney, that motivated a third thoraco-abdomin-pelvic CT scan. The total body CT showed a 5.4 × 4.5 cm mass with thick walls and central colliquation, involving the renal parenchyma and the renal fat but without involving the renal sinus, suspicious for advanced malignant tumor. A previous CT done 1 year earlier for other purpose (diverticulitis) did not show any pathology in the left kidney. An MRI scan was then performed to better clarify the nature of the lesion, but no certain diagnosis was achieved . After urological consultation done in another hospital, the initial decision was to perform radical nephrectomy for suspicious of an advanced malignant renal disease. However, after a second opinion of an expert, considering the reported symptoms previously attributed exclusively to the virus, renal abscess was suspected and a renal biopsy was recommended. This lesion was then drained and specimens were sent to cytologic examination showing it was a renal abscess (presence of inflammatory cells and no bacteria) which did not require surgical removal. The patient started oral antibiotic treatment and performed a follow-up ultrasound at 3 months that revealed reduction in the diameter of the renal abscess.