In 2017, a 61-year-old Japanese man was referred to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in Tokai University Hospital, Isehara, Japan, because of trismus and general fatigue. He complained of gradually worsening trismus and a painful ulcerated wound in the right buccal mucosa that had failed to heal for the past 6 months. He was on medication for hypertension and had no other specific systemic disease. On physical examination, facial swelling without redness was observed on the middle right side of his face, and trismus was noted (inter-incisor distance was 17 mm). Ulceration was observed in the right buccal mucosa, and an indurated mass could be palpated on the skin of his right cheek. Multiple palpable cervical lymphadenopathies were observed. He underwent workup for suspected malignancy of the buccal mucosa. There were no neurological and cardiologic abnormalities.
Computed tomography (CT) showed a mass in the right buccal mucosa that extended superiorly destructing the lateral wall of the maxillary sinus, inferiorly to the retromolar trigone, and laterally to the buccinator and anterior border of the masseter muscles, with multiple cervical lymph node enlargements . Whole-body 18F-fludeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT was performed. The PET scan showed increased uptake of FDG in multiple lymph nodes in the right cervical area, scapula and erector spinae muscles, and the right femur .
Laboratory tests on admission showed high white blood cell count (13,400 cells/μL) and elevated levels of SCC marker (4.5 ng/mL), but did not show any disorder in other tests including blood coagulation tests and tumor markers: cancer antigen (CA) 19-9, 31 U/ml; and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 1.0 ng/ml.
An incisional biopsy of the right buccal mucosa was performed, which confirmed the diagnosis of SCC. He was given a diagnosis of right buccal carcinoma (T4bN2bM1). Induction chemotherapy was planned, and he was admitted at our hospital. Five days after hospitalization and prior to the initiation of chemotherapy, he experienced aphasia and lost consciousness. He had right hemiparesis with right upper and lower extremities manual muscle test (MMT) grade 0 [, ], and his National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 19 [, ].
The first set of laboratory tests right after onset revealed a platelet count of 31.1 × 104/μL, a prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) of 1.06, and high levels of fibrinogen degradation product (FDP) at 9.2 μg/ml and D-dimer at 5.4 μg/mL. No marked abnormality was observed on other blood chemistry tests, and the condition did not fulfill the diagnostic criteria for DIC. Brain CT, 30 minutes after the onset of symptoms, showed scattered hyperdense curvilinear areas suggestive of developing petechial hemorrhage in the region of his right middle cerebral artery (MCA) . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 100 minutes after the onset of symptoms. Diffusion-weighted image (DWI) showed a scattered lesion affecting the cortical part of the region supplied by his right MCA and perfusion imaging showed corresponding deficit . Head magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed attenuated flow-related signal in his right MCA region beyond the M1 segment, but its superior division was not visible . All imaging findings indicated right MCA infarction. A Doppler ultrasound scan of his neck revealed thrombosis of his left internal jugular vein (IJV), and compression of his right IJV by metastatic lymph nodes . He was diagnosed as having TS by multifocal cerebral infarction.
Intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) (alteplase 0.6 mg/kg) was administered directly after the MRI scan. Electrocardiogram (ECG), Holter monitoring, echocardiography, and blood culture tests did not show any abnormalities. A head CT on 1, 3, and 7 days after onset showed that the infarction in his right MCA area had not recovered. Seven days after the onset of brain infarction, systemic heparinization was started (PT-INR, 1.5 to 2.0). He did not recover from his cerebral infarction and died 16 days after admission, 21 days after diagnosis, due to pneumonia. A pathological autopsy was not performed as the family did not consent. Family consent was obtained for this case report.