A 53 year old Caucasian female with a past medical history of right eye choroidal melanoma presented with a one year history of erythema and induration of the skin at the junction of the inferior aspect of the right nipple profile and surrounding areolar skin . The patient had subsequently been treated with the application of topical steroids and topical antibiotics to the right nipple profile and surrounding areolar skin for the duration of approximately 5 months, and showed no clinical improvement. No palpable intraparenchymal breast masses were detected on clinical breast examination within either breast. A bilateral digital mammogram performed approximately seven months before presentation was within normal limits. Dermatoscopic findings revealed increased red serpiginous and annular structures most prominent at the 6 o’clock position of the right nipple profile .
An initial 3 mm punch biopsy of the skin at the junction of the inferior aspect of the right nipple profile and surrounding areolar skin was obtained by a dermatologist and histopathologic evaluation was reported to show subareolar sclerosing duct hyperplasia without abnormalities of the skin. Subsequently, one month later, a larger 6 mm punch biopsy was performed by a breast surgical oncologist to the same region of the right breast and histopathologic evaluation was reported to show adenosis and associated usual type ductal hyperplasia, consistent with subareolar duct papillomatosis. No atypia or malignancy was identified within either of the two sequential skin punch biopsy specimens. Repeat diagnostic digital mammography was performed on the patient during her evaluation by the breast surgical oncologist, and showed stable, benign-appearing right breast calcifications, and no suspicious mammographic findings within the right subareolar region or elsewhere within the right breast.
The patient was subsequently taken to the operating room , and elected to undergo a right central breast resection, consisting of surgical excision of the right nipple profile, adjacent surrounding areolar skin, and superficial underlying breast and subcutaneous tissues . The patient elected to simply have primary skin closure of her right breast surgical incision site, and without any attempt at cosmetic reconstruction of a right “neo-nipple” .
Histopathologic evaluation by a breast-specific pathologist of hematoxylin and eosin stained sections from the right central breast resection specimen revealed a well-circumscribed, compact proliferation of tubular glands within the nipple stroma and nipple skin dermis . The lesion appeared centered in the reticular dermis, with focal extension into the papillary dermis. The overlying epidermis showed acanthosis, but was not directly involved by the lesion itself. Epidermal ulceration was not identified. At medium power, an adenosis pattern with proliferation of benign tubular glands was seen . At high power, several glands showed usual type ductal hyperplasia and apocrine metaplasia . A medium power hematoxylin and eosin stained section and the corresponding immunohistochemical stained sections are shown collectively in Fig. . Immunohistochemical stains for p63 (antibody BC4A4, BioCare Medical Inc., Concord, CA; Dilution 1:300 HIER, Bond Epitope Retrieval solution 1, Bond Autostainer) and smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (antibody SMMS-1, Dako, Carpinteria, CA; Dilution 1:350 HIER, Bond Epitope Retrieval solution 1, Bond Autostainer) confirmed the presence of myoepithelial cells surrounding the glands . CK5 (antibody XM26, Novocastra, Buffalo Grove, IL; Dilution 1:150 HIER, Bond Epitope Retrieval solution 2, Bond Autostainer) showed a mosaic pattern of reactivity in foci of usual type ductal hyperplasia . Therefore, a final pathologic diagnosis of NA was given. There was no histologic evidence of atypia or malignancy identified within the submitted specimen at the time of histopathologic evaluation.
The patient has continued regularly scheduled follow-up with her dermatologist and her surgical oncologist. At the current time, some 31 months after her definitive surgical therapy to her right breast, the patient remains without any evidence of any recurrent process within her right breast.