A 15-year-old previously Taiwanese healthy boy presented with 5 days of fever, right lower quadrant abdominal pain, and watery diarrhea after consuming abundant seafood. Stools were watery but no blood or mucus were noted. He was febrile up to 39.8 °C before the presentation. He went to the local clinic at first. Injection with buscopan (hyoscine-N-butylbromide) , loperamide, and antipyretics were prescribed to relieve symptoms. Although he stopped having diarrhea, his fever still lasted more than 2 days. He was presented to the emergency department with signs of shock : he was hypothermic to 35.2 °C, tachycardic to 102 beats per minute, and with low blood pressure of 90/55 mmHg. A basic metabolic panel and complete blood count were remarkable for leukocytosis of 23,400/μL with left shift with 8% band form and significant elevation of C-reactive protein (CRP) of 39.57 mg/dL. Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography scans demonstrated acute enterocolitis consisting of moderately distended, thickened, fluid-filled loops of the ascending colon and transverse colon, and intramural air noted at the ascending colon . Stool and blood cultures were obtained, and he was admitted for fluid challenge and antibiotic treatment.
On the second day of admission, despite adherence to metronidazole, ceftriaxone, and vancomycin, his symptoms persisted along with low blood pressure with widened pulse pressure (100/45 mmHg). In the evening, he suffered from sudden onset of severe, diffuse abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed muscle guarding, rebound tenderness, and silent bowel sound. Abdominal X-ray showed subdiaphragmatic free air at standing view. .
The patient underwent emergent exploratory laparotomy, which revealed sigmoid colon perforation of about 0.5 cm. Enterolysis and repair of sigmoid colon were performed. Pathology demonstrated active enterocolitis with ulceration, cryptal microabscess, transmural colonic perforation, and peritoneal reaction . There was no evidence of chronic mucosal injuries such as granulomas or low-grade nuclear dysplasia, arguing against an underlying diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease. Intraoperative stool specimen nucleic acid amplification testing had turned positive for Campylobacter spp., with negative results for other bacterial pathogens, whereas a stool obtained at admission and blood cultures remained negative. He was treated with 8 days of vancomycin, metronidazole, and ceftriaxone. However, ascites culture collected during operation reported growth of Escherichia coli, which was resistant to ceftriaxone, this corresponds to the high prevalence of fecal carriage of nonsusceptible E. coli in children in Taiwan. Therefore, we substituted meropenem for treatment.
Postoperatively, he was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit for close monitoring and given total parenteral nutrition. Improving leukocytosis and decreasing CRP occurred in the following days. His symptoms improved and he tolerated the diet well. He was discharged 15 days after hospital admission. He was evaluated in the clinic a week after discharge with significant improvement in his symptoms and surgical wound.