The proband is 2 years and 6 months old male. He is the only child to healthy nonconsanguineous parents of Sri Lankan origin. He was delivered when his mother was 24 years old, at 35 weeks of gestation via an emergency lower segment cesarean section due to severe oligohydramnios and marked fetal growth restriction. There was no history of antenatal bleeding, fetal decelerations, or any miscarriages before this pregnancy. His Apgar scores at 1 min and 5 min were 8 and 10 respectively. At birth, his anthropometric parameters were as follows; birth weight—1080 g, birth length—30 cm, and occipitofrontal circumference—24 cm. All parameters were well below—3SD in the standard WHO growth charts. He was admitted to the Special Care Baby Unit during the 1st week of life due to very low birth weight. From birth to 6 months, he had been extensively evaluated for poor weight gain. All recorded biochemical investigations were within the normal range. However, endocrine assessments related to growth were not performed due to financial constraints. His current growth parameters are shown in Fig. A–C which are also below—3SD. His developmental milestones remained age-appropriate since birth and there aren’t any symptoms suggestive of any food intolerances, metabolic or malabsorption syndromes. Despite optimal calorie intake, his growth velocity is constant. On examination, the following dysmorphisms were noted retrognathia, small ears, prominent nasal root with a large nose, microdontia, sparse scalp hair . He also has a characteristic high-pitched voice. Hypopigmented patches were noted in the upper limbs, but they did not follow the Blaschko lines. Limb examination revealed bilateral fifth finger clinodactyly. During other systems screening, echocardiography revealed a small ostium secundum atrial septal defect. An ultrasound scan of the abdomen revealed that the proband had markedly smaller normally functioning kidneys. His right and left kidneys measured 4.5 cm and 3.8 cm respectively. The normal range is 7.1 (6.8–7.4) cm for the right kidney and 7.0 (6.7–7.2) cm for the left kidney . Therefore, the probands kidney is below the 1st percentile for the kidney length in cm according to age. The hip radiograph showed a poorly formed narrow pelvis with a flat acetabulum.
Prior to performing Whole Exome Sequencing we obtained written informed consent from the proband’s parents under a protocol approved by the Ethics Review Committee of the Faculty of Medicine University of Colombo. Extraction of the genomic DNA from the blood leukocytes was done using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The SureSelectXT® Human(Mouse) All Exon V6 5190-886 kit was used in Illumina® NovaSeq® 6000 Next Generation Sequencer for Whole Exome Sequencing. An in-house bioinformatics pipeline was used to analyze the generated data. Aligning the paired-end sequencing data to GrCh37 human reference genome and variant calling was performed using the BWA-mem algorithm and Genome Analysis Tool Kit (GATK). Annotation of the generated variants calling format file was performed using SNP-eff with the help of Refseq, clinical, and population frequency databases. Then a virtual gene panel consisting of genes that were known to cause skeletal dysplasia was used to filter out the variants relevant to the proband's phenotype. According to the standard ACMG guidelines , benign variants were filtered out. In silico functional prediction tools (Mutation Taster, SIFT, PolyPhen2, and Provean) were used to predict the functional significance of the detected variants. Functional impact on the protein structure and conservation of the resided region were used to further scrutinize the variants. After filtration, results revealed a pathogenic compound heterozygous frameshift variant in the PCNT gene c.5059_5060delAA | p. Asn1687fs (novel variant) and c.9535dup (p. Val3179fs). On screening his parents, his mother and father were found to be heterozygous for the variants .
For genomic analysis of the present case, the FASTA sequence of the homo sapiens pericentrin B (PCNT2) mRNA, complete cds with GenBank ID: AF515282.1 of 10020 bp was downloaded from the NCBI nucleotide database ( AF515282). In the wild-type sequence, there were two adenine nucleotides at cDNA positions 5059 and 5060. Manual deletion of this nucleotide pair was carried out to generate the variant corresponding to the proband c.5059_5060delAA. Both mRNA sequences were submitted to the ORF tool to access the differences in the coding amino acids. We observed a change in the amino acid sequence owing to a shift in the reading frame. Thus, in the mutated protein at the 1687th position amino acid asparagine "N" was replaced by glutamine "Q". Furthermore, there was an appearance of TGA (i.e., termination codon) succeeding 10 triplet codons after the initial amino acid change. This resulted in premature termination of protein synthesis. The downloaded FASTA sequence of the wild-type protein (UniProtKB ID-O95613, PCNT_HUMAN) had 3336 amino acid residues and 3D modeling was carried out using the SPDBV offline software. Modeling of the wild type and mutated PCNT was done by homology approach by taking 1JQN as a template structure. According to the 3D models of the two proteins, the amino acid numbers were 643 and 615 respectively. We compared the number of non-glycine and non-proline residues which were 600 and 576 respectively. It was also observed that in the mutated protein one amino acid was found in the disallowed region thus contributing to an unstable tertiary structure . There was also an increase in the number of cavities from 4 in the wildtype to 5 in the mutant protein with altered amino acid configurations around these cavities .