A 44-year-old man, in January 20XX (24 years old at that time), underwent left parotid pretreatment and cervical dissection for parotid carcinoma. A histopathological diagnosis of MASC was established. Postoperatively, the patient was treated with radiation therapy, but no drug therapy was administered, and the patient was followed up. In April 20XX+16, 16 years after the initial surgery, the patient visited our otolaryngology clinic because of a palpable mass in the left parotid region. After close examination, the patient was diagnosed with local recurrence and cervical lymph node metastasis. However, complete resection of the lymph nodes proved to be challenging. Unfortunately, there were no recommend drug therapies available for effective treatment. In response to the patient’s request for oral treatment, oral S-1 therapy was initiated. However, local recurrence gradually increased and lung metastasis appeared in October 20XX+19; therefore, S-1 oral therapy was discontinued, and a biopsy of cervical lymph node metastasis was performed simultaneously.
The pathological diagnosis of the biopsied tissue was SC, which was similar to that at the time of the initial surgery. Immunostaining for S-100, MUC4, and Pan-Trk showed widely positive results , while immunostaining for mammaglobin revealed partially positive result. Subsequently, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with an ETV6 (12p13) break-apart probe (Vysis ETV6 Break Apart FISH Probe Kit, Abbott) using a previously reported method revealed split signals in the nuclei . These findings supported the diagnosis of SC. In Japan, the use of TRK inhibitors requires ETV6-NTRK3 fusion analysis using next-generation sequencing. Finally, a CGP test using FoundationOne® CDx (Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USA) was performed, and the ETV6-NTRK3 fusion gene was identified.
The patient was started on entrectinib therapy (600 mg/day) in January 20XX +20. The patients’ pretreatment blood test results are shown in ; there were no problematic findings. However, the patient had a recurrent tumor approximately 7 cm in length in the left parotid region, which had partially self-disintegrated and showed effusion; therefor, he lived with a gauze over his neck at all times. After treatment, the local recurrence in the left parotid region shrank rapidly and completely disappeared 6 months later (, upper row). Computed tomography (CT) findings also showed that the local recurrent lesion had shrunk deeply after 2 months of treatment and completely disappeared after 6 months of treatment (, lower row). Simultaneously, the pulmonary metastases disappeared, and the CT images revealed a complete response.
Adverse events experienced during entrectinib treatment and the patients’ clinical course are illustrated in . Adverse events with entrectinib included grade 1 (CTCAE version 5.0) dysgeusia on day 4 of treatment, which worsened to grade 2 by week 2; however, the oral intake was good and tolerable. In addition, grade 1 weight gain was observed at week 3 of treatment, grade 1 fatigue and creatinine levels increased at week 4, grade 1 dizziness was observed at week 15, and grade 2 weight gain increased at week 21, all within acceptable limits; entrectinib was continued at a dose of 600 mg/day. However, an increase in grade 2 creatinine levels was observed at week 68 of treatment. Entrectinib was withdrawn for 1 week, and creatinine levels immediately improved to baseline values; therefore, entrectinib was reduced to 400 mg/day and continued from April 20XX+21. After the entrectinib dose reduction, all adverse events decreased, and the patient was able to go about his daily life, including work, without any problems.
Thirty months after the start of treatment, the patient is still receiving entrectinib therapy, and complete resolution of the recurrent lesions has been sustained on imaging and gross examination.