In 2017, a 26-year-old man experienced a sudden reduction of vision in his left eye without eye movement pain or diplopia. Upon presentation to another hospital, he was diagnosed with optic neuritis and underwent treatment with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone. Two weeks later, his left eye visual acuity returned to normal. In 2020, he was admitted to our hospital because of blurred vision that had been present in the left eye for 3 months and progressive lower limb weakness that had been present for 1 month. He did not exhibit other new symptoms. Cerebral and cervical magnetic resonance imaging in another hospital revealed multiple demyelinating lesions in the brainstem, bilateral insula, corpus callosum, left parietal lobe, and cervical cord (at the level of C3–C5). The patient had a history of 4–5 cigarettes per day for 8 years. He had no history of rheumatic disorders or other systemic disorders; he also had no history of mental or genetic disorders. His parents did not have a consanguineous relationship.
Neurological examination revealed horizontal nystagmus and the presence of weakened light perception and limited abduction in the left eye. Muscle strength in the patient’s lower limbs was 80% of normal (4/5) under normal muscular tension. The patient’s tendon reflexes were brisk in both lower extremities, but normal in the upper limbs. He exhibited bilateral positive Babinski signs, as well as hemi-thermanalgesia immediately below the level of T8. His other physical findings were unremarkable.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed pressure of 0.59 kPa and nucleated cell count of 3*106/L (reference: 0–8*106/L). The patient’s immunoglobulin G index was 1.3 (reference: 0.00–0.70). CSF biochemical, immunological, microbiological, and virological tests showed no abnormalities. Complete blood count, biochemical test results, and findings concerning TPPA, HIV, HBV, HCV, tumor markers, thyroid function, and HbA1c were normal. Furthermore, ANA, RF, ANCA, and LA results were in normal ranges. Oligoclonal band and anti-flotillin-1/2 autoantibodies (1:1) were present in CSF but absent from serum; anti-AQP4, anti-MOG, and anti-MBP autoantibodies were absent from both CSF and serum.
Chest CT findings were normal. Bilateral optic nerves showed strong signals on T2WI with minimal gadolinium enhancement on T1WI. Spinal MRI revealed long-segment extensive lesions without enhancement, extending from C3 to C5 and from Th5 to Th10. Cerebral MRI showed abnormal long T1 and T2 signals at the bilateral frontal parietal lobe, centrum ovale, bilateral lateral ventricle, corpus callosum, hippocampus, and right cerebellar peduncles; these signals did not show mild enhancement or strong signals on DWI.
The corrected decimal visual acuity values were 0.08 and 0.1 in the patient’s left and left eyes, respectively. Fundus examination and OCT indicated retrobulbar neuritis in the left eye. Visual evoked potential analysis confirmed visual pathway impairment in both eyes. Brainstem auditory evoked potential analysis showed relatively low amplitudes with normal latency, which indicated conduction dysfunction in the peripheral segment of bilateral brainstem auditory pathways. Sensory-evoked potential analysis suggested a conduction dysfunction in the central segment of the bilateral lower limb sensory pathway with normal SEP of the upper limbs.
Based on the patient’s history, symptoms, and signs, including classical demyelination and evidence of anti-flotillin autoantibody, he was diagnosed with NMOSD. was showcasing a timeline with relevant data from the episode of care. Therefore, he received high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (initially 1 g per day, then tapering by half at 3-day intervals). He then received oral prednisone acetate 60 mg per day, with tapering. He also received immunosuppressants; tacrolimus was initially used, but azathioprine was subsequently used because the tacrolimus trough level was insufficient. The patient’s lower limb muscle strength recovered to 100% (5/5). His visual acuity in the left eye improved, but has not yet returned to normal. In the next face-to-face follow-up, radiological examinations including susceptibility weighted images, retest of CSF and serum autoantibodies, and thorough cognition assessment were scheduled.