An 89-year-old man, followed over 30 years for leprosy-associated ocular complications, presented to our sanatorium for monthly examination. Two years before this presentation, he had bilateral persistent epithelial defects and bacterial keratitis. Although epithelialization was obtained with the use of autologous serum eye drops, corneal thinning of left eye progressed to perforation in the peripheral region at 9 o’clock position. The perforation closed by the treatment with eye drops and ointments. He also had a prior history of bilateral lower eyelid retraction for lagophthalmos caused by facial nerve paralysis due to leprosy, pterygium, and cataract surgery. There were no other ocular infections (HSV and HZV) and ocular injury. Fundoscopic examination with +20D lens and optical coherence tomography (OCT) scan evaluation showed fundus of the both eyes were normal.
He was first diagnosed with lepromatous leprosy (LL) at the age of 15 years and it was cured after treatment with dapsone at the age of 65 years although he had glove and stocking anesthesia, pain less ulcer and contractures of hands and feet. He had no additional relevant medical history, including genetic disease and systemic disease (diabetes and central nervus system disease) that can cause NK.
Examination demonstrated best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/80 in the right eye and 20/2000 in the left eye. Although he had no pain, a corneal ulcer was detected in the central region of the left eye on slit-lamp examination . Cross-sectional anterior segment OCT (AS-OCT) showed stromal thinning . Fundus examination of the left eye showed neither retinal detachment nor vitreous hemorrhage. Corneal scraping for bacterial and fungal culture was negative. Because of the absence of corneal sensation judged by lack of pain against corneal ulcer, he was diagnosed with persistent epithelial defect due to NK. To prevent complications of corneal infection, he was treated with 0.5% cefmenoxime and 0.1% fluorometholone four times daily, 0.3% ofloxacin ointment twice daily, and 0.1% purified sodium hyaluronate eye drops six times daily in the left eye. Two months later, the epithelial defect was closed.
Three months later, he presented with blurred vision in right eye without pain. BCVA in his right eye was hand motion. Corneal perforation was detected in the central region of the right eye . AS-OCT showed the stromalysis and fibrin beneath the cornea . Because of the corneal perforation, we couldn’t check fundus of right eye. Treatment with 2% glutathione eye drops four times daily, 0.1% fluorometholone three times daily, 0.1% purified sodium hyaluronate eye drops five times daily and 0.3% ofloxacin ointment three times daily successfully addressed the absence of epithelium. Three months later, a corneal sensitivity test using a handheld Cochet–Bonnet esthesiometer (Handaya Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) demonstrated an absence of sensitivity; the filament length of five corneal quadrants was < 5 mm in both eyes. Schirmer’s test showed almost normal tears in both eyes, with strip wetting of 14 mm in the right eye and 20 mm in the left eye. Patient continued to be closely monitored with treatment.