A 43-year-old male arrived via emergency medical services as a transfer from a stand-alone emergency department (ED) with hypoxemia and severe respiratory distress. He provided a limited history secondary to his respiratory distress but noted he had experienced progressively worsening shortness of breath and chest pain over the prior 1–2 days. The patient had a COVID-19 exposure at an airport, approximately 7–10 days prior to arrival. Paramedics noted he had oxygen saturations in the low 80s on room air and improved to the mid 90s with 15 liters per minute (LPM) through a non-rebreather mask. He felt better with the supplemental oxygen but was still experiencing shortness of breath and speaking in two- to three-word sentences. He denied significant medical history other than tobacco abuse with recent cessation.
The patient’s initial vitals were notable for a temperature of 101.2oF, respiratory rate of 51 breaths per minute, and heart rate of 138 beats per minute. On examination, he remained in respiratory distress with profound tachypnea, but auscultation revealed clear bilateral lung sounds without wheezes, rhonchi, or rales. Other notable exam findings were diffuse patches of capillary dilation with each collection originating from a single locus scattered throughout the distal extremities, tachycardia with regular rhythm, and mild scleral icterus. After examination, the patient was transitioned to high-flow nasal cannula, and his work of breathing improved with a flow rate of 45 LPM and 100% oxygen. Consideration was given to initiating bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP); however, because his clinical presentation was suspicious for COVID-19 infection BiPAP was not started to reduce potential staff exposure. The patient intermittently self-proned with some subjective symptomatic improvement.
The patient’s notable laboratory work-up is described in the . A chest radiograph obtained showed bilateral interstitial and airspace infiltrates. In addition, the patient’s COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) resulted negative.
Despite the negative COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction test (PCR), his clinical presentation and work-up appeared most consistent with severe COVID-19 pneumonia. Blood cultures were drawn, and the patient was started on cefepime and vancomycin in the event his presentation was a result of a bacterial pneumonia. A computed tomography (CT) angiography of the chest was obtained due to the elevated D-dimer and respiratory distress. No pulmonary embolism was present, but the CT did reveal extensive bilateral infiltrates consistent with a COVID-19 pneumonia . After results had been obtained, a report from the transferring ED contained similar lab results, including a negative COVID-19 PCR. The patient was then admitted to the ICU for ongoing care.
After the patient transferred to the ICU, a third COVID-19 PCR test was obtained and resulted negative. The profound thrombocytopenia triggered a review of the patient’s hematopathology. His peripheral smear demonstrated neutrophil intracellular organismal inclusions consistent with HGA. Confirmatory anaplasmosis PCR testing was sent and would later result positive. The patient was empirically switched to doxycycline 100 milligrams (mg) twice a day antibiotic therapy for 14 days. Further information was later obtained from the patient’s wife, who noted the patient had been hunting approximately 1–2 weeks prior to presentation and had removed numerous ticks from himself afterward.
Despite treatment with doxycycline, the patient’s respiratory status worsened and he required intubation for acute respiratory distress syndrome on hospital day (HD) one and subsequent proning. The patient required five days of mechanical ventilation; he was then extubated and transferred out of the ICU on HD six. He had a progressive, severe, non-oliguric acute kidney injury thought to be secondary to acute tubular necrosis with creatinine peaking at 7.31 mg per deciliter on HD four, but never requiring hemodialysis. The patient’s thrombocytopenia required a platelet transfusion on HD zero and again on HD three after platelets dropped to 9 ×109 per liter (109/L). However, platelets improved to 183×109/L by the time of ICU transfer and did not require further transfusions. The patient recovered and was discharged to home with home physical therapy after a 12-day hospitalization.