A 36-year-old caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital due to a moderate to severe retrosternal pain, commencing 24 hours ago, radiating to the back and being aggravated with deep breathing. There was no fever, history of recent viral infection or any other accompanying symptoms. The woman had been suffering for the last 5 months from a low-grade fever, diffuse myalgias and worsening fatigue. She had been fully investigated during the previous month and was considered to suffer from an autoimmune disease, yet no definite proof was available. While waiting for the results of a skin-muscle-vessel and liver biopsy she was empirically set on corticosteroids and was discharged from the hospital. A few days later she presented to us with the previously described pain. From her medical history she had no significant cardiovascular risk factor.
On admission she looked ill. She had no dyspnoea and from her physical examination she had sinus tachycardia, normal first and second heart sounds, a fourth heart sound, a mild apical mid-systolic murmur, no pericardial friction rub and clear lung fields. On chest x-ray the heart size was normal and there were not any signs of pulmonary congestion. The admission ECG revealed sinus rhythm, normal QRS axis, a Q-wave at I, aVL and ST-segment elevation at leads I, aVL, V3-V6 with reciprocal ST-segment depression at leads III, aVF . Cardiac enzyme levels (troponin, creatin phosphokinase-MB) were increased. Echocardiography showed a left ventricle with normal internal dimensions, an apparent regional hypokinesia of the posterior, the middle and apical segments of the lateral wall and a mildly compromised global systolic function.
The electrocardiographic and echocardiographic findings, as well as the enzymic activity, were typical of an acute myocardial infarction. However, the young age of the patient, the atypical features of chest pain, the lack of significant risk factors for coronary artery disease and the underlying autoimmune disease, led us to reconsider our diagnosis towards that of acute focal myocarditis. After a lot of consideration, we decided to initiate high-dose intravenous corticosteroid treatment, instead of immediate reperfusion with intravenous thrombolysis (as emergent coronary angiography and possible primary angioplasty were not available in our setting).
On the following days ST-segment elevations gradually decreased and negative T-waves appeared at the same leads, following the pattern of acute myocardial infarction . However, on the third day of hospitalization, a second echocardiogram revealed the presence of a mural thrombus attached to the previously recognized hypokinetic area . Antithrombotic therapy was initiated (with low molecular weight heparin and acenocoumarol) and three days later the thrombus gradually disappeared without any embolic sequela.
Serial echocardiographic assessment showed that the segmental wall motion abnormality gradually improved and ten days later the global contractility of the left ventricle were normal. Similarly, the cardiac enzymes that were elevated on admission returned to normal, following the pattern of an acute myocardial infarction. The patient underwent coronary angiography, which revealed normal coronary arteries and normal systolic function of the left ventricle.
A few days after her hospital discharge, the previous taken skin-muscle-vessel biopsy was proved to be diagnostic of polymyositis. Twelve months later, while being on corticosteroids, the patient remains asymptomatic, with a normal ECG , and a normal echocardiogram.