An 82-year-old caucasian woman was admitted to the emergency room of our hospital with pyrexia (40 °C) and pain in her right knee and leg. She had a history of intraarticular injection of cortisone in the right knee 3 days before the admission. Her physical examination revealed erythema of the right lower limb with edema on palpation. The medical history of the patient was notable for severe aortic stenosis (estimated surface 1 cm2) with multiple episodes of hemodynamic pulmonary edema, for which the patient had refused any intervention; hypertension; type 2 diabetes mellitus; and a hiatal hernia. Her chronic treatment consisted of amlodipine, aspirin, olmesartan, furosemide, metformin, and omeprazole.
Blood testing conducted while the patient was in the emergency room showed a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 47.5 g/L (normal <1 g/L), a bicarbonate level of 24 mmol/L (normal 22-30 mmol/L), and a hemoglobin level of 9 g/dl (normal 12–15 g/dl). Analysis of her knee fluid revealed the presence of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, for which she was treated with intravenous flucloxacillin (2 g six times per day), oral rifampicin (600 mg every day), and intravenous acetaminophen (1 g four times per day). Ten days after her admission, she developed encephalopathy associated with arterial hypotension at 70/50 mmHg that did not respond to crystalloid administration. The patient was transferred to the ICU, and blood gas analysis at her admission revealed increased anion gap metabolic acidosis with no elevated lactate level (pH 7.17, partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide [PaCO2] 11.2 mmHg, partial pressure of arterial oxygen [PaO2] 122 mmHg, lactate 1.22 mmol/L).
Blood work conducted at the patient’s ICU admission confirmed that she had acidosis. She had a bicarbonate level of 4 mmol/L, a chloride concentration of 119 mmol/L, a sodium concentration of 145 mmol/L, and a potassium concentration of 3.6 mmol/L. The calculated anion gap was high at 22 (normal 8–12). The patient’s plasma osmolality was 283 mOsm/kg. Common causes of high anion gap metabolic acidosis, such as lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis, ingestion of toxic substances, and renal failure, were ruled out The patient’s blood glucose level was 174 mg/dl, and her renal function was normal (creatinine 0.87 mg/dl, normal 0.5–1.2 mg/dl; plasma urea 31 mg/dl, normal 17–42 mg/dl). A search for blood and urine ketones returned negative results, and the test results for levels of methanol, ethanol, and ethylene glycol by headspace gas chromatography and for levels acetylsalicylic acid with gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) were also negative. There was no indication of elevated D-lactate levels. In the context of treatment with flucloxacillin and acetaminophen, as well as the presence of severe sepsis, metabolic acidosis by accumulation of 5-oxoproline (pyroglutamic acid) was suspected. The diagnosis was confirmed by GC-MS analysis of urinary pyroglutamate (9789 mmol/mmol creatinine, normal level <14 mmol/mol creatinine).
The treatment consisted of stopping any medication that inhibits 5-oxoprolinase and causes glutathione deficiency. We replaced flucloxacillin with co-trimoxazole, which does not affect this enzyme. We also stopped the administration of acetaminophen and gave an infusion of acetylcysteine to replenish the patient’s glutathione stores.
The patient’s condition evolved favorably, and she was allowed to leave the ICU 8 days later. A blood gas sample taken at discharge showed regression of the metabolic acidosis (pH 7.53, PaCO2 21.7 mmHg, PaO2 80.2 mmHg, bicarbonate 18 mmol/L, calculated anion gap 8) and regression of the inflammatory syndrome (CRP 3.1 g/dl). The result of follow-up analysis of urinary pyroglutamate 15 days later was negative.