A 17-year-old Sardinian young woman underwent an initial examination at the dentist’s office during a routine checkup in 2010. After obtaining informed consent from her parents, clinical evaluation was performed, during which some caries were detected and also the need for an orthodontic consultation. The presence of an atrophy of filiform papillae with circinate erythematous ulcer-like lesions of the dorsum and the lateral border of the tongue was observed.
During the anamnesis, neither the patient nor her parents reported any history of systemic disease or, in particular, any gastrointestinal symptoms. Talking with the patient and her parents, it was possible to verify that the tongue affection had started when she was five years old with no other symptoms and with intermittence. During her past medical history, no one had ever investigated these tongue lesions.
With these elements, the clinician identified the tongue condition as an AG and started with a more detailed analysis of systemic and local conditions related to this pathology. The patient, as highlighted by the anamnesis, did not show any other symptoms or signs related to pathologies typically linked to an AG, apart from her short stature . She was only 145 cm tall but this condition had previously gone unnoticed because her parents were also short. Considering the presence of short stature with an AG, the problems could be related to a nutritional dysfunction such as vitamin B12 deficiency. Given that Sardinia is an area with a high frequency of CD, gluten enteropathy became the first suspect as a possible cause for the eventual vitamin B12 deficiency.
As a first step, a blood sample was requested to determine the vitamin deficiency and to perform AGA and tTG antibody tests and the EmA test. Hematologic tests showed a vitamin deficiency with positive results for antibody tests so a small intestine biopsy was performed during a gastroenterological consultation .
A diagnosis of CD was made based on the findings from the biopsy sample; such as: the characteristic changes in intraepithelial lymphocytosis, crypt hyperplasia and a Marsh type IIIc villous atrophy. She was treated by excluding gluten-based-food from her diet (gluten-free diet). After five months she repeated the intraoral examination where it was possible to verify remission of the AG.