A 59-year-old female with a history of osteoarthritis, hypothyroidism, and follicular B-cell lymphoma presents with a rash on her face and body. This rash had initially developed on treatment with bendamustine and rituximab chemotherapy for her recent lymphoma diagnosis. Pruritic, erythematous, dome-shaped papules with crusting were present diffusely on the patient’s back, neck, and face, particularly forehead, perinasal, and periorbital areas . Bendamustine was discontinued due to cytopenia and worsening symptoms, and treatment was switched to R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophophamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine sulfate, prednisone). Change in treatment seemed to improve the rash on her body with no change in facial rash.
Initial skin biopsy demonstrated dermal lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with a proposed differential diagnosis including granulomatous rosacea or granulomatous folliculitis ( and ). A trial of minocycline was initiated but discontinued due to side effects. Treatment was switched to doxycycline 100 mg daily in conjunction with metronidazole 1% cream with minimal improvement.
Repeat biopsy of a lesion on the forehead revealed dense superficial perifollicular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate in the superficial and mid dermis, suggestive of granulomatous rosacea. Treatment was again switched to erythromycin 500 mg PO twice a day (BID) and clobetasol 0.05% ointment BID to the face as the patient’s primary symptom was extreme pruritus. This led to significant improvement. Clobetasol was eventually switched to Protopic 0.1% ointment.
Given the persistent facial lesions and complex clinical picture, the case was reviewed. There was no involvement of the skin by follicular lymphoma on morphology. Immunohistochemistry showed patchy staining for S100 in the histiocytes within the dermis with no staining for CD1a ( and ). Given the unusual immunoprofile, cutaneous involvement by a non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis was proposed, and a diagnosis of CRDD was made. During this cutaneous disease progression, the patient was further diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
This patient’s CRDD remains as scattered, minimally elevated papules on the forehead with some excoriated papules on the face and xanthelasma periocularly. She has since been managed with erythromycin (oral and topical), loratadine, hydroxyzine, tacrolimus ointment, clobetasol scalp lotion, and Stieprox shampoo.