An 83-year-old man was admitted to our institution owing to shortness of breath, fatigue, and facial oedema for ∼1 year. His medical history was unremarkable, except for hypertension and benign prostate hyperplasia. On admission, his blood pressure was 120/73 mmHg, heart rate was 62 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation was 94%. On physical examination, leg oedema, hepatosplenomegaly, and general lymphadenopathy were not observed; however, the internal jugular vein was extremely distended without any y descent. Cardiac auscultation revealed a Grade 2/6 systolic ejection murmur in the fourth left intercostal space with muffled heart sounds. Laboratory findings were unremarkable, including negative results for HIV antibodies; however, the soluble interleukin-2 receptor was mildly elevated to 932 U/mL. Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm with a complete right bundle branch block. Chest radiography revealed a globular heart silhouette with a water bottle configuration . Computed tomography revealed massive pericardial effusion without pericardial thickening, lymphadenopathy, or an obvious mass lesion . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed massive pericardial effusion surrounding the entire heart, resulting in early diastolic collapse of the right ventricular free wall (see , ), indicating elevated pericardial pressure ( and ). Doppler echocardiography showed a significant inspiratory reduction in cardiac output in the left ventricular outflow tract and expiratory augmentation of forward flow . Conversely, the opposite response was observed at the right ventricular outflow tract under spontaneous respiration, suggesting ‘pulsus paradoxus’ and exacerbated ventricular interdependence . Transmitral flow showed an impaired relaxation pattern , and superior vena cava flow exhibited a remarkable systolic component dominant pattern , in accordance with the inspection findings of the jugular venous waveform, all indicating the presence of cardiac tamponade. The patient underwent pericardiocentesis, and 700 mL of pericardial fluid was drained. His symptoms significantly improved soon after the drainage.
The pericardial fluid was bloody and exudative, and most importantly, its adenosine deaminase (ADA) level showed an abnormally high value of 221 U/L. Microbiological studies found no bacteria, fungi, or acid-fast organisms. However, cytological examination revealed a cellular population compatible with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with prominent blastic characteristics . Immunocytochemistry showed that the tumour cells were positive for CD20 and Epstein–Barr virus-encoded small RNA in situ hybridization but negative for HHV-8 latent nuclear antigen . Thus, the patient was diagnosed with HHV-8-unrelated HIV-negative PEL-like lymphoma. Based on oncological consultation, chemotherapy was withheld, considering the age and poor physical status of the patient. Although initial 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET CT) showed mild accumulation of 18F-FDG in the mediastinum and left supraclavicular lymph nodes , the accumulation improved 3 months after pericardial drainage alone . The patient is closely followed up by an oncologist every 3 months using echocardiography and 18F-FDG-PET CT, and he has been in complete remission without any chemotherapy for more than 15 months.