A 64-year-old woman was transferred to our hospital on account of hematemesis and melena.
The patient complained of hematemesis and melena 2 d prior to presentation. She underwent hemostasis and rehydration at the previous hospital. Colonoscopy and gastroscopy were successively performed, and severe gastric varices were found before administration.
Laparoscopic radical resection of right colon cancer had been performed 16 mo earlier due to ascending colon cancer (pT4N2Mx). Preoperative gastroscopy did not show any abnormalities . She received eight cycles of oxaliplatin combined with capecitabine for 6 mo postoperatively. No tumor recurrence was found after intermittent re-examination.
The patient had no known history of liver disease. She had no history of habitual use of alcohol and no significant history of exposure to liver injury-inducing drugs other than chemotherapy.
The patient’s temperature was 36.6°C, heart rate was 93 bpm, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 125/65 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. The patient had an anemic appearance and pale palpebral conjunctiva. No signs of chronic liver disease, such as palmar erythema and spider nevus, were found. No significant enlargement of the liver or spleen was detected on palpation.
Blood examination indicated severe anemia with normal levels of leukocytes and platelets. Prothrombin time was normal with a slight increase in plasma D-dimer level. Liver function test indicated mild hypoproteinemia with normal transaminase and bilirubin levels; renal function was normal. Liver tests were negative for hepatitis viruses; autoimmune liver diseases; and metabolic liver diseases, such as hepatolenticular degeneration and hemochromatosis .
An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed postoperative changes of the colon, an irregular liver contour, slightly enlarged spleen, low-grade fatty liver, and varices in the gastric fundus with gastro-renal shunting . Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography showed that the size of the spleen was 4.2 cm × 11.2 cm. The diameter of the retropancreatic splenic vein was 0.67 cm with a mean blood flow velocity of 33.0 cm/s and volume flow of 528.7 mL/min.
A transjugular liver biopsy was performed, and the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG, wedged hepatic venous pressure – free hepatic venous pressure) was measured as 15 mmHg. Liver biopsy showed that the hepatic lobule was essentially complete with sinusoidal dilatation, and no pseudolobular formation was observed. Hepatocyte nuclear size slightly varied. Focal perisinusoidal fibrosis could be observed in the hepatic central vein area, which showed a diffuse distribution of necrotic hepatocytes engulfed by phagocytes. There were slight inflammatory reactions in hepatic portal areas, with slight fibrosis in the interstitium and around the bile duct. The vascular wall of the portal vein was thickened, indicating portal hypertension, and the final pathological diagnosis considered NCPH .