A 32 years old male of Han ethic group from northeast china, driver by occupation, presented to Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Norman Bethune Hospital of Stomatology, ChangChun, China with pigmented lesions on the upper left lip vermilion during month of June 2011. The lesion was noticed for the first time 4 years before as a macule of approximately 1 cm × 0.5 cm which gradually increased in size without any accompanying symptoms and discomfort. He also noticed a change in the color of skin of lip above left vermilion after about 3 years of the changes in the mucosa of the lip.
There is no significant past medical and family history. The patient’s family history of any other tumor was also inquired but nothing significant was reported. He has neither the history of smoking nor drinking.
On extra oral examination, pigmented papules of various sizes were seen in the vermilion of upper left lip associated with brownish discoloration of the skin above vermilion. The skin discoloration was approximately 0.5 × 1 cm extending from 0.5 cm medial to left angle of mouth to the left philtral ridge . The lip was slightly swollen. On intra-oral examination, the mucosal lesion was about 1.5 cm above the vestibule extending from labial frenum to 0.5 cm medial to angle of mouth on the left side. It was neither indurated nor tender on palpation. There were some areas of ulcerations in the mucosa.
There was no apparent neck swelling and cervical lymph nodes were non palpable (not enlarged). There were no similar skin pathology in other parts of body except lip.
A complete blood count, biochemical profile and urine analysis were done without significant findings. No abnormality was detected in the chest X-ray. Computed tomography (CT) scan was done to find out the extent of the lesion and to rule out local and regional lymphatic involvement.
On presentation, presumptive clinical diagnosis of mucosal melanoma (MM) was made. A punch biopsy was done and the tissue was sent for histopathological analysis. The histologic features were consistent with clinical diagnosis of oral mucosal malignant melanoma.
Medical information was provided to the patient and his family regarding the diagnosis, staging, therapeutic options and prognosis. Excisional biopsy was performed with safety margin of 5 mm and frozen section biopsy was found to be free of malignant cells. Left nasolabial flap was used for reconstruction of the lip and mucosal portion of lip was covered with biological membrane and bolster dressing was given.
On Jan 2015, after three and half years of first operation, he presented with similar lesion on the lip. On examination, a nodular bulge of 3 × 2 cm was seen. Following the recurrence, the patient presented with mucosal macules of 4 × 2 mm and 3 × 2 mm on the vermilion of the upper left lip without involvement of the skin above vermilion, in contrast to the first presentation as papules.
The lesion was more than 2 mm in thickness which can be correlated with stage III of Breslow’s classification although this classification has not been validated as prognostic predictors in oral melanoma due to architectural differences between oral mucosa and skin. The swelling was indurated and non-tender. There was a small area of ulceration on mucosa. The pathological report showed <1 mitoses per square millimeter. The cervical lymph nodes were not palpable. On biopsy, recurrence of the oral mucosal melanoma was confirmed. Excision of the melanoma was performed with safety margin of 2 cm in contrast to 5 mm safety margin during the first operation. Frozen section confirmed the margins to be free of malignant cells. The lip was reconstructed with Abbe-Estlander flap as well as utilizing tissue from the right nasolabial fold as shown in the Fig. . The patient denied of undergoing radiotherapy treatment after excision. The patient is under regular follow up and strictly advised to maintain regular follow up every 3 monthly.