A 57-year-old gentleman presented to a peripheral centre with sudden onset palpitations associated with dizziness and profound sweating. Two episodes of VT were documented and needed direct current (DC) cardioversion due to haemodynamic instability. After 3 h, he was referred to our emergency on intravenous (IV) amiodarone infusion at 1 mg/min (after initial loading dose of 150 mg).
He had history of Type 2 diabetes mellitus and Grave’s disease for last 10 years (on oral hypoglycaemic drugs and tablet carbimazole 10 mg thrice daily). He had no past history suggestive of cardiac illness but the family history was significant for sudden cardiac death (SCD) in two siblings at ages of 55 and 59 years. However, the patient had not undergone any work-up for familial SCD.
At presentation, he had a pulse rate of 60/min and BP of 120/84 mmHg with no other significant clinical findings. In our emergency, he had another episode of monomorphic VT (with haemodynamic compromise) that was DC cardioverted.
The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) during VT showed ventricular rate of 190 beats/min with left bundle branch block pattern, left axis deviation, and QRS transition in lead V6 with notching in QRS complexes, all suggestive of right ventricle (RV) free wall origin . This was similar in morphology to the ECGs recorded in the peripheral centre. ECG during sinus rhythm showed epsilon waves in leads V1–V3 and inferior limb leads. Leads V1–V3 also showed T-wave inversion along with terminal activation duration of 60 ms . These findings favoured a diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC).
His blood sugar, serum electrolytes, and thyroid profile were normal. High-sensitivity cardiac-specific troponin T (Elecsys Troponin-T-hs, Cobas®, Roche diagnostics) (hs-cTnT) was mildly raised . Patient was reloaded with IV amiodarone 150 mg for breakthrough VT and continued the infusion at 1 mg/min for a total of 6 h followed by 0.5 mg/min for 48 h. After 24 h, the IV infusion was overlapped with oral amiodarone (200 mg tablet thrice daily for 10 days followed by 200 mg twice daily for 5 days, making a cumulative dose of 10.1 g) followed by 200 mg once daily thereafter as per recommendations. He was also started on oral carvedilol (50 mg) daily.
Echocardiography showed dilated RV and RV outflow tract (RVOT) (diameter—34.7 mm), RV fractional area change of 20.3%, and RV global strain (free wall + septum) of −14.8%. The left ventricular (LV) dimensions and function were normal. Patient met all major non-histological modified task force criteria for diagnosis of ARVC. Automated implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (AICD) for secondary prevention was planned as per European guidelines.
As part of protocol in our institute to assess COVID-19 status of all emergency patients warranting admission, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay for COVID-19 on nasopharyngeal swab was done which turned out positive with a cycle threshold (Ct) value of 25.4. His laboratory investigations showed high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), raised neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR), interleukin 6 (IL-6), D-dimer, and B-Type natriuretic peptide (BNP) .
We monitored his inflammatory markers, D-dimer, and NLR along with hs-cTnT twice weekly and BNP every 2 weeks. These parameters showed a surge during the first 4 weeks ( and ). Holter monitoring (for 24–72 h) and RT-PCR for COVID-19 were also done at weekly intervals. RV origin multi-morphic ventricular premature contractions (VPCs) along with couplets and non-sustained VT episodes were noted with highest burden during the 4th week . The RT-PCR was also persistently positive for COVID-19 till 4th week. The Ct value for first 3 weeks suggested increasing viral RNA load (Ct value is inversely proportional to the viral RNA load) followed by a decline starting from 4th week . No QT prolonging antiviral drug like hydroxychloroquine or azithromycin was given to the patient. At the end of 4th week, the thyroid profile reassessed was within normal limits and amiodarone 200 mg once daily was continued.
From 5th week onwards, the inflammatory markers started subsiding, mirrored by a similar decrease in the levels of hs-cTnT, BNP, and 24 h VPC burden ( and ). RT-PCR for COVID-19 became negative during the 6th week (assessed twice at 48 h interval). By this time, the inflammatory markers, BNP, and hs-cTnT had also returned to normal range and the VPC burden had become insignificant ( and ). No respiratory symptoms or fever were noted during these 6 weeks.
Following this, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done, which revealed grossly dilated RV [end-diastolic volume = 114.3 mL/m2 (ULN 110 mL/m2)] with global hypokinesia, reduced RV ejection fraction (20.5%), and dilated RVOT (3.6 cm). Prominent trabeculations in RV apex along with focal outpouchings in RV free wall were also noted ( and Videos 1 and 2). The RV mid-cavity free wall, inferior, and apical segment showed late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) suggestive of myocardial fibrosis. The LV basal and mid-cavity (anterior and inferior septal segments) along with mid-cavity (inferior and inferolateral segments) showed T2W hyperintensity due to myocardial oedema which colocalized with selective subepicardial LGE suggestive of myocarditis in evolution with replacement fibrosis .
After the systemic hyperinflammatory phase had subsided and the patient became COVID negative, a single-chamber AICD was implanted (Fortify Assura™ ICD, St. Jude Medical, Minnesota, USA) at the end of 6th week. Amiodarone, carvedilol, carbimazole, and oral hypoglycaemic drugs were continued in the post-intervention phase along with broad-spectrum IV antibiotics for 72 h.
A transient surge of inflammatory markers and hs-cTnT along with the VPC burden was noted in the post-operative phase ( and ). However, the patient’s total leucocyte count and serum procalcitonin levels were normal together with sterile blood and urine cultures, ruling out any infectious aetiology. All the deranged parameters spontaneously returned to baseline within 1 week. He was discharged thereafter on tablet amiodarone 200 mg once daily, carvedilol 25 mg twice daily, and ramipril 5 mg once daily as per guidelines along with anti-thyroid and anti-diabetic drugs. At follow-up of 6 weeks, the patient is asymptomatic and euthyroid without any recurrence of symptoms or AICD interventions.