A 64-year-old Korean male visited the outpatient department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology in December 2014, with the symptom of recurrent periorbital swelling whenever the dose of oral corticosteroid was reduced as well as uncontrolled asthmatic symptoms and persistent nasal obstruction. The patient was diagnosed with asthma in 2002, underwent allergen immunotherapy for 3 years, and did not use inhaled corticosteroids regularly due to voice changes and intranasal corticosteroids due to complications including nasal bleeding. Therefore, he had maintained LTRA and antihistamines, and taken oral corticosteroids frequently, whenever his symptoms were exacerbated. Both periorbital swelling, which developed around 2010 and had been managed in previous hospitals with corticosteroid treatment, was noted on physical examination. Orbit MRI suggested IgG4RD involving lacrimal glands, bilateral lateral rectus muscles, and the nasal cavity along with CRSwNPs. Biopsy of nasal tissue, including NPs, was done together with middle meatal antrostomy. Biopsy and immunohistochemistry showed up to 100 IgG4-positive plasma cells per high power field and an IgG4+ /IgG+ cell ratio of about 50%. The patient started 60 mg/day of oral prednisolone as well as anti-asthmatic medications including ICS, but symptoms were partly improved. Moreover, whenever the prednisolone was tapered below 30 mg/day, his symptoms recurred and he was brought to our hospital for further management.
The patient was taking oral prednisolone 30 mg/day at the time of the initial visit. Periorbital swelling was present, and the patient had histories of recurrent hypersensitivity reactions to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and a history of anaphylaxis to midazolam. The levels of serum IgG4 and IgE were 1040 mg/dL (reference range, 3.9–86.4 mg/dL) and 1684 kU/L at the initial evaluation. Orbit MRI showed consistent findings with CRS and IgG4RD, similar to the result of MRI taken in 2013 . First, the dose of oral corticosteroid (methylpredinisolone) was increased to 40 mg/day. Omalizumab and rituximab were started with 150–300 mg of omalizumab at 4–8 weeks intervals, and 7 cycles of rituximab (1000 mg given twice, 2 weeks apart) were administered for 4 years until January 2019. Initially, periorbital swelling, sputum, and rhinitis symptoms seemed to subside, and the patient even had symptom-free periods without oral corticosteroids for about 2 months in January 2016. However, symptoms soon developed again, and methylprednisolone could not be reduced below 3 mg/day, making the patient dependent on oral corticosteroid. The serum level of IgG4 quickly decreased and formed a plateau level around 200 mg/dL after starting omalizumab and rituximab, but did not further decrease below that level and later started to increase again before changing to reslizumab . Serum level of IgE also decreased to a plateau level of around 1000 kU/L, but showed more fluctuations and also increased later before changing to reslizumab . Although blood eosinophil counts were low in the initial treatment phase, it gradually increased and showed peak level of 1200/μL before changing to reslizumab. 100 mg of reslizumab was given for 4 consecutive times as an alternative to control eosinophilia and type 2 inflammation, but the patient’s symptoms were not much improved.
Then, dupilumab was administered, starting from 300 mg every 2 weeks. Periorbital swelling and airway symptoms improved rapidly in 8 weeks after dupilumab was started. As symptoms improved, the patient could stop oral corticosteroid completely without aggravation of symptoms, and the interval of dupilumab injection was gradually extended to 8 weeks. Around this time, the serum levels of IgG4 and IgE decreased to 82.5 mg/dL and 97 KU/L, respectively, and plasmablast counts remained 0/mL and eosinophil counts estimated around 300/μL. Currently, symptoms are controlled after 4-week administration of dupilumab, and the patient remains completely free of corticosteroid after the start of dupilumab treatment .