A 64-year-old woman arrived at our emergency department with a sudden left lateral cervical swelling associated with dyspnea and transient paresthesia of the left face with speech difficulties. The patient ruled out any exposure to food allergies, drugs, trauma o insect sting, and presented symptoms suggestive of COVID-19: axillary temperature of 37.5°, dysgeusia, and cough over the previous three weeks partially resolved in 7 days. Her husband had died of COVID-19 three weeks before. Her past medical history included arterial hypertension and surgically-treated esophageal achalasia without any history of allergies.
The physical examination revealed a left mobile edematous swelling in the neck. The skin of the neck was reddish and warm . Oxygen saturation was 98%, temperature measured by a tympanic thermometer was 36°, chest and neurological examinations were normal.
Laboratory tests showed C reactive protein of 0.43 mg/dL (normal value < 0.50 mg/dL), white blood cells count of 11, 39 × 10^3/mm^3, neutrophils 71%, eosinophils 2%, D-Dimer 750 ng/mL (normal value 200–350 mg/dL); the remaining values were unremarkable.
Neck Computed Tomography (CT) revealed a diffuse soft-tissue swelling and edema of subcutaneous tissue, hypodermis, and muscular and deep fascial planes with normal appearance of nodes and salivary glands. The chest scans also revealed bilateral subpleural ground-glass opacities and lung pleural effusion. Collaterally, CT documented esophageal wall edema with adjacent effusion . A nasopharyngeal swab was performed and yielded a positive result for SARS-CoV-2 by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR).
She was immediately hospitalized and started therapy with lopinavir/ritonavir (200 mg and mg respectively) twice a day and hydroxychloroquine (200 mg) twice a day, combined with piperacillin/tazobactam (4000 mg and 500 mg,respectively) by intravenous administration three times a day for 7 days as empiric therapy of deep neck infection. The neck swelling resolved in less than 24 h, while the erythema was still present up to two days later. Chest and neck CT performed four days later confirmed resolution of the swelling and esophageal edema . The patient was discharged after seven days in good clinical condition, and PCR test was negative for SARS-CoV-2 on the twenty-first day.