We report the case of a mesenteric vessel thrombosis in a 30 year old female, G5 P3, eight days after caesarean section. She also had history of two spontaneous abortions between P2 and P3. She had undergone uneventful caesarean section in view of fetal distress with meconium stained liquor, delivered a healthy female baby and was discharged on fifth post-operative day. Patient developed fever with rigors & chills and respiratory distress on sixth post-operative day. Also had repeated episodes of vomiting which were non-bilious, non-projectile in nature. Patient had normal bowel and bladder habits till 8th post-operative day.
Eight days after her caesarean section, she presented to emergency department with respiratory distress. On examination, she was afebrile and her abdomen was soft. On auscultation there was decreased air entry in bilateral lungs. Her blood pressure on arrival was 156/110 mm of Hg and pulse 102/min. Patient was nebulized and put on antibiotics, oral Labetalol 20 mg, injection Amlodipine10 mg stat, injection MgSO4 loading followed by maintenance. Vital charting was done; patient had persistent tachycardia during next 4 days. All baseline investigations were sent. Subsequently, on Day 5 of admission patient developed abdominal distension with absence of bowel sounds and also complained of numbness in left arm. On examination of pulses: right sided radial artery volume was good but low volume was noticed in left sided radial, brachial, bilateral dorsalis paedis and posterior tibial artery. Right arm B.P – 128/70 mm of Hg, Left arm B.P – 80/60 mm of Hg. Abdomen was diffusely tender. Probable diagnosis of sepsis with intestinal obstruction was made.
Investigations: # Hb 10.0 g/dL, platelets 2.8 lakh/mm3, total leucocyte count 18,500/mm3 with neutrophilia, serum creatinine 1.3 mg/dL, serum uric acid 7.7 mg/dL, electrocardiogram normal, chest X-ray- prominent vascular markings, abdominal X-Ray - dilated bowel loops . USG whole abdomen showed prominent bowel loops and sluggish peristalsis. Color Doppler – No significant vascular abnormality, no obvious thrombosis/stenosis noted. CT – Angiography revealed complete occlusion of superior mesenteric artery (a and b), and saddle shaped thrombus in right and left pulmonary artery extending into bilateral upper and lower lobe segmental branches suggestive of pulmonary thromboembolism (c). CECT abdomen showed dilation of jejunal and ileal loops, likely small bowel ischemia.
Emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed with resection of gangrenous bowel with end to end anastomosis. Unfortunately, patient did not recover from shock and died on post-operative day 1 after laparotomy.
Gangrenous segment of bowel was received in pathology department. Specimen was 60 cm in length and included jejunum and ileum. Grossly there was marked blackening and thinning out of areas in bowel wall (a and b). Microscopic sections examined showed features of mesenteric vessel thrombosis leading to infarction of segment of gut. Changes were typical of ischaemic damage comprising of necrosis and sloughing of mucosa, marked edema and haemorrhage in interstitium. Cut ends were viable. Sections examined from mesenteric vessels traced from the specimen show a fresh thrombus of 24 hour duration in mesenteric vein occluding upto 80 % of lumen . This case is reported in line with the SCARE criteria .