A 58-year-old man was presented to our hospital with progressive dyspnea and atypical chest pain. Clinical examination found no signs of congestion and angina pectoris. At the age of 51 years old, he had undergone partial right nephrectomy as right RCC was detected. Two years post to nephrectomy, multiple lung metastases from RCC were detected, and the patient was treated with targeted molecular therapy (Sorafenib). This treatment happened to be successful with reduced and disappeared metastatic lesions. However, 4 years post nephrectomy, right adrenal gland metastasis was subsequently detected. He was treated with another targeted molecular therapy (Sunitinib), but limited effect was observed followed by increased lesion, and eventually underwent right adrenalectomy. Post these treatments, lung and adrenal gland metastases were well-controlled through chemotherapy.
At the time of admission, transthoracic echocardiography showed a 53 × 32 mm mass in the RV that moved without extension into the outflow tract nor involvement of the inferior vena cava (IVC) . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a mobile mass with hypervascular tissue characteristics infiltrating the free wall of the RV myocardium . A fluorodeoxyglucose-position emission tomography (FDG-PET) examination showed a mildly FDG-avid mass in the RV free wall and free of other organ metastases . Contrast-enhanced cardiac computed tomography (CT) displayed an intramyocardial mass in the RV wall supplied by RV branch of the right coronary artery . After consultation with urology and oncology, the differential diagnosis included cardiac metastatic from RCC based on his medical history. Surgical tumor resection might enable preventing a tumor embolism-related sudden death as well as identifying appropriate anticancer agent through pathological diagnosis of metastatic lesion. Therefore, a multidisciplinary treatment was planned expecting a prognosis improvement.
Under general anesthesia and median sternotomy, a cardiopulmonary bypass was established between the ascending aorta and bicaval drainage. After cardiac arrest, the inside of the RV was observed with the approach via the tricuspid valve by the right atriotomy. A part of the valve leaflets between the anterior and posterior leaflet were incised near the annulus and the tumor was deployed to the right atrium by manual compression of the outside of the RV wall . It was observed that the tumor layer attached to the RV free wall was thin, but the muscular layer remained as previous. Moreover, RV branch was running on the center of the lesion. For that reasons, the tumor was resected to preserve the RV wall as much as possible. Considering the possibility of tumor cell remnants, cryoablation was managed against the wall followed by a tricuspid annuloplasty with a 26-mm Physio tricuspid (Carpentier-Edwards, Irvine, California) after the leaflet suture repair. The operation progressed straightforward and weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass was smooth. Histopathological examination led to a final diagnosis of metastatic tumor from clear cell RCC . Postoperative echocardiography showed the disappearance of RV tumor and normal tricuspid valve function. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 16 after an uneventful hospitalization. One year post surgery, he has been asymptomatic and stable course without recurrence of cardiac tumors and metastasis to other organs under careful follow-up of oncologists.