A 45-year-old man presented with a 1-year history of dyspnoea, palpitations, chest pain, peripheral numbness, weight loss, and hypotension. A mediastinal mass had been detected on chest computed tomography (CT) study. A transthoracic CT-guided biopsy was performed in another hospital 6 months prior; however, the procedure was complicated by a cardiac tamponade and the tissue sample was uninformative. The patient then refused further management and was only administered dexamethasone for symptom alleviation. He had no other medical conditions and was not on any other regular medication.
Physical examination revealed bilateral lower leg oedema, a loud systolic murmur, heart rate of 66 b.p.m. and respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute. The lung auscultation, blood oxygen saturation, and blood pressure were normal (93% and 100/60 mmHg, respectively).
Haematologic and biochemical analyses were unremarkable (in particular, C-reactive protein was 15.9 mg/L (normal range <3mg/L), troponin I 0.16 µg/L (normal range <0.04 µg/L). Electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm, ST depression in II, III, aVF leads, and T-wave inversion in I, aVL, and V4–V6 leads. Chest radiograph revealed left pleural effusion, left lower lobe consolidation, and enlarged cardiac silhouette. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a large (5 × 4 × 2 cm), heterogeneous, hyperechoic mass in the left atrial (LA) projection, extending into the pericardial cavity with compression of the LA and mild mitral regurgitation. Additionally, there was hypokinesia of the left ventricular (LV) inferior and lateral walls—this was felt to result from limited pericardial adhesions; there were no other features of constriction. LV systolic function was mildly impaired with ejection fraction of 45%. Electrocardiography-gated CT revealed a large (14 × 8 × 12 cm), heterogeneous, contrast-enhancing, markedly calcified pericardial lesion along with the left heart extending into the LA walls, occluded left pulmonary veins and small bilateral pleural effusions . Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging, performed for further tissue characterization, confirmed a large (14 × 7 × 14 cm) solid pericardial mass extending along the anterior and lateral LV walls, invading the LA with adjacent intra-atrial thrombus . The mass was heterogeneous on T1W with fat saturation , enhanced after Gadolinium administration and had low values on ADC map of diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . The left upper and lower pulmonary veins were invaded. There were satellite pericardial nodules along the right atrial wall and the coronary sinus and a separate nodule in the left cardiophrenic angle.
Initial differential entities included primary or metastatic calcification-prone tumour, among them a teratoma or metastatic osteosarcoma. Secondary calcification due to haemorrhage after previous biopsy and other pathologies, such as tuberculous pericarditis were considered.
The benign nature was excluded after CT and CMR showed tumorous tissue plane invasion, pleural effusion, contrast enhancement, and satellite nodules. Moreover, the tuberculosis screen was negative, and abdominal ultrasound study was unremarkable. Due to predominant pericardial location, a primary pericardial malignancy was suggested.
As the previous biopsy was unsuccessful, thoracoscopy was performed to remove the left cardiophrenic angle nodule. Histopathology revealed a well-vascularised tumour, formed by polymorphic spindle-shaped cells with a moderate amount of cytoplasm, large oval nuclei, frequent mitoses, some of which were atypical. There were wide necrotic areas and foci of osteogenic differentiation. Immunohistochemistry was positive for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and negative for CD34, S100, smooth muscle actin (SMA), CK20, BCL-2, Anti-TLE, and CD99 . The final pathological diagnosis was thus a primary pericardial sarcomatoid mesothelioma. The tumour anatomically was too advanced for surgical removal and, after multidisciplinary discussion, appointment with an oncologist regarding chemotherapy was scheduled. During the admission, the patient was treated with dexamethasone (1 mg/day) and diuretics orally (torasemide 20 mg/day and spironolactone 25 mg/day). A week after the histopathological diagnosis, patient’s condition worsened due to a development of a left lower lobe pneumonia, which responded well to antibacterial treatment (Sulfamethoxazole–Trimethoprim 400/80 mg/b.i.d.). However, several days later, the patient experienced an acute severe abdominal pain and was diagnosed with peritonitis due to a perforated peptic ulcer (confirmed by esophagogastroduodenoscopy), which may have had developed after long-term dexamethasone treatment. Patient underwent abdominal surgery but passed away due to sepsis 2 days later.