A 39-year-old woman visited the neuro-ophthalmologic clinic with intermittent binocular vertical diplopia, oscillopsia, and dizziness. She complained that these symptoms occurred 3–4 times over the past 1–2 months and resolved spontaneously within an hour. However, the symptoms persisted at presentation.
Her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/32 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination demonstrated cortical and posterior capsular lenticular opacities in both eyes. Although ductions and versions were normal, she demonstrated 6 prism diopters (PD) of right hypertropia and downbeat nystagmus . Hypertropia was concomitant, even with the head tilt test. Downbeat nystagmus was observed in all gazes, but was slightly suppressed on upward gaze. On funduscopic examination, mild incyclotorsion was detected on her right eye . All other neurological examinations revealed nonspecific findings.
She had a past medical history of bipolar disorder treated with lithium 600–900 mg per day for the past 6 years. Two months before her first visit, her daily dose of lithium was increased to 1200 mg to control her bipolar symptoms. Her other medications comprised quetiapine 175 mg/day, clonazepam 1 mg/day, valproate 1250 mg/day, lamotrigine 200 mg/day, propranolol 40 mg/day, topiramate 50 mg/day, and ziprasidone 40 mg/day. She had no history of alcohol abuse or relevant viral infection.
Interestingly, she experienced improvement in diplopia and oscillopsia just after consuming sports drinks or receiving intravenous fluid therapy. Therefore, we repeated the ophthalmic examination 20 min after she consumed sports drinks, and we confirmed that the nystagmus and hypertropia subsided after ingesting sports drinks.
Her evaluation plan included brain magnetic resonance image (MRI), laboratory work-up, and consultation with a psychiatrist to assess the possibility of lithium-induced side effects. Her serum lithium level was 0.8 mEq/L (therapeutic range: 0.6–1.0 mEq/L), and there was no evidence of electrolyte imbalance. The serum levels of sodium, potassium, calcium, and chloride were normal, and the vitamin B12 level was also normal.
After the psychiatric consultation, the lithium dosage was reduced 600 mg and then stopped within 1 week. However, the patient refused further exams, including brain MRI. Six days after cessation of lithium, downbeat nystagmus and right hypertropia completely resolved, and her symptoms did not recur over a period of 1 year. The patient provided written informed consent for publication.