A 62-year-old man with a past history of severe fibrotic lung disease requiring long-term oxygen therapy was hospitalised with typical angina pain with no resolution despite sublingual glyceryl trinitrate use. ECG demonstrated dynamic anterolateral ST depression with T wave inversion in anterior and lateral leads . High-sensitivity troponin I assays (normal: < 5 ng/L) measured 99 and 250 ng/L. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a left ventricle ejection fraction of 52% and anterolateral hypokinesis (video ) with a high likelihood of pulmonary hypertension (estimated systolic PA pressure 110 mmHg), indicating likely group III pulmonary hypertension (secondary to hypoxic lung disease). The main PA diameter was measured at 5.0 cm . Cardiac catheterisation assessment as part of a lung transplant work-up 7 years earlier had shown no significant coronary disease with invasive measurements demonstrating only mild pulmonary hypertension (mean systolic PA pressure 30 mmHg). The differential diagnosis included pulmonary thromboembolism and pulmonary/aortic dissection, although the clinical picture was most consistent with acute MI. The patient was commenced on pharmacological treatment for non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. In view of the significant lung disease, an initial conservative approach was taken, but after continual chest pain despite optimal medical therapy, invasive coronary angiography was necessitated. The transradial coronary angiogram showed a tight narrowing of the LMCA ostium . The smooth tapering appearance raised the possibility of external compression. This was subsequently confirmed with the use of intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) which showed dynamic external compression of LMCA with a slit-like lumen and absence of atheroma (, video )—suggesting that the patient had developed a type 2 NSTEMI due to demand ischaemia. A gated CT scan confirmed normal origin and course of the LMCA; however, it was compressed by a grossly dilated PA measuring 58 mm (normal ~30 mm) at its maximal diameter , compared to 33 mm 7 years ago .
The patient was not felt to be a suitable candidate for surgery and underwent IVUS-guided percutaneous coronary intervention with a 5 × 20 mm everolimus drug-eluting stent deployed directly without any predilatation. Postdeployment, IVUS confirmed a well-apposed stent (video ) with resolution of extrinsic compression and restoration of the LMCA lumen . The patient was rendered pain free and discharged home after a short period of observation and remained angina free on subsequent follow-up.