A 23-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department (ED) of Careggi Hospital, Florence, in a comatose state after the ingestion of two e-cigarette refills. Immediately after the ingestion of the e-liquid, the patient had a sudden loss of consciousness with vomiting, followed by bradycardia and respiratory muscle paralysis. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was started few minutes later by a neighbor (an anesthesiologist doctor). After 20 min, the patient found unconscious but with a pulse by the emergency team of physicians, underwent orotracheal intubation and was later admitted to the ED.
At the time to the arrival to the ED, the patient was hemodynamically stable with no need for vasoactive drugs (blood pressure 130/80 mm Hg, pulse 80 bpm). The blood gas analysis was as follows: pH 7.3, pCO2 43 mm Hg, pO2 120 mm Hg, BE: – 0.4 mmol/L, cHCO3: 24, SpO2 97%, and FiO2 0.3. He underwent gastric lavage with retrieval of a brownish viscose liquid. Liquid paraffin was administered by the same route given the oily nature of the xenobiotic ingested. The first blood sample, collected at about 2 hr postnicotine ingestion and tested for nicotine and cotinine concentration by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (lc-ms/ms), showed a peak value of plasmatic nicotine of 1,900 µg/L, while the cotinine peak value was 2,100 µg/L . No positivity to other drugs was detected. A brain computed tomography (CT) showed no signs of brain edema or other signs of severe hypoxic encephalopathy, with a gray matter/white matter (GM/WM) ratio = 1.32 . The patient was thus admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a Glasgow coma scale ≤ 3 but with the bilateral presence of the pupillary reflex. After the admission to the ICU, an echocardiographic assessment and electrocardiogram (ECG) were performed, showing normal findings. The oxygenation index was good (P/F > 300). During ICU stay, the patient remained hemodynamically stable and no arrhythmic events were detected on ECG monitoring. At about 7 hr after coma onset, an electroencephalogram (EEG), recorded in the absence of sedation, and somatosensory evoked potentials (SEPs) were performed, showing a nonreactive near-continuous low-voltage pattern and the bilateral presence with normal voltage of the cortical response (N20) (SEP pattern NN), respectively. At 24 hr after coma onset, EEG became continuous with normal voltage and with inconstant reactivity , and SEPs still showed a NN pattern .
Four days after coma onset, the patient lost the pupillary reflexes. At this time, the cortical SEP responses became pathological/absent (PA; Figure ) and the EEG became suppressed and areactive . On the same day, a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, revealing the presence of severe and diffuse cytotoxic edema. In particular, a diffuse hyperintensity was observed bilaterally in the parieto-occipital lobes and at the level of the frontal lobes on diffusion-weighted imaging and on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery-weighted imaging . A reduced diffusion measured with apparent diffusion coefficient was also detected. At last, a transcranial Doppler examination documented symmetrical flow acceleration of all arteries of the base, indicating hyperinflow. The day after, an isoelectric EEG pattern and an absent/absent (AA) cortical SEP pattern were detected in the presence, however, of the bilateral lemniscal wave, generated at the bulbar level. Nine days after coma onset, the patient showed the loss of respiratory drive and evolved toward BD.
We confirm that we have read the journal's position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines.