A 54-year-old woman with a complex medical history including cerebral palsy, Crohn’s disease, and transfusion-dependent iron deficiency anemia experienced bilateral pulmonary embolism. Following thrombectomy, the administration of pharmacologic anticoagulation resulted in gastrointestinal bleeding and a substantial need for blood transfusions. Therefore, a retrievable IVCF was implanted as a preventive measure against recurrent pulmonary embolism. Three years later, the patient experienced generalized weakness and bilateral lower extremity pain. Physical examination revealed noticeable swelling and pain in both lower extremities, particularly upon calf compressions. Overnight, her hemoglobin level dropped from 8.5 g/dL to 7.8 g/dL. A diagnostic CT abdomen study with intravenous contrast revealed an adherent thrombus within and above an indwelling IVCF . Endovascular thrombectomy and removal of the IVCF was planned.
The patient was moderately sedated and placed supine. Access was gained to the right internal jugular vein using a 21G micropuncture kit (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN). A 5F Berenstein catheter (Merit Medical Systems Inc., South Jordan, UT) was advanced through a 6F vascular sheath and used to direct a 0.035-inch hydrophilic-coated guidewire (Glidewire, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN) beyond the IVCF and into the left common iliac vein. The catheter was exchanged for a 5F Omni Flush catheter (AngioDynamics, Queensbury, NY), through which a digital inferior venocavogram was performed, confirming the adherent nonocclusive thrombus surrounding the indwelling IVCF . The Omni Flush catheter was removed over a 0.035-inch super-stiff guidewire (Amplatz wire, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN), and the access site was sequentially dilated to 24F.
A 24F 50-cm long Inari Protrieve sheath with a 33.5 Nitinol funnel (Inari Medical Inc., Irvine, CA) was advanced over the wire and deployed superior to the IVCF in the hepatic IVC. The Protrieve sheath was placed proximal to the renal veins. The distal end of the sheath was then retracted, allowing the self-expanding nitinol mesh funnel to expand. This funnel exhibited proper apposition to the caval wall to effectively collect any emboli generated during the removal of the IVCF or IVC thrombectomy.
Due to the significant thrombus burden, the FlowTriever System (Inari Medical Inc., Irvine, CA), which consists of the Triever20 (T20) catheter and the FlowTriever catheter, was used to minimize both procedure time and blood loss. The T20 aspiration guide catheter was telescoped through the Protrieve sheath to aspirate the thrombus. The T20’s aspiration mechanism of action relies on the generation of a vacuum within the system by pulling back a 60-mL custom large-bore syringe (Inari Medical Inc., Irvine, CA) that was attached to a side port tubing connector of the sheath. Once established, the vacuum was released by opening the respective port and extracting possible thrombus via powerful suction into the syringe. Each 60-mL aspiration was followed by filtration of the blood with the FlowSaver Blood Return system with a 40-μm filter (Inari Medical Inc., Irvine, CA) and returned to the patient via the Protrieve sheath. Despite attempts to aspirate the thrombus connected to the filter, the filtration of the aspirated blood did not reveal any clots. As a result, the next approach focused on removing the thrombosed filter.
The attempts to remove the IVCF using a 20-mm gooseneck snare (Merit Medical Systems Inc., South Jordan, UT), advanced through a 9F sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN) within the 24F Protrieve sheath, proved to be unsuccessful. This revealed an embedded IVCF within the intimal layer of the IVC. Subsequently, the snare and 9F sheath were replaced with a 14F GORE® DrySeal sheath (Gore Medical, Newark, DE), which was positioned coaxially through the 24F sheath. An endobronchial forceps (Lymol Medical, Woburn, MA) was employed successfully to mobilize and grasp the filter . While attempting to extract the filter into the sheath, the filter detached from the forceps, leading to an incomplete removal. A 3-mm cloverleaf snare (Merit Medical Systems Inc., South Jordan, UT) was advanced through the sheath to retrieve and successfully extract the remaining filter fragments . Subsequently, both the filter and the 14F sheath were removed together.
Thrombus freed from the filter collected within the Protrieve funnel. Aspiration with the T20 aspiration guide catheter through the Protrieve sheath removed the trapped thrombus . Venocavogram was then performed from the lower IVC, demonstrating no residual thrombus or venous extravasation following filter and thrombus retrieval .
To address the ongoing need for an IVCF, the decision was made to proceed with the placement of a Bard Denali IVCF (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ). To accommodate the length requirements, the Protrieve sheath was replaced with a standard 24F Inari sheath (Inari Medical Inc., Irvine, CA). Subsequently, the delivery sheath of the Bard Denali IVCF was positioned over a wire and inserted into the IVC. The Bard Denali filter was then advanced through the delivery sheath and deployed in the infrarenal IVC. The delivery sheath was guided to the level of the filter, and a brief post-placement inferior venacavogram was performed to confirm the accurate positioning of the filter .
Following the removal of wires and sheaths, hemostasis was established at the right neck by employing a 0 Prolene pursestring suture and applying compression. A sterile dressing was applied. The patient tolerated the procedure well, experiencing no bleeding events and showing symptom improvement, and was discharged on post-procedure day three on apixaban. The scheduled one-month follow-up appointment to address IVCF removal was missed. Three months later, the patient’s primary care physician reported no recurrence of symptoms.