A 78-year-old man visited our hospital because a chest radiograph taken during his medical check-up showed a solitary nodular shadow in the right middle lung field. Five years ago, a rash appeared on both legs, and he was tested for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and syphilis (non-treponemal test) at a public health center; the results were negative. One year prior, a chest radiograph at his medical check-up showed no abnormalities. Six months prior, he developed a mild cough; however, there was no fever, weight loss, or sputum.
He smoked 20 cigarettes per day from 19 to 28 years of age, drank alcohol (sake 270 mL/day), and had no history of asbestos exposure or tuberculosis. He was sexually active with an unspecified number of people when he was about 35 years old but was not currently sexually active. He had two children, and his wife had no abnormalities noted in the screening test for syphilis (non-treponemal test) at the time of their children’s birth.
His body temperature was 35.8 °C, blood pressure was 159/75 mmHg, pulse rate was 99 beats/min, and respiration rate was 12 breaths/min with a peripheral capillary oxygen saturation level of 98% (room air). No skin rashes or erythema was observed. There were no abnormal lung sounds, heart sounds, or cranial neurological findings.
Blood test results were as follows: white blood cell count was 6700 /µL with 74.3% neutrophils, C-reactive protein level was 0.05 mg/dL, carcinoembryonic antigen level was 5.88 ng/mL (standard value: ≤5.0 ng/mL, cytokeratin 19 fragment level was 1.3 ng/mL (≤ 3.5 ng/mL, progastrin-releasing peptide level was 66.0 pg/mL (< 46.0 pg/mL), and (1,3)-beta-d-glucan level was < 4.0 pg/mL (≤ 20.0 pg/mL). Aspergillus antigen and cryptococcal antigen test results were negative, interferon-gamma release assays were negative, rapid plasma reagin (RPR) value was under 0.4 RPR Units (R.U.) (< 1.0 R.U.), Treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay (TPHA) value was 60 Titer Units (T.U.) (< 10 T.U.), and HIV antigen and antibody test results were negative.
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a 13-mm nodule with a cavity in S6 of the right lower lobe of the lung . The cavity wall was irregular and had a ground-glass opacity around it. 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) revealed a nodule with an internal cavity and FDG accumulation (standardized uptake values (SUV) max = 2.25). The right hilar lymph node also showed FDG accumulation (SUVmax = 2.84) .
Lung cancer (clinical stage: cT1bN1M0) was suspected, and a robot-assisted right lower lobectomy with lymph node dissection was performed. Pathological examination revealed that the nodules were bronchiolocentric lesions, and inflammatory changes with lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and deposition of hyalinized collagen fibers with focal organizing pneumonia were noted. The cavity found on CT showed a dilated bronchiole with erosion. Immunohistochemistry (T. pallidum, polyclonal antibody, BioSource International, Inc, Hopkinton, MA, USA) revealed T. pallidum within necrotic debris in the cavity and inside macrophages around the inflammatory nodules. Cancer was not diagnosed, and no fungal or acid-fast bacillus infections were observed . The lymph nodes showed reactive lymphadenopathy, and immunostaining was negative for syphilis. We diagnosed the patient with secondary syphilis with pulmonary involvement based on the positive serological TPHA levels and immunostaining results.
The patient received intramuscular benzathine benzylpenicillin (2.4 million Units), which was repeated 3 weeks later.
There was no recurrence of the disease; the RPR value was 0.3 R.U. and the TPHA value was 41.9 T.U. 6 months after antibiotic treatment.