A 49-year-old man was admitted to our hospital presented with 1 month of limb numbness and developed pinprick-like pain in the posterior neck and unsteady gaits 7 days ago. Neurological examination on admission revealed brisk deep tendon reflexes and positive Babinski’s sign. Results of the rest of the neurological examination were normal. He had no underlying health problems other than type 2 diabetes. MRI of the cervical spine showed an abnormal signal with aberrant reinforcement at medulla oblongata and the level of C1-C7 . No obvious abnormalities were found on thoracic spine and optic nerves . CSF examination revealed total protein 664 mg/L (normal value 150–450), albumin 394 mg/L (normal value 100–300), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 25 U/L (normal value <40), IgG 64.2 mg/L (normal value ≤ 58.6), IgA 8.2 mg/L (normal value ≤ 7.0). The autoantibodies associated with paraneoplastic neurological syndrome were not detected. Tumor markers detection showed Cytokeratin fragment 19 was slightly high. Therefore, he was clinically diagnosed as longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) (antibody-negative). Steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone, 1 g starting, halving every 3 days, 120 ending) was administered after which patient improved and was discharged on oral prednisolone for maintenance .
One month later, he developed limb weakness, inability to walk, severe pain in the posterior occiput, back, and waist, incontinence of urine and feces, accompanied with fever. Neurological examination revealed decreased muscle strength, increased muscle tone, hypesthesia and ataxia. MRI showed a new lesion in the thoracic myelon . We launched a new cascade of Steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone, 500 mg starting, halving every 3 days, 40 mg ending). But it did not improve his symptoms, which was confirmed objectively by MRI .
After consultation with radiology and neurosurgery neoplastic lesions like glioma were considered. Vertebral microscopic resection and the postoperative pathology manifested aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma (non-germinal center), corresponding with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was positive for Lymphocyte common antigen (LCA) and cluster differentiation (CD) 20 . Positron Emission Computed Tomography (PET/CT) showed hypermetabolic lesions from medulla oblongata to the cervical cord, ruling out the existence of systemic diseases. The final diagnosis is PISCL (3 months post illness onset). His disease process is listed as Fig. .
Then he was treated with combination chemotherapy regimens including 8 cycles of high-dose methotrexate (HD-MTX, 3.5 g/m2) and rituximab (RTN, 375 mg/m2)between October 20, 2020, and April 9, 2021. The patient breathed a sigh of relief as indicated by the MRI . The efficacy was evaluated as partial remission in March 2021. Next he underwent radiation therapy in the tumor area between May 2021 and June 2021. The follow-up MRI showed changes after treatment with no relapses, after which he just received palliative care. Unfortunately, pulmonary, abdomen and lymph nodes metastases were detected when he was readmitted to the hospital because of edema of both lower limbs in March 2023. He was treated with 2 cycles chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide 1000 mg + vindesine 3 mg + etoposide 0.12 g + prednisone 100 mg), resulting in very little success. At this time, he was bedridden with upper extremity muscle strength level 5- and lower extremity muscle strength level 0. Eventually, he accepted zanubrutinib for targeted therapy and a longer follow-up period was required to fully determine its effectiveness.