The patient was a 50-year-old man who had been followed up at a local clinic due to hypertension, type 2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hyperuricemia, fatty liver, and obesity. His medications included valsartan, voglibose, bezafibrate, and febuxostat. Although proteinuria was noted at an annual health checkup five years previously, proteinuria was not detected at the subsequent health checkup. Then, hyperproteinemia (9 g/dl), a high gamma globulin level, and κ Bence-Jones protein (BJP) positivity were noted, and he was referred to the hematology department of Mie University Hospital one year previously. Bone marrow aspiration showed 5% plasma cells, which did not lead to a diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Since he had persistent proteinuria, he was referred to the nephrology department and admitted for close examination.
His height was 170 cm, his body weight was 97.5 kg, and his body mass index was 33.7. His blood pressure was 151/103 mmHg. Although a physical examination did not reveal any obvious enlarged lymph nodes or hepatosplenomegaly, computed tomography (CT) showed mildly enlarged cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, mediastinal, para-aorta, hepatic portal, and bilateral inguinal lymph nodes, splenomegaly, and fatty liver. Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed mild accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, and inguinal lymph nodes. His laboratory data are shown in Table . His urinary protein level was 0.84 g/g⋅Cr without occult blood, and urine immunofixation showed BJP-κ type. Serum immunofixation showed IgG-κ type, and the blood immunoglobulin free light chain κ/λ ratio was also elevated .
Kidney biopsy showed 24 glomeruli, of which 2 showed global sclerosis, 2 showed segmental sclerosis, and 1 collapsed. Tubulointerstitial damage was observed in 10–20% of patients. There was an increase in mesangial cells and matrix without nodular lesions under light microscopy . No obvious spike formation was observed under high magnification with periodic acid methenamine silver staining . An immunofluorescence study showed granular deposits of IgG and C3 on the capillary wall and weak positivity for C1q . IgG3 was predominant among the IgG subclasses, and intraglomerular κ and λ staining was negative for κ and positive for λ . Direct fast scarlet staining was negative. Electron microscopy revealed lumpy deposits without a fibrillar structure in the subepithelial area .
Based on the above findings, a diagnosis of membranous nephropathy-type PGNMID was made. Considering that hypertension and obesity-related hyperfiltration may have contributed to the urinary protein, he was treated with sodium restriction and body weight loss in addition to valsartan (40 mg, daily) . Since his proteinuria increased gradually over the three years, oral prednisolone (30 mg, daily) was initiated, which led to a decrease in proteinuria. Valsartan was changed to azilsartan (40 mg, daily), and teneligliptin (20 mg, daily) was initiated. Oral prednisolone was gradually tapered to a dose of 10 mg per day, and his proteinuria was 0.88 g/g⋅Cr with the use of azilsartan (40 mg daily, canagliflozin (100 mg, daily), and esaxerenone (1.25 mg, daily).