The patient was a nondiabetic 29-year-old female of mixed racial ancestry with a history of recurrent urinary tract infections. She denied other comorbidities. She was referred to our hospital from another healthcare facility with a sonografically confirmed diagnosis of liver abscess and staghorn stone in the right kidney. She had been treated with intravenous metronidazole for 2 weeks before referral for a suspected amebic liver abscess without improvement. On admission, she complained of moderate pain in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen and of a mild to moderate fever for the past 3 weeks. The patient denied any history of renal colic, the passing of urinary stones, or any gastrointestinal symptoms. On physical examination, the patient was in apparently preserved general condition, axillary temperature of 38.2 °C, no conjunctival jaundice, marked tenderness in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen on deep palpation. Blumberg negative. Laboratory analysis showed mild anemia, leukocytosis of 12.7 K/µL. Serum biochemistry parameters, particularly aminotransferases and total bilirubin, were within normal range. Serum creatinine was 0.9 mg/dL. HIV 3rd Generation ELISA antibody testing was negative. Urinalysis showed moderate bacteriuria. Urine cultures were positive for Proteus spp. with a colony count of 100,000 CFU/mL. Strain serotyping was not performed. Blood cultures obtained prior to the initiation of antibiotic therapy were negative. Serial microscopic examinations of concentrated stool samples did not reveal any ova or vegetative forms of any parasite.
Abdominal ultrasound of the right upper quadrant showed a solitary hypoechoic lesion measuring 2.7 × 1.8 × 1.5 cm surrounded by an enhancing rim located in the right hepatic lobe segments adjacent to the right kidney . The kidney was decreased in size (longitudinal axis = 7.5 cm), accompanied by parenchymal thinning. In projection to the central zone, a staghorn calculi occupying the renal pelvis and calyces (acoustic shadows) can be appreciated. Zooming in on the area of the lesion , it was possible to follow the path of the infection process [arrows 1, 2, and 3], which appears to have started in the middle third of the right kidney [arrow 1], passing through the renal capsule [arrow 2], the perirenal fat [PRF], and finally penetrating Glisson's capsule [arrow 3] and the liver parenchyma. The gallbladder was reported to be unremarkable. No dilatation of the biliary tree was observed. The left kidney measured 9.6 cm in its longitudinal axis and its appearance was echographically within the normal range. The cross-sectional CT showed a hepatic abscess, most likely in segment VI of the liver, surrounded by an area of intermediate density corresponding to the hypoechoic rim seen on ultrasound. The coronal CT scan showed a staghorn stone in the right kidney. In both views, the perirenal fat was part of the inflammatory area, forming a heterogeneous mass involving the adjacent renal parenchyma and hepatic abscess.
The patient was treated empirically with a combination of 1 g/IV meropenem every 8 h and 500 mg/IV amikacin every 12 h. As the results of the urine culture and the antibiotic susceptibility test showed good sensitivity of the isolated bacteria against both antimicrobials, the ongoing therapy was continued for 22 days and 10 days, respectively.
Complete remission of symptoms was achieved after the first week of therapy. A repeat ultrasound scan after 3 weeks of antibiotic treatment showed complete resolution of the abscess . The patient was discharged from hospital without symptoms and referred to the urology outpatient clinic for further management.