A 58-year-old female patient presented to our hospital in November 2021 with jaundice, yellow sclera, paroxysmal pain in the left upper abdomen, itching, fatigue, tea-like urine, and weight loss of 1.5 kg.
The patient developed symptoms 2 mo ago with recurrent upper left abdominal pain.
The patient underwent surgery for cholecystolithiasis 10 years ago.
The patient had no similar family history or genetic history of the disease.
Physical examination on admission revealed yellow discoloration of the skin and sclera, no chest deformity, and cardiac sound in the right chest. The abdomen was soft, while the upper abdomen was tender. There was no rebound tenderness or muscle tension. The liver and spleen were not palpable under the rib edge, and the activities of both lower limbs were unremarkable.
Preoperative auxiliary examinations were as follows: Total bilirubin 126.2 μmol/L (normal range: 3.4-20.5 μmol/L); Direct bilirubin 97.2 μmol/L (normal range: 0-6.8 μmol/L); Indirect bilirubin 29.2 μmol/L (normal range: 3.1-14.3 μmol/L); Aspartate aminotransferase 19.0 U/L (normal range: 13-40 U/L); Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 28.0 U/L (normal range: 7-45 U/L); Alkaline phosphatase 255 U/L (normal range: 50-135 U/L); Abnormal prothrombin 76.60 ng/mL (normal range: 0-40 ng/mL); Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 197.96 U/mL (normal range: 0-37.00 ng/mL). Other blood biochemical indexes were within the normal range.
The chest X-ray exposed that the right heart was mirrored . Multi-slice spiral computed tomography CT (MSCT) revealed complete transposition of the thoracic and abdominal viscera, as well as a tumor in the lower segment of the common bile duct, with minimal intestinal obstruction. The intrahepatic bile duct, extrahepatic bile duct, and pancreatic duct were dilated, and cholecystolithiasis with chronic cholecystitis was diagnosed . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed, and the tissue was taken for pathological biopsy; the results showed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed intraluminal growth of cholangiocarcinoma in the lower part of the common bile duct with dilatation of the bile duct and pancreatic duct.
Postoperative histological results were as follows: (1) Well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the common bile duct with invasion of the duodenal wall. No vascular tumor thrombus and nerve invasion were identified; (2) There were no signs of malignancy in the gastric, duodenal, and pancreatic margins; (3) Each of the 6 Lymph nodes manifested reactive hyperplasia; and (4) Cholecystolithiasis with chronic cholecystitis.5. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CDX-2, cytokeratin (CK) 7 and CK19 .