A 70-year-old male who had been undergoing HD for 10 years for diabetic nephropathy was referred to our department with a left renal tumor. CT showed a 33 × 37 mm hypervascular tumor in the upper pole of the left kidney. The patient was diagnosed with RCC and underwent laparoscopic left nephrectomy. The pathological diagnosis was clear cell carcinoma, the histological grade was 2 according to the Fuhrman classification, pT1a, and the resection margins were negative . His Karnofsky Performance Status score was 90. Six months after, right pubic sciatic metastasis and multiple lung metastases were detected using CT. The patient was diagnosed with metastatic RCC of intermediate risk group using the International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium risk classification and treatment of pazopanib (400 mg/day) was started. Radiotherapy at a total dose of 50 Gy was administered to the pubic bone metastases. After 6 months of pazopanib treatment, CT revealed increased lung metastases. Nivolumab (480 mg/4 weeks) was started as second-line therapy and was effective in maintaining the shrunken size of the lung metastases for 17 months. The right renal tumor mass was diagnosed as RCC, and the patient underwent right laparoscopic nephrectomy. The pathological diagnosis was acquired cystic disease associated RCC. The histological grade was 3, pT1a, and the resection margins were negative . Six months after, an enlarged left subclavian lymph node appeared, and axitinib was initiated as third-line therapy. Axitinib was effective for 9 months; however, multiple lung metastases progressed and nivolumab was restarted as fourth line therapy, which retained the metastases size for 6 months. Since the patient's clinical status was stable and not detected any progression on CT, we diagnosed that the best response of this fourth line nivolumab was SD. Hypophysitis was observed during treatment with fourth line nivolumab; however, nivolumab treatment was carefully continued along with hydrocortisone (10 mg/day) supplementation. Lung metastases, new pleural seeding and massive pleural effusions were observed after 6 months of the fourth line nivolumab treatment. Thoracentesis, thoracic drainage, and pleurodesis were then performed. The patient and his family decided to provide the best supportive care instead of further medication. He spent 4 months at home on HD, visited a local hospital three times a week, died of respiratory failure due to multiple lung metastases. After obtaining consent from the patient's family, a post mortem examination was performed. The left thoracic cavity was highly adherent, and grayish-white nodules that completely occupied the tumor tissue were observed. The right lung contained effusion. Autopsy findings of the metastases were all clear cell carcinomas, suggesting that the metastases originated from the initial clear cell carcinoma . In the present case, the patient was safely treated with nivolumab for 24 months without CTCAE ver.5 grade 3 or higher AE and treatment showed efficacy . The staining of CD8 has been performed in the primary and metastatic lesions, and it showed that both of the lesions had scarce staining of CD8 .