A 63-year-old man attended our hospital with heavy abdominal pain in January 2016. The CT revealed a mass with elevation of tissue fascia and free air near the cecum . Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with perforation of the cecal diverticulum, and open drainage and construction of ileostomy was performed. After 3 months, the patient received right hemicolectomy and closure of the ileostomy. We did not detect the mass from the resected specimen , and pathological examination revealed no malignancy.
The patient experienced a palpable mass in the left abdomen from May 2017 and attended our department in December 2017. The enhanced CT revealed a 38-mm mass, resembling a dyeing ring in the left rectus abdominis muscle. The mass was located near the scar of ileostomy closure . The size of hernia orifice from the epigastrium to the pubic bones was approximately 20 cm.
After 4 months, the MRI revealed a 40-mm mass in the left rectus abdominis muscle. T2 weighted image showed a low intensity area similar to muscle , and the tumor was uniformly enhanced .
We performed endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and fine needle aspiration of the mass and reached the pathological diagnosis of desmoid tumor. Because the patient had pain at the mass and at the point of abdominal incisional hernia, we planned resection of the abdominal desmoid tumor and repair of incisional hernia.
We performed a midline incision similar to the previous scar and cut a spindle shape around the mass at 2-cm margin from the mass . There was no exposure of the tumor at the abdominal side. We used the Harmonic ScalpelTM (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati) to cut the muscle to prevent bleeding . Next, we removed the rectus abdominis muscle from the left lateral end. The abdominal wall defect measured 10 cm × 10 cm . The hernia was repaired with a simple closure using anterior layer of rectus sheath and the defect was closed by suturing the right anterior layer of rectus sheath to the left aponeurosis of external oblique muscle . Considering the risk of recurrence of abdominal wall hernia at the defect site, we decided to repair the defect with autologous fascia. We used a fascia lata patch measuring 15 cm × 5 cm to repair the defect in the left abdomen ( and –).
The size of the mass was 45 mm × 45 mm, and it was a solid tumor. The macroscopic view of the resected tumor revealed its whitish color . Pathological analysis revealed the growth of fibroblasts, defect of the nuclear heteromorphism, and presence of abundant collagen fibers between fibroblasts . Additionally, a nuclear-positive image of β-catenin was observed on immunostaining . The pathological diagnosis was desmoid-type fibromatosis. No recurrence of incisional hernia and desmoid tumor was detected 22 months after surgery.