A 54-year-old female patient presented to the neurosurgical emergency department, brought by her family, who described a history of rapid and progressive mental confusion (starting around two months earlier, with significant worsening over the last two weeks), leading to complete dependence for basic daily activities such as baths and eating. The only significant condition in her medical history was hypertension. One relevant social factor was that she had grown up on a farm and had had direct contact with several bird species including pigeons.
General and neurological physical examinations revealed that the patient was normotensive but in a poor general condition, was only able to obey simple orders, was restricted to bed (gait was not evaluated because the patient presented general weakness), seemed not to have any motor deficits and did not have any cranial nerves alterations or meningeal signs. It was difficult to perform a complete neurological examination because of her general condition. Based on her history and physical examination, she was categorized as having a score of 50 on the Karnofsky performance scale (KPS).
An MRI scan performed on the patient a few days before this evaluation was brought with her and this showed two left occipital lesions surrounded by edema. She did not have any other systemic impairment. It was decided to perform surgery to resect these lesions, which had a macroscopic appearance of a solid component with more gelatinous pseudocyst areas inside. A quick check-up was performed, through laboratory tests, including a complete blood count before surgery, chest radiography and an electrocardiogram, and it did not show any abnormalities. Gross total removal was achieved and postoperative computed tomography (CT) scans were performed . In addition, samples from the lesion were sent for histopathological analysis . The result revealed that the lesion consisted of cryptococcoma. Because of this result, a more precise investigation was performed. The patient was found not to have either HIV or hepatitis (both tests were performed twice) or any other immunocompromised conditions. In addition, chest and abdominal CT scans were normal.
After the operation, the patient showed some neurological improvement and, after some days, a lumbar puncture was performed to evaluate the presence of meningitis. The presence of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) infection was confirmed (large numbers of specimens of Cryptococcus neoformans were observed in the samples, along with increased protein levels). Before the puncture, a brain CT scan was performed to rule out any signs of intracranial hypertension or any alteration that might make it impossible to perform this procedure. All punctures revealed increased intracranial pressure (ICP) that progressively worsened (the highest value was 29 cmH2O), but she did not present hydrocephalus.
Initially, ventriculoperitoneal shunt was not proposed, but when it was noticed that the ICP levels were progressively increasing and the procedure was indicated, she was seen to present a poor general condition with significant clinical impairment. Proper antifungal treatment consisting of amphotericin B (AmB) and fluconazole was administered, in association with clinical support, because she presented renal failure due to use of many drugs and required hemodialysis. However, despite optimal clinical treatment in the intensive care unit (ICU), comprising antifungal drugs, broad-spectrum antibiotics against pneumonia, electrolyte replacement, hemodialysis and respiratory physiotherapy, the patient’s condition evolved to death due to various complications, including the initial disease, the toxicity of the various medications and bronchoaspiration leading to sepsis.