A 71-year-old male with a past medical history of hypertension presented to our community emergency department (ED) transported by emergency medical services (EMS) with the chief complaints of chest pain, difficulty breathing, back pain, and weakness of both lower extremities. He had an abrupt onset of chest pain, described as a sharp and stabbing pain, while using his rototiller in the garden, 6 h prior to arrival. His symptoms continued to progress to the point that he was having difficulty breathing and starting to have trouble walking for which EMS was called. Per EMS, they noted rapidly progressing symptoms while en route to the ED. Vitals on arrival to the ED are as follows: 94.5 °F, blood pressure of 91/64 mmHg, heart rate of 109 beats/min, respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min, and 100% pulse oximetry on room air. On physical exam, he was toxic appearing, in acute distress, and diaphoretic. Jugular venous distention was present. Cardiopulmonary exam was notable for tachycardia, distant heart sounds, and the presence of bibasilar rales. His skin/lower extremities were pale, mottled, and he was unable to move them. Carotid pulses were 2+ bilaterally, radial pules 1+ bilaterally, femoral pulses 1+ bilaterally, with absent popliteal pulses. On neurological exam, he had dysarthric speech, left-sided facial droop, and loss of strength and sensation in his lower extremities.
The patient was placed on non-invasive positive pressure. Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia with premature atrial complexes, a right bundle branch block, with non-specific ST/T wave changes in the anterior leads. Portable chest radiography taken in an upright position demonstrated a widened mediastinum at about 10.5 cm. A bedside point of care cardiac ultrasound revealed a significant pericardial effusion. Computed tomography (CT) of the head without contrast was unremarkable for any acute process. Pertinent laboratory evaluation:
Hemoglobin of 9.2 (13.5–17 g/dL) Arterial blood gas: pH 7.01, pCO2 45, p02 116, HCO3 12 Initial lactic acid of 8.3 (0.5–2.2 mmol/L) that increased to 14.8 Blood/urea/nitrogen of 42 (8–22 mg/dL) Creatinine of 3.06 (0.6–1.4 mg/dL).
CT angiography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with and without intravenous contrast revealed a Stanford type A dissection with an intimal tear beginning at the level of the aortic root and extending throughout the course of the thoracic aorta and into the abdominal aorta . Additional findings on CT included involvement of the origins of the great vessels (brachiocephalic trunk, left common carotid artery, left subclavian artery). Hemopericardium is visualized with high suspicion for pericardial tamponade. There is dilation of the ascending thoracic aorta measuring up to 5.2 cm. The dissection continues distally to involve the left common iliac artery and bilateral external iliac arteries.
He was transferred emergently to a tertiary center and was taken immediately to the operating room for definitive repair. The patient underwent sternotomy, repair of Stanford type A dissection with right groin cannulation, and repair of the right femoral artery and vein. He arrived in the surgical intensive care unit in guarded condition, his sternotomy was left open secondary to severe coagulopathy intraoperatively, and he was on an epinephrine, norepinephrine, and vasopressin infusion. By day 2, continuous renal replacement therapy (CCRT) was initiated for acute tubular necrosis. Vascular surgery was consulted to evaluate a pulseless right lower extremity status post right femoral artery cannulation for cardiopulmonary bypass. Given the patient had an open sternotomy with five chest tubes with significant output requiring transfusion of multiple blood products throughout the night, vascular surgery could not perform a femoral-femoral bypass or axillofemoral bypass without heparinization.
By day 3, he underwent mediastinal irrigation and sternal closure with cardiothoracic surgery. He was then taken for a right common femoral endarterectomy, iliofemoral and lower extremity embolectomy, and right lower extremity four-compartment fasciotomy secondary to acute ischemia of the right lower extremity. In addition, neurosurgery evaluated the patient because he was not spontaneously moving his extremities after surgery and there was concern that the dissection had caused an infarction of his thoracic spinal cord, resulting in paraplegia. By day 4, he remained stuporous off sedation and on maximum pressor support (norepinephrine infusion at 30 mcg/min, epinephrine infusion at 10 mcg/min, and a vasopressin infusion at 0.04 units/min). He continued to have upper extremity non-epileptic myoclonic jerks secondary to continued renal failure. CT of the head revealed multiple 1 to 2 cm foci consistent with likely subacute infarcts related to embolic disease. By day 5, a family discussion was had regarding a poor neurological prognosis for independent neurological recovery with likely permanent cognitive and motor deficits. His code status was subsequently changed to do not resuscitate (DNR) with no further escalation of care. The patient continued to deteriorate throughout the night, became asystolic, and expired.