A forty-three year-old female presented with a one-day history of nausea, vomiting, and seven episodes of diarrhoea with lower abdominal pain. She also reported two-week history of fatigue, exertional dyspnoea, and a dry cough. She also noted paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, bilateral lower limb oedema, and facial oedema. On retrospective collateral history, there was also subtle difficulties with concentration and memory.
Her significant medical history included relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis, with previous autologous stem cell transplant (fludarabine and cyclophosphamide conditioning) three months earlier. In the past, she had also had prophylactic bilateral mastectomy and oophorectomy for a known BRCA gene mutation with family history of breast cancer; two uncomplicated pregnancies; endometriosis; post-traumatic stress disorder; and generalised anxiety disorder.
Her medications on admission included aciclovir (CMV prophylaxis) and nebulised pentamidine (PJP prophylaxis) in the post-autologous stem cell transplantation period, gabapentin and diazepam for generalised anxiety disorder, and Progynova for hormone replacement therapy.
On examination, temperature was 36.7 °C, blood pressure 160/95 mmHg, pulse rate 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 97% on ambient air. Examination was largely unremarkable other than mild non-pitting oedema in both ankles. Bedside urinalysis revealed mild blood and leukocytes.
Initial investigations revealed a newly raised creatinine of 142 μmol/L with an eGFR 39 mL/min/1.73m2 (baseline creatinine of 80 μmol/L and eGFR 79 mL/min/1.73m2, a year earlier). Her haemoglobin was 90 g/L (baseline 103 g/L, a month prior to presentation), platelet count 82 × 109/L (baseline 164 × 109/L), and white cell count 6.5 × 109/L. Tests of liver function and coagulation profile were normal. Random urine protein-to-creatinine ratio was 206.9 mg/mmol, and there were no dysmorphic red blood cells, casts, or crystals.
On Day 3, High-Resolution Chest CT (HRCT) showed multifocal consolidation in the right lower lobe of lung. She was initially managed on empirical antibiotics with intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam and gentamicin, as well as escalating to intravenous acyclovir. She eventually escalated to intravenous voriconazole and meropenem, with only mild response to her symptoms. All investigations were unable to culture any micro-organism, including from sputum, stool, multiple blood cultures, CMV PCR, and bronchiolar lavage.
Her kidney function continued to decline to a creatinine 266 μmol/L and eGFR 18 mL/min/1.73m2, despite usual supportive measures . A 24-h urinary excreted protein was 1.72 g/day, with urine volume 1500 mL. Autoimmune, vasculitis, and glomerulonephritis screen were all negative. From Day 4 of admission, there was a deterioration in her haemoglobin to 70 g/L, and platelet count to 67 × 109/L, with red cell fragments detected on blood film . Her haptoglobin was undetectable at < 0.08 g/L, with a raised reticulocytes to 288 × 109/L, and raised LDH to 529units/L.
On Day 13, a kidney biopsy showed marked mesangial expansion with mesangiolysis of the glomeruli, with some showing foci of fibrinoid necrosis and capillary thrombi. The renal arterioles showed fibrinoid necrosis and subendothelial expansion. The diagnosis of thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) was made.
Throughout this period, she developed persistent pulmonary oedema and bilateral pleural effusions. On Day 8, a transthoracic echocardiogram revealed moderate global systolic dysfunction (LVEF 40%) with mild-moderate mitral regurgitation. This would later deteriorate to moderate-severe segmental systolic left ventricular dysfunction (LVEF 35%) and severe systolic right ventricular dysfunction, along with severe pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary systolic pressure 53 mmHg).
She was commenced on TPE from Day 15–23 of admission, but despite initial rapid improvement in LDH, there was no improvement in her anaemia, thrombocytopenia, haptoglobin, and kidney function. Stool shiga toxin was negative. ADAMTS-13 activity was 58%. Complement studies showed C5 > 200 mg/mL, C6 100 mg/L, C7 110 mg/L, and C9 500 mg/L, C3 1.17 g/L, C4 0.25 g/L . Complement Factor I (CFI) and Complement Factor H (CFH) were in the normal range. Genetic analysis was performed using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) targeting entire coding regions of ADAMTS13, C3, CD46, CFB, CFH, CFHR1, CFHR2, CFHR3, CFHR5, CFI, DGKE, MMACHC, PIGA, and THBD genes; including ten base pairs of intronic flanking sequences. The NGS panel did not detect the presence of pathogenic variants. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was performed using SALSA® MLPA probe mix P236-A3 (provided by MRC-Holland), which detected heterozygous deletion encompassing the entire CFHR1 and CFHR3 genes. Soluble C5b9 and anti-CFH antibody testing was not yet available at the time of presentation in our institution.
The patient was diagnosed with atypical haemolytic-uremic syndrome (aHUS). As well as haematological and kidney manifestations, it was suspected her disease demonstrated cardiac, respiratory, gastrointestinal, and possibly neurological involvement. We postulate that the initial infection triggered complement over-amplification in the presence of potentially contributory gene variants based on the combination HRCT findings, temporal distance from other background risk factors (cancer, surgery, stem cell transplant, chemotherapy medications, pregnancies), high C5 levels, and heterozygous CFHR1/CFHR3 gene deletions.
On Day 24, she commenced anti-complement therapy with Eculizumab 900 mg weekly infusion (along with Meningococcal B and ACWY vaccines, and amoxycillin 250 mg BD for two weeks), with some initial improvement to her anaemia, thrombocytopenia, and kidney function.
Despite three weeks on eculizumab, she developed new clinical features of haemorrhagic cystitis in association with a new rhinovirus/enterovirus upper respiratory tract infection. Cystoscopy-guided bladder biopsy demonstrated active TMA . After intensification of eculizumab therapy to 900 mg twice weekly, it was observed that her haematuria greatly improved. CH50 was < 10% (undetectable), suggesting adequate complement suppression with eculizumab. However, persisting thrombocytopenia and ongoing cardiac failure in the presence of worsening left ventricular ejection fraction suggested refractory disease, prompting further eculizumab dose intensification to 1200 mg IV weekly.
Although CH50 level was already suppressed, eculizumab dose intensification was trialled in an attempt to control refractory disease. During this treatment period, her platelet count normalised by the third week, and stabilised during the period of eculizumab dose intensification to 1200 mg IV weekly through weeks 5–9. The haptoglobin normalised by the sixth week. Eventually, her other extra-renal (gastrointestinal, respiratory, neurological) manifestations finally improved, and by sixth week her left ventricular function normalised.
Despite extra-renal improvement (and after seven weeks of eculizumab therapy), her kidney function continued to deteriorate to a serum creatinine 565 μmol/L with eGFR 7 mL/min/1.73m2, and she was commenced on haemodialysis. Subsequent prognostic kidney biopsies on commencement of (and ten months into) haemodialysis revealed lesions of TMA, but now with widespread tubular interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy. Eventually the patient had her eculizumab infusions weaned to 1200 mg fortnightly, and completed two years of therapy. No further recurrence or progression of extra-renal aHUS was detected, and she converted to long-term peritoneal dialysis.
After three years on peritoneal dialysis, she proceeded to undergo a cadaveric kidney transplant. She was deemed low risk for disease recurrence based on genetic findings and did not qualify for prophylactic eculizumab. Anti-CFH auto-antibodies were repeated pre- and immediately post-transplant, which remained negative. At two years post-transplant, her progress has been uncomplicated and without recurrence of aHUS or need for eculizumab therapy, with a recent serum creatinine 82 μmol/L with eGFR 74 mL/min/1.73m2.