A 72-year-old man was referred from a local hospital with a 4-year history of swallowing difficulty which progressively worsened over time. He also had occasional episodes of aspiration. There was no history of neck trauma, headache, dysarthria, or gait problems. He was a known hypertensive but not a diabetic. He had a positive history of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) from a ruptured middle cerebral artery aneurysm, which was managed surgically (not clipped) at a local hospital 35 years before the present illness. Laryngeal endoscopy showed no obstructive lesion, however, videoendoscopy and videofluoroscopy revealed delayed swallowing reflex and occasional aspiration.
In our hospital, he was initially managed by the otorhinolaryngologists (ORL) as an outpatient. He developed left-sided tongue atrophy which progressively worsened during ORL follow-up. He was later referred to the neurologists who made a diagnosis of left HN palsy caused by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [Figures –] detected left vertebral artery (VA) compression of the medulla. Three-dimensional computed tomography angiography showed left PICA fusiform aneurysm . He was then referred to the neurosurgery service for microvascular decompression (MVD).
General physical examination was unremarkable. Neurological examination showed an alert elderly man with intact higher cerebral function. He had left tongue atrophy and impaired movement of the tongue. Other cranial nerves were intact. Sensorimotor system examination was normal and coordination was good. He was worked up for MVD after an informed consent was obtained.
The MVD was done through a left transcondylar fossa approach. Intraoperative findings were thickened arachnoid around the lower cranial nerves and fusiform aneurysm of the left PICA at its origin from the left VA which was severely adherent to and compressing the left HN rootlets . The HN rootlets were carefully dissected from the aneurysm wall [Figure and ]. The PICA with the aneurysm was transposed caudally and anchored to the dura with three pieces of oxidized cellulose and fibrin glue . The PICA aneurysm looked difficult to clip and wrapping was not done for fear of inducing further inflammatory response and worsen the adhesions around the already dysfunctional HN. No complications were encountered during the procedure.
Postoperatively, the patient's preoperative neurological status was preserved. MR Angiogoraphy showed anterior medullary segment of PICA was successfully transpositioned without stenosis [Figure and ]. There was no objective improvement in his tongue atrophy at 1-year follow-up, however, there was subjective progressive improvement in his tongue movement and swallowing. MRI done at 1-year follow-up was not significantly different from the immediate postoperative MRI. Videoendoscopy and fluoroscopy, however, have remained the same.