The patient was a 75-year-old man with a history of hypertension, hypertensive cardiopathy, benign prostatic hyperplasia and right renal lithiasis requiring surgical lithotomy. In January 2013, during study for an upper digestive tract hemorrhage, a high-grade gastric gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) was diagnosed, with a spindle-cell pattern, and a duodenal neuroendocrine tumor, requiring total gastrectomy and esophageal-jejunal anastomosis. The extension study showed grade T4, N0, M0. He was treated with imatinib (400 mg/day) continuously for 6 mos. He had chronic kidney failure (serum creatinine 1.7–2.5 mg/dL) since 2010 and IgG kappa paraproteinemia detected in 2013.
In May 2015 he was admitted with rapid worsening of renal function, with serum creatinine of 5 mg/dL (in October 2014 it had been 1.7 mg/dL), proteinuria 524.79 mg/24 h and an IgG kappa monoclonal spike.
The proteinogram detected a monoclonal band in the gamma fraction with a monoclonal spike of 0.56 g/dL and IgG kappa on serum immunoelectrophoresis. Quantification of the free light chains showed kappa chains 962 mg/L, lambda chains 28.8 mg/L, and a free kappa/free lambda ratio of 33.4. Urine immunoelectrophoresis showed 36% monoclonal component, equivalent to 189 mg/24 h, and free kappa light chains.
Serum levels of immunoglobulin A (IgA) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) were within normal ranges, with a slight decrease in immunoglobulin M (IgM) (33 mg/dL). He had marked hypocomplementemia, with reductions in complement C3 (C3) (47 mg/dL) and complement C4 (C4) (22 mg/dL), and slightly raised levels of beta 2 microglobulin (14.4 mg/L). The other parameters were normal or negative.
Bone marrow aspirate showed 1.2% plasma cells with an abnormal phenotype, typical of myelomatous plasma cells, plus 0.2% normal phenotype plasma cells. The bone map showed a marked general reduction in bone density, with non-specific mid-spine vertebral wedging. Flow cytometry discarded monoclonal B-cell lymphoid proliferation.
Ultrasound-guided percutaneous kidney biopsy 6 days after admission showed alterations compatible with C3-GMN with no extracapillary proliferation. Under light microscopy the kidney biopsy showed 50% sclerosed glomeruli, with the rest having a lobular pattern with cell proliferation, a few cases with an endocapillary type and others mesangial, with isolated polymorphonuclear neutrophils; arterioles with focal subendothelial hyalinosis; and marked interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy . Periodic acid-Schiff staining showed focal double contour in most of the glomeruli . Immunofluorescence revealed intense mesangial positivity for C3 and negative for IgA, IgG, IgM, fibrinogen and kappa and lambda light chains . The biopsy sample for electron microscopy study only contained one glomerulus. As this was sclerosed we cannot consider the sample representative.
As the patient also had purpura-like lesions on the trunk and legs a skin biopsy, taken from the lumbar area, showed a perivascular lymphocyte infiltrate but no evidence of vasculitis, with deposits of C3 in the vessel walls .
Although the patient had no clear laboratory data for thrombotic microangiopathy (normal haptoglobin and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)), schistocytes (16 per 1000) and moderate thrombocytopenia were seen on the blood smear.
Given the severity of the clinical and histological picture the patient was treated with high-dose steroids (6-methylprednisolone 500 mg/day for 3 consecutive days) and plasmapheresis (8 complete plasma exchanges). Concomitantly, treatment was started with bortezomib 2 mg/day up to 5 doses, to reduce the production of monoclonal IgG kappa paraprotein and indirectly prevent the activation of the alternative complement pathway. After completing the first chemotherapy cycle with dexamethasone and bortezomib, we noticed a hematological response, with electrophoresis demonstrating disappearance of the monoclonal protein in the serum. The skin lesions have now disappeared. However, despite the treatment the patient is currently on predialysis (serum creatinine 4 mg/dL and glomerular filtration rate 14 mL/min), with proteinuria of 230 mg/24 h, C3 hypocomplementemia (41 mL/dL) and conserved diuresis.
The hospital ethics committee (CEI Provincial de Málaga) is aware of the case, which followed normal clinical practice, and has given its written consent. The patient also gave written informed consent for all the procedures and publication of the case.