A 28-year-old man complaining of acute hoarseness and tingling in his left upper and lower extremities was admitted to hospital. His past medical history revealed persistent frontal headache for the last 3 weeks. On admission the patient was nervous and slightly confused. Fever was not present, although the patient complained of flu-like symptoms 4 weeks before. On neurologic examination dysarthria, a left facial weakness, clumsiness in rapid alternating movements of the left hand and dysmetric finger-to-nose testing beside abnormalities in pain and temperature sensation on the left side were found. Cranial computed tomography (CCT) scan was normal. Routine laboratory examinations showed no abnormalities. Serum antibodies to neurotropic viruses, HIV, Treponema pallidum and Borrelia burgdorferi were not found. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contained inflammatory cells (32 lymphocytes/μl) and total CSF protein was elevated (930 mg/l). The glucose ratio was normal. Immunological studies and polymerase chain reactions for herpes simplex virus type 1, 2 and varicella-zoster virus were unobtrusive. Suspecting acute viral meningoencephalitis the patient was treated with aciclovir 3 × 750 mg/d. Within 24 hours after acute onset of focal neurologic symptoms remission of dysarthria was observed while the abnormal sensation and mild agitation were still present. Magnetic resonance (MR) scans performed 24 hours after acute onset of focal symptoms showed disseminated hyperintensities of the supratentorial grey and white matter with predominance in the right occipital region lacking enhancement after GdDTPA-injection . The MR-angiography was normal. The characteristics and location of these findings were not typical for acute disseminated encephalomyelitis or herpes simplex encephalitis. The follow-up MR scans showed an increase of white matter hyperintensities with enhancement after GdDTPA-injection. Repeated CSF analyses revealed no new aspects. During the hospital course only subfebrile body temperatures could be registered. Eight days after admission conventional angiography was considered but the patient developed severe disorientation and agitation. Within 12 hours he became unconscious and developed signs of transtentorial herniation. The emergency CCT-scan revealed massive generalized brain edema. Artificial ventilation was necessary. The patient was treated with steroids 2 × 1000 mg/d, but died 10 days after onset of his focal symptoms with signs of extensive brain stem dysfunction.
The postmortem examination revealed primary angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS) with focal granulomatous inflammation and partially thrombotic occlusion of leptomeningeal and cerebral arteries resulting in multiple acute infarction areas in the cerebrum. There was also a brisk acute hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy with diffuse eosinophilic neuronal injury (particularly in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, Purkinje cell layer, and olivary nucleus) leading to and sustaining a prominent swelling of the brain with terminal herniation and necrosis of the parahippocampal gyrus as well as tonsillar tissue. There was no deposition of amyloid beta protein (Abeta) in the brain parenchyma and vessel walls as revealed by immunohistochemistry for Abeta (6F/3D anti-Aβ monoclonal antibody to residues 8 – 17, dilution1:100, Dako). Outside the dural confines no signs of vasculitis or systemic disease were found.