A 53-year-old male was sent to Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taiwan, due to shortness of breath for ~ 2 weeks and pneumonia confirmed by chest X-ray. Disease history included sleep apnoea, coronary artery disease after percutaneous occlusion balloon angioplasty and medication controlled hypertension. SARS-CoV-2 was confirmed positive. With episodes of dyspnoea, progressive tachypnoea, paradoxical respiratory pattern and impaired consciousness, the patient was transferred to the ICU and intubated on March 28, 2020. EIT measurements were performed throughout the disease management to facilitate decision making. During invasive ventilation, EIT was used to titrate positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and body positioning. EIT was next used to manage the weaning support level, and finally to determine an appropriate flow rate for high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygen therapy.
The patient was ventilated under volume controlled mode with the following initial settings: tidal volume 400 ml, respiratory rate 20 /min, FiO2 1.0, PEEP 12 cmH2O. The peak and plateau pressures were 43 and 23 cmH2O, respectively. PaO2 was 229.0 mmHg and the measured respiratory system mechanics were: resistance 24.5 cmH2O/L/s, compliance 38.4 mL/cmH2O. Intrinsic PEEP of 0.7 cmH2O was observed. PEEP was adjusted to 10 cmH2O at a later time point. Chest X-ray showed infiltrates progressed in both lungs, and pleural effusion especially in the left lung (Additional file : Fig. S1 of the online supplement). Co-infection with other viruses was excluded. Medications and body temperature are summarized in the online supplement (Additional file : Fig. S2).
The protocol for EIT-guided PEEP titration increases pressure starting at 8 cmH2O with 2-min steps of 2 cmH2O till 20 cmH2O, and then decreases it with 2 cmH2O steps . At each step, fractions of regional collapse and overdistention are calculated and the PEEP level selected (12 cmH2O) at the intercept point, to provide the best compromise between collapsed and overdistended lung . PEEP was tapered gradually following this procedure of .
Continuous lateral rotation therapy was provided to the patient . Lateral (both left and right, ~ 40° with pillows) and supine positions were performed (~ 2 h for each position). A routine blood gas analysis after the left lateral position on April 1st indicated worsening of gas exchange. EIT revealed that ventilation in the left lung was much worse than the right lung . Twelve hours after stopping left lateral positioning (only right lateral and supine), PaO2 raised from 90 to 130 mmHg.
As the patient’s condition gradually stabilized, improvement of ventilation was observed . Nasal swab test for SARS-CoV-2 showed negative, the patient started to wean from ventilator on April 13. Automatic tubing compensation (ATC) was used for a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT). EIT was used to select a suitable support level with a previously described method . Three support levels were tested, namely ATC100%, ATC70% and ATC0%. The patient was first ventilated under assisted-control mode with PEEP of 8 cmH2O. SBT was started with ATC100% for 5 min, followed by ATC70% and ATC0% with PEEP kept at 8 cmH2O. The increase of intra tidal ventilation distribution towards dorsal regions was noted as the support level decreased from AC to ATC100% further to ATC70%. However, no further increase was observed when the level changed from ATC70% to ATC0%, indicated a possible fatigue of diaphragm (See Additional file : Fig. S3). ATC70% was considered as an adequate support level without overloading the work for respiratory muscles. The patient was successfully extubated after 18 days of invasive mechanical ventilation on April 15th.
After extubation, HFNC was provided and EIT used to select an appropriate flow rate (Precision flow, Vapotherm, NH, US. Figure d) and to test whether nasal cannula could be used instead of HFNC. The flow rate decreased from 25 to 5 L/min with steps of 5 L/min and 10 min of each step. Respiratory rate was the lowest and end-expiratory lung impedance (corresponding to lung volume) was the highest at 15 L/min, at which the patient reported being most comfortable. As the patient’s condition improved, he was transferred to general ward on April 18th.