A 42-year old woman consulted the Centre for Ophthalmic Specialised Care (COS) because of decreased visual acuity in her left eye. She had been seen several weeks earlier for photopsias. She had been investigated for uveitis but, allegedly, investigations were negative and a periocular corticosteroid injection had been administered on the left side.
When we saw the patient, she complained of persistent headaches and her visual acuity on the Snellen scale was 1.0 OD and 0.5 OS. At the slit-lamp there was no flare OD and a 1+ flare OS. Laser flare photometry showed a subclinical flare of 17.8 ph/ms OD and a flare of 66.4 ph/ms OS (normal values 3–6 ph/ms). On the left there were rare mutton-fat keratic precipitates and a few Koeppe nodules as well as 1+ of anterior vitreous cells. Fundus examination showed left yellow discoloration indicating choroidal infiltration while the right fundus was normal .
Fluorescein angiography was normal in the right eye with the exception of a slightly hyperfluorescent disc, while on the right eye there was a pronounced disc hyperfluorescence and several areas of hyperfluorescence inferior-temporally . ICGA, however, showed bilateral hypofluorescent dark dots (HDDs) on both sides indicating bilateral diffuse choroiditis .
Anticipating vigorous dual steroidal and non-steroidal immunosuppression, in order to be sure of the diagnosis and to have the patient accept the therapy we performed a lumbar puncture showing a pleiocytosis of 243/3 lympho-monocytes in the cerebrospinal fluid. Dual corticosteroid and cyclosporin therapy was initiated at once. Two months later, under therapy, the colour of the fundus OS returned to normal , FA showed decrease of hyperfluorescence of the optic disc and temporal inferior area of hyperfluorescence and ICGA showed disappearance of HDDs and restoration of the choroidal vessels . No optical coherence tomography (OCT) data were available as the patient was seen in the pre-SD-OCT and pre-EDI-OCT era.
No clinically apparent disease developed on the right side. Unfortunately, after an attempt to taper therapy one year later, the disease recurred bilaterally and the patient had to be treated during the following 18 years with diverse combinations of inflammation suppressive therapies including anti-TNF agents.