A 29-year-old Chinese man presented with a sudden loss of consciousness.
A 29-year-old Chinese man suddenly passed out while jogging at the school sports field. He was found unconscious with disappearance of carotid pulsation when a doctor from the school hospital arrived in 3 min. His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a flat line without any electrical activities . Then he was quickly diagnosed with sudden cardiac arrest. After about 10 min cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), return of spontaneous circulation was achieved, and the patient was transferred to our hospital for assessment as soon as the ambulance arrived. After admission, the patient regained consciousness on the next day and had no symptoms of discomfort. He claimed no previous symptoms of chest pain or shortness of breath on exertion.
The patient was an active individual who took exercise regularly with height of 183 cm and weight of 75 kg. He suffered a high fever at the age of 5 but was not able to recall whether there was any other discomfort like a skin rash. There was no other history of past illness.
He does not drink alcohol or smoke and has no history of trauma and drug use. This patient has no family history of cardiac disease or any clinical feature to suggest connective tissue disease.
Vital signs were steady during hospitalization. No abnormalities were found on cardiopulmonary examination. There were no swollen lymph nodes, and no skin rash on the whole body.
The levels of troponin I were slightly elevated from admission to normal levels after a few days (from 0.44 ng/mL to normal, Figure ). His liver function suggested that alanine aminotransferase was 454 U/L and aspartate aminotransferase 357 U/L at admission, which gradually decreased to normal levels, consistent with the expression of myocardial injury markers. The blood routine showed that white blood cells (13.3 × 109/L) and neutrophils (11.3 × 109/L) were slightly increased at admission to normal levels after a few days. His routine chemistry panel was normal with sodium 138.94 mmol/L; potassium 4.00 mmol/L; and magnesium 0.84 mmol/L. His renal and coagulative functions were normal. Test results of syphilis antibody, human immunodeficiency virus antibody, hepatitis series, anti-nuclear antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. The 12-lead ECG performed upon admission showed depressed ST-segments in I, II, aVF, and V2-6 leads. Followed-up ECG 4 hr later showed normal ECG parameters .
Echocardiography indicated normal atrial and ventricular size, normal wall thickness, normal systolic and diastolic function, and an ejection fraction of 63.2%. Computed tomography of brain showed no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed marked aneurysms and extensive calcifications in the proximal and mid left anterior descending (LAD) and right coronary artery (RCA), . Coronary angiography was performed at day 10, which showed giant aneurysms of the proximal LAD with subtotal occlusion and the proximal and mid RCA with chronic total occlusion. The RCA received left-to-right epicardial collateral circulation from left circumflex coronary artery .