A 43-year-old female came to the outpatient department of Hebei General Hospital and complained of a lesion found in the right lobe of her liver during her last check-up 15 days ago. Further inquiry revealed no specific symptoms and a history of hepatitis B for over 20 years. Physical examinations discovered no abnormality.
The serum tumor marker of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was within the reference range. Blood tests showed negative of HBsAb and HBeAg, but positivity of HBsAg, HBeAb, and HBcAb. HBV DNA was 5.29×104IU/mL. Other viral (HCV/HIV) serology tests all tested negative. The serologic tests including assessment of hepatic fibrosis and liver function were normal .
Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated a slightly heterogeneous hypoechoic nodule in the background of normal hepatic parenchyma in the right lobe of the liver . The nodule was about 19.9mm×14.2mm in size, with a clear margin.
The patient underwent contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) examination for further diagnosis. A 1.1mL ultrasound contrast agent SonoVue suspension was injected. Arterial phase: the lesion began to show slight hyperenhancement at the 11th second, with a wedge-shaped high hyperenhancement around the lesion. The hyperenhancement reaches its peak in the 14th second, with a range of approximately 45.5mm×29.2mm. The lesion had a clear boundary with a normal vascular pattern. After 22 seconds, the lesion was rapidly washout from the center, and the boundary gradually became unclear. Portal phase: The lesion is further washout and shows low enhancement; Delayed phase: The lesion continues to washout and shows low enhancement .
The Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a high-intensity mass on T2-weighted , a low-intensity mass on T1-weighted images , and a high-intensity mass on diffusion-weighted images , which was located in the right lobe of the liver with an estimated magnitude of 18mm×14 mm; a clear margin was also observed. (Gadobenate Dimeglumine) Gd-BOPTA-enhanced MRI revealed heterogeneous enhancement with a vague margin in the arterial phase and contrast medium washout in the portal and delayed phases . The lesions appear as low signal intensity in the hepatobiliary phase and capsular (pseudocapsule) enhancement .
After discussion by a multidisciplinary team (MDT), malignant tumors cannot be excluded based on contrast-enhanced ultrasound and MRI. Thus, we decided to perform surgery for the patient. The patient underwent laparoscopic tumor resection. The operation lasted for 1.5 hours, and the intra-operative blood loss was about 200 mL. The post-operative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8. During the routine follow-up 3 months after surgery, no evidence of recurrence was noted, and the liver function of the patient remained normal.
A 6.5cm×5cm×3 cm segment of the liver was resected. A 2cm×1cm×1cm gray, well-defined, non-encapsulated solid mass was grossly identified, 0.5 cm from the nearest resection margin .
Microscopically, the lesion is composed of a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma and significant lymphocytic infiltration. Fibrous pseudocapsules were seen in some areas . There was no microvascular invasion in the liver tissue near and far from the tumor (MVI grade M0), and no nerve invasion was found. Four satellite nodules were found in the liver tissue near the cancer. No cancer cells were found at the resection margin. The tumor cells have obvious atypia, the cells are round or oval, the nucleoli are obvious, and mitotic figures are easy to see . Small focal steatosis can be seen in the surrounding liver tissue, a moderate amount of inflammatory cell infiltration can be seen in the liver lobules and portal areas, mild fibroplasia in the portal areas, and no cirrhosis changes: consistent with G3S1.
Immunohistochemical examination revealed positive in CK (pan), EMA, CK7, CK19, and negative in AFP, CEA, IDH1, Vimentin; P53(scattered positive), Ki67 (about 40%); The dense lymphocytic infiltrate consisted of T-lymphocytes (CD3 positive), B-lymphocytes (CD20 positive) and macrophages (CD68 positive); Hepatocyte specific markers: HepPar-1, Arginase-1 and CD10 were all negative; Hepatocellular carcinoma markers: CD34, GPC3 and GS were all negative while HSP70 was positive; Gastrointestinal stromal tumor markers: CD117 and CD34 were negative; EBV-encoded RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization was performed and found positive in tumor tissues . The non-neoplastic liver parenchyma with HBsAg positive did not show cirrhosis but fibrosis. All features fulfilled the diagnosis of lymphoepithelioma-like intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (LEL-ICC).