We present the case of a 14-month-old girl from birth until today. Pregnancy was uneventful until 34 weeks gestation, when polyhydramnios, pathological cerebral Doppler flow, pleural effusions, and pathological cardiotocography led to performing a cesarean section. The girl was born pale, with no muscle tone, no spontaneous breathing, and bradycardia. The APGAR score was 2/6/7 at 1/5/10 min. Persisting respiratory insufficiency required maximally invasive treatment including the administration of endotracheal surfactant, the use of a high-frequency oscillation ventilator and nitrogen monoxide to maintain sufficient oxygenation. Continuous dobutamine and adrenaline infusions were necessary due to severe circulatory deterioration starting immediately after birth. Echocardiogram revealed pulmonary hypertension and compromised right ventricular function. Massive hepatosplenomegaly was detectable on abdominal ultrasound.
An initial hemoglobin value of 6.3 g/dl led to an emergency erythrocyte transfusion, and further erythrocyte transfusions were necessary in the first weeks of life. Multiple petechiae and suggilations were present at birth, thrombocytopenia and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy with unmeasurable thrombin time repeatedly required multiple thrombocyte concentrate and fresh-frozen plasma transfusions. An initial leukocyte count of 45.000/μl rapidly dropped to a minimum of 600/μl.
The etiology of the clinical condition with cardiorespiratory failure, pancytopenia, and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy together with skin hemorrhages and hepatosplenomegaly was at first elusive. Ganciclovir was initiated for suspected cytomegalovirus infection but withdrawn following negative results. Given the possibility of neonatal sepsis, various antibiotics and fluconazole were administered, but inflammatory values did not markedly increase and microbiological cultures and extensive viral PCR studies yielded exclusively negative results. Peripheral blood smears from the fourth day of life revealed immature monocytic cells, and bone marrow puncture was found unrepresentative without evidence of blastic cells. Additional flow cytometry was unremarkable. Genetic predisposition for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis was excluded.
The girl’s clinical condition remained highly instable, when on the tenth day of life the assessment of acute abdomen required explorative laparotomy. During surgery, a meconium ileus was found that could only be resolved by establishment of an ileostomy. Because of a massively distended abdomen, abdominal closure could only be realized by placement of a patch. Buccal mucosa and ileum biopsies were undertaken to exclude neonatal hemochromatosis.
Unexpectedly, pathological examination revealed diffuse submucosal infiltration by polymorphous, atypical cells suspicious of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH). Single-shot treatment with vincristine (0.05 mg/kg) and prednisolone (1.5 mg/kg/d) for suspected LCH was immediately commenced. Five days later, the LCH diagnosis was rejected by reference pathology evaluation and reclassified as completely undifferentiated blastic transmural infiltration with diffuse growth pattern, positive staining for CD68, partial expression of S100, negative staining for langerin, lysozyme, CD1a, myeloperoxidase, CD34 ,and CD30, and an increased proliferation rate of 80 % (MIB1) .
To further classify the blastic infiltration, additional immuno-histochemical staining was performed and revealed partial expression of CD163, negativity for CD56, CD117, CD3, CD79a, desmin, NB84, pan-cytokeratin, synaptophysin, and TdT, and preserved nuclear expression of INI1, thus being consistent with an undifferentiated leukemia with partial monoblastic differentiation. Further, a chromosomal breakpoint at the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) locus 11q23 could be detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH, LSI MLL Dual Color, Break Apart Probe, Abbott) substantiating the diagnosis of an undifferentiated, MLL positive leukemia. Two subsequent bone marrow punctures at the age of 3 and 5 weeks did not show any signs of leukemia, and no MLL rearrangement could be detected by FISH .
Subsequently, leukocyte, erythrocyte, and thrombocyte counts recovered spontaneously, accompanied by gradual clinical improvement including complete weaning from ventilator support and reversal of ileostomy. The patient was discharged at 6 weeks of age and a weight of 2900 g in excellent clinical condition.
Subsequent clinical follow-up displayed regular weight gain (weight at birth 3000 g, at the age of 6 weeks 2900 g, at 3 months 4300 g) and development and routine hematological controls remained unremarkable. Five months later, while on treatment for hemangioma with propranolol, suspicious, blue-berry muffin-like skin lesions were noted on clinical examination. Leukocyte count was 28.500/μl, and thrombocyte and erythrocyte counts were normal. Monoblastic leukemia (AML FAB M5) was diagnosed from peripheral blood and bone marrow . An MLL-AF10 fusion transcript was detected by real-time and nested PCR. Retrospective analyses (by nested PCR) at the time point, when bone marrow sampled in the third week of life was MLL-rearrangement-negative by FISH, showed that the MLL-AF10 fusion transcript was already detectable back then, 4 months prior to the definitive diagnosis of AML in the bone marrow .
Chemotherapy was initiated according to the German AML-BFM 2012 study protocol . Due to the MLL-AF10 rearrangement, the patient was classified as “high risk” and consequently qualified for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (hSCT). The patient received one block of induction and two blocks of consolidation chemotherapy. Subsequently, the patient underwent hSCT from an unrelated, HLA-matched donor. The conditioning regimen consisted of busilvex, cyclophosphamide, melphalan, and anti-thymocyte globuline (ATG). Cyclosporin A and methotrexate were administered as prophylaxis against Graft versus Host Disease (GvHD). Leukocyte engraftment was detected at day 19, granulocyte engraftment at day 23 post transplantation. Chemotherapy and stem cell transplantation were well tolerated under supportive care. The girl was discharged at day +60. Apart from partial compromise of renal function, no significant complications occurred. Until now, the patient is well, relapse-free, and showing no signs of GvHD 9 months after transplantation. Donor chimerism is 100 %.