A 45-year-old right-handed Sudanese housewife presented to the orthopedics surgery clinic with progressive right forearm and hand pain, numbness with a tingling sensation around her right elbow, ulnar side of the forearm and hand. She reported right-hand weakness and decreased grip strength during daily activity. Her signs and complaints had persisted for 1 year, with substantial worsening of the symptoms over the last 2 months. The patient had no other related medical history.
Physical examination revealed a positive Tinel’s sign at the elbow, normal and full range of motion of the elbow, and wasting of the adductor pollicis and first dorsal interosseous muscles . In addition, the hand grip was weaker on the affected side, with sensation impairment in the ulnar side of the fifth finger and ulnar half of the hand. X-ray of the elbow showed no abnormality. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was not done preoperatively due to financial constraints, but a nerve conduction study demonstrated severe conduction block of both ulnar motor and sensory fibers at the elbow .
The diagnosis of right ulnar nerve entrapment suggests cubital tunnel syndrome. The patient discussed her condition and was fully informed about her clinical diagnosis supported by the nerve conduction study findings. Surgical exploration was the final decision based upon her preference.
In lateral position and under general anesthesia, we preferred a posterior surgical approach to approach the nerve for direct exploration. The ulnar nerve identified in the cubital tunnel was severely compressed and flattened by a 15 × 20 mm2 epineural ganglion.
The epineural ganglion was completely excised and the nerve freed . Histological examination of the cyst confirmed the ganglion cyst diagnosis. A rehabilitation physiotherapy protocol for postoperative recovery followed. Afterward, the patient continued her follow-up for 6 months with complete recovery of sensory and motor function, with significant improvement of hand grip strength and muscle wasting clinically.