A 79-year-old African American man with a history notable for heavy tobacco use, traumatic brain injury following a motor vehicle accident, hypothyroidism, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia last requiring therapy 4 years previously presented with 1 month of persistent cough. On a chest X-ray, a large mass in the mid-lung zone of his left lung was noted. Chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a mass in the upper lobe of his left lung measuring 7.7×8.7 cm and a 1.1 cm left hilar lymph node . A CT-guided percutaneous biopsy of the lung mass revealed malignant spindled and focally epithelioid neoplasm with extensive necrosis with poor differentiation favoring sarcomatoid carcinoma . Immunohistochemistry demonstrated positive staining for epithelial markers CAM5.2 , cytokeratin (CK) 5/6, CK903, and CK7, and negative staining for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), p63, desmin, S100, and paired-box gene 8 (PAX8).
At this time, he was also noted to have an ulcerated area on his upper lip on which topical anesthetic agents were placed. Seven days later, a follow-up examination revealed painful and substantial upper lip swelling. An abscess was suspected, systemic antibiotics were prescribed, and he was referred urgently to our Otolaryngology service. He was found to have a 2.7 cm upper lip mass with normal overlying skin. A CT of his neck revealed a 2.1 cm anteroposterior (AP) × 3.6 cm transverse × 3.8 cm craniocaudal (CC) right upper lip mass with surrounding inflammatory change . An incisional biopsy demonstrated metastatic sarcomatoid carcinoma, with morphologic and immunohistochemical characteristics similar to the primary lung lesion .
Subsequent imaging demonstrated two intracranial metastases. He received palliative radiation 3000 cGy in 10 fractions to his upper lip and 3000 cGy in 10 fractions to his brain. He continued to decline functionally; he was admitted to our in-patient hospice unit, and died 39 days after initial diagnosis of the primary sarcomatoid lung cancer.