A 32-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our department due to complaints of spontaneous gingival pain, bleeding, and increased tooth mobility of the maxillary left second molar. The patient had already started orthodontic treatment at the time of referral; she had acute seizure symptoms during orthodontic treatment and was receiving antimicrobial medications at the time of presentation. According to the referring orthodontist, the patient had been screened by her family dentist (general practitioner) for caries and periodontal disease before orthodontic treatment, and orthodontic treatment was initiated based on the results of the screening. The patient had been experiencing gingival inflammation since the initiation of the orthodontic treatment, and emergency treatment had been provided in collaboration with her family dentist. However, the patient’s symptoms of pain, gingival swelling, and tooth mobility worsened, and her family dentist suggested the need for specialized diagnosis and treatment by the orthodontist, who in turn referred the patient.
To make a diagnosis and develop a treatment plan, we performed oral and periodontal examinations. Periodontal damage was diagnosed based on probing pocket depth (PPD) measurements at six sites around each tooth and evaluations of the teeth and soft tissues . Intraoral periapical radiographs revealed extensive alveolar bone loss , including vertical bone resorption extending from the distal aspect of the maxillary left first molar to the mesial aspect of the maxillary left second molar. Vertical bone loss was also observed distal to the mandibular right second molar . Clinically, deep periodontal pockets (PPD, 4–7 mm) were detected around the bilateral maxillary first and second molars and bilateral mandibular second molars. The inflamed periodontium had a surface area of 277.4 mm2 [, ]. Based on the initial periodontal findings, severe localized stage III grade B periodontitis in the maxillary left first and second molars and in the mandibular right second molar was diagnosed . As the patient had good general health and only localized clinical attachment loss, we suspected localized aggressive periodontitis (1999 International Workshop for a Classification of Periodontal Disease and Conditions) in relation to the maxillary left first and second molars and the mandibular right second molar .
We conducted bacteriological examinations to observe the bacterial flora before and after treatment. Bacterial specimens were collected using paper points from periodontal pockets around the maxillary left second molar, the site of acute periodontal disease, and the distal side of the mandibular right second molar with vertical bone loss on dental radiographs. Saliva specimens were also collected, and real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis (Perio-Analysis; NOVEO, Hong Kong, China) was conducted . The pretreatment bacteriological examination showed that the counts of Porphyromonas gingivalis, Tannerella forsythia, and Treponema denticola (red complex) as well as those of Prevotella intermedia, Parvimonas micra, and Fusobacterium nucleatum (orange complex) at the maxillary left second molar were > tenfold higher than the tolerated values. At the mandibular right second molar, the counts of T. forsythia, T. denticola, P. intermedia, P. micra, and Campylobacter rectus were > tenfold higher than the tolerable values. Similarly, in the saliva samples, the counts of T. forsythia, T. denticola, P. micra, F. nucleatum, C. rectus, and Eikenella corrodens were ten times higher than the permissible values .
To eliminate the etiology of the periodontal disease, the orthodontist treating the patient was consulted and all orthodontic treatments were suspended. The orthodontic appliance was removed from the upper and lower molars in the affected area. FMD was performed within 24 hours of debridement of all periodontal pockets by scaling and root planing (SRP) using Gracey curettes, followed by adjunctive oral sitafloxacin (100 mg/day for 7 days). The patient was educated on the Bass technique for toothbrushing and interdental brushing techniques, and detailed oral hygiene instructions were given to ensure a significant reduction in bacterial load. Plaque was also found around the brackets; therefore, we educated the patient to identify sites of plaque accumulation and instructed her on how to carefully remove it.
At 3 months after FMD, we observed no recurrence of periodontal disease . Post-treatment radiographs revealed that there was no advancement in alveolar bone resorption since the initial examination or in alveolar bone deposition around the maxillary left second molar and the mandibular right second molar .
The O’Leary plaque control scores were improved from 49% to 22%, bleeding on probing decreased from 24 (16.7%) to 21 sites (14.6%), the average PPD was improved from 2.4 to 2.1 mm, and periodontal inflammatory surface area decreased from 277.4 to 125.6 mm2. The patient is currently receiving supportive periodontal therapy, and her condition is stable without recurrence of periodontal disease. Orthodontic treatment was put on hold for 3 months during the primary periodontal treatment phase; however, it was resumed at the same time as was the supportive periodontal therapy.
The counts of P. intermedia and C. rectus in the saliva samples were only ten times higher than the reference value, which was one of the reasons for periodontal disease management with supportive periodontal therapy. The red complex was no longer detected in the periodontal pockets that showed severe disease before treatment, and the orange-complex counts decreased below the standard value. However, in the saliva samples, T. denticola was detected, and the orange-complex counts, especially the P. intermedia count, were approximately 100 times higher than the reference values .
Currently, the patient has resumed orthodontic treatment, which is progressing well with no evidence of recurrence of periodontal disease.