A 56-year-old man sought evaluation for progressively severe edema in the lower limbs bilaterally after lenvatinib treatment for DTC.
Approximately 1 mo after starting lenvatinib, the patient began to experience a feeling of bloating on both feet. Although his walking ability was unaffected, the uncomfortable feeling was progressively exacerbated. Occasional dysuria was also documented, but the patient denied painful or burning micturition. No other associated symptoms or issues with other organs were reported.
The diagnosis of papillary type DTC was made by biopsy 2 years before the current presentation, and the patient underwent bilateral total thyroidectomy. Pathologic evaluation showed papillary carcinoma staged at T1b at the left lobe and a nodular goiter at the right lobe . Two positive lymph nodes at level six (pre-tracheal, paratracheal, and pre-laryngeal sites) from central dissection revealed metastatic cancer (N1a). Postoperative computed tomography showed no identified distant organ involvement before beginning RAI (total dosage of 450 mCi). After completion of RAI, no other distant organ metastasis was seen on computed tomography. However, 11 mo later, the patient presented with hoarseness, difficulties swallowing, and hemoptysis. Tracheal deviation was seen on chest radiography. Based on unexplained hemoptysis and tracheal space-occupying mass, bronchoscopy was performed, and a biopsy specimen showed metastatic papillary carcinoma . Computed tomography was indicated and performed, and multiple metastatic nodules were seen in both lungs .
Thereafter, lenvatinib, one of m-TKI agents, was suggested to treat this RAI-refractory metastatic DTC. Oral lenvatinib was started at 20 mg/d. However, 1 wk after initiation, hypertension developed (155/92 mmHg), and nifedipine at 30 mg/d was started.
At the patient’s current presentation for foot evaluation, vital signs were as follows: temperature, 35.2 °C; heart rate, 77 bpm; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 161/96 mmHg. Oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. Moderate pitting edema grade 3+ was assessed. Neurologic examination showed normal sensory and motor functions. Chest examination revealed neither dull tone during percussion nor diminished breath sounds during auscultation. The abdomen appeared ovoid without distention, and negative shifting dullness was assessed. No knocking pain was detected on bilateral costovertebral angle examination.
The patient’s thyroglobulin (Tg) was 398 ng/mL, significantly decreased from an initial value beyond detectable limits (> 486 ng/mL) on diagnosis of RAI-refractory DTC. Anti-Tg antibody remained undetectable. Complete blood count results were as follows: white blood cell, 5500/μL; hemoglobin, 12.3 g/dL; and platelets, 202000/μL. Differential count results were neutrophils, 69.3%; lymphocytes, 22.5%; monocytes, 5.7%; eosinophils, 2.0%; basophils, 0.5%; and bands, 0%, which were all within normal range. Liver function tests (aspartate aminotransferase: 23 IU/L; alanine amino-transferase: 28 IU/L; and prothrombin time: 10.20 s) were all normal, but hypercholesterolemia (312 mg/dL) was observed. Serum albumin was tested to be hypoalbuminemia (2.4 g/dL). Total bilirubin was 0.5 mg/dL. Kidney function tests revealed glomerular hyperfiltration (creatinine, 0.56 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 12 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate, 161 mg/dL). Urine analysis showed trace hematuria, but no urinary tract infection. Estimated 24-h urine protein was 9993 mg (random urine protein of 285.5 mg/dL; urine volume of 3500 mL/d).
Recurrent thyroid cancer was seen at the left paratracheal space of the superior mediastinum with left tracheal wall invasion, and multiple lung metastases in both lungs were also evident on computed tomography. Limited improvement of the metastatic nodules on both lungs was observed . No abnormalities were seen on computed tomography for the upper and lower urinary tract.
Cystoscopy and ureteroscopy were performed, and no specific abnormalities or visible tumors were seen along the urinary tract.