A 70-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with sudden abdominal pain and bloating. The patient did not have any underlying diseases, such as diabetes, coronary heart disease, or hypertension. More than 30 years ago, the patient underwent surgery for “ectopic pregnancy”. The patient had no family history of hereditary disease, nor did any immediate family members have a history of cancer. Physical examination revealed mid-abdominal tenderness and a palpable 6 cm × 6 cm mass, with a firm texture and unclear boundary. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a large mixed density mass in the lower abdominal cavity-pelvis, approximately 162.5 mm × 105 mm × 182 mm . The mass was closely related to the right appendage, the adjacent bowel and bladder were compressed and moved, and no obvious obstruction or dilation of the bowel was seen. A cystic low-density, nonenhancing shadow was seen in the left adnexal area, measuring approximately 27 mm × 21 mm. No obvious abnormality was found in the liver, gallbladder, spleen, kidney, or pancreas. Laboratory tests showed that hemoglobin was 80 g/L (reference: 115–150 g/L), albumin was 25.9 g/L (reference: 40.0–55.0 g/L), and other routine laboratory tests showed no obvious abnormality. Furthermore, cancer antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were within normal limits, but CA125 was elevated to 706.7 U/ml (reference: 0.00–35.00 U/ml).
The patient had a definite diagnosis of a large tumor in the abdomen and pelvis. After communicating with the patient's family, we decided not to perform a preoperative biopsy and to surgically remove the tumor and perform a pathological biopsy. The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy, and a large tumor in the abdomen and pelvis was revealed, approximately 20 cm × 20 cm in size. The tumor was attached to the terminal ileum, approximately 12 cm away from the ileocecal region, and could not be separated. We considered that the tumor probably originated in the small intestine . The terminal mesentery was then segmented in a fan shape, and the intestinal tube was severed 3 cm distal to and 10 cm proximal to the tumor, followed by small bowel anastomosis. The pelvic cavity was explored again, and it was found that the right adnexa and uterus were atrophied. A cyst was observed in the left adnexa, approximately 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm in size, so the left adnexa was excised.
The postoperative recovery of the patient was uneventful, and she was discharged after half a month. The tumor was histologically composed of cells arranged in the form of solid sheets and pseudopapillary areas . Ectopic pancreatic tissue was also observed histologically within the resected tumor. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed positive results for CD10, CD56, E-cadherin (weak positive), cytokeratin (CK), vimentin (Vim), progesterone receptor (PR), and succinate dehydrogenase complex subunit B (SDHB). In addition, the tumor cells showed nuclear staining for β-catenin, paranuclear dot-like staining for CD99, and focal staining for soluble protein-100 (S100) and synaptophysin (Syn). The proliferation index of Ki-67 was approximately 20%. The pathology of the left adnexa showed the formation of white bodies in the left ovary . Combined with IHC, we confirmed that this was an extrapancreatic SPN of primary ileal origin.
The patient did not receive chemotherapy or radiotherapy after surgery. Thirteen months after surgery, the patient was admitted again with abdominal pain. Laboratory examination showed her hemoglobin was 88 g/L, and her CA125 was elevated to 47.4 However, CA19–9 and CEA were within normal limits. Enhanced CT of the chest and the whole abdomen showed that there was a mixed density mass in the right middle abdomen, approximately 59 mm × 57 mm × 92 mm (left and right × front and back × up and down), and the boundary was not clear . A cystic and solid mass was seen next to the duodenum, approximately 35.2 mm × 22.7 mm, with an irregular shape and unclear demarcation with the duodenum. The solid part was significantly enhanced . There were several nodular and clump-shaped hypodense shadows in the liver, and the larger shadows were located in the right lobe of the liver . There were multiple solid nodules in both lungs, and the largest nodule was located in the dorsal segment of the left lower lobe . The patient and her family refused reoperation and biopsy, and the patient was discharged after her abdominal pain and anemia resolved.