A 77-year-old male patient with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was referred to our emergency department as a heart attack case. He presented 4 days of progressively intense pain in the right lower quadrant along with a syncopal episode preceded by dyspnea and oppressive thoracic pain. In the remission site troponin was positive and the electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal; This required initial anti ischemic management and transfer to our service. Upon admission his abdomen showed marked abdominal distension with peritoneal irritation signs, absent bowel sounds and an incarcerated hernia in this level. The patient did not report thoracic pain or dyspnea during the physical exam and the cardiopulmonary auscultation was normal.
The ECG showed Q waves in DII, DIII and AVF, negative T waves in VI V2 and V3 without alteration of the ST segment. The laboratories showed an ultrasensitive positive troponin of 0.040 with a delta positive at 0.030, The blood count, renal function, electrolytes and arterial gases were normal.
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a moderate dilatation of the right ventricle with signs of pressure and pulmonary hypertension without contractility disorders. The complementary computed tomography (CT) showed findings of acute appendicitis and probable Amyand’s Hernia .
The treatment consisted of oral restriction, antibiotics, analgesia, and hydration. This combination was highly approved by the cardiology and surgical teams who decided to perform an emergency laparotomy. The intraoperative findings included a right inguino-scrotal hernia incarcerated with a necrotized hernia sac that contained the cecal appendix which was gangrenous and perforated, with significant tissue edema in the right inguinal region, blind, parietal peritoneum with pelvic peritonitis (, ). The patient required Intensive Care with invasive ventilatory support and vasopressor.
With managed multidisciplinary care by intensivists, cardiologists, nutritional support and surgeons, the patient presented an evolution of improvement, achieving, on the second postoperative day, removal of the ventilatory and vasopressor support. He was transferred to the hospitalization area and administered a liquid diet, analgesia and cardiac catheterization to establish the etiology of the MI. Acetylsalicylic acid which was added at a dose of 100 mg every day, along with an angiotensin receptor antagonist (ARA II), due to high blood pressure during hospitalization, and anticoagulation with enoxaparin. He was taken for cardiac catheterization with evidence of healthy coronaries and no signs of atherothrombosis which could lead to the diagnosis of MIT2.
His hospitalization lasted about 6 days with a positive outcome. Consequently, he was discharged with antibiotics therapy for 7 days, analgesia as needed and an outpatient’s order controlled by general surgery and cardiology at 10 days presenting an adequate postoperative.