A 31-year-old woman visited our fertility center after confirming her pregnancy with a urine test. She was previously diagnosed with secondary infertility, having not conceived since a missed abortion a year prior. An Initial infertility workup, which included an ultrasound, hysterosalpingography , and prenatal test with hormonal lab tests was conducted. She was diagnosed with Müllerian duct anomaly, a unicornuate uterus with a non-communicating right rudimentary horn, classified as U4aC0V0 according to the ESHRE/ESGE classification system. Given that the patient had a patent left salpinx, a normal-sized left-sided unicornuate uterine cavity with normal endometrium, and a regular 30-day interval menstrual cycle, the doctor recommended intercourses on cycle days 19 and 21 to maximize fecundity. Three weeks later, she returned to our clinic to confirm a normal intrauterine pregnancy after her positive urine pregnancy test. Based on her estimated ovulation date, she was considered to be at 5 weeks and 1 day of gestation. A blood test revealed a beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (b-hCG) concentration of 2052.0mIU/mL. A transvaginal sonography (TVS) exam demonstrated a hyperechoic gestational sac-like lesion with increased vascularity, as indicated by the color Doppler. The lesion was surrounded by the myometrial wall of the right-sided rudimentary horn and was dated at 5 weeks and 6 days of gestation. The next day, at 6 weeks of gestation, the patient was admitted for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), intravenous pyelogram (IVP), monitoring and preventing hemodynamically unstable circumstances, such as uterine rupture, and to plan for laparoscopic surgery. The MRI revealed an approximately 8 mm-sized, thick-walled cystic lesion at the cornua of the right rudimentary horn , suggesting a pregnancy in the right rudimentary horn, consistent with previous transvaginal ultrasound. A corpus luteal cyst was noted in the right ovary, and the thickened endometrium showed no pathologic findings in the left unicornuate uterus. IVP revealed the right duplex kidney . The serum b-hCG concentration had increased to 9269.0mIU/mL. Based on the imaging studies and serum b-hCG concentration, a diagnosis of non-communicating rudimentary horn pregnancy (NCRHP) was made. The patient and her husband were informed of the potentially life-threatening risks of continuing the pregnancy. They were advised that the safest treatment would be an elective laparoscopic resection of the rudimentary horn. After understanding the risks, the patient and her husband signed up for the informed consent of laparoscopic resection of the rudimentary horn and ipsilateral salpinx.
The following day, laparoscopic resection of the rudimentary horn and ipsilateral salpinx was performed. Upon entering the abdominal cavity with one 10-mm trocar at the umbilicus, and two additional 5-mm trocars at the bilateral lower quadrants, no ascites or signs of bleeding were identified. The surface of the right rudimentary horn, which contained the gestational sac, appeared engorged with pronounced peripheral vessels. The right salpinx originated from the horn, while the left adnexa was grossly normal and connected to the dominant left unicornuate uterus . The right rudimentary horn and right salpinx were completely resected using a bipolar coagulator . Indigo-carmine dye was infused to confirm the connectivity between the two horns of the uterus, which was verified as non-communicated .
After the surgical treatment, the patient was discharged on postoperative day 3 without any complications. The postoperative b-hCG concentration was 1135.0mIU/mL on the day of discharge and gradually decreased to 6.820mIU/mL 18 days after resection. The histological report confirmed the presence of the product of conception inside the rudimentary horn.
Three months after her recovery, she returned to our fertility center to attempt natural conception through superovulation and timed intercourse. After two unsuccessful cycles of timed intercourse and one cycle of intrauterine insemination, she opted for IVF. During her initial assessment, the serum anti-Müllerian hormone level was 3.63 ng/mL, and the follicle-stimulating hormone on day 3 was 9.02mIU/mL. Using a regular dose of gonadotropin with an antagonist protocol, we collected eleven oocytes, fertilized seven embryos, and obtained four blastocysts, three of which were good-quality embryos. Diagnostic hysteroscopy before the frozen-thawed embryo transfer cycle revealed a single external os of the cervix, a left uterine cavity with an intact endometrial lining, and a single left tubal ostium. Endometrial scratching with hysteroscopic biopsy forceps was performed . The following menstrual cycle endometrium was prepared with hormone replacement (estradiol valerate 6 mg/day), and a single blastocyst was transferred. A successful pregnancy through IVF was confirmed with a first-trimester transvaginal ultrasound .
At 21 weeks and 6 days of gestation, she was hospitalized due to a short cervix and signs of preterm labor. She underwent cerclage and received intravenous tocolytic therapy and corticosteroid treatment during her hospital stay. She remained hospitalized until 35 weeks and 6 days of gestation and was discharged after cerclage release. A week later, an outpatient assessment revealed her amniotic fluid index was 3.2. She was readmitted for induction. She delivered a healthy male baby weighing 2495 g with APGAR of 7 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min at 37 weeks and 0 days by cesarean section due to failure to progress.