A 70-year-old man presented with the chief complaint of epigastric discomfort. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed isolated gastric varices , and the patient was referred to our hospital for further examination. He had no history of major organ diseases that can cause splenic vein stenosis, such as pancreatitis or abdominal trauma. The liver was impalpable, and no obvious abdominal tenderness or rebound pain was elicited. The spleen was also impalpable, and no signs of liver cirrhosis such as jaundice or superficial vein engorgement were found. Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 6050 cells/μL, normal differential counts, a C-reactive protein concentration of 0.07 mg/dL, a slightly low platelet count of 139,000 cells/μL, normal liver function and coagulation tests, and unremarkable tumor marker concentrations. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed stenosis (2 mm in diameter) of almost the entire length of the splenic vein, with post-stenosis dilatation at the splenic hilum (10 mm in diameter; Fig. a, b), and development of gastric fundal varices and short gastric veins . No inflammatory changes around the pancreas or pancreatic neoplasm were observed in any imaging study . Additionally, the left gastric vein (LGV) was highly contrasted (to the same extent as the portal vein) before the superior mesenteric vein was completely contrasted. Therefore, the patient was considered to have hepatopetal venous blood flow in the LGV.
Based on these findings, we diagnosed the patient with LSPH caused by idiopathic splenic vein stenosis. Splenectomy was performed because of concerns about the risk of bleeding from the gastric varices. No obvious abnormality was detected around the splenic vein. The liver surface was smooth and the edges were sharp, while the spleen weighed 120 g and was macroscopically almost normal. Histopathological examination showed slightly conspicuous sinus hyperplasia, but no obvious findings of neoplastic lesions or vasculitis, including around the splenic vein. Congo red staining was also performed, but no obvious amyloid deposits were observed. The postoperative course was smooth, and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed 3 months after the operation showed that the gastric varices had disappeared .