The patient is a 33-year-old male with a known case of chronic relapsing ITP diagnosed in 2012. Additionally, he is diagnosed with temporal lobe epilepsy on anti-epileptic medications, Graves’ disease status post radiation of thyroid and on levothyroxine replacement, and valvular heart disease.
The patient presented at the time of diagnosis in April 2012 with severe thrombocytopenia that was complicated by pulmonary hemorrhage which required ICU admission. His investigation at the time showed platelets count of only 1 × 10 9/L (normal range 150–450 × 109/L). The patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and steroids (Prednisone 25 mg/day), responding for 4 months with a rise in platelet count to 62 × 10 9/L. After which he relapsed developing epistaxis, purpura and a platelet count of 2 × 10 9/L. Again, the patient was treated with higher dose of steroid (30 mg/day) and IVIG and a surgical team was consulted for possible splenectomy. A bone marrow aspirate and biopsy was preformed which showed increased megakaryocytes consistent with ITP and was otherwise normal. Laparoscopic splenectomy was done in October 2012, the surgery went well and the patient was discharged in good condition. Three years later in December 2015, he presented again with bleeding and ulcer in the oral cavity and minimal episodes of fresh blood per rectum. He was admitted as a case of chronic relapsing ITP with platelets of 6 × 10 9/L, which increased to 96 × 10 9/L after a short course of steroid (Prednisone 25 mg/day), and IVIG. About 3 months later in March, he relapsed with platelets of 3 × 10 9/L. During hospital course, he underwent CT scan of abdomen and pelvis with contrast which revealed a small-sized mass originating from the medial part of the tail of the pancreas that was suspected to be an accessory spleen . Thus, a surgical team was consulted and a colloid scan was advised that confirmed accessory spleen originating from the tail of the pancreas . Repeated bone marrow aspirate and biopsy was done in the same admission to rule out malignancy.
Meanwhile, IVIG and steroid were continued and a laparoscopic accessory splenectomy (LAcS) was performed on the scheduled date in April 2016 as the patient was seen by neurology and cardiology for his conditions and found to be fit for surgery. Platelet count on the day of surgery was 230 × 10 9/L. The intraoperative setting confirmed the radiological data of accessory spleen which was surrounded by a fibrotic capsule that separates it from the adjacent pancreatic parenchyma, consistent with gross examination reported in the literature . Using three trocars including the scope, the lesser sac was opened and pancreas was localized. Then the inferior border of the pancreas was dissected to find the small splenule in the inferior part which was removed from within the pancreas. The surgical time was 80 min, following which there were no post-operative complications. Pathologic assessment of the excised tissue confirmed the specimen to be accessory spleen. As expected, within a few days, platelets increased up to 754 × 10 9/L and the patient was started on Aspirin 81 mg daily for 3 months.
The patient was followed up regularly in hematology clinic and was continued on prednisone 20 mg daily and Eltrombopag 50 mg daily until both were tapered off in May 2016. His platelets continued to range from 265 × 10 9/L to 363 × 10 9/L since then. Although his platelet count dropped slightly during his last clinic visit on October 2018 (30 months’ post-surgery) where it was 130 × 10 9/L, it was still considered acceptable as it did not reach a threshold level that could cause a significant increased risk of bleeding.