A14-year-old female patient known to have Pica disorder since the age of 2 years with a history of recurrent trichophagia was admitted to the emergency department for nausea, vomiting, and unintentional weight loss of 7 kg in 1 month.
On physical examination, the vital signs were stable, the patient appeared pale.
Abdominal exam revealed a large, firm and hard mass in the epigastric and left upper quadrant areas.
The result of the blood tests including complete blood count, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, liver function tests, amylase and lipase were unremarkable.
The patient underwent a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis, revealing a large mass measuring 30 × 17 × 12 cm, well defined, multi-layered, heterogeneous, solid appearing, non-enhancing mass in the gastric lumen, extending from the gastric fundus to the pyloric canal. Some of the layers of this mass were heterogeneously hyperdense . The lesion was separated from the gastric walls by gastric fluid. No evidence of abnormal gastric mural thickening was noted .
Consequently, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was done, revealing a collection of a large hard hairball occupying the entire lumen of the stomach from the fundus through the pylorus reaching the duodenum. Endoscopic intervention failed to retrieve the mass due to its large size and hard nature.
Subsequently, surgical intervention was planned through a midline laparotomy. A large solid fixed mass was palpated in the stomach. A 7 cm longitudinal gastrotomy was done on the anterior gastric wall, 6 cm from the pylorus. A large trichobezoar, filling the entire stomach and the first portion of the duodenum, was identified and removed . The gastrostomy site was repaired in two layers with continuous 3.0 PDS (polydioxanone Ethicon). The abdominal incision was closed in two layers with continuous Vicryl 1 suture and skin was closed with staples. The total operative time was 50 min and the weight of the bezoar was 8 kg. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was referred to behavioral and mental health providers.