A 46-year-old Chinese woman of Han ethnicity presented with a 4-week history of chronic right lower quadrant abdominal pain without other associated symptoms. A general systemic examination was normal except for a large mass in her right lower quadrant. There was no significant past medical history. Routine biochemical and hematological tests were within normal limits. A chest X-ray also revealed no abnormalities. A subsequent abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 8.6×6.0cm oval-shaped mass, with a clear boundary and mild-moderate enhancement, in her lower right retroperitoneal region, pressing against her right psoas muscle and her right iliac artery .
She underwent an operation to resect the mass. Surgical exploration revealed a retroperitoneal mass measuring 9×6cm adjacent to her transverse colon, her right psoas muscle and her vertebral column and covering her inferior vena cava. No associated lymphadenopathy was observed. Because the mass had infiltrated her right psoas muscle and was attached to her right iliac artery and her inferior vena cava, most of the gross tumor was resected, and the margin was positive. A CT scan revealed a liquid dark area in the surgical area after the operation .
A cut section revealed a homogenous solid mass with a rough surface. Multiple sections were taken from various areas of the tumor. Microscopic examination revealed that the tumor was composed of fat to long spindle cells with multinodular infiltration that were arranged in a storiform pattern . The tumor exhibited necrosis, cell atypia and obvious mitosis. The mitotic events numbered up to 12 per 10 high-powered fields, and there was focally marked nuclear atypia, including pleomorphic, multinucleated cells. Furthermore, the tumor cells exhibited positive immunohistochemical staining for vimentin, CD21, CD35, D2-40 and leukocyte common antigen as well as negative staining for cytokeratin , CD20, CD30, CD117, epithelial membrane antigen and S-l00 (not shown). Based on these histopathological and immunohistochemical findings, the patient was diagnosed with FDCS of the retroperitoneal lymph node.
She received postoperative sequential chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Three cycles of chemotherapy with a standard dose of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone (CHOP) were initiated in July 2010. A total radiation dose of 60Gy was then administered over 6 weeks, followed by another three cycles of chemotherapy with CHOP. To evaluate the efficacy of the adjuvant therapy, an abdominal CT scan was performed, which revealed that the liquid dark area had shrunk significantly .
Hospital records indicate that the patient has reached 3 years of follow-up. Although she is alive, she has a right pulmonary metastasis.