A 47-year-old female came to the hospital with complaints of pain in her right ankle after falling down the stairs in an inverted position one month before. The pain was more pronounced during walking and standing position. The patient had diabetes mellitus since 10 years ago with low treatment compliance (HbA1C 7.6 % and random blood sugar 317 mg/dl).
The patient was compos mentis with visual analog scale (VAS) was 8. Physical examination showed blood pressure (BP) of 126/85 mmHg, heart rate of 94×/min, temperature of 36C, respiratory rate of 20×/min, and SpO2 99 %, and body mass index (BMI) of 29.91 which falls within the obesity range. Physical examination revealed edema and tenderness of the right ankle with limited range of motion (ROM) due to ankle pain. While plain film X-ray revealed bony fragmentation in the Ankle joint (A). The patient refused to be amputated and underwent fibular strut graft arthrodesis.
The principle of operation technique is shown in . In this case, we used anterior and lateral approaches. A curved incision at the medial approach was made to access the medial osteotomy and distal fibula with a clearer view. After debridement of the necrotic tissue, we denuded the talar dome cartilage (.2 yellow color) to create a gutter tunneling at the anterior surface of the distal tibia and a hole at the center of talar dome to prepare the implantation of fibular strut graft. After measuring the precise size of fibular graft, we implanted fibular graft through gutter side of tibia and the hole of talus (.3). Autologous bone graft was added between tibiotalar surrounding fibular strut graft. (.4 and 2.5). We fixated the fibular strut graft with a reconstruction locking plate or small locking compression plate (adjustable bend) with nine cannulated screws for augmentation of stabilization (.6).
The postoperative X-ray examination revealed two plates attached to the anterior and medial distal tibia. A total of nine screws were attached to the patient (B). Blood glucose was strictly controlled to avoid any complications. Post-surgery, the patient was also required to wear Ankle Foot Orthosis (AFO) for 3–6 Weeks to stabilize the ankle joint. The patient was able to walk normally three weeks' post-surgery. The patient had removed the AFO at week six on the doctor's advice.
During the post-operative period, we were focusing on healing the stitches and controlling blood sugar. After a month, the pain was drastically reduced and the stitches had started to dry. In the following month, the removal of the AFO was planned. The patient was only able to receive follow-up care after six months because the patient was out of town. There was no complaint of pain during walking, infection, or ulcers in six months' follow-up.