In 2016, a 54-year-old man was referred to our institution with a newly established diagnosis of non-small cell lung carcinoma. Clinical evaluation revealed chronic cough, appetite loss and cachexia. Prior to initial pulmonary bronchoscopy investigation, two consecutive tomodensitometry imaging studies had shown left hilar consolidation and right upper lobe cavitary lesions to be stable in time over a 1-year period. His past medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic hepatitis C, associated cryoglobulinemia and lymphoma for which he had received chemotherapy and cervical radiation therapy in 2003. He was a chronic alcohol, tobacco and cannabis drug user and took no regular medication.
Prior to chemotherapy initiation, mycobacterial culture performed on the initial diagnostic bronchoalveolar lavage revealed the presence of M. malmoense. During the following 3-month period, M. malmoense was repeatedly isolated from six sputum and bronchial aspiration control specimens. According to local procedures, isolates were recovered from BACTEC™ MGIT™ (Becton–Dickinson, New Jersey, United States) radiometric mycobacterial broth culture system with incubation at 37 °C for an average of 25 days. Identification to the species level was confirmed by mass spectrometry and RNA polymerase ß-subunit coding rpoB gene sequence analysis per local procedures [, ]. The rpoB sequence was 612-bp long and shared 99.8% similarity with M. malmoense ATCC 29671 strain (GenBank Accession No. GQ153314). The second closest mycobacterium species was Mycobacterium palustre sharing only 571/612-bp 93.3% (GenBank Accession No. HM022210). Broth dilution antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed per published Clinical Laboratory Standard Institute guidelines and showed the isolate to be in vitro susceptible to rifampicin, clarithromycin, streptomycin and amikacin; and in vitro resistant to isoniazid, ethambutol, ofloxacin, doxycycline, tigecycline and linezolid.
Detailed epidemiologic and potential environmental exposure history revealed the patient had been incarcerated in France in 2016 and regularly ate both fox and squirrel bush meat. He reported having exceptionally eaten MukTuk, a traditional Inuit and Chukchi meal of frozen whale skin and sub-cutaneous adipose tissue and having been in close contacts with a friend and his dog upon their return from Scotland .
A treatment of isoniazid 5 mg/kg/day, rifampin 10 mg/kg/day, ethambutol 15 g/kg/day and clarithromycin 500 mg bid was initiated to cover both tuberculosis and M. malmoense infection. On control imaging following both antimycobacterial treatment and chemotherapy initiation, superior lobes consolidated and cavitary lesions had regressed. Clinical evolution was also favorable. On the other hand, nodular and reticulonodular infiltrates in lower lobes were progressing. These discordant radiologic findings were interpreted as ongoing infection. Extended microbiologic workup was repeated but unrevealing except for an additional M. malmoense positive culture.
Upon submission of this paper, the patient was still alive, undergoing his chemotherapy treatments and receiving full antimycobacterial therapy without side effects.