A four-year-old girl born to a consanguineous family was referred to the pediatric clinical immunology outpatient clinic for diagnostic workup of recurrent infections and recurrent neutropenia in the past year. The medical history, indicated a delay in motoric milestones and feeding difficulties in her first months of life. Currently, she is not able to eat solid food. She had no history of seizures. Her parents were disease free and none of her relative had experienced similar symptoms, she has no siblings. Her mother had a history of stillbirth in her first pregnancy. On clinical examination, the patient had microcephaly, hypotonia, hypermobile joints, motor developmental delay, slender fingers, and a cheerful disposition. She had speech delay and had just started to utter some words. Her facial characteristics included low hairline, short philtrum, prominent upper central incisors, wave-shaped eyelids, thick and long eyelashes and prominent root of nose . Unlike many other cases of CS , the eye examination was normal.
In review of her lab results in the period of past 6 months, absolute neutrophil count ranged from 0.5–2.32 (103/μL), neutrophil percentile ranged from 7.8–30%, and other components of complete blood count were normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), serum IgG, IgM, IgA and IgE levels (assessed with ELISA test), serum T3 and T4, TSH, urea, creatinine and fasting blood sugar were normal. Serum alkaline phosphatase was lower than normal (135 U/L). Table indicates the summary of the patient’s lab results.
Given the patient’s history, physical examination, and lab results, different subtypes of congenital neutropenia, including G6PC3 deficiency, cartilage-hair hypoplasia, ELANE-Related neutropenia and WAS-Related disorders were considered as differential diagnosis. Based on her developmental delay, friendly disposition and facial features, CS was our primary diagnosis. However, due to expenses of Whole exome sequencing in the patient’s country, the test was performed in a foreign country and confirming the final diagnosis took longer than anticipated.
Whole exome sequencing for the patient was performed at the Dr. von Hauner Children’s hospital NGS facility using Agilent V6 + UTR library preparation and an Illumina NextSeq 500 sequencing platform. The bioinformatics analysis pipeline uses Burrows-Wheeler Alingner (BWA 0.7.15). Genome Analysis Tool Kit (GATK 3.6), Variant Effect Predictor (VEP 89) and frequency filters with public and in house databases (e.g. ExAC , GenomAD and GME ). We found a novel homozygous frameshift variant in the VPS13B gene: VPS13B (LRG_351t1: c.7095del; p.Ser2366AlafsTer49). Based on the classical 5-tiered system introduced by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, this variant is classified as a pathogenic variant and there is very strong evidence for its pathogenicity [, ]. This mutation confirmed our early diagnosis.
Currently, the patient is not experiencing any severe problem. No unanticipated adverse effect has been observed. The patient undergoes irregular medical treatment with 300 μg/injection granulocyte colony stimulating factor (GCSF) once her neutrophil count decreases under the normal limit. Also, Co-Trimoxazole 80 mg/400 mg has been prescribed for infection prophylaxis. Her eye examination remained normal. Her verbal and motor abilities have improved as a result of speech and occupational therapies. She is able to say some simple words like mom and dad. She is also able to walk with her parents’ assistance. Lastly, due to the high likelihood of developing ocular abnormalities, the patient is evaluated by an ophthalmologist periodically.