A 72-year-old woman with a history of breast cancer in remission but complicated by secondary AML was admitted to the hospital for AML consolidation therapy. She was given cyclophosphamide, fludarabine, and total body irradiation followed by allogeneic stem cell transplant. Two and a half weeks post-transplant, she became acutely somnolent and febrile. An emergent computerized tomography (CT) of the head was obtained and unremarkable, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain performed three days after symptom onset – though motion degraded – showed no acute abnormalities, and her initial infectious and metabolic work up was notable only for mild acute renal injury. A lumbar puncture showed 1 nucleated cell, 0 red blood cells, protein 20.3 mg/dL, and glucose 52 mg/dL with negative gram stain and bacterial culture. Despite the non-infectious appearing cerebrospinal fluid, she was found to have a positive cerebrospinal fluid HHV-6 quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) that corresponded with rising HHV-6 viral titers in the serum – 12,419 copies/mL at onset of mental status change with a peak level of 105,862 three days later – raising concern for HHV-6 encephalitis. She was treated with intravenous ganciclovir followed by oral acyclovir prophylaxis with significant improvement in her mental status and a decrease in HHV6 viral load to <1,000 copies/mL five days following peak level.
A few weeks after her transplant she began to feel herself “shaking” both at rest and with activity. Over the next month she had worsening involuntary movements impairing her ability to feed herself leading to a referral to movement disorders clinic, and subsequent neurologic examination revealed mild intermittent dystonic head posture, motor impersistence, and continuous, irregular, non-stereotyped writhing movements of the head, neck, and upper limbs particularly involving hands and fingers symmetrically, consistent with choreoathetosis (see ). She had no history of exposure to neuroleptics, metoclopramide, or prochlorperazine, and there was no personal or family history of movement disorders. The patient was diagnosed with a choreoathetotic movement disorder secondary to HHV-6 infection, though it was unclear if the movement disorder was a sequela of the primary infection or a secondary autoimmune response. Differential diagnosis also included a choreoathetotic movement disorder due to mild renal failure and/or tacrolimus toxicity. These were deemed to be less likely causes, however, as her involuntary movements began subsequent to renal function improvement at a time when she had normal serum tacrolimus levels and no recent dosage changes. As she recovered from her HHV-6 infection, she had gradual symptom improvement. When seen one month after the movement disorder was initially observed she had less pronounced head movements and was able to cut food and eat by herself. She was treated with valbenazine 40 mg daily for one week during this period without additional improvement, so this was discontinued. When seen three months from the initial diagnosis of her movement disorder, she had only mild choreiform movements of the hands, worse on the left than the right, that were not bothersome to the patient. Three months after that, her symptoms had resolved and only recurred once in the setting of a brief febrile illness.