The patient was a 60-year-old man with a history of hypertension. He had been diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the ascending colon with bowel obstruction (pT3N0M0, high risk stage II) and had undergone open right hemicolectomy approximately 2 years earlier. The surgery was done with ligation of right colic artery and ileocolic artery and vein. We encountered several small bleeders near the mesentery, and some of them were secured with silk suture ligations. We performed ileocolic anastomosis with hand-sewn technique with silk sutures and 3-0 Monocryl sutures. Oral tegafur and uracil had been administered as adjuvant chemotherapy, and no complications had been observed. After surgery, he had been regularly followed up at our institution every 3 months. However, recent abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a newly developed infiltrative heterogenous soft tissue lesion near the right mesenteric root and adjacent to the previous ileocolic anastomosis, causing regional tissue traction and small intestine adhesion . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed 2 months later revealed lesion progression with water restriction on an apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map . The lesion mimicked a pervasive tumor with desmoplastic reaction around it and the previous suture site. PET/CT was not covered by our national health insurance, and the patient did not have enough financial support to pay for a PET/CT examination. The patient denied fever, abdominal pain, nausea/vomiting, and other discomfort. However, tumor markers were elevated: the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 2.50 ng/mL (3 months earlier 2.43 ng/mL), and the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level was 50.61 U/mL (3 months earlier 33.51 U/mL). Local recurrence was therefore suspected because of the radiological features associated with progression. We have discussed with the patient and offered an option of continuing close surveillance in addition to surgery. The patient favored the surgical option, and we consequently arranged tumor resection.
During surgery, we observed a 4 cm × 4 cm × 3 cm tumor arising from the mesentery near the previous ileocolic anastomosis, with involvement of the small intestinal wall approximately 50 cm from the ileocecal valve. We excised the tumor en bloc with a LigaSure® Vessel Sealing System (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) scalpel, including the part contacting the small intestinal wall, and then repaired the small intestinal wall defect. The specimen was sent for histopathological examination. Grossly, the tumor appeared grayish and included fragments of silk suture. Under a microscope, the specimen revealed an abscess and foreign body-type granulomatous inflammation. The tumor featured chronic and acute inflammatory cell infiltration, fibrosis, necrosis, aggregation of degenerative leukocytes, foreign body-type giant cells, and granulomas . Neither mycobacteria nor fungi were identified with an acid fast or periodic acid–Schiff stain, and no evidence of malignancy was discovered. Seven days after surgery, the patient was discharged with no complications observed during the hospitalization.