A 39-year-old Caucasian woman presented in our emergency department with acute abdominal pain associated with nausea, vomiting, and signs of intestinal occlusion. The clinical history of the patient highlighted two other admissions for the same clinical signs. During the first admission, she was given an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan that demonstrated only the presence of free fluid localized in the pouch of Douglas and the perihepatic region. In relation to these signs, she was given an emergency, explorative laparotomy, with lavage of the abdomen. The laparotomy demonstrated only hyperemic jejunal and ileal handles. She was discharged after nine days without any complications. Two weeks after the patient was readmitted to the same hospital with similar symptoms, and she was treated with corticosteroids, mesalazine, and metronidazole with a complete resolution of the symptoms. Five days later, the patient was admitted to our unit. At admission, she had leukocytosis (WBC, 19.960 × 106/L) and normal levels of the coagulation parameters. She was given abdominal ultrasonography in association with Doppler ultrasonography (Esaote Megas GPX 7.5-MHz convex probe), highlighting a thrombosis of the SMA. As a result of this clinical picture, she underwent an abdominal CT scan , demonstrating the presence of a partial thrombosis of the celiac trunk, a thrombosis of the SMA for a 25- to 30-mm tract, and the lack of a splenic artery. She immediately underwent an explorative laparotomy, showing ischemic, but viable handles, and a tree revascularization by thromboendarterectomy with a Fogarty catheter was performed. In the following postoperative days, she was given a scheduled second and third look, showing necrotic handles (the first jejunal handle, the last ileal handle, and about 20 cm of the medium ileum) in the first procedure, and another necrotic tract of small bowel (the other 10 cm of the first jejunal tract) in the last procedure. During that surgical procedure, we performed duodenojejunal and three other laterolateral anastomoses to reestablish the bowel continuity. A T-tube was inserted to protect the duodenojejunal anastomosis. A cholecystectomy and biliary diversion were performed to reduce the biliary output. In relation to the risk of dehiscence, we performed a colonostomy in the right flank. During all the surgical procedures, we performed intraoperatory Doppler ultrasound of the SMA and celiac trunk to control the arterial flow without evidence of a new thrombosis. The patient stayed in the ICU for 27 days with total parenteral nutrition and antibiotics therapy. A coagulation screening demonstrated a thrombophilic state for a protein-S (16%) deficiency with normal values of VIII, IX, and XI factors. The search for antiphospholipid antibodies was negative, and the genetics test for factors II to V and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR; the deficiency of this enzyme is associated with an increased risk to develop massive thromboembolic events) was negative (no mutations). She was discharged from our unit after 37 days without any complications. After three months, the patient had a surgical procedure for restoring the bowel continuity. The patient was evaluated after one week, and one, three, and six months after discharge with blood and coagulation examinations, abdominal ultrasonography, Doppler ultrasound, and abdominal CT scan. She was asymptomatic and stayed well. At one year, we had successfully restored the bowel continuity without complications.