A 67-year-old man who complained of dyspepsia, hair loss, skin hyperpigmentation, and pedal edema was referred to Beijing Friendship Hospital by his preliminary care physician.
The patient complained that the symptoms started several months ago but were ignored by the patient and not evaluated by physicians. However, the symptoms deteriorated in the past few months, which brought him to his primary care physician who referred him to our department. The patient reported no dysphagia or odynophagia. Physical examination revealed alopecia, onychotrophia, and pitting edema in lower extremities .
Past medical history included hypertension, which was diagnosed 3 years before admission and controlled well by amlodipine 2.5 mg per day.
The patient eats a balanced diet, hardly any intake of hot food, and occasional smoking and drinking. His place of birth and living was not an endemic region of esophagus squamous cell carcinoma. Both of his parents died of natural causes and his two sisters had not been diagnosed with cancer.
Serum albumin level was 28.7 g/L (reference range: 40–55 g/L). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed a Paris 0-IIb mucosal lesion occupying 1/3 esophageal circumference originating from the mucosa layer, which was confirmed by magnifying endoscopy and endoscopic ultrasound. During a colonoscopy, numerous polyps were discovered spreading from the distal ileum to the rectum .
The patient was treated with endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for the esophageal lesion and endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) for colon polyps. Histological examination revealed that the lesion of the esophagus was squamous cell carcinoma. Hyperplastic polyps were identified in the gastric specimens. Polyps in the colon contained juvenile type polyp and inflammatory polyps .
Based on the presentation of alopecia, skin hyperpigmentation, onychotrophia, and gastrointestinal polyposis including juvenile type polyps, the diagnosis of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome was established. Prednisone 40 mg (0.67 mg per kilogram of body weight) per day was also administered, as well as nutrition supplementation and probiotics.
The patient was discharged with a better appetite, alleviated edema, and no sign of gastrointestinal hemorrhage. The patient was followed for a year and the symptoms were relieved with no recurrence of esophageal carcinoma. EGD and colonoscopy were conducted 6, 12, and 18 months after ESD, which revealed no sign of recurrence of esophageal squamous carcinoma, decreased density of gastrointestinal polyps, and healed GI mucosa.