A 15-year-old boy was referred to our unit with severe leg pain on a background of 1 week of claudication-type symptoms. On arrival, he had a dusky left lower leg with reduced sensation, reduced movements, and a capillary refill time of 7 s. Examination of the foot demonstrated an absence of the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses. Medical history included meningococcal septicemia at 2 years old with no long-term sequelae. There was no family history of vascular disease. Blood tests revealed a normal prothrombin time of 14 s and a prolonged thrombin time of 194 s. A CT angiogram demonstrated complete occlusion of the left popliteal artery with additional thrombus within the profunda femoris artery . The apparent cause for this was a mixed density lesion arising from the distal femur, compressing the femoral vessels. As thrombus was seen in the profunda without an obvious cause (the tumor was in the distal femur), a diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and paradoxical embolus was considered. An echocardiogram excluded a patent foramen ovale and subsequent imaging excluded a DVT. The exact cause of the post-traumatic femoral (PFA) thrombus was never ascertained, but the suspicion was the whole SFA thrombosed initially with thrombus spilling into the PFA, then later embolized distally away from the PFA origin.
Initial concern was that this lesion represented a malignant tumor with both osteosarcoma and chondrosarcoma within a previous osteochondroma considered. It was also considered that this could simply represent an osteochondroma with a vascular complication. Given the acute presentation, the patient was taken immediately to theater for attempted decompression of the tumor and popliteal vessels. Due to the concerns that this lesion may have represented a malignant tumor, an open biopsy was performed through a medial approach. Copious hematoma was evident which was compressing the popliteal vessels.
Following decompression, the wound was irrigated and closed and attention transitioned to the thrombectomy through the common femoral artery. Initial femoral thrombectomy was successful in retrieving a large volume of fresh thrombus. Despite this, an on-table angiogram demonstrated little flow distal to the tumor and so a repeat thrombectomy was performed. Further, angiography again demonstrated poor distal flow with the vessel, this time appearing to empty into a false aneurysm . At this point, it was decided that further thrombectomy would be futile, so a popliteal exclusion bypass was performed using ipsilateral reversed long saphenous vein to good effect. Given the ischemic time, prophylactic four-compartment fasciotomies were performed and the patient was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit on an unfractionated heparin infusion.
Intraoperative frozen sections demonstrated a predominantly fibrinous tumor with no bony or cartilaginous matrix. This was later confirmed to be an osteochondroma. Post-operative radiographs and a magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a posteromedial cortical spur without evidence of a clear chondral cap which was thought to have been removed intraoperatively .
Unfortunately, the patient returned to theater on the first post-operative night due to hemorrhage from a slipped ligature on the graft managed with a single suture. The patient was converted to warfarin on post-operative day 11 and subsequently transitioned to clopidogrel following 3 months of anticoagulant therapy. He was discharged on post-operative day 18 having made significant progress with the physiotherapists. At his 5 month follow-up, the patient remained free from claudication and demonstrates good flow on duplex ultrasonography follow-up at 1 year.