An abnormal shadow was detected in a 59-year-old man during a routine medical examination. He was asymptomatic and his past history was unremarkable. The chest roentgenogram showed a mass shadow in the right upper lung field. Chest computed tomography (CT) imaging showed a 4.5 cm × 4.0 cm mass in the S1 segment of the right lung . At the same time, we incidentally found an anomalous vessel. This vessel originated from the right upper lobe and drained into the superior vena cava (SVC) . We diagnosed the abnormality as a PAPVC. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) showed a nodule with maximum standard uptake value of 10.6. The echocardiogram showed normal cardiovascular activity without an atrial septal defect. The preoperative blood gas analysis revealed a partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) of 77.1 mmHg and partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 41.3 mmHg in room air. Spirometry revealed normal respiratory function.
Because the mass may have been lung cancer—and if so, it was believed to be a resectable lesion with a clinical staging of T2aN0M0 stage IB—a right upper lobectomy was performed using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. The anomalous pulmonary vein drained into the SVC. The pulmonary vein (V2t) was normally connected to the left atrium . Based on needle biopsy, the lesion was diagnosed as non-small cell lung cancer. A right upper lobectomy and dissection of the lymph-node were curative. The anomalous vein was mechanically cut and sutured using a stapler. We thereafter ligated and cut the normal V2t. The surgery was completed successfully. His postoperative course was uneventful without any cardiac failure. The postoperative blood gas analysis revealed a PaO2 of 72.1 mmHg and a PaCO2 of 39.1 mmHg in room air. In the resected specimen, the tumor measured 4.7 cm. It was histopathologically an invasive adenocarcinoma. The pathologic stage of the lung cancer was IB (i.e., T2aN0M0). Four months after the surgery, he remains in good health without relapse of lung cancer.