A 61-year old man was referred to our hospital for having suffered from painless gross hematuria for 2 wk.
The patient had a history of hypertension going back more than 10 years. He had not undergone systematic treatment.
The patient had no special personal or family history.
The patient’s temperature was 35.6 °C, heart rate was 80 bpm, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 121/74 mmHg. The clinical urological examination showed no abnormalities.
Routine blood examination, C reaction protein test, routine stool examination, and liver and kidney function were normal. Routine urine examination showed that the urine occult blood test was positive (+++). Neoplastic markers (CA153, CA199, CEA, AFP, NSE, and CA125) were negative .
The patient was investigated by urinary ultrasonography initially, which showed ureteral calculus at the distal end of the right ureter. Besides, multiple masses rising from the retroperitoneum and pelvis were found incidentally. In order to identify the reason of hematuria as well as define the character of the tumor, contrast–enhanced CT was performed. The contrast-enhanced abdominal-pelvic CT revealed multiple well-defined hypodense cystic lesions arising from retroperitoneum and pelvic space without enhancement . The lesions grew along the peritoneal interstitial space, the pelvic wall, and external iliac vascular deformation area, some of which showed shaping and suture-like changes. The largest one was 3.3 cm × 2.5 cm. Thus, a provisional diagnosis of multiple retroperitoneum and pelvic masses (the possibility of a malignancy cannot be ruled out) was made. To make a systematic evaluation of the general condition and a further diagnosis of the disease, F-18 FDG PET/CT was performed 1 h after injection of (10 mCi) 370 MBq of F-18 FDG. No uptake by the masses was observed on fused PET/CT images . Combining the feature of morphology and the result of no F-18 FDG uptake, the conclusion of benign tumor was made. The ureteroscopic lithotripsy as well as exploratory laparotomy was performed at last. The stone was removed, and some of the tumor tissues were prepared into pathological sections where fibrous cystic wall-like tissues were observed under an optical microscope, with proliferated lymphoid tissue inside .