A 3-year-old girl presented to a local emergency department with pain and tenderness of the dorsum of the left foot after being stepped on by a sibling 12 h prior. Her past medical history was significant for pre-term birth at 23 weeks, for which she spent 3 weeks in a tertiary care intensive care unit, and foetal alcohol syndrome. She also had intermittent asthma and a history of acute otitis media. Her immunizations were up to date and she was in the care of indigenous family services.
The patient was in the eighth percentile for weight. She was febrile at 38.8 °C and had borderline tachycardia of 140 beats min−1. Her oxygen saturation and respiration rate were within normal limits. On examination, the patient was reluctant to move her foot. Pedal pulses were palpable. No skin rashes were observed. No enlarged lymph nodes were found in femoral or neck regions. Tympanic membranes were intact with no signs of effusion. The throat was clear with no exudate, swelling or deviated uvula. There were no adventitious heart or lung sounds. The abdomen was soft and non-tender with bowel sounds present. The cranial nerve examination and peripheral nerve examination were normal.
Given the history of possible trauma, x-rays were performed of the left foot; no abnormalities or bony injuries were noted. Blood tests revealed a haemoglobin level of 125 g l−1 (normal=112–165 g l−1), a white blood cell count of 11.2×109cells l−1 (normal=4.7–10.3×109 cells l−1) and an alkaline phosphatase level of 380 IU l−1 (normal=115–375 IU l−1). Blood cultures were collected. A concern for cellulitis and/or septic arthritis was raised. The patient was admitted to the hospital for treatment and observation on intravenous (IV) cefazolin (400 mg every 8 h), oral ibuprofen (200 mg every 4–6 h as needed) and oral codeine (15 mg every 4 h as needed).
The following day, blood culture results demonstrated the growth of H. influenzae type a sensitive to ampicillin, chloramphenicol and cefotaxime, with no detection of β-lactamase enzymes. The antibiotic was switched to IV cefotaxime (500 mg every 8 h). Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) samples were collected; the CSF indices were normal with sterile cultures.
Limited improvement was seen the following day, so the patient was sent to a tertiary care facility for a bone scan. The scan showed increased flow in the left foot, specifically in the base of the left first metatarsal. On delayed images, focal increased activity was seen in the base of the first metatarsal and the first cuneiform. The findings were consistent with septic arthritis of the first tarsometatarsal joint with bone oedema on either side of the joint. Two days later, the cefotaxime dose was increased to 750 mg every 8 h (150 mg kg−1 daily).
The patient remained in hospital for 9 days. During this time the erythema and swelling improved, followed by decreased pain. Upon discharge, the left dorsum of the foot was still tender but the patient was able to walk. The patient was discharged with IV cefotaxime (750 mg every 8 h) with plans to follow up with a paediatrician in 1 week and to continue antibiotics for 6 weeks in total. The patient made a full recovery and had not had any recurrences since this time.