A 24-year-old female reported the primary complaint of a severe headache and fever of a two-week duration. She presented with a history of a headache in the right and left temporoparietal regions accompanied by fever, malaise, and vomiting, which had become worse over a one-week period. On admission, the patient was found to have an altered mental status without focal weakness. There was no history of photophobia, blurred vision, or diplopia, or any significant past medical history. On physical examination, the patient's vital signs were stable and within normal limits. On clinical examination, Kernig's sign was negative; gait and coordination were normal; and the sensory system, motor system, and cranial nerves were normal. An ophthalmologic examination including fundoscopy did not reveal any abnormality. Other systemic examinations did not reveal any significant findings. Routine complete hematological and biochemical analyses did not reveal any abnormalities. The electroencephalogram (EEG) was normal. However, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of the patient's serum was positive for anti-HSV IgM antibodies. A neurological investigation commenced. Cranial imaging with a computed tomographic (CT) scan was normal; however, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed areas of focal edema in the temporal lobes and insular cortex, as well as the angular gyrus. T2-weighted MRI revealed hyperintensity in both temporal regions medially, sparing the basal ganglia . Axial diffusion-weighted imaging revealed restricted diffusion in the right and left medial temporal lobes consistent with herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE).
Based on the serological and MRI findings, a presumptive diagnosis of HSE was made. HSV-1 disease was confirmed by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) quantification. Intravenous acyclovir was administered (750 mg every 8 h) for 14 days. The patient improved clinically. A repeat MRI following treatment showed reduced temporal enhancement. Oral valacyclovir (1,000 mg three times daily) was administered for an additional 3 months as an outpatient. The patient presented again four weeks after initial admission with the left periocular pain of a three-day duration and reduced visual acuity in the affected eye. An ophthalmologic examination revealed a swollen and hyperemic left optic disc, impaired color vision, an afferent papillary defect, and progressive vision loss in the affected eye. There was a delay in left P100 latency and reduced visual evoked potential. An MRI of the brain with fat-suppressed postgadolinium T1-weighted images including orbital cuts revealed an intensely enhanced segment in the left optic nerve . Axial and coronal short tau inversion recovery images [Figures and ] showed a faint increased signal in the left optic nerve. In comparison, the right optic nerve was normal. The MRI findings, history, and clinical spectrum indicated a diagnosis of post-encephalitic left optic neuritis. Prompt corticosteroid therapy of intravenous methylprednisolone (250 mg every 6 hours for 3 days) was initiated, followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/d) for 11 days and a 3-day tapering dose of prednisolone thereafter. The patient showed significant improvement in color vision, contrast sensitivity, and the visual field, and left eye pain resolved completely.