A 63-year-old man was diagnosed as having advanced esophageal cancer by upper endoscopy after a chief complaint of dysphagia. The tumor was located in the lower thoracic esophagus and a biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma. His body weight was 98 kg and body mass index was 30.2 kg/m2. Preoperative diagnosis of the tumor was T3N1M0 Stage III according to the TNM classification of the Union for International Cancer Control . After he received two courses of bi-weekly DCF (docetaxel 35 mg/m2, cisplatin 40 mg/m2, and fluorouracil 400 mg/m2) [, ] as neoadjuvant chemotherapy, we performed thoracoscopic esophagectomy with two-field lymphadenectomy, subtotal stomach reconstruction via the posterior mediastinal route, and jejunostomy. The cervical esophago-subtotal stomach anastomosis was created via the hand-sewn method. On postoperative day (POD) 7, the patient complained of high fever and cough, and chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) revealed a right pyothorax and air leakage . Upper gastrointestinal imaging showed no anastomotic leakage. Also, multiple right thoracic cavity drainage was performed, but no turbulent fluid flow was obtained from the thoracic tube. Therefore, we considered that the extensive pyothorax and pneumothorax had developed due to port site bleeding and hematoma infection. After conservative therapy including drainage and antibiotics, the inflammation gradually improved. The patient resumed oral intake on POD 14 and was discharged from hospital on POD 31. He was admitted to another hospital with pneumonia once after esophagectomy and treated with antibiotics.
Four months after surgery, he was re-admitted due to dyspnea, chronic cough, fever, and dysphagia. A blood gas analysis on admission reveled respiratory failure with a partial pressure of arterial oxygen of 59.2 mmHg and a partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide of 36.8 mmHg (O2, 6 L/min), and CT images revealed severe bilateral pneumonia and pneumothorax . A Gastrografin contrast study showed a persistent fistulous tract between the gastric tube and the left main bronchus . Upper endoscopy showed a circumferential ulcer of the esophagus proximal to the anastomosis and a fistula in the anterior wall of the distal esophagus . After these examinations, a nasogastric drainage tube and nutritional feeding tube from the nose to the duodenum were inserted, and treatment against pneumonia and the esophageal ulcer using a proton pump inhibitor was performed for 1 month. Although the esophageal ulcer shrank and the EBF had become slightly smaller after this treatment , digestive fluid and sputum frequently refluxed into the lung, and the respiratory disorder remained.
We considered that right thoracotomy would be too invasive and dangerous for patient who developed extensive right pyothorax after esophagectomy. We also considered separating the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts by constructing an esophagostomy, but this method could cause severe mediastinitis due to the loss of blood flow in the esophagus after esophagectomy. Therefore, we decided to perform a three-step operation for this EBF.
The first procedure was aimed at maintaining stable tube nutrition and continuous drainage of digestive fluid in the gastric tube to improve his pneumonia. We inserted a decompression catheter into the gastric tube as a gastrostomy and a feeding tube to the jejunum from the gastric tube by laparotomy under general anesthesia . This operation enabled stable nutritional management and treatment of pneumonia, and although there were two tubes in the abdomen, the nasogastric tubes could be removed, allowing the patient to be discharged temporarily. However, over the next 9 month, he repeatedly developed aspiration pneumonia.
The second procedure was performed 14 months after the esophagectomy to bring the cervical esophagus to the left cervical region as an esophagostomy . We performed intraoperative ICG-guided evaluation of blood flow through the anastomosis in the hope of confirming blood supply by collateral circulation through the anastomotic line from the gastric tube. The esophagus was taped at the left neck, the planned esophagostomy site was clamped, and ICG 25 mg/5 mL was gently injected via the peripheral blood route. The ICG fluorescence was detected with near-infrared light visualization (Stryker Co., Kalamazoo, USA). Within about 30 s after the ICG solution was injected, blood flow in distal side of the esophagus was confirmed from the gastric tube through the esophagogastric anastomosis . This procedure prevented dripping of oral saliva and digestive fluid and eliminated direct inhalation of digestive fluid via the esophago-bronchial fistula, following which the patient then underwent 3 months of physical rehabilitation and nutritional support to prepare for reversal of the esophageal discontinuity.
The third procedure was performed 17 months after the esophagectomy. The esophagus was reconstructed using a pedicle jejunum in a Roux-en-Y anastomosis via a subcutaneous route. After confirming sufficient blood flow, the second and third branches of the jejunal artery and vein were ligated, and a long segment of the jejunum was pulled up subcutaneously. Microvascular anastomoses of the right internal thoracic arteriovenous and second jejunal arteriovenous vessels were performed by plastic surgeons. The esophagostomy was closed, the cervical esophagus and the lifted jejunum were manually anastomosed, and the end of the pedicled jejunum was anastomosed to the jejunum in a Roux-en-Y configuration . Oral intake was started on POD 7, and a barium swallow study showed smooth oral intake. The patient was discharged on POD 31.