A previously healthy 61-year-old male patient presented with sudden onset of a left-sided migraine-like headache (December 26, 2019) and developed a right-sided migraine-like headache after 2 days. He was immediately admitted to a local hospital for treatment. The results of the brain CT scan (data not shown) showed acute cerebral infarction of the left occipital-parietal lobe, and he was diagnosed with acute ischemic cerebral infarction. The patient was then treated with aspirin (100 mg/day), atorvastatin (20 mg/day), and citicoline (0.6 g/day). However, he had weakness in his right limb and could not walk for 7 days after onset. He subsequently showed emotional irritability and hallucinations 8 days after onset. There was no history of blurred vision, hearing impairment, migraine headaches, or gastroenteritis. In addition, there was no history of diabetes, hypertension, or a family history of stroke, and no history of smoking or drinking. No one in his family had a similar medical history.
The patient was admitted to our hospital 11 days after onset (6 January 2020). On physical examination, his blood pressure was 112/69 mmHg, and he had lethargy and a lag in response with slow speech. He also had right homonymous hemianopia, which was shown by a slight wrinkle on the right frontal, a slight nasolabial groove on the right, and his mouth was skewed to the left with a tongue extended into the middle. The patient was given grade 1 for right upper extremity strength, grade 3 for right lower extremity strength, and grade 5 for left extremity strength, with reduced tendon reflex of the limbs. The pathological sign was negative. His score was 10 according to the United States National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS).
After 12 days of onset, clinical chemistry analysis revealed fasting blood glucose levels of 6.6 mmol/L, glycated hemoglobin levels of 6.1%, creatine kinase levels of 448 U/L, high sensitivity C-reactive protein levels of 42.1 mg/L, and arterial blood lactic acid levels of 3.3 mmol/L. The results of routine hematological tests, homocysteine, blood lipids, four coagulation tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-neutrophil antibodies, protein C, and protein S were all within the normal range. The results of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) assay showed a value of 4.13 mmol/L for lactic acid, and routine biochemistry did not reveal any abnormalities.
The first magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination was performed 12 days after onset (7 January 2020) , and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed a high signal intensity (, 3). Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed dilation of the left middle cerebral artery, posterior cerebral artery, and bilateral superficial temporal arteries . Arterial spin labeling (ASL) indicated hyperperfusion in the left occipital-temporal-parietal focal areas . There was a double inverted lactate peak at 1.33 ppm detected by magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) .
Electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring revealed several high amplitudes and sharp slow-wave activities in the left and right hemispheres, varying during waking and sleeping. A muscle biopsy was performed on the patient. The modified gomori trichrome (MGT) staining was negative . The succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)/c oxidase (COX) double staining showed a blue fiber, no positive result of blood vessel wall strength, and no obvious abnormality of muscle fiber under the electron microscope . Next, 3 ml of peripheral venous blood from the patient was drawn for genotypic detection analysis, and the results indicated mitochondrial 3243A>G mutation , which is a pathogenic mutation . The proportion of the m.3243A>G mutation in blood was 15%.
The patient was diagnosed with MELAS by gene testing. After initial treatment (adenosine triphosphate disodium 60 mg/day, coenzyme Q10 30 mg/day, and L-arginine 20 g/day), the patient's condition showed significant improvement, and he was able to live independently. The second MRI examination was performed 27 days after the first onset (22 January 2020). DWI showed that the high signal intensity of the left occipital-temporal-parietal lobe was reduced . In addition, MRA showed that the bilateral superficial temporal arteries were retracted .
Unfortunately, the patient relapsed 68 days after the first onset (3 March 2020). There was a twitch on the left limb of the patient; his limbs were weak, and he was unable to walk. The third MRI examination was performed on 3 March 2020. DWI revealed a high signal intensity , and ASL showed hyperperfusion in the right occipital-temporal-parietal focus areas . In addition, according to MRA, the left middle cerebral artery was normal, whereas the right middle cerebral artery was dilated . His limb convulsions did not recur after treatment with lamotrigine (50 mg/day), coenzyme Q10 (30 mg/day), and L-arginine (20 g/day), and his limb muscle strength weakness was improved, but he developed dementia and currently requires family care.