A 48 years old lady was admitted to cardiology ward complaining of progressively worsening breathlessness, orthopnoea and chest discomfort for 1 month. Coexisting medical conditions include chronic hypertension on treatment, with 2 episodes of spontaneous miscarriages previously and 1 episode of transient ischemic attack 3 years ago.
Clinically, she was haemodynamically stable with a wide pulse pressure. Finger clubbing was noted with livedo reticularis rashes over bilateral upper and lower limbs without ulcers or thrombophlebitis. Her peripheral pulses were bounding with water-hammered pulse, and a grade III diastolic murmur was heard during cardiac auscultation. In addition, she has elevated jugular venous pressure, crepitation over both lung bases, and bilateral pedal oedema.
Echocardiography showed dilated left atrium and left ventricles with preserved ejection fraction. Severe aortic regurgitation was found with PHT of 156 ms, mean pressure gradient of 32 mmHg, and end diastolic velocity of 29 cm/s. In addition, a vegetation sized 1.2cm2 was seen on aortic valve . Mild mitral regurgitation was also noted with thickened anterior leaflet. There was minimal pericardial effusion seen but no intracardiac thrombus. Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm with left ventricular hypertrophy and P-mitrale. Coronary angiography was subsequently done which revealed minor coronary disease.
Blood investigation revealed bicytopenic picture of anemia and thrombocytopenia, with elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Otherwise the reports were not suggestive of occult infection with normal white cell count, C-reactive protein (CRP), and negative blood cultures. D-dimer was positive but there was no features suggestive of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. Further serological investigations revealed positive antinuclear antibody (1:640), Lupus anticoagulant (LA), anti-smith antibodies, direct and indirect coombs’ test. Subsequent bone marrow aspiration and cytogenetic study showed a grossly normal specimen. She was thus treated as acute pulmonary oedema secondary to severe aortic regurgitation, precipitating by aortic valve vegetation with newly diagnosed antiphospholipid syndrome. Therapeutic enoxaparin therapy was initiated perioperatively.
She underwent aortic valve replacement, and intraoperative exposure of aortic valve revealed verrucous thickening of aortic leaflets with vegetations involving all three cusps, with rolled edge on left coronary cusp. No perforation or destruction of cusp tissue was identified. A mechanical valve was implanted following the excision of aortic valve. The course of cardiopulmonary bypass was uneventful. Subsequent microscopic findings of the valve specimen confirmed the diagnosis of Libman-Sacks endocarditis .
Postoperatively, oral anticoagulation therapy was started with international normalized ratio (INR) target of 2.5 to 3.5 with subcutaneous enoxaparin as bridging therapy. There was no excessive bleeding or major thromboembolic complications occurred during in-patient stay. Corticosteroid therapy was started at 2 months postoperatively by Hematology team. She was well and free of complications at 6 months and 1 year follow-up. Clinical examinations and echocardiography demonstrated satisfactory aortic valve function. The microbiological culture of the excised vegetations revealed sterile specimens.