A 66 year-old woman presented with gas and FI for twenty years. She has one daughter, born in 1970 by cesarean section after a long labor without pelvic lesions or lacerations. She takes the following home therapy:Telmisartan 40 mg, 1 tablet at 12 h and 1 tablet at 20 h; Levotiroxine 75 mcg, 1 tablet at 8 h; Bromazepam 1,5 mg, 1 tablet at 8 h and 1 tablet at 20 h; Clomipramine 10 mg, 1 tablet at 8 h; Nebivol 5 mg, 1 tablet at 8 h.
She refers FI of liquid or solid stool and gas incontinence two-three times per day, which had a marked negative impact on her social life. She is suffering from anxiety-depressive syndrome that worsened because of incontinence. She has changed her lifestyle, her behavior and she is very embarrassed of her incontinence.
Physical examination: nothing to report.
Rectal exploration: anal sphincter hypotonia.
Anorectal manometry was performed with detection of:Low median basal pressure: 20 mmHg (normal range 40–60 mmHg), The lower limit of normal pressure after maximal voluntary contraction: 93 mmHg, Duration of maximal voluntary contraction 15 s (normally more than 1 min), Sensitivity threshold to 30 ml (normally 40–60 ml), Threshold of subjective reflection to 40 ml (normal value 50–70 ml), Normal threshold of the inhibitory objective reflex: 40 ml (normal value 30–50 ml) .
She did not perform any medical therapy for incontinence but she has performed 3 cycles of rehabilitation with anorectal biofeedback with poor benefit.
We proposed to the patient to undergo SECCA procedure.
Lithotomy position, general anesthesia was performed. A dose of 500 mg of metronidazole was administered intravenously to induction of anesthesia. Then, 20 applications of RF through the 4 nickel needles of the device were performed from the dentate line and proceeding cranially every 5 mm to 2.5 cm total. The same procedure was performed on the 4 quadrants of the internal anal sphincter, including the recto-vaginal wall (which is often the thinnest area and for this reason not always surgically treatable). The entire procedure lasted 40 min.
The day after surgery she was discharged in good health. After 10 days she presented intermittent hyperpyrexia, leak of purulent material through the anus and anal pain. We performed general physical and proctologic examination with anoscope and found evidence of abscess of the right posterior-lateral anal wall at 2 cm from the anal verge. We have sent the purulent material for bacterial culture and antibiogram: “Escherichia coli multi resistant”. The patient has performed blood tests without indices of inflammation replaying . The authors administered antibiotic therapy with metronidazole and ciprofloxacin without satisfactory improvement of the symptoms.
Surgery has been organized to remove the abscess after 20 days from SECCA procedure.
The patient was in lithotomy position. Metronidazole 500 mg was administered intravenously. The authors explored the anal canal finding about 2 cm from the anal verge, a recess of about 2–3 cm in diameter, undermined for about 1 cm in cranial direction. Opening and deroofing with curettage of the fundus treated the abscess .
The day after surgery she was discharged in good health. Four days after the procedure, the patient was in good conditions. At 6 months follow up the patient was in good health and during the anal exploration it was possible to feel a rectal depression in the wall with a smooth consistence. In spite of the complication and subsequent surgical treatment, the procedure has been able to ameliorate the patient incontinence.