A 49-year-old Chinese man presented to the urology clinic with a complaint of penile pain during urination for 2 wk.
Symptoms started 2 wk before presentation with recurrent penile pain during urination.
Three months ago, the patient presented to a local hospital with a complaint of bloody stools for 3 mo. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed an irregular soft tissue density mass in the rectal cavity. A rectal tumour was initially suspected. Colonoscopy revealed a light-red raised cauliflower-like mass located 8 cm from the anal margin, with erosions and necrosis on the surface, accounting for 1/2 of the intestinal cavity. Endoscopic biopsy of the colorectal mass was positive for adenocarcinoma. Combined with the findings of subsequent enhanced pelvic CT, the local hospital considered the patient’s T stage as T3. No distant metastasis was found by positron emission tomography (PET)/CT. Laparoscopic RC excision (Dixon operation) with sigmoid colostomy was performed. Results of the pathological examination of the resected specimen confirmed a moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum (T4N2M0), and the tumour diameter was 4.2 cm × 3.8 cm. Metastatic tumour cells were detected in 13 of 18 resected lymph nodes. Subsequently, adjuvant XELOX chemotherapy regimen (oxaliplatin 240 mg as continuous intravenous infusion over 24 h on day 1 combined with capecitabine 1.5 g on days 1-14) was initiated as one cycle per 3 wk after surgery.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumours.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.5℃; blood pressure, 117/68 mmHg; heart rate, 82 beats per min; respiratory rate, 19 breaths per min. Furthermore, a painful nodular mass, with a diameter of 1.5 cm, was found on the left penis. There was no obvious redness and swelling. The glans, testis, and epididymis were normal. No secretion was found at the urethral orifice. Digital anal examination was not performed.
Levels of serum tumour markers were normal (carcinoembryonic antigen, 4.3 ng/mL; carbohydrate antigen 19-9, < 2 U/mL; alpha-fetoprotein, 3.1 ng/mL). No abnormality was found in routine blood and urine analyses.
Ultrasonography revealed a hyper-echoic mass, with a diameter of 1.5 cm, on the root of the left penis . Mass biopsy was recommended; however, the patient refused. Subsequent PET/CT revealed that the penile lesion had a clear edge and high fluorodeoxyglucose uptake, so a tentative diagnosis of malignancy was made. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a nodular and mildly enhanced mass on the left penis.