A 28-year-old female was referred to our hospital with sudden severe headache and vomiting. She fell into a coma during transportation, and was initially treated in the intensive care unit. Prior to this event, she had been in good health except that she often experienced migraine-like headaches. On admission, she was assessed as Glasgow Coma Scale 4 (E1V1M2), and her blood pressure was 125/84 mmHg, heart rate was 67/min (regular in rhythm), respiratory rate was 16/min, body temperature was 36.2oC, and routine laboratory blood tests showed no remarkable abnormalities. Her pupils were 2.5-mm prompt when reacting to direct light on the right side and 3.0-mm sluggish when reacting to direct light on the left side. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of her head revealed a large heterogeneous-dense space-occupying lesion in the trigone of the left lateral ventricle with midline shift to the right. The oval-shaped lesion was approximately 6.5 × 5.0 × 5.0 cm in size with intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH), which extended forwards into the third and fourth ventricles . CT angiography showed no vascular abnormality such as aneurysm, vascular malformation, or tumor stain. The patient was thus a relatively young female with no symptoms until onset who had developed a massive intracranial hemorrhage, which made it difficult initially to consider hemorrhage due to meningioma.
Our first impression derived from these findings was acute intracranial hemorrhage in the left ventricular trigone, although the cause of the hemorrhage was unclear. Her clinical status was so bad that urgent extraction of the hematoma was performed in order to save her life. A massive hematoma was removed and the enlarged left lateral ventricle was opened through the occipital pole cortex via a left occipitoparietal craniotomy. The hematoma consisted of one part that could be easily evacuated and another part, located mainly on the deep side, that was solid and bled easily. The surgery was terminated after confirming that a large amount of the hematoma had been debulked, leaving a portion in which hemostasis was difficult. Histological examinations of the solid part revealed a meningioma with massive hemorrhage within the tumor and many irregular vessels, including softened thin-walled vessels, closed vessels, etc., at the peripheral area of the tumor . Closed arteries with organized reaction suggested a possibility of old hemorrhage. Spindle-shaped tumor cells were arranged in fascicular or storiform structures, and a few psammoma bodies were observed. Nuclear atypia or mitosis was rarely seen, and the Ki-67 proliferative index was less than 3 %. The tumor also extended to the choroid plexus, suggesting its derivation. The diagnosis of the 1st surgical specimen was fibrous meningioma, WHO grade 1. The intracranial hematoma was therefore thought to be due to intratumoral hemorrhage in a left lateral ventricular trigone meningioma. Postoperatively, the patient recovered well, but was diagnosed with right homonymous hemianopsia, right hemiparesis, and right abducens nerve palsy. Cerebral angiography was performed 5 days after the first operation and did not show any abnormality such as aneurysm, vascular malformation, or tumor satin. However, follow-up head CT demonstrated a residual tumor in the trigone of the left lateral ventricle .
At 42 days after admission to our institution, 2nd surgery was performed to remove the residual tumor using the same approach as in the 1st surgery. The tumor was found to be relatively soft and well-demarcated. It arose from the choroid plexus, with arterial blood supplied from the medial and posterior lateral choroidal arteries, and was removed completely. Microscopic examinations of the 2nd surgical specimen yielded a diagnosis of fibroblastic meningioma with a Ki-67 proliferative index of l − 2 %. Abundant hemosiderin deposits, indicating prior hemorrhage, were visible within the tumor. The patient’s 2nd postoperative course was uneventful, and no residual intraventricular tumor was found on her follow-up imaging . She was discharged from our hospital after the 30th post-2nd-surgery day. She was seen to be in a good state at the 15-month follow-up, demonstrating recovery from her right hemiparesis and right abducens nerve palsy, although her hemianopsia was not resolved.