A 65-year-old man was admitted to the respiratory intensive care unit (RICU) on December 15, 2018, after experiencing symptoms of fever, cough, and left chest pain for 10 days and dyspnea for 1 day. He had had hypertension, diabetes mellitus and diabetic nephropathy for many years and had controlled these conditions by taking medication. On admission, the patient showed high scores of 21, 4, and 6, respectively, on the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II), SOFA, and Geneva scales. His bedside chest film showed serious left pleural effusions with right lung inflammation , and rising inflammatory markers (white blood cells (WBC) 27.55*109/L, procalcitonin (PCT) 2.8900 ng/ml and C-reactive protein (CRP) > 200 mg/L) with some other poor laboratory results (D dimer 0.5 mg/l, lactic acid 10.40 mol/L, albumin 23.4 g/L, creatinine 171.7 µmol/L, B-type natriuretic peptide precursor 1437.00 pg/mL). The patient was treated with carbapenems and glycopeptides , the antibacterial spectrum of which covered Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria, Pseudomonas and anaerobes. At the same time, the patient was also treated with noninvasive ventilation (ST mode, FiO2 90%, F 18 BPM, IPAP 13 cmH2O, EPAP 5 cmH2O), cardiotonic and sodium bicarbonate. A few hours later, the patient developed irritability, cool and moist limbs and shock. A 780 mL purulent liquid–gas mixture was extracted from his left chest cavity, and a thoracic drainage tube was placed into the left chest for continuous drainage. Examination of the pleural effusion showed that the total number of cells was 681,889*106/L, and the number of nucleated cells was 245,589*106/L. After these measures, the patient's dyspnea was slightly relieved.
This patient worsened from his second day of admission. He began to exhibit hypotension with respiratory distress. His OI dropped to 67 mmHg. The laboratory tests yielded worse indicators—WBC 38.63*109/L, PCT 19.0700 ng/m, CRP > 200 mg/L, BNP 4711.00 pg/m and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) decreased to 26 mL/min. The bedside chest film showed encapsulated pneumothorax on the left chest cavity . Endotracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation were implemented (P-A/C mode, FiO2 100%, F 18/min, Pi 16 cmH2O, PEEP 4 cmH2O). At the same time, a sedative, an analgesic and a muscle relaxant were employed. Norepinephrine, low molecular weight heparin, enteral nutrition and parenteral nutrition support were also used. Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed to identify extensive erosion and edema of the bronchial mucosa and serious obstruction of the airway by copious purulent secretions. Daily bronchoalveolar lavage was carried out for the next 11 days to extubation.
Bedside CRRT was performed for 8–12 h a day for 3 consecutive days from the third day of admission, and the ultrafiltration volume was 150 mL, 100 mL and 1116 mL, respectively. After CRRT, the patient maintained stable vital signs without using norepinephrine and muscle relaxants. From the 5th day of admission, gamma globulin was given at 20 g a day for 3 consecutive days, after which the OI of the patient increased gradually . During the treatment, the sputum culture suggested yeast-like fungal growth, while multiple blood cultures did not indicate any positive results. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, whose sensitivity test suggested that it was sensitive to minocycline, was found in the left pleural pus. Aspergillus was observed in the sputum of the endotracheal tube. Aspergillus fumigatus was present in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Therefore, the treatment was supplemented with antifungal agents and minocycline.
On the 10th day, this patient developed subcutaneous emphysema with dyspnea . Considering that compression and obstruction of the drainage tube could inhibit improvement of this syndrome, the closed thoracic drainage tube was replaced. On the 12th day, the inflammatory markers continued to decrease, and the eGFR increased to 53.6 mL/min. Spontaneous breathing experiments (SBT) were performed for 2 h, and the rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI) was 80. Then, the endotracheal tube was removed, and the patient was switched to noninvasive mechanical ventilation. The thoracic drainage tube was removed on the 14th day, and the anti-infective regimens at that time were sulbactam, cefoperazone, vancomycin, minocycline and caspofungin. On the 17th day, the patient’s bedside chest film showed reduced inflammation and basically absorbed subcutaneous gas . Nasal catheters replaced noninvasive mechanical ventilation, and biapenem was used alone to resist infection on the 21st day. The patient discharged himself from the hospital after 35 days of admission and was satisfied with the treatment method and effect. He was followed-up at the outpatient clinic of the same hospital. He is presently leading a normal life, with his eGFR remaining at 60 mL/min (as of October 2020).