We report on a 4 years and 6 months old Ethiopian boy who presented to Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital, Addis Ababa, with a recurrence of cough and fast breathing of five days. His respiratory complaints had been waxing and waning over the past few months and was at presentation on his 5th month of anti-tuberculous treatment which was not relieving his illness. He also had low grade fever, grunting, poor appetite and failure to thrive. His past medical history showed repeated treatment for pneumonia and otitis media. He also had epistaxis and occasional passage of stool mixed with bright red blood since infancy. He was on follow-up for generalized itchy skin lesions since 7 months of age. He was treated at age 2 years for pulmonary tuberculosis and declared cured.
He was the third child for his family, a product of non-consanguineous parents. His immediate older brother had died at age 2 years of similar illness. He has an apparently healthy older sister. All maternal brothers had died in childhood due to recurrent severe infections. There was no history of delayed separation of his umbilical cord. He received all ageappropriate vaccines with no post-vaccine adverse reactions reported. Despite not being vaccinated against meningococcal infections, he had record of being treated for neither meningococcemia nor meningitis.
He appeared chronically sick with extensive skin lesions but no dysmorphia. His pulse rate was 108/minute, respiratory rate 52/minute, temperature 36.4oC and saturation of oxygen in room air of 82%. He was underweight (weight = 12 kg). He had profuse purulent discharge from his right ear with an excoriated right pinna. He had no oral thrush. He had submandibular lymphadenopathy and hepatomegaly of 12 cm. He had crusted lesions on the scalp and face and hypopigmented lesions on trunk and extremities . He also hadumblicated small nodules over face and extremities and clubbing.
His total white blood cell was 6800/mm3 (normal for age: 4000 – 12000/mm3). His absolute neutrophil count was 3700/mm3, absolute lymphocyte count was 2300/mm3, absolute eosinophil count was 14/mm3.
His hemoglobin was 10.2 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume 81.4 fl, platelets 9000/mm3 (normal: 150,000 – 400,000/mm3) and mean platelet volume 8.5 fl (normal 9.4 – 12.3 fl).
The peripheral smear showed thrombocytopenia with no inclusions in lymphocytes, neutrophils or platelets. His chest X-ray showed bilateral reticulonodular infiltrates and no thymic aplasia. A GeneXpert molecular test from his gastric aspirate was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. His abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly with no focal lesions. His HIV serologic test was negative. His short hospital stay could not enable work-up for autoimmune disorders.
A clinical diagnosis of WAS was made based on his gender, early death of male family members, recurrent pulmonary and ear infections, bleeding tendencies, eczema, thrombocytopenia, small platelets, normal lymphocyte and neutrophil counts. Despite parenteral and otic antibiotics and platelet transfusions, the platelet count remained below 20,000/mm3 and he succumbed due to his illness. Prophylactic Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole and Acyclovir had been initiated. Intravenous immunoglobulins were not available in the hospital formulary. Hematopoietic cell transplantation (definitive treatment) is not performed in Ethiopia.