An 85-year-old man with a medical history significant for ASH, hypertension,
hyperlipidaemia, and severe aortic stenosis presented to our centre for worsening dyspnoea
with the New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III symptoms with no reported angina nor
syncope. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg, heart rate was 76
b.p.m. Cardiac auscultation was remarkable for an aortic systolic murmur best heard at the
second intercostal space with a significant decrease in S2. The transthoracic echocardiogram
(TTE) showed ASH with a diastolic septal diameter of 17 mm, a fixed LVOT gradient of
11 mmHg, moderately calcified aortic valve associated with severe stenosis (mean gradient of
42 mmHg, the maximal velocity of 4.05 m/s, the continuity equation was not applicable to
calculate aortic valve area due to accelerated jet in the LVOT), an ejection fraction (EF)
of 60%, and normal systolic pulmonary artery pressure. Cardiac catheterization revealed
normal coronary angiogram. He had a low risk for open-heart surgery (Logistic Euro score
7.96%, STS score 2.9%) with a frail physical state for which the Heart team decided to refer
him for TAVI. Computed tomography and angiography showed ASH with a moderately calcified
aortic valve, mild LVOT calcifications , and an accessible femoral route.
The TAVI procedure was performed with a 26 mm Sapien 3 bioprosthetic valve (Edwards
Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). The initial result was acceptable, with no PVL nor coronary
obstruction. We noticed an upward movement of the valve during implantation . There was no pre- nor post-dilations required. No
electrical or access site complications were encountered. The patient was transferred to the
cardiac ward.
Later that day, the patient developed chest discomfort associated with atrial fibrillation
with a rapid ventricular response at 130 b.p.m. and non-specific ST-T changes. A TTE showed
normal EF, a mean aortic gradient of 8 mmHg, a fistula jet reaching from the LVOT to the RA,
no right ventricular dilation, no right atrial dilation, and no pericardial effusion.
Transoesophageal echocardiogram showed mild PVL, and an LVOT pseudo-aneurysm, that is
associated with an LVOT to the RA fistula. The fistula's jet was lining the tricuspid valve
plane with a maximal gradient of 123 mmHg . A post-procedure computed
tomography (CT) scan showed that the bioprosthesis was well placed with no significant PVL,
no coronary artery obstruction. At the level of the LVOT, there exists a small
pseudo-aneurysm of 5 mm, immediately upstream of the valve prosthesis. It is extended by a
fistulous track towards the RA of an ∼2 mm diameter, where the jet flushes parallel to and
outlining the tricuspid valve plane .
The patient remained asymptomatic during the course of the hospitalization and was
discharged home on Day 7 post-TAVI. The follow-up TTE was done 1 month later showed a
persistence of the fistula with an increase in size (from 2 to 2.95 mm) and an increased
colour jet and gradient (maximal gradient 166 mmHg) ( and ).