A 54-year-old woman experienced an episode of left-sided hemiplegia at 5:30 AM, March 29, 2009, when she was about to get up from bed. The initial episode lasted 5 minutes and disappeared spontaneously. Two subsequent episodes of the stereotype recurred and lasted 20 minutes and 30 minutes respectively, with complete recovery between such that she could walk, eat and go to the bathroom by herself. At 1 PM she developed severe left-sided hemiplegia and moderate dysarthria, which lasted 6 hours without recovery. Then she was sent to our emergency department in a wheel chair. Her general examination revealed a blood pressure of 120/75 mm Hg, and other findings were unremarkable. On neurologic examination, she was alert with moderate dysarthria, presenting with severe left central facial palsy and mild left hemiglossoplegia. Left-sided hemiplegia was severe in the upper and lower limbs (Medical Research Council scale grade 0), with decreased tone and left extensor plantar response. No sensory or cortical signs were seen. Her neurologic status was 10 on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS). She had had a 10-year history of hypertension, and started on oral nifedipine 10 mg three times per day in the last two years. She had seldom measured her blood pressure levels so that she did not know the exact value of her blood pressure. Her serum low density lipoprotein-cholesterol concentration was 3.83 mmol/L. Fasting blood glucose, 30-minutes blood glucose and 2-hours blood glucose after oral glucose tolerance test were 5.80 mmol/L, 14.08 mmol/L and 12.80 mmol/L, respectively. No significant abnormality was detected on cranial CT scan on admission. MRI revealed an acute right paramedian pontine infarct 6 days after the onset of the fixed hemiplegia . MRA showed diffused mild atherosclerosis, and no significant stenosis or occlusion within major intracranial arteries. She was commenced on oral clopidogrel, atorvastatin and acarbose. After 23 days of hospitalization, she was discharged with severe left hemiplegia (grade 3 in the proximal and grade 1 in the distal of the left limbs), and her neurologic status was 5 on NIHSS.