In February 2018, a 62-year-old woman with a previous light smoking history (five packs/year) was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma with pleural, pericardial, lymph nodal and bone metastases. After two cycles of first-line chemotherapy with cisplatin and pemetrexed (best response stable disease) and the detection of an EZR-ROS1 fusion on liquid biopsy (InVisionFirst-Lung amplicon-based assay), confirmed by FISH on tumor sample, the patient received entrectinib 600 mg daily since July 2018. No relevant side effects were recorded and partial response was achieved after two months. In November 2019, multiple brain lesions were detected , without extra-cerebral progression. Patient complained the recent onset of right harm and gait impairment, conditioning an ECOG performance status (PS) of 2. Entrectinib was suspended and fractionated stereotactic brain radiotherapy was performed on the five largest metastases (the remaining ones being sub-centimetric) . In January 2020, after entrectinib resumption, new brain MRI and CT scan respectively detected meningeal carcinomatosis , with partial regression of the irradiated metastases , and thoracic progression (carcinomatous lymphangitis and parenchymal lesions increase, pleural effusion onset, ). A lumbar puncture was positive for tumor cells and for an EZR-ROS1 fusion was detected in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by the Oncomine™ Lung cfDNA Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), without additional mutations across the kinase domain, potentially implicated in resistance. Meanwhile, neurocognitive disorders worsened, with the onset of visual hallucinations and psycho-motor deficiency (ECOG PS 3). After having received the approval within a “temporary authorisation for use” program, third line lorlatinib 100 mg daily was initiated at the end of January 2020 and led to a rapid neurological improvement in the very next days, leading to patient’s discharge. CT scan and brain MRI of March 2020, performed six weeks after treatment start, detected thoracic response , with major regression of brain and meningeal involvement (, ). At the last follow-up of October 2020 after nine months since lorlatinib initiation, the patient is in good clinical conditions (ECOG PS 1), intra- and extra-cranial disease response is maintained, and the TKI is well tolerated without toxic effects (eg hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, weight increase, neurocognitive disorders).