Patient was a 24-year-old male engineer who presented remotely via telephone (patient was traveling at the time) to his chiropractor with chief complaint of intense headache. This condition began insidiously 24 h earlier. One week prior to the onset of the headache, the patient played semi-elite basketball but denied a traumatic incident. Five days prior to the onset, the patient drove for 12 h and participated in repetitive bending and heavy lifting of furniture.
Pain was located across the parietal and frontal regions of the head. Patient described the pain as intense in nature and rated his symptoms as 11 out of 10 on a numeric pain rating scale. There was associated nausea and vomiting. Patient described the vomiting as nonprojectile. He also was experiencing diaphoresis and a sensation of clamminess across his face. Patient denied dysphagia, dysarthria, dizziness, diplopia or gait irregularities. There was no facial weakness or numbness. There were no prodromal symptoms associated with the headache. Patient denied upper or lower extremity pain, paresthesias or weakness. Cognition, mood and mental functions were normal. Headache pain, nausea and vomiting were aggravated when the patient was upright. Bending over and lying down almost instantaneously relieved the head pain to level 1/10.
Right olecranon fracture and repair 2017. Appendectomy 4 weeks prior to the onset of his headache. The rest of the health history was normal. Patient took no medications.
Patient’s father was 6 ft 9 in. (205.7 cm) without a history of connective tissue disorder.
Self-reported height 6.8 in. (205 cm). Patient reported full cervical range of motion which did not aggravate the headache. Bending forward motion with lumbosacral flexion range of motion decreased the headache pain to level 1/10.
Postural headache.
Chiropractic physician referred the patient to a nearby hospital for management of a postural headache.
Patient reported to a local hospital the following day. He was diagnosed with a headache and was given intravenous fluids and discharged with opioid medication. He initially improved, however, within 2 h the pain worsened again. He telephoned his chiropractor who referred him back to the emergency room with a diagnosis of a postural headache likely due to a CSF leak. Patient decided to consult with a local general practitioner rather than returning to the emergency department. Family physician diagnosed atypical migraine and ordered CT scan of the brain. Patient was seen 2 days later. CT scan of the brain was read as normal. The general practitioner, however, suspected a CSF leak and had the patient transported by ambulance to local hospital emergency department where he was evaluated by a neurologist. During this time, patient’s status deteriorated with persistent intense headaches and multiple episodes of projectile vomiting. MRI of the brain was performed and revealed features of intracranial hypotension with mild diffuse thickening of the pachymeningeal enhancement overlying the brain parenchyma. Neurologist diagnosed spontaneous intracranial hypotension (SIH). Patient was initially placed on caffeine. Following the neurologist diagnosis of SIH, a lumbar puncture was performed (9 days after the onset of the headache). 20 mL of autologous blood was retrieved from the cubital vein and inserted into the epidural space which reproduced his intense headache. He was observed for 6 h following the lumbar puncture and was discharged after headache was reduced to pain level 2–3/10 in the standing position. The headache completely resolved within the following 2 days. Patient remained inactive for 1 week and then resumed short walks. He was advised to avoid lifting or strenuous activity for 1 month. He returned to competitive basketball after 1 month.