A 47-year-old gentleman, presented direct to the emergency department with central chest pain. He was a non-smoker with no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or family history of ischaemic heart disease. He had no history of illicit drug use. He experienced retrosternal chest pain of 6 h duration radiating to both shoulders. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed hyperacute T waves in anterior chest leads . Clinical examination was unremarkable. He had ongoing chest pain and was transferred to the cardiac cath lab on the primary PCI pathway. He was given 300 mg of Aspirin and 60 mg of Prasugrel. A bolus of 5000 IU of heparin was given with the aim to achieve activated clotting time of 300 s. Radial access coronary angiogram showed occlusion of proximal left anterior descending (LAD) (TIMI 0 flow) with angiographic evidence of large thrombus burden . Left main stem and left circumflex artery were free from disease. Pre-dilatation with a 2.5 × 15 mm balloon did not change flow and therefore aspiration with an Export catheter was carried out which was successful in retrieving a large amount of thrombus . The procedure was covered with Eptifibatide bolus. After thrombectomy, there was no obvious angiographic lesion within the LAD with TIMI III flow. We therefore performed OCT which confirmed only mild atheroma with a small amount of plaque and minimal red thrombus. There was OCT evidence of plaque erosion without any plaque rupture ( and ). The luminal area was above 9 mm2 and we decided not to treat this with a stent. The right coronary artery had an anterior take-off and was unobstructed. Laboratory tests post-procedure showed high-sensitivity troponin I level of >50 000 ng/L (normal <34 ng/L) with normal lipid profile. Echocardiogram post-PCI showed normal left ventricular size with impaired systolic function with regional wall motion abnormalities affecting the LAD territory. Estimated ejection fraction 48% ± 5%. He was discharged home after 72 h and placed on 12 months of DAPT with Aspirin 75 mg o.d. and Prasugrel 10 mg o.d. The patient has remained angina free so far.