A 32-year-old Caucasian man consulted his primary care physician because of left upper-quadrant abdominal pain, dyspnea upon exertion, drenching night sweats, and unintentional weight loss. His initial clinical examination revealed tachycardia of 120 beats/minute, pronounced pallor, and splenomegaly of 8 cm×26 cm. Laboratory analysis showed a leukocyte count of 327×109/L, a hemoglobin level of 7.0 g/dL, and a platelet count of 377×109/μL. The patient's lactate dehydrogenase level was significantly elevated at 1080 IU/L. His coagulation tests showed a normal activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 34 seconds (< 36 seconds) and an international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.1. The patient was taking no medications.
He was immediately referred to our Department of Hematology and Oncology. There a bone marrow aspiration was performed, and cytomorphologic as well as cytogenetic analysis was carried out. Microscopic examination showed a left-shifted granulopoiesis with 8% blasts and 20% promyelocytes. The alkaline phosphatase index was 2. A BCR-ABL fusion transcript (coefficient 26.074 = 100×bcr-abl/abl) could be identified by polymerase chain reaction assay. Thus, the diagnosis of a Ph+ CML in chronic phase was made.
The patient initially underwent leukapheresis twice and then received cytoreductive chemotherapy with hydroxyurea. Simultaneously, the search for a bone marrow donor was initiated. After 14 days, normal leukocyte counts were reached and the therapeutic regimen was switched to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib. While the initial management efficiently led to a reduction of CML blasts, the patient encountered a severe complication of a standard diagnostic procedure: three days after bone marrow aspiration at the left superior posterior iliac spine he complained about massive pain in his left buttock. A clinical examination revealed massive swelling that was extremely tender to touch. The increasing pain necessitated the use of continuous intravenous morphine. Computed tomography revealed a large hematoma in the left gluteal region. One day after the onset of symptoms surgery became necessary because of increasing swelling accompanied by a drop of the hemoglobin and impending compartment syndrome. During surgery, diffuse bleeding was noted without an identifiable lesion to major vessels or other anatomic structures. The hematoma (about 500 mL) was evacuated, and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) as well as packed red blood cells (PRBCs) were given to the patient. At the time of surgery, PTT was 40 seconds, the INR was 1.4, and the platelet count was 300×109/L. The patient's post-operative course was complicated by continuous bleeding with a further increase in size of the hematoma and extension into the left leg, renewed deterioration of coagulation parameters, and onset of fever (< 38.5°C). Continuous substitution of FFP and PRBCs was necessary, and surgery had to be repeated on day 9. Because of continuous post-operative bleeding and the risk of compartment syndrome, the wound was left open to reduce tissue pressure. The bleeding time assessed according to the modified template method was prolonged at 13 minutes. Therefore, further platelet function tests were performed. Occlusion times determined by using a platelet function analyzer (PFA-100; Dade Behring, Inc., Deerfield, IL, USA) were 152 seconds for adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (71 to 118 seconds) and > 300 seconds for collagen/epinephrine (C/Epi) (94 to 193 seconds), respectively. As the patient had no history of bleeding prior to the diagnosis of CML, further laboratory examinations for other pathological bleeding situations were not performed. Therefore, despite increased platelet counts, platelet transfusions were initiated. Following the platelet substitution, his bleeding ceased quickly. The patient could be discharged 10 days later. At that time, the patient had paresis of the leg with a positive Trendelenburg's sign due to compression of the superior gluteal nerve. His bleeding time was still highly pathologic upon discharge.
We assumed that the patient's platelet dysfunction originated from a clonal expansion of dysfunctional megakaryocytes derived from the identical stem cell from which the CML blasts had originated. We therefore hypothesized that treatment targeting BCR-ABL would be equally effective in reducing the CML blasts and dysfunctional megakaryocytes. Despite the risk of hemorrhage in this patient, we therefore continued a single-agent treatment strategy with imatinib in an outpatient setting.
No further episodes of bleeding occurred during the follow-up of the patient. During that time, the patient underwent dental surgery without experiencing excessive bleeding. The defect in the gluteal region disappeared completely as a result of secondary wound healing, and the paresis regressed steadily. Six months after discharge from the hospital the patient was in excellent health. At his last complete laboratory follow-up four years later, his bleeding time was normal (four minutes) and his C/Epi occlusion time was 211 (94 to 193 seconds). He was in complete molecular remission. Six years after the incident the patient remains clinically in very good health without any signs of bleeding and continues to be in complete molecular remission.