Our patient was a 60-year-old Caucasian woman who presented with recurrent left pneumothoraces. She also had mild scoliosis, an increased metacarpal index and mitral valve prolapse. There was a family history of mitral valve prolapse affecting both her mother and one of her daughters. Her brother has Usher's syndrome. Her parents were first cousins. An initial presumptive diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV was made but no confirmatory tests were carried out.
Over the next 10 years, our patient developed further pneumothoraces requiring video-assisted pleurodeses and bullectomy. Serial computed tomography (CT) scans showed the presence of cystic lung disease which was more marked at the bases; and development of mild bronchiectasis . In late 2004, she and her daughter, who was expecting her first child, were seen by clinical geneticists. On examination, it was found that our patient did not exhibit any of the expected complications of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The presumptive diagnosis was then reconsidered.
Our patient was noted to have pale, flat macules over her face and forehead , which had been present for at least 10 years. In conjunction with the recurrent pneumothoraces, this was suggestive of BHDS. A biopsy of a lesion from her neck confirmed the presence of a fibrofolliculoma, a characteristic skin finding. An abdominal CT scan revealed a 1.7 cm lesion in the lower pole of the left kidney (T1 N0 M0). This was excised in a partial nephrectomy and was found to be a hybrid oncocytoma. The tumor was a 20 × 16 × 15 mm well-circumscribed, solid lesion with a macroscopically clear margin of 2 mm at the closest point. Microscopically, the nodule was predominantly composed of oncocytes interspersed with a smaller proportion of clear cells with uniform nuclei, and with focal cyst formation. The pathological stage was pT1a. Germline mutation analysis of the folliculin (FLCN) gene by polymerase chain reaction and sequencing identified a pathogenic mutation c.2052-2053 del, p.GlnfsX in exon 14. The mother of our patient and our patient's daughter carry the mutation and have fibrofolliculomas but no other phenotypic features. Our patient remains well and no further renal tumors have been detected.