The patient is a 55-year-old white male with a history of hypertension, type II diabetes, resulting in hypertensive and diabetic nephropathy, as well as NASH cirrhosis. This diagnosis was further complicated by hepatorenal syndrome, hepatic encephalopathy, esophageal varices, and ascites requiring multiple endoscopies for variceal banding and paracenteses. Abdominal imaging demonstrated cirrhosis without evidence of hepatocellular carcinoma. He did have evidence of portal hypertension, splenomegaly, and thrombosed main portal vein with poor distal reconstitution. In October of 2017, the patient received combined liver-kidney transplantation with en bloc graft. The donor was a brain dead 42-year-old white male. His terminal creatinine was 1.1 mg/dL and liver function tests were within normal limits.
Organ recovery was performed using standard techniques for donation after brain death (DBD) as previously described using histidine-tryptophan-ketoglutarate (HTK) solution for flushing . The liver and right kidney allografts were procured en bloc, dividing the inferior vena cava (IVC) inferior to the right renal vein. The renal allograft did have a main hilar artery and an inferior polar artery. Standard liver and kidney back-table reconstruction was performed. However, an arterioplasty was performed on the main and lower pole renal arteries followed by end-to-end anastomosis to the donor splenic artery using 7-0 polypropylene sutures ( A, B).
The recipient hepatectomy was performed in the standard fashion with ligation of the hepatic arteries, common hepatic duct, and portal vein. A portal vein thrombectomy was performed using eversion technique, extended down to the confluence of the superior mesenteric vein and splenic vein resulting in adequate portal flow. The right colon was mobilized medially to identify the proximal right ureter.
Transplantation was performed by modified piggy-back technique with a side-to-side cavo-caval anastomosis. The portal venous anastomosis was completed in a standard end-to-end fashion. Next, the arterial inflow to the allografts was performed by anastomosing the donor celiac artery to the recipient common hepatic artery. The renal arteries were positioned posterior to the portal vein and donor IVC. Portal venous and arterial flow was restored to the en bloc organs. The lower pole of the kidney did not demonstrate brisk perfusion compared to the rest of the allograft, with poor Doppler signal in the lower pole artery. Therefore, the lower pole artery was re-anastomosed to the donor left gastric artery stump anterior to the portal vein, resulting in excellent flow. Finally, an end-to-side ureteroureterostomy was performed to the recipient’s right ureter over two Double-J stents . Total operative time was 8 h, wherein CIT was 4 h and warm ischemia time (WIT) was 40 min.
Postoperative liver and transplant kidney Doppler studies demonstrated normal portal vein flow (86.4 cm/s), normal hepatic artery flow with resistive index (RI) slightly elevated at 0.75, and normal arterial waveforms on kidney Doppler with RI ranging from 0.56 to 0.66 between upper pole and lower pole. Improvements in serum creatinine and liver function tests were noted immediately post-transplantation and continued to improve. The patient’s operative course was uncomplicated and he was discharged on postoperative day six. At 30-day follow up, the portal vein remained patent with normalization of hepatic artery RI at 0.68 and stable range of intrarenal arterial RI (0.49–0.53). The ureteral stents were removed by rigid cystoscopy and ureteroscopy with basket extraction by Urology 6 weeks post-transplantation.