A 49-year-old male presented to the urology clinic after incidental detection of a renal mass. He was asymptomatic, without any hematuria, flank pain, constitutional symptoms, or prior urological history. His past medical history was remarkable for morbid obesity, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, asthma, osteoarthritis, and gastro-esophageal reflux disease. His only prior surgery was a pannulectomy. He reported no relevant family history. Physical examination was unremarkable, except for an obese abdomen and a large ventral hernia. Patient weighed 400 lbs., having previously weighed 500 lbs. His bloodwork showed a hemoglobin of 131 g/L, creatinine of 96 umol/L, and eGFR of 80 ml/min/1.73m2.
A CT scan of the abdomen was done as part of a workup for abdominal pain. This revealed a large exophytic heterogeneous mass measuring 9.1 × 9.1 × 10.5 cm in the lower pole of the left kidney . There was no lymphadenopathy, regional invasion, or distant metastases seen. Bilaterally there were renal cysts without hydronephrosis or hydroureter. A pre-operative CT scan of the chest and bone scan were both negative for metastatic disease. A renogram showed that the large left renal mass was poorly functioning and that there was significant tubular dysfunction affecting both kidneys symmetrically. The function was estimated as 43% on the left and 57% on the right. Review of CT with urology and radiology was suggestive of T2A, N0, M0 renal cell carcinoma. Because of the high likelihood of RCC diagnosis, pre-operative biopsy was offered to the patient, but felt to be unnecessary.
Four months after presentation, he underwent an uncomplicated open left partial nephrectomy. He recovered expectantly post-operatively. The tumor was confined to the kidney with negative surgical margins; pathological stage was pT2a, Nx, Mx.
Since the patient’s surgery, he has been seen in follow up every 6 months with CT imaging. To date, he has remained without evidence of any local or distant tumour recurrence.
Gross examination revealed a firm-to-rubbery 10 cm tumor located in the lower pole of the left kidney. The tumor was tan brown with areas of hemorrhage and a pale yellow scarred area measuring 3.2 cm.
Microscopic examination showed a solid renal tumor. The cells were intermediate to large in size with partially vacuolated eosinophilic cytoplasms. The nuclei were round (non-resinoid) and without prominent nucleoli or apparent perinuclear halos. The tumor was classified as ISUP nucleolar grade 1 of 4. . There was no necrosis, sarcomatoid change or increased number of mitotic figures. The tumor cells stained positive for PAX8, AE1/AE3, CAM 5.2, p504S, and EMA. The tumor cells were negative for SDHB, CD117, CK7, CK20, CD10, vimentin, RCC, S100, HMB-45, Melan-A, myogenin, SMA, calretinin, inhibin, DOG1, E-cadherin, and CD56 .
The absence of SDHB staining by immunohistochemistry confirmed SDH -deficient RCC. Most individuals with SDH -deficient RCC have underlying germline mutations in one of the SDH genes. The patient subsequently underwent genetic counselling and germline mutation analysis of the SDH genes was carried out. This revealed a pathogenic mutation in the SDHB gene.
Since there is an increased risk of paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas in SDHB mutation carriers, surveillance for these neoplasms was carried out. A baseline CT scan of the neck/chest/abdomen/pelvis, utilized as the patient’s body habitus precluded MRI scanning, revealed no significant abnormalities aside from post-operative changes post partial nephrectomy. Similarly, baseline 24-h urinary collection for metanephrines and catecholamines was within normal limits. He will continue to undergo annual or biennial biochemical and radiographic surveillance for PC and PGL. Additionally, genetic testing has been offered to family members, who are at risk of inheriting the SDHB mutation.