A 9-year-old boy of Italian descent was referred to our Pediatric Department with a one-year history of abdominal pain, progressive poor scholastic performance and gait disturbance in absence of a clear diagnosis. At the age of 8 years and 2 months he had been hospitalized for severe abdominal pain of unknown origin. The stools were normal without history of constipation or diarrhea. All routine laboratory tests were normal. An abdominal ultrasonography, esophageal gastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy with mucosal biopsies, and an abdominal CT-scan were sequentially performed, without evidences of any abnormality. Common causes of pediatric abdominal pain such as peritonitis, appendicitis, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, intra-abdominal abscesses, malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, vasculitis and pleural abnormalities, malignancies, eosinophilic gastro-enterocolitis and inflammatory bowel disease were ruled out. Fecal cultures, parasitic examination and virus polymerase chain reaction test on stools all resulted negative. Family history was negative for psychiatric disorders, and absence of emotional or anxiety disorder was assessed by a pediatric psychiatrist.
After discharge the pain gradually and spontaneously remitted over the next 2 months. Six months before our evaluation he experienced learning difficulties with attention deficit and irritability, in addition, he developed difficulty in walking.
When he was admitted to our Department he presented with ataxic gait, difficulty in speaking and attention deficit. Physical examination was unremarkable except for bilateral patellar areflexia and sensory ataxia with positive Romberg sign. Routine laboratory values (including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein level and white cell count) were normal. Nerve conduction studies of the lower limbs showed bilateral slowed conduction in the peroneal motor nerves. Brain and spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a diffuse contrast enhancement of the leptomeninges and of the III, V and VII cranial nerves, as well as of the cauda equina nerve roots, with multiple bilateral T2-hyperintense lesions in periventricular white matter. CSF analysis showed lymphocytic pleocytosis (290 cells/mm3 – normal values < 5 cells/mm3), low glucose level (15 mg/dl - normal values > 50 mg/dl), hyperproteinorrachia (587 mg/dl - normal values < 45 mg/dl). Bacterial blood and CSF cultures were negative as well as a multiple molecular assay panel for meningitis and encephalitis (BIOFIRE® FILMARRAY® ME Panel, BioMerieux Italy) for the most common bacteria and viruses linked with encephalitis.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) activity on serum and CSF was negative excluding neurosarcoidosis.
Antineuronal antibodies were negative (i.e. anti-NMDA-R, anti-AMPA-R, anti-GABA, anti-CASPR2, anti-Hu, anti-CV2, anti-RI, anti-Yo, anti-amphiphysin, anti-GAD, anti-Sox1). CSF oligoclonal IgG bands were found at immunofixation and Lyme neuroborreliosis was considered.
The Clinical Microbiology Laboratory used a cytospin slide centrifuge to prepare CSF Gram stains. Cytospin smears were prepared by centrifuging 0.2 mL of CSF at 2000 rpm for 10 min and staining it with conventional Gram staining, slides were examined by light microscopy at 100x magnification to allow quantitation of CSF cells: many activated mononuclear cells and some polymorphonuclear cells were identified, without evidence of bacteria or malignant cells .
Serum Borrelia burgdorferi-specific IgG were detected (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ELISA followed by Western Blot positive for anti-VIsE and anti-p14, 21, 30). Specific antibodies in CSF were tested in an enzyme immunoassay (IDEIA Lyme Neuroborreliosis). Borrelia burgdorferi IgG index was 12.6 (references: < 0.3) and B. burgdorferi IgM index was 10.1 (references: < 0.3) which indicate intrathecal production of specific antibodies consistent with neuroborreliosis. Diagnosis of LNB was thus confirmed. Detection of Borrelia burgdorferi-DNA PCR resulted negative in the CSF. Indeed, a thorough past medical history collection evidenced that the onset of abdominal pain started 2 weeks after a tick-bite episode occurred during a walk in the wood. Neither the patient nor his parents showed any skin rash. According to the latest European clinical guidelines for LNB, the boy was treated with a course of intravenous ceftriaxone (3 g daily for 3 weeks) . Furthermore the treatment was prolonged with oral amoxicillin (2 g daily for 3 weeks) considering the disseminated and long-lasting illness . Three months thereafter, CSF findings had remarkably improved (20 cells/mm3, proteins 127 mg/dl, glucose 70 mg/dl) . Similarly, we recorded a slight improvement in gait and better scholastic performances. At the one-year follow-up visit, complete neurological recovery was observed, without any recurrence of abdominal pain. The patient was considered completely healed, without specific signs and symptoms.