In March 2021, a 39-year-old Caucasian man with no medical, family, and psychosocial history presented with a lump in the right upper neck region that had been evolving for about 4 months, associated with a 2-month history of headache and epistaxis. Personal medical and surgical history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed multiple bilateral neck node enlargements, with the largest measuring 10 cm × 1.5 cm in the right cervical region. Fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy revealed lifting of the right side of the tonsillar crypts, and the surface was rough. This lesion was biopsied.
Histopathology findings of the nasopharynx specimen showed characterized large malignant cells with vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, syncytial growth pattern, and a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. These findings are consistent with undifferentiated NPC (World Health Organization type III).
Radiological examination with contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) scan of the head and the neck showed a nasopharyngeal lump centered in the right Rosenmüller fossa with deep extension into carotid space and bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy with a maximum node size of almost 9 cm × 1.5 cm. CECT of the chest revealed a heterogeneously enhancing lesion in the right breast parenchyma (in the retroareolar area) with ipsilateral lymph node enlargement .
The breast examination found no apparent anomaly, and there were no axillary palpable nodes. No other abnormalities were seen in the rest of the somatic examination. The results of routine blood examination were within the normal range.
The patient then underwent a breast ultrasound that showed two oval microlobulated hypoechoic masses without speculations measuring 10 mm and 12 mm, respectively, located in the upper outer quadrant and the retroareolar region of the right breast, associated with the ipsilateral axillary lymph node. Our patient underwent an ultrasound-guided biopsy; histologically, the cores examined were dissociated by undifferentiated carcinomatous proliferation. The tumor cells were large with reduced cytoplasm. They had atypical and often mitotic nuclei. In immunohistochemistry, they expressed p40 and p63 . They were negative for GATA 3, mammaglobin, and hormone receptors. These data confirmed the diagnosis of breast metastasis from the NPC. The patient was thus diagnosed to have NPC stage T2N3M1.
After a multidisciplinary meeting, palliative treatment was indicated. The patient was treated with several lines of chemotherapy and a palliative external beam radiation therapy on the nasopharynx and cervical lymph nodes; he received 40 Gy in 20 fractions in view of the stability of the disease to relieve symptoms and reduce primary tumor burden. Breast radiation has been planned for this patient, but he died after 30 months of follow-up following a deterioration of the general and respiratory state.