A 28-year-old man on maintenance hemodialysis (HD) was diagnosed with steroid-resistant primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis causing nephrotic syndrome in February 2006. There was only a partial response to ciclosporin, and he reached end-stage kidney failure requiring hemodialysis in August 2011. He presented with progressive global motor weakness, tremor and hallucinations in December 2011. This was preceded by eight months of polyarthralgia, constipation, abdominal pain, and nausea and vomiting, and one month of severe neuropathic pain in all limbs, nightmares and involuntary vocalization. To enquiry, he admitted taking Ayurvedic medicine over a long but unquantifiable duration.
Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg, a heart rate of 76 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 18 per minute. His cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal and joint examinations were unremarkable. Alopecia was notable, although we could not identify any skin or nail abnormalities. The striking neurological findings were moderate-to-severe muscle weakness involving the face, neck and all limbs; absent reflexes at C6, C7 and S1; impaired proprioception in the hands and feet; and a patchy disturbance of light touch and pinprick over all limbs.
He had normocytic normochromic anemia, with erythrocyte basophilic stippling noted on two of his numerous peripheral smears. His erythrocyte porphyrins level was 5 umol/L (normal < 1.8 umol/L). Nerve conduction studies revealed axonal sensorimotor polyradiculoneuropathy. Other investigations included magnetic resonance imaging of brain, cerebral spinal fluid analysis, autoimmune, infection and metabolic screens, and were all unremarkable.
At this point, a provisional diagnosis of heavy metal poisoning was considered, based upon his history of Ayurvedic medicine exposure. His blood Pb level was found to be significantly elevated at 6.3 umol/L (normal < 0.47 umol/L), but his blood mercury level was normal at 5 nmol/L (normal < 50 nmol/L). His blood was not tested for Ars, although pooled (scalp, chest and arms) hair samples were sent for testing at this time. Parathyroid hormone level was 7.5 pmol/L (normal 1.7 – 7.3 pmol/L). The ayurvedic products recovered from the patient’s domicile contained high levels of Ars (50 to 290 mg/kg), Pb (28 to 12,000 mg/kg) and mercury (5 to 75,000 mg/kg).
Due to initial unavailability of CaNa2EDTA and DMPS, we treated him for 5 days with continuous veno-venous haemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) and BAL administered intramuscularly at 4 mg/kg every 4 h. When CaNa2EDTA became available, we switched him to thrice weekly standard high-flux HD with the 1 g of CaNa2EDTA administered over 1 h, given 1 – 3 h before HD. His nightmares, involuntary vocalisation and gastrointestinal symptoms resolved over a few weeks, although his peripheral neuropathy and alopecia persisted with only mild improvement. After a month, the results of initial testing for Ars became available. The level in his hair samples was 1.21 mg/kg (normal < 0.1 mg/kg), suggesting ongoing exposure in the 2 to 3 months prior to hospital admission. Our assessment was that the residual peripheral neuropathy was most likely attributable to Ars, as it tends to cause a sensorimotor polyneuropathy often presenting with predominantly sensory symptoms, while Pb poisoning usually presents with minimal to no sensory involvement [, ]. On the basis of this assessment, we felt that it was reasonable to attempt a course of chelation specifically for Ars. We chose DMPS on the basis of its favourable toxicity profile, which was administered to him orally 2 – 3 h before each HD. We discontinued this medication after 2 weeks, however, due to a lack of clinical improvement and evidence of mobilisation of Ars, with levels that remained consistently undetectable in both blood and dialysate (< 0.05 umol/L).
In total, we provided 8 weeks of Pb chelation, after which time the blood Pb level decreased and remained less than 1.2 umol/L (see Fig. ). Over the following 8 months of follow up, there was only mild improvement of his tremors and weakness, and the peripheral neuropathy persisted, presumably on the basis of chronic arsenicosis. There were no chelator-associated adverse effects during the course of the treatment.