A 62-year-old man with a past medical history of prediabetes and heavy smoker was admitted with central chest pain. At the arrival of the ambulance crew, an ECG was performed, showing noST elevation. Clinical examination showed a well perfused, normotensive patient, with no other symptoms but central chest pain. He was in sinus rhythm at 70 b.p.m. Chest auscultation revealed normal heart sounds with no added sounds or murmurs and clear chest. The patient did not have any symptoms of arm claudication in his past medical history and indeed he had good pulses in both upper limbs on clinical examination. First bloods showed a normal full blood count, with raised fibrinogen (629 mg/dL), troponin T (1038.00 ng/L), and brain natriuretic peptide (2081 pg/mL). The coronary angiogram performed via the right radial route, revealed significant left main coronary artery and three-vessel disease, and a patent right brachio-cephalic artery. The echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 30% with hypokinesia in the inferior and anterior segments. As per current guideline recommendations, the carotid arteries were not imaged.
In theatre, during anaesthetic induction, the patient became unstable with ST-elevation requiring an urgent initiation of surgery, precluding a BIMA procedure. Therefore, he underwent surgical revascularization using a LIMA to LAD, a saphenous venous graft (SVG) to intermediate and SVG to the posterior descending artery. He came off cardiopulmonary bypass easily, on minimal inotropic support with stable echocardiographic appearances, similar to the preoperative study. The graft assessment with the flow-meter showed patent grafts with satisfactory diastolic Doppler flows.
However, 48 h after surgery, he developed mixed cardiogenic and distributive shock requiring intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) and high doses of inotropes. Echocardiographic assessment did not show any new regional wall motion abnormalities, and there were neither dynamic ECG changes nor troponin rise (downward trend). Both inotropic support and IABP were weaned after 7 days of treatment.
Despite this temporal improvement, he deteriorated again after becoming septic. Inotropic support (adrenaline, noradrenaline, and milrinone) was restarted and empiric antibiotic coverage was initiated with meropenem. His repeat echocardiogram showed more profound hypokinesia in the mid-distal LAD territory, despite the absence of dynamic ECG changes and down-trending troponin values. In view of the deteriorating echocardiographic picture (suggestive of likely stunned anterior wall myocardium), he was transferred to the catheterization laboratory, where a chronic total occlusion of the left subclavian artery proximal to the origin of the LIMA was seen . The two SVGs were patent whereas the LIMA was seen filling retrogradely through the native coronary images . A peak systolic gradient of 60 mmHg between the ascending aorta and subclavian artery distal to occlusion was measured.
To improve the coronary flow down the LAD territory percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was performed with the implantation of a new-generation sirolimus-eluting stent in the LMS–LAD (Orsiro, Biotronik, Inc., Germany) followed by paclitaxel-eluting balloon inflation in the proximal circumflex artery (SeQuent Please, B Braun, Germany) . Additionally, a comprehensive invasive functional assessment was performed with a pressure wire to estimate the amount of blood flowing retrogradely to the left subclavian artery through the LAD. Both fractional flow reserve (FFR) and absolute flow (AF) were measured in the distal LAD with and without occlusion of the LIMA using a compliant balloon. Absolute flow was determined by continuous thermodilution during maximum hyperaemia induced by serum infusion (PressureWire × guidewire—Abbott, USA, Coroventis program—CoroFlow Cardiovascular System, Sweden, and RayFlow catheter—Hexacth Inc., France). Following PCI, a positive FFR (0.67) was obtained in the LAD with no significant differences under varying haemodynamic conditions (IABP on/off, LIMA transiently occluded, or patent). Absolute flow in proximal LAD was 0.198 L/min. However, the AF in the distal LAD was very low, but increased by 14% when the LIMA was occluded (from 0.043 to 0.050 L/min). According to these findings, we decided to occlude the LIMA using coils (Helix EV3 Concerto 2 × 6, 3 × 4, and 4 × 8 mm), as the subclavian artery occlusion was not readily treatable percutaneously and the patient’s unstable condition rendered surgical re-canalization extremely hazardous. Since complete occlusion was not achieved with coils , the operators elected to also implant a Micro Vascular Plug (5.3 × 12 mm) device in the mid-LIMA .
In a more stable patient, alternative treatment options would have included reoperation and anastomosing the proximal end of the LIMA into the aorta, extra-thoracic carotid–subclavian bypass/transposition to restore the flow to the subclavian artery, or even an attempt at percutaneous re-canalization of the subclavian chronic total occlusion. However, in view of his haemodynamic instability and the presence of dual antiplatelet therapy and heparin on his therapeutic chart, the heart team agreed that a PCI was in the best interests of the patient.
Following the procedure, the patient improved significantly within days, being able to be weaned from the inotropic support and the ventilator. He was then discharged to the ward with minimal impact on his motor function from the prolonged intensive care stay.
The patient was discharged home in a good functional status 1 month after surgery following intense rehabilitation. Six months post-surgery, the patient has an EF of 40% with hypokinesia of the inferior wall, a finding present pre-surgery, but normalization of the anterior wall contractility.