A 26-year-old Caucasian man with nail patella syndrome presented to the accident and emergency department, after slipping on a step while running and sustaining a twisting injury to his right knee. The right knee became swollen and was painful on attempted weight bearing directly after the fall. He had no other associated injuries.
His past medical history was remarkable for a diagnosis of osteo-onychodysplasia or NPS, which was discovered at the age of 11 after noting bilateral thumb nail changes. Anterioposterior pelvis radiography performed at initial diagnosis also revealed bilateral iliac horns, a finding pathognomonic of NPS. He had normal elbow function and yearly renal and ophthalmological investigations since his diagnosis have been normal. He reported no previous patella dislocation, but had complained of mild knee pain after extensive exercise in the years prior to the injury.
Initial laboratory investigations on this admission were all within normal limits.
On examination his right knee was swollen, clinically consistent with hemarthrosis and was tender over the lower pole of his right patella. He was unable to extend his right knee against gravity. Bilateral dysplastic thumb nails were noted. Other fingernails and toenails were normal. Radiographs revealed a fracture of the lower pole of the right patella . Bilateral hypoplastic patella and a hypoplastic left medial femoral condyle were also incidentally noted, consistent with his existing diagnosis of NPS .
As the extensor mechanism was disrupted, surgical management was indicated. A lower midline incision was made, and the hemarthrosis evacuated. A full thickness tear of the lower patellar retinaculum was noted, and on closer inspection of the fracture site, the distal fractured fragment was seen to be small and almost completely extra-articular. His bone quality was good. The distal fragment of his patella was excised, and a retinacular reconstruction undertaken with a non-absorbable, braided, polyethylene suture (2 Ethibond), followed by a layered closure.
His post operative course was uneventful and he was discharged with an above knee full cast and analgesia. The cast was removed after two weeks and a hinged knee brace applied, allowing 0° to 30° range of movement for a further two weeks. Flexion was increased to 90° four weeks post operatively and at six weeks all immobilization aids were discontinued. A Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DEXA) scan was performed two months post fracture, which revealed mild osteopenia at the right femoral neck; Z Score −1.7. No previous bone mineral density (BMD) measurement had been taken prior to this.
At six months follow up, his full knee range of motion had been restored and he had returned to work successfully. On functional assessment he scored 100 on the WOMAC score . A lateral X-ray of his right knee revealed no residual evidence of fracture .