The 55-year-old male patient was diagnosed on March 26th, 2021, following a chief complaint of "left testis swelling for 16 years and right hip pain for 1.5 months". Physical examination revealed a hard mass in the left testis, approximately 10 cm in diameter, without tenderness and invading the skin. The patient had no history of other diseases but had smoked about 20 cigarettes a day for more than 30 years. Neither his parents nor his children had a history of cancer. Computer tomography (CT) showed a huge low-density mass, 10.1 × 8.6 cm, located in the left testis and accompanied by marginal calcification, and a large soft tissue mass, 15.0 × 12.0 cm in the right iliac fossa, accompanied by bone destruction. There were no metastases in the groin, abdominal cavity, retroperitoneum, or lungs. Laboratory tests did not reveal elevated tumor markers, including α-fetoprotein (AFP), β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199), CA125, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) or prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Mass biopsy of the right iliac fossa demonstrated invasion of moderately and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. A radical resection of the left testis was performed on April 12 and gross specimens showed a tumor located in the hilum of the testis with a maximum diameter of 13.0 cm, accompanied by necrosis. The tumor was close to the testicular tunica albuginea with an unclear boundary. The texture was soft, gray-white and gray-yellow in color and remaining testicular tissue was sponge-like . Microscopically, the tumor cells were spiked with hyperchromatic and pleomorphic nuclei. They had formed largely slit-like branched tubules with a few papillary and solid areas which had grown into one another in varying proportions . We could also find acinar-like structures, many mitosis , interstitial fibrosis accompanied with chronic inflammatory cell infiltration and atrophic spermatogenic tubules surrounded by tumor cells . There were vascular invasions but no nerve bundle invasions. The immunohistochemistry results showed positive cytokeratin 7 (CK7; Fig. ) and Ki-67 (approximately 40%) but negative vimentin, synaptophysin (Syn), chromogranin A (cgA), cluster of differentiation 56 (CD56), Wilms tumor 1 (WT-1), calretinin (CR), thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX-2), CD30, CK20, CK5/6, CEA, AFP, P63, CD117, β-hCG, and Villin.
Post-orchiectomy, the patient received 2 cycles of nab-paclitaxel combined with nedaplatin on May 6 and May 28 2021, and intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) to the metastasis with a dose of 2,640 cGy in 220 cGy per fraction. However, he developed multiple metastases in both lungs and in the 12th thoracic vertebra two months after the beginning of first-line chemotherapy . Treatment was changed to one cycle of irinotecan combined with capecitabine. On July 14th 2021, a repeat CT showed progressive lung metastases. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed targeting 700 genes associated with solid tumors to identify therapeutic targets. A somatic lysine methyltransferase 2C (KMT2C) c.5605 T > C mutation was found in exon 36 with an abundance of 49.27% . No targeted drugs were available and one cycle of etoposide combined with cisplatin and cyclophosphamide was administered. Unfortunately, the patient suffered grade 4 neutropenia, and chest and abdominal CT revealed continually progressing lung metastases on August 18th, 2021 . Subsequently, the patient was switched to 2 cycles of Anlotinib which kept the disease stable until October 29th 2021 when the patient refused to continue the drug due to unacceptable anorexia and nausea. He died on April 6th, 2022, having survived for 12 months since diagnosis.