On October 20th, 2017, a 67-year-old man was hospitalized because of wheezing and chest tightness. His personal history included 40-years of smoking 20 cigarettes per day. No notable medical history was present.
During admission as an inpatient to hospital, chest computed tomography (CT) showed a 37 × 25 mm soft tissue mass shadow in the lower lobe of the left lung, an 11 × 8 mm nodule in the lower lobe of the right lung, and lymph node metastases in the right supraclavicular region, 2L and 7 regions of mediastinum, and left hilum. No abnormalities were found in the head and bone. A biopsy of a supraclavicular lymph node was performed, and its findings confirmed metastasis of lung adenocarcinoma without EGFR, ALK, ROS1, RET, or MET mutations.
In November 2017, the patient was enrolled into one clinical trial receiving the bevacizumab in combination with paclitaxel and carboplatin regimen for four cycles. CT scans showed a partial response of the disease. Tolerance, however, was poor, with grade III thrombocytopenia. Subsequently, the regimen switched to pemetrexed in combination with bevacizumab for three cycles. Although a CT scan revealed a further partial response after these cycles of treatments, progressive thrombocytopenia occurred and reached the lowest point on June 20th, 2018 (platelet count, 3 × 109/L). After extensive discussion at the multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting, a bone marrow aspiration was done to examine the reason for thrombocytopenia. The results of the bone marrow smears showed that the ratio of granulocyte and erythroid series was 22.5:1, granulocytes accounted for 25%–50% of the bone marrow cells, with non-hematopoietic cells predominant, and the proportion of mature lymphocytes was 73.2%. Flow cytometry analysis of the bone marrow aspirate showed an abnormal mature B cell lymphoid subset, accounting for 30.3% of nuclear cells and expressing CD19, HLA-DR, CD20, FMC7, CD79b, and surface immunoglobulin Kappa. Marginal zone lymphoma was diagnosed. This patient received 5 cycles of rituximab in combination with lenalidomide treatment. At the end of the treatment, lymphoma was in complete remission. The platelet number resumed to normal level, the B cell number decreased to zero level, while the T cell number was unaffected .
In February 2019, a CT scan revealed disease progression, with the mass in the lower lobe of the left lung approximately 52 × 41 mm. Bone scans showed that bone metabolism was active in the right clavicle, the ninth and twelfth thoracic vertebra, and the first and second lumbar vertebrae, indicating bone metastasis . A second biopsy was performed on the lung mass and adenocarcinoma was confirmed. The analysis of gene mutations showed that TP53 gene was mutated and MET gene was amplified. Results from PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining showed that the rate of PD-L1 positive tumor cells was 90%, and that of PD-1 positive cells less than 1% .
Given that PD-L1 were highly expressed on tumor cells, the MDT decided to treat the patient with sintilimab injection, a PD-1 inhibitor, of 200 mg every 3 weeks, starting in March 2019. After four cycles, a CT scan revealed a 38.4% reduction in the soft tissue mass shadow in the lower lobe of the left lung to about 27 × 32 mm, reaching a partial response . Because the patient refused to undergo bone scans, we do not know whether the patient’s suspected bone metastases have also been relieved. However, from the results of each CT examination, there was no significant increase in bone metastasis, and the patient did not have corresponding pain symptoms. The patient continued PD-1 inhibitor monotherapy every 3 weeks, and no adverse events have occurred. In October 2019, after 10 treatments and 8 months of disease control, the patient’s condition was stable and the lung mass had shrunk further. At the time of writing, treatment with immunotherapy is ongoing .