A 77-year-old man diagnosed with prostate carcinoma 7 years ago received hormone therapy (gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist) and was well-controlled. A tumor of the tuberculum sellae was observed on whole-body computed tomography in 2017 [CT; ], but it was not recognized. In April 2019, he developed hyperproteinemia and anemia and was diagnosed with plasmacytoma. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography showed a suprasellar lesion with low uptake (maximum standardized uptake value, 4.2). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor (25 × 18 × 19 mm) in the tuberculum sellae . Ophthalmologic examination revealed that his left eye was affected by fundus hemorrhage caused by hyperviscosity syndrome associated with plasmacytoma. In his right eye, Humphrey perimetry revealed upper temporal quadrantanopsia , but his visual acuity was intact (20/20). His serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was within the normal range at 3.900 ng/mL and his pituitary hormone level was also normal. We diagnosed the tumor as a meningioma in the tuberculum sellae. Treatment for plasmacytoma was prioritized and chemotherapy was initiated. Two months later, he complained of blurred vision and his visual acuity in the right eye had decreased (10/20). Humphrey perimetry revealed progressive visual field disturbance . MRI showed tumor growth (27 × 24 × 25 mm) with homogeneous and dural enhancement . Fast imaging with steady-state acquisition revealed that the right optic nerve was compressed by the tumor and malignant meningioma was suspected. He underwent endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery. The tumor was strongly attached to the dura. Surgery was completed with partial resection because the tumor adhered to the optic nerve/chiasm and was difficult to detach. The dura and bone defects were reconstructed using an overlay technique to prevent cerebrospinal fluid leakage. Pathological examination revealed atypical epithelioid cells with vacuoles. The gland-like formation was immunopositive for PSA and androgen receptor [-]. The patient was diagnosed with dural metastasis from prostate carcinoma and received radiation therapy at a dose of 45 Gy (3 Gy × 15). The tumor disappeared on MRI and his visual impairment improved . Two years after irradiation, the patient did not experience any recurrence.