A 70-year-old white man developed right knee pain and swelling followed by left ankle pain and swelling over a week. Over the next 4 months, his symptoms progressed to include both knees, both feet, and both hands. Due to the severity of his symptoms he was unable to ambulate or carry out normal activities of daily living. He initially took ibuprofen 800 mg three times daily with some mild improvement, but at the time of presentation, it offered no relief.
In addition, he endorsed morning stiffness that persisted for most of the day. Due to the stiffness in his joints, he could no longer ambulate and presented to our clinic in a wheelchair. He previously was fully functional and independent in his activities of daily living. He was an avid fisherman and was unable to pursue his interests at all.
His past medical history was significant for metastatic melanoma initially diagnosed 2 years ago. His initial lesion was located over the left side of his neck and he had a Mohs procedure with negative margins. He was monitored closely for 1.5 years until he was found to have new right lower lobe lung nodules on positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) with increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake. Wedge resection of the right lower lobe revealed metastatic melanoma with wild type BRAF and no C-KIT mutations. Continued surveillance demonstrated an increasing number of right pulmonary nodules over the next 6 months. Dual therapy nivolumab (1 mg/kg every 3 weeks for four doses followed by 240 mg every 2 weeks) and ipilimumab (3 mg/kg every 3 weeks) immunotherapy was started. After the second cycle of his immunotherapy he developed severe non-infectious colitis requiring hospitalization. His immunotherapy was stopped and his colitis resolved with supportive care and glucocorticoids. Without further immunotherapy, he developed new left pulmonary nodules within 6 months that were increasing in size. Single agent immunotherapy with nivolumab (240 mg every 2 weeks) was started 4 months before his presentation to Rheumatology. With single agent immunotherapy, the pulmonary nodules receded fully and no further metastatic disease was seen on subsequent PET/CT imaging 3 months later.
His medical history was also notable for hypertension and benign prostatic hypertrophy.
He was treated with hydrochlorothiazide, aspirin, and nivolumab. He had no known drug allergies.
There was no family history of connective tissue disease or inflammatory arthritis. His mother died from colon cancer in her 80s and his father had coronary artery disease. He was married with three living children. He served in the Navy during the Vietnam War and worked as a mechanic after his military service until retirement. He denied any history of recreational drug or alcohol use. He reported a 20-pack year tobacco smoking history, but quit over 10 years ago.
He denied having any chest pain, shortness of breath, rashes, oral or nasal ulcers, alopecia, Raynaud’s disease, fevers, chills, night sweats, or unintended weight loss. He did endorse feeling weak because of his chronic condition.
He appeared his stated age and in no apparent distress. His temperature was 37 °C, blood pressure 116/78, heart rate 70 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation 100% on ambient air. His musculoskeletal examination was significant for tender boggy synovitis of his bilateral metacarpophalangeal joints (MCPs), proximal interphalangeal joints (PIPs), wrists, elbows, knees, ankles, and metatarsophalangeal joints (MTPs). There was no palpable effusion in any joint but he had significant soft tissue pitting edema present over his extremities. There was +3 pitting edema over the dorsum of both hands and feet extending up to his wrists and mid-shins respectively. There was mild erythema and warmth present over his joints, most notable over his MCPs . There was decreased range of motion in his hands, feet, ankles, elbows, and knees. There also were extensor tendon rubs noted on range of motion of his MCPs bilaterally by palpation and auscultation. The remainder of the musculoskeletal examination and general physical examination was unremarkable. There were no rheumatoid nodules noted on examination.
Results of the laboratory evaluation are shown in Table . Our patient’s erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein (CRP) were quite elevated. The remainder of his laboratory tests was unremarkable. Ultrasound and X-ray imaging of his hands were obtained demonstrating soft tissue swelling and extensor tenosynovitis. There were no erosions present.
He was started on prednisone 40 mg (0.5 mg/kg per day) and tapered gradually over the course of 6 weeks to 10 mg daily. He had a very rapid response to the prednisone with almost complete resolution of his symptoms. Once his prednisone was decreased below 10 mg he began noticing a steady return of his symptoms. During this time period he continued treatment with nivolumab and on surveillance imaging he had complete resolution of metastatic disease. Due to the marked response of his melanoma to immunotherapy, it was felt that paraneoplastic RS3PE was unlikely. Although at the time there were no published reports of nivolumab or other checkpoint inhibitors causing a RS3PE picture, it was felt that because of the temporal relationship between the nivolumab and the acute onset of his symptoms that they were related. The numerous previously described autoimmune conditions associated with checkpoint inhibitors raised the possibility that this presentation of RS3PE was another rheumatological manifestation. The clinical dilemma we were left with was that our patient had previously demonstrated a very rapid relapse of his stage 4 melanoma when off treatment, yet was incapacitated with the side effect of the treatment. After a careful discussion with his oncologist, we elected to maintain a steady dose of prednisone of 7.5 mg daily to control rheumatological symptoms and continue nivolumab. At 9 months, he demonstrated minimal pitting edema, no inflammatory arthritis, and continued full response from nivolumab therapy.