A three-year-old female with a past medical history of asthma presented to the emergency department (ED) with fatigue and generalized body aches. The patient complained that her “legs were tired,” and her mother stated that she was unable to walk and could only crawl since waking that morning. She had been diagnosed with an influenza-like illness three days prior by her pediatrician, the symptoms of which had mostly resolved by the time of presentation except for cough and rhinorrhea. She had been afebrile for 36 hours prior to ED presentation.
Vital signs included the following: blood pressure 108/89 millimeters of mercury, temperature 37.6°Celsius, respirations 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation on room air of 99%. Physical examination was remarkable for cervical lymphadenopathy and abnormal coordination and gait. Specifically, the child was alert with mentation appropriate for age, and she had no pupil abnormalities and no slurring of speech. The remainder of her neurological exam (including reflexes) was normal and without focal deficit. The patient had a wide-based, shuffling gait, and while she slightly favored her right leg and hip she had no restricted range of motion of the hips or knees and had no pain in the joints to movement or palpation.
Laboratory serum chemistries were significant for elevated CK levels (319 units per liter (U/L) [normal <201 U/L]) indicating myositis; creatinine 0.34 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (0.39–0.55 mg/dL); alkaline phosphatase 128 U/L (156–369 U/L); and aspartate aminotransferase 65 U/L (26–55 U/L). Trace amounts of protein were found in her urine. Rapid strep A test was negative. Comprehensive respiratory pathogen profile polymerase chain reaction detected influenza A-matrix and influenza A-H3. Complete blood count results showed decreased white blood cell count (3.1 thousand per centimeters cubed [K/cm3] [6.0–17.0 K/cm3]) consistent with a viral infection. This patient had not been vaccinated for that year’s strain of influenza.
The patient was admitted from the ED for observation overnight and given intravenous fluids, oseltamivir, and ketorolac to treat the flu and pain and inflammation, respectively. Infective myositis of the bilateral lower extremities was determined as the principal problem. By the next morning, she was able to walk without significant pain, showed no signs of ataxia, remained afebrile, and tolerated oral medications. The patient was discharged home 27 hours after initial presentation and instructed to continue ibuprofen every six hours for the next one to two days.