An 80-year-old woman presenting with difficulty swallowing was referred to our hospital for further examination. Her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status was 0, and her serum creatinine level was 0.47 mg/dl indicating preserved renal function. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a half-circumferential ulcerative lesion in the thoracic lower esophagus . Biopsy of the ulcerative lesion was performed, and a pathological diagnosis of moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma was made . The PD-ligand 1 (PD-L1) cell percentage score (CPS) of this specimen was > 10% . Computed tomography (CT) revealed the swelling of not only regional lymph nodes, including the perigastric lymph node, but also the left supraclavicular lymph node and the lymph node on the dorsal surface of the inferior vena cava (IVC) . Furthermore, the left supraclavicular lymph node and the lymph node on the dorsal surface of the IVC showed 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation on positron emission tomography–CT (PET–CT) and were considered to be lymph node metastases . Consequently, the patient was clinically diagnosed with stage IVB ESCC (cT3N2M1, cStageIVB, Union for International Cancer Control 8th edition TNM classification), and chemotherapy with pembrolizumab plus FP was planned. This regimen consisted of a 3-week course of 5-FU (800 mg/m2/day), intravenously administered on days 1–5, with cisplatin (80 mg/m2), intravenously administered on day 1, and pembrolizumab (200 mg/body), intravenously administered on day 1. In the first course, 5-FU and cisplatin were reduced to 80% dose considering her age. As there were no adverse events in the first course, 5-FU and cisplatin were administered at 100% dose in the second course. However, Grade 3 neutropenia was observed in the second course, so 5-FU and cisplatin were reduced to 80% dose in the third and fourth courses. After four courses of pembrolizumab plus FP therapy, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed scarred mucosa in the area where the ulcerative lesion was observed . The biopsy specimen showed some atypical squamous cells with enlarged nuclei, suggesting a reactive change rather than a neoplastic lesion. CT revealed primary tumor and metastatic lymph node shrinkage , and PET–CT revealed no abnormal FDG accumulation in the lymph nodes where metastasis was originally suspected . Based on these findings, we determined the patient had downgraded to ycT2N0M0, ycStageII (UICC 8th edition) and that radical resection was feasible.
She subsequently underwent thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy reconstructed by a gastric tube retromediastinally with regional lymph node dissection. Considering the surgical invasiveness, the lymph node at the dorsal side of the IVC was not resected, and the left supraclavicular lymph node was removed. The resected specimen showed an ulcerated scar measuring 18 × 5 mm at the site of the primary tumor. Histological examination revealed no residual tumor, and a diagnosis of histological complete response (CR) was made . No lymph node metastasis was observed in the regional lymph nodes. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 16 days postoperatively. She received no adjuvant chemotherapy and remained alive without recurrence at 10 months postoperatively.