A 57-year-old Japanese woman visited the memory clinic affiliated to our hospital with a 2-year history of visual memory loss. Examination revealed that the patient had agraphia as well as left-right agnosia. Her insights into her cognitive dysfunction, however, were relatively well-preserved. She showed no signs of parkinsonism. Magnetic resonance imaging and single- photon emission computed tomography of the head revealed bilaterally symmetric atrophy of the occipitoparietal lobes and decreased blood flow to the same areas. She was clinically diagnosed as having posterior cortical atrophy, a visual variant of early-onset Alzheimer’s disease.
She was prescribed donepezil at the dose of 3 mg per day, which was later increased to 10 mg per day, in the absence of any side effects. Her visuospatial function gradually deteriorated during the treatment. In the following year, she presented with dressing apraxia. At the age of 60, she had difficulty in positioning herself to sit on a chair; her attempts to take a seat often resulted in her missing the chair and she found herself trying to sit on air instead. She was unable to find her way out of our examination room. She became dependent for her activities of daily living. She also became so impulsive and agitated that she was always talking to herself, without daily fluctuations in cognitive functions. Donepezil was discontinued in view of her agitation. Instead, she was started on augmentation therapy with the combination of galantamine and memantine to improve her psychiatric symptoms and maintain her cognitive function status. However, two weeks after the treatment switch from donepezil to galantamine plus memantine, she was admitted to the neuropsychiatric unit of our hospital, because her psychiatric symptoms did not improve, and she began to show signs of parkinsonism.
On admission, she presented with frozen gait and a mask-like expression. No rigidity, tremor or other neurological signs, such as paralysis or sensory impairment, were apparent. There were no remarkable changes of the vital signs or abnormalities on physical and laboratory examinations. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed no increase of the cell count or protein levels, and the IgG index was within normal limits. The CSF amyloid beta 1–42(Aβ 1–42) level was 116 pg/mL and that of phosphorylated tau(P-tau) was 41 pg/mL, consistent with the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease . To examine the possibility of Lewy body disease, 123I-(3meta)-iodobenzylguanidine myocardial scintigraphy and dopamine-transporter scanning were performed, which showed early and delayed heart/mediastinum ratios of 3.96 and 3.88, and specific binding ratios of 5.76 (right) and 5.78 (left), respectively, excluding Lewy body disease. Also, corticobasal syndrome was ruled out, because of the absence of laterality.
Her medications on admission included galantamine 4 mg bid, memantine 10 mg qd, suvorexant 20 mg qd. Her parkinsonism signs deteriorated after she was hospitalized. In particular, she showed sustained flexion of both the head and body trunk, with slight rotation of the body to the right side, consistent with the diagnosis of PS, which was exacerbated while walking; these symptoms remained fixed until the 13th hospital day. Based on the suspicion that the PS in this patient had developed as a side effect of galantamine, this drug was stopped on the 13th hospital day. After discontinuation of galantamine while continuing memantine monotherapy, the characteristic posture of PS gradually improved within 2–3 days. In accordance with improvements on posturing, her freezing of gait also disappeared so that she was able to walk without any assistance. Meanwhile, her masked face was preserved. Finally, her posturing almost thoroughly disappeared over the subsequent 14-day period .
For the agitation and insomnia, the patient was prescribed 5 mg of asenapine, an antipsychotic, which was effective without any side effects in terms of extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS), including PS. By the 93rd hospital day, her neuropsychiatric symptoms had markedly improved and the patient was discharged home, where she was taken care of by her family members in her daily life.