A 58-year-old woman presented with a 4-month history of anomic aphasia, memory disturbance, and a recent onset of dizziness. At age 32 years, she was managed for stroke resulting from atrial myxoma, which was removed surgically. The patient’s daughter and granddaughter were both diagnosed with CNC, in addition to the daughter having Cushing’s syndrome.
On examination, she was fully conscious and cooperative. She had fluent aphasia as well as naming disorder and agraphia. Pupils were 2.5 mm in size bilaterally and promptly reactive, and there were no obvious cranial neuropathies. Motor and sensory examinations were unremarkable, and cerebellar signs were negative. The other system examinations were essentially normal.
Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a well-circumscribed, hypodense, extra-axial mass in the left temporal region with significant bony erosion and partially calcified rims. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a heterogeneously contrast-enhanced mass with significant displacement of the adjacent temporoparietal lobes .
The patient underwent tumor excision through a left frontotemporal approach. There was tumor invasion of the cranium and partial destruction of the outer table of the skull; however, the temporalis muscle and periosteum were intact. The tumor was consisted of a yellowish soft lesion with a jelly-like component. The inner table of the skull was destroyed, and the tumor was adherent to the dura. The tumor was meticulously dissected from the dura and gross total resection of the tumor was achieved . The dura was coagulated, and cranioplasty was done with titanium mesh plate. Intraoperative frozen section was unable to make a histopathological diagnosis. Postoperative course was uneventful, and the anomic aphasia had a complete resolution. Postoperative imaging confirmed gross total tumor resection . She has been followed for over 9 years without any neurological deficit including seizures (Karnofsky performance scale 100%) or radiological signs of recurrence.
Grossly, the pathological specimen consisted of a yellowish, soft, and gelatinous tissue. Histologically, the resected lesion showed a proliferation of bland spindle cells which had ovoid to elongated nuclei with myxoid stroma. Occasionally, spindle cells with atypical hyperchromic nuclei were seen. There were prominent macrophages and no cartilage, osteoid, or bone were identified . Immunohistochemistry, the spindle cells were focally immunoreactive for EMA and alpha-SMA, negative for desmin, and CD34. S-100 showed equivocal expression . The features were different from atrial myxoma and appeared rather more cellular than tumors known as osteochondromyxoma which has been described in CNC. Pathological diagnosis was descriptive and labeled the lesion as an atypical myxoid spindle cell neoplasm.