An 18-month-old male Caucasian patient was admitted to our department with clinical presentation of partial motor seizures for left side extremities as well as signs and symptoms of intracranial hypertension (vomiting and lethargy). Two months before the current hospitalization, our patient underwent an operation in another institution with subtotal resection of a giant temporoparietal meningioma invading the middle fossa and parietal dura. The intervention at that time was terminated due to high blood loss. The histological result for the subtotally resected tumor was an anaplastic meningioma (World Health Organization grade III). He was receiving sodium valproate 30mg/kg. However, a computed tomography scan two months after the first operation revealed a large (110×61mm) right temporoparietal, contrast-enhancing mass, with a partial cystic component and significant brain compression (midline shift of 14mm) (Figure ). His middle fossa and parietal dura mater were invaded by the tumor mass. There was no significant perifocal brain edema.
After discussion of the case and a review of the computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, our patient was scheduled for elective revision surgery with the goal of total resection because of the prognostic relevance of the extent of surgical resection.
Our patient fasted for eight hours prior to surgery. Routine monitoring during surgery included electrocardiography, end-tidal concentration of CO2 and sevoflurane, and pulse oximetry. All hemodynamic parameters were monitored continuously and recorded throughout the neurosurgical procedure. Anesthesia was induced with sevoflurane (volume fraction 6% followed by fentanyl (1μg/kg) and atracurium (0.03mg/kg). After intubating his trachea, his lungs were mechanically ventilated (S/5 Aespire Config; Datex-Ohmeda Ins., Madison, WI, USA) with a mixture of air and O2 and sevoflurane (volume fraction 3%).
Our patient was placed supine on the operative table with his turned head placed on the three-point Mayfield head-holder rotated to the left side. After standard preparation of the operative field, a large horseshoe temporoparietal incision, repeating the one from the previous intervention, was made. After elevation of the bone flap, the revealed dura mater was found to be diffusely infiltrated by the tumor. After its excision the intracranial work was continued using the operative microscope. After intratumoral debulking, the tumor over the dura of the middle cranial fossa and tentorium was addressed. The tumor was dissected from the middle cranial fossa and the tentorium, during which time the anesthesiologist reported a significant sudden hypotension, from a mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) of 67mmHg to 30mmHg (55% drop), followed by a drop in heart rate from 140 beats/min to 110 beats/min (21% drop). These changes resolved upon cessation of the middle fossa dura manipulation. Ephedrine 0.01mg/kg was administered to counter the low MABP and the surgery continued. A second such episode occurred with manipulation of the middle fossa dura, with a drop in his MABP from 67mmHg to 43mmHg (36% drop), but with a tendency for tachycardia (170 beats/min) due to the previous application of ephedrine. Again, after a short cessation of the surgical intervention, his blood pressure parameters returned to baseline. Dopamine was administered on constant perfusion (3μg/kg/min) and a blood transfusion was initiated (8mL/kg).
Upon completion of the operation, our patient remained stable. No arrhythmias were documented postoperatively. His postoperative period was uneventful. The histological result showed again an anaplastic meningioma (World Health Organization grade III). Our patient was referred to a specialized pediatric oncology center.
Three months after the second intervention, a residual tumor mass (79×47mm) was discovered on control MRI and our patient underwent a further operation. No arrhythmias were documented during the intraoperative or postoperative period.
Two months after the third intervention, a ventriculoperitoneal catheter was introduced due to the development of hydrocephalus. Again no arrhythmias were documented during the intraoperative and postoperative period.
Eight months after the first intervention a follow-up MRI study was performed. A large recurrent tumor mass (64×21mm) was discovered invading his middle cranial fossa, tentorial edge and Meckel’s cave, with posterior fossa extension. A large postoperative cyst (34×45mm) was also revealed. Because our patient’s condition was stable, the decision was made not to surgically attack the tumor and to continue close follow-up radiological studies. Our patient`s follow-up regarding the TCR remained uneventful.