A 64-year-old man presented with dysphagia at a high-volume center for POEM in Japan. His previous medical history was of minimal significance except for the presence of well-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus. He underwent POEM, which decreased his Eckardt score from 8 to 3 points. His symptoms were not alleviated to the expected extent, and he continued to suffer when eating solid foods, such as beef steak. He spontaneously visited our hospital for further surgical treatment 2 years after undergoing his initial POEM procedure.
Preoperative examinations were performed. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed Grade B reflux esophagitis with long-segment Barrett’s esophagus . A biopsy ruled out malignancy. A timed barium esophagogram (TBE) resulted in barium column heights at 1 min and 5 min of 119 mm and 119 mm, respectively . Computed tomography showed an apparent dilation of the thoracic esophagus with no signs of malignancy. A 24-h esophageal multichannel intraluminal impedance and pH monitoring examination showed an acid exposure time (AET) of 8.2% and a DeMeester score of 24.5, indicating morbid reflux. High-resolution manometry (HRM) revealed a normal integrated relaxation pressure (IRP) of 13.6 mmHg and the absence of a peristaltic wave. These results were compatible with a diagnosis of Chicago type 1 achalasia complicated by post-POEM reflux esophagitis. Considering the lack of LES relaxation and the delayed esophageal outflow, the prior POEM was deemed to have been incomplete. The laboratory data showed no abnormalities, including tumor markers. As the patient was a candidate for an additional POEM, a repeat POEM was recommended . However, the patient refused to undergo a repeat POEM because of a profound apprehension of another failure.
After a thorough preoperative examination and evaluation, he underwent LHM with Dor fundoplication. Neither the previous doctor nor we prescribed proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) prior to the surgery. The operation was performed by an experienced surgeon using 5 ports. Some fibrotic changes in the posterior esophageal wall were present, possibly because of the prior POEM. As the chief complaint was difficulty swallowing, the fundoplication was performed in a manner that would guarantee food passage. The myotomy was completed 4 cm above and 2 cm below the esophagogastric junction. The operating time was 242 min, and the operative blood loss was 5 mL. The postoperative course was uncomplicated. Oral intake was resumed on postoperative day 2 after a TBE examination. The TBE barium height had improved to 50 mm/45 mm . He was discharged on postoperative day 5 with vonoprazan 10 mg for prophylaxis of GERD. EGD showed improvement in reflux esophagitis . At a 7-month postoperative visit to our outpatient clinic, he was asymptomatic and had an Eckardt score of 0 points.