A 58-year-old male patient was directly admitted to our cardiac catheterization laboratory
with sudden onset chest pain of 2 h duration. The electrocardiography performed by the
ambulance crew demonstrated anterior ST-segment elevation. The chest pain had started when
he was straining to have a bowel movement. Upon arrival in the department, he was in
cardiogenic shock. He had undergone off-pump CABG surgery 4 weeks earlier with LIMA graft to
the left anterior descending (LAD) artery and saphaneous vein grafts (SVGs) to the right
coronary artery (RCA) and to the circumflex (LCx) artery. His other cardiac history included
previous percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) to the LAD and LCx arteries 10 years
before. His pre-operative echocardiogram was reported as normal. He was a recent ex-smoker
and was on treatment for hypertension and dyslipidaemia.
Emergency diagnostic coronary angiography was performed via the right radial access route
and showed severe proximal stenosis in the LAD artery. Extravasation of the contrast media
from the LAD artery into the pericardium was noted . There was no flow in the distal LAD artery;
hence dehiscence of the LIMA graft was suspected. Injection of the contrast media to the
LIMA graft demonstrated the flow of the contrast media to the mid-segment only with no
further flow of the contrast after the mid-vessel . The SVGs to the RCA and LCx were patent.
Following diagnostic coronary angiography, patient developed pulseless electrical activity
cardiac arrest. Return of the spontaneous circulation was achieved with one cycle of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Intra-aortic balloon pump was inserted. Urgent
echocardiography showed a large global pericardial effusion with right atrial and right
ventricular collapse. Emergency pericardiocentesis was performed via sub-xiphoid approach
and seldinger technique using an 8.3 Fr/50 cm straight drainage catheter of
PeriVacTM Pericardiocentesis Kit (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) and
echocardiography guidance. Seven hundred millilitres of haemorrhagic fluid was aspirated
with slow drainage. Further aspiration of the pericardial fluid was not possible, indicative
of the presence of an organized thrombus. Due to on-going haemodynamic compromise and
non-availability of cardiac surgery on site, decision was made to treat the LAD artery
stenosis with PCI. Using a 6 Fr EBU 3.5 guidecatheter (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) a
Sion Blue guidewire (ASAHI Intecc, Aichi, Japan) was used to cross the vessel. The lesion
was pre-dilated with a 2.5 mm × 20 mm semi-compliant balloon (Emerge, Boston Scientific,
Marlborough, MA, USA) and then stented with a 2.5 mm × 20 mm PK Papyrus covered stent
(Biotronik AG, Bülach, Switzerland). Subsequent to PCI, thrombolysis in myocardial
infarction (TIMI) 3 flow was achieved. No further extravasation was seen at the dehiscence
site and ST-segment elevation resolved . Further assessment of the LIMA graft showed a sluggish flow
with extravasation of the contrast media into the pericardium; therefore, embolization of
the LIMA graft was performed with four coils (Tornado Embolisation Microcoils. Cook Medical,
Bloomington, IN, USA) and the flow was subsequently stopped .
The patient’s haemodynamic condition stabilized at this stage. The echocardiogram post PCI
demonstrated residual blood clots in the pericardial space that were difficult to extract
percutaneously. The patient was then transferred to the local cardiac surgery unit and
underwent emergency re-sternotomy and evacuation of the blood clots. His haemoglobin level
post CABG (4 weeks prior to this admission) was measured at 100 g/L and dropped to 79 g/L
following LIMA avulsion. He received 2 units of blood transfusion. The patient made a good
recovery with no neurological sequelae and was discharged home after a few days. Outpatient
review at 3 months confirmed an excellent recovery without report of cardiovascular
symptoms. Control coronary angiography was performed at 5 months and the patient underwent
successful PCI to mid and proximal LAD into the left main (LM) artery with LCx ostium
optimization .