A 27-year-old female patient presented with an indolent but progressive swelling of the right mid femur over the last 2–3 months in our outpatient consultation hour of our university hospital. She reported of a known osteogenisis imperfecta type V, being the only member of her family suffering from it. Clinical phenotype was characterized by short statue, a mild kypho-scoliosis, a short neck and a mild ligamentous hyperlaxity. She did not report of a trauma or any inflammatory disease. Although numerous fractures of the lower extremities occurred over the last decade which were treated conservatively as well as operatively by intramedullary nailing, HPC or extraordinary swelling never developed.
Conventional radiographs of the affected area showed a massive osseous tumor of the right femoral mid-shaft . Radiographically the lesion was characterized by a massive irregular hypertrophic lamellar ossification with an irregular sunburst pattern as well as the appearance of spiculae, showing potential periosteal signs of malignancy. Laboratory tests only showed an elevated level of alkaline phosphatase of 257 U/l.
In the assumption of a malignant osteosarcoma, further tumor staging was initiated, including contrasted computed tomography of thorax, abdomen and pelvis. Furthermore a contrasted magnetic resonance Imaging (MRI) of the affected femur and a scintigraphy were performed. MRI showed massive irregular periosteal hypertrophic lamellar ossification with an irregular sunray pattern, additional infiltration of the surrounding musculature and soft tissue could not be clearly ruled out. Skeletal scintigraphy showed a massive enhanced tracer accumulation in the mid femoral shaft, but, as well as contrasted computed tomography of thorax, abdomen and pelvis showed no additional lesions. A mini-open biopsy under consideration of tumor-surgical aspects was performed by two senior surgeons. Histopathologic analysis of the bioptic specimen showed distinctive zones with the outer regions of callus containing edematous tissue with a loose collagenous network to the innermost region showing hypercellular trabeculae of woven bone and small cartilaginous islands without signs of malignant transformation. In consideration of all findings, the diagnosis of late onset HPC in a patient with osteogenesis imperfecta type V was made and the differential diagnosis of a cortical or periosteal osteosarcoma was ruled out. The patient wished no additional surgical intervention like marginal resection of the HPC and preferred to wait for possible spontaneous remodeling [,]. She undergoes regularly 6-month follow-up examinations.