A 62-year-old female patient was recently referred to our hospital with a 3-months history of an episodic, but progressively worsening stridor, exertional dyspnoea and dry cough. Clinical examination of the right side of the neck revealed a hard 3 cm × 5 cm solitary thyroid nodule with ipsilateral level III and IV cervical lymphadenopathy. No neck tenderness or dilated veins could be identified. Serum thyroid function tests were within normal limits (TSH 1.8 Miu/L, Free T3 4 pmol/L, Free T4 16.3 pmol/L), but thyroglobulin level was >115 IU/ml. Subsequent neck ultrasonography (US) confirmed a solitary thyroid nodule showing cystic changes and calcification with cervical lymphadenopathy. The ipsilateral IJV was also noted to be distended but the ultrasonographer was not able to comment on any intravascular masses. Fine-needle aspiration cytology of the thyroid nodule revealed a papillary thyroid carcinoma, and papillary thyroid cells in the enlarged lymph nodes. A fibre-optic laryngeal examination revealed a narrow glottis area with a postnasal drip, the vocal cords appeared normal, but with diminished mobility. Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed a large hypo dense nodule with areas of cystic degeneration and calcification occupying the right lobe of the thyroid gland and invading the left lobe (a) and a large, well defined, heterogeneously enhancing mass in the right anterior jugulo-digastric region representing a pathological lymph node partially compressing the right IJV (b). Surgery was considered for treatment and a total thyroidectomy with right neck dissection revealed a locally advanced thyroid neoplasm with superficial invasion of the trachea. Intraoperative palpation of the distended right IJV showed a 2 cm × 3 cm hard intraluminal mass. Longitudinal venotomy revealed a tumour thrombus with no endothelial adhesion and was easily removed . The vein was repaired using 6-0 prolene and the tracheal invasion was shaved successfully.
Histopathology and immunohistochemistry analysis of the right thyroid lobe mass and the tissue shavings of the trachea revealed stage (PT4bN1M) undifferentiated anaplastic carcinoma (a and b respectively). Histology of the right IJV intraluminal mass revealed a papillary thyroid carcinoma (c).
The surgery was followed by ablative radioiodine plus external beam radiotherapy to the neck. The patient is alive and functional 16 months later with no signs of local recurrence or distant metastasis.