A 49-year-old Caucasian male presented with a two-week history of sinusitis, nonproductive cough, and sore throat, which progressed to a fever up to 38.9 °C unrelieved by acetaminophen. The patient also experienced generalized myalgia, and had a two-day history of decreased appetite, diarrhea and frontal headache. He tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay and was quarantined and medically managed at home for seven days prior to hospital admission. He was admitted due to hypoxemia with oxygen saturation in the low 80 s.
The patient’s past medical history was significant for mixed connective tissue disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. The patients’ rheumatological symptoms were controlled by a combination of methotrexate weekly and rituximab every six months since 2008. However, the prolonged course of rituximab resulted in chronic pansinusitis which led to a diagnosis of acquired humoral deficiency. The patient was referred by an otolaryngologist for an immunological evaluation because his chronic pansinusitis did not resolve with septoplasty and bilateral sinus surgery followed by several rounds of clarithromycin. His laboratory results revealed poor humoral function as demonstrated by peripheral lymphopenia with zero absolute CD19 count with an absence of IgA and IgM, but a normal level of IgG . The IgG serology showed no titer response following a pneumococcal vaccination. Because rituximab was the key in management of his rheumatological conditions, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was initiated. Initially, the IVIG treatment and dosage were targeted at 400 mg/kg per dose every 4 weeks, increased to 600 mg/kg per dose every 4 weeks, then eventually to 600 mg/kg per dose every 3 weeks along with prophylactic azithromycin daily to effectively manage his chronic sinus infections. The patient’s last IVIG and last dose of rituximab was seventeen days prior to hospitalization and two days prior to the start of a non-productive cough.
On admission, the patient presented with tachypnea and visible respiratory distress. His pulse oximetry was 96% on 2 L/min of oxygen via nasal cannula. The vital sign measurements were as follows: temperature of 37.6 °C, blood pressure of 119/87 mmHg, heart rate at 82 beats per minute, and respiratory rate at 20 breaths per minute. The auscultation of the lungs revealed fine bibasilar inspiratory crackles with symmetric chest expansion. The initial chest X-ray revealed cardiomediastinal silhouette enlargement with increased pulmonary vascularity and mild bibasilar atelectasis. The complete blood count demonstrated leukopenia and lymphocytopenia, which were both normal in January 2020 . At this time, the patient was experimentally given hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, but the lack of pulmonary infiltrate on the initial chest X-ray did not qualify him for the remdesivir trial.
On hospital day four, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit due to worsening hypoxemia. The laboratory results in demonstrated persistent leukopenia and lymphocytopenia with a new elevation of IL-6, C reactive protein, D-dimer, ferritin, glucose, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate transaminase, and lactate dehydrogenase levels. On day five, IVIG was given at 600 mg/kg followed by another 600 mg/kg dose two weeks later. Supplemental oxygen via high flow nasal cannula was initiated at 15 L/min and titrated up to 20 L/min by day twelve. A repeat chest X-ray revealed multifocal ground-glass consolidative opacity that was more significant in the left lower lung with worse aeration compared to prior study.
His respiratory condition was complicated by abdominal distention with diarrhea and ileus, necessitating a nasogastric tube placement. An abdominal computed tomography study was completed on day twenty-six revealing thickening of the colon. On day twenty-seven, he was discharged from the intensive care unit. Cultures of Histoplasma, Pneumocystic jiroveci, Staphylococcus aureus, Rhinovirus, Metapneumovirus, Adenovirus, and Clostridium difficile were found negative for respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms; however, SARS-CoV-2 remained positive via PCR assay. A computed tomography of the chest was performed on day thirty-three showing diffuse patchy infiltrates in both lungs, worse in the right upper and middle lobes as shown in . The patient was discharged to home after forty-one days of hospitalization with oxygen supplementation only with ambulation and a complete resolution of diarrhea despite still being tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. The patient eventually was cleared of SARS-CoV-2 after three different PCR assays at three weeks post hospital discharge.