A 67-year-old housewife had been treated for 2 years with cycles of strong doses of cortisones and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (i.e., Dicloreum) to ease the pain in the back of her left inferior limb.
The medical history, negative for trauma, presented a diagnosis of fibroangiomatosis of the left leg, which had been treated with electrocoagulation and phlebectomy 50 years ago. At the physical examination, both limbs showed diffused varicosis. The Lasègue maneuver of the left limb was positive whereas the Wasserman maneuver was negative. The patellar reflexes, Achilles reflexes, and the plantar reflexes reacted normally and symmetrically. Digital pressure in the posterior region of the left thigh, at the limit between the proximal third and the middle third, provoked slight pain. At this site, the Tinel's sign was positive with paresthesia radiating to the popliteal space and to the calf. The ultrasound scan of the left thigh was negative for lesions of the superficial and deep soft tissues.
A color Doppler ultrasound exam of the lower limbs highlighted ectasic collateral veins of the posterior left thigh and leg and incompetence of the external saphenous vein in the same limb.
An X-ray exam of the femur showed a delimited zone of hyperostosis in the proximal third of the femoral diaphysis. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the thigh was negative for lesions of periskeletal soft tissue or changes of the bone signal . A computed axial tomography (CAT) scan of the left femur highlighted a small area of thickening of the solid cortical bone in the proximal third of the diaphysis, on the medial side, with no images about focal lesions of that same bone.
Electromyography revealed chronic neurogenic damage without denervation in progress, with a bilateral L5-S1 radicular distribution and slight predominance on the left.
Other radiographic exams of the hips, knee and spine showed diffused moderate or severe arthrosis. The common hematochemical examinations (sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and the hemochromocytometric examinations) presented values within the normal range.
Because of the persisting pain and the findings of the physical examination, we decided to perform a surgical exploration of the sciatic nerve, in the region where the Tinel's sign was positive. Around the nervous trunk, we observed a fibrous tissue which blended in with the tissue of the surrounding muscular fascia. When this was removed, we could note a nerve deformity, with a partial interruption of the vasa nervorum .
On the first postoperative day, the painful symptoms had disappeared and this condition remained unchanged at the last clinical checkup 2 years after surgery.