A 48-year-old female had a 2-year history of right hemifacial spasm. She had been treated with clonazepam and other alternative therapies with limited effect. She was admitted to our hospital for microvascular decompression surgery for her hemifacial spasm. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with T2-based cisternography revealed attachment of her right posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) to her facial nerve exit zone. We carried out microvascular decompression surgery with a lateral suboccipital approach and placed a sponge (polyurethane) between the PICA and the brainstem, fixing them with fibrin glue . Her postoperative course was uneventful. Her hemifacial spasm disappeared completely 3 days after the decompression surgery. Postoperative MRI showed a PICA running course without attachment to the brainstem .
Six years after her surgery, she noticed a mild spasm in her superior orbicularis oculi muscle which spread to her prioral muscles and occasionally sustained a tonic state. She visited our department and underwent a MRI scan. T2-based cisternography showed a closed PICA running course compared with the MRI immediately after her initial surgery . At this point, she was eager to undergo decompression surgery again, even if it was only for inspection. We carried out the second surgery with her informed consent.
Using a lateral suboccipital approach through the previous incision and craniotomy, we dissected the arachnoid adhesion and confirmed that the sponge placed in the first surgery between the offending artery and the brainstem was not dislocated. However, the sponge was degenerated. The structure of the sponge was fragile and easy to collapse. The honeycomb structure or bubbles in the sponge were not preserved . We attempted to remove the sponge, but its adhesion to the lower cranial nerves was strong. We inserted Teflon between the sponge and the brainstem and moved the distal portion of the PICA to the dura of the petrous surface with Teflon strings. Her facial spasm disappeared immediately after the surgery and she experienced no complications. She has experienced no spasmatic movements on her face during the year after the second surgery.