A 22-year-old male presented to medical acute receiving on July 15, 2022, with a 2-week history of intermittent headaches and vomiting. In addition, there was a 1-week history of the left-sided weakness and a 3-day history of altered sensorium. His initial Glasgow coma score (GCS) was 14 (E4, V4, M6), and his pupils were bilaterally reactive and normal in size. Neurological examination revealed weakness with left-sided power of grade 2 in his arm and leg (MRC scale). Babinski was upgoing. Marked splenomegaly was present on palpation of the abdomen and ultrasound spleen. His initial blood count revealed leukocytosis, and his total leukocyte count was 447 × 10^9/L (reference range 4–11 × 10^9/L). This raised suspicion of hematological malignancy. A full blood count (FBC) with peripheral smear showed 38% myelocytes, 7% metamyelocytes, and 1% blast cells, making CML the main provisional diagnosis with an intracerebral complication.
A CT scan and an urgent bone marrow biopsy were done the next day. During this time, the patient’s conscious level acutely deteriorated with a GCS of 11 (E3, V2, M6). He was administered mannitol 200 mL IV bolus and was referred to our neurosurgery department. The CT scan revealed a right frontal-temporal-parietal intracerebral hematoma with perifocal edema and a midline shift of 2.5 cm . A right-sided frontal-temporal-parietal decompressive hemicraniectomy with expansion duraplasty was performed. Intraoperatively, the brain was tight and slightly pulsatile. The patient was shifted to neuro-ICU for mechanical ventilation and monitoring. Within 3 h, it was noted that his dressing was soaked, and his scalp wound was oozing blood. The scalp flap was swollen. The patient was immediately taken to the emergency operation theater, and a 60 mL extradural hematoma was evacuated. Hemostasis of bleeding scalp vessels was performed, and he was shifted back to the neuro-ICU. Postoperatively, he received sedation, paralysis, and mannitol. After 3 days, he was weaned from mechanical ventilation and shifted to the neurosurgical ward. A postoperative CT scan after 48 h revealed an improving midline shift (1.2 cm) with remaining perifocal edema . After 1 week, the patient recovered without complication, and his GCS became 15/15 with persisting left-sided weakness (power 3/5).
His remaining investigations performed by the medical admissions team, as advised by hematology/oncology, before he was shifted to neurosurgery, revealed as follows. Platelet count was 202 × 10^9/L (reference range 150–300 × 10^9/L). A peripheral smear showing red blood cell morphology included anisocytosis with poikilocytosis and macrocytosis with a few teardrop cells. Differential leukocyte count confirmed that there were 50% neutrophils, 38% myelocyte, 7% metamyelocyte, 2% basophil, 1% lymphocyte, and 1% blast cells. Bone marrow aspirate taken from the posterior iliac crest showed hypercellular smears with reduced erythropoiesis and increased leucopoiesis with all stages of maturation seen. The myeloid-to-erythroid precursor ratio was 25:1. Megakaryocytes were present mainly hypolobulated, and blasts constituted 1% of nucleated marrow cells. CML in the CP was confirmed as blast cells in the bone marrow and peripheral blood were <10%.
During his stay in the neurosurgical ward and transfer to our oncology colleagues, cytogenetics was performed, including fluorescence in situ hybridisation, and BCR-ABL t(9;22) (q34;q11.2). A BCR-ABL fusion confirmed the diagnosis of CML, as this translocation was detected in 82.5% of cells. The patient is now commenced on a tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib by our oncology colleagues with risk stratification based on the Sokal score.