A 75-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency service with the complaints of a 7-day history of colic-style abdominal pain, nausea and biliary vomiting. The patient whose vital signs were stable at the time of admission was.
In laboratory tests, C-reactive protein (CRP): increased as 10 mg / dl, the value of WBC (White blood count) was found as 16,000 μ/L high, and in biochemistry values glucose value was viewed as elevated by 414 mg/dL. There was no significant change in other tests.
Radiological examinations were performed and the patient was diagnosed as ileus. On the images of the patient who was performed oral-iv contrast-enhanced abdominal but, it was found that the patient had gallstone ileus after the Rigler’s triad and a prominently viewed forchet sign were seen .
The patient was taken to the surgical intensive care unit due to her advanced age and dehydration, also having additional disease. After hydration he was operated on the 2nd day of his hospitalization. The operation was performed openly due to the fact that the duration of anesthesia was wanted to be kept short. In the exploration, it was seen that the segment of jejunum which was 80 cm distant from the treitz ligament was totally obstructed with a limited mobile, large mass. Intestinal segment of the mass in the proximal was seen widely. This mass lesion was initially predicted to be a bezoar, but after enterotomy it was found to be a 4 × 6 cm large gallstone. After enterolithotomy, small bowel was repaired double transversely . When exploration was continued, it was seen that gallbladder was edematous and also there was cholecystoduodenal fistula between gallbladder and duodenum. Cholecystectomy and fistula repair were left for the second session because of the edematous tissues. The operation was terminated by placing a drain into the abdomen. The operation lasted a total of 80 min.
Antibiotic treatment was started to the patient before the operation and the treatment was completed in 48 h. The naso gastric catheter, which was inserted for aspiration and decompression, was withdrawn on the second post-operative day because the patient had gas outlet. At the postoperative 5th day, the abdomen drain was withdrawn from the patient who took diet of Regime 1 and tolerated. The patient was discharged with full recovery on the 6th post-operative day.