We report the case of a 53-year-old otherwise healthy woman who presented with a 2-year history of right-sided sciatica. The pain was greater in the supine position and slightly relieved when upright. There was no weakness or numbness. The symptoms began gradually 2 years ago with no history of trauma or injury.
Initial management included an EMG that showed myelin damage to the right L5 root which indicates L5 root compression. MRI of the pelvis and lumbar-sacral spine revealed a well-defined ovoid mass in the right presacral space, adherent to the sacral anterior surface without any sign of invasion growth. The parenchyma was heterogeneous with few calcifications noted. The mass had contact with the external iliac vein, internal iliac artery and vein, and the right ureter . The radiologic characteristics of the mass suggested presacral schwannoma type III of the Klimo classification as the most possible diagnosis.
Therefore, surgical resection was decided, and an anterior approach was chosen. We found it necessary to put a double J stent in the right ureter prior to the operation to prevent its injury during the pelvic dissection.
The patient was placed in a supine position and a lower midline incision from the umbilicus to symphysis pubis was performed. After opening the abdomen, a 6cm retroperitoneal mass was detected occupying the right presacral space and compressing the vascular structures. The ureter was identified and protected. The vascular structures were thoroughly dissected around the lesion. The mass was encapsulated with no invasion of the adjacent organs . We performed a digital enucleation of the tumor through a capsulotomy.
Pathology revealed a well-encapsulated tumor of interwoven spindle cell bundles. There were areas of calcification within the tumor. These features were typical of a degenerative schwannoma, and this was confirmed on immunohistochemistry with component cells staining strongly for S-100 protein. There were no features of malignancy .
The post-operative period was uneventful. A follow-up examination at 6 months showed no signs of numbness or weakness in the right leg. The previously described pain totally regressed.