Ms. M, a 50 year old Caucasian female with no previous medical or psychiatric conditions, presented with a fever, cough and myalgia while on holiday by the coast in the middle of December 2020. She was admitted to hospital on the 28 December 2020 after testing positive for COVID-19. Ms. M had a family history of macular degeneration and was a non-smoker and did not use any alcohol. She developed severe nausea, and vomiting and progressive weakness of all limbs along with significant confusion and disorganised behaviour. She was not hypoxic at the time of presentation.
Her blood results ate the time revealed an elevated C-reactive protein of 50 mg/L and marginally increased D-Dimer of 0.72 ug/mL.
An MRI brain was undertaken which showed significant abnormalities consistent with a cytotoxic encephalopathy.
A lumbar puncture was performed on the 02 January 2021 and an elevated total protein (770 mg/L) was noted with no polymorphs and only 1 Red blood cell per uL. The glucose was 3.1 mmol/L (within range). The CSF IgG was 77.0 (Normal range < 34.1) and the viral screen, oligoclonal bands, TB PCR and TPHA were negative.
She was treated with a dose of pulse solumedrol 500 mg daily for 3 days and commenced on Sodium Valproate controlled release at 200 mg twice daily, Enoxaparin 40 mg daily SC and Esomeprazole 40 mg daily.
Ms. M was discharged into the care of her family after completion of the pulse therapy and returned to her home in Johannesburg. However, she continued to exhibit marked behavioural dysfunction and was also dependant on her family to perform simple activities of daily living.
She was transferred to a rehabilitation facility on the 09 January 2021 in Johannesburg where the treating practitioner noted the marked behavioural dysfunction, emotional lability, quadriparesis, left sided sensory deficits most marked in her face, tongue and extremities, slurred speech, urinary retention and cognitive impairment.
Ms. M was referred to a Johannesburg hospital on the 14 January 2021 for further neurological assessment where, in addition to above symptoms, significant cerebellar dysfunction was noted. She had evidence of truncal ataxia and brisk bilateral deep tendon reflexes with bilateral Babinski signs. There was no evidence of any meningism.
An MRI of the brain was repeated (14 January 2021) which showed improvement of the marked cytotoxic encephalopathy. There was increased signal in the region of the dentate nucleus, inferior cerebellar peduncle, corticospinal tracts at the level of the basal ganglia and midbrain with diffuse restriction evident in these areas. This was consistent with an Acute Demyelinating Encephalomyelitis (ADEM).
Anti N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibodies were performed with markedly raised titre of 1:1280 noted.
The anti neural antibodies, antiphospholipid antibodies and the antibodies against aquaporin receptors were all negative.
A diagnosis of an autoimmune anti NMDA receptor antibody encephalitis precipitated by COVID-19 was subsequently made. However further investigations were undertaken to exclude a neoplastic process, in particular, excluding ovarian tumours. A gastroscopy and colonoscopy, CT chest and abdomen, mammogram were all normal.
She was administered intravenous pulse steroid therapy, however, the clinical response was noted to be limited and she was started on intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (IVIG) 40 g daily for 5 days.
Ms. M showed subsequent clinical improvement especially with regards to her higher functions. Her strength was noted to have normalised and her cerebellar dysfunction showed much improvement but requiring of ongoing physical rehabilitation.
She was discharged back to the rehabilitation on the 26 January 2021 on Enoxaparin (Thrombosis prophylaxis) and pantoprazole where she spent the next 2 months undergoing physical therapy. She was discharged on the 19 March 2021 on Escitalopram 20 mg daily, Trazodone 50 mg daily, Esomeprazole 20 mg daily and potassium supplementation.
Ms. M spent the next 2 months at home but on the 2 May 2021 she developed significant weakness of her limbs and a generalised seizure was witnessed by her family. She was admitted to our facility and was given a loading dose of intravenous Sodium Valproate and placed on seizure surveillance. Mrs. L. M was noted to have marked weakness of all her limbs, urinary retention and faecal incontinence. An MRI brain and whole spine with gadolinium was ordered which showed prominent bilateral and symmetric hyper-intense T2 AND FLAIR lesions in the corticospinal tracts extending to the medullary pyramids, which demonstrated T2 shine-through characteristics on the diffusion weighted sequences (high b1000 signal without commensurate signal loss on the apparent diffusion coefficient map) . These symmetric findings have, to our knowledge, not yet been previously reported in literature. There were further areas of periventricular and subcortical asymmetric white matter demyelination which did not demonstrate any diffusion abnormality. There were no susceptibility changes to suggest any calcification or hemorrhage and the arterial system and dural venous sinuses were normal.None of these supratentorial lesions demonstrated any post contrast enhancement. There was however, a further lesion within the spinal cord at the cervico-medullary junction which did demonstrate post contrast enhancement. There were further non-enhancing lesions of the spinal cord noted at D7/8 and D10/11 . There were background incidental degenerative changes of the spine. A diagnosis of acute post viral disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) was made with further differential for the symmetric intracranial changes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis being considered.
A lumbar puncture was performed on the 03 May 2021 which showed an elevated protein (502 mg/L), a marginally increased CSF IgG of 35.2 with no polymorphs or red blood cells.
An anti NMDA receptor antibody was repeated and she was commenced on Solumedrol 500 mg IVI daily for 3 days. The response to steroids was initially promising but thereafter she continued to weaken.
The anti NMDA receptor antibody titre was again positive with a titre of 1:640. It was decided, in light of the positive antibody result and clinical deterioration to offer Ms. M plasmapheresis which was commenced on the 07 May 2021.
Ms. M received 5 sessions of plasma exchange and thereafter a repeat dose of IVIG (2 g/kg over 5 days) was administered. Rigorous physiotherapy was undertaken and she began to improve with regards to her strength and mobility. Ms. M was seen by a psychiatrist who switched the escitalopram and trazodone to vortioxetine. She was discharged home on oral prednisone 40 mg daily and advised to repeat the dose of IVIG in 4 weeks. No adverse events were reported prior to discharge.
Ms. M returned in 4 weeks for her repeat dose of IVIG and had improved significantly from her admission on the 2 May 2021. A discussion on the mode of immunosuppressive/modulator therapy was undertaken and the use of rituximab is being considered as long term therapy.
It is thought that due to the fact she has had a severe relapse twice before Ms. M will require chronic therapy. She continues to receive her immunoglobulin therapy every 4 weeks and has shown steady improvement. Her anti NMDA receptor antibody titres will be monitored to assess, along with her clinical improvement, the response to therapy.
Ms. M, after careful consideration, was advised to vaccinate against COVID-19. She received her Pfizer vaccine 6 weeks apart and this was timed to be given about a week prior to receiving her Immunoglobulin dose to allow her to be monitored for any worsening of her neurological condition. It was also considered beneficial to having the immunoglobulin therapy after to mitigate any potential autoimmune flare.