A 39-year-old man presented with progressive blurred vision and ocular pain in the left eye for the preceding 8 months, and the left eye had undergone laser peripheral iridectomy previously. His right eye underwent combined phacoemulsification, intraocular lens (IOL) implantation, goniosynechialysis, anterior vitrectomy, and irido-zonulo-hyaloid-vitrectomy (IZHV) to resolve malignant glaucoma after trabeculectomy 5 years ago. The patient denied a family history of eye diseases or a history of ocular trauma or systemic diseases.
The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.1 in the right eye (OD) and 0.4 in the left eye (OS), and the refractive state was hypermetropic (OD + 2.00/−1.00 × 120, OS + 2.5.00/−1.25 × 25). IOP measurements were 11 mmHg OD and 45 mmHg OS. The fundus of the right eye cannot be seen clearly because of posterior capsular opacity. Positive findings on slit-lamp examination of the left eye revealed mild corneal edema, clear lens and shallow central and peripheral anterior chamber. Fundus examination of the left eye was notable for a spoke-wheel pattern in the macular area and a pale optic disc . Gonioscopy demonstrated a synechial angle closure in both eyes. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) images of the left eye showed a shallow anterior chamber, closed angle, and ciliary body anteposition and forward rotation . The anterior chamber depth (ACD) was 1.55 mm and the axial length was 21.45 mm in the left eye measured by IOL Master. Perimetry revealed a significant visual field defect and the result of fundus fluorescein angiography was normal . Macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a tiny cystic macular lesion . The patient’s whole-exome sequencing revealed a hemizygous nonsense mutation, c.489G > A (p.W163X) in exon 5 of the RS1 gene. Genetic testing was also detected in other family members, and the heterozygous for the same variant in the RS1 gene was confirmed in his mother, while no variant in the RS1 gene was detected in his father or his son .
Carteolol, brimonidine tartrate, brinzolamide eye drops and oral acetazolamide were used to lower the patient’ IOP. Given the severe visual field damage and the elevated IOP on maximum anti-glaucoma medications, the left eye underwent trabeculectomy combined with clear lens extraction, IOL implantation and goniosynechialysis. On postoperative day 1, the eye showed a shallow central and peripheral ACD with a raised IOP of 35 mmHg. Malignant glaucoma was diagnosed, and anterior vitrectomy combined with IZHV was performed to balance the pressure between the anterior and posterior chamber. Following surgery, his IOP decreased to 11 mmHg and the ACD deepened.
After 2 weeks, the right eye underwent Nd: YAG laser posterior capsulotomy and bilateral OCT was performed. OCT showed that the schitic cavities in the left eye were worse than that before surgery and lasted for 1 year . Interestingly, his foveal cyst in the right eye resolved at 6 months and get worse again at 1 year following Nd: YAG laser posterior capsulotomy . One year following treatment, his BCVA was 0.4 OD and 0.2 OS. The ACD remained stable at around 3.29 mm and IOP was between 12 and 14 mmHg in both eyes without anti-glaucoma drops.