A 51-year-old male patient, non-smoker, was referred to our Maxillofacial Surgery Unit (University of Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli,” Naples, Italy) with a left upper cervical mass of 1-year duration. Clinical examination revealed a fluctuant, painless mass close to the middle third to anterior border of sternocleidomastoid. The overlying skin appeared normal . Neck ultrasonography showed a well-defined cystic mass with thin hyperechoic wall and internal anechoic component, measuring 30 × 35 mm. There were no loco-regional lymphadenopathies. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the neck showed a circumscribed cystic mass of 30 × 30 × 44 mm surrounded by peripheral enhance, located behind the left sub-mandibular gland, lateral to the left great vessels, and deep to the left sternocleidomastoid muscle . The patient had previously performed two consecutive FNAC in two different hospitals. By the first FNAC, straw-yellow material was taken which microscopically showed histiocytes and crystals. The second FNAC showed amorphous material, crystals, inflammatory elements, histiocytes, and anucleate keratin lamellae in a serous background. These features, associated with the clinical-instrumental presentation, suggested a branchial cleft cyst.
The patient underwent neck dissection to remove the cyst, which appeared encapsulated. Grossly, the cystic structure measured 3.5 × 3.2 × 2.7 cm and showed a brownish, smooth external surface. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections showed a cystic lumen surrounded by squamous cell epithelium. The epithelium presented a progression from benign squamous epithelium to carcinoma in situ, up to a squamous carcinoma infiltrating the cystic wall even with poorly differentiated areas . Organized lymphoid tissue with lymphoid follicles was present in the cyst wall. These findings identified a squamous cell carcinoma with a gradual transition from benign epithelium to squamous cell carcinoma arose in a branchial cleft cyst. The immunohistochemistry showed negativity for HPV and EBV and positive for CKAE1/AE3. The patient underwent a magnetic resonance (MR) of the head and neck region followed by a 18 FDG PET-CT scan and a fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy and laryngoscopy that revealed no lesions or abnormalities, defining any occult primary tumor, thus diagnosis of PBC was confirmed. The case was discussed in the multidisciplinary team meeting (MDT) and it was established to perform prophylactic selective neck dissection to ensure the complete removal of the neoplasm. Postoperative period passed without complications. All lymph nodes resected were negative at the histological examination. The MDT recommended a follow up at closer intervals during the first year, adjuvant therapy was not suggested. Neck ultrasonography was performed 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery and no signs of relapse were reported.