A 17-year-old male initially presented with chief complaints of a fever (at 40.2°C), headache, dyspnoea on effort, and cervical lymphadenopathy. Three days later, he was diagnosed with KD based on the appearance of polymorphous rash, peripheral oedema, cracked lips, bilateral conjunctivitis, and a swollen and bumpy ‘strawberry’ tongue. He had no noteworthy previous medical history or family history. The antinuclear antibody level was below 1:40 and the rheumatoid factor was negative. Both the myeroperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and proteinase3-ANCA levels were within normal limits and no suspicious findings regarding other immune diseases were observed. He was hospitalized at this time and received a single dose of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG; 2 g/kg) together with oral aspirin therapy (30 mg/kg/day) in an effort to prevent the development of a coronary artery lesion . Shortly thereafter, his blood pressure dropped to 74/38 mmHg and his heart rate increased to 133 beats/min. Chest radiograph was notable for bilateral lung congestion and cardiac enlargement (cardiothoracic ratio = 59%). An electrocardiogram included ST-segment elevation in V2–4 precordial leads . At this time, his ejection fraction had dropped to 10% , and accumulated pericardial fluid was detected in an echocardiogram. Likewise, plasma levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) increased markedly to 1.031 pg/mL (normal < 18.4 pg/mL); serum levels of troponin-T were mildly elevated at 0.093 ng/mL (normal < 0.014 ng/mL). These findings suggested acute myocardial injury in association with KD. Emergency coronary angiography was performed, followed by right heart catheterization and endomyocardial biopsy under inotrope infusion, intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP), and peripheral veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (V-A ECMO) support. He had no valvulitis, but his age-adjusted haemoglobulin level was normal and platelet count was preserved (160 000/mm3). In addition, blood cultures showed no bacterial involvement and plasma endotoxin levels were within normal limits. He was diagnosed as KDSS as per the recently proposed criteria.,
Pathological findings in the endomyocardial biopsy specimen are shown in . Inflammatory cell infiltrates were detected in the myocardial interstitium in association with mild fibrosis, consistent with a diagnosis of myocarditis. Immunostaining revealed a small number of CD3+, CD4+ or CD8+ and CD20− small lymphocytes together with a few CD68+ macrophages. The serological analysis with paired serum samples did not reveal any viral involvement. No stenosis or aneurysms were noted at the coronary arteries. As his cardiac index had decreased to 1.6 L/min/m2, we treated his IVIG-resistant KDSS and myocardial inflammation with pulse IST using methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day for 3 days; oral steroids were added because the troponin-T level remained high on hospital Day 4 . Left ventricular systolic function had slightly improved by hospital Day 5 and had normalized by hospital Day 7 , with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 55%. V-A ECMO was discontinued on hospital Day 7 as was IABP support on hospital Day 8. During right heart catheterization, cardiac index, and pulmonary artery wedge pressure was maintained at 3.5 L/min/m2. A repeat coronary angiography on hospital Day 30 revealed no abnormal findings and notably no coronary aneurysms. At follow-up 6 months after discharge, echocardiography was notable for normal systolic function (LVEF 66%). Troponin-T and plasma BNP level were within normal range without oral steroid therapy (0.005 ng/mL and 7.0 pg/mL, respectively).