A 10-year-old healthy boy visited the Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Chonnam National University in July 2018 to complete root canal therapy. An asymptomatic lesion was discovered incidentally in a conventional panoramic X-ray. There was no history of trauma to the area and he had no complaints about the lesion. There were no abnormal findings in either the physical examination or laboratory data.
Cone-beam computerized tomograms depicted a round cavity with a defined cortical border measuring approximately 5 × 5 × 5 mm in size, mesiolingual to the root of tooth 34 . A panoramic radiograph showed a periapical bone resorption with sclerosing osteitis on the apical to the adjacent tooth .
The diagnostic hypotheses from radiology were simple bone cyst, periapical cemental dysplasia, and paradental cyst because of its location and radiologic features. A tumor enucleation was performed, and a whitish, firm, myxoid connective tissue was transferred for pathological analysis. Based on the histopathological study results, POT was confirmed as a definitive diagnosis. There were no adverse events neither signs of recurrence after surgery during a one-year follow-up.
The gross specimen showed a 5 × 5 × 5-mm-sized well-defined and slippery white nodule of pale, translucent, firm, myxoid connective tissue. Histologically, the periphery of the tumor was enveloped by a delicate membrane of ameloblastic epithelium, which is a single layer of columnar epithelium exhibiting typical “reverse nuclear polarization,” i.e., displacement of nuclei away from the basement membrane and vacuolated cytoplasm at the bottom part. Most of the tumor was composed of loose and myxoid fibrous tissue, including spindle cells . In some areas, the cords or islands of the epithelium were observed in the connective tissue because of tangential folded sectioning. The cord-like or nests of the enfolded epithelium possessed stellate reticulum between the columnar cells . Dentine was found in the peripheral portion of the connective tissue , which represents an association between tumor and adjacent tooth.
Upon immunohistochemistry analysis, the epithelial component demonstrated strong positivity for cytokeratin 19 only in columnar cells, which was consistent with previously reported cases. Vimentin was also positive throughout the tumor tissue; specifically, strongly positive in the epithelial layers and moderately positive in mesenchymal tumor cells. In addition, alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and S100 protein were negative in the ectomesenchymal cells. Ki67 expression was lower than 2% .