A 55-year-old female presented with swelling in her left lower abdomen for 5 days. She was stung in the left lower quadrant of her abdomen by a hoverfly that appeared innocuous while lounging in an open area on a sunny day. She felt the bite but did not care because, initially, nothing was noticeable. The patient was a chronic smoker with no documented comorbidities. The next day, she noticed a small blister at the stung site, which she ruptured with a toothpick, and left it, reassuring herself that it would resolve. The lesion slowly became painful; therefore, she used a painkiller and was confused with the boil. By the sixth day, she had developed pain and redness in the region associated with fever. She visited a nearby hospital on the periphery. She was referred from there, and then they came to a reputed hospital in the vicinity, where she was admitted with the diagnosis of cellulitis and the administration of intravenous antibiotics and other medications. Despite treatment, there was a gradual worsening of the lesion, so the antibiotic was upgraded, after which there was some improvement in the symptoms and blackening of the lesion. However, during resuscitation, the patient collapsed and was advised to move to the ICU.
The patient was shifted to our setup after initial resuscitation in another hospital for 3 days. On arrival, the patient was febrile and had experienced remarkable pain. The patient was hemodynamically and systemically stable. Abdominal examination revealed tender erythematous swelling in the left lower abdomen with blisters, blackening, and peeling of the skin . The patient was evaluated by a general surgeon and an anesthesiologist and admitted to the ICU with the necessary intravenous support. The next morning, she was consulted for a plastic surgery opinion. Necrotizing fasciitis spreading beyond the discoloration was diagnosed, and exclusive debridement was advised. Owing to the presence of right-sided pleural effusion and worse condition of the chest, along with a total white blood cell count (WCC) of 23 000 cm3, she was scheduled to undergo debridement under spinal anesthesia.
On the second day of hospital admission, she underwent massive debridement with the removal of all the necrotic and infected fascial layers and subcutaneous tissue . Pre-debridement and post-debridement pictures depict the level of debridement. The following morning, her condition remained static, with no signs of spreading of the lesion. On the third postoperative day, despite a decrease in the total white blood cell count to 13 300 cm3, there was a noticeable increase in the amount of pleural effusion. Diagnostic pleural tapping was performed, and the fluid was sent for investigation. On the fourth postoperative day, the count continued to decline with no obvious evidence of wound spreading; however, an ultrasound of the chest revealed a collection of 550 ml of fluid in the left pleural cavity and 600 ml in the right pleural cavity . Staphylococcus aureus was isolated from the pus culture of the wound sent during debridement, and it was found to be resistant to every antibiotic we employed. Clinical evidence indicated that the prescribed antibiotics were effective; therefore, we substituted culture-resistant levofloxacin with culture-sensitive cloxacillin while continuing with other treatments.
On the fifth postoperative day, 900 ml of pleural fluid was tapped from the right side, and 250 ml of pleural fluid was tapped from the left side . The wound started to show growth of granulation tissue , and her symptoms improved. The patient was shifted to the ward on the same day after noticing clearance of the chest in comparison with prior films. Following evaluation of the wound on the seventh postoperative day, an abdominoplasty closure strategy was decided. On the eighth postoperative day, the patient underwent wound closure in an abdominoplasty fashion . The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient recovered well. Meleney’s gangrene appeared to require a skin graft; however, the concept of abdominoplasty resolved this case. The length of the hospital stay was also shortened as she was discharged post-drain removal on the 14th postoperative day. The patient made a full recovery over 1 month, and she was monitored.