A 32-year-old Hispanic woman, G1P1L1, stay-at-home mom, with a history of recurrent sinusitis and preseptal abscess for 2 years presented with a hoarse voice, swelling around the right eye, and diplopia in July 2018. She was previous a cocaine (occasionally since 2015) user for 2 years, who had quit it 2 years before presenting to the hospital. She had no family history of cancer or hematological diseases. She had a blood pressure of 124/81 mmHg, heart rate of 113 beats per minute, and temperature of 37.1° C on first admission. On physical examination, swelling of the right orbit, including the eyelid, was noted. Nasal examination showed some erythema to the nasal mucosa but no perforated septum and no saddle nose deformity. There was no inflammation in the ears, and the inner ears looked normal with normal tympanic membranes. On neurological examination, limited eye movements on the right side with no ability for abduction or adduction indicating extraocular muscle involvement were detected. Sinus mucosa biopsy showed chronic inflammation featuring heavy perivascular infiltration of mixed lymphoplasmacytic cells and histiocytes. Despite being on prednisone owing to the primary impression of autoimmune nature of the disease, over a period of 3–4 months, there was progression of symptoms causing hoarse voice and further swelling around the right eye, diplopia, and limitation of right eye movement. Complete blood count results revealed 9 × 103 white blood cells with 6 × 103 neutrophils, 2 × 103 lymphocytes, and 1 × 103 monocytes, with no eosinophils and basophils. Hemoglobin level was 14.4 g/L, and platelet count was 328 × 103/µL. The other blood test results were as follows: creatinine 0.75 μmol/L, urea 1.9 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 15 units/L, alanine aminotransferase 26 units/L, alkaline phosphatase 89 units/L, and gamma glutamyl transferase 42 units/L.
Direct laryngoscopy in December 2018 showed infiltrating tissue involving laryngeal ventricles bilaterally extending towards the anterior aspect of false vocal cords. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbit also showed infiltration and enlargement of the right medial rectus muscle.
Both laryngeal infiltrating lesions and medial rectus muscle of the right eye were biopsied. On immunohistochemical examination of laryngeal infiltration biopsy, the neoplastic cells showed diffuse positivity for cluster of differentiation (CD)3 (cytoplasmic), CD7, CD56, granzyme B, CD30, and multiple myeloma oncogene-1 (MUM1). Results were negative for CD5, CD4, CD8, CD10, CD20, and PAX5. In situ hybridization study was positive for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-encoded ribonucleic acid (EBER). Monoclonal T-cell receptor (TCR) gene arrangement was detected by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) .
Nasal-type extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma was confirmed. Right medial rectus muscle biopsies, however, were negative for lymphoma with a confirmed negative TCR by PCR. Investigation for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus (HTLV1) was negative. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy were also negative. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) computed tomography (CT) scan at the time of diagnosis showed a discrete hypermetabolic focus in the right medial rectus muscle corresponding to the area of greatest thickening. Mild residual mucosal thickening was seen in the maxillary antra and nasal mucosa. A focal hypermetabolic area was noted in the anterior laryngeal soft tissues adjacent to the intrinsic laryngeal muscles indicating viable lymphoma. There was no metabolic activity in the rest of body based on the PET CT results.
Since the lymphoma was localized to the laryngeal area with no systemic involvement, the patient received one cycle of chemotherapy in February 2019 with VIPD protocol containing etoposide (100 mg/m2, intravenous infusion, days 1–3), ifosfamide (1200 mg/m2, intravenous infusion, once a day, days 2–4), mesna (330 mg/m2 of mesna was given before ifosfamide, and 480 mg/m2 was given 4 and 8 hours after infusion for 3 subsequent days , intravenous infusion, three times a day), cisplatin (33 mg/m2, intravenous infusion, weekly), and dexamethasone (40 mg, once daily, days 1–4, with G-CSF support). Two more cycles of VIPD were also scheduled in April and May of 2019, after the completion of chemoradiation. FDG-PET CT scan after completion of treatment was done in June 2019 and did not show convincing metabolic activities to suggest residual viable lymphoma. The previously noted hypermetabolic soft-tissue nodule at the anterior aspect of the larynx was resolved.
However, within a month after the PET-CT scan featuring complete metabolic response, the patient presented with an enlarged right-sided submandibular infiltrative mass. CT scan showed asymmetric mass in submandibular glands area that was bulkier in the right and demonstrated heterogeneous enhancement in favor of recurrent disease. Orbital CT scan also reported an asymmetric soft-tissue mass and stranding involving the right preseptal and periorbital fat predominantly at the inferior aspect of the periorbital tissue.
A repeat biopsy from the right lower eyelid confirmed involvement by the previously diagnosed nasal-type EBER-positive extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma.
Systemic investigation did not show any distant involvement. The patient was scheduled to receive salvage chemotherapy with SMILE protocol in August and September 2019 [oral methotrexate 2 g/mg, orally, on day 1, leucovorin 15 mg, intravenous infusion, four times a day, on days 2–4, ifosfamide 1500 mg/m2, intravenous infusion, on days 2–4, mesna 300 mg/m2, intravenous infusion, once daily, on days 2–4, dexamethasone 40 mg, daily, on days 2–4, etoposide 100 mg/m2, intravenous infusion, on days 2–4, l-asparaginase 6000 U/m2, intramuscular, on days 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, and 20, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) support from day 6 and discontinued if the leukocyte count exceeded 5000/μL]. Tumor cells also showed CD30 expression; thus, CD30-targeting monoclonal antibody, brentuximab vedotin (1.8 mg/kg every 3 weeks) was added to the treatment in October 2019. Salvage chemotherapy with SMILE protocol was complicated with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. In addition, brentuximab vedotin induced grade 3 sensory and motor neuropathies in both lower extremities while the disease did not respond to the treatment.
Subsequently, pembrolizumab was given at the dose of 100 mg every 3 weeks starting December 2019 with a clinical response after the third cycle of treatment, and the patient remained disease-free on this treatment. Orbital and cervical MRI figures during this therapy are shown in Fig. . The patient is currently alive and disease-free with grade 2 motor neuron toxicity on the left ankle that has remained unchanged since chemotherapy with brentuximab vedotin. The swelling of the eye and voice changes are completely back to normal. The patient’s Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status is 1. Fatigue and mild nausea are ongoing adverse events that she has been experiencing. Both symptoms are considered to be grade 2 and are not impairing the patient’s quality of life. Her last follow-up in the cancer center was on 10 June 2021.