A 46-year-old gentleman, presented with low back ache and difficulty in walking for 3 months, associated with loss of appetite and loss of weight. Other notable points in history include a dragging sensation in the right upper abdomen and difficulty in initiating micturition. Clinical examination revealed tenderness in the right upper quadrant of abdomen, and increased tone and decreased power in the right lower limb, with patient being bedridden with an Eastern Co-operative Oncology Group performance status of 4. A baseline positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed lytic and sclerotic lesions with increased fluoro-deoxy glucose (FDG) uptake in the entire axial and appendicular skeleton, multiple subpleural and parenchymal lung nodules and discrete hypodense lesions in segment 7/8 of liver. Keeping in view the patient age and diffuse lytic lesions in PET scan, a multiple myeloma work up was done, including serum electrophoresis and serum free light chain assay, which were all normal. His liver biopsy and bone marrow biopsy showed a poorly differentiated mesenchymal tumour. Despite multiple reviews with sarcoma pathologists; his diagnosis could not be established. Subsequently liver biopsy was repeated and sent again for expert review, which revealed a collagenising spindle cell proliferation comprised of epithelioid and short spindled cells with ovoid nuclei, fine chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli and scanty eosinophilic cytoplasm . The tumour cells expressed MUC 4 , while S-100, SOX10, desmin, smooth muscle antigen, CD34 and ETS-related gene were negative, suggestive of SEF. FUS-CREB3L1 fusion was not available in-house, so EWSR1 gene rearrangement by fluorescence in-situ hybridisation (FISH) was done, which was positive. He was started on systemic chemotherapy subsequently. He had disease progression following two lines of therapy, namely cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin and gemcitabine-docetaxel. He was later switched to the oral multi-kinase inhibitor pazopanib, following which he had remarkable improvement in his general condition. This patient who was bedridden before therapy, could walk again and there was notable improvement in his abdominal pain, appetite and weight. But the response was short lived, lasting for 2 months, with subsequent PET scans showing disease progression.