A 30-year-old Chinese female, G3P2002 at 26 weeks and 2 days gestation, presented to the Emergency Department complaining of shortness of breath and a dry cough that started one week prior. She had no sick contacts or recent travel history and denied obstetrical complaints. Her history was significant for chronic hepatitis B and two prior vaginal deliveries. She appeared critically ill, with vitals as follows: febrile to 39.3°C, tachycardic to 128 beats per minute, tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, hypotensive to 88/55 mmHg, and her oxygen saturation was 93% on room air. Pertinent laboratory findings included WBC 7.0 K/μL, an initial neutrophil–lymphocyte ratio of 7.25, hemoglobin/hematocrit of 9.1 g/dL/28.1%, ESR of 50 mm/hr, procalcitonin of 178 pg/mL, CRP level of 69.6 mg/L, AST 14, ALT 32, and a BUN/creatinine ratio of 4 mg/dL/0.59. Her chest X-ray showed evidence of multifocal pneumonia . On initial obstetrical evaluation, a sonogram confirmed a male fetus in cephalic presentation, with an estimated fetal weight of 910 g. The biophysical profile (BPP) score was 8/8. She was admitted for management of sepsis secondary to suspected COVID-19 infection.
This patient underwent a septic work up including NP SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR testing, respiratory viral panel, MRSA culture, legionella and streptococcus pneumoniae testing, blood cultures, and a urine culture. There was no clear etiology for her hypoxia, including negative SARS-CoV-2 testing, but was significant for asymptomatic bacteriuria, which was treated with cefpodoxime. Given the high clinical suspicion of COVID 19, SARS-CoV-2 testing was repeated but remained negative.
Within the first two days of admission the patient continued to deteriorate with increased work of breathing, increased oxygen requirements, and mixed respiratory and metabolic acidosis. On hospital day (HD) 3 her WBC increased to 10.6 K/μL and trended to 21.6 K/μL by HD9. The neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio was 16.41, lymphocyte percentage was 5%, and CRP was 187 mg/dL. She received ceftriaxone and was started on azithromycin for presumed community acquired pneumonia. She was evaluated by the critical care team for acute hypoxemic respiratory failure despite treatment with a nonrebreather mask and high-flow oxygen and was intubated on hospital day (HD) 4 with transfer to the ICU. A third SARS-CoV-2 test remained negative.
An interdisciplinary team including medicine, pulmonary, anesthesia, neonatology, and obstetrics with maternal fetal medicine guided clinical decision-making. It was felt that delivery would not provide maternal or fetal benefit; therefore, magnesium sulfate and antenatal steroids were not given.
In the ICU, she received a norepinephrine drip due to hemodynamic instability, propofol for sedation purposes, rocuronium for paralysis, and insulin drip for glycemic control, and heparin prophylaxis was initiated. She received 50 mg of methylprednisolone four times daily for 25 days, which was tapered over several days. Her acidosis was addressed and corrected with a goal pH of 7.4-7.47. She exhibited persistent leukocytosis, and her antibiotic coverage was changed to meropenem. She intermittently required blood transfusions for anemia to maintain a hemoglobin level above 7 mg/dL. Initially, she failed to maintain good oxygenation with worsening radiographic findings, and her ventilation settings were adjusted accordingly with increasing PEEP settings (maximum set at 16). Two additional SARS-CoV-2 PCR tests were repeated and were still negative. The patient then underwent a bronchoscopy on HD 14 with a bronchoalveolar lavage, and the fluid culture yielded no growth.
The question regarding delivery versus expectant management was revisited multiple times, and maternal fetal medicine recommended that a cesarean section only be performed if the patient continued to deteriorate despite maximum ventilation settings. In terms of antenatal monitoring, we could not implement continuous electronic fetal monitoring due to lack of remote monitoring capabilities and training limitations of the ICU house staff. Instead, we performed daily biophysical profiles to assess fetal status. We observed a score of 4/8 on HD16 (points removed for breathing and movement) that was attributed to an increase in the propofol and rocuronium titrations. The ICU team subsequently decreased the dosing which resulted in improved findings on the biophysical profile 2 days later. A sonographic estimated fetal weight (EFW) was measured on HD20 at 1165 g (9.5% percentile by WHO fetal growth calculator). Umbilical artery Dopplers were performed twice weekly thereafter and remained normal. Her ventilation settings were slowly weaned down and she showed radiologic improvement. She was extubated on hospital day twenty-five.
She remained in the ICU for one week after her extubation and required high-flow oxygen that was slowly weaned down to a nasal cannula. She was transferred to the antepartum unit requiring 2 L/min oxygen on a nasal cannula. Sonographic EFW on HD33 was 1549 g (21 percentile by WHO fetal growth calculator). Meeting her recovery milestones, she was discharged home at 31 weeks gestation on HD 35 with no supplemental oxygen requirements. She was seen in the clinic 2 weeks after discharge and was doing very well. She then underwent testing for COVID-19 IgG antibodies and had a positive test result.
She was readmitted to the antepartum unit with preterm contractions and 3 cm cervical dilation at 34 weeks. She was given a course of betamethasone and monitored for preterm labor; she was discharged two days later after making no cervical change. She subsequently underwent weekly NST/BPPs (consistently 10/10) and monthly growths with an estimated fetal growth of 2962 g at 38 weeks and 4 days (28% by WHO fetal growth calculator). The patient was admitted to Labor and Delivery at 39 weeks and 0 days gestation in labor and had an uncomplicated normal spontaneous vaginal delivery of a live male neonate in cephalic presentation. Apgar scores were 9 and 9 at 1, and 5 minutes, respectively, the neonatal weight was 2830 g, with a base excess of -7.9 and an arterial pH of 7.18. The placental pathology findings included meconium staining, and patchy avascular villi suggestive of fetal vascular malperfusion. The mother and child were discharged home from the hospital two days after delivery with no complications.