A 55-year-old Asian man presented with increasing neck pain and numbness of the upper extremities over the previous three months. These symptoms were exacerbated by coughing and over stretching. Six years before admission to our hospital, he had suffered a traffic accident and had sustained a spinal injury with complete paraplegia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies at that time demonstrated a burst fracture of the L1 vertebral body with severe contusion of the spinal cord. The patient underwent a posterior fusion followed by six months of rehabilitation. He reported a definite improvement in pain sensation but remained wheelchair dependent.
Five years later, he presented with chest tightness. An MRI study revealed the presence of a syringomyelic cavity of the cord extending to the thoracic level. A T4-5 laminectomy and syringo-pleural shunt were performed in another hospital and our patient experienced a brief and intermittent improvement in chest discomfort.
On admission to our hospital one year later, neurological examinations elicited grade III muscle strength in both upper extremities. Deep tendon reflexes were pathologically brisk in all four limbs. MRI studies of the whole spine revealed the presence of a large syrinx extending to the medulla .
It is likely that syrinx recurrence after the previous shunt procedure was related to shunt malfunction; moreover, it was difficult to identify any unscarred subarachnoid space. Thus, we designed a syringo-fourth ventricle shunt for this case. This procedure facilitated re-establishment of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow dynamics by avoiding cord injury and damage to spinal bony structures. To the best of our knowledge, there are no previously published accounts of this procedure.
Our patient was placed in the prone position with a rigid pin-type head-holder. Suboccipital craniectomy and a partial laminectomy of C1 were performed. A Y-shaped incision was used to open the dura, and the arachnoid membrane was opened. The fourth ventricle was inspected and the obex was identified . Under echo guidance, we used a small ball-tip dissector to create a channel between the fourth ventricle and the syrinx. After the channel was created, high-pressure fluid ran into the fourth ventricle from the cord, which became slack. A silicone tube with a diameter of 1.5 mm and a length of 4 cm was then advanced into the syrinx cavity to a length of 2 cm. The tube was then maintained at a length of 1 cm inside the fourth ventricle . Tissucol fibrin sealant (Baxter, Vienna) was used to fix the tube onto the obex to avoid migration. No dural augmentation was required and the dura was repaired using water-tight sutures.
Post-operatively, our patient complained of headache and tinnitus, which persisted for about one week and subsided spontaneously. Our patient described an improvement in numbness and pain. The muscle strength of the upper extremities improved markedly to grade IV and he gradually began to use both hands for daily activities. An MRI study performed two years after surgery showed a substantial diminution in the size of the syrinx .