A 45-year-old Indian female presented to the gynecologist with a six-month history of a mass descending down the vagina. She was post menopausal for the last three years and there was no relevant medical or surgical history. Local examination revealed second-degree uterine prolapse with cystocoele and rectocoele. Cervix showed a bluish-colored area measuring 2.5 × 3 cm in size. This area was not related to the most dependent part of cervix. Vulva and vagina were unremarkable. Routine cervical smear was reported as atrophic smear with inflammation. Pre-operative biochemical investigations were unremarkable and she underwent vaginal hysterectomy.
On gross examination, a bluish discolored area without ulceration measuring 2.5 × 3 × 3 cm in size was seen in the uterine cervix . Endometrial and endocervical cavities and myometrium were unremarkable. Microscopic sections from uterus showed basal endometrium and unremarkable myometrium. The discolored area was processed in entirety and the sections showed mild focal hyperplasia of the epithelium, basal layer destruction and a dense band-like lymphocytic infiltrate at the junction of epithelium and the subepithelium with exocytosis of lymphocytes in the epithelium . There was no evidence of dysplasia in the lining epithelium. No appreciable congestion was seen and rest of the cervix showed only minimal chronic inflammatory infiltrate in the subepithelium. Immunohistochemistry was performed for CD4 and CD8 subsets of T cells (Biogenex, San Ramon, USA) using peroxidase as the enzyme. Clusters of CD8 + T cells were seen at the junction of mucosa and submucosa, specifically in areas of basement membrane disruption. CD8+ T cells were also seen infiltrating the lower parts of epidermis . The CD4+ cells were seen scattered with no preferential localization. Based on the histological features, a diagnosis of an inflammatory lesion with interface involvement was considered and the various causes looked for. Systemic lupus erythematosus was excluded on the basis of absence of clinical features and negative serum antibody titers (anti-nuclear factor and anti-dsDNA). Extensive history-taking did not reveal any drug intake. On extensive examination of the patient, no evidence of LP at other cutaneous or mucosal sites was found. Thus a final pathologic diagnosis of isolated lichen planus of the uterine cervix was rendered.