A 41-year-old man was admitted with a 5-day history of intermittent, crampy abdominal pain associated with vomiting and fever. The patient also reported a 2-month history of alternating diarrhea and constipation, abdominal distension and weight loss.
On admission, the patient was normotensive, afebrile and tachycardic. Generalized abdominal tenderness was noted on palpation, with hyperactive bowel sounds and no guarding or rigidity. The patients also presented bilateral lower extremity edema. No petechia, lymphadenopathy, or hepatosplenomegaly were present. The remainder physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory examination including a complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver and renal profile were normal. Stool and blood cultures were negative. Multiple air fluid levels were noted on an upright abdominal radiograph. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed ascitis, dilated loops of small bowel with concentric mural tickening, diffuse peritoneal tickening with multiple peritoneal masses, and infiltration of the mesentery and the greater omentum. No lymphadenopathy was seen. Ultrasound-guided paracentesis was performed, and cytologic evaluation of the ascitic fluid showed a cell population with a blastic appearance presenting multilobular nuclei, prominent nucleoli and cytoplasm scant. Immunohistochemistry study revealed positivity for myeloperoxidase (MPO) and CD68. The neoplastic cells were negative for T-cell markers (CD3, CD5) and for B-cell markers (CD20, CD79a). During hospital stay, the patient's condition steadily deteriorated, and he developed increasing abdominal girth and ascitis and experienced worsening diarrhea, continued weight loss, abdominal pain, and lower extremity edema. With concern for possible myeloid neoplasm and the presence of subacute intestinal obstruction the patient was scheduled to undergo an exploratory laparotomy. On operation, multiple nodular masses in mesentery and small bowel causing luminal narrowing were seen. Laparotomy findings also included ascitis, and multiple masses on the greater omentum and tickening of the peritoneum. Resection of a clear and evident stenotic segment of small bowel with primary anastomosis and biopsies of the greater omentum and the peritoneum was performed. Samples from ascitic fluid were also taken. The jejunal segment that was resected was 14 cm long and had one tumor that was 4 cm long. Histopathology showed a transmural infiltrate, extending to the adjoining mesentery, of poorly differentiated pleomorphic cells with numerous interspersed eosinophils. At higher magnification, the cells had prominent mitotic figures, large irregular nuclei, and scant cytoplasm. Immunohistochemical staining was strongly positive for MPO, lisozyme and Bc12, and negative for CD10 and Cyclin D1. Similar findings were also found in biopsies of the greater omentum and the peritoneum. Since the final diagnosis was GS, the patient was investigated for leukemia. Flow cytometric analysis performed on the ascitic fluid sample showed the expression of CD13, CD33, CD34, CD117 and HLA-DR. A bone marrow aspiration revealed normal cellularity with preserved megakaryocytes, normoblastic erythroid cells, mild myeloid hyperplasia, no increase in blasts and no dysplasia. Molecular analysis of the bone marrow cells using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) identified a CBFβ-MYH11, "type A" fusion transcript with an underlying inversion of chromosome 16, inv(16) (p13;q22). An insertion of FLT3 internal tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD) in exon 14 was found in molecular study of ascitic fluid and intestinal biopsy. According to these data, the diagnoses of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with inv(16) and FLT3-ITD-positive, M2 in the FAB classification, and granulocytic sarcoma in abdomen were made. Induction chemotherapy for AML with idarubicin and cytosine arabinoside (3+7 regime) was started. The clinical course was complicated by catheter-related sepsis. Abdominal symptoms worsened dramatically in 1 week, so he received only one cycle of treatment. After recovery from post-chemotherapy, radiotherapy was administered. A total dose of 22.4 Gy was administered in 14 fractions over 3 weeks (20 days). After radiotherapy, the patient improved considerably, he gained weight and abdominal pain and distension disappeared. CT scan showed absence of ascitis and a clear decrease in the tickenning of small bowel. Two months after diagnosis of GS, the patient is about to restart chemotherapy.