Mrs A is a 43 year old female with a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. She was transferred to the National Psychosis Unit, a tertiary referral in-patient service which specialises in the management of treatment resistant psychotic illness. On admission she presented as dishevelled, agitated, thought disordered and labile in mood. She expressed grandiose and paranoid delusions, 3rd person auditory hallucinations and visual hallucinations of large wild cats. Negative features included apathy and withdrawal. Mrs A had little insight into her illness. These symptoms had persisted largely unchanged despite in-patient management and compliance with antipsychotic and mood stabilising medications for the previous 6 months. These visual experiences were evident during the day in clear daylight and consciousness, but worse at night when she was alone in her bedroom; on admission, she would choose to sleep in the corridor so as to avoid these creatures- and had been doing so for over 6 months.
Mrs A first became unwell with features of a schizoaffective disorder at the age of 19. Following treatment and discharge there was a period of relative stability over the next 20 years during which she was under the care of her local community mental health team (CMHT). At the age of 40, Mrs A was again admitted following a breakdown in her ability to function in the community due to deterioration in her mental state. Various treatment strategies were utilised during this period, including clozapine, following failure of combinations of other atypical antipsychotics and mood stabilisers. She had responded well to a combination of clozapine, aripiprazole and escitalopram in terms of a reduction in persecutory delusions and auditory hallucinations, however her visual hallucinations remained vivid. These had then taken greater prominence in Mrs A's mental state and this subsequently led to more subjective distress. Socially she was quite isolative and did not maintain any relations with family or friends Her presentation was not thought to be related to non compliance, drug and alcohol misuse or psychosocial stressors. Physical Investigations were unremarkable. MRI and EEG were reported as normal and blood indices including thyroid function tests, copper, caeruloplasmin and autoantibody screens were negative.
Mrs A's PANSS score on admission was 79 (p30, n15, g34) and MMSE was 30/30. The pharmacological management plan was to commence and maintain semi-sodium valproate within therapeutic plasma levels, reduce and discontinue her clonazepam and to restabilise on clozapine therapy. Following 4 months of this therapy with clozapine at a dose of 450 mg per day and in combination with psychological and occupational therapy, Mrs A's mental state stabilised with marked improvement in her delusions and auditory hallucinations, stable mood and better function. Her PANSS rating improved to a total score of 52 (p14, n13, g 25). Despite these improvements on clozapine, Mrs A continued to experience vivid visual hallucinations of tigers and lions.
A decision was made by the multidisciplinary team to begin an AChEI, Rivastigmine to target visual hallucination symptoms. Rivastigmine patches at 4.6 mg/24 hrs was initiated. No changes were made to all other psychotropic medications. PANSS rating scales and MMSE scores were done on two occasions following the addition of rivastigmine patches to therapy. In addition a tailored visual hallucination rating scale was developed, adapted from the Psychotic Symptom Rating Scales for auditory hallucinations (PSYRATS) . This consisted of 3 items measuring frequency, vividness and distress associated with the hallucinations. Items were scored 0-4 (frequency and distress) or 0-3 (vividness), and were clinician-rated. Ratings were taken daily by the primary or allocated nurse in the two weeks prior to treatment with rivastigmine and during treatment.
Mrs A continued to show an improvement in her functioning, demonstrated by the fact she now slept consistently in her own bedroom at night, was independent in her self-care, and started to participate in community outings and OT activities. Mrs A's level of occupational and psychological therapy input remained stable throughout the introduction of rivastigmine patches, and focused on reducing the distress and interference with daily activities associated with the visual hallucinations. No further medication changes were made to her pharmacological therapy. Mrs A suffered no untoward side effects from the rivastigmine patches. Two weeks following the addition of rivastigmine patches her PANSS total score was 45 (P 13, N 10, GP 22) and this improvement was maintained as her PANSS total score at 7 weeks was 43 (P 11, N 10, GP 22). Over the baseline assessment period, Mrs A continued to report distressing visual hallucinations throughout the day. After the rivastigmine treatment was initiated, after 3 weeks of treatment, reporting of visual hallucinations was decreased to once a day on average, and the level of distress was significantly reduced. This one appearance a day was usually reported as seeing a lion or tiger in her bedroom when she woke up in the middle of the night. Slowly, even this report became much more ambiguous; the animals were more unclear at night and she had more difficulty making them out. Subjectively, Mrs. A reported that she thought the patches were helpful and she was seeing the animals less frequently than before. She was discharged from hospital and at 6 month follow up was living independently quite successfully, with support from her locality mental health team, and remaining free from visual hallucinations and continuing her rivastigmine.