Mr. J is a 46-year-old gentleman requesting re-exploration of his health issues due to the recent withdrawal of his benefits. He has had pain and loss of mobility in the right hip and back (since childhood) which have impaired his ability to work for long periods of time.
In 1971 when the patient was 3 years old, he stood on a rusty nail. His right leg became infected, developing osteomyelitis while also concurrently developing poliomyelitis. Neglect by his parents meant this was ignored and normal medical interventions did not take place allowing chronic infection to set in the background of poliomyelitis. This ultimately resulted in avascular necrosis (AVN) of the right hip. Subsequent treatment failed to eradicate the infection.
Consequent natural arthrodesis at the right hip joint led to a loss of mobility and altered gait. Mechanical problems include a shortened right leg, atrophy of the abductors and quadriceps (due to immobility), pain in the right hip joint, and spinal hernia. Additional problems include:
Tightness of right leg. Falls due to adducted right leg catching left leg while walking. Osteoarthritis of the right hip, knee, and ankle. Shooting pain from right rib to right ankle, aggravated by stress. Mechanical back pain which has been present over the past few years. Spinal stenosis resulting in the loss of muscle control with urinary and fecal incontinence.
Mr. J has asthma, psoriasis, agoraphobia, osteoarthritis and depression. Mr. J’s social circumstance is complicated :
General examination revealed he had antalgic gait, nil right hip movements, right quadriceps and abductor muscle wasting, and right leg on tip toe and inverted.
Examination of the lower limb revealed hip flexion of up to 10°, nil hip extension, internal and external rotation and severely restricted hip abduction, and adduction movements. Spine examination showed reduced lumbar curvature.
X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging findings are shown in , , , , .
After full discussion with the orthopedic team, he has decided against surgery on the grounds of surgical and social issues that may arise. This is discussed further below.