An 84-year-old woman found a mass in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast > 1 year ago.
On April 8, 2020, she went to the clinic complaining of pain and discomfort intermittently in the lump, which had not subsided for 12 mo.
Her personal and family history was unremarkable.
There was nothing special to mention in her personal and family history.
In the upper outer quadrant of the right breast, a mass of about 3.0 cm × 2.0 cm × 2.0 cm was palpable, with a hard texture, clear boundary, and no tenderness. No abnormalities were seen in the nipple and skin. There was no enlarged lymph node in the right axilla.
Laboratory examinations were normal.
Breast ultrasound examination detected a mixed mass was detected in the right breast . The boundary between the mass and its surroundings was clear, the echo was uneven, and the blood flow signal was disordered in some areas. Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System score: 4C . There were no enlarged lymph nodes in the right axilla. Chest computed tomography (CT) examination : There is nodular soft tissue shadow in the right breast area, about 2.0 cm in diameter.
One piece of gray-yellow tissue, measured 4.0 cm × 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm (including surrounding normal tissue); a gray-white, gray-yellow nodular mass was seen on the cut surface, the boundary was clear, and the length was 2.2 cm.
Microscopic observation showed that most areas of the mass and the surrounding boundary are clear; glandular tubular structures were seen in the lesions, which contain pale eosin secretions . Double-layered cells can be seen in some glandular ducts, and apocrine metaplasia were seen locally. A large area of cartilage mucus-like matrix can be seen, and oval-shaped myoepithelial cells are trapped in the matrix. Myoepithelial cells are polygonal, oval and star-shaped. Cell atypia was not obvious, and there was no mitotic phenomenon or necrosis. In some areas, the tumor and the surrounding area are unclear, showing invasive growth , infiltrating into the fatty tissue and close to the thick-walled blood vessels , and there is a phenomenon of arranging around the catheter. The abnormality of cells in this area is obvious, and mitotic figures are easy to see.
Immunohistochemistry test results were as follows. The glandular tubular structure expressed EMA, CK7, CD117, dim surface E-cadherin and p120, and partial glandular epithelium was also positive for CK5/6 and GCDFP-15. They were negative for ER, PR and C-erbB-2/HER-2. The myoepithelial cells were positive for spinal muscular atrophy and p63, and negative for S-100 protein. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated the dual epithelial and myoepithelial components. Ki-67 proliferation index was low (10%).
FISH showed no rearrangement of PLAG1 and HMGA2 genes .