Our case report describes a 31-year-old female Syrian patient (gravida two, para one) of 8 +3 weeks of gestation depending on the last menstrual period date, who walked into the emergency department presenting with mild lower abdominal pain and she was otherwise healthy.
Pain started four days before the presentation, it was dull, continuous and mild, it was localized in the lower abdomen with no radiations or exacerbating or relieving factors.
The patient did not report any underlying disease. She did not mention a history of smoking, alcohol, or drugs. Her surgical history only included a cesarean section four years ago, due to fetal distress, where she was not reported to have any uterine anomalies. She did not have a history of infertility and did not undergo assisted reproductive techniques. She did not report a history of gynecological surgeries or sexually transmitted diseases.
Vital signs of the patient were normal at the time of presentation. Physical examination was unremarkable. No abdominal rigidity, involuntary guarding, or severe tenderness was found. On bimanual pelvic examination, no adnexal or cervical motion tenderness was noticed.
Routine emergency department scan was conducted. Transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasound were performed and a gestational sac of 4.2 cm × 4 cm with an embryo with cardiac activity was observed occupying the right horn of the uterus and was not detected to be communicating with the endometrial cavity. No adnexal abnormalities were detected (, ).
Laboratory tests showed no abnormalities but a positive pregnancy test.
Surgical intervention was decided and scheduled on the next day. Serum β-hCG level was 8735 mIU/ml.
Under general anesthesia, laparotomy was carried out and the diagnosis of an unruptured right interstitial pregnancy was confirmed (, ). Right cornual resection with right salpingectomy were performed and hemostasis was achieved . No complications were confronted in the postoperative period and the patient was discharged from the hospital after 24 h from surgery.
We performed β-HCG measurement after 48h from surgery and then repeated the test weekly until it became undetectable, which happened after 4 weeks from the surgery. Pathological findings were corresponding with the previously made diagnosis.
The patient was advised that close antenatal surveillance in subsequent pregnancies is necessary to monitor the risk of uterine rupture and decrease the incidence of recurrent cornual or interstitial ectopic pregnancies. It was also emphasized that cesarean delivery may be required in future pregnancies to reduce the risk of uterine rupture in labor.