A 58-year-old man was referred to our hospital for symptomatic hypoglycemia for the past 10 years.
At the age of 48, he manifested with pre-prandial malaise, discomfort, and amnesia. Since food or sugar intake resolved these symptoms, he did not seek for a medical consult. However, at the age of 49, a blood test revealed a low random serum glucose level (53 mg/dL), with a hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c) level of 4.7%. Subsequently, he underwent a contrast-enhanced CT scan at the age of 50, which revealed a 15-mm diameter nodule with intense early enhancement at the tail of the pancreas, which was adjacent to the spleen. The nodule was round in shape, and its enhancement effect was almost similar to that of the spleen. Abdominal MRI also showed a nodule in the same area. The signal was isointense with the spleen on T1-weighted imaging, while on T2-weighted imaging, the signal was almost equivalent or slightly hypointense compared to the spleen . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT showed no significant uptake in the nodule. Since it was difficult to rule out the presence of an accessory spleen and establish the diagnosis of insulinoma, EUS and EUS-FNA were recommended as an additional preoperative investigation for further confirmation prior to surgery. However, the patient refused these imaging modalities due to its invasive nature. Since the symptoms of hypoglycemia could be managed with a supplementary diet, the patient was carefully followed up with dietary treatment as per his request. Thereafter, his random serum glucose levels remained at 47–90 mg/dL and his HbA1c levels remained at 4.6–5.0%. At the age of 58 years, his symptoms started to worsen. His regular blood sampling revealed that his random serum glucose level was 36 mg/dL and HbA1c was 4.5%, which were the lowest values on his clinical record during follow-up. Therefore, he was referred to our hospital and admitted for further examination.
His past medical history included hypertension, supraventricular tachycardia, and spinal disc herniation. His regular medications included cilnidipine and bisoprolol. He had no history of diabetes mellitus or other endocrinopathies and previous gastric surgery. Since the age of 40, he had no history of alcohol consumption and had not been using any anti-diabetic agents.
On admission, his blood pressure was 134/92 mmHg, and his heart rate was 63 beats per minute. His height was 171.0 cm and body weight was 73.9 kg. In the last 10 years, his body weight had increased by approximately 10 kg. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia was confirmed in his fasting blood sample in the early morning (plasma glucose level was 44 mg/dL, serum insulin level was 5.1 μU/mL, C-peptide level was 1.53 ng/mL, and total ketone body was 23.9 μmol/L; acetoacetic acid and 3-hydroxybutyric acid levels were 7.9 μmol/L and 16.0 μmol/L, respectively). His anti-insulin antibody was negative. His adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, thyroid-stimulating hormone, free thyroxine, and insulin-like growth factor 1 levels were within normal limits (14.7 pg/mL, 13.26 μg/dL, 1.664 μIU/mL, 1.52 ng/dL, and 181 ng/mL, respectively) .
Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen showed a well-demarcated hypervascular round nodule in the pancreas tail , which was adjacent to the spleen. Compared to the CT and MRI images at the age of 50, no apparent change of the tumor size was noted. Findings suggestive of a lymph node or liver metastasis were not detected. For SSTR-targeted imaging, 68Ga-labeled 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N,N′,N″,N‴-tetraacetic acid-D-Phe1-Tyr3-octreotide (DOTATOC) PET/CT, which can provide higher spatial resolution and superior diagnostic capability than 111In-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid octreotide single-photon emission CT (SPECT)/CT, was performed . DOTATOC PET/CT showed no significant uptake in the pancreatic tail nodule .
18F-exendin-4 was synthesized according to the previous reports (, ) and 18F-exendin-4 PET/CT scans were performed. The protocol was approved by the Kyoto University Certified Review Board (Y0074) and was conducted in accordance to the provisions of the Declaration of Helsinki. 18F-exendin-4 PET/CT demonstrated distinct uptakes in the pancreatic nodule at both 1 and 2 h after the intravenous probe administration . The maximum standardized uptake values (SUVmax) of the nodule were 14.5 at 1 h and 12.7 at 2 h , respectively. These uptakes were remarkably higher than the normal pancreas or surrounding organs except for the kidney and bladder . The nodule signals were easily distinguished from the normal pancreas and the surrounding organs including the spleen. The tumor/pancreas ratio of the mean standardized uptake values (SUVmean) were 9.31 and 9.28 at the corresponding time points. The SUVmean of the spleen were 0.62 and 0.35 at the corresponding time points. No other focal uptakes were observed in the whole body . No adverse events were observed during the scans.
Additionally, an SACST was performed. SACST demonstrated greater than two-fold increases in insulin levels in the proximal and distal splenic arteries, without increases in the proper hepatic artery, gastroduodenal artery, or superior mesenteric artery . These results suggested the presence of a responsible tumor in the tail of the pancreas, which was consistent with the findings of 18F-exendin-4 PET/CT.
Therefore, the pancreatic tail nodule was diagnosed as insulinoma and was the responsible tumor for the symptomatic hypoglycemia. Based on the preclinical diagnosis, laparoscopic enucleation was performed. In the histopathological examination of the tumor, hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed a typical well-differentiated pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasm, characterized by a trabecular proliferation of cells with oval nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm . In immunohistochemistry, the cells of the nodule were positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin . The Ki-67 labeling index was 2.0% . The cells of the nodule were also positive for insulin , SSTR type 2 , and GLP-1R . (low magnification image) indicates that GLP-1R is diffusely expressed in the tumorous component. (high magnification image) indicates that GLP-1R is expressed in almost all cells. Based on these pathological findings, the tumor was confirmed as a well-differentiated, benign insulinoma, classified as NET G1 under the 2019 WHO classification .
After surgery, the hypoglycemic episodes and hyperinsulinemia resolved. The patient’s fasting plasma glucose levels returned to normal (fasting plasma glucose level, 98 mg/dL; insulin level, 5.7 μU/mL; and c-peptide level, 1.24 ng/mL) and his HbA1c level was 6.1%. Three months after surgery, no recurrence of hypoglycemia was observed.