A female patient, 45 years old, with BMI 80, arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, waist circumference 135 cm, with medications for T2DM, underwent scheduled LL-RYGB (biliopancreatic limb 200 cm, alimentary limb 150 cm). On the fifth postoperative day leakage of the enteroenteric anastomosis was diagnosed, small bowel resection (approximately 100 cm) with a new anastomosis was performed and she was discharged in good condition. 60 days after the surgery, the patient had an excess weight loss (EWL) of 38% but she gradually showed deterioration in the values of hepatic function and lipids . Jaundice was presented and she was readmitted to the Surgery Department for support and better investigation of this impairment. First a computed tomography scan and blood cultures were obtained in order to exclude sepsis. The results were negative and the ultrasound did not show biliary obstruction but revealed serious liver steatosis and perihepatic fluid. Despite the nutritional support with special supplements, total bilirubin reached 20 mg/dL and signs of liver failure and clinical deterioration were noted. A liver biopsy was obtained and revealed steatohepatitis with bridging fibrosis (S3A3F3, steatosis activity fibrosis).
Ultrasound guided catheterization of the bypassed stomach was decided in order to place a gastrostomy tube for activating the blinded biliopancreatic limb and reverse the vicious cycle of hepatic impairment. Catheterization with ultrasound guidance did not succeed, so the patient had general anesthesia and a gastrostomy was placed, with the patient recovering well after the operation. Enteral feeding was started from the gastrostomy in the bypassed stomach and after 60 days the hepatic function improved, with better values and resolution of jaundice. Now the patient is in the 6th month postoperatively with EWL 61%, no longer having diabetes or hypertension, and having nearly normalized hepatic values . The gastrostomy tube was removed and the patient feeds orally. Hepatic impairment after bariatric surgery remains a rare complication and such cases should be recorded in order to evaluate the risk factors and better understand the underlying mechanisms.