A 21-year-old man presented a bilateral, painless, and blurred vision for 5 weeks. Before ocular symptoms, he had got a mild cold and cough for several days. Two years ago, he was diagnosed with HSP, manifesting symptoms of hematuria and purpura. His clinical manifestations were resolved with the treatment of intravenous methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisolone. He had only once recurrence of symptoms after an attack of influenza during the 2 years.
Five weeks ago, he experienced blurred vision in both eyes, especially in the left eye but he didn’t pay much attention. At that time, he was taking 2.5 mg oral prednisolone per day and he ceased prednisolone 1 week later. At present, the patient had no symptoms of active HSP symptoms and had normal blood pressure. He denied a history of hypertension and trauma. There were no abnormal findings upon the total blood cell count, coagulation profile, and the function of the liver and kidney.
On examination, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/12 on the right eye and 6/48 on the left, with a relative afferent pupillary defect in the left eye. The anterior chamber was quiet. Fundus examination and retinal fluorescein angiography(FA) revealed diffuse, tortuous, and dilated retinal vein with scattered round-like retinal hemorrhages . The optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed cystoid macular edema (ME) in both eyes .
The patient began to take intravenous dexamethasone 10 mg per day and experienced a significant improvement on the following day. Seven days later, his BCVA was 6/6 on the right eye and 6/12 on the left with a significant reduction in macular edema, which was demonstrated by the OCT images .
Unfortunately, ME of the left eye reoccurred 1 week after he switched to oral prednisoneME , and the vision decreased to 6/60 again on the left eye and remained 6/6 on the right eye. He received 3 + PRN of intravitreal aflibercept injection in both eyes, with three injections in the right eye and four injections in the left eye. His VA improved to 6/6 on the right eye and 6/7.5 on the left with the regression of retinal hemorrhages and then faded awayfrom macular edema after 6 months follow-up .