A 46-year-old man presented to his physician with anal pain and was found to have a perianal abscess and bladder mass by CECT. After perianal abscess incision and drainage, the patient was referred to our hospital for further bladder mass examination and treatment. Palpitations during urination were observed a few months ago but had no other medical history. Complete blood count and biochemistry tests were within normal ranges; urinalysis showed no hematuria, and urinary cytology showed a class III lesion. CECT showed a 61 × 52 mm bladder tumor at the left bladder sidewall and mild left external iliac lymph node enlargement. MRI showed a faint high signal intensity on T2-WI and a high signal intensity on T1-WI and DWI, which suggested urothelial carcinoma with extramural invasion . Cystoscopy showed a non-papillary submucosal tumor protruding from the left sidewall . Because it was atypical as bladder paraganglioma from the MRI image and there was no symptom other than recent micturition attacks, muscle-invasive bladder cancer was diagnosed, and then TURBT was performed. Systolic blood pressure increased to 240 mmHg when the bladder tumor was resected. The tumor was resected in small volumes to confirm the histological types, reducing the operation time. However, the patient complained of dyspnea after leaving the operating room. Percutaneous oxygen saturation fell to 86% with 3 L of oxygen administration and chest CT showed ground-glass opacities on the dorsal side of the bilateral lung fields, which led to the ARDS diagnosis. The symptom improved after oxygen administration, and oxygen administration could be discontinued 1 day postoperatively.
The 123I-MIBG scintigraphy showed accumulation consistent with a bladder mass . Serum catecholamines and 24-h urine catecholamines, metanephrine, and vanillylmandelic acid levels were elevated above the normal range.
Pathological analysis revealed that polygonal and amphophilic cells proliferated in alveolar or trabecular patterns, arranged in large and irregular cell nests on hematoxylin–eosin staining. Cellularity was moderate. An immunohistochemical study revealed positive findings for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and Ki-67 (<1%) . Based on the above findings, the pathological diagnosis was urinary bladder paraganglioma. The GAPP score was 2.
After oral doxazosin mesylate administration, the dose gradually increased to 16 mg/day for preoperative preparation. Robot-assisted radical cystectomy and ileal neobladder reconstruction were performed. The left external iliac lymph node was smaller than before on the CT scan just before surgery. Intraoperative rapid pathological diagnosis at the equivalent site showed no evidence of malignancy. Thus, pelvic lymphadenectomy was omitted. Systolic blood pressure sometimes rose to 180 mmHg during surgery and phentolamine was administered at 2–10 mg/hour as a continuous intravenous and 1–2 mg as a bolus injection when appropriate, but after tumor removal, it remained in the normal range and no special vasopressors or antihypertensives were used. On histopathologic analysis, the bladder paraganglioma showed invasion into the perivesical fat, but the resection margins were negative. The patient had an uneventful postoperative clinical course and was discharged on postoperative day 22. Postoperatively, serum and urinary catecholamine levels normalized. Genetic testing was not performed in this case without the patient's request.