A 15-year-old Asian (Vietnamese) male high school student as well as basketball player presented with the first-ever episode of palpitations. He had never had syncope or presyncope, documented arrhythmia or been diagnosed with cardiovascular diseases. His 27-year-old brother had died suddenly one year ago due to out of hospital cardiac arrest. Most likely cause of death was identified as arrhythmia by emergency physicians after other differentials such as cerebral vascular stroke, myocardial infarction, congenital and acquired cardiac disease were excluded by imaging, blood tests. On examination, his vital signs were normal with no clinical signs of heart failure. His electrocardiography (ECG) on admission showed frequent and various forms of premature ventricular complexes (PVC) with negative T waves in leads V1–V3.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed mildly dilated right ventricle with no other significant structural or functional abnormalities. The 24-h ECG ambulatory revealed significant PVC burden, accounting for 10.5% of the total number of heart beats. At least three distinct PVC morphologies were observed. There were occasionally coupled PVCs but no non-sustained or sustained VT was captured.
Electrophysiology (EP) study was indicated for two purposes: (1) to ablate the frequent PVCs, and (2) to conduct programmed electrical stimulation (PES) to induce sustained ventricular arrhythmias for risk stratification. During the procedure, frequent PVCs with various patterns were observed. These PVCs originated from the RV at different sites of the postero-lateral wall, proximal to the tricuspid annulus. Multiple attempts of mapping and radiofrequency ablation failed to terminate all PVCs. PES delivered at the RV apex with two extra stimuli induced non-sustained episodes of VT repeatedly .
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed enlarged RV with dyskinesia and reduced ejection fraction (RV ejection fraction 34.97%). An aneurysm close to the RV apex was also observed. Late-enhancement signal with Gadolinium showed diffused fatty infiltration in the RV free wall . Left ventricular structure and function was normal (LV ejection fraction 62%).
We then performed molecular-genetic analysis using next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods to identify gene mutations for further risk stratification. A mutation in the PKP2 gene which encodes Plakophilin-2 protein was identified . The most prevalent cause of ARVC is a heterozygous mutation in this gene. So far, more than 200 mutations in the PKP2 gene have been documented, the majority of which are point mutations.
Finally, patient was diagnosed with ARVC according to the Modified Task Force criteria for ARVC proposed by the International Task Force of ESC and International Society and Federation of Cardiology in 2010. The specific diagnostic criteria were:Major criterion: cardiac MRI found RV dyskinesia and RVEF 34.97%. Major criterion: T wave inversion in leads V1–V3 on ECG Minor criterion: 9899 PVCs on Holter ECG. Major criterion: the PKP2 gene mutation.
After a thorough consideration of all risk factors as well as careful discussion with the patient’s parents, we decided to implant an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) for primary prevention of SCD. Patient was initially discharged on beta-blocker (bisoprolol 5 mg daily). After one month, amiodarone 100 mg daily was started when ICD check found many episodes of non-sustained VT.