A 37-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a right axillary mass. Fourteen months prior to her presentation at our institution, she presented to a different breast clinic with the same complaint. However, she was told that there were no abnormal findings based on normal screening mammography and ultrasonography of the breast.
She was referred to the hematological department for evaluation of lymphadenopathy. PET was performed and not only the axillary region but also the outer upper quadrant of the breast were enhanced on the image . She was thus referred to our department for evaluation.
On physical examination, the patient had a 2-cm mass in her right axillary fossa . There were no overlying skin changes and no signs of an accessory nipple.
Her screening mammography showed no abnormal findings. However, spot mammography confirmed a round well-circumscribed high-density mass in the axillary area. Ultrasonography showed a 1.4-cm oval-shaped, well-circumscribed echoic mass corresponding to the axillary lesion on physical examination and mammography. There were no abnormal findings, however, in the vicinity of the tumor. No swollen lymph nodes were detected.
Enhanced MRI was performed and showed a segmentally enhanced area in the entire upper outer quadrant including the axillary mass . There were no abnormal findings in the contralateral side of the breast. After the enhanced MRI, we carried out a second-look ultrasound (US) examination. However we could not find any abnormal findings in the upper outer quadrant of the breast.
Core needle biopsy was preformed for the axillary mass and showed invasive ductal carcinoma. Subsequently, vacuum-assisted biopsy was performed for the upper outer quadrant mass, 2 cm away from the axillary mass towards the nipple without image guidance. Pathology revealed an intra-ductal carcinoma at this site.
According to these findings, we determined that the patient had breast cancer in the axillary tail of Spence with extended intra-ductal spread. We performed total mastectomy and sentinel node biopsy. The sentinel lymph nodes were negative.
Pathological examination of the surgical material revealed 1.9-cm invasive lesions accompanied by an 8.5-cm intra-ductal lesion. These lesions were continuous with each other . The characteristics of her invasive lesion were as follows: estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, progesterone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, 23% of Ki67, nuclear grade 3, and no sign of lymph-vascular invasion.
The patient received chemotherapy in the form of docetaxel and cyclophosphamide, followed by tamoxifen therapy. The patient is well 8 months post-operatively and has no signs of recurrence.