A 26-year-old gravida 1, para 1 female presented to the ED reporting a frontal headache for the prior three days. The patient had received epidural anesthesia for an uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal delivery five days earlier and was discharged to home after two days. The patient reported that since being home she had been having a headache described as a pressure feeling. A friend recommended that she lie flat, which did improve her headache, but she was concerned because the headache returned every time she sat or stood upright. She denied fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, extremity numbness or weakness, chest pain, shortness of breath, or other associated symptoms. Past medical history was significant only for asthma. The patient was on no medications and denied alcohol use or cigarette smoking.
Physical exam revealed a young woman in no obvious distress. Vital signs revealed a pulse of 80 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 127/91 millimeters of mercury, temperature of 98° Fahrenheit (36.7° Celsius), and 96% oxygen saturation on room air. Examination of the head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat exam was normal. The heart exam was normal, and auscultation of the lungs revealed clear, bilateral breath sounds. The abdomen was soft, nontender, and without guarding or rebound. Examination of the back revealed no evidence of a CSF leak. On neurologic exam, she was awake, alert, and oriented to person, place, time, and situation. Cranial nerves II–XII were intact, the patient had 5/5 motor strength in all four extremities, and a normal gait. Sensation was intact to light touch throughout, and there was no upper extremity pronator drift.
An intravenous line was established. Laboratory studies were sent for a complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic profile (BMP), liver function studies (LFTs), and a urinalysis. A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head was also ordered. The CBC was only remarkable for a mild leukocytosis. The BMP and urinalysis were normal. The LFTs were remarkable for a mildly elevated alkaline phosphatase. The CT of the head revealed “an acute subdural hematoma along the left frontal cerebral hemispheric convexity, measuring 7 millimeters (mm) in thickness and 9 centimeters (cm) in the anterior posterior dimension. There was no midline shift or mass effect.”
Neurosurgery was not available at the hospital, so the emergency physician called the local tertiary care referral hospital and consulted neurosurgery. The neurosurgeon recommended coagulation studies, type and screen, testing for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), neuro checks every hour, bed rest, and levetiracetam 500 milligrams intravenously every 12 hours. Coagulation studies were normal, and the COVID-19 test was negative. Review of the anesthesia records revealed the epidural anesthesia had been placed with the patient in the sitting position at the third and fourth lumbar level. A 17-gauge epidural needle had been used and required only a single attempt. No complications were described.
The patient remained in stable condition and was transferred to the tertiary care hospital without incident. Her neurologic exam remained unchanged, and she arrived with a mild headache, no new complaints, and was overall in no acute distress. Neurosurgery ordered a computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the head and neck to evaluate for an etiology of the SDH. The study revealed “no explanation for the subdural hemorrhage. No aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation. Patent intracranial superficial and deep venous system. Patent intracranial and extracranial cerebral arteries without evidence of significant stenosis.” The patient was admitted to the neurology intensive care unit for close observation. Additional studies included magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical, lumbar, and thoracic spines without contrast; all were unremarkable. An MRI head with and without contrast revealed “a left frontal convexity SDH measuring up to 7 mm in maximum thickness. No other hemorrhage identified.”
The patient remained in stable condition and was transferred to the floor the next day. Anesthesia placed an epidural blood patch, which resulted in significant improvement in her symptoms. She was discharged home the next day, pain free and with a normal neurologic exam.