An 8-year-old boy was admitted for a 1-day history of headache, vomiting, extreme fatigue and fever, initially 102 °F, along with photophobia and hyperacusis. He complained once of sore throat, but had no abdominal pain, diarrhea, or urinary tract symptoms. Shortly before admission, his fever rose to 106.4 °F, accompanied by confusion and hallucinations. Mild conjunctival injection and a petechial rash on the cheeks were seen on admission but resolved in less than 24 hours. He was briefly hypotensive with diastolic blood pressures as low as 37 mmHg; his hypotension responded to normal saline fluid boluses alone.
Initial laboratory studies were significant for white blood cell count of 21.0 (differential of 92% neutrophils, 1% bands, 2% lymphocytes, and 5% monocytes). Platelet count was 164,000. Procalcitonin was elevated at 21.52 ng/mL, while C-reactive protein was elevated at 19.59 mg/dL. A creatinine level of 0.5 mg/dL was elevated for his weight, with his baseline later determined to be 0.34–0.37 mg/dL. Hepatic function testing was normal with the exception of alkaline phosphatase . Creatine phosphokinase was mildly elevated at 297 U/L. His albumin was normal upon admission (4.1 g/dL) but dropped (to 2.3 g/dL) by day 4 of hospitalization. Coagulopathy was present on admission: prothrombin time (PT) was 16.5 second with fibrinogen mildly elevated at 476 mg/dL. Elevated levels of interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, and tumor necrosis factor-α were present in blood.
Admission blood culture (and multiple additional blood cultures) were negative, as was a nasal culture for S. aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes. Nasal cultures were done because the patient was orally intubated at the time of the infectious disease consultation, and throat swab for PCR or culture was not possible. There is precedent for using nasal cultures, as well as pharyngeal cultures, for detection of the Group A streptococcal carrier state . Nasal swab for methicillin-resistant S. aureus by PCR was negative, as was a throat swab for Streptococcus pyogenes by PCR. Urine culture (voided from a circumcised male) grew greater than 100,000 colonies/mL of S. epidermidis, resistant to oxacillin and penicillin, and sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, gentamicin, and nitrofurantoin; urinalysis showed a specific gravity of 1.020, pH of 3.5, and dipstick positive for albumin and small ketones. Microscopic analysis showed 0–5 white blood cells and 0–2 red blood cells per high power field. After intubation for sedation and procedures, endotracheal culture showed growth of only normal upper respiratory flora (Viridans group streptococci, gamma-hemolytic streptococci, and Stomatococcus). A respiratory pathogen PCR panel (BioFire, St. Lake City, UT) was negative for adenovirus, Bordetella parapertussis and Bordetella pertussis, Chlamydia pneumoniae, coronaviruses 229E, HKU1, NL63, OC43, SARS-CoV-2, human metapneumovirus, influenza A and B, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, parainfluenza 1–4, and respiratory syncytial virus and positive for rhinovirus/enterovirus, which did not appear to be clinically relevant. SARS-CoV-2 antibody test was negative. Cell-free DNA metagenomic assay of plasma (Karius, Redwood City, CA) was negative.
Lumbar puncture obtained clear cerebrospinal fluid, with the following indices: 0 white blood cells, 2 red blood cells, glucose 78, and protein 15. Gram stain and bacterial culture were negative; a meningitis/encephalitis PCR panel (Quest, Minneapolis, MN) was negative. Additionally, serum herpes simplex virus DNA PCR was negative. Serum varicella zoster virus DNA PCR was not done.
The patient’s voided urine culture was initially considered a contaminant (despite its pure growth at high colony count), so treatment was directed against possible viral and bacterial causes of encephalopathy. This included vancomycin (hospital day 1–5), ceftriaxone (hospital day 1–8), clindamycin (hospital day 1–5), and acyclovir (hospital day 2–4). Doxycycline was begun on hospital day 4 and continued for a 10-day course, given concern for possible Chlamydia or Mycoplasma encephalitis. In retrospect, doxycycline might well have been active against coagulase-negative staphylococci.
On the empirical therapy (vancomycin, ceftriaxone, clindamycin, and acyclovir), the patient became afebrile within 72 hours. White blood cell count had normalized to 7.1 by hospitalization day 2 ; at that time his platelet count reached its nadir , and subsequently returned to normal. No intravenous immunoglobulin or steroids were given. Plasma was obtained from residual of other ordered tests for later study.
Abdominal ultrasound on hospitalization day 3 showed mild right collecting system dilatation and an unremarkable bladder. Besides the complete abdominal ultrasound, a negative chest X-ray was obtained on hospital day 1. Repeat chest X-ray (portable) showed perihilar and left basilar opacities, read as a combination of atelectasis and edema. Confusion and hallucination persisted after fever resolution and removal of sedation. MRI of the brain, including MRA and MRV, was negative.
Further neurological workup included negative cerebrospinal fluid autoantibodies (AChR ganglionic neuronal, AMPA-R CBA, Amphiphysin, Antiglial nuclear [AGNA-1], Antineuronal nuclear [ANNA-1], Antineuronal nuclear [ANNA-2], Antineuronal nuclear [ANNA-3], CASPR2 IgG CBA, CRMP-5 IgG, DPPX Ab IFA, GABA-B-R Ab IFA, GAD65, GFAP IFA, IgLONS IFA, LGI1 IgG CBA, mGlur1 Ab IFA, NIF IFA Ab, NMDA-R Ab CBA, N-type Calcium channel, P/Q Type Calcium channel, Purkinje Cell Cytoplasma Ab T1 [PCA-1], Purkinje Cell Cytoplasm Ab T2 [PCA-2], Purkinje Cell Cytoplasma Ab TTr [PCA-Tr], and Smooth Muscle) as performed by the Mayo Clinic Laboratory. Additional autoimmune antibodies tested, not on the panel above, included: Proteinase 3 AB, Myeloperoxidase Ab, DNA double stranded Ab, and Rheumatoid factor. All were negative.
Since the patient presented with sepsis and encephalopathy in Minnesota in October, tick-borne pathogens and arboviruses were considered. Arbovirus antibodies were assayed in both serum and cerebrospinal fluid with negative results. Our arbovirus panel contains the following viruses: Eastern Equine, Lacrosse/California, St. Louis, and Western Equine. In addition, cerebrospinal fluid assays for West Nile Virus IgG and IgM were negative. Tick-borne pathogen antibody panel and tick-borne pathogen PCR panel (Mayo Clinic Laboratory), and Bartonella and Chlamydophila antibodies were negative. Mycoplasma serologies were repeated 3 weeks after the inpatient results were obtained. Mycoplasma IgG by IFA was negative both acutely and in convalescence; IgM was positive acutely and remained positive in convalescence. These results demonstrated that the initial IgM results were false-positive or cross-reactive.
Propofol and midazolam were used for sedation. No other CNS medications were used, as the boy’s sensorium gradually cleared after 7 days of hospitalization. He completed a 10-day course of ceftriaxone. Doxycycline was also prescribed for 10 days to cover possible infection with either atypical bacteria or Staphylococcus species and completed as an outpatient. Seen in clinic 4 weeks after discharge, he was fully recovered. Besides Mycoplasma serologies, SARS-CoV-2 and Lyme antibodies were also repeated and remained negative.
Residual plasma was recovered and sent to author Patrick M. Schlievert where PCR analyses were performed specifically for the superantigens, staphylococcal enterotoxins A-E . The positive control was DNA from S. aureus MN8, a menstrual TSS isolate. The blood plasma produced positive PCR results for staphylococcal enterotoxins A, C, D, and E . There was a very faint band for staphylococcal enterotoxin B which likely results from staphylococcal enterotoxins B and C being 75% identical; thus there may be minor cross-reactivity . There was no PCR product for the TSST-1 gene, suggesting the positive PCR results for other superantigens were not the result of nonspecific PCR reactions. The MN8 strain produces the superantigens TSST-1 and staphylococcal enterotoxin A; the strain is negative for staphylococcal enterotoxins B, C, D, and E . Additionally, we have extensively performed PCR on urine and other body fluids from non-TSS individuals with no PCR products observed.