A 62-year-old Caucasian male self-presented to the Emergency Department (ED) at the Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital (RBWH) approximately 2 hours after the suspected ingestion or aspiration of an endodontic hand file during his visit to the dentist. He was receiving endodontic (root canal) therapy on a maxillary molar tooth. He recalled experiencing two episodes of excessive coughing and dyspnea, lasting several minutes each. Following the coughing, the dentist noted that an endodontic file was missing. He was promptly referred to the ED for investigation of a potentially ingested or aspirated endodontic file. His previous medical history included ischemic heart disease which was managed pharmacologically. Physical assessment revealed stable observations, normal bronchial and vesicular breath sounds with no signs of respiratory distress, cough, dysphagia, abdominal pain, or vomiting. An examination of the oral cavity was normal, suggesting passage of the foreign body beyond the oropharynx.
Frontal chest and abdominal radiographic imaging confirmed the presence of a 27-mm linear radiopaque foreign body located to the right of the midline of the abdomen, approximately at the level of the L2/3 disc , representing the endodontic file in the duodenum. General surgical opinion at the time advised inspection and removal via gastroscopy, however by the time this was organized a new abdominal radiograph showed migration of the endodontic file to the distal ileum/ascending colon, beyond the scope of endoscopic retrieval . The patient was admitted under the care of the general surgery team for observation as an inpatient.
Serial abdominal radiographs were used to monitor the migration of the foreign body. A third abdominal radiograph was taken on day 1 post ingestion and depicts a foreign body within the transverse colon . During this time, the patient did not demonstrate any clinical signs of bowel perforation, nor was there any radiographic evidence of pneumoperitonium. On the second day post ingestion, the endodontic file could no longer be visualized on radiographic imaging, indicating that it had been expelled. The patient was symptom free and was discharged.