A 20-year-old fit and healthy female was admitted to the emergency department after collision with a snowgun when skiing. The patient sustained a femoral shaft fracture (AO 32-A2.3) and was treated with intramedullary nailing one hour after the accident (Expert R/AFN, 10/400; DePuy-Synthes, Johnson & Johnson, Warsaw, IN). Due to narrow intramedullary canal, SynReam® (DePuy-Synthes, Johnson & Johnson, Warsaw, IN) was used to enlarge the intramedullary canal diameter up to 11,5 mm to ensure nail insertion. Operation time was 32 minutes, no complications occurred. 14 hours after surgery the patient complained about vision loss in both eyes. She couldn’t read the text messages on her cellphone any longer and reported feeling uncomfortable, dizzy and weak. No other visual or neurological symptoms were present at this point. Blood pressure was relatively low 80/40 mmHg and was 100/50 mmHG after infusion of 250 ml Voluven® (HES 130/0,4) 6% and 500 ml Ringer’s solution, but visual symptoms persisted without improvement. Laboratory findings included elevated leukocytes 18.3 × 103/μl (normal range 4.3-10.0) and LDH 245 U/l (normal range 120–240). Subsequently the patient was referred to a neurologist for neurologic examination and MRI scans of the brain were ordered. However, no pathologic finding, neither in the neurologic examination nor in the MRI scans were detected. The patient was eventually referred to an ophthalmology department, where Purtscher’s retinopathy was diagnosed after slit lamp examination and funduscopy.
Ophthalmological findings and visual outcome:
At first presentation uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) and best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) were 0.25 decimal in both eyes. A computer perimetry (Humphrey 30:2) could only be performed for the right eye due to the patient’s general malaise after femoral surgery. The field did not show any specific patterns or findings.
Pupils were equal, round and reactive to light, no relative afferent pupillary defect was detected.
Slit lamp examination showed normal findings in the anterior segment. At fundoscopy cotton wool spots and Purtscher flecken (black arrows, Figure ) were revealed along the posterior pole in both eyes as well a small intraretinal hemorrhage in the periphery (Figure ). Additionally to funduscopy an optical coherence tomography (OCT) was performed in both eyes. The findings (Figure ) showed hyperintense lesions within the retinal nerve fibre layer due to microinfarctions. Summing up these findings Purtscher’s retinopathy was diagnosed.
The patient was administered intravenous haemo-rheologic therapy for five days (Haes® and Trental® in increasing dosage, i.e. 250 ml Haes and 100 mg Trental first day, 250 ml Haes and 200 mg Trental second day, 300 ml Haes and 300 mg Trental days 3, 4 and 5) as well as low molecular heparine in therapeutic dose and Vasonit® 400 mg bid orally.
No particular monitoring regarding the clotting profile was undertaken since there is no evidence based therapy for Purtscher’s and initiated treatment was the sole attempt to improve blood flow in the affected retinal vessels (7).
The patient had follow-up exams after 4 weeks and 6 months. At final follow-up the symptoms had almost resolved completely and visual acuity improved to 0.8 decimal UCVA and BCVA in both eyes.
Funduscopy at the final follow-up showed no more pathologic finding.