A 75-year-old woman presented with transient loss of consciousness and subsequent severe headache at home and was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital. She had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 13/15 (E3V4M6) and no obvious focal neurological symptoms on admission. Head computed tomography (CT) revealed a Fisher Group 3 SAH uncomplicated with acute hydrocephalus [ and ]. Digital subtraction angiography revealed the presence of a saccular aneurysm at the A2–3 junction in the left ACA with the formation of a daughter sac [ and ]. Therefore, she was diagnosed with the World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies Grade II SAH due to the rupture of an aneurysm at the left ACA.
On day 1, endovascular coil embolization was successfully performed [ and ]; however, postoperative CT revealed a massive hematoma in the corpus callosum with expansion into the cingulate gyrus, which was compatible with the site of the aneurysm . The occurrence of rebleeding was suspected at some points, although there was no obvious sign of rebleeding, such as a sudden increase in blood pressure and/or a decrease in consciousness preoperatively and intraoperative angiographic extravasation. On day 2, the patient presented with spontaneous eye opening and some movements of the upper and lower limbs. However, she remained completely mum but was able to perform some reactions according to the instructions of intense verbal and/or auditory stimulation. The patient underwent conservative treatment for the hematoma, and gradually regained her ability to speak. Forty-four days after SAH onset, head CT demonstrated that the hematoma in the corpus callosum had disappeared for the most part , and the patient had recovered fully from mutism. On day 7, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging demonstrated secondary multiple ischemic lesions in the left putamen, corona radiata, and frontal lobes [-] and MR angiography revealed mild vasospasm of the ACA, although it was indistinct due to the presence of a hematoma [ and ]. Fortunately, the patient did not show obvious neurological deficits due to these ischemic lesions. After that, advanced vasospasm and ischemic stroke were not confirmed until day 14. Finally, she was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital because of residual diffuse muscle atrophy of the lower limbs.