A 52-year-old woman presented with pain and active function loss in her left shoulder, and was admitted to our hospital in June 2017. Her shoulder problem had started 3 months earlier, and there was no history of trauma or fracture. At first the pain was intermittent and bearable, but then gradually increased. On examination, there were no positive signs except for localized pain. A radiologic examination on 3 April 2017 found no destruction of the shoulder . Pain at the shoulder joint became gradually aggravated, together with the appearance of shoulder joint dysfunction. Two months later, physical examination revealed mild swelling of the shoulder, and markedly restricted shoulder and elbow motion. Mild distal nerve function defects appeared gradually. Radiography on 3 June 2017 showed that the head of the humerus had disappeared within the past 2 months , which was confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging .
The patient is a healthy, active individual with no history of weight loss, anorexia, or fever during this period. General and systemic examination findings were within normal limits. Routine laboratory investigations were also normal, including levels of serum calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. An open biopsy of the lesion revealed that the bony tissue had been replaced by fibrous connective tissue, and small areas of bony trabeculae with occasional osteoclasts were visible . There was no evidence of malignancy or tuberculosis. Because of the lack of any clinical findings or supporting data for other causes, the features were confirmatory of GSD. Computed tomography of the shoulder joint revealed a bony defect of the glenoid cavity.
We performed surgery involving glenoid cavity amplification with an autologous iliac bone graft and a reverse total shoulder arthroplasty. The grafts were from autologous iliac bone . A deltopectoral approach was used on the shoulder, and necrotic and dissolving bone tissue was removed. Reconstruction of the glenoid was carried out with autologous iliac bone and installation of reverse shoulder prosthesis. Postoperatively, the arm was placed in a sling for 3 months. Passive elevation and external rotation were allowed 2 weeks after the operation. Three months later, sling use was discontinued, and active range of movement was initiated. Six months after surgery, the patient is pain-free with more than 90° of active abduction, 100° of forward flexion, and 30° of shoulder posterior extension. She also has good functional use of her shoulder .