A 37-year-old Malay gentleman with underlying T2DM for the past 2 years, presented to hospital at day 4 of illness with lethargic and shortness of breath, and tested positive for COVID-19 infection upon admission. There were no other gastrointestinal symptoms at initial presentation to the hospital, and he was able to take orally as usual. His initial serum glucose level and arterial blood gas (ABG) values were within normal range. He required admission for observation in view of symptomatic COVID-19 infection and was not started on any steroid therapy. He claimed to be compliant to his medications, which included empagliflozin 25 mg daily and subcutaneous liraglutide 0.6 mg in the morning and 1.8 mg at night.
On the third day of admission (day 7 of illness), he became more lethargic and had persistent vomiting. He was diagnosed with DKA as his ABG revealed high anion gap metabolic acidosis, capillary blood glucose 11.9 mmol/L, and urine ketone 3.0 mmol/L. Serum ketone was not available. Other laboratory investigations showed blood urea 11.4 mmol/L, sodium 136 mmol/L, potassium 4.5 mmol/L, chloride 106 mmol/L, and creatinine 105 mmol/L. He was then started on treatment for DKA in the ward with protocolized intravenous fluid administration and fixed-scale insulin infusion, which showed resolution the following day.
On the seventh day of admission (day 11 of illness), the patient developed sudden progressive dyspnea and tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 40 breaths per minute without desaturation, heart rate 110 beats per minute, and stable blood pressure. The ABG taken under room air revealed severe high anion gap acidosis (pH 6.87, pCO2 17 mmHg, pO2 37 mmHg, HCO3− 3.1 mmol/L, lactate 1.7 mmol/L), capillary blood glucose 10.9 mmol/L, and serum ketone 4.2 mmol/L. Treatment for DKA was restarted along with broad-spectrum antibiotics, and he was referred for intensive care unit (ICU) admission in view of possibility of worsening pneumonia. He was started on high-flow mask oxygen therapy while awaiting ICU admission. However, as his chest radiograph did not show worsening COVID-19 pneumonia, steroid therapy was not commenced.
In the ICU, he was put on high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygen therapy with fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 0.5 and flow of 50 L/minute. Protocolized DKA treatment was continued with fixed-scale insulin at 0.1 unit/kg body weight, intravenous fluids, and potassium correction. In addition, sodium bicarbonate infusion was started.
Treatment was adequate during his initial stay in the hospital. There was no issue with compliance with medications. In addition to that, he had been taking orally well prior to his deterioration before ICU admission. It was noted that empagliflozin was continued by the patient himself throughout his stay in the ward, and it was immediately withheld in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Severe euglycemic DKA due to empagliflozin was diagnosed in view of high anion gap metabolic acidosis, which could not be explained by the small rise in lactate and ketonemia alone. His urine output remained at more than 0.5 mL/kg/hour throughout his stay, and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was persistently more than 50 mL/minute/1.73 m2. Serial laboratory investigations taken in ICU are presented in Table .
After 3 hours of ICU admission, the patient developed worsening of tachypnea and mild confusion. He required low doses of noradrenaline infusion for about 10 hours to achieve mean arterial pressure (MAP) target of > 65 mmHg, and there was minimal improvement of metabolic acidosis. Subsequently, continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) was commenced to aid in the correction of acidosis. A total of 18 hours of renal replacement therapy was required to achieve normal acid–base balance. The patient continued to improve over the next 24 hours and was weaned down to nasal prong oxygen. Initial partial pressure of oxygen taken under HFNC during his initial stay in ICU was persistently above 150 mmHg . We were able to immediately wean off his oxygen requirement within a short period of time, which did not suggest worsening COVID-19 pneumonia. He was transferred out from ICU 3 days later and discharged home after 2 weeks of hospitalization, with modification of his antihyperglycemic agents.