We present the case of a 32-year-old Caucasian man who initially presented five years previously with right hip pain and was found at that time to have a large multilobulated mass arising from his right ilium and extending to his right sacrum with involvement of his gluteal musculature . A biopsy showed a grade 1 chondrosarcoma. Subsequently, a right hemipelvectomy was performed, and the diagnosis of grade 1 chondrosarcoma arising from a pre-existing osteochondroma was confirmed . Additionally, a minor component of clear cell chondrosarcoma was identified at the origin of the osteochondroma within the medullary cavity of the underlying ileum . Recurrence in the sacral stump and an area adjacent to his paraspinous muscles was noted two years later after our patient experienced a fall. He underwent proton beam radiotherapy and resection, complicated by a postsurgical abscess.
Approximately two-and-a-half years later, our patient presented with significant pain in his right pelvis, difficulty in ambulating and a decreased performance status due to pain. A bone scan showed uptake in his left temporal bone and an excisional biopsy confirmed recurrence of the clear cell chondrosarcoma . A positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan showed uptake to an standardized uptake value (SUV) maximum of 9.0 in the right sacral lesion with two other areas of uptake in his pelvis . Two non-hypermetabolic pulmonary nodules were also noted. Stereotactic radiosurgery was applied to the temporal bone lesion. Our patient was started on sunitinib 37.5 mg daily, which was initially tolerated well, with only mild fatigue. His pain greatly improved. A PET/CT scan obtained two months after the initiation of sunitinib showed improvement in the fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avidity of the lesions, with a right sacral lesion showing an SUV of 6.8 . He continued to take sunitinib at the same dose and was referred for proton beam radiation to his right pelvis. He received twenty fractions of radiation concurrent with sunitinib 37.5 mg daily and experienced some diarrhea and worsening of an acneiform rash, but our patient wished to continue on the same dose given his excellent response with regards to the pain. A total of six months after initiating sunitinib, our patient continued to show improvement on imaging, with a PET/CT scan revealing stable non-hypermetabolic pulmonary nodules and improvement in the right sacral lesion with an SUV of 3.4 . He did require a reduction in the dose 25 mg daily, however, due to the worsening acneiform rash and diarrhea.