A 49-year-old Japanese woman (gravida 2 para 1) was admitted to another hospital due to lower abdominal and back pain that had started 1 month earlier. She had a history of asthma since the age of 22 years, but there was no increase in the number of eosinophils. Liquid-based cytology of the uterine cervix was performed, and she was diagnosed with atypical squamous cells-cannot exclude high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (ASC-H). A cytological examination of the tumor cells revealed irregular cell distances, irregular-shaped nuclei, nuclear anisocytosis, and dense chromatin. In this specimen, a mildly inflammatory background was pointed out, but no marked increase in the number of eosinophils was noted.
The first biopsy was taken from the uterine cervix, resulting in a diagnosis of non-keratinizing SqCC. Mild eosinophilic infiltration was observed in the tumor stroma. After 1 month, she was admitted to our hospital. Pelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed a tumor mass lesion, measuring up to 5.5 cm in the largest diameter, in the uterine cervix. The wall of the cervix was thickened, and the demarcation between the mass and the intrapelvic organs, including the urinary bladder and rectum, was unclear . A second cervical biopsy was performed, resulting in a diagnosis of non-keratinizing SqCC with marked infiltration of eosinophils. Endometrial cytology revealed pleomorphic non-keratinizing SqCC together with normal endometrial glands in a background of marked eosinophil numbers. A few keratinizing SqCC cells were also seen, but no mucous glands were observed. The number of eosinophils was obviously increased (>100 per high-powered field; ). Considering the possibility of TATE, we asked a clinician to measure the eosinophil count. The number of eosinophils in the peripheral blood was extremely high (643 μL−1), although the other laboratory data were within normal limits. Radical hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed, and the number of eosinophils drastically decreased after surgery (6 μL−1,). Macroscopically, the cervical mucosa revealed a rough surface. The cut surface of the tumor looked light tan to yellowish-white and solid, penetrating the cervical wall. Histologically, the tumor was predominantly composed of non-keratinizing SqCC with stromal invasion . However, obvious gland formation was recognized in some tumor tissues. High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) was slightly spread around the invasive cancer. Although koilocytosis suggestive of human papilloma virus (HPV) infection was not observed, HPV type 68 was detected. The tumor cells had cohesive or cord-like cell nests, oval to polygonal in shape, with eosinophilic cytoplasm. Individual keratinization and mucous cells were found in a small portion of the tumor cell nests (5%). The cytoplasm of these mucous cells was positive for mucicarmine staining. Marked eosinophilic infiltration was observed not only in the tumor stroma but also in the invasive tumor cell nests or in HSIL . CEA (DAKO, diluted 1:4000), MUC1 (Leica, diluted 1:1000), and p63 (NICHIREI, diluted 1:1) were positive for tumor cells. FOXP3 (Abcam, diluted 1:100)-positive regulatory T cells (Treg) were also recognized in the tumor stroma. Furthermore, both lymphatic and venous permeation of the SqCC was noted, and a micro-metastatic lesion was found in the left external iliac lymph node. CRTC1-MAML2 or CRTC3-MAML2 fusion genes were not detected. We diagnosed this case as adenosquamous carcinoma of the uterine cervix displaying TATE. The clinical stage of this case was evaluated as FIGO IIB.
After 1 month of surgery, the number of eosinophils increased again (240 μL−1, ). Chemo-irradiation was started, and the number decreased (87 μL−1, ). However, it increased again at the time of recurrence 1 year later (270 μL−1, ). Recurrence of adenosquamous carcinoma accompanied by marked eosinophil infiltration was observed at the vaginal stump. After 1 year and 2 months, the patient developed ileus, and ileotransversostomy was performed. The best supportive care was performed, but the patient ultimately died 1 year and 8 months after the operation .