An 8-year-old male neutered domestic longhair cat weighing 6.54 kg with an unknown vaccination status was referred for a 3-week history of a right ventral cervical mass. Primary care complete blood count (CBC) and serum biochemistry revealed hyperglobulinemia (8.7 g/dl; reference interval [RI] 2.9–4.7) as the only clinically significant finding.
On presentation, physical examination revealed a large, subcutaneous, mobile mass (30 mm × 25 mm) in the right ventral cervical region. CBC showed no clinically significant findings. Serum biochemistry revealed mild hypoalbuminemia (2.4 g/dl; RI 2.6–4.0) and hyperglobulinemia (7.4 g/dl; RI 2.9–4.7). Feline leukemia virus antigen and feline immunodeficiency antibody SNAP tests (IDEXX Laboratory) were negative. The patient was sedated with dexmedetomidine 0.005 mg/kg (Dexdomitor; Orion Pharma) and butorphanol 0.3 mg/kg intravenously (Torbutrol; Bristol-Myers). Cranial, cervical and thoracic CT scans were acquired (Aquilion 64 slice, 36-5 [Toshiba] and Tsurumichuo 4-chrome [Tsurumi-Ku]) before and after intravenous injection of iodinated contrast medium (1.83 ml/kg iodixanol [Isovue 300; General Electric Healthcare]). Images revealed lymphadenopathy of the right medial retropharyngeal lymph node (RMRLN; 39 mm × 18 mm × 19 mm) and right mandibular lymph node (RMLN; 12 mm × 14 mm × 7 mm), bilateral non-destructive rhinitis with soft tissue attenuating and non-contrast-enhancing material in the frontal sinus and right sphenoid sinus causing ill-defined turbinate margins and no maxillary or ethmoturbinate lysis. Cytology of the mass showed plasma cell proliferation, eosinophilia and mast cells, suggestive of a reactive lymph node. Serum protein electrophoresis (SPE; IDEXX Laboratory) was consistent with a polyclonal gammopathy with severe hypergammaglobulinemia of 5.33 g/dl (RI 0.3–2.5). The owner declined additional diagnostics at this time.
Five months later, the cat re-presented for progression of the mass (45 mm × 45 mm). Chemistry revealed persistent hypoalbuminemia (2.5 g/dl; RI 2.6–4.9) and hyperglobulinemia (8.4 g/dl; RI 2.9–4.7). Cervical and thoracic CT was repeated under sedation as previously described, revealing a large right ventral cervical mass with ill-defined margins causing deviation of the hyoid bones, the base of the tongue, larynx and pharynx to the left. There was also bilateral mandibular lymphadenopathy (right 12 mm × 14 mm × 7 mm; left 5 mm × 5 mm × 6 mm) and severe enlargement of the RMRLN (50 mm × 41 mm × 47 mm; ). Cytology of the RMLN showed lymphoid reactivity with mixed inflammation and no evidence of neoplasia. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the mass, liver and spleen were performed. Cytology of the mass was inconclusive, whereas the liver and spleen showed marked plasmacytosis. Surgical excision with histopathology of the RMLN and cervical mass was recommended and pursued. Histopathology of the lymph node diagnosed sclerosing pyogranulomatous eosinophilic lymphadenitis with fungal hyphae. The cervical mass was a pyogranuloma with numerous branching hyphae . Fungal cultures were not performed. The patient was given robenacoxib (1 mg/kg PO [Onsior; Elanco]) once after surgery and discharged with buprenorphine (0.01 mg/kg oral transmucosally [OTM] q8h [Buprenex; Indivior]) and liquid suspension itraconazole (5.05 mg/kg PO q24h [Sporanox; Janssen Pharmaceutica]). However, owing to difficulty administrating at home, the patient only received one dose of itraconazole.
The patient re-presented 17 months postoperatively for suspected recurrence of the cervical fungal granuloma. Physical examination revealed a firm, lobulated right subcutaneous ventral cervical mass (50 mm × 30 mm) near the scar of the previous excision site. The right superficial cervical lymph node (RSCLN) was firm and enlarged on palpation (15 mm in length). CBC, serum biochemistry and CT were repeated and compared with previous visits. Anemia (hematocrit 27%; RI 30–45%), lymphopenia (679/µl; RI 1500–7000), hypoalbuminemia (2.5 g/dl; RI 2.6–4.0) and hyperglobulinemia (9.2 g/dl; 2.9–4.7) were identified. Imaging revealed an enlarged right cervical mass, left mandibular lymphadenopathy, decreased lung lobe sizes and tortuosity of the cranial mediastinal blood vessels . Cytology of the mass revealed mixed inflammation with intralesional fungi. Marginal surgical excision of the recurring fungal granuloma and RSCLN were performed and submitted for histopathological analysis and fungal culture.
Histopathology yielded similar results: pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis with intralesional fungal hyphae . Fungal culture revealed Aspergillus species characterized by branching fungal hyphae with roughly parallel walls and Grocott’s methenamine silver (GMS) and periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) confirmed recurrence. Speciation was not performed. The patient was discharged with gabapentin (10 mg/kg PO q8h [Neurontin; Pfizer]), robenacoxib (1 mg/kg PO q24h), liquid suspension itraconazole (5.05 mg/kg PO q24h) and buprenorphine (0.01 mg/kg OTM q8h).
The cat re-presented 11 months after the second surgery for acute respiratory distress. Liquid suspension itraconazole (5.05 mg/kg PO q24h) had not been administered as instructed. Physical examination revealed a firm, lobulated, subcutaneous mass (120 mm × 40 mm) in the left ventral cervical region, immediately caudal to the mandible. A gallop rhythm with a grade 4/6 left parasternal systolic murmur was auscultated. CBC revealed a non-regenerative anemia (hematocrit 15.2% [RI 30–45%]; reticulocytes 6800/µl [RI 0–50,000]). Doppler blood pressure was 112 mmHg. An echocardiogram showed left ventricle thickening with mitral regurgitation and turbulent outflow, consistent with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy without signs of heart failure. Contrast-enhanced cranial and thoracic CT was repeated, showing a large mass (56 mm × 38 mm × 34 mm) extending from the right retrobulbar region to the nasopharynx, caudally to the thoracic inlet, causing rightward deviation of the hyoid apparatus, larynx, trachea, thyroid glands and cervical esophagus, as well as displacement of the right globe . The left lateral mandibular lymph node was enlarged (12 mm × 7 mm). The left common carotid artery coursed through the mass, and there was sternal and cranial mediastinal lymphadenopathy, in addition to a pulmonary nodule within the left caudal lung lobe. There was marked loss of endoturbinate structures of the right and left nasal cavity, with soft tissue-attenuating material within the lateroventral aspect of the right nasal cavity. Given the extent of the fungal granuloma and recurring nature, surgical resection was not advised, and the cat was humanely euthanized without necropsy.