A 48-year-old Chinese man with a long-term history of smoking was diagnosed with stage IIB lung cancer in June 2020 . Preoperative chest computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of a 25 mm × 20 mm mass in the upper lobe of the left lung, deemed resectable upon surgical evaluation . Thereafter, he underwent thoracoscopic-assisted pulmonary radical lobectomy and lymph node dissection. Pathologic examination identified adenocarcinoma with positive staining for Napsin A, TTF-1, p53, and CK7 and negative staining for p63, CK5/6, and Ki-67 (30%). Parabronchial lymph nodes (2/4) showed negative staining for CK5/6 and P63. Pleural invasion and vascular cancer embolism were observed (pT2aN1M0 stage IIB; AJCC 8th edition) . The patient declined postoperative chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The surgical specimen was analyzed using next-generation sequencing (NGS) to identify possible targetable molecular alterations. The findings revealed a mutation in exon 19 of EGFR, with no other gene mutations detected.
Subsequently, the patient received adjuvant targeted therapy with the first-generation TKI gefitinib (250 mg orally) every day for 15 months, during which time no recurrence was noted. However, due to transaminase elevation (grade 2, common terminology criteria for adverse events), dyspepsia (grade 2), and rash (grade 2), the patient temporarily withdrew without medical permission. In November 2021, the patient experienced rapid disease progression, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) of 3. He exhibited a series of symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, dizziness, lethargy, insensitivity, and an inability to provide accurate answers to questions. Brain enhancement magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination revealed mild hydrocephalus and slightly swollen meninges without parenchyma metastases . No extracranial recurrence was detected following a comprehensive examination. A second round of NGS using peripheral blood confirmed an EGFR exon 19 mutation, with no evidence of acquired T790M, KRAS, ALK, ROS1, RET, or MET mutations. Cytologic findings from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) obtained by lumbar puncture revealed adenocarcinoma cells . Furmonertinib is a novel third-generation EGFR TKI that targets both EGFR-sensitive mutations and the T790M mutation while sparing wild-type EGFR. Furmonertinib has been shown to be more effective than gefitinib in treating the CNS in patients with EGFR-mutated NSCLC and CNS metastases. Therefore, our patient was administered high-dose furmonertinib (160 mg/day). Mannitol was administered to alleviate cerebral edema. Remarkably, within 5 days of receiving furmonertinib, the patient, who had been admitted with lethargy, showed significant improvement in physical and cognitive function. After discharge, the patient continued oral furmonertinib at a daily dose of 160 mg. Imaging studies were not performed until January 2022, following 2 months of furmonertinib administration, when the patient developed symptoms of cough, expectoration, and dyspnea. A chest examination revealed a new 3.3 cm mass in the left upper lobe hilar region, with right hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathies . Electronic fiber bronchoscopy revealed complete obstruction of the left upper lobe bronchus, with a neoplasm protruding from the lumen at the opening . A biopsy was attempted but proved to be challenging, yielding inconclusive pathological results. Re-biopsy was quite difficult to perform. Positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) indicated abnormally increased fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism in the left hilar surgical region, left thoracic entrance, mediastinal aortic arch, right lower paratracheal lymph nodes, carina lymph nodes, and right hilar lymph nodes . While definitive pathological diagnoses were unavailable, a combination of CT, PET/CT, and bronchoscopy findings led us to suspect tumor recurrence in the lungs. Consequently, the patient received intensity-modulated radiotherapy at a total dose of 30 Gy, delivered over a 2-week period at 3 Gy per fraction, in conjunction with 160 mg (daily) of furmonertinib. By February 2022, after 3 months of furmonertinib and radiotherapy, both intracranial and pulmonary lesions were evaluated as stable disease (SD) . The primary adverse events observed were transaminase elevation (grade 2) and nausea (grade 2). In April 2022, following 5 months of furmonertinib administration, the patient was hospitalized due to a left lung abscess, accompanied by fever, cough, dyspnea, and loss of consciousness. Anti-infective therapy was administered for 2 weeks. One month later, in May 2022, the patient died of severe infections. Accordingly, furmonertinib extended the patient’s OS by 6 months.