A 38-year-old man was admitted to the neurosurgery department of our center for treatment of headaches, complaining of a 1-week history of headaches. Prior to admission, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan had been performed at the previously visited hospital, and no invasive methods or medications were administered to the patient. On admission, we performed routine laboratory tests such as blood count, liver and kidney function, and coagulation. The patient had normal muscle strength, normal sensation, and good function of intracranial nerves on physical examination. Total protein was 63.9 g/L, and albumin was 38.5 g/L.
On the first day after admission, an MRI scan was performed on the patient.
The size of skull base cerebral occupancy was 41 × 31 mm, and the falx occupancy was 10 × 10 mm. The signal of two occupancies showed isointensity in both T1 and T2. The enhanced MRI report showed an unbalanced enhancement of the occupancy; the center of the occupancy was not enhanced (–). We also found a 7 × 6 mm enhancing node under the right temple bone.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy shows that, according to the normal brain tissue, the Cr peak was slightly increased but the N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) peak was not remarkable. Perfusion weighted imaging shows that the occupancy has the feature of increased cerebral blood flow and cerebral blood volume (CBV) and delated mean transit time and time to peak . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) shows a cystic vascular change in both anterior communicating artery (ACOA) and right anterior cerebral artery (R-ACA) (A2), while the A1 portion of R-ACA does not appear to have this change.
The patient underwent a digital subtraction angiography (DSA) on the third day after admission, as the local hospital report mentioned an intracranial aneurysm. The result shows that three aneurysms are located in the ACOA and R-ACA (A2 + A3) .
Based on the patient's history, signs, symptoms, and supplement findings, we made a primary diagnosis of three occupancies, inferring them as meningiomas, but a definitive diagnosis would require biopsy results. The aneurysm was sure. According to the patient’s condition, a surgery plan was made. We decided to perform resection, clipping, and indocyanine green choroidal (ICG) angiography together.
On the sixth day after admission, we decided to perform tumor resection and aneurysm.
We exposed the brain tissue through an interhemispheric fissure approach, and a tumor of about 1 cm was seen besides the falx, with normal blood supply; we covered it with cotton pads, and then the frontal lobe near the midline was lifted to reveal the tumor at the anterior skull base; the tumor was attached to the anterior skull base and falx cerebral. The blood supply of the tumor surface was normal, the tumor texture was slightly benevolent, and the color was grayish white. Tumor surface had a capsule, the boundary with the surrounding normal brain tissue was clear, and the surrounding brain tissue was obviously edema. We freed the tumor along the tumor capsule and resected the skull base tumor.
After the resection of the skull base, we lifted the frontal lobe to expose the right frontal base, the A1 segment of the anterior cerebral artery, and the bilateral A2 segment; the anterior communicating artery was exposed along the direction of the interhemispheric fissure. The sizes of the aneurysms were 4 mm * 6 mm, 2 mm * 2 mm, and 4 mm * 2 mm. After the temporary aneurysm clip was used to block A1, the back of the neck of the aneurysm was fully dissociated, and three aneurysm clips were successfully applied to the anterior communicating aneurysm. The A2 and A3 segments of the aneurysm were successfully clipped with an aneurysm clip. Then, ICG fluoroscopy showed that the aneurysm was not developed, and the A1 and bilateral A2 arteries were developed smoothly.
Then, the right para-falx meningioma was resected and completely removed. The surgery was successful.
On the third postoperative day, an MRI review showed that the skull base and the falx occupancies had been resected, and computed tomography (CT) angiography showed that all three aneurysms had been successfully clipped.
The histologies of the skull base and falx occupancy were both reported to be endothelial meningiomas . The immunohistochemical technique shows EMA(+), GFAP(−), Ki-67(2%), PR(+), SSTR2(+), VIMENTIN(+).
The patient had minor epilepsy once on the third day after the surgery; sodium valproate was given, and epilepsy never happened again.
CT reviews of the brain and lungs were also performed three times on the first, third, and sixth postoperative days to check the bleeding and lesions. After the recovery time, the patient stated that the headache had disappeared.
Follow-up was planned for 3 months after discharge. The patient reported no discomfort, such as headache or epilepsy, during the follow-up time.