82-year-old male patient, known to the NMT service of the “El Tunal” Hospital in
Bogotá, admitted for the management osteomuscular pain.
Consultation in January, 2021, for symptoms lasting 5 days suggestive of the
evolution of SARS-CoV-2, given dyspnea, cough, anosmia, physical examination
findings on admission of TA: 121/66 mmHg., HR: 75/min, FR: 19/min, Tº: 36º,
SaO2: 70%, and bi-basal rhonchus, with a history of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease secondary to exposure to biomass smoke up to 60 years of age
and low socioeconomic status.
In the present case, a single NTM intervention is carried out according to the
“visceral-cutaneous reflex” first proposed by Head based on the connection
between the skin and the internal organs, with innervation at the
same level as the metameric segment. The intervention with 0.5% procaine
injections, consists of application to papules in the dermatomes that are
correlated with the segmental level of the lung viscera. The patient was
immediately referred to the emergency department.
However, it is important to note that each patient is unique, and an
individualized approach based on patient life history and physical examination
findings is needed.
Admitted to the emergency room without clinical changes, receiving paraclinical
service ,
severity with Call score scale class C [13 pts], high risk of progression of SARS-CoV-2 (>50%),
hemogram with neutrophilia, renal and hepatic function preserved, with no hydro
electrolytic disorder. Indications of severity given by elevation of PCR,
ferritin, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Chest x-ray showed an increase in
bi-basal opacity with no signs of consolidation.
In the emergency room, treatment was initiated with ampicillin-sulbactam,
clarithromycin, dexamethasone, albendazole, and inhalations with ipratropium
bromide and salbutamol. On the second day of hospitalization, the patient
resolved the oxygenation disorder with a Pa/Fi: 357 and FiO2 32%.
On the third day, a complication occurred, with pulmonary thromboembolism and
moderate oxygenation disorder; CT angiography showed pulmonary embolism of the
segmental and subsegmental branches of both lower lobes of right predominance
for which full anticoagulation was indicated with low molecular weight heparin
at 100 mg.
On the seventh day of hospitalization, the oxygenation disorder improved without
the requirement of oxygen, SaO2: 89% to the environment.
On the ninth day of hospitalization, the patient was discharged with supplemental
oxygen.
1 month after discharge, a follow-up appointment reported the 12th day without
supplemental oxygen requirement, with SaO2: >93% and no decrease
in functional class, and the last follow-up appointment at 18 months showed no
evidence of SARS-CoV-2 sequelae.