A 37-year-old male was referred to the emergency room with acute abdominal pain and fever. Physical examination showed signs of an acute peritonitis and lab tests revealed elevated inflammation markers (C-reactive protein). CT-scan showed a pneumoperitoneum and an emergency exploratory laparoscopy was performed. Since the site of the perforation could not be detected by laparoscopic approach, the procedure had to be converted to an open laparotomy. A gastric perforation (2 mm in diameter) was found, excised and sutured. Unexpectedly, the surgeons noted a rigid thickened stomach wall (consistent with linitis plastica) during operation. Furthermore, a tumor mass invading the minor omentum and the mesentery was found. Intra-surgical frozen section analysis confirmed the initial suspicion and revealed diffuse growing gastric cancer with signet cells. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with a diffuse gastric cancer (pT4bN3M1).
The young age at diagnosis and histological subtype prompted the surgeon to refer the patient and his family to genetic counselling. Evaluation of the family history revealed that the patient’s paternal grandfather died of abdominal cancer at the age of 40. No other family members suffered from cancer, especially not the father (61 years old; Fig. , II.1). Both the father and the healthy older brother underwent elective gastroscopies. In both patients, endoscopy showed an unremarkable mucosa . Multiple random “button hole biopsies” were taken during gastroscopy and diffuse growing malignant cells could be detected in one out of three of the biopsies taken from the father. Genetic testing revealed the heterozygous germline mutation c.1137G > A of CDH1. This genetic alteration affects the last exonic nucleotide at the canonical splice donor site leading to impaired splicing and consequently to a dysfunctional E-cadherin molecule (Human Gene Mutation Database/HGMD® No. CS0060517). As this mutation has already been described in other HDGC patients, the diagnosis of HDGC in the father and also in the index patient carrying the same mutation was confirmed. Surprisingly, despite the presence of a CDH1 mutation, E-cadherin expression could still be immunohistochemically detected in tumor tissue with a monoclonal antibody raised against E-cadherin .
With identification of a pathogenic CDH1 mutation, index patient’s healthy brother (38 years old; Fig. III.1) as well as the three paternal aunts (53-, 56-, 58- years old, respectively, Fig. , II.2, II.3, II.4) had an a-priori risk of 50% to also carry the CDH1 mutation. Ultimately, all four relatives underwent predictive testing after genetic counselling. While the mutation was detected in the brother and one aunt , two aunts did not inherit the mutation. As a result, his brother and his aunt underwent prophylactic gastrectomy. While no malignant cells were found in the histologic examination of the brother’s stomach, a diffuse growing adenocarcinoma was detected during histologic workup in the stomach of the aunt. Despite a macroscopically unremarkable appearance of the surgical specimen, two isolated cancer foci of signet cells located 7 mm from one another were detected in the upper third of the lamina propria of the cardiac region. Similar to the index patient’s father /herbrother, this diffuse gastric cancer was not macroscopically detectable during gastroscopy before gastrectomy was performed, not even after retrospectively analyzing the affected sites in the endoscopic images. Further staging showed no involvement of lymph nodes or distant metastasis in her case (pT1a pN0 (0/16) cM0).
The father, brother and aunt recovered well after their surgeries. Unfortunately, the condition of the index patient worsened quickly due to perioperative complications. Systemic chemotherapy could not be administered due to his poor general condition. He died 2.5 months after diagnosis.