A 45-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our surgical department for treatment of a mass in her left groin area. From her past medical history, our patient was on treatment with levothyroxine after thyroidectomy for multi-nodular goiter and with amlodipine and valsartan for hypertension. She did not smoke cigarettes and did not report any history of trauma in the area.
The mass was discovered incidentally on a lower extremity triplex ultrasonography one month before her admission. Our patient was complaining of aching, soreness and heaviness of her lower extremities for two months and was advised to have her lower extremity venous system evaluated. On her right lower extremity, the triplex ultrasonography revealed insufficiency of the saphenofemoral junction and insufficient valves of the great saphenous vein. On her left lower extremity, the study was difficult to perform because of a mass in the groin area. It was a solid hypoechoic mass of heterogeneous texture, 50×55 mm in size, lying 11 mm under the skin surface and with minimal blood flow. It appeared to be in proximity with the femoral vessels but without compressing them, and there was no local lymph node enlargement.
On physical examination, a painless, fixed, solid mass was palpated in her left groin area. Both lower limbs were symmetrical with normal motility.
Our patient was subsequently submitted for an MRI of the area. It revealed a mass lying in a space defined anteriorly from her pectineus muscle, posteriorly from her abductor muscle, laterally from her obturator muscle and medially from her innominate bone. The mass had a heterogeneous low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and heterogeneous high signal intensity with inner areas of low signal intensity on T2-weighted images. It was lobulate with dimensions 78×59×45 mm and relatively well-defined margins. No enhancement was marked after the intravenous administration of paramagnetic substance . Additional imaging studies (upper and lower abdominal ultrasonography, chest radiography) did not reveal any other pathology.
On laboratory examination, a full blood count, basic metabolic panel, liver and kidney function tests, electrolytes and amylase, and coagulation profile were normal. The thyroid function tests showed euthyroidism. Cancer- and tissue-specific markers (α-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, CA 15.3, CA 19.9 and CA 125) were also tested. Of these, CA 19.9 was found elevated at 39.51 U/mL (reference range, 0-35 U/mL). To exclude possible laboratory error, the elevated value of CA 19.9 was repeated twice.
Our patient underwent a surgical excision of the mass. A longitudinal incision over the femoral vessels was performed, and a mass measuring approximately 6 cm was identified. It was firmly attached to the adjacent structures; however, it was dissected without ligating any large blood vessel. The mass was resected en bloc and sent for histopathology study. The incision was closed with interrupted sutures.
The post-operative period was uneventful, and our patient was discharged on the third post-operative day.
The macroscopical specimen examination revealed an oval-shaped lobulated mass 80× 55×50 mm in size with residual striated muscle. On histopathology, it was found to be an IM.
At the follow-up six months later, our patient did not have any complaints, and there was no clinical evidence of recurrence. Ultrasonography of her left groin area revealed insufficiency of the saphenofemoral junction and no mass recurrence. Upper and lower abdominal ultrasonography results were normal. All laboratory test results were normal, and CA 19.9 was reduced to 11.34 U/mL. During colonoscopy, the sigmoid colon was found to be edematous and spastic, and first-grade hemorrhoid disease was present.