On February 8, 2020, a 52-year-old Chinese woman reported fever and coughing symptoms for three days. This female patient had an eight-year history of hypertension and coronary heart disease. Her daily medication included one 30 mg nifedipine extended-release tablet and one 100 mg Bayaspirin tablet, both taken orally. She denied a history of recent travel. However, she was in close contact with her son, who had been infected with COVID-19 five days previously. She was immediately isolated in an airborne infection isolation room, as her throat swab tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on a real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction test.
Clinically, the body temperature, oxygen saturation (SaO2) on room air, and respiratory rate of the patient were 38.6°C, 91%, and 20 breaths/min, respectively. On examination, her lungs were clear on auscultation. Laboratory investigations revealed a white blood cell count of 5.3 × 109/L, a lymphocyte count of 1.12 × 109/L, a hemoglobin level of 12.6 g/dL, and a platelet count of 153 × 109/L. C-reactive protein was elevated, at 75.6 mg/L (normal value ≤7.5 mg/L), and procalcitonin was <0.1 ng/mL (normal value ≤0.5 ng/mL).
On admission, blood glucose was 11.28 mmol/L, and urinalysis showed glycosuria +++ and ketone bodies ±, demonstrating abnormalities from the normal range. Her serum lactate, liver function, and renal function tests were normal. However, computed tomography (CT) of her chest showed subtle ground-glass opacities or consolidation in both lungs without pleural effusion (: A1–A2). The patient was treated with lopinavir/ritonavir, inhaled aerosolized recombinant human interferon, and traditional Chinese medicine.
Within 48 hours of presentation, the patient experienced increasing difficulty breathing, with severe dry cough. Examination showed a body temperature of 38.1°C, respiratory rate of 34 breaths/min, and SaO2 of 86% on 5L/min oxygen by face mask.
A repeat chest CT showed the rapid development of bilateral diffuse ground-glass opacities or consolidation (: B1–B2). Considering the possibility of a cytokine storm, methylprednisolone 40 mg/day was administered intravenously for five days. The patient received high-flow-oxygen therapy (flow rate of 60 L/min, oxygen concentration 65%) and maintained SaO2 at 88%. Bedside ultrasonography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50% and ventricular wall motion normality. Kerley B lines appeared on both of the dorsal lungs. In response, 20 mg of furosemide was given intravenously. Meanwhile, the patient’s activity level was reduced, and an indwelling urinary catheter was sited. After 60 hours of treatment, the patient’s blood pressure was 78/50 mmHg, and she was sweating profusely. A 250 mL bolus of 0.9% saline was infused rapidly (over 10 min) without significant improvement. The vasoactive drug dopamine was then given to maintain blood pressure at approximately 95/60 mmHg. When the oxygen concentration was decreased to about 70%, the patient’s SaO2 fluctuated between 96% and 99%. Blood levels of troponin, amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, and D-dimer were all normal. The oxygenation index was 122 mmHg. Thus, she was intubated and initiated on mechanical ventilation.
Despite deep sedation, significant ventilator dyssynchrony was initiated to maintain the lung’s protective ventilation. The patient was supported with volume-controlled ventilation: tidal volume 350 mL, FiO2 0.8, PEEP 10 cmH2O, and a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min with a platform pressure of 20 cmH2O. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.43, a CO2 partial pressure of 38.8 mmHg, and an O2 partial pressure of 158 mmHg. The value of FiO2 was adjusted to 0.55, and she did not require prone ventilation.
After five days of mechanical ventilation, normothermia, and oxygenation, the appearance of the ground glass opacities on the chest X-ray improved, the results of all bacterial cultures were negative, and she was successfully extubated.
On the 15th day of admission, a pharyngeal swab for COVID-19 was negative .
On follow-up after discharge, the patient had no complications, and chest CT appearances continued to improve at one, three, and six months .
This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Petroleum Clinical Medical College of Hebei Medical University. The consent from the patient for the publication of the case was obtained.