A 46-year-old Chinese female patient was admitted to the Department of Neurology at Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine (Shanghai, China) due to being unconscious for half an hour. She had no previous history of symptoms such as headache, dizziness, blurred vision, and no strenuous exercise was performed before becoming unconsciousness. The patient was found to have a history of hypertension lasting 6 years, and her blood pressure at the time of admission to the hospital was 155/84 mmHg.
On physical examination, in addition to unclear consciousness, her Glasgow coma score was found to be 7 points, showing severe brain damage. The pupillary light reflex was normal, bilateral nasolabial sulci were symmetrical, and the tongue was in the middle while stretching. Physical examination of the heart, lung and abdomen was normal. She had lower muscle tension on both sides and positive pathological signs of both lower limbs.
Auxiliary examinations such as blood biochemistry and coagulation function showed Lp(a) 2100 mg/L (normal range 0–300); uric acid 201 µmol/L (normal range 210–430); low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 2.15 mmol/L (normal range 1.53–3.45); and d-dimer 1.26 µg/mL (normal range 0–0.2). The results of all routine diagnostic tests, such as blood, urine, stool and glycosylated haemoglobin, were normal.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested multiple acute cerebral infarctions in the vermis, cerebellar hemispheres and occipital lobes on both sides and multiple acute lacunar infarcts in the thalamus and left hippocampus on both sides. Brain magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) showed irregular stenosis of the lumen of the right internal carotid artery, M1 and M2 segments of the right middle cerebral artery, and P2/P3 segments of the bilateral posterior cerebral artery. Intracranial computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed that the P2 branch of the bilateral posterior cerebellar artery and the left anterior inferior cerebellar artery diverged mostly in the form of soft plaque with varying degrees of luminal stenosis and right anterior inferior cerebellar artery thrombosis with embolism. The results of electrocardiography and colour ultrasound of the heart and abdomen were normal. Carotid artery ultrasound suggested right carotid artery plaque formation. The results of electrocardiography (ECG) and colour ultrasound of the heart and abdomen were found to be normal. Ultrasound of the carotid artery showed plaque formation in the right carotid artery.
The patient was diagnosed with ischaemic stroke due to basilar artery thrombosis. After admission, the patient was immediately treated with basilar artery stent thrombectomy, and the basilar artery responded well after the operation. Intracranial pressure was reduced by mannitol, platelet aggregation was prevented by aspirin and clopidogrel and the neurological symptoms were improved by edaravone. After 18 days of treatment, the patient showed improvement and was discharged.
Before discharge, her blood pressure was 140/70 mmHg, physical examination revealed that muscle strength of the 4 limbs was at level 5, and the Babinski and Chaddock signs on the left were positive. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 0 points. The patient could perform her daily routines and work during follow-up for 3 years. She had a clear consciousness, no aphasia, and no obvious abnormalities in cranial nerve examination. The muscle tension of the 4 limbs was normal, and the muscle strength was at level 5. The Lp(a) level of the patient continued to decrease to 875 mg/L through proper exercise and a reasonable diet.
A total of 446 genes related to hereditary cardio-cerebrovascular diseases based on OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, ) were included in the gene variation screening group of next-generation sequencing (NGS). In brief, genomic DNA extracted from external blood was segmented using Q800R Sonicator (Qsonica) to produce 300–500 bp insert fragments. Specially designed NimbleGen SeqCap probes (Roche NimbleGen, Madison, Wis) were used to hybridize in solution to enrich target sequences. A NextSeq500 sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, Calif) was used to index and sequence the enriched DNA samples with 100–150 cycles of single-end reads. After image analysis, initial data in FASTQ format was generated, and Illumina Pipeline was used for base calling. After the removal of the adapters and the low-grade reads, sequenced reads were mapped to the reference version of the human genome hg19 (release 2009-02, ). NextGENe software (SoftGenetics, State College, Pa) was used to call and review the observed nucleotide changes in the alignment sequences. An internally developed overlay-based algorithm and eCNVscan were used to screen for large exon deletions and replications. The standardized coverage depth of each exon in the experimental sample was in comparison with the average coverage depth of the same exon in the reference file. Population and literature databases containing 1000 Genomes, HGMD, gnomAD, ClinVar, dbSNP and OMIM, were used to annotate sequence variations . Finally, targeted genetic analysis of the patient identified a novel heterozygous deletion of exons 3–16 covering KIV2 CNVs in the LPA gene . This novel heterozygous deletion was further validated by qPCR using one set of primers detecting the second exon of KIV2 (KIV2 forward: 5′-CGACTATGCGAGTGTGGTGT-3′; KIV2 reverse: 5′-GGTGCAGGAGTGCTACCAT-3′). The 2-ΔΔCT method with a normalized ratio to the reference gene (beta-actin) was used to conduct data analysis .