A 5-year-old female infant (weight 23 kg and height 120 cm) was evaluated in Wuhan Children’s Hospital for three days of incessant cough and a syncopal episode. Three years ago, the child suffered from heart palpitations after contracting an acute upper respiratory tract infection. A year ago she had a brief syncope that was accompanied by pallor. However, the parents were neither examined nor treated for the cause of the illness at this time. During this hospitalization in our hospital, physical examination showed that the infant’s heart rate was 160 beats per minute, and arrhythmias were noted. Furthermore, the infant’s heart sound was slightly low and no obvious heart murmurs were heard. The infant’s respiration was 30 fractions and palpation of the liver was normal. CK-MB and hypersensitive troponin T were normal values. 24 h Holter monitoring revealed sustained atrial tachycardia with eight sinus stops lasting more than 2 s, with the longest RR interval of 2265 s and an average heart rate of 149 beats per minute. Echocardiography revealed an enlarged tele diastolic diameter (46.1 mm) and malfunctioning (EF 28%) left ventricle.
Intravenous injection of deslanoside was ineffective in rate control and remained uncontrolled at 160 beats per minute . Due to the poor cardiac function of the infant, RFCA under general anesthesia was considered after obtaining informed consent [, , ]. The infant had persistent tachycardia since RFCA. Two venous accesses were created. A 6 F-decapolar and a 6 F-quadripolar catheter were advanced into the coronary sinus and right ventricular apex via the left subclavian vein and right femoral vein, respectively. The ablation catheter was advanced into the left atrium using a transseptal puncture technique because the foramen ovale had closed.
Three-dimensional electro-anatomical mapping systems (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) were used to map tachycardia at the right anterior oblique angle of 30 degrees (RAO 30°) and the light anterior oblique angle of 30 degrees (LAO 30°). Mapping near the LAA showed early signals in the LAA area. The isochronous activation map of tachycardia was constructed based on the proximal atrial CS signal to show that the lesion was located at the distal end (apex) of the LAA . A 4-mm open-irrigated-tip catheter (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) was used at the site. Over the course of a 3-hour treatment, radiofrequency energy was delivered to five lesions within 40 s at a target temperature of 43 °C, a power of 20–30 W and a flow rate of 17 ml/min. AT stopped during RFCA, indicating that the lesion was in the left atrial appendage and confirming that AT was spontaneous and focal. After the AT stopped, sinus rhythm occurred, but it recurred a few seconds later, forcing us to consider further treatment options. This could be reversed to show that atrial tachycardia in the infant was spontaneous and focal.
Due to the high risk of perforation in the LAA, LAA resection was performed with parental consent on the second day after radiofrequency ablation. Based on the precise location of the lesion in the LAA identified by electrophysiological mapping and RFCA, the infant’s chest was opened through a left posterolateral incision under general anesthesia. The LAA was partially detached from the atrium using a clip at the base, and then a left atrial appendectomy was performed . As the procedure progressed, AT ended after LAA resection and sinus rhythm, with an appropriate frequency profile being established immediately . The echocardiogram showed that LVDd decreased from 46.1 mm to 37.1 mm, while LVEF increased from 28.53 to 46.2% . The infant remained asymptomatic in sinus rhythm after a 1-month follow-up .