A 21-year-old female of Maghreb origin with the wish to change the colour of her eyes presented herself at the clinic. The subject met the eligibility criteria for the procedure: she was in good general health and had no corneal damage; corneal cell-count was not <2,500 cells per square millimetre; she had no cataract, no keratoconus, and no retinal abnormalities. Written consent was obtained after the nature and potential risks of the procedure were explained.
The following parameters were assessed: corneal endothelial cell count (specular microscope, SP-1P, Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan); visual field (Model 745, Zeiss Humphrey Instruments, Jena, Germany); refraction in dioptres and visual acuity in logMAR; pachymetry and topography (Topographer, TMS-5, Tomey Corporation, Aichi-ken, Japan); and intra-ocular pressure (Kerato Refractometer KR-1, Topcon Corporation).
The pre-operative (May 18, 2016) and post-operative values for corneal endothelial cell count, refraction and visual acuity, pachymetry and intra-ocular pressure are given in Table . The differential topographical maps are provided as online supplementary material (for all online , see ).
Key aspects of the case report are chronologically summarized in Figure .
The pre-operative procedure was as follows: Blephaclean wipes for cleaning the eyelids (1 per eye), twice daily, from 3 days before until the morning of the operation. Five minutes before surgery, a drop of oxybuprocaine 0.4% was instilled in both eyes.
The surgical procedure was as follows: the patient was placed under the laser (femtosecond laser VisuMax®, Carl Zeiss Instruments, Jena, Germany), and the centre of the cornea was marked with methylene blue. After positioning of the laser cone, the eyes were treated with the Intra-Corneal Ring (ICR)® program, making a tunnel for insertion of intracorneal rings (used in the treatment of keratoconus or moderate myopia). The surgical parameters were as follows: external diameter, 9.3 mm; internal diameter, 5.5 mm; depth incision, 225 μm; 2 radial incisions at 90° and 270°. The tunnel was then dissected with a specially developed and patented round spatula (reference P5042A and P5043A, Duckworth and Kent, Baldock, UK), which was followed by the insertion of the pigment Neoris®-Biotic (Paris, France) using the same spatula.
The post-operative regimen was as follows: azithromycin (Azyter) eyewash 1 drop twice daily, starting 2 h after the operation, for 3 days; dexamethasone (Dexafree) eyewash 1 drop twice daily, starting 2 h after the operation, for 2 weeks; trehalose (Thealose) 1 drop 4 times daily, starting 2 h after the operation, for 3 months; paracetamol 500 mg 1 tablet every 6 h for 24 h in case of pain; borage oil (Alphalarm) 1 capsule daily, starting the morning after surgery, for 3 months.
The follow-up consisted of patient-perceived outcomes as well as photographic and ophthalmological assessments. The surgical procedure took place without any complications, and 1 day post-operatively, the patient reported: “Honestly, everything went well, knowing that it is the second day, I have no pain anymore. I find it looks natural enough, I have had some good comments, I am not disappointed.” Eight months after the procedure, the patient reported to have experienced no problems and being satisfied with the result. The aesthetic aspect before and 8 months after the procedure is depicted in Figure .
The principal ophthalmological safety parameters are given in Table . It is clear from Table that these parameters were stable during the follow-up period. In addition, optical coherence tomography pachymetry after 8 months (January 25, 2017) is depicted in Figure . This figure confirms the stable presence of the pigment at 225 μm depth. There is no sign of leakage or diffusion of the pigment in the cornea.
The visual field was normal (60° temporally on both sides). The pre-operative topography compared to 8-month follow-up topography (differential topography) confirmed that there were no anatomical changes in both corneas (online ). There were no reported side effects at any time during follow-up.