A 76-year-old Japanese man with right oropharynx ACC presented at a general hospital. Computed tomography (CT) detected masses of 23 × 19 mm on the right upper lung lobe, 14 × 12 mm on the right lower lung lobe, and 15 × 14 mm on the left lower lung lobe. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed abnormal accumulation in the lung tumors. The patient was diagnosed with T3N0M1, stage IVC ACC of the right oropharynx with lung metastases. Despite the lung metastasis, a favorable long-term prognosis was possible after control of the primary tumor. Radical surgery was not indicated for reasons related to functional preservation, and the patient received carbon ion (C-ion) radiotherapy for the primary tumor. The total dose was 64 Gy (relative biological effectiveness) delivered in 16 fractions. After 30 months, there was no recurrence of the primary lesion; however, the metastatic lung tumors had increased in size. The masses had grown to 32 × 30 mm on the right upper lung lobe, 31 × 25 mm on the right lower lung lobe, and 18 × 17 mm on the left lower lung lobe . The patient consented to sequential treatment with CyberKnife for multiple lung metastases . CT images of 1 mm thickness were acquired to plan the treatment. Respiratory migration was assessed by four-dimensional CT. The gross tumor volume (GTV) was delineated based on thin-slice CT images. The clinical target volume (CTV) was identical to the GTV (CTV = GTV). The planning target volume (PTV) included 2 mm margins surrounding the CTV. The organs at risk (OARs; lung, spinal cord, heart, and skin) were outlined on the treatment planning CT scan and dose–volume histogram analysis. D95 was defined as the minimum dose covering 95% of the GTV for the first and the second CyberKnife treatments or the PTV for the third CyberKnife treatment. The dose prescribed for the PTV was used for the third treatment because of its small size. The patient received a total dose of 60 Gy in 10 fractions of D95. The treatment was planned using the MultiPlan System (Accuray). The composite dose distribution is depicted in Fig. . The treatment data for the first CyberKnife administration are summarized in Table . Conformity and homogeneity indices were calculated according to the following formulas :
Conformity index = TVRI/TV
Homogeneity index = maximum dose/prescribed dose
TVRI = target volume covered by the reference isodose
TV = target volume
The conformity and homogeneity indices were 1.09 and 1.45, respectively.
At 3 months after the first CyberKnife treatment, the patient developed acute radiation pneumonitis, which was classified as grade 1 based on the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 4.0 . The radiation pneumonitis remained at grade 1 for 6 months after CyberKnife treatment. After confirming that the pulmonary fibrosis and inflammatory reaction had stabilized, the second and third tumors in the right and left lower lung lobes were treated at 6 and 15 months after the first CyberKnife treatment, respectively. The patient developed grade 1 pleural effusion after the second CyberKnife session, whereas no adverse events were observed after the third treatment.
There were no chronic adverse events resulting from any of the CyberKnife treatments. Other adverse events, such as esophagitis, rib fractures, pleuritic pain, or bronchial fistula, were not observed. CT or FDG-PET/CT did not detect any signs of recurrence at 21 months after the first CyberKnife session or at 6 months after the third CyberKnife treatment.