A 49-year-old Japanese man noticed a mass in the right parotid gland without pain. There was no history of weight loss, fever, or night sweats. Ultrasound examination demonstrated that the tumor was a solid mass about 2 cm in diameter. T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed a low-intensity, well-defined mass in the right parotid gland unaccompanied by lymph node swelling . Abdominal computer tomography (CT) and whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed no other tumor elsewhere. Although fine-needle aspiration was performed several times, it was difficult to obtain tumor cells for diagnosis, except for cells from normal salivary glands. Superficial parotidectomy was therefore performed and the tumor was successfully resected without facial nerve paralysis. After parotidectomy, the patient received radiotherapy and is currently alive and well with no evidence of recurrence after 3 years.
Grossly, the tumor occupied the superficial lobe of the right parotid gland, and was solid and firm, measuring 2.7 × 2.7 × 2.3 cm. It was well circumscribed without a fibrous capsule, and the cut surface was grayish tan in color showing some lobulation at the tumor borders . Macroscopic necrosis or intratumoral hemorrhage was not evident. Histologically, the tumor predominantly showed a border that was well-defined from the surrounding tissue, although it was focally infiltrative in some areas. There was no fibrous capsule around the tumor. The tumor was composed of sharply demarcated cellular nests of various-sizes, growing in a paucicellular fibromyxoid or collagenous stroma . The tumor cells were round to polygonal and small to medium-sized, with scant cytoplasm and hyperchromatic irregular round nuclei with granular chromatin . Tumor cells with clear cytoplasm were also found in tumor nests, but rhabdoid cells were not identified. Apoptotic bodies were occasionally found, but necrotic foci were not evident. Venous invasion was detected . Some non-neoplastic salivary ducts were found between tumor nests, demonstrating that the tumor infiltration had extended within the parotid parenchyma. There was no evidence of regional lymph node metastasis.
An immunohistochemical study was performed using formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) sections of representative tumor blocks, using the antibodies summarized in Table . The tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3, CK8/18), EMA, vimentin, desmin, and focally positive for CD56 . Desmin immunoreactivity showed a diffuse cytoplasmic pattern for the most part, as well as a paranuclear dot-like pattern in a smaller proportion of the tumor . The cells were negative for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, S100 protein, CK5/6, p63, CD99 (MIC2), GFAP, and CD117 (KIT). They were also negative for calponin and α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA), in contrast to the positivity shown by myofibroblast-like spindle cells in the stroma. The Ki-67 labeling index was almost 50%. For WT1, the tumor cells showed strong nuclear staining with an antibody recognizing the C-terminal region of WT1 (C-WT1) (polyclonal, Abnova). However, neither of two N-terminal antibodies (N-WT1), WT49 (Leica) nor 6F-H2 (Dako), elicited positive nuclear staining, although the latter showed nonspecific cytoplasmic staining, .
Dual-colored fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using EWSR1 break-apart probes (Abbott Molecular, Abbott Park, IL) on FFPE tissue detected EWSR1 split signals in 94% of the tumor cells . We then performed 3′/5′ expression imbalance assay based on reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) according to the methods described by Suehara et al , in order to determine whether aberrant WT1 gene expression was present. The result clearly showed that 5′-regional expression of the WT1 gene was lacking in the tumor , being consistent with absence of immunoreactivity with the N-WT1 antibody at the protein level revealed by immunohistochemistry . To confirm these gene alterations, RT-PCR for the EWSR1-WT1 fusion gene was performed using a forward primer (5′-TCCTACAGCCAAGCTCCAAGT-3′, EWSR1 exon 7) and reverse primer (5′-ACCTTCGGTTCACAGTCCTTG-3′, WT1 exon 8) . This revealed the characteristic EWSR1-WT1 fusion gene .