A 51-year-old woman had lost consciousness while working at a pachinko parlour. She was a never-smoker and had no relevant medical history. She was transported to our hospital by ambulance and had regained consciousness somewhat but was still in somnolent state with limited orientation. On admission, the systolic blood pressure was 92 mmHg, the heart rate was increased at 98 b.p.m., and the Glasgow coma scale score was E3V4M6; she was in a pre-shock state. Blood testing revealed normal findings, including normal troponin T levels. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a significant pericardial effusion, but the wall motion and valve function were normal. Chest X-ray showed enlargement of the cardiac silhouette. We suspected aortic dissection because of the pericardial effusion and performed three-dimensional contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT). It revealed two large aneurysms (27 and 31 mm in size) on the anterior wall of the PA . We suspected CPAF with aneurysm. The blood pressure continued dropping despite the use of a vasopressor. Therefore, pericardial puncture was performed after endotracheal intubation; 400 mL of blood was drained and the blood pressure increased. Subsequently, we performed coronary angiography to determine the definitive diagnosis and the possibility of endovascular treatment.
Coronary angiography showed an aneurysm of a CPAF originating from the left anterior descending artery (LAD) . The right coronary artery was normal. Although leakage of contrast from the aneurysm was not confirmed, we suspected that the cardiac tamponade was caused by rupture of the CPAF aneurysm. Regarding the treatment options, we considered that the blood flow from the PA side could not be blocked with a covered stent and that coil embolization would be necessary if we selected endovascular treatment. Thus, we agreed that surgical aneurysm removal was desirable. The patient was transferred to an operating room 4 h after symptom onset.
Intraoperatively, two coronary aneurysms were observed, 25 and 30 mm in size. One of the aneurysms, arising from the LAD and extending to the PA, was slightly bleeding . We made a small incision in the LAD and inserted a 1.5 mm probe to identify the LAD. Next, we resected the aneurysms and closed the fistula, suturing as close as possible to the LAD and PA. Subsequently, a longitudinal incision was made at the anterior PA wall and the outflow site of the CPAF was closed with suture. Considering the possibility of decreased blood flow in the LAD after the suture, left internal thoracic artery-to-LAD bypass was performed. The histological examination of the resected specimen showed arteriosclerotic changes in the form of intimal fibrous thickening. The elastic fibres were ruptured and lost, the stroma was oedematous, and mixed inflammatory cell infiltration was observed. It was inferred that the aneurysm formed due to arteriosclerotic changes in the vessel wall.
The patient was extubated 1 day after the operation. Contrast-enhanced coronary CT angiography performed on post-operative Day 7 showed a patent bypass and no narrowing of the LAD. The patient was discharged on hospital Day 14 and has had no symptoms 1 year after the operation.