A 50-year-old male was referred to the cardiology office for palpitations and pre-syncope while playing ice hockey. He had no history of syncope and no significant past medical history. His father had a history of coronary artery disease, valve replacement surgery and died of ‘heart attack’ at age 75. His son had episodes of syncope which were thought to be vasovagal. His grandfather had a sudden death in his 50 s. His cardiovascular exam was unremarkable. Labs including complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, and TSH were within normal limits. His echocardiogram did not show any structural heart disease and a 48-h Holter monitoring showed 263 single premature ventricular complexes (PVCs). He then underwent exercise ECG stress test. His baseline ECG showed sinus rhythm with incomplete right bundle branch block . There was no ECG evidence of ischaemia at peak heart rate. However, about 3 min into recovery, his ECG showed type 1 Brugada pattern which returned to baseline about 5 min into recovery. He also developed multifocal PVCs including couplets and 3 beats of monomorphic ventricular tachycardias (VTs) . The patient was referred to an electrophysiologist. He underwent an electrophysiology (EP) study with procainamide challenge. High lead positioning of V1 and V2 in the second intercostal space was used during the EP study. Ventricular fibrillation was induced with triple ventricular extra-stimuli in the basal state but no Brugada pattern was seen with procainamide infusion (850 mg/10 min). He had a loop recorder implanted after the EP study and was followed by cardiology without a documented arrhythmia. About a year later, he had coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) exposure and felt unwell for 2 days. He then had a cardiac arrest at home and was successfully resuscitated. On exam, he was afebrile, intubated, and non-responsive to pain with reactive pupils. Heart sound was irregular at 122/min without murmurs and he had crackles bilaterally. His ECG on arrival showed atrial fibrillation with type I Brugada pattern and interrogation of his loop recorder showed ventricular fibrillation (VF) at the time of the arrest . Initial labs showed leucocytosis of 22.3 × 109/L, creatinine of 1.85 mg/dL, high-sensitive troponin T of 3904 ng/L, C-reactive protein of 10.4 mg/L, and D-dimer of 18 440 ng/mL. Electrolytes including calcium and magnesium were normal. A coronary angiogram showed non-obstructive coronary artery disease. PCR for SARS-CoV-2 was positive and his chest X-ray was consistent with COVID-19 pneumonia. Echocardiogram on presentation showed severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction which recovered to normal in 2 weeks. He had a good neurologic recovery and underwent a dual-chamber implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implantation prior to discharge. He later underwent genetic testing and was found to be heterozygous for c.844C>G (p.Arg282Gly) mutation in the SCN5A gene. The patient continued to do well on follow-up 3 months later and underwent genetic counselling with plans to test his children for the same mutation.