A 50-year-old man presented with a 4-week history of rectal bleeding with associated dyspnoea on exertion. His past medical history was unremarkable and there was no significant family history. He was a non-smoker and a social drinker. Physical examination including a digital rectal examination was unremarkable.
Initial investigations revealed a hypochromic, microcytic anaemia with a haemoglobin level of 8 g/dl and a ferritin level of 4 μg/L. Biochemical assessments of liver and renal functions were normal. Gastroduodenoscopy was normal and colonoscopy only revealed an incidental 2 mm benign tubular adenoma in the rectum.
Cross-sectional imaging was carried out. A MRI enteroclysis revealed a 22 mm peripherally enhancing soft tissue lesion in the right iliac fossa, and a CT enterography suggested that the mass lesion was arising either from the appendix or a Meckel's diverticulum.
A laparotomy was carried out via a grid iron incision. A Meckel's diverticulum was found to be adherent to the tip of the appendix in the right iliac fossa. There was a primary tumour arising from the Meckel's diverticulum and multiple sub-centimetre peritoneal deposits in the adjacent visceral peritoneum. These deposits were further distributed in the parietal peritoneum on the right side of the true pelvis and as tiny granular deposits in the greater omentum. A Meckel's diverticulectomy and en bloc appendicectomy was carried out and an omental deposit was sampled for histological assessment.
Gross examination of the specimen revealed a 40 mm diameter tumour arising from the mucosal aspect of the bowel wall of the Meckel's diverticulum. The tumour directly involved the peritoneal wall, and had invaded the serosal surface of the small bowel. The resection margins and the adhered appendix were tumour-free. A single omental deposit submitted separately was also involved by the tumour.
Histology of the tumour showed that it was composed of scattered small glandular structures and also scattered bizarre single tumour cells. The tumour cells expressed cytokeratin CK7, and CA 19.9. There was no expression of CK20, CDX2 or CEA. These findings support an upper gastrointestinal/pancreatico-biliary origin. Associated with the tumour were nests of cells with a pancreatic islet morphology, which expressed general neuroendocrine markers (CD56, synatophysin and chromogranin), and specific islet cell markers insulin and glucagon. Carcinoid markers serotonin and gastrin were negative. These appearances are consistent with the tumour being a pancreatic-type adenocarcinoma arising from ectopic pancreatic tissue in a Meckel's diverticulum.
The patient made good post-operative recovery. He was discharged following multi-disciplinary discussion among surgeons, radiologists and oncologists, with detailed out-patient follow-up arrangements in place, including an outpatient appointment with the pancreatic oncology specialist within a week of discharge.
Two weeks following discharge however, he developed food intolerance and small bowel obstruction was confirmed on CT scan. A second laparotomy was carried out and a dramatic increase in the volume of tumour was encountered with a significant increase in the size, number and extent of peritoneal deposits . There was no single point of obstruction in the distal small bowel and in view of the encasement of distal ileum and proximal colon together with local mesenteric infiltration, an ileo-transverse colonic bypass was performed to relieve the obstruction.
Subsequent management was palliative and the rapid tumour progression continued until his death some 6 weeks after the initial operation.