The patient is a 48-year-old Afghanian male that referred to our center due to swelling, redness and tenderness of external genitalia, that found incidentally in the investigation of cachexia and weigt loss. He revealed no genitourinary or gastrointestinal complaints before admission. After admission full physical examination performed.
On examination, patient was cachectic with BMI of 18 kg/m2. He was afebrile and initial hematological investigations revealed only a moderate leucocytosis (WBC count, 18000 Cells/HPF) with mild anemia (Hg 11 g/dl). External genitalia and perianal examination revealed skin necrosis, pussy drainage and subcutaneous crepitations, in addition to above mentioned signs.
Urgent and vigorous intravenous triple antibiotic therapy with Ceftriaxone (2 grams Q 12 h), Metronidazole (500 mg Q 8 h) and Amikacin (500 mg Q 12 h) was commenced. He was taken to operating room, multiple times, and every time vigorous debridement performed. A thorough washout was performed. Following acute management a thorough examination including digital rectal examination was performed which detected an extensive rectal mass with extension of necrotic points to the anal area. Punch anal biopsy performed and sent for histological analysis, which showed rectal adenocarcinoma. The zone of necrosis covered a large area from external genital area to the inner aspect of right thigh to the right side of the abdomen . A CT scan revealed a large rectal tumor with pelvic adenopathies. In the course of surgical management the patient received multiple units of packed RBC due to intermittent acute bleeding after each surgical debridement and also anemia of chronic disease-underlying malignancy. He also received regular infusion of parenteral nutrition. After partial stabilization, a standard left loop colostomy performed to prevent an impending large bowel obstruction and to promote healing of the perineum. After full stabilization, skin dermal grafting for full coverage of involved areas performed .
Systemic chemotherapy for the treatment of underlying rectal adenocarcinoma initiated, the patient was well one year after first visit.