In May 2021, a 19-year-old caucasian male patient was referred to the university hospital of Brandenburg owing to a severe decline of excretory kidney function. The serum creatinine concentration was 649 µmol/l (normal range 62–106 µmol/l) at the time of admission . The patient suffered from mild dyspnea, lack of appetite, and moderate itchiness.
The patient did not report any known diseases, nor did he take any medication on a regular basis. Approximately 10 weeks earlier, he had an upper respiratory tract infection that did not require antibiotics or other medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Since then, he did not recover completely but instead suffered from persistent fatigue. Also, he lost 8 kg of body weight until admission. He denied fever, nausea/vomiting, myalgia, arthralgia, skin abnormalities, photosensitivity, Raynaud symptoms, and hair loss. He did not report morning stiffness or lower back pain. Three weeks before admission, he noticed pain in his right eye, accompanied by redness and blurred vision. A prompt ophthalmological examination led to the diagnosis of anterior uveitis. The ocular inflammatory process was not treated in a systemic manner, particularly not with systemic steroids, antibiotics, or NSAIDs. He exclusively received steroid-containing eye-drops. One day before admission, he underwent outpatient control of several blood parameters to identify the etiology of ocular inflammation. Serum analysis showed severely deteriorated kidney function.
At the time of admission, he presented an overall reduced physical condition. His height was 180 cm and body weight 93 kg (BMI: 28.7). His initial blood pressure was 144/114 mmHg and heart rate 124 beats per minute. Respiratory rate was 14 breaths per minute, and peripheral oxygen saturation was 99%. He had no increased body temperature. Examination of heart, lungs, and abdomen did not reveal any pathological findings, the same applied for both the central and peripheral nervous system. Abdominal skin was moderately affected by striae distensae.
Besides impaired excretory kidney function, the patient showed moderately increased C-reactive protein (CRP) (45.7 mg/l; normal range < 5 mg/l) and elevated haptoglobin (2.6 g/l; normal range 0.3–2.0 g/l). Also, parathormone (PTH) was mildly elevated (72.8 pg/ml; normal range 15–65 pg/ml). Immune diagnostics revealed the following positive findings: anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) titer (1:160; normal range < 1:160) and anti-La (56.6; normal range < 46). Both cytoplasmic and perinuclear Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies (c- and pANCA) were negative, anti-proteinase 3 was 2.3 U/mL (normal range < 10 U/mL). Light chain (LC) diagnostics showed increases of both, kappa- and lambda-LC (121 mg/l; normal range 3.3–19.4 mg/l, and 60.1 mg/l; normal range 5.71–26.3 mg/l), and the ratio differed from the normal range as well (2.01; normal range 0.26–1.65). Total serum immunoglobulin-G (IgG) was mildly elevated (22.1 g/L; normal range 5.49–15.8 g/L). Chlamydia pneumoniae-IgG (21 RE/ml; normal range < 16 RE/ml) was positive, as was serological testing for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) [virus-capsid antigen (VCA) EBV-IgG-antikoerper (Ak) (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) 137 RE/mL (normal range < 16 RE/mL), Epstein-Barr Nuclear Antigen 1 (EBNA 1)-IgG-Ak 1.02 (normal range < 80)]. Differential blood cell count showed an eosinophil percentage of 3.6% (normal range 0.5–7%). Other non-aberrant findings were monocytes, platelet count, and serum and urine calcium.
Semiquantitative urine analysis showed a proteinuria of 0.25 g/l and few erythrocytes (25/µl; normal: negative). The daily proteinuria was determined to be 0.77 g (normal range < 0.15 g). Urinary eosinophils were negative.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mildly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (50%; normal range > 60%). Diastolic function was impaired, although mild as well. The inferior part of the left ventricle was akinetic. Visually, the right ventricular function was slightly reduced. Computed tomography of thorax and abdomen revealed diffuse intraabdominal lymph node expansion. The initial ophthalmological investigation confirmed the diagnosis of unilateral anterior uveitis of the right eye. Specifically, the right conjunctiva showed perilimbical hyperemia, and the cornea was unaffected. The anterior chamber was not flattened and did not contain relevant cell numbers. Retinal investigation did not reveal any signs of inflammation.
Due to AKI of unknown origin, we performed kidney biopsy (6 days after admission). Two samples were obtained from the left kidney. Initial ultrasound analysis showed normal organ dimensions and no signs of obstruction. The pathological investigation by an experienced renal pathologist showed interstitial inflammatory infiltrates around the tubuli mainly composed of lymphocytes . The findings led to the diagnosis of acute interstitial nephritis . Signs of glomerular inflammation were absent. The diagnosis was tubulointerstitial nephritis with anterior uveitis (TINU) syndrome of no specific or suspected origin.
Immediately after admission, the patient received intravenous glucocorticoids (prednisolone 250 mg daily) on three consecutive days, followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg daily for 7 days, dose reduction of 10 mg daily every 7 days thereafter) since we initially suspected an ANCA-associated autoinflammatory disease. Also, we started the patient on renal replacement therapy (RR, hemodialysis) after central vein catheter insertion into the right femoral vein. Volume depletion during individual dialysis session was not mandatory since urine production was not affected. One week after admission, the patient suffered from fever and general weakness. He received intravenous antibiotics (piperacillin and tazobactam) and was transferred to the local intensive care unit (ICU). The central vein catheter was removed since the patient showed localized pain around the insertion area, that is, signs of catheter-related blood infection. RRT was continued after establishing a new central vein catheter at the ICU. Two days after the initial fever attack, the patient developed generalized rash including moderate itchiness. The antibiotics therapy was adapted to meropenem. During the ICU stay, oral prednisolone therapy was continued as initiated. Discharge from the ICU was initiated after 3 days. The last dialysis treatment session was performed 1 week before discharge from the hospital . Kidney excretory function continuously improved, with a last serum creatinine concentration of 214 µmol/l. Also, the ocular manifestation resolved almost completely after local corticosteroid eye drop treatment for 7 days. The in-hospital stay lasted for nearly 3 weeks, and the further management was planned in the outpatient area.