The patient was a 28-year-old man who had developed NS at the age of 5 years. Renal biopsy was performed, and it showed no glomerular lesions. In addition, immunofluorescence (IF) disclosed no immunoglobulin and complement deposition. He was pathologically diagnosed with MCD, for which he received various immunosuppressive drugs including steroid pulse therapy, mizoribine, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, and mycophenolate mofetil for FRNS. However it had been difficult to maintain long-term remission. Twenty-one times of recurrences had occurred before having a tonsillectomy, and more than half of them were triggered by tonsillitis. He was diagnosed by an otolaryngologist with chronic tonsillitis, as he had four or more episodes of acute tonsillitis a year, and bilateral palatine tonsillectomy was performed for chronic tonsillitis to reduce the recurrence of tonsillitis. Informed consent for the operation was obtained from the patient. On admission, his height was 161.5 cm, body weight was 60.6 kg and blood pressure was 118/64 mmHg. No abnormality was observed on general physical examination. Urinalysis showed urine specific gravity of 1.021 and pH of 7.5. By urinary qualitative, urine protein and occult blood were negative. Urinary protein level was 0.02 g/day; β2-microglobulin was 139 μg/day. His blood urea nitrogen was 15.0 mg/dL, albumin was 4.0 g/dL, creatinine was 0.59 mg/dL, and cystatin C was 0.69 mg/L. Immunoglobulin and complement levels were normal.
The pathological findings of the tonsils are shown in Fig. . The lymphoid follicles and germinal centers were observed various sizes. The boundary of each follicle was unclear and the distance between follicles was expanded. T-cell nodules were enlarged due to infiltration of CD4+ cells. Abnormal reticulation of the crypt epithelium was observed by cytokeratin staining. Peripheral blood CD4 + CD25+ Treg count increased from 379/μL to 444/μL between 2 months pre and post tonsillectomy. After the tonsillectomy, the patient was followed up for 3 years, and the average number of recurrences of NS per year decreased from 1.1 times to 0.33 times.