A 25-year-old female patient admitted to the Jimma University Medical Centre, Jimma, Ethiopia, Ophthalmology clinic on May 9, 2019 with the complaint of photophobia, redness, and purulent discharge from the right eye. The slit-lamp examination also showed matted cilia of the eyelid, conjunctiva injection which had eroded around the stitch, corneal ulcer of 3.5 x 3 mm, negative sidle test, hypopyon, deep fibrinous anterior chamber reaction, pupil not visible well due to stitch-site abscess, the lens was transparent and located around thestitch. She had also a light perception (LP) visual acuity for the same eye. The eye was firm when examined digitally .
She had a traumatic globe injury of the same eye one month earlier. At that time, she had bleeding from the eye. There was also laceration of the cornea and iris. For this reason, the cornea-scleral repair was performed under aseptic technique and corneal wound repair was performed with nylon 10/0 while sclera’s wound was repaired with vicryl 5/0. Tetracycline and sub-conjunctiva vancomycin and ceftazidime were given at that time.
An abscess was debrided and 3–5 stitches were removed during admission one month after cornea-scleral repair. The corneal scraped sample was then sent to the microbiology department for culture and drug susceptibility test and an empirical fortified antibiotic was prescribed. Fortified vancomycin eye drop 50mg/mL (5%) and fortified gentamicin eye drops 14mg/mL (1.4%, tropicamide 0.3% eye drop, and acetazolamide 250mg orally were given for patient). The patient was taking the above medication until the result of the microbiology report (7days) but no improvement was seen. Ophthalmologist collected corneal scrapings with a 20 gauge sterile needle during admission. A topical anaesthetic (1% tetracaine) was used during taking of the corneal specimens. Then the scraping was inserted into a 2mL brain heart infusion broth (Oxoid, Hampshire, UK) tube. After that, it was immediately inoculated into chocolate and blood agar. A chocolate and a blood agar plate were placed into a candle jar for fastidious bacterial pathogens, which require CO2, while one blood agar plate was placed into a cold chain to maintain the viability of the bacterial pathogens during transport. This three culture plates and one tube were incubated appropriately. After incubation, subcultures were made onto sheep blood agar (5%), chocolate agar, mannitol salt agar and MacConkey agar (Oxoid, Hampshire, UK) using the standard methods. The inoculated media plates were incubated at their respective optimal temperatures. The plates were then checked for growth after 48 hours. The bacterial isolates from the corneal scrapings was identified up to species-level based on different criteria which included morpho-cultural and biochemical tests. Currently using a molecular method such as polymerase chain reaction is recommended to identify different species of Klebsiella but we used a biochemical test method (old method). Biochemical test on isolated organism showed negative methyl red, positive Voges-Proskauer reaction, positive citrate, urea and growth on sulfide-indole motility medium (indole-positive). It was also ornithine decarboxylase negative and lysine decarboxylase positive. Finally, these were all test-proven characteristics of Klebsiella oxytoca which as reported by Jimma University Medical Center Microbiology Department. In vitro antibiotic susceptibility testing of the bacterial isolates was performed by Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion method. The interpretation of the results was according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute methodology as susceptible, intermediate and resistant .
Due to this, drug susceptibility test and local availability of eye drop fortified antibiotics were discontinued and a high dose of ciprofloxacin 0.3% eye drop was prescribed every 2 hours with dexamethasone eye drops every 6 hours. Ibuprofen 400mg as required was also given for pain relief. She had also taken cloxacillin 500mg orally every 6 hours for 7days. Pain, photophobia, and discharges were much decreased. Ulcer size also decreased to less than 1.5 x 1mm She was discharged after one month on June 8, 2019 . After discharge, she was kept on weekly follow-up and stayed on follow-up until September 21, 2019. At follow-up, she was taking tetracycline eye ointment, ciprofloxacin eye drops, and tropicamide eye drops. Sometimes, she took ofloxacillin eye drops in place of ciprofloxacin eye drops. At the end of follow-up, a scar was formed around the stitch and improvement of vision was seen from LP to hand motion at the end of 4 months .