A 65-year-old man was transferred to the Emergency department of our hospital after a motorbike accident. He was a non-smoker, with no medical comorbidities. He was initially managed according to the ATLS guidelines. His vital signs were normal, while he was complaining about bilateral knee pain. A second-degree, partial-thickness burn on the ipsilateral knee was identified. Clinical evaluation revealed a limited, painful range of motion and edema on both patient’s knees. The radiological examination revealed bilateral Hoffa fractures of the medial femoral condyles and an undisplaced medial tibial plateau fracture of his right knee ( and ). A CT scan was performed for better visualization of the fractures and pre-operative planning. Based on the condition of the soft-tissue envelope, no early surgical intervention was considered. Ten days after his admission, he was transferred to the operating room. The patient was placed in supine position with bilateral tourniquets applied. Both knees were flexed at 20–30° and hips slightly externally rotated . Two different teams were operating simultaneously on both sides, and a classic medial approach to the distal femur was utilized. Under direct visualization, both fractures were reduced and stabilized using three 3.5 mm countersunk lag screws on each side to prevent rotational instability. A 3.5 mm partially threaded screw was placed though the same incision to stabilize the tibial plateau fracture of the patient’s right knee. Free range of motion was confirmed intraoperatively, while fluoroscopic images were obtained . Passive range of motion exercises began the 1st post-operative day, and the patient was discharged 4 days postoperatively.
At 1-month follow-up, free range of motion was identified bilaterally. A split-thickness skin graft (STSG) from the contralateral thigh was obtained to cover the skin loss on patient’s right knee . At 2-month follow-up, partial weight bearing was started, while skin graft integration was observed. Finally, at 3-month follow-up, the patient was able to walk without any assistance, an unrestricted range of motion was obtained, skin graft was fully integrated, and the patient was able to return at his pre-injury level of activity.