A 35 year old Japanese, nulligravida woman presented with abdominal tension at Niigata University Medical and Dental Hospital, Niigata, Japan. Multiple myomas (≤8 cm in diameter) were detected in the uterine body. To improve her symptoms, a laparoscopically assisted myomectomy was performed. No obvious intraperitoneal adhesion or abnormality of the bilateral adnexa of the uterus was detected during surgery. After the injection of diluted vasopressin into the myometrium around the tumors, an incision was made with an electric scalpel. Myomas (≤4 cm in diameter) at the lower segment were removed after vertical incision of the uterus. Although the endometrium was not macroscopically injured, the myomas were located near the endometrium. After removing 15 tumors, a transvaginal ultrasound did not detect any residual tumor. The surgical sites were repaired in two layers with poligleaprone (2-0 monocryl® suture; Johnson & Johnson Patient Care, Inc., New Brunswick, NJ, USA). After the first continuous unlocked suture of the deep myometrium, the needle was continuously inserted from the deep aspect of the myometrium to the serosa on both sides of the incision in the second suture. An absorbable adhesion barrier (INTERCEED®; Johnson & Johnson Patient Care, Inc.) was used to prevent any unintended adhesion. For 5 months after the surgery, the patient's clinical course was uneventful.
She revisited the hospital following 2 years of infertility (at age 40 years). Multiple myomas were redetected in the uterus. Diagnostic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a normal cervix and multiple myomas that were displacing the uterine cavity. An abnormal T2-weighted, high-intensity lesion was visualized, which appeared to be similar to the endometrial cavity . A hysterosalpingography (HSG) revealed an abnormal accumulation of contrast medium at the site of the lower segment of the uterus without any deficit or deformation of the endometrial cavity ; no other fertility abnormality was detected. Therefore, a laparoscopically assisted myomectomy was reperformed because the myomas were suspected as one of the causes of infertility and potentially future perinatal complications. Although the intestine extensively adhered to the fundus of the uterus, there was no adhesion at other previous uterine surgery sites. As with the first myomectomy, an incision was made after injecting diluted vasopressin. To remove the myomas around the pseudo-endometrial cavity, the uterus was incised vertically and the surgical site was repaired with double-layer continuous suture using 2-0 monocryl® as in the first myomectomy. Nineteen myomas (sized 1-7 cm) were removed and the actual endometrium was not injured during surgery. No obvious residual tumor was detected with the transvaginal ultrasound during the surgery and INTERCEED® (Johnson & Johnson Patient Care, Inc.) was used again.
Six months later, a HSG revealed the same abnormal accumulation of contrast medium and bilateral tubal occlusion. A transvaginal ultrasound showed a thin myometrium in the lower uterine body . One year after the repeat myomectomy, the patient conceived via in vitro fertilization (IVF) under a luteal phase down-regulation protocol (long protocol) for controlled ovarian stimulation, followed by a cryopreserved ET (Gardner grading system: grade 3AA) during her natural ovulation cycle. The ET procedure was performed under transabdominal ultrasonography guidance with a hard-tipped ET catheter (Wallace® malleable stylet; Origio, Målov, Denmark). The procedure was difficult due to flexion of the uterus and the catheter was inserted and removed multiple times. The embryo eventually was delivered by using a nearby uterine fundus. Although urinary human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) was detected on post-ET days 15, 22, and 29, the gestational sac was not observed in utero. On day 38 (8 weeks of gestation), the urinary hCG was elevated to 2276 mIU/mL and a transvaginal ultrasound detected the gestational sac (16 mm in diameter with an embryo that was 10 mm in length) outside the uterus; these results were consistent with observations from five-to-six weeks of gestation. The gestational sac was located between the bladder and the uterus and was covered with a low echoic hematoma-like mass ; there was no embryo in utero. As a result of severe abdominal pain and the growing hematoma-like mass, emergency laparoscopic surgery was performed.
A severe inflammatory intraperitoneal adhesion obscured the bilateral adnexa (excluding the right tubal fimbriae), indicating that the INTERCEED® (Johnson & Johnson Patient Care, Inc.) that was used during the repeat myomectomy had a limited effect in preventing adhesions . After removing the adhesion and clarifying the tubes, both tubes swelled as a result of mild hydrosalpinges. Moreover, there was no ovarian abnormality or abnormal intraperitoneal bleeding; signs of tubal or ovarian pregnancy were not detected. Furthermore, a transvaginal ultrasound during surgery confirmed the gestational sac between the uterus and the bladder, which was consistent with a site of dark-purple peritoneum . Soon after incising the peritoneum and splashing water under the peritoneum, the gestational sac protruded with the hematoma . The product of conception with the hematoma was evacuated and ultrasonography did not detect any remnant. As there was no abnormal bleeding, INTERCEED® (Johnson & Johnson Patient Care, Inc.) was placed again over the incision of the peritoneum without suturing the peritoneum or myometrium. After surgery, there was no severe complication or small hematomas at the vesicouterine pouch.
Pathologic examination detected normal villi and deciduas without abnormal trophoblastic cells or myometrium. After surgery, the patient's hCG level gradually decreased. Three months later, the patient received IVF-ET treatment again but experienced a biochemical pregnancy only.