A 76-year-old Taiwanese woman was presented to the emergency department of our institute with chief complaint of severely painful arms and limitation of movement in both shoulders. Her both shoulders were locked with abduction and internal rotation. She had cardiac surgery 10 years ago. Her past medical history was unremarkable. There were no histories of seizure or epilepsy. She denied drug use or alcohol intake. She had no family history of connective tissue disease, musculoskeletal disorder, or any other seizure disorder. The day before attending our emergent room, she turned to a bonesetter [,] for shoulder joint mobilization and manipulation due to chronic soreness and stiffness of her shoulders for 6 months. Without any radiographic or ultrasound examinations, we could not clarify the shoulder pathology before the bonesetter’s manipulation. She had range of motion with abduction of shoulders with 100 degrees. The bonesetter manipulated her right shoulder with abduction and external rotation and a forceful anteriorly push, leading to a snapping sound and a sharp pain over her right shoulder. He explained that the sound meant the Qi flow was patent and it was OK. The patient believed him and received the same manipulation method for the other shoulder subsequently. Her left arm had the same sensation of pain. Her both arms were painful with limited range of motion .
The following morning, she still experienced painfully locked shoulders, so she rushed to our institute. On physical examination, the patient’s both upper arms were bruised with hypoesthesia. Both shoulders revealed flattened and squared lateral contour with arms in abduction and external rotation. The radiographs confirmed bilateral anterior shoulder dislocations without fracture. The physician performed closed reduction for her shoulders, using the Kocher’s method . Post-reduction films of shoulders showed successful reduction . Fortunately, her sensory, motor, and vascular functions were intact after successful reduction. The ultrasonic examination showed no rotators cuff tears. The patient was placed in bilateral slings for 6 weeks with progressive mobilization, starting rehabilitation course at 2 weeks with pendulum movement exercise of both shoulders. Six months after the reduction, the patient recovered to 100 degrees of abduction of both shoulders with little neurovascular deficits.