A 42-year-old woman with no history of ocular diseases or conditions presented to our hospital complaining of visual disturbance in the right eye for the past 3 days. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/200 for the right eye and 6/5 for the left eye. Slit-lamp examination showed no inflammation in the anterior chambers of both eyes. Fundus examination revealed off-macula retinal detachment, with retinal tears at both ends of the retinal lattice degeneration at the temporal-oven peripheral retina of the right eye. She underwent 27-G sutureless PPV with chandelier-assisted, endolaser photocoagulation, and sulfur hexafluoride gas injection. Postoperatively, she was treated with topical steroid (0.1% betamethasone). Postoperative inflammation was only mild in the anterior chamber and gradually decreased. Twelve days postoperatively, the retina was reattached. BCVA was 6/30 in the right eye, and the patient was discharged.
Fifteen days postoperatively, she started experiencing headache and diminishing vision in both eyes. Symptoms gradually worsened, and she visited our hospital 21 days postoperatively. BCVA was 6/30 for the right eye and 6/15 for the left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed ciliary injection, keratic precipitates, cells in the anterior chamber of both eyes, and posterior synechiae in the right eye. Fundus examination revealed papillitis and subretinal detachment at the posterior poles of both eyes . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed subretinal fluid in the maculae of both eyes . Fluorescein angiography showed multiple sites of hyperfluorescent leakage in the retinal pigment epithelium during the early phase, and pooling of fluorescence into the area of exudative retinal detachment during the late phase . Blood tests showed no elevated inflammatory response and no findings suggestive of auto-immune diseases such as sarcoidosis or vasculitis or infections such as tuberculosis, syphilis or fungi. Cerebrospinal fluid examination showed elevated mononuclear cells (136/μL). Human leukocyte antigen testing showed expression of the DR04 phenotype, so we diagnosed the patient with SO.
She was treated with steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone at 1000 mg/day for 3 days) and oral prednisolone (60 mg/day), in addition to intensive topical steroids (0.1% betamethasone). Visual disturbance subsided, and subretinal fluid improved . The dosage of oral prednisolone was gradually reduced. The patient was discharged 28 days after readmission to our hospital. She received repeated courses of low-dose oral steroid medication, and BCVA improved to 6/10 for the right eye and 6/5 for the left eye by 95 days after the initial surgery. Thereafter, steroids were tapered off, and the patient has remained recurrence-free for 1 year.