A 70-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with the chief complaint of a painless left submandibular mass that had been present for one year. She had no medical conditions other than medicine prescribed for dyslipidemia, and had no previous surgical history. Further, she had never smoked or had no history of alcohol abuse. The mass was approximately 20 mm, with slightly poor mobility and no tenderness, and was suspected to be a submandibular gland tumor. Neck ultrasonography revealed a heterogeneous mass on the dorsal aspect of the left submandibular gland measuring 21 × 20 × 16 mm3 with smooth margins, low internal density, and mixed papillary hyperechogenicity at the internal margins . Malignant lymphoma or metastatic lymph nodes were initially considered as differential diagnoses. The left submandibular gland was normal, the thyroid gland was in a normal position, and multiple 10–20 mm cysts and hypoechoic nodules were observed, suggesting an adenomatous goiter. Cervical computed tomography (CT) revealed a well-defined mass behind the left submandibular gland. Without iodine contrast, the mass was mostly hyperdense, and had partially low density, which was hardly enhanced by iodine contrast, suggestive of lymph node disease . The thyroid gland was in a normal position . Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the left submandibular mass revealed no epithelial cells, and findings of foamy cells on a bloody background were suggestive of cystic fluid, which did not lead to any diagnosis.
The patient underwent left submandibular dissection for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Intraoperative findings revealed a solitary mass that was not contiguous with either the submandibular or thyroid glands. Histopathological examination revealed a cystic lesion filled with a dark brown jelly-like substance at the macroscopic level. The cyst wall was adherent to the submandibular gland, but without continuity. Microscopically, papillary lesions with fibrovascular cores were observed in the interior, and the epithelial cells were cylindrical in shape, with eosinophilic cytoplasm and round or oval nuclei. Although nuclear grooves were observed in some areas, no intranuclear inclusion bodies or psammoma bodies were detected. The entire lesion was evaluated and no pathological features leading to the diagnosis of papillary carcinoma, and no findings, such as capsular or vascular invasion, to indicate malignancy or follicular carcinoma. Immunohistochemically, the epithelial cells were positive for TTF-1 and thyroglobulin . Based on these pathological findings, the lesion was diagnosed as a follicular thyroid adenoma with papillary architecture arising from the ectopic thyroid gland. Since the left submandibular mass was a thyroid tumor, FNAC of the left thyroid mass was performed to exclude papillary carcinoma. The results showed sheet-like follicular epithelial cells on a colloidal background. The cellular findings were consistent with those of adenomatous goiter, and papillary carcinoma was ruled out. The postoperative thyroid function was normal, and the patient did not require thyroid replacement therapy. The patient has not experienced any recurrence within two years.