A 20 year-old woman with no relevant past medical or surgical history, recurred to the emergency department of our institute because of left flank pain and fever. On physical examination tenderness at percussion of left lumbar region was observed, the pulse was 90 beats per minute, and the blood pressure 115/75 mmHg. The with-cell count was 14,200 per cubic millimeter, the plasmatic creatinine concentration was 0,9 mg per deciliter and urinalysis was positive for nitrites. The patient was discharged with the diagnosis of uncomplicated left Pyelonephritis and treated with a 7-day regimen of levofloxacine. The patient was completely asymptomatic after completing the treatment, however in the next 12 months she developed 10 episodes of recurrent non-complicated left-sided Pyelonephritis. In all the episodes a urine culture revealed more than 10,000 colony-forming units of Escherichia coli per milliliter of urine. The US examination of kidney and bladder revealed no alterations and the contrast enhanced CT scan performed at emergency in one of the episodes revealed a heterogeneous uptake of intravenous contrast in left kidney in favor of pyelonephritis, but absence of urinary system obstruction (, ).
The patient was referred for our Urologic Department for evaluation of recurrent Pyelonephritis and a prophylactic antibiotic regimen of nitrofurantoin 100 mg once a day was prescribed. The urologic evaluation was completed with a renal DMSA scan and VCUG. Renal DMSA scan revealed a left kidney with decreased uptake of DMSA with several cortical lesions. The differential kidney function was 70% for right kidney and 30% for the left kidney and the VCUG revealed a left grade II VUR . The patient was submitted to endoscopic treatment of left sided VUR with subureteric injection of dextranomer/hyaluronic acid copolymer (Deflux®). The procedure was uneventful and post-operative VCUG revealed complete resolution of VUR. After 6 months of endoscopic treatment the patient is completely asymptomatic without any report of Pyelonephritis.