A 69-year-old man with past medical history of diverticulitis and irritable bowel syndrome presented with 1 month history of binocular vertical diplopia that was worse in right gaze and downward gaze. He also noted mild ptosis of his left upper lid, some increased tearing in the left eye, and discomfort behind the left eye, which he attributed to preexisting seasonal allergies. On examination, visual acuity with correction was 20/30 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Pupils were normal and visual fields were full. Ocular motility examination showed grossly full ductions and versions. Maddox rod testing revealed a small left hyperdeviation that was the same in all directions of gaze except in downward gaze, where the left hyperdeviation increased. He was able to fuse with two prism-diopters base-down prism in front of the left eye. He had a mild left upper lid ptosis, which did not appear fatigable with prolonged upgaze. Cogan's lid twitch was absent. Globes were normal to retropulsion. Orbicularis function, anterior segment examination, and fundoscopic examination were normal bilaterally. Intraocular pressure was 18 mm Hg in both eyes. The patient was provided with prism lenses which led to slight resolution of symptoms over 2 weeks. Acetylcholine receptor antibodies were undetectable and thyroid stimulating hormone levels were normal. Patient returned a week later with the complaint that diplopia returned and was now almost constant. The diplopia was more horizontal than vertical. On examination, he had an 8–10 prism-diopter esotropia, as well as a small left vertical deviation. Repeat acetylcholine receptor antibodies were negative. Patient was referred for magnetic resonance imaging which demonstrated an incidental planum sphenoidale meningioma. On follow-up 3 weeks later, the patient had improvement in double vision, with symptoms worsening toward evening. On examination, he had small left hyperdeviation. However, the esodeviation from prior examination had disappeared and he had a small exodeviation. MuSK myasthenia antibody was negative. One month later, diplopia worsened, with exam demonstrating left sixth nerve palsy. Electrodiagnostic testing revealed normal nerve conduction and electromyographic studies, as well as normal repetitive nerve stimulation and single-fiber electromyography. Magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography were performed at this time. Magnetic resonance angiography revealed enlargement of left superior ophthalmic vein along with a left CCF. The patient underwent a left cavernous sinus embolization by transvenous approach [Figures and ]. On 3-month follow-up, he had a left sixth nerve palsy with a large amplitude esotropia. On 1 year follow-up, he had complete resolution of sixth nerve palsy and prior symptoms.