A 53-year-old female presented with dyspnoea and atypical chest pain on a background of hypertension, impaired glucose tolerance and asthma. The patient was normotensive, normal saturation on room air, with a normal heart rate and rhythm. There were no significant clinical findings on examination. Electrocardiogram was significant for a left bundle branch block. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular (LV) size with mildly reduced ejection fraction. Coronary angiography demonstrated unobstructed coronary arteries. She was referred for CMR to further assess her LV dimensions and function..
The patient underwent standard comprehensive screening for contraindications to CMR. This was negative. The CMR demonstrated a small LV cavity with mildly impaired ejection fraction, dyssynchronous contraction and mild concentric LV hypertrophy. Right ventricular volumes and function were normal. There was no myocardial infarction or infiltration. Unexpectedly the apical segments were partially contaminated by signal loss and distorted by off-resonance artefact consistent with a potentially ferromagnetic body (FB). This artefact was particularly prominent on balanced steady-state free precession (bSSFP) sequences . The patient had no history of previous surgery, other intervention, penetrating injury, and no recollection of an event that would have resulted in a FB within the thorax. She was not on iron supplementation. The patient was well and had no ill effect at clinical follow-up.
Further investigation with chest X-ray revealed a thin needle-shaped structure near the cardiac apex . A three-dimensional volume-rendered image on multi-detector computer tomography (Somatom flash, Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) showed a thin needle-shaped metallic density in the right ventricular side of the apical septal wall .
Previous transthoracic echocardiogram images were reviewed. The FB was not visible. This patient’s coronary angiogram report was requested from the referring institution and reviewed. The coronary angiogram had made incidental note of a slim line of radio-opacity that moved in time with the heart, but the exact location was unclear.
Controversy was raised regarding patient safety in undergoing further CMR examination vs. inappropriate refusal to arrange follow-up imaging for a patient with cardiomyopathy. Following a review, the patient was treated for a non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy and follow-up CMR imaging deemed safe. Finally, protocol adjustments were required to optimize images and minimize the artefact. Informed consent was obtained for this publication.