We report on a 51-year-old female Caucasian patient with no significant previous illnesses. Our patient had been a smoker for many years, with persistent nicotine use at the time of her first presentation. The initial symptom, which first led the patient to contact her primary care physician, was pain in the region of her left hip. She did not complain of cough, dyspnea, fever or night sweats. Her weight remained constant.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of her left hip joint demonstrated extensive osteolysis in the acetabulum with infiltration of the iliopsoas muscle. Moreover, bone fracture of the joint socket was highly suspected. Magnetic resonance tomography (MRT) of her pelvis confirmed the pathological fracture. Skeletal scintigraphy found no further evidence of osteolysis.
We performed a CT-guided biopsy of the large area of osteolysis in her left acetabulum. The histological diagnosis was of a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Despite extensive immunohistological chemical analyses (pan-keratin focally positive; cytokeratin 8/18 moderately positive; cytokeratin 5/6 weakly positive; cytokeratin 7 moderately to strongly positive; melanoma cocktail, thyroid transcription factor-1, mammaglobin, thyroglobulin, cluster of differentiation (CD) 56 and CD 138 negative), it proved impossible to assign the primary tumor to a particular organ.
Moderate leukocytosis at 21,200 cells/μL was diagnosed as early as this point, in the presence of mild anemia and normal platelet concentration. No leukocyte differentiation was performed at this time. A routine blood count from one and a half years before, examined retrospectively for this analysis, was without pathological findings.
A CT scan of her neck, chest and abdomen and a MRT scan of her cranium were performed. These demonstrated a pulmonary tumor in her right hilar region with a diameter of 2.3cm, in close proximity to the upper lobe and encircling her right main bronchus . Enlarged lymph nodes up to 2.5cm in size and infracarinal lymph nodes up to 2.0cm in size were observed in her right hilar region. In addition, numerous pleural, pericardial and diaphragm metastases were diagnosed. No pulmonary metastases were seen. Excess tissue was shown in her right infraclavicular region. Abdominally, a distension of her left adrenal of 2.0cm in diameter was assessed as highly suspect for metastasis. The cranial MRT findings were normal.
The leukocyte concentration in the mean time was elevated at 39,000 cells/μL, with largely unremarkable differentiation (see Table ).
Bronchoscopy and transbronchial needle aspiration from her main and upper lobe carina demonstrated a moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the lung, consistent with the primary tumor of the known metastasis in her left acetabulum. In molecular pathological follow-up investigations, based on the metastasis of the acetabulum, no mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene could be identified (wild type). The K-RAS gene exhibited a mutation, which argues in principle against the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors of the gefitinib type.
The next step involved radiotherapy of the area of osteolysis in her left hip joint, including the surrounding soft tissue metastasis, of up to 40Gy with a single dose of 2Gy. In addition, simultaneous radio- and chemotherapy was started consisting of radiotherapy of the primary tumor and of the mediastinum up to 55.8Gy with a single dose of 1.8Gy plus cisplatin (20mg/m², days 1 to 4 and 29 to 32) and vinorelbine (12.5mg/m², days 1, 8, 15, 29, 36 and 43) was started.
In the course of the therapy, our patient reported progressive pain in the region of her left flank, which was attributable to a considerable increase in the size of the adrenal metastasis to 5.9 × 4.4 × 7.5cm. A blood count at this point showed leukocytosis at 146,200 cells/μL, with largely normal differentiation and complete maturation .
Inflammation parameters were, at most, mildly elevated (C-reactive protein 49.3mg/L, procalcitonin. 0.4). She had no fever, so we assumed not so much an inflammatory reaction or abscess formation but rather feared a hematological secondary disorder. Her levels of liver transaminases were normal (aspartate transaminase 17U/L, alanine transaminase 21U/L). A cytological bone marrow examination showed a massively increased and left-shifted granulopoiesis up to the myeloblasts with displaced erythropoiesis and normal megakaryopoiesis, as can typically develop under stimulation with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) . In a fluorescence activated cell sorting analysis, granulocytic maturation of cells with partial coexpression of CD56 was predominantly seen. No immature cells were detected; in principle, these findings seemed consistent with the presence of myeloproliferative neoplasia.
Cytogenetic investigation showed a normal female chromosome set (46,XX). Molecular genetic analysis by means of fluorescence in situ hybridization ruled out t(9;22) translocation. As expected, polymerase chain reaction also failed to demonstrate a BCR-ABL fusion gene. Similarly, a V617F mutation in the JAK2 gene could also not be demonstrated, which overall makes the presence of a myeloproliferative neoplasia very unlikely although it does not rule it out. On histology, a bone marrow biopsy also provided no evidence supporting either a hematological neoplasia, in particular chronic myelogenous leukemia. (CML), or the presence of infiltration by tumor cells.
Although our patient continued to exhibit no classic signs of inflammation, the differential diagnosis of abscess formation in the soft tissue metastasis in the iliopsoas muscle had to be followed up, given the absence of evidence for a hematological secondary disorder. However, this could not be confirmed by means of CT-guided biopsy. The biopsy specimen proved to be just as sterile as the repeatedly taken blood and urine cultures.
At the same time, the empirically initiated antibiotic treatment, first with ceftriaxone and subsequently with piperacillin and sulbactam sodium and also metronidazole, failed to affect either the leukocyte concentration or the C-reactive protein and procalcitonin to a clinically relevant degree.
Upon completion of the simultaneous radio- and chemotherapy, the primary tumor exhibited a slight regression. The adrenal metastasis, however, had increased in size during the ongoing therapy to 8.0 × 4.8cm. We therefore attributed the regression of the primary tumor first and foremost to the radiotherapy and initiated systemic second-line therapy with docetaxel (30mg/m², once a week) and pemetrexed (500mg/m², repeated on day 22). As there was no clinical response and our patient’s general condition deteriorated continuously, this therapy was discontinued after just one cycle. A third-line therapy with gemcitabine (1,000mg/m², once a week) failed to have an effect either on the primary tumor or on the leukocyte concentration. Our patient died two weeks after starting the third-line therapy.