A 23-year-old man was admitted for a month-long fever, weight loss, mild cough, and dyspnoea. Past medical history was unremarkable except for a continuous murmur heard since childhood.
Electrocardiogram and chest X-ray were normal. Blood tests showed increased inflammatory markers and mild normocytic anaemia. Blood cultures were positive for a multi-sensitive Streptococcus mitis strain. Different serology tests, oropharyngeal swab culture, bronchoalveolar lavage culture for mycobacterium tuberculosis, and autoimmune screening test were negative.
Antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone was started and two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) did not show signs of IE. Chest computed tomography showed multiple pseudo-nodular bilateral pneumonia, hilar adenopathy, and pronounced right atrial profile that aroused the suspicion of IE, prompting transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE). The exam showed right atrial dilation and bacterial vegetations inside a tunnel-like structure (maximal diameter of 20 mm × 22 mm), originating from the right coronary sinus, running parallel to the right coronary artery and connected to the RA. Two-dimensional colour multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) images showed high-velocity flow within the tunnel . Pulmonary artery pressure was within normal limits, pulmonary/systemic blood flow ratio was 1.1:1 and left ventricle ejection fraction was 54% at TTE. Aortic root angiography showed a large and tortuous tunnel originating from the right coronary sinus and emptying into the RA. Coronary angiography demonstrated normal epicardial arteries. Three-dimensional multidetector computed tomography angiography (3D-MDCTA) confirmed the presence of an ARAT and better defined its anatomy . The patient was treated for 28 days with ceftriaxone achieving normalization of inflammatory markers and marked improvement of the lung lesions.
After heart team discussion, catheter-based closure was recommended and the procedure was performed under general anaesthesia with angiographic and TOE guidance. Using a right femoral vein and artery approach, an artero-venous loop was established across the ARAT and the fistulous communication was closed using a patent ductus arteriosus closure device (PDA Long Shank 10/8 mm, 10.5 mm in length, Occlutech International AB, Sweden) . Aortic angiography and TOE confirmed device stability at the entrance of the tunnel with moderate residual shunt. The patient was discharged 2 days after the procedure. At 3-month follow-up, TTE showed further device expansion and mild left-to-right residual shunt . At 6 months, 3D-MDCTA was performed. Volume rendering three-dimensional reconstruction showed correct position of the occluder device and curved MPR demonstrated almost total occlusion of the tunnel confirmed in cross-section reconstructions .