A 66-year-old male farmer with no medical history reported severe sharp low back pain, numbness and lower limbs weakness for three years. Two months later, he was admitted to a primary hospital due to an acute exacerbation of low back pain. After received two months of traditional Chinese medicine treatment, he was subsequently transferred to our tertiary referral hospital for worsening lumbar pain.
In the tertiary hospital, his physical and neurologic examination was normal except for lumbar pain, with no risk factors for Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bone destruction and spinal cord compression within L1 and L2 . Laboratory tests were unremarkable, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 9.9 mm/h (normal < 15mm/h) and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 1.05 mg/l (normal < 10 mg/l). Multiple blood cultures and serological tests for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Coxiella burnetii and Brucellosis were negative as well as tuberculin testing. A CT-guided puncture biopsy from the vertebra L1-L2 yielded inflammatory granuloma .
In order to diagnose this unexplained infection, the biopsy tissue was subjected to mNGS testing, involving in a wide range of genomic sequences for 6350 kinds of bacteria (including mycobacteria, chlamydia and rickettsia), 1798 kinds of virus, 1064 kinds of fungus and 234 kinds of parasite. Results of the mNGS testing revealed that only Coxiella burnetii was detected positively for the inspected specimen collected from spinal lesions. Incorporating microbiological, clinical and radiological presentations, the patient was primarily confirmed for spinal infection caused by Coxiella burnetii and then the therapeutic schedule was made.
According to the guidelines , therapy with rifampin (0.6g orally daily), doxycycline (0.1g orally twice a day) and levofloxacin (0.4g orally daily) were initiated and continued for 18 months at least. Inflammation was partially absorbed after one month of conservative treatment, but the extent of the lesion was not alleviated as well as the severity of symptoms (Additional file : Figs. S2, S3). The low back pain progressed to the point, and he was no longer able to ambulate. So the surgical debridement was recommended. After informed consent was obtained from the patient, anterior debridement and fusion plus posterior fusion with instrumentation was performed to remove eroded bone and infected associated granulomatous tissue for decompression of spinal nerve.
His physical examination remained well without any signs of infection, so he was discharged to home. After 16 months of follow-up after surgery, the sagittal MRI showed that vertebral edema signals disappeared and the graft of bone fused .