Our patient was a 63-year-old Caucasian woman. She does not smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol. She measures 162.5 cm in height and weighs 66 kilograms. She had no significant family history. She was initially diagnosed with stage IIIA endometrial carcinoma for which she underwent a hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo ophorectomy followed by pelvic external beam radiation therapy. Two years later, she developed recurrent disease with widespread peritoneal carcinomatosis. An incidental mucinous carcinoma of the appendix was also found during surgical exploration. A central venous catheter port was placed and she received chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and later, irinotecan, capecitabine and oxaliplatin. Her disease progressed despite multiple lines of chemotherapy. During the course of her cancer treatment, our patient also developed a series of complications which included tumor-related right ureteral obstruction requiring a nephrostomy placement, a sigmoid-vaginal fistula necessitating a colostomy with reversion of the ureteral stent, small bowel obstruction and ileostomy placement, short bowel syndrome and significant weight loss requiring total parenteral nutrition. Our patient recovered gradually and was able to receive subsequent courses of chemotherapy consisting of capecitabine, an oral chemotherapy agent classified as an antimetabolite, and oxaliplatin, an intravenous platinum-based chemotherapy agent classified as an alkylating agent. She developed predictable chemotherapy-related adverse events including diarrhea and hand-foot syndrome, but was able to continue her treatment intermittently. She started developing fever and tenderness at the site of her central venous catheter. Blood cultures were repeatedly negative. Our patient had not received antibiotics within the eight weeks prior to this event. She was not neutropenic. Laboratory results reflected a white blood cell (WBC) count of 12,100 cells/μL, with 87% neutrophils. Urine and stool examination revealed no abnormal findings. Liver and renal function tests and a chest X-ray were normal. Blood cultures taken from both the central venous catheter and peripheral vein were reported to have no growth after 96 hours incubation. She received empiric vancomycin for two weeks and all signs of infection, including fever, resolved with normalization of WBC count to 7500 cells/μL and 67% neutrophils. However, four weeks later, she was admitted to the intensive care unit with a septic shock picture; she had fever, hypotension and tenderness at the site of the central venous catheter, which was then removed. WBC count at this time was 18,400 cells/μL with 93% neutrophils. A chest X-ray was negative for pulmonary disease and sputum cultures revealed no microbial growth. She was empirically treated with intravenous ticarcillin/clavulanate, ciprofloxacin and vancomycin. Cultures from the catheter tip as well as blood cultures were submitted for analysis. Two days later, large, irregular mucoid colonies grew and were non-fermentative, distinguishing them from diphtheria colonies. Further incubation grew characteristic salmon-colored colonies of R. equi. Microbiologic characteristics of the pathogen were as follows: catalase and urease positive; oxidase, carbohydrate fermentation, mannitol, indole, and citric acid negative; equi factors positive. The cultured organism was found to be resistant in vitro to penicillins and susceptible to erythromycin, gentamicin, tobramycin, vancomycin, imipenem/cilastatin and rifampin. Our patient's antibiotic regimen was modified to include the combination of a β-lactam antibiotic (imipenem/cilastatin) and a bactericidal antibiotic rifampin. She received imipenem 500 mg intravenously every 8 hrs for 14 days and rifampin 600 mg orally daily. She was discharged on oral rifampin after resolution of her symptoms and two negative blood cultures were obtained. She continued rifampin for twenty-one days and made a full recovery.