A 39-year-old white man, working as a house builder, was admitted to our pulmonary ward in August 2007 with an eleven-month history of persistent wheezing, heard not only during auscultation but also by patient himself. This wheezing had no correlation with physical exertion. He also reported a few episodes of haemoptysis within last 7 months and dry cough for about a month. Patient's weight was 81.5 kg, his height was 180 cm. Except from nodular goitre (in euthyreosis), the patient reported no other complaints or diseases in his medical history. His family history was not clinically significant. He had a 10 pack-years smoking history, until the age of 31 when he stopped smoking. He drank alcohol occasionally. His symptoms were unsuccessfully treated with inhaled β2-agonists and steroids for about 10 months. Apart from these medications, he took no other drugs. On auscultation, there were wheezes in upper fields of both lungs. The chest radiograph showed a disproportion in dimensions and vascular markings between both lungs- the left one was significantly smaller and had decreased vascular markings in comparison to the right one- these findings might be the expression of left lung hypoplasia. The heart silhouette was discretely displaced to the left side.
Spirometry performed during hospitalization in our clinic showed a restrictive pattern with forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 59% predicted and forced vital capacity (FVC) of 66% predicted. The FEV1/FVC ratio was 70% predicted.
Bronchoscopy was performed, revealing a polypoid endobronchial tumor, localized in the left main bronchus (2 cm from tracheal bifurcation), completely occluding its lumen. The tumor was biopsied and the specimen was sent to histological examination which gave the diagnosis of bronchial carcinoid.
Thoracic computed tomography showed a polypoid mass in the left main bronchus with a diameter of about 20 mm. The tumor showed very high enhancement after contrast medium administration: from 9 HU (Hounsfield units) to 119 HU in arterial phase and 47 HU in parenchymal phase , which is characteristic for carcinoid.
Hilar and mediastinal nodes were not enlarged. In virtual bronchoscopy, as well as in transparent reconstruction of the airways, a total occlusion of the left main bronchus by the tumor could be observed .
The patient was transferred to thoracic surgery ward for surgical treatment. He underwent left pulmonectomy and histopathological analysis of post-operative material confirmed the diagnosis of bronchial carcinoid. There were no complications during post-operative period and the patient was discharged from hospital 10 days after the operation. Then, the patient went abroad and was lost for follow-up until May 2008. On control visit in May, he was in very good condition, presenting no signs of pulmonary disease. On physical examination, except from diminished breath sounds and dullness to percussion over left lung (due to pulmonectomy and consequent pleural fluid accumulation) no abnormalities were found. In control computed tomography there were no signs of recurrence of the disease.