A 43-year-old man diagnosed with follicular thyroid cancer (FTC) with metastases in the lungs, the 7th cervical vertebra, and malignant lymph nodes mainly in the mediastinum and resistance to first-line MKI was given a combined therapy of antiangiogenic MKI apatinib and anti-PD-1 antibody camrelizumab in October 2020.
In 2015, the patient was diagnosed with DTC (, ) and received radical thyroidectomy and subsequent RAI therapy. Mutation analysis was performed, and results were positive for TERT, BRAF p.L597Q, and VEGF, while negative for RAS and BRAF p.VAL600. During the regular follow-up including cervical ultrasound and chest computed tomography (CT) scanning accompanied by TSH suppression therapy, recurrences were found in cervical lymph nodes, mediastinal lymph nodes, lungs, and the 7th cervical vertebra in 2017. Therefore, he received cervical lymph node dissection and several subsequent RAI therapies. However, his pulmonary lesions did not take iodine revealed by whole-body iodine scan after last RAI therapy in October 2019 . Thus, he was identified as RAIR after receiving several surgeries and RAI therapies with a cumulative dose of 670 mCi. He was then given a first-line MKI in October 2019. While initially showing disease stabilization after giving the first-line MKI, the patient developed progressive disease (PD) and terminated the first-line MKI therapy on September 10, 2020.
Followed by a 4-week discontinuation, the patient was enrolled into an exploratory phase II clinical trial combining antiangiogenic MKI apatinib and anti-PD-1 antibody camrelizumab in November 2020. The therapeutic schedule was given by 250 mg apatinib orally once daily and 200 mg camrelizumab intravenously once every 2 weeks in a 4-week cycle. The patient was evaluated every cycle in the first 2 cycles and every 2 cycles thereafter. During the first 6 months’ assessment, the combination therapy initially showed disease control in terms of both stable structural lesions and biochemical thyroglobulin (Tg) level . Six months later from April 2021, the targeted and non-targeted lesions began to shrink rapidly followed by a rapid decrease in serum Tg, and a partial response (PR) according to RECIST 1.1 criteria was finally achieved upon 12 months’ assessment in October 2021 (targeted lesions: 4.7 to 2.9 cm) (, ). Along with this process, the biochemical Tg level also decreased from 22,481 ng/ml (October 2020) to 5,351 ng/ml (October 2021) .
During this process, the main adverse event was occasional diarrhea without treatment interruption. The patient was in the state of PR at the last assessment and will be followed up in the future.