65-years-old man was admitted by ambulance to the Vilnius University Hospital Santaros klinikos after having palpitations for the first time in his life. The patients’ symptoms were accompanied by dizziness and weakness. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) with left bundle-branch block morphology, heart rate was 202 beats per minute (BPM). Although Amiodarone infusion was administered to the patient, sinus rhythm was restored by synchronized electrical shock (150 J) due to the worsening of hemodynamic parameters. The man was monitored and observed in the hospital for the next 6 hours. No recurrent arrhythmia was observed and the next morning patient was discharged from the hospital.
Anamnesis revealed that the patient was consulted by a cardiologist in outpatient clinic three years ago due to episode of chest pain and dyspnea. ECG, lipidogram and exercise stress test were performed. ECG showed right bundle-branch block (RBBB) with T-wave inversion in V1-V5 leads . According to the patient, ECG lesions have also been identified during previous preventive examinations. No pathological changes were observed in the lipidogram and exercise stress test.
After 2 weeks the patient was admitted to the hospital again because palpitation and chest discomfort. ECG , performed in emergency room, revealed the episode of monomorphic VT with left bundle-branch block morphology (heart rate 202 BPM). Sinus rhythm was restored by electrical cardioversion (70 J). Due to unclear cause of recurrent ventricular tachycardia the patient was hospitalized for detailed examination. The first thought was of acute coronary syndrome, therefore coronary angiography was performed showing no stenosis in coronary arteries. For the differential diagnosis of heart failure or cardiomyopathies, echocardiography was carried out. Right ventricular (RV) structural and functional abnormalities were found: trabeculation of RV, mild enlargement, decreased RV systolic function and relaxation, nevertheless left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction was normal (> 53%), no signs of LV dilatation. It was the first visualization method, which let us to suspect ARVC. Subsequently magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and its findings justified the suspicion of diagnosis of ARVC: segmental contraction with the local aneurysms has been reported, RV ejection fraction was 21% . Additionally, structural changes ir the right (akinesia of RV inferior wall and diskinesia of RV apex) and left myocardium (regional akinesia of LV posterior wall and regional hypokinesia of LV lateral wall with preserved LV EF) has been reported (, - late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) images – stuctural changes – LGE in the right and left ventricles). The MR radiologist conclusion was one of the major ARVC criteria (according to Task Force 2010). These findings suggested ARVC diagnosis of biventricular involvement.
Patient had one major (MRI) criterion and two minor (repolarization disorders ECG and ventricular arrhythmia) criteria of ARVC: complete right bundle-branch block in ECG with T-wave inversion in leads V1-V5 and VT with left bundle-branch block morphology. Genetic counseling assessment was performed for the patient. It was found out that the patient’s cousin died suddenly at the age of 40. According to the Task Force 2010 criteria, the diagnosis of ARVC was approved and it was decided to perform genetic test to confirm the molecular diagnosis of the disease.
For SCD prevention and VT suppression extended-release metoprolol was prescribed and implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was implanted.
After 8 months patient was admitted to emergency room due to VT (heart rate 180 BPM) without ICD discharge. Sinus rhythm was restored by electrical cardioversion (150J) and ICD was reprogrammed. The patient was subsequently treated with Amiodarone.
Next-generation sequencing analysis of genomic DNA isolated from patient’s peripheral blood was performed using TruSight Cardio Sequecing panel (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA). Coding exons of 174 genes were analysed, including the main genes associated with ARVD (DSC2, DSG2, DSP, JUP, PKP2,
PKP2, RYR2, TGFB3, TMEM43). A novel likely pathogenic DSC2 gene (MIM#125645) variant NM_024422.3:c.577_624del, NP_077740.1:p. Gly193_Ser208del, rs767081975 and a variant of uncertain clinical significance in RYR2 gene (MIM#180902) NM_001035.2:c.9018C>G, NP_001026.2:p. (Ser3006Arg) were identified. The other family members were not available for segregation analysis, since the patient has no children or siblings, his parents died because of cancer and heart failure at the age of 77 and 81. Only the fact of cousin sudden death at the age of 40, which could be associated with congenital heart disease, is known.
Due to thyrotoxicosis, medical treatment with Amiodarone was changed to Metoprolol. Regular yearly follow-ups were planned for the patient.