An 86-year-old woman with symptomatic paroxysmal AF was referred to our hospital for possible catheter ablation therapy. She had a history of hypertension, chronic kidney disease, acute pulmonary embolism, and deep venous thrombosis. She had an IVC filter (Günther Tulip®) implanted 15 years prior because of sub-massive pulmonary embolism with reiterative venous thrombosis. CHADSVASC score was 4 points. At the time of admission, she was taking atenolol, amlodipine besilate, azosemide, edoxaban, and aspirin. From 8 months before the admission, this patient also received an antiarrhythmic drug (pilsicainide 25 mg twice daily) to treat paroxysmal AF but despite ongoing treatment with antiarrhythmic medication, she had ongoing symptoms of intermittent palpitations. The patient was provided with two potential treatment options; alternative antiarrhythmic drug therapy or catheter ablation therapy. Following discussion with her family, the patient decided on catheter ablation therapy. On the admission, the patient’s oxygen saturation was 99% on room air, blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg, with a heart rate of 75 beats per minutes, regular. Physical examination revealed a 1/6 systolic murmur in the left sternal border. Lab work showed elevated creatinine at 1.12 mg/dL (0.46–0.79 mg/dL), D-dimer at 0.95 mg/L (0.0–0.7 mg/L), haemoglobin of 9.3 g/dL (11.6–14.8 g/dL), platelet count of 462 (158–348), and white blood cell count of 6.4 (3.3–8.6). Thyroid function was within the normal range. Electrocardiography on admission showed normal sinus rhythm, but AF had previously been documented during palpitations experienced by the patient. Transthoracic echocardiography showed that the left ventricular ejection fraction was 77%, the left atrium was slightly dilated (42.3 × 52.6 mm), and mild aortic valve stenosis was present.
Because delivery of a long sheath via the IVC carries a risk of dislodgement or fracture of the IVC filter and perforation of the IVC, we planned to perform PVI via an SVC approach. To minimize haemorrhagic complications for this elderly patient, a right internal jugular and left subclavian approach was selected.
First, a deflectable 20-pole 6-Fr catheter (BeeAT®; Japan Lifeline, Tokyo, Japan) was placed into the coronary sinus from a 7-Fr straight sheath (Terumo Medical, Tokyo, Japan) via the left subclavian vein. A Brockenbrough needle was placed into the right atrium from an 8.5-Fr steerable sheath (Agilis®; Terumo Medical) via the right internal jugular vein. Both venous access points were obtained using ultrasound guidance. The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia to regulate the respiratory function, and TOE was used when performing the transseptal puncture. Although intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) would also provide anatomical details of the interatrial septum during the transseptal puncture, ICE requires additional vascular access. Therefore, to minimize the amount of vascular access, we performed transseptal puncture assisted by TOE . After the single transseptal puncture, we performed anatomical 3D mapping and myocardial potential mapping using a multipolar mapping catheter (PentaRay®; Biosense Webster, CA, USA) on the display of an electroanatomical mapping system (CARTO®; Biosense Webster) and then PVI by radiofrequency catheter using a steerable sheath . We used a contact force-guided ablation catheter (THERMOCOOL SMARTTOUCH D-F curve®; Biosense Webster), and the ablation index (automatically calculated value by computer programming) was monitored continuously to maintain adequate radiofrequency ablation. Target ablation index was 450 on the left atrial (LA) anterior wall and 350–400 on the LA posterior wall. Bidirectional conduction block between the four pulmonary veins (PVs) and the left atrium was confirmed following the ablation by both the radiofrequency catheter and mapping catheter . Total patient time in catheterization laboratory was 6 h, the duration of general anaesthesia was 5 h 17 min, procedural time (from puncture to removal of sheath) was 3 h 54 min and time from first ablation to isolation of all four PVs was 1 h 33 min. No complications occurred and recurrence of AF was not documented in the 12 months after the procedure by every 2 months 12 lead electrocardiogram.