A 71-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed with poorly differentiated pT3N2M0 adenocarcinoma of the transverse colon. He underwent a transverse colectomy followed by adjuvant chemotherapy which he could not tolerate, and therefore stopped after three cycles. One year later he developed a single metastasis to the left lobe of his liver which was successfully resected. Following the resection he tolerated 12 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy (irinotecan and de Gramont) and continued in remission.
Four months after finishing chemotherapy, a surveillance computed tomography (CT) scan showed a new single liver nodule highly suspicious of metastasis. Another surgical resection was being considered and a positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan was performed to exclude the presence of metastases elsewhere. Unfortunately, three fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) -avid pulmonary nodules were found, as well as a small focus of intense tracer uptake in the spinal canal at the C2-C3 level in his neck . These findings precluded surgical resection. At that time our patient was totally asymptomatic from a neurological point of view.
One week later our patient started to feel pins and needles in his right upper and lower limbs. His symptoms worsened rapidly over the next three days and progressed to motor weakness. Two days later he was unable to walk without using a stick or being supported. There was no history of trauma and he denied any loss of sphincteric control. He was referred and reviewed as an emergency and admitted on the same day. A neurological examination revealed the following signs on his right side: spasticity, hyperreflexia (all right deep tendon reflexes), weakness, decreased tactile discrimination, joint and vibration sense, and upgoing plantar reflex. On his left side, the only abnormality was decreased temperature and pain sensations below the C5 dermatome level. There were no extrapyramidal signs on either side. His coordination was normal.
Our patient was immediately started on intravenous high-dose dexamethasone and an urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his cervical spine was performed that day. The scan showed an oblong expansile intramedullary lesion at the C2/C3 level of the spinal cord, associated with a large proximal and distal syrinx and edema extending from the cervico-medullary junction to the inferior aspect of his T3 vertebral body. The lesion enhanced post-contrast and measured about 2 cm in cranio-caudal dimension. It was slightly to the right of the midline. There was no evidence of bone involvement .
Surgical resection of this intramedullary lesion was not an option in the presence of other lesions in the liver and the lungs, and therefore our patient was referred for palliative radiotherapy.