A 60-year-old woman was admitted to our endocrine department with a diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome (CS) presumably caused by a cortisol-secreting adrenal carcinoma with pulmonary metastases. The patient reported a progressive course of central obesity, moon-shaped face, muscle atrophy and weakness, asthenia and emotional disturbance over the last six years. During this period she had developed arterial hypertension, which was poorly controlled despite five antihypertensive drugs. Five years ago abdominal magnetic resonance (MR) imaging had been performed in the local hospital for further evaluation of a suspected liver hemangioma, and revealed an incidental finding of a 2.5 cm lesion in the right adrenal. No endocrinological evaluation was performed. Three years before admission she underwent abdominal computed tomography (CT) imaging for evaluation of recurrent hypertensive crises. No change of the adrenal tumor size was found. Screening for pheochromocytoma and primary hyperaldosteronism was negative. In the weeks before presentation at our department the patient complained of polyuria and exertional dyspnoe. The family physician diagnosed diabetes mellitus, which was treated with dietary measures. Furthermore, abdominal CT imaging was repeated, which showed an increase of the adrenal tumor size to 3.3 cm. The patient was subsequently admitted to the local hospital for further endocrinological investigation.
Laboratory tests performed at the local hospital showed failure to suppress cortisol levels after 1 mg dexamethasone and elevated 24-hour urine cortisol secretion. Plasma adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) levels were suppressed indicating an adrenal origin of the hypercortisolism . A pulmonary nodule was suspected in the abdominal CT imaging and an additional chest CT revealed multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules which were not described in a CT imaging of the chest performed 5 years earlier. A fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was performed for further evaluation. A high uptake of 18 F-FDG for both the adrenal lesion and the pulmonary nodules was observed .
The patient presented in our clinic for further evaluation of the suspected metastatic adrenal carcinoma. The physical examination revealed skin atrophy with bruises, buffalo hump, central obesity and facial hirsutism. Laboratory tests confirmed the presence of ACTH-independent hypercortisolism . For histological verification and for “debulking” purposes to potentially reduce the cortisol excess, the patient underwent a right laparoscopic adrenalectomy.
Unexpectedly, the histological report indicated an adrenocortical adenoma with no evidence of malignancy. The tumor size was 3.5 cm and the Weiss score was 0, compatible with a definitive diagnosis of a benign cortisol-secreting adrenocortical tumor . Postoperatively signs of CS gradually receded and laboratory testing revealed secondary adrenal insufficiency . The patient received intra- and postoperative glucocorticoid coverage followed by chronic replacement therapy for adrenal insufficiency. A thoracoscopic wedge resection with biopsies of the left upper and lower lobe was performed. Histopathology showed spindle-shaped cells with positive immunostaining for CD31, CD34 and for human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8) , consistent with a diagnosis of pulmonary Kaposi’s sarcoma. Neither skin lesions nor involvement of the gastrointestinal tract or other organs were detected. Gastroscopy and colonoscopy were unremarkable. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing was negative and testing of the immune status showed normal CD4 cell counts (1014 cells/mm3; normal range: 410–1590 cells/mm3) as well as a normal CD4/CD8 ratio (1.18; normal range: 0.8-4.2) eight weeks after adrenalectomy. The differential white blood cell count revealed relative lymphopenia before the adrenalectomy which was normalised 8 weeks after adrenalectomy .
Palliative treatment with systemic combination chemotherapy was considered after the diagnosis of advanced KS was established, but was refused by the patient. The patient experienced significant clinical improvement of her hypercortisolism-related clinical symptoms such as normalization of hypertension under antihypertensive medication, fat redistribution and gradual recovery of muscular strength. Restaging was performed with chest and abdominal CT three months and with FDG-PET/CT six months after the adrenalectomy and showed complete disappearance of all KS-induced pulmonary nodules.