This case report is about a 53-year-old female patient, living in the Tibetan plateau, with a history of close contact with animals such as “cows, sheep and dogs”, who was admitted to the hospital in 2017 with a 1-week history of back pain and discomfort. The patient had not received any treatment prior to admission, and physical examination revealed only mild epigastric tenderness.Tests for tumor markers such as alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), CA125 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were all negative, and the results of the Echinococcus IgG antibody test (ELISA) were positive.Routine urinalysis showed a mild urinary tract infection (urinalysis combination: bacteria: 23065.50/uL, turbidity: +1), but urine culture results were negative.
An enhanced CT scan showed a lesion measuring approximately 5.83 cm x 5.1 cm with invasion of the second porta hepatis . Chest CT showed a microscopic nodular shadow (1.10 cm x 1.02 cm) in the lower region of the left lung , and no abnormalities were seen on nephrography. The diagnosis of hepatic alveolar echinococcosis was made based on his life history, CT scan findings and laboratory findings.
Subsequently, the patient herself refused to be treated with transplantation surgery and was treated conservatively with albendazole. Patients received 20 mg/kg/day (1280 mg/day) in 2 divided doses for 1 month, followed by continued treatment after 14 days of withdrawal. Back pain is relieved by conservative treatment. Three years later, he had sudden onset and worsening of back pain, and the degree of hepatic lesion invasion increased compared with the previous one , and the nodular shadow of the left lower lobe of the lung was enlarged (4.8 cm x 3.6 cm) .Features of urinary infection remained but renal imaging did not show any abnormality . Split allograft liver transplantation and left lower lung basal segmentectomy were selected for treatment after discussion by the treatment team, and postoperative pathology of liver lesions showed liver tissue structure was destroyed, irregular echinococcal cysts of varying sizes were seen consisting of alveolar structures with stratum corneum formation, and inflammatory cell remnants were seen in the surrounding, which was diagnosed as hepatic alveolar echinococcosis , and the pathology of lung lesions showed lung tissue structure was destroyed, irregular echinococcal cysts of varying sizes were seen consisting of alveolar structures with a thinner visible cuticle formation, and the germinal layer was not easily recognizable. The diagnosis of alveolar echinococcosis was made .Long-term oral tacrolimus, but not albendazole, were administered after discharge. Two years after liver transplantation, the patient developed left-sided lumbar pain, and magnetic resonance imaging showed the presence of a space-occupying lesion approximately 3.80 × 5.06 cm in size in the left kidney , with obvious compression symptoms and renal dynamic imaging showed left-sided renal insufficiency. Elective resection of the left kidney was performed and postoperative pathology showed glomerular atrophy and irregularly sized alveolar composed of echinococcal larval sacs with a thin stratum corneum surrounded by bands of acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration interspersed with eosinophils. Diagnosis of renal alveolar echinococcosis was made .