The patient was a 5 year-old girl from Russia. She had unremarkable perinatal, neonatal and family history (parents and brother are clinically healthy).
She was born from the fifth pregnancy, the second childbirth and was delivered by Caesarean section. Her birth weight was 3800 g and height was 53 cm. Apgar scores were 8 and 8 at 1 and 5 min respectively. No abnormalities were noted in neonatal period. Up to 2.5 years the girl developed according to her age without delay of speech and motor development. At the age of 2,5 years against a background of trauma of little finger, girl stopped talking. Gradually speech was restored, but vocabulary decreased. At 3 years the first febrile seizure attack occurred. Later parents noticed significant deterioration in her speech and communication. She became socially withdrawn. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed diffuse lesions in the white matter and hypoplasia of the lower cerebellar vermis. At the age of 3, 5 years stereotypic movements appeared. From 3, 5 years patient was commenced on valproic acid (antiepileptic drug). But motor deterioration progressed: by the age of 5 she stopped walking.
Based on observed symptoms, diagnosis of Rett syndrome was suggested. Prior to clinical exome sequencing the following studies were carried out: measurement of palmitoyl protein thioesterase (PPT) level in leukocyte, tandem mass spectroscopy, sequencing of MeCP2 and TPP1, analysis of common mitochondrial DNA mutations. All studies showed no abnormalities.
At the age of 5 years 8 months she was admitted to Scientific and Practical Center of Pediatric Psychoneurology with motor and mental deterioration, visual impairment and stereotypies.
She had normal physical development: she was 20, 5 kg in weight and 111 cm in height. Head was normal shape, head circumference was 50, 5 cm (normal). The skin was normal and clean. Abdomen was soft, painless. Stool and micturition were normal. Basic blood and urine tests were normal.
There was no interest in environment, no play activity. Orientation in space and time was absent. Speech and understanding of speech is disturbed: she used only speech sounds and syllables. She had stereotypic movements of hands and face. The girl have myoclonus in her hands, legs and facial muscles. Tactile stimulation enhances myoclonus. She does not walk, does not stand, does not crawl. A girl can only hold her head, roll over, sit with periodic falls.
Ophthalmological evaluation revealed partial atrophy of optic nerves, nistagmus, retinitis pigmentosa and mixed astigmatism.
EEG (electroencephalography) revealed a significant delay in the formation of cortical electrogenesis and poorly-structured epileptiform activity in the occipital-parietal-posterior temporal regions.
MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) revealed cortical atrophy, periventricular leukopathy of both hemispheres of the brain and atrophy of the cerebellum .
ECG (electrocardiography) showed severe sinus bradyarrhythmia. The heart rate was 48–84 bpm.
In the hospital, she received treatment with anticonvulsant drugs: topiramate (100 mg/day) and levetiracetam (1200 mg/day).
Clinical exome sequencing was carried out by Genotek Ltd. Genomic DNA from peripheral blood sample was extracted using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturerʼs protocol. DNA libraries were prepared using AmpliSeq Exome (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturerʼs protocol. Sequencing was performed on Ion Proton System (ThermoFisher Scientific). After sequencing we trimmed 3′-nucleotides with read quality below 10 using Cutadapt . Raw reads were aligned to reference genome hg19 (GRCh37.p13) using BWA MEM . FastQС was used for data quality control . We called short variants using GATK HaplotypeCaller according to GATK Best Practices DNA-seq [, ]. The effect of each mutation was assessed using snpEff To assess pathogenicity and conservatism, the data was extracted from the dbNSFP , Clinvar [, ], OMIM database (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) and HGMD , as well as using the SIFT and PolyPhen-2 [, ] utilities to predict pathogenicity of the mutation. Information on the frequency of mutations was taken from 1000Genomes project [, ], ExAC [, ] and Genotek frequency data. Description of mutations and their pathogenicity were predicted according to the Standards and Guidelines developed by ACMG (American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics), AMP (Association for Molecular Pathology) and CAP (College of American Pathologists) . Copy number alterations were determined using CNVkit .
MFSD8 variant identified by exome sequencing was confirmed by Sanger sequencing.