A 36-year-old woman with a medical history of kidney transplantation in 2005, after recent right hemicolectomy due to locally advanced pT4AN1BM0 (clinical stage III) colon adenocarcinoma (G2), was qualified (in March 2021) to adjuvant chemotherapy regimen based on oxaliplatin, leucovorin and 5-fluorouracil (FOLFOX-4). At that time, the kidney graft function was satisfactory; however, the slow increase in serum creatinine up to 1.4 mg/dL was observed during the few preceding months. The blood tests showed anemia (hemoglobin, 8.4 g/dL), C-reactive protein 11.2 mg/L, CA-125 18.7 U/mL, and CEA 0.95 ng/mL. After two FOLFOX-4 cycles, substantial deterioration of kidney graft function was observed, resulting in the discontinuation of chemotherapy and return to hemodialysis.
In October 2020 (16 years post-transplant), the patient started to report recurrent mild abdominal pain without concomitant hematochezia, diarrhea, change in bowel motility, or weight loss. At the same time, a slight increase in serum creatinine from 1.0 to 1.4 mg/dL [estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 45 mL/min/1.73 m2], with no proteinuria, was detected. In January 2021, the patient was admitted to a surgery department with clinical suspicion of herniation of the terminal ileum into the cecum. During surgery, a large cecal tumor was found (7 cm × 5.5 cm × 5 cm), and a right hemicolectomy with terminal ileum–transverse colon graft was performed. Histological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma G2 invading the peritoneum and blood vessels, with metastases to two of 24 resected mesenteric lymph nodes (pT4AN1B) – corresponding to clinical stage III. A multidisciplinary team qualified the patient to adjuvant chemotherapy (FOLFOX-4), which was suspended due to abdominal wall abscess after the previous surgery. On March 17, 2021 (7 wk since hemicolectomy), the first FOLFOX-4 cycle was administered and the second was on April 1, 2021. However, the subsequent chemotherapy cycles were cancelled due to progressive kidney graft insufficiency. There was no deterioration of blood pressure control during CTH.
Meanwhile, immunosuppression was modified by conversion from mycophenolate mofetil 250 mg BID to everolimus 0.75 mg BID . Notably, during the subsequent 2 mo, the blood trough levels of everolimus were low (1.0–1.4 ng/mL). Finally, the drug was discontinued because of its poor gastric tolerance. In addition, the tacrolimus level started to fluctuate (with a nadir of 2.5 ng/mL), and de novo proteinuria was noticed up to 4.2 g/24 h. Lately, tacrolimus once daily was switched to twice daily formulation to achieve adequate blood trough levels. Serum creatinine level increased up to 3.4 mg/dL.
The patient was diagnosed with chronic glomerular nephritis at the age of 10 years. It was confirmed by kidney biopsy, and glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide were initiated. In 2001, hepatitis C virus infection was diagnosed, and the patient underwent a successful 12-mo interferon-γ treatment. Hypertension was diagnosed at the age of 18 years in the course of chronic kidney disease. The patient developed end-stage kidney disease and started hemodialysis at the age of 19 years (2004). After 8 mo of dialysis therapy, the patient underwent kidney transplantation (2005) with basiliximab induction. The kidney graft function on an immunosuppressive regimen consisting of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and steroids was excellent, with serum creatinine of 1 mg/dL for many years. The immunosuppression schedule was modified between 4 and 8 years post-transplant by converting mycophenolate to azathioprine due to planned pregnancy. She passed two pregnancies, giving birth during 5 and 8 years post-transplant. During the whole observation, there were no episodes of acute kidney rejection or proteinuria. The blood trough levels of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil were stable, at 6–7 ng/mL and 2.7 ng/mL, respectively.
Family history was unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed no abnormalities except surgical scars.
Because of the increase of serum creatinine up to 3.4 mg/dL, a kidney graft biopsy was performed on June 1, 2021. Histological examination revealed overlapping features of active chronic rejection and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Overall, interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy covered > 50% of the interstitial area . Donor-specific antigens were not present, whereas a moderate Epstein–Barr viremia (7485 copies/mL) was detected. Other virological results (hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus and cytomegalovirus) were negative at that time.
Computed tomography (CT) with contrast media administration was performed twice, during the oncological work-up, in June and September 2021. The second examination visualized intraperitoneal spread of colon adenocarcinoma, confirmed by positron emission tomography/CT , and corresponding with recent patient complaints about abdominal pain.