We reported a case of a ten-year-old boy from Zhangjiakou City in Hebei Province, who presented with persistent symptoms including nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting and severe diarrhea, accompanied by intermittent fever. The child was firstly admitted to a local hospital, where routine examination revealed elevated levels of multiple indicators, as well as the presence of blood and white blood cells in his stool . Initial treatment involved cefloxacin administration and fluid rehydration , but his symptoms did not improve. On the fourth day after the onset of symptoms, he exhibited a decreased level of consciousness, prompting his transfer to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) at Beijing Children’s Hospital Affiliated with Capital Medical University.
Upon admission to the PICU, the child had a fever of 38°C and presented with intermittent episodes of confusion, disorganized speech and shock. His physical examination revealed a heart rate of 138 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 26 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 134/90 mmHg. Clinical signs of dehydration were observed, including dry and less elastic skin, dry lips, as well as sunken eye sockets. His extremities exhibited coldness, and the capillary refill time (CRT) was measured at 4 seconds. Routine blood tests showed leukocytosis (18.5×109/L) and thrombocytosis (448×109/L), as well as elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP, 13 mg/L), hemoglobin (171 g/L) and procalcitonin (6.1 ng/mL). Blood biochemical results indicated remarkably high levels of urea (23.1 mmol/L), creatinine (236.6 umol/L), creatine kinase (1,327 U/L) . Subsequent stool test results revealed 8 white blood cells per high power field.
There were no obvious abnormalities in the patient’s immunoglobulin and lymphocyte counts and proportions. Antishock therapy was administered to him via intravenous fluids and electrolyte supplementation, resulting in the correction of his shock within 6 hours of admission. In view of the elevated levels of creatine kinase and serum myoglobin, a diagnose of rhabdomyolysis was made and the child was treated with hydration and alkalization. Due to severe dehydration caused by vomiting and diarrhea, he received a fluid supplement. In addition, racecadotrel was administered orally to reduce intestinal fluid secretion, montmorillonite powder was given orally to protect the intestinal mucosa, and probiotics were prescribed orally to regulate the intestinal flora. Infectious diarrhea was highly suspected, and cefoperazone sulbactam (4g q8h) was given as empiric therapy . The child’s pancreatic enzyme levels were observed to be elevated on day 4 after admission, and subsequent pancreatic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated abnormalities in pancreatic morphology and filling. This led to a diagnosis of pancreatitis, and somatostatin was administered to inhibit the secretion of pancreatic enzymes.
The antigen test for rotavirus was negative, and negative PCR results ruled out the presence of norovirus and Clostridium difficile. Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) tests were performed with the consent of the family. Given the possibility of a systemic infection, the whole blood samples of the child were collected on Day 2 after admission, and sent for nucleic acid extraction, library construction and high-throughput sequencing (Hugo-Biotech Company, Beijing). After the sequence of human genome was excluded, mNGS identified 3,178 specific reads belong to C. parvum, accounting for 1.9% of nucleotide sequence coverage . The test results were obtained on Day 3, and the patient was promptly initiated on intravenous infusion of azithromycin (0.5g qd) for anti-parasitic treatment. After 2 days, the medication was transitioned to oral administration of metronidazole (0.4g tid) and albendazole (0.4g tid) tablets. During this period, the patient’s peripheral blood cultures were negative. Additionally, tests for IgG antibodies against various pathogens, including Toxoplasma gondii、Trichinella spiralis、Dengue fever and liver fluke, were negative. The Brucella tiger red test was also negative, as were tests for Cryptosporidium and Giardia antigens (the colloidal gold method) in stool samples. Furthermore, PCR results of Entamoeba trophozoites and cysts, Enterovirus 71, Coxsackie virus A16, and Vibrio cholerae slide agglutination test were all negative. Microscopy examination did not reveal any fungi or parasites.
On Day 5 after admission, anal swabs of the child and his parents were collected for further detection using mNGS. The results of child’s tests showed that 92.2% (116,897) of pathogenic reads corresponded to C. parvum with a coverage of 61.9%, and neither parent was detected with any pathogen . On day 10, the child’s temperature and inflammatory markers returned to normal levels, and cefoperazone sulbactam was discontinued. Additionally, his vomiting and gastrointestinal symptoms were relieved, and the levels of pancreatic enzymes, creatinine and creatine kinase were lower than before. On Day 15, mNGS identified 5,274 specific reads of C. parvum in the child’s anal swabs samples, indicating a decrease in pathogen nucleic acid load. However, Candida tropicalis and Candida parapsilosis (302,484 and 5,320 specific reads) were also detected in this test . This was considered to be caused by an imbalance in intestinal flora, and oral voriconazole (0.2g q12h) was given to prevent opportunistic infections. On Day 17, the patient’s temperature was normal without vomiting or diarrhea, and he was discharged. After discharge, he continued to take albendazole, metronidazole, and voriconazole tablets orally for 10 days, and no fever, diarrhea, or vomiting recurred. On the 7th day after discharged, his blood routine test, liver and kidney function, and pancreatic enzyme levels returned to normal, and re-examination using mNGS showed no presence of pathogens.