A 51-year-old man was admitted to our General Medicine Division complaining of intermittent fever (up to 40 °C) and progressively worsening dyspnea associated with fatigue and weight loss. His medical history was positive for arterial hypertension on treatment with olmesartan and hydrochlorothiazide; neither further medical disorders nor other medications were reported. On admission, physical examination revealed diffused bilateral crackles at chest auscultation and the presence of a palpable, hyperpigmented skin lesion on the left areola with surface desquamation and velvety texture . The patient had no known previous dermatosis. Oropharyngeal candidiasis was also present. No further abnormalities were found at physical examination.
Blood count revealed normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 9 g/dL) and lymphopenia (total lymphocytes 380/μL). Arterial blood gases analysis showed moderate hypoxemia (pO2 71 mmHg) and hypocapnia (pCO2 30 mmHg). Chest X-ray revealed the presence of multiple parenchymal infiltrates, while cysts of Pneumocystis jirovecii were detected in bronchoalveolar lavage samples. Diagnosis of P. jirovecii pneumonia was made and the patient was started on combination treatment with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg, 2 tablets per os q8h) and fluconazole (200 mg per os q24h).
Considering the opportunistic nature of P. jirovecii pulmonary disease, HIV-1 infection was suspected. Serology was positive for HIV-1 antibodies at both ELISA and western blot confirmatory testing; plasma HIV-1 RNA levels revealed high viral load (325,000 copies/mL). CD4+ T cell count showed a profound immunosuppression (37 cells/μL). HIV-1 genotypic drug resistance test was then performed, showing the presence of a wild-type virus (CRF12_BF). HLA-B*5701 tested negative. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) viremia was also detected (1412 copies/mL). Therefore, diagnosis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) was established and the patient was subsequently started on antiretroviral therapy (ART) with raltegravir 400 mg per os q12h and tenofovir/emtricitabine fixed-dose combination per os q24h.
Excisional skin biopsy of the left areola lesion was performed and revealed focal hyperkeratosis, mild papillomatosis, and hyperpigmentation of the basal layer. Dermal papillae projected upwards as finger-like projections with prominent verticalisation of subepithelial vessels and scattered deposition of melanophages. The valleys between papillae showed mild acanthosis and seemed occasionally filled with keratotic material. These findings were overall consistent with a diagnosis of AN . Commonly associated diagnoses as malignancies and endocrine disorders, as well as drug-related forms of AN, were excluded. Particularly, obesity and abnormalities in lipid profile as well as in glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity were excluded. Indeed, patient’s body mass index was 24.3 kg/m2 and baseline fasting blood tests at admission – i.e. before starting ART – showed normal values of serum total cholesterol (3.62 mmol/L), low-density lipoprotein (LDL, 2.25 mmol/L), high-density lipoprotein (HDL, 0.91 mmol/L), triglycerides (1.01 mmol/L), as well as normal fasting glucose (5.1 mmol/L) and glycated hemoglobin (5.4%). Moreover, oral glucose tolerance test was performed as soon as AN diagnosis was confirmed and tested negative, too (fasting glucose: 4.8 mmol/L, 120-min glucose: 6.3 mmol/L). Fasting insulin at the time of oral glucose tolerance test was 7.2 μU/mL.
Interestingly, progressive improvement in AN size and pigmentation was observed after starting ART and complete regression was confirmed at one-year follow-up visit .