A 46-year-old male patient who was involved in a motor vehicle accident presented with a left abdominal wall injury and severe chest pain.
The patient had no specific history of present illness.
The patient had no specific history of past illness.
The patient had no personal or familial disease.
Tenderness and rebound tenderness were observed in the lower left quadrant of the abdomen. Crepitus and tenderness were present in the left chest wall, accompanied by decreased breath sounds. Symmetrical chest wall expansion during breathing was observed with no initial flail motion.
Initial arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.4, PO2 of 80.3 mmHg, and PCO2 of 34.0 mmHg on room air. Cardiac enzymes were elevated at troponin T 244 ng/L (normal range: < 14 ng/L), CK-MB 23.32 ng/L (normal range: < 4.94 ng/L), and CPK 4176 U/L (normal range: 58–348 U/L).
Chest CT revealed multiple rib fractures with hemopneumothorax in the left hemithorax. No abnormalities were observed in the mediastinum. Abdominal CT revealed a bowel herniation through an abdominal wall defect. The initial ECG showed an elevated ST segment in the anterior leads; however, it was deemed to be insignificant .
The patient was initially diagnosed with multiple rib fractures and hemopneumothorax in the left chest. Panperitonitis due to bowel perforation was suspected, and blunt cardiac contusion was considered highly likely.
A 24-French thoracic drainage catheter was placed, and the hemothorax was confirmed to be minor. Despite the perioperative risks associated with cardiac contusions, the patient underwent emergent surgery to rule out abdominal organ injuries. The peritoneum was intact, and no significant findings were observed except for several pelvic muscle tears.
Postoperative care in the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) was provided as usual. Blood tests for elevated cardiac enzymes were repeated every 4 h and showed gradual improvement. The patient did not complain of worsening chest pain, which was successfully controlled with analgesics. However, the patient’s systolic blood pressure fluctuated intermittently with prominent ECG changes. Although the changes were not the classical reciprocal findings observed for the myocardial infarction (MI), we still found it necessary to confirm the patient’s cardiac condition .
On Day 2 of hospitalization, TTE was performed to check for cardiac conditions. The patient was confirmed to have neither pericardial fluid collection nor abnormal cardiac movements. The patient’s ECG remained variable, fluctuating from normal to prominent ST elevations, and we regarded these findings as non-meaningful and indicative of the usual transient changes after cardiac contusion.
On Day 3 of hospitalization, the patient complained of dyspnea and difficulty with expectoration. Paradoxical asymmetric chest wall motion was newly observed on the left anterior chest wall to the extent where the chest wall moved in rhythm with the patient’s heartbeat. Despite proper support, including higher oxygen supplementation via a high-flow nasal cannula, the patient’s condition gradually deteriorated. Follow-up chest CT revealed a worsening lung condition. However, the mediastinum was relatively clear . After thoroughly discussing the risks associated with cardiac contusions with anesthesiologists, we decided to perform surgical stabilization of rib fractures (SSRF).
A flail chest due to multiple rib fractures and blunt cardiac contusion were considered as additionally diagnosed conditions.
The patient underwent SSRF on Day four of hospitalization. The surgery was performed routinely under general anesthesia with a single endotracheal intubation, with the patient placed in the 45-degree semi-lateral right decubitus position. An anterolateral thoracotomy was performed in the fifth intercostal space from the median border of the left pectoralis major muscle to the mid-axillary line. After opening the fifth intercostal space, a large hole was identified in the pericardium . The inferolateral left ventricular wall was visible through the hole and was covered by a thin whitish fibrin clot. We explored the pericardial space with an index finger and confirmed no apparent abnormalities.