The patient was a 41-year-old woman who was first seen at Shahid Mofateh Clinic affiliated to Yasuj University of medical sciences in 2019 with complaints of having progressive dysphagia to solid foods, and a ten-kilograms weight loss for the preceding 6 months (Weight = 50.5, BMI = 19.77); the patient also had anorexia, decreased intake, and general fatigue and lethargy as accompanying symptoms, but the patient had no nausea and vomiting. Physical examination findings were typically normal. There was no neck (laterocervical or supraclavicular) lymphadenopathy and no hepatomegaly. In past medical and drug history, the patient had asthma and used fexofenadine and salbutamol spray. There was no family history of malignancy in her parents and siblings. The patient did not use tobacco, smoke cigarette and drink alcohol. Laboratory values were all within normal limits.
The patient underwent upper GI endoscopy. In esophagus, the upper esophageal sphincter, cricopharyngeus and upper third of esophagus were normal. A large fungating and ulcerative mass was found in the middle and the lower third of esophagus, 25–33 cm from the upper incisors. The Z line was normal . In the stomach, the cardia (retro-vision maneuver), fundus, body and antrum were all normal. In the duodenum, the bulb and 2nd part were normal. The patient underwent an incisional biopsy and was found to have poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma in pathology evaluation.
In spiral chest CT scan with and without intravenous (IV) contrast, obtained axial images, represented a 29 × 18 mm soft tissue fullness at middle to distal esophagus (at the level of the carina to the level of the main pulmonary artery), which was suggestive for a tumoral lesion. No lung metastasis was found. In spiral abdomen and pelvic CT scan with oral and IV contrast, there was a 12 × 9 mm LN within gastrohepatic ligament . In the abdomen and pelvic sonography, there was a 10 × 9 mm hypoechoic lesion between the left liver lobe and greater curvature which was suggestive of lymphadenopathy (LAP) .
Afterward a multidisciplinary team decision-making meeting (weekly general surgery grand round at the department of surgery, Shahid Beheshti Hospital, Yasuj University of Medical Sciences) was held, and it was decided that the patient would receive 3 sessions of chemotherapy without radiotherapy before undergoing the operation. Then, the patient underwent three field esophagectomy (McKeown) including laparotomy, right thoracotomy, and gastric pull-up with cervical anastomosis including extended thoracotomy, esophagectomy, gastric pull-up, pyloroplasty, cervical esophagostomy, jejunostomy, and chest tube insertion. An abdominal LN at the gastrohepatic ligament was also resected. The postoperative course was uncomplicated. There was no evidence of the leak at the anastomotic site by administration of methylene blue dye on the fifth postoperative day and then nasogastric tube was removed and the patient was told to start drinking liquids. The patient advanced to a regular diet by the tenth postoperative day. She was discharged from the hospital on the 14th day of admission. At a follow-up visit of 1 week and then 2 weeks after discharge from the hospital she was feeling well. The patient’s condition after surgery came back to her normal habitual life within 3 months. The patient had no complaint at the 9th month follow-up visit after surgery. A spiral chest and abdomen CT scan was done and showed a pulled-up stomach, filled with fluid and air at the right paraspinal region . In the last follow-up, the patient had no complaints and said that she ate a satisfying meal recently, and that she is optimist about the future.
The specimen was sent in formalin for pathology and immunohistochemistry evaluation. The received specimen was consisted of the esophagus and a segment of the stomach. The resected esophagus was 12 cm in length and 3 cm in the greatest diameter. The adventitial surface was congested. On opening, there were four intramural creamy round firm masses measuring from 1 to 2 cm. No perforation site was found. Proximal and distal margins were not grossly involved. The resected segment of stomach was 8 cm in greater curvature and 6 cm in lesser curvature and showed no mass . Multiple LNs were identified measuring from 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter. Pathological evaluation was done, and the patient had small groups of residual poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma and also multiple leiomyomas (four). A leiomyoma was coexisted with an invading overlying SCC . There were 5 isolated LNs within the pathology specimen, of which two were involved with the tumor, but pathology did not show any sign of metastasis in the LNs resected at the gastrohepatic ligament. Tumor pathology characteristics are summarized and shown in Table .