We hereby report an uncommon case of a 14-year-old girl, living in a rural area, being first child of two siblings, with a younger brother having no significant pathology, and whose parents are second degree consanguineous. She was born from a full-term pregnancy without significant incident, exposure to radiation or maternal drugs, except for vitamins and iron. Her vaginal delivery in a birth center was without notable incidents, placental examination was normal, but the search for a single umbilical artery was not mentioned.
At 14-year-old, she was admitted at our tertiary care center with complaints of primary amenorrhea and cyclical lower abdominal pain evolving for six months. Clinical examination revealed a normal morphotype, a correct size, well-developed secondary sex characteristics and breast and pubic hair were categorized as Tanner stage 5 and Marshall stade 3 . A mobile nontender mass, arising from the pelvis to the belly button, was felt in the abdomen. Vulvo-perineal inspection revealed clitoral hypertrophy, labia hypoplasia and the absence of an external vaginal opening . On rectal examination, a tense cystic mass suggestive of hematocolpos was felt anteriorly. An ENT consultation revealed the normal morphology of the pavilions as well as the external auditory canals, however, severe transmission hypoacousia of the right ear with a hearing loss of 70 dB was noted. Abdominal-pelvic ultrasound showed hematocolpos proximal to the perineum and hematometra with an otherwise normal-appearing uterus and ovaries. It also revealed the presence of a small dedifferentiated atrophic right kidney associated with compensatory hypertrophy of the contralateral left kidney. Hormonal assays were performed and within normal range. FSH, LH, and 17b estradiol were normal. Testosterone, D4 androstenedione, 17OH progesterone and DHEA were also normal, which allowed us to eliminate hyperandrogenism. Renal function tests were normal and reflected an effective compensation of the left kidney. The blood karyotype was also normal (46 XX), with no visible chromosomal abnormality.
The diagnosis of poly malformative syndrome associating vaginal, renal and auditory involvement was therefore retained, also called Winter syndrome. A multidisciplinary consultation meeting allowed to opt for a reconstructive surgery of her vaginal agenesis associated with a close monitoring of her auditory and renal functions. Before surgical treatment, the patient and her family were informed about the prognosis of her fertility and verbal as well as written consent were obtained from her legal guardian.
The vaginoplasty was then carried out with the patient in the dorsal lithotomy position. A Foley catheter is placed into the bladder to avoid an inadvertent anterior entry into the posterior wall of the bladder. A transverse incision is made where the introitus should be located, and a dissection is carried out to reach the obstructed upper vaginal tissue. Care is needed to keep the dissection in the midline and avoid the bladder above and the rectum below . Creation of a 5 cm-length passage through connective tissue was done carefully to reach the tense bulge of the hematocolpos and allow drainage. Mucosal margins of the upper vagina were then pulled down till the introitus and sutured there with a spacing of 5 mm between each suture, in a radial arrangement . The mobilization of the dilated proximal vagina allowed the pull-through vaginoplasty. Operative time was 126 min and blood loss were quantified at 200 ml. Prophylactic antibiotics were initiated postoperatively.
After a successful surgery, we guided the patient on the use of vaginal mold to ensure that the vagina heals well without restenosis. The opening of the vaginal introit was then dilated by ascending vaginal probes of increased dimensions lubricated with estrogen gel, until complete healing and sufficient caliber to sexual intercourse. On follow-up after 2 months, she was regular menstruating with no obstruction signs. At 20-year-old, the young woman became pregnant, and safely vaginally delivered a healthy male baby weighting 2700 g at 38 weeks’ gestation without an episiotomy.