A 74-year-old female with known arterial hypertension, chronic atrial fibrillation, dyslipidemia, and severe mitral regurgitation with asymptomatic severe pulmonary hypertension was diagnosed by routine echocardiography. Mitral valve repair was performed in October 2010 without apparent complications. She was discharged at day 6 post-surgery and had already complained about shortness of breath and bilateral leg edema. At day 18 post-surgery, she went to the emergency department because of worsening symptoms and she also complained of dark urine, jaundice, and right abdominal pain. A physical examination revealed extensive jaundice, with jugular ingurgitation at 45°, shortness of breath at rest, auscultation with systolic murmur audible in the precordium, hepatomegaly, and bilateral leg edema. Laboratory values showed normocytic and normochromic anemia of 7 g/L, elevated levels of transaminase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, and alkaline phosphatase, hyperbilirubinemia (18 mg/dL) with a direct fraction of 8,18, an elevated lactate dehydrogenase level of 4467 IU/L, low haptoglobin, hemoglobinuria, and the presence of schistocytes in a blood smear . A thoracic X-ray revealed cardiomegaly with pulmonary edema. Abdominal ultrasound showed biliary sludge.
With the clinical picture of hemolytic anemia with right heart failure and a previous heart surgery, the patient had transthoracic echocardiography performed . We found mitral plasty with moderate mitral regurgitation , which was unlikely to be the cause of such severe hemolysis. The case was discussed with cardiac surgeons, who excluded the possibility of hemolytic anemia because of problems with mitral valve repair and advised investigation of other etiologies that might explain the patient’s condition.
The patient was admitted in an internal medicine ward where she began intravenous diuretic therapy, transfusion support, iron, and folate, as well as an angiotensin-conversion enzyme blocker. Other hemolytic anemia causes were excluded.
She was discharged after symptomatic and blood values improved , with a scheduled cardiothoracic appointment and transthoracic echocardiography.
Despite her improvement, she began having the same complaints of shortness of breath and generalized edema, as well as abdominal discomfort, which resulted in her being admitted to the emergency department again. She had an Abdominal Computer Tomography Scan performed because of her abdominal complaints and hyperamylasemia of 1123 U/L. There was no evidence of acute pancreatitis and the patient was discharged with the same diagnosis of hemolytic anemia after valve repair. One week later, there was no further improvement, and she was re-admitted to our ward. Transthoracic echocardiography was similar to the first image, and despite the same pharmacological measures, she did not improve. She underwent another surgical procedure with mitral valve replacement. According to the cardiac surgeon, there was no macroscopic evidence of dysfunction in the previous mitral valve repair.
In the post-surgery period, the patient showed significant improvement of heart failure complaints and anemia . Currently, the patient is asymptomatic for activity that requires a small amount of effort, and is anicteric, without any evidence of anemia .