A 29-year-old female patient reported to the outpatient Department of Periodontics with a chief complaint of bleeding gums while brushing from the lower back tooth region. Clinical examination revealed Miller Grade I mobility in mandibular right first molar. On radiovisiographic examination of the region, a radiolucency of around 3 mm (vertical dimension) was noted . Treatment was divided into Phase I and Phase II therapy. Phase I therapy included scaling and polishing, and general oral hygiene instruction were given, routine hematological examinations were done before surgical intervention, which were found to be within normal limits. After adequate local anesthesia (2% xylocaine with epinephrine, 1:200,000), an intrasulcular incision was made around the involved tooth and extending to the adjacent tooth for adequate access . Mucoperiosteal flap was reflected to access the underlying bone morphology in the furcation area. After thorough debridement , the furcation area was assessed using Q2N Naber's probe . The assessed defect was around 3 mm horizontally and 3 mm vertically . The area was properly debrided using Gracey curettes. Gengigel® (Ricerfarma, Milano, Italy), was applied in the furcation area (slightly overfilled) . The processed dehydrated amniotic membrane was placed onto the furcation area and proximal bone as GTR membrane . Upon placement, the processed dehydrated amnion membrane became hydrated and self-adhered to the area thus eliminating the need for suturing. Immediately after placing the membrane, the reflected flap was repositioned over the amnion membrane and secured with interrupted direct loop 3-0 nonresorbable silk sutures. The patient was put on systemic analgesics and antibiotics consisting of 500 mg of paracetamol every 6 h and 500 mg of amoxicillin every 8 h for 5 days. The patient was instructed to continue her regular home hygiene care, except in the operated area, in which toothbrushing was discontinued for the 1st 15 days after surgery and plaque control was maintained by means of gentle topical applications of chlorhexidine gluconate in saturated cotton swabs twice a day. Gentle toothbrushing with an extra soft-bristle toothbrush (Postsurgical toothbrush) using Charter's method was then initiated. The sutures were removed 1-week after the surgery. Healing was uneventful and at 4 months and 6 months of follow-up, there was substantial defect fill in the furcation area with residual vertical dimension of <2 mm at 4 months and residual vertical dimension of <1 mm at 6 months , representing a significant percentage of bone deposition.