A 52 year-old Caucasian male was admitted, on emergency basis to the orthopaedic department with six weeks history of increasing mid thoracic pain, change in gait, poor balance, subjective weakness, numbness of the lower trunk and legs. He didn't report any neurogenic bladder or bowel disturbances and he was otherwise fit and well.
The patient had a right sided orchidectomy 3 years ago, for stage one well differentiated Leydig cell tumour. He was diagnosed having an enlarged right testis. No adjuvant therapy was given perioperatively. Afterwards, he followed up periodically and Computer Tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis were performed on the basis of evaluation and potential metastasizing of the neoplasm.
Two years following the primary operation the patient complained of back pain. Plain films of the spine showed an "ivory" vertebra at T4. CT scan depicted a definite abnormality in the body of T4 with no evidence of general metastatic disease. There was no soft tissue extension and no vertebral body collapse. None of the visceral organs was involved and this was the only detectable pathological sign. The bones scan showed intense uptake in T4 and no other sights of increasing radioisotope uptake. The blood tests, including tumour markers, didn't show any abnormality. At that stage, the oncologists decided against biopsy as they felt it was potentially hazardous and the patient will have little to gain from it. Accordingly, in absence of symptoms and tenderness, a "wait and see" policy was adopted.
Nine months later the patient admitted to the Spinal Unit in an emergency base complaining of increasing mid thoracic pain, change in gait, poor balance, subjective weakness, numbness of the lower trunk and legs. Examination revealed a broad base gait, able to walk in toes and heel, absence of tenderness or masses over T4 level, hypo aesthesia below T5 level more pronounced over the left side, exaggerated tendon reflexes in the lower limbs, un-sustained ankle clonus bilaterally and normal plantar reflexes. No objective motor weakness detected and intact perianal sensations were recorded.
X-rays of the thoracic spine revealed a sclerotic appearance of the T4 vertebral body and an urgent Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed quite dramatic change in the appearance of T4 compare to the previous CT despite the maintenance of vertebral body height. Furthermore, T5 vertebral body was also involved, but to a lesser extent. There was a soft tissue expansion into the extradural space causing spinal cord compression .
Blood test, including inflammatory and tumour markers, were within normal values and a dose of 16 mg Dexamethasone daily was started. A CT guided biopsy was performed and the histological appearance of the lesion was identical to the primary tumour.
After discussion with the patient, a decision was made to perform urgent T4 and T5 corpectomies, decompression of the spinal cord and reconstruction of the vertebral bodies. Anterior surgery was contemplated as the compression was coming only from the front and the tension band of the posterior elements, at the involved level, were intact.
Surgery was performed through a right subscapular 3rd rib thoracotomy, and the cord function was monitored by Somatosensory Evoked Potentials (SSEPs) throughout the procedure. After complete canal decompression, reconstruction was achieved by a Synmesh packed with bone graft obtained from the excised rib. Anterior Universal Spine System (USS) II system was added to augment the construct .
The patient was then transferred to Intensive Therapy Unit (ITU) and had an uneventful recovery. He discharged one week following operation with clear neurological improvement. Three weeks postoperatively, he developed a right-sided pneumonia, which resolved with antibiotics. The histological evaluation of the excised tumour was identical to the primary.
Because it was a solitary metastasis and eradication of the tumour wasn't feasible by surgical excision alone as it had already extended beyond the bony limits, postoperative radiotherapy with radical intent was applied. The duration of the radiotherapy was a daily 5 weeks course and the dose was 50 Gy in 25 fractions to the area of T4/T5. Neither side effect from radiotherapy nor skin reactions was reported.
The patient was followed up periodically by Technetium bone scans and CT scans of chest, abdomen and pelvis. At the last follow-up visit-two years and six months postoperatively he was disease-free based according to the results of repeated scans. He complained only for a minimal numbness of the right foot and slight winging of the right scapula.