A 30-year-old male patient was diagnosed with a PC in 2013, for which he underwent a resection. During the following years, the patient suffered several local relapses, for which 5 more procedures were performed, including local resections, a total thyroidectomy and both a central and bilateral neck dissection. In 2019, the patient presented for the first time in our hospital with persisting PTH-mediated hypercalcemia, while under maximally tolerated dose of the calcimimetic cinacalcet (90mg twice daily) and bone-antiresorptive therapy with denosumab (120 mg once monthly). CT scan showed two suspicious retrosternal lesions, a paratracheal node and a possible adenopathy in lymph node level III at the right side. All suspect locations were resected and a thymectomy was performed. Pathology confirmed the presence of PC retrosternally, in level III on the right, and retroclavicular and paratracheal on the left. As shown in and , serum calcium and PTH levels decreased after the surgical procedure, and cinacelet and denosumab could be stopped.
Eight months later, the patient experienced a relapse of symptomatic hypercalcemia, in which nausea was predominant, however without convincing tumoral focus at imaging (FDG PET-CT, MRI of the neck, CT of the mediastinum). Cinacalcet was restarted at an intermediate dose. Unfortunately, serum calcium and PTH kept on rising, for which the dose of cinacalcet was increased to maximal dose and denosumab was restarted. With this medical therapy, calcium levels stabilized, remaining at high-normal levels. However, during the following months, serum PTH increased progressively. Repeated imaging now showed a nodular, contrast-capturing lesion between the anonymous vein and the sternum, with erosion of the sternum and the first rib on the left .
As the lesion was considered inoperable, the multidisciplinary tumor board decided to opt for a radiation treatment (RT). When patient presented at our RT department, he suffered from severe nausea, which could have been either a side effect from the calcimimetics or directly due to the hypercalcemia. He did not experience pain due to the erosive lesion in the sternum. Based on the few literature that existed, it was decided to deliver a radiation dose of 70 Gray (Gy) in 35 fractions of 2 Gy, using an arc technique with 6 MV photons. Gross Tumor Volume (GTV) was contoured manually and defined as demonstrable macroscopic disease on CT. The Clinical Target Volume (CTV) consisted of a 10-millimetre margin around the GTV, corrected for bone and air cavities. Another 5 millimetres were added for the construction of the Planning Target Volume. Volumetric Modulated Arc Therapy (VMAT) was used, using 2 arcs allowing a precise shaping of the dose to the form of the tumor. Daily cone beam CT imaging was performed to improve the precision and accuracy of the delivery of radiation treatment. Just before the start of RT, the patient developed acute sternal pain, caused by a sternal fracture for which a conservative treatment with analgesics was proposed. The pain disappeared quickly during the RT.
During the radiation treatment, the patient reported markedly less gastro-intestinal discomfort. At the end of the treatment, he did not need any symptomatic anti-nausea medication and there was significant weight gain. Furthermore, there was a good tolerance for the treatment: patient developed a grade I dermatitis, there was no dysphagia. Serum calcium and PTH levels were checked weekly during RT and showed a progressive decline ( and ).
Two months after the end of the RT, the patient was still free from nausea and PTH and calcium levels were progressively decreasing. On CT-scan, a small volume increase of the sternal lesion was described. This increase was presumably due to pseudo-progression resulting from tumor necrosis, based on the density of the lesion and decreasing levels of calcium and PTH . Five months later, the clinical and biochemical situation was stable and CT-scan showed a volume decrease of the sternal lesion . The patient did not experience any pain and nausea was controlled under maximal dose of calcimimetics and bone antiresorptive therapy. Unfortunately, two months later, he experienced a return of gastro-intestinal disturbances. An increase of serum calcium levels was observed and a volume increase of the sternal lesion was confirmed on FDG PET-CT. Patient was referred for inclusion in a medical trial, in which he is currently treated with PARP (poly ADP ribose polymerase)-inhibition.