A 53-year-old multiparous female (gravida 5 para 5 by normal vaginal delivery), mother of 5 children menopause for at least seven years living in Hamadan, located in the western part of Iran. She had complained of asymptomatic swelling of the right labia major. She was referred to a gynecologist due to a painless mass with a gradual increase in size. She was sexually active. Her family history was negative regarding cancer. She had no comorbidity or drug consumption other than vitamins. She operated on with impression of Bartholin mass. A mass of about 6 × 6 × 3 cm size was removed. The pathology report of the specimen was dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) and the margin of the lesion was positive.
In immunohistochemical study, CD34 and K167 were positive, which was consistent with the diagnosis of dermatofibrosarcoma. The patient, after six months of the first operation, returned with pain and rapidly growing mass in the vulva. She was referred to our center as the tertiary level center of gyneco-oncology. Clinical exam revealed a non-tender mass with a rigid consistency of about 7 × 8 cm in the right labia major with clitoral involvement and separate from the urethra. The skin covering the mass was intact. In the review of the slides and completion of IHC in our center, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans was confirmed .
History, physical exam and pathologic report of the case presented in the joint clinic of gyneco-oncology for decision making and management, as the routine of cancer patients in Imam Hossein Medical Center. The patient underwent radical vulvectomy and resection of the margin of about 2-3 cm along with bilateral inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy due to deep palpation of inguinal lymph nodes. The margins of the mass lateral and deeply were negative in the frozen section. Morphology of the mass and removed specimen are shown in the images. The macroscopic specimen of the mass was 5 × 7 × 10 cm in size . According to Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) staging system for sarcomas, this patient was in stage IA and based on TNM system was in T2N0M0. Microscopic examination revealed: Hypercellular neoplasm in dermis comprising monomorphic spindle cells with high mitotic activity, some hyperchromatic nuclei arranged in palisading fashion. Microscopic and IHC study confirmed the conversion of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans to fibrosarcoma . In 18 months follow-up, the site of surgery is normal.