We present the case of a 40-year-old male with no significant past medical history, aside from a penicillin allergy, who presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of severe right elbow pain, swelling, and limited passive and active range of motion for one day. He reported a prodromal flu-like syndrome of subjective fever, chills, and myalgias with associated right-arm soreness for two days prior to symptom onset. The patient stated that his right elbow started to swell and he progressively experienced increased pain over the following day. He attempted to use heating pads and ice without symptomatic relief. On further history, he reported recent unprotected sex with a new sexual partner in addition to right knee and hip pain without a history of trauma. At the time of his presentation, he denied any penile discharge, burning during urination, or pain in other joints.
On physical exam, the patient was in moderate distress due to pain. His right elbow was erythematous, edematous, warm, and tender to palpation. Passive and active range of motion were limited and worsened pain. Mild effusion was noted on palpation of the joint. He was initially afebrile with a temperature of 99.9°F, mildly tachycardic to 110 beats per minute, normotensive, and had 100% oxygen saturation. Labs were remarkable for an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 68 millimeters per hour (mm/hr) (reference range: 0–30 mm/hr), borderline leukocytosis of 10.7*103 cells per milliliter (mL) (4.0–11.0*103 cells/mL), mild hyponatremia, and mild hypokalemia. Complete blood count, creatinine kinase, and lactic acid were within normal limits. Blood cultures were obtained for Gram stain and culture.
Right elbow radiograph revealed joint effusion without evidence of fracture or soft tissue swelling . Arthrocentesis from the right elbow was performed with 18 mL of aspirate. Synovial fluid analysis revealed cloudy fluid with small clots, a SF WBC count of 22,000 cells per cubic millimeter /(mm3) (reference range: 0–200 cells/mm3), 90% segmented neutrophils, and 66,500 red blood cells. Synovial fluid was cultured and sent for Gram staining. Intravenous (IV) ketorolac and morphine were given for pain control, and the patient was empirically started on IV clindamycin for suspected skin and soft tissue infection. While he was in the ED, there was suspicion for an inflammatory process of the joint with an overlying soft tissue infection. However, due to the risk of SA, he was admitted to the floor for further workup and evaluation.
On the floor, antibiotics were switched to aztreonam and vancomycin by the primary team due to suspicion of SA. Rapid human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1/2 antibody/antigen and gonorrhea-chlamydia tests were ordered. Orthopedic and infectious disease teams were consulted for further management and recommendations. Further laboratory testing revealed HIV 1/2 antibody positive, absolute cluster of differentiation (CD4) count of 82 cells/mm3 (reference range: 518–1,472 cells/mm3), CD4:CD8 of 0.2 (0.9–5.0), and positive blood cultures for H. influenzae. Upon blood culture results, the infectious disease team switched antibiotics to ceftriaxone and vancomycin to cover for H influenzae bacteremia. Due to the low CD4 count of 82 cells/mm3, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was started for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) prophylaxis. The patient underwent right elbow arthrotomy, irrigation, and excisional debridement of the synovium and subcutaneous tissue. Postoperatively, he experienced intermittent fevers that responded to acetaminophen and improved over a few days.
During his hospital course, the patient experienced polyarticular joint pain in his right knee and hip with swelling and difficulty weight bearing. This development was concerning for spread of H influenzae to the right hip and/or knee. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right hip revealed trace effusion with edema within and surrounding the inferior segment of the visualized right iliopsoas muscle. This MRI finding was concerning for myositis secondary to H influenzae bacteremia. The patient then underwent aspiration of the right knee, which revealed no organisms and a SF WBC count of 3057 cells/mm3. Aspiration of the right hip also revealed an unremarkable SF analysis. Given systemic symptoms, echocardiogram was performed to rule out endocarditis and was negative for vegetations. As pain, swelling, and fever improved, a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line was placed for outpatient IV antibiotics.
After eight days of in-patient evaluation and treatment, the patient’s clinical status and acute febrile illness had improved significantly. Per infectious disease final recommendations, the patient was discharged with a PICC line to receive IV ceftriaxone 2 grams daily for four weeks. He was also instructed to continue trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for PJP prophylaxis and to follow up with infectious disease as an outpatient to begin anti-retroviral therapy.