Initially, a 56-year-old man complained about left scrotum sagging and swelling. Further, the physical examinations revealed the presence of a sizeable palpable mass throughout the left abdomen. Further, the biochemical laboratory examination resulted in hemoglobin levels of 106 g/L. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination revealed a colossal mass shadow in the left retroperitoneal cavity. The surrounding tissues and organs were ultimately squeezed and disorganized, especially the structure of the left renal hilum, assuming that they might have been invaded . Further, no lung abnormality by the chest computed tomography (CT) and no apparent irregularities in other examinations were found. Therefore, the panel of surgeons has decided to operate and resect the tumor.
During the open surgery, in the supine position and with a supra-infra umbilical incision, we detected a solid tumor of approximately 3 × 2 cm2 in the capsule of the lower pole of the left kidney. Moreover, it was observed that the massive retroperitoneal tumor adhered to the surrounding tissues and organs, especially between the tumor and the left kidney, leading to difficulty in its separation. In addition, the network of blood vessels near the left renal pedicle was surrounded and penetrated deeply into the tumor. Thus, we decided to remove the tumor and the left kidney and clean the surrounding adipose tissue as much as possible. The excision site was approximately in the dimensions of 20 * 16 * 10 cm3 and weighed about 2.5 kg . Further, the histopathological changes were demonstrated using hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemical stainings of the excised tumor tissues and observed under Olympus BX53 microscope equipped with Golden Domain LIR System V1.0.22.526 (Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan). These microscopic observations showed that the left lower pole extracapsular tumor and the giant retroperitoneal tumor were of dedifferentiated LPSs. Remarkably, no tumor infiltration was found in the left kidney, ureter, and blood vessels. Moreover, the immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis results indicated the cells were MDM2-positive .
After the initial three months of surgery during follow-up, no tumor and metastasis recurrence in other parts of the patient were observed in the surgical area. Subsequently, the patient had no significant complaints during the 6-month postoperative follow-up. Nevertheless, the abdominal MRI showed nodular shadows on the left side of the adrenal gland and the left side of the lumbar muscle, with sizes of 2.5 * 2.1 cm2 and 1.5 * 1.3 cm2, respectively. In addition, the chest CT revealed multiple lung nodules, which were confirmed to be tumor metastasis .
While compiling this case report, the patient received the targeted therapy with anlotinib, administered for three months. Further, the chest CT results after treatment indicated that the metastatic tumor size was significantly reduced compared to before treatment. Nonetheless, the abdominal MRI indicated no significant change in the size of retroperitoneal tumors .