In April 2019, a 50-year-old woman was admitted to our Intensive Care Unit for septic shock related to a necrotizing soft tissue infection.
Her medical history mentions a complicated bypass surgery 1 year before followed by severe malnutrition still in need of enteral feeding supplement. Earlier diagnoses include arterial hypertension and discoid lupus erythematosus. She never required immunosuppressive therapy.
A few hours before admission, the patient developed a sudden intense leg pain, associated with malaise. At the emergency room, she presented hyperaemia and swelling of both anterior thighs and right abdominal flank . Blood pressure was 50/35 mmHg, heart rate 140 bpm and temperature 35.3 °C. Arterial blood lactate was 12 mmol/L (N < 2 mmol/L).
Intravenous fluids resuscitation was started with high doses of vasopressor (norepinephrine up to 6 mcg/kg/min) and empirical antimicrobial treatment combining piperacillin-tazobactam, amikacin and clindamycin. Septic shock was associated with severe disseminated intravascular coagulation (prothrombin time 30 s, activated platelet time superior to 150 s, platelets 6000/mm3, D -dimers 25,000 mcg/L, fibrinogen 85 mg/dL) and acute kidney injury (creatinine 2 mg/dL, urea 96 mg/dL and oliguria 20 mL/hour).
Urgent surgical exploration of the skin lesions revealed extensive subcutaneous necrosis not encompassing the fascia. The lesions underwent extensive debridement .
All surgical sample and blood cultures returned positive for Neisseria meningitidis. The first blood culture drawn at admission being so after 9 h. The strain isolated was identified as a serogroup W subtype W: P1.5,2: F1–1: ST-11 (cc11). Genetic comparison based on Core Genome Multilocus Sequence Typing (cgMLST) using the international Neisseria public database for molecular typing (pubMLST) indicated that the isolate belonged to the UK 2013 lineage. The sequence has been deposited into the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) database and is available under study accession number PRJEB37139.
Antibiotic treatment was de-escalated to benzylpenicillin related to a minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) measured at 0,06 mg/L.
A lumbar puncture performed at day 2 after coagulation correction returned normal values.
After 52 days spent in ICU with several complications occurring, the patient benefited from successful repair skin grafts and was discharged to the hospital ward 10 days later.
Three months before this necrotizing cellulitis, the patient had undergone an immune status workup by a nephrologist for low-level proteinuria. ANA/ANCAs were negative, while C3 and total haemolytic activity (CH50) levels were low at 55 and 19% respectively. A normal C4 level was found. Complement had been reported normal at the occasion of the earlier diagnostic investigation for discoid lupus erythematosus.