A 74-year-old Chinese man sought evaluation at our hospital for left-sided sciatic pain upon standing or walking for 5 min of approximately 1 month’s duration. At the first visit to our hospital, there were no skin lesions. On physical examination, sciatic pain provocation was observed by extension and left bending of the trunk. There was no apparent motor weakness, sensory disturbance, or vesico-rectal disturbance. Bilateral dorsalis pedis artery pulsations were palpable bilaterally. The patient claimed that he was able to ride a bicycle for approximately 1 h.
A plain X-ray showed slight anterior listhesis of the 4th lumbar (L4) vertebral body without instability on a flexion/extension lateral X-ray. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed spinal canal stenosis between the 4th and 5th lumbar spine (L4/5) level and redundant nerve roots superior to the most stenotic level . Thus, we diagnosed the patient with sciatica induced by spinal canal stenosis.
We treated the patient with oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS). Because NSAIDS had a minimal effect, a caudal epidural block was attempted using a mixture of a local anesthetic (lidocaine) and steroid. The caudal epidural block provided symptom relief for a few days.
Because repeated caudal epidural blocks (twice in 2 weeks) failed to relieve the symptoms, we considered decompressive surgery for the L4/5 level of stenosis. At that time, the patient complained of a skin rash involving his left foot for several days. A vesicular rash and erythema were observed on the dorsal and plantar surfaces of the great toe and lateral malleolus . There were no skin rashes involving the buttock, thigh, and lower leg. Pain was diffusely localized to the left foot, lower leg, and lateral thigh. The magnitude of pain was severe, even at rest (85/100 mm on a visual analogue scale of 100 mm). Thus, we consulted a dermatologist in our hospital. The patient was diagnosed with herpes zoster in the left L5 area based on clinical findings, including the characteristics of the pain (along the L5 area) and vesicular rash and erythema in the L5 dermatome.
The patient was treated with famciclovir (1,500 mg/day) and NSAIDs. After 1 week of medication, the skin rash resolved and pain relief was obtained.