A 64-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a 5-months history of dull pain in the right upper quadrant abdomen. The pain was intermittent without obvious incentive. She had no fever, nausea, vomiting, or hematemesis. The physical examination was unremarkable. Alcohol and nicotine consumption was denied. The family history was non-contributory. Notably, she had a history of hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatitis B surface antigen, e antibody, core antibody were positive. Complete blood count, chemistry, coagulation, and liver function tests were within the normal limits. The tumor markers including AFP、CA125、CA19-9、CA15-3 and CA72-4 were not elevated.
MRI scan obtained at other hospital revealed a 1.6 × 1.2 cm mass in the right liver lobe. Ultrasound (US) of the liver showed a hypoechoic subcapsular nodule of 20 × 11 mm with a well-defined margin, regular shape, and light vascularity. An abdominal plain CT scan revealed a hypodense mass measuring 1.8 × 1.3 cm underneath the liver capsule of the segment V, and the average CT value was 34 HU. An area along the left border of the mass showed even lower density, with CT values averaging 18 HU. The mass had a well-defined boundary and caused retraction of the adjacent hepatic capsule . In addition, multiple small cystic lesions with irregular margins were scattered in both lobes of the liver, especially in the subcapsular area. The largest one was 0.5 cm in diameter . After intravenous contrast medium injection, the mass showed a marked enhancement in the arterial phase followed by wash-out in the venous phase. The lower density area showed slight enhancement . No enhancement was seen in those small cystic lesions . Intrahepatic bile ducts looked normal. There were no enlarged lymph nodes.
The patient subsequently underwent partial resection of liver’s right lobe. Her postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged on postoperative day 5. Gross examination of the resection specimen revealed a 1.5 × 1.5 × 1.2 cm subcapsular firm mass with irregular outline and whitish surface. Histological examination showed that the lesion was composed of tubular structures embedded in a fibrous stroma and the tubules had variable sizes and irregular shapes, with some of them dilated to cysts . Bile-like materials were observed in some lumens of the tubulocystic structures . The epithelial lining was a single layer of cuboidal to low columnar cells and apocrine-like changes were seen in some areas . A part of the lesion showed crowded tubular structures with closely packed nuclei. In these areas, the nucleoli were prominent and the nuclear membrane showed distinct contour. Mitotic figures could be easily detected. And invasive growth in the adjacent liver parenchyma could be seen focally . Immunohistochemically, the epithelial cells stained positive for CK7、CK19、CEA. Ki67 proliferation index in the benign part of the tumor was less than 10% , and that of the malignant part was 20–30% . Based on the histopathological result, the final diagnosis was BAF with malignant transformation (middle to well-differentiated adenocarcinoma).