A 56-year-old immunocompetent woman with nonischemic cardiomyopathy with automated implanted cardioverter defibrillator (AICD), bioprosthetic mitral valve replacement secondary to rheumatic heart disease, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation on anticoagulation, and history of nephrolithiasis presented to the emergency department (ED) with LUQ pain. She denied any recent history of trauma. Laboratory data and computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast were unremarkable. Secondary review of imaging done by an independent radiologist for publication confirmed a lack of splenic pathology. The patient was noted to have hematuria and discharged from the ED with suspicion for nephrolithiasis-associated renal colic from a stone that had already been passed out of the urethra. Five days later, she was asked to return to the hospital due to positive blood cultures growing Haemophilus parainfluenzae. On admission, she met modified Duke criteria for possible infective endocarditis (IE). She was started on IV ceftriaxone and continued on apixaban home regimen. A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was performed without evidence of AICD lead or valvular vegetations, although mild mitral valve regurgitation was noted.
Persistent LUQ pain by hospital day three prompted a follow-up CT with oral and IV contrast of the abdomen and pelvis that revealed a large hemoperitoneum with a splenic hematoma measuring 15 × 9 × 15 centimeters. There was no definitive contrast blush, but active splenic hemorrhage was strongly favored by the reading radiologist. Her hemoglobin had dropped from 11.9 grams per deciliter (g/dL) to 7.1 g/dL (reference range: 11.2–15.7 g/dL). Emergent angiogram confirmed active extravasation at the inferior pole of the spleen during selective angiography of the splenic artery, and the splenic artery was embolized with seven coils and gel foam. The patient received three units of packed red blood cells. Apixaban had been held for more than 12 hours, and no reversal agent was indicated. Further intensive care unit and hospital course were uncomplicated, and the patient was discharged on day eight to complete a six-week course of IV ceftriaxone on home anticoagulation regimen.
She returned to a nearby hospital the next day for continued abdominal pain. No evidence of bleeding was seen at that time, but anticoagulation was held for a total of four months. No neurovascular complications were evidenced during this period nor recurrence of bleeding when anticoagulation was restarted. Surveillance cultures after antibiotic regimen completion were negative, and follow-up TEE did not show new findings.