A 68-year-old Thai male presented with advanced-stage cecal adenocarcinoma accompanied by liver and peritoneal metastases. He also exhibited symptoms of rigidity, tremor, and dysphagia, which progressed to tachypnea, tachycardia, diaphoresis, and eventually confusion over 20 hours. One day before his symptoms occurred, he was admitted for the first cycle of chemotherapy with a standard dose of modified FOLFOX-6 (mFOLFOX-6: oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin), 400 mg/m2 of 5-FU administered as bolus, and 1200 mg/m2 infusion in 23 hours on days 1 and 2. His symptoms started approximately 1 day after the bolus dose administration and peaked during day 2 of infusion. He received two doses of intravenous metoclopramide 10 mg 6 hours before his symptoms occurred . No other medication was given, and the patient was previously fully independent and did not exhibit neurologic abnormality.
The patient’s vital signs were as follows: body temperature 36.9 °C, blood pressure 169/113 mmHg, regular heart rate 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 100% on room air. Physical examination revealed mild cachexia, diaphoresis, and confusion. Systemic examination results were otherwise within normal limits. Neurologic examination showed marked rigidity at the bilateral arms and legs (Additional file : Video S1). No tremor (including the perioral area), myoclonus, or dystonia was observed. The patient was confused but was able to follow simple one-step commands. Spastic dysarthria was also observed. The results of other cranial nerve examinations were normal. Both pupils were 3 mm equal and reactive to light bilaterally. The patient’s resting eye position was in the midline with normal spontaneous eye movement in all directions. The result of fundoscopic examination was normal with no papilledema. The rest of the neurologic examination results were normal, including the deep tendon reflexes. The patient was diagnosed with NMS as a result of generalized rigidity and acute confusional state. The initial blood test revealed mildly elevated CPK level of 249 mg/dL, mild anemia, hemoglobin level of 11.2 g/dL, leukocytosis, total white blood cell count of 15.5 × 109/L (neutrophil, 84%), and acidosis with bicarbonate of 17 mEq/L. Metoclopramide rarely causes NMS, especially when it develops acutely within less than a day. However, given the findings of leukocytosis, and because no other explanation can be provided, he was administered oral bromocriptine 2.5 mg every 8 hours and intravenous crystalloids.
The patient regained his consciousness after 6 hours, and his motor activity returned to normal after less than a day. He was discharged with the diagnosis of improved mild NMS. Oral bromocriptine was tapered to every 12 hours after 1 week. However, further episodes of the described event in this patient occurred 2 weeks apart after receiving the second cycle of mFOLFOX-6 . Metoclopramide or anti-psychotic drugs were not given at that time, which prompted reconsideration of the diagnosis. This identical episode occurred less than 1 day after receiving the same chemotherapy regimen (Additional file : Video S2).
His blood test revealed CPK level of 151 mg/dL, marked leukocytosis, total white blood cell count of 17.1 × 109/L (neutrophil, 87%), lactic acidosis with bicarbonate of 9 mEq/L, and arterial lactate of 10.1 mEq/L. Chest radiograph did not show infiltration, and his urinalysis result was completely normal. His blood culture later was also negative. He was resuscitated given his abnormal blood tests, and bromocriptine was restarted with an improvement of his symptoms within 2 days and total resolution after 3 days. Nevertheless, the patient’s CPK level and the recurrent event prompted reconsideration of the diagnosis. An MRI scan of the brain revealed widespread white matter change consistent with leukoencephalopathy . The levels of serum thiamine (thiamine pyrophosphate) and ammonia were 10.9 μg/dL (28–85 μg/dL) and 32 μg/dL (30–120 μg/dL), respectively. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) testing was not performed as it is not readily available in our hospital. The thiamine level was found to be very low; thus, supplementation was initiated with intravenous thiamine 200 mg once daily for 3 days, and he was continued on oral thiamine 100 mg per day. Lumbar puncture was not conducted as the symptoms rapidly resolved. The diagnosis of 5-FU-induced acute leukoencephalopathy was established, and the patient’s third cycle of 5-FU was adjusted to 600 mg/m2 continuous infusion on days 1 and 2, which is half the original dose of 5-FU, and concomitant high-dose intravenous thiamine 500 mg every 8 hours for 3 days with no issue.