This 87 year old female pensioner presented for the treatment of recurrent nocturnal leg cramps to our family medicine practice. She reported a history of intense, painful sensations in the leg who were associated with sudden muscle hardness. The symptoms regularly appeared in both calves similarly during the night but never during daytime. They had been occurring regularly for five years with a low to intermediate pain intensity. Since three weeks symptoms had been worsening and the patient now described an “intense pain”. She had been treated with quinine by her former family doctor in the past and therefore began to self-medicate with quinine 200 mg once daily from her own stocks achieving only short term symptomatic relief. She asked the consulting doctor to give her another quinine prescription.
The patient had moved here about a year ago and had been a patient of our practice since. She was in very good general condition (Barthel-ADL Score 100 points) and enjoyed good quality of life despite the leg cramps. There was no history of neurologic disorders, hypoglycaemia, diabetes, alcoholism or hypothyroidism. Information on earlier diagnostics concerning the leg cramps was not available.
Her past medical history and medication is displayed in Table .
We conducted a clinical examination based on uptodate’s guideline on nocturnal leg cramps .
The 87 old female patient presented in good physical condition. Inspection and palpation of the musculoskeletal system showed no physical abnormalities like muscle atrophy or hypertrophy, bone abnormalities, muscle tenderness or stiffness. Skin examination of the lower extremities was unremarkable despite scars from knee replacement on both sides. Strong arterial pulses were palpable in all relevant locations. Examination of the sensory as well as motor system yielded no pathological findings.
Structural disorders such as flat feet, genu recurvatum, and the hypermobility syndrome were ruled out.
Laboratory testing and other studies are usually not required in diagnosing nocturnal leg cramps .
Still we took a blood sample including Creatinine, GFR, Vitamin B12 and folic acid. Renal function had deteriorated compared to prior laboratory findings (Creatinine from 0.91 (range 0.51–0.95) to 1.42, GFR from 64 to 38) (see Fig. ). The values for tested vitamins were within normal limits. As the blood sample had to be stored for analysis on the following day (outpatient, office setting), we could not analyse creatinine kinase (CK) values. Nocturnal leg cramps are most commonly idiopathic in nature . In this case, past medical history, physical examination and laboratory findings yielded no pathological results. A graphic display is given in the timeline.
In preparing the demanded quinine prescription, we conducted a medication interaction analysis. The analysis showed a warning for the combination of quinine and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Quinine is a CYP3A4 inhibitor, the very enzyme which is involved in the metabolism of most statins . Thereby it may increase blood levels of simvastatin by reducing its first-pass metabolism. One case report documents renal failure, rhabdomyolysis, haemolytic uremic syndrome and disseminated intravascular coagulation after ingestion of quinine along with atorvastatin .
Cramps qualify as symptomatic myopathy which is associated with statin therapy and is dose, blood level and cytochrome metabolism dependent [, ]. Therefore we considered the combination of the statin and quinine or the statin alone as the most likely cause of the nocturnal leg cramps.
Based on these reports we discussed the possible medication interaction with the patient and gave her a resume of the positive effects of the statin. Shared decision making led to an immediate discontinuation of simvastatin and quinine.
We reviewed the patient two and three weeks after the discontinuation of her medication. After three weeks she reported to having been “cramp free” for one week for the first time in years, while renal function was improved (Creatinine 1.03, GFR 55) (see Fig. ). We scheduled a consultation two months and six months later in which the patient continued to be without cramps.