A 63-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the hospital complaining of fever, worsened gait unsteadiness, dysarthria, and vomiting for one day. His wife stated that he experienced a transient episodic convulsion. He was conscious during the convulsion, which had alleviated after 20 s.
During the 4 mo prior to his presentation at the hospital, the patient exhibited gradual deterioration of his memory and attention, as well as the onset of mild depressive symptoms; he would occasionally experience difficulty expressing himself, was unwilling to talk to others, and exhibited indifference during this period. His wife stressed that they did not consider her husband’s condition seriously, as his clinical symptoms were not persistent.
The patient had a 5-year medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia. He had been sweating excessively and experienced constipation for about 1 year without any recent weight loss.
The patient denied any history of viral infection or autoimmune disease. He had no notable family history and consumed a moderate amount of alcohol for 30 years.
His vital signs were as follows: Temperature of 38 ˚C, pulse rate of 66 beats/min with a regular rhythm, and blood pressure of 150/90 mmHg. His respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and chest and abdominal examinations were all normal.
The patient had poor consciousness, dysarthria, and a drawling speech. His pupils were equal in size, round, but abnormally small in diameter (d = 1.5 mm); they were sensitive to direct and indirect light stimulation. He had mild horizontal nystagmus. His muscle strength and tone were normal. His tendon reflexes had diminished. The patient had obvious ataxia and no meningeal irritation. The findings of the other neurological examinations were unremarkable.
The lumbar puncture revealed the following: Intracranial pressure, 140 mmH2O; protein level, 0.72 g/L (normal, 0.15-0.45 g/L); immunoglobulin G, 38 mg/L (normal, 0-34 mg/L); and glucose, ion, and cell number, normal. Routine blood tests revealed that the patient's leukocyte count was high at 13.5 × 109/L (normal, 4-9 × 109/L), with a neutrophilic percentage of 57%. C-reactive protein was found to be 28 mg/L (normal, 0-10 × 109/L). No viruses or bacteria were found in the serum or cerebrospinal fluid. The results of the other laboratory tests were unremarkable.
At the level of the cerebellum, MRI revealed symmetrical slightly high-intensity signals in the bilateral cerebral hemispheres, middle cerebellar peduncle, and paravermal regions. These findings were associated with atrophy of the vermis on T2-weighted (T2W) and fluid attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences . The corresponding lesions were characterized by high signal intensity on DWI sequences .
At the level of the cerebrum, T2W images demonstrated multiple old lacunar infarcts in the bilateral basal ganglia and cerebral atrophy . The DWI showed high-intensity signals that extended along the corticomedullary junction but not into the deep white matter . Furthermore, the T2W and FLAIR sequences revealed significant leukoencephalopathy around the paraventricular region of the bilateral lateral ventricles. The corresponding leukoencephalopathy was associated with slightly hyperintense signals on the apparent diffusion coefficient sequence .
A biopsy specimen of 6 mm in diameter was obtained from 10 cm above the lateral malleolus after the administration of local anesthesia. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions in the nucleus of sweat duct epithelium under a light microscope, while immunohistochemical staining showed that the inclusion bodies were positive for anti-p62 . Under an electron microscope, spherical inclusion bodies composed of fibrous substances without membranes were noted .
A repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction assay revealed 72 GGC repeats in the 5′ untranslated region of NOTCH2NLC . Screening for the FMR1 gene mutation excluded a diagnosis of fragile X–associated tremor ataxia syndrome.