A 47-year-old Caucasian man initially presented with a two-month history of progressive bilateral hand tremor, difficulty walking, behavioral changes and headache. On examination he was afebrile, with poor memory recall, bilateral action and postural tremor, diffuse hyperreflexia with the presence of Babinski signs bilaterally, frontal release signs, bilateral dysmetria and marked truncal ataxia resulting in an inability to walk. His medical history included hypertension, anxiety disorder and tobacco use. Medications included citalopram and lisinopril.
T2-weighted fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) brain MRI revealed diffuse, symmetrical, increased intensity throughout the white matter in his centrum semiovale and corona radiata concurrent with bilateral linear enhancement in a radial distribution on the gadolinium-contrasted study . The subcortical ‘U’ fibers of his white and grey matter were spared. No abnormalities were noted in his cerebellum and corpus callosum. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) demonstrated elevated choline, decreased N-acetyl aspartate and no evidence of lactate (not shown). MRI scans of his cervical and thoracic spine were normal. Magnetic resonance and computed tomography angiograms were normal.
Basic and specialized laboratory tests were either normal or negative. Specifically, these included a complete blood count; comprehensive metabolic profile; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; C-reactive protein; vitamins B12, D, E and folate; thyroid profile; human immunodeficiency virus; hepatitis A, B and C panel; angiotensin-converting enzyme; serum protein electrophoresis; serum galactocerebrosidase; arylsulfatase; very long chain fatty acids; polymerase chain reaction for Whipple’s disease; mycoplasma immunoglobulin (Ig) G and IgM; Lyme IgG and IgM; blood cultures; and rheumatologic studies (anti-nuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, C3/C4, anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), anti-ribonucleoprotein, c/p-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-SS-A/B, anti-myeloperoxidase). A urine analysis, urine drug screen and chest X-ray were all negative.
A lumbar puncture showed an opening pressure of 26cm H2O (normal: 50 to 180mm H2O), 240 white blood cells per mm3 (89% lymphocytes, 11% monocytes), 10 red blood cells per mm3, protein 196mg/dL (normal: 15 to 45mg/dL), and glucose 49mg/dL (normal: 45 to 85mg/dL). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) bacterial, viral, fungal, acid-fast bacilli stains and cultures were negative, as was a multiple sclerosis panel (oligoclonal bands, IgG index, and quantitative IgG). His CSF was also negative for anti-Yo and anti-Hu antibodies and cytology was negative for malignancy. CSF polymerase chain reaction studies were negative for herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2, varicella zoster virus, John Cunningham (JC) virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus and parvovirus.
Our patient was initially treated with intravenous antibiotics until infectious studies came back negative. He was then started on intravenous dexamethasone followed by a tapering dose of oral prednisone. Our patient showed a dramatic clinical improvement, was ambulatory in two days, and was discharged from the hospital. One month later, while on oral steroids, he was clinically stable. A repeat lumbar puncture showed an opening pressure of 18cm H2O, 0 white cells per mm3, protein 106mg/dL, and glucose 52mg/dL. T2-weighted FLAIR MRI of his brain showed decreased intensity of the white matter abnormalities with persistence of subtle bands of contrast enhancement (not shown). Nerve conduction studies and electromyography showed no evidence of neuropathy.
Three months later, our patient’s gait began to deteriorate. An examination revealed increased tremulousness, dysmetria and spastic gait. T2-weighted FLAIR MRI of his brain revealed worsening intensity of the white matter changes (not shown). An MRI of his spine showed extensive, diffuse, continuous T2 white matter hyperintensities in his cervical and thoracic spinal cord (C7 to T9, not shown). His CSF revealed 73 white cells per mm3 (98% lymphocytes, 2% monocytes), protein 141mg/dL and glucose 93mg/dL. His IgG level was elevated at 9.9mg/dL but oligoclonal bands were absent.
A right frontal brain biopsy showed numerous perivascular non-caseating granulomas consistent with the granulomatous pattern of PACNS . Our patient was treated with oral prednisone and monthly intravenous cyclophosphamide (750mg/m2) for 12 months. There was improvement in his headache and balance. A neurological examination showed decreased tremor and dysmetria, and his gait had almost normalized. Follow-up brain and spine MRI scans showed improvement in the white matter hyperintensities on FLAIR imaging as well as on the gadolinium-enhanced images .