We report a 16-year old male, HIV + patient (vertical transmission) on second line combined antiretroviral therapy (cART), ABC/3TC + ATV/r regimen, with recent CD4 count of 835 cells/uL. He never had baseline viral load as the service was not available at his follow up area. He presented with progressive forgetfulness and gait imbalance over a period of 4 months. In addition, he has episodic loss of consciousness associated with sudden staring and automatism and hand tremor. He has blurring of visions and paresthesia of lower limbs. Past medical history was relevant for repeated admission for bacterial meningitis at a local hospital; after he presented with fever, headache, and neck pain. At a time he was investigated with CSF analysis, which was repeatedly suggestive of pyogenic meningitis. He was discharged after completion of full course of anti-meningeal dose of antibiotics. He denied any history of treatment for cryptococcal meningitis, no history of bowel or bladder dysfunction or history of upper limb weakness.
Neurological examination was pertinent for cognitive dysfunction with score of 6 on International HIV Dementia Scale (motor speed = 3, psychomotor speed = 2, and memory recall = 1). Patient’s functional status was not assessed formally by using standard tool. However, we have assessed his functional status by asking him about his daily activities, including home and school activities, he reported to have mild functional impairment, but able to live independent of anyone’s help for hid daily life. He fulfilled criteria for HIV-associated mild neurocognitive disorder (MND). Fully conscious and oriented with normal cranial nerves, lower limbs motor power was 4−/5, equivocal plantar responses, mildly increased tone, increased knee reflexes. Has an unsteady gait with flexed trunk and impaired tandem walk. He used to be on cotrimoxazole prophylaxis (CPT) but discontinued shortly because he couldn’t tolerate the drug.
Routine hematological and serological tests were unremarkable. Viral load is 33,008 copies/mL Brain MRI revealed diffuses both cortical and white matter T2 and FLAIR hyperintense lesions, also minimally involving cerebellum, without mass effect . Thoracic MRI revealed abnormal T2 signal prolongation involving the cord, spanning from mid thoracic to conus, which is non-enhancing to contrast agent. Electroencephalography (EEG) study showed severe generalized slowing with evidence of severe focal dysrhythmia around bilateral frontotemporal regions , indicating generalized encephalopathy related to the HAND.
The patient was treated for pulmonary tuberculosis 5 years back (diagnosed based on chest X-ray) and completed his drug regimen and declared cured. On current spine MRI, there are no evidences of Pott disease, which is often radiologically characterized by presences of: wedged shaped vertebral fracture forming gibbus, paraspinous enhancing mass compressing spinal cord mainly in the lower lumbar region. Accordingly, our patient does not have any of these radiological features to make us suspect spine TB. Considering clinical presentations, examination findings, brain and spine MRI findings, EEG findings and higher viral load detection despite fairly maintained CD4 count; the patient was diagnosed as a case of virological failure + HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder + HIV-associated myelopathy + seizure disorder. The patient was started on integrase based regimen (Dolutegravir +3TC + ATV/r). In addition, valproate was started for seizure disorder and physical therapy for spasticity. On 1 month follow up, the patient has improvement in symptoms related to seizure disorders. However, no significant clinical improvement was observed regarding cognitive and gait abnormality. The latter symptoms may take longer time to result in observable clinical improvement.