We report of a 58-year-old woman, who did not suffer from any pre-existing medical conditions, with the only exception of being mildly overweight (BMI 31.25). In particular, she did not smoke, she had no history of migraine, and she did not receive any hormone replacement therapy after menopause, that occurred at age 51. One hour after the execution of her first-time (later revealing as negative) nasopharyngeal swab, while driving home, she likely experienced amnesia: the bystanders reported that the woman pulled over the car, lowered the window and called for rescue, telling she was unable to find the right direction; when she was asked where she was going, she answered she did not remember and began to behave anxiously. The bystanders reported that she could tell her name and other personal information, and that she could herself remember the unlock code of her phone and call her husband. The husband noticed she was disoriented, repeatedly asking the same questions about where she was and what she was doing. This episode lasted for about two hours then reverted; the day after, she was conducted to our attention for evaluation. A memory gap for the episode persisted: she could remember having had the swab tested, then having paid for the test, having left the hospital, and reached the car after the procedure, but she could not remember the following events, including those witnessed by the by-standers and including the call to her husband and its arrival on the place where she had left her car.
Neurological examination was normal. Brain MRI, performed one day after TGA, revealed a hippocampal punctate area of DWI restriction , confirming the clinical suspect. Supra-aortic vessels Duplex ultrasonography and EEG were negative, ruling out mimics. The strict temporal relationship between nasopharyngeal swab and TGA may have been simply coincidental, but we are usually prone to investigate each time carefully the triggers for TGA, since TGA recent anamnesis is often full of peculiar, even bizarre, but usually biologically fitting antecedents.