A 54-year-old man with severe aortic valve stenosis and patent foramen ovale (PFO) was hospitalized in our institution to undergo aortic valve replacement with a biological valve and PFO closure. This patient had a medical history of Ménierè syndrome and underwent surgery with prophylactic administration of cefazolin. The patient exhibited pain in the region of the surgical site, and purulent discharges from the wound were observed on postoperative day (POD) 11. Plain computed tomography (CT) showed no signs of postoperative mediastinitis such as retrosternal fluid and free air. Therefore, at that point, mediastinitis was not suspected. Blood culture and purulent discharges were submitted to culture, and sulbactam/ampicillin (3 g every 8 h) administration was empirically started. Microscopic examination of the purulent discharges showed no bacteria on Gram staining; however, many neutrophil aggregations were observed. The bacterial culture of purulent discharges and blood culture using the BacT/ALERT 3D system (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) was negative. The patient developed fever, and purulent discharges from the wound were observed despite the administration of sulbactam/ampicillin. On POD15, enhanced CT showed the appearance of a retrosternal fluid and free air, and mediastinitis was suspected . Then, re-opening and vacuum-assisted closure for the sternotomy site was started. On POD16, the patient suddenly developed cardiopulmonary arrest, and transthoracic echocardiography showed cardiac tamponade. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support was started, and the patient was moved to the operating room to reopen the chest. Bleeding from the ascending aorta was detected, and rupture of a pseudo-aneurysm caused by mediastinitis was diagnosed. The pseudo-aneurysm originated primarily from the suture lines of a former aortic valve surgery. In addition, the infected aortic wall adjacent to the suture line had become vulnerable. The ascending aorta was repaired using a bovine pericardial patch, and debridement and omentopexy for mediastinitis was performed. The antimicrobial agent was changed to meropenem (1 g every 12 h) and vancomycin after surgery. The dose of antimicrobial agents was reduced due to renal dysfunction. Gram staining of the abscess and tissue sampled from the surgical site did not show any visible microorganisms; however, many neutrophil aggregations were observed. The cardiovascular surgeon consulted the department of infectious disease, and the infectious disease expert suspected postoperative mediastinitis caused by M. hominis or Ureaplasma species. On POD18, to identify M. hominis and Ureaplasma species, abscess and tissue obtained from POD16 and urine obtained on POD17 were cultured using urea-arginine LYO2 broth (bioMérieux). Then, the antimicrobial therapy was changed from meropenem and vancomycin to levofloxacin (250 mg every 24 h) and vancomycin. A color change in the broth was observed 24–48 h after the start of culture . DNA was extracted from the broth using a MORA-EXTRACT DNA extraction kit (Kyokuto Pharmaceuticals Industrial Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using M. hominis, Ureaplasma paruvum, and Ureaplasma urealyticum-specific primers was performed [, ]. All samples were positive for M. hominis, and a final diagnosis of postoperative mediastinitis caused by M. hominis was determined. No growth of other bacteria was detected from the abscess, and therefore, the antimicrobial agent was changed to only levofloxacin on POD21. The two sets of blood cultures sampled on POD16 were negative. The abscess, tissue, and urine samples were also cultured on Brucella HK agar plates (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial Co., Ltd.) under anaerobic conditions at 35 °C. After 4 days of anaerobic culture, numerous pinpoint colony formations became visible on the Brucella HK agar plates. M. hominis was identified from the colonies by PCR using M. hominis-specific primers. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) analysis was also performed with a BD MALDI Biotyper sirius system (Becton, Dickinson and Company, USA) using the MBT Compass 4.1 with reference database MBT Compass library: Ver.9.0.0.0 (8468MSPs) (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). MALDI-TOF MS analysis using pure culture colonies, performed by direct transfer methods as previously described , identified the isolates as M. hominis with a high score value ≥ 2.000.
The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC; μg/mL) values of clindamycin, levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and minocycline were determined using the E-test (bioMérieux) . However, these MIC values were for reference only because the interpretation of MICs determined by the E-test is not mentioned in the criteria of Clinical and Laboratory Standard Institute (CLSI) M43-A .
After surgery, the postoperative course of mediastinitis was good. However, stenosis of the ascending aorta at the repair site was observed using transesophageal echocardiograph which showed that the maximum flow velocity at the stenosis site was 5.1 m/s. This patient could not be weaned from ECMO due to the stenosis. On POD23, thoracic endovascular aortic repair was performed for stenosis of the ascending aorta, and the intra-vertical hematoma was removed by re-opening the chest. After surgery, the patient was able to be weaned off ECMO. Although an abscess was not detected at the surgical site, the hematoma was cultured in urea-arginine LYO2 broth, and the broth changed color after 24 h. In addition, PCR using M. hominis-specific primers was positive. Although the MIC of levofloxacin determined by the E-test was not high, we suspected that the M. hominis isolate was resistant to levofloxacin, and the antimicrobial agent was changed to minocycline (100 mg every 12 h) on POD25. After re-surgery and changes to the antimicrobial agent, the postoperative course was good. Antimicrobial treatment with minocycline was continued for 3 weeks and the patient’s clinical condition improved; the patient was transferred to another hospital on POD80.