A 36-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history experienced recurrent right facial pain in the second and third division of the trigeminal nerve for 27 months. Facial pain was triggered by chewing and tooth brushing, which occurred about 6 times a day with each episode lasting for 10 min. Nine months after the initial onset, facial pain spread to the first division of the trigeminal nerve. Carbamazepine administration slightly alleviated the pain but did not eliminate it; therefore, the patient was referred to our department for further evaluation and treatment. Neurological examination revealed left-sided deafness, left Bruns’ nystagmus, bilateral papilledema, and paroxysmal electric pain in all right trigeminal nerve divisions. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a heterogeneously enhanced mass measuring 4.8 × 3.3 cm in the left cerebellopontine angle (CPA) and a tight cerebellopontine cistern of the right CPA .
For further evaluation of right facial pain, the bilateral BR was obtained using bipolar stimulation by placing the cathode in the supraorbital crease and the anode 2 cm above the cathode. Recording electrodes were placed on the lower eyelids, with a reference electrode near each lateral cantus. Stimulation with 0.2 ms square-wave pulses was measured using Neuropack X1 (Nihon Kohden, Japan). The latency of the R1 and R2 waves ipsilateral and contralateral to the stimulus and the difference between the R1 latency ipsilateral and contralateral to the lesion were measured. We referred to previous study indices of normal neurophysiology values expressed as the mean ± SD in ms: R1, 10.5 ± 1.6; R2 ipsilateral, 30.5 ± 6.4; R2 contralateral, 30.5 ± 3.4; the difference between right and left R1, 1.2; and mean upper limit, +2 SD. The BR was recorded immediately after the neurological examination. Preoperative evaluation of the BR showed a delayed R1 latency after stimulation of the right supraorbital nerve, despite a normal R2 latency and normal R1 and R2 latencies after right and left supraorbital nerve stimulation, respectively, suggesting neuropathy in the afferent pathway between the right REZ and the principal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in the pons .
The tumor was removed using the left retrosigmoid approach under general anesthesia with auditory brainstem response (ABR), motor-evoked potential (MEP), and sensory-evoked potential monitoring. The MEP was used to monitor brainstem injury. During surgery, the preservation of facial nerve function was confirmed using a neural integrity monitor. The ABR and MEP results did not change postoperatively. Finally, complete tumor resection was performed, while avoiding facial nerve and brainstem dysfunction. The tumor was diagnosed as a grade 1 schwannoma based on histopathological examination (the World Health Organization criteria). Because his right facial pain disappeared 5 days after surgery, carbamazepine was gradually tapered off until completely discontinued on the 45th postoperative day. Postoperative MRI demonstrated a significant reduction in brainstem compression and widening of the right cerebellopontine cistern . The BR test performed on the 50th postoperative day showed normalization of the ipsilateral R1 latency, followed by right stimulation and enlargement of the amplitude of the R1 wave, indicating improvements in right trigeminal nerve function . The patient has been free of facial pain for 8 months after surgery without medication.