In December 2020, a 48-year-old housekeeping female was admitted to the Alborz Hospital (Western Iran) due to dorsolumbar pains for over 2 months and fever (the temperature of 37.8–38). She had urinary incontinence during 1 month and declared no close contact with animals, recent travel history, or consumption of unpasteurized dairy products. It also suffered from type 2 diabetes mellitus and rheumatoid arthritis as underlying conditions. She complained of longstanding pain in the back, and lower-back regions. She reported pain and tenderness in the lower back that led to restrictions on back movements. The patient had several negative brucellosis serological tests including Rose Bengal test (RBT), Serum Agglutination test (SAT) and 2-Mercaptoethanol (2ME). For further evaluation, lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and brucellosis was suspected through the involvement of the lumbar disc. The MRI diagnosis of lumbar spine without intravenous contrast showed that patient had disc bulging, left foraminal narrowing at L5-S1, left foraminal narrowing, anterolisthesis grade II at L4-L5 .
However, the lumbar spine was normal in shape and alignment. The vertebral bodies marrow signal intensity and disc space height seemed grossly normal. There was no evidence of canal stenosis and no signal abnormality was observed in spinal cord including conus medullaris. Moreover, the pelvic MRI showed adequately distended urinary bladder with normal wall thickness. No apparent lymphadenophathy and abnormality on soft tissue were visible. The disc tissue sample was collected according to the standard operating practices for elective lumbar microdiscectomy . Disc specimen was aseptically placed into a closed sterile micro-tube to minimize the risks of post-resection contaminations. The size of the resected disc specimen was 3 × 3 × 5 mm. The disc fragment was homogenized by mortar under aseptic conditions and placed into a pestle containing 3 ml of Brucella broth medium for culture (Himedia, India). A total of 200 µl of the resultant homogenate was inoculated on to Brucella selective supplement medium containing the cycloheximide (50 mg), vancomycin (10 mg), polymyxin B (2500 IU), nalidixic acid (2.5 mg), nystatin (50,000 IU), bacitracin (12,500 IU) (Oxoid, UK) along with 5% inactivated horse serum. The inoculated plates of bulging disc specimen were incubated under appropriate protection with 10% CO2 at 37 °C for 10 days. Typical isolated Brucella colonies were identified by conventional and molecular biotyping analyses. Common specific phenotypic features of Brucella spp. were observed in the isolated bacteria i.e. Gram negative bacteria with shiny and smooth surface exhibiting a translucent honey color . The Brucella isolate was identified as B. abortus biovar 1 using conventional biotyping methods . Accordingly, the isolate was identified as wild type B. abortus using Bruce-ladder and AMOS PCR. AMOS PCR results showed a 498 bp B. abortus specific band, common to biovars 1, 2 and 4 . This result was further confirmed by the Bruce-ladder PCR resulting to PCR products of 1682, 794, 587, 450 and 152 bp in size . The patient was treated with two drugs i.e. doxycycline 100 mg plus rifampin 300 mg every 12 h for 3 months. In the course of the follow-up, the patient’s general condition has remarkably improved and the low-back pain was reduced. After a 3-month treatment, the urinary incontinence had recovered well. However, we were not able to follow the patient after 3 months as she did not appear at the next checkup for further tests due to COVID-19 strict mobility restrictions and the improvement of her low-back pain symptoms.