A 50-year-old woman came with the chief complaint of an intermittently painful ulcer on her left cheek. The lesion started five years ago as a pruritic, erythematous papule with scabs on her left maxillae. Three years later, the skin lesions enlarged and developed to an erythematous plaque covered in brownish crust. It continued to enlarge, reaching the size of a baby’s palm, while becoming painful, wet, and easily bled with light pressure. There was no history of a similar lesion before. The patient denied recent weight loss. She had a tremendous amount of sun exposure in the past by having daily sunbaths for approximately 30 minutes and working outdoors, yet she has never used any sunscreen or any protective apparels.
On the physical examination, the lesion appeared large, with a 4 × 6 × 0.3 cm dimension, solitary, irregular border, and covered by crust. Upon crust removal, we revealed a deep, irregular ulcer . On dermoscopic examination, there were serpentine and hairpin vessels, erosions, and white structureless areas . No regional lymph node enlargement was found. Blood examination results were unremarkable. Histopathological examination revealed a tumor mass consisting of condensed, hyperplastic round, oval-to-polygonal tumor cells with partially eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclei appear polymorphic, hyperchromatic, and vesicular with clear daughter nuclei . A computed tomography scan (CT-Scan) of the head showed no bone or other organ involvement.
The patient was diagnosed with SCC and consulted to the Department of Oncology Surgery. We planned for a wide excision with 1 cm margin with intraoperative frozen section. Due to the potentially large defect, the closure was planned using a forehead interpolation flap, followed by a skin graft to the forehead. At the time of the procedure, the residual tumor was found by frozen section on the margin 0–1 to 1–3, thus additional excision was done with a 1 cm margin. After the second excision, we confirmed the incision margins 1–2, 3–4, 4–5, and 5–0 were free of malignant tumor cells. The final defect on the cheek after excision was measured as 12 × 14 cm. Forehead skin was opted as a donor to accommodate the size of the defect. Interpolation skin flaps technique was done by pivoting the forehead skin to the left cheek with a left temporal skin pedicle as its axis. The left temporal pedicle was meant to be removed after the survival of the skin flap was assured (planned for at least within four weeks). A full-thickness skin graft (FTSG) was carried out for the forehead skin defect and the tissue donor was taken from the abdomen . The patient recovered in three days without complication and was discharged afterwards. The temporal pedicle was removed eight weeks after procedure. The comparison of before procedure, two and six weeks after procedure, and after pedicle removal can be seen in . At the end of observation, there were a visible unwanted result such as ectropion of the left lower eyelid, and dissimilarity of the skin graft with surrounding skin. Nevertheless, the patient was generally satisfied with the result.