A case is presented of a 49-year-old woman who presents for evaluation of osteoporosis. She had a personal history of migraines and had previously undergone surgeries, including cesarean sections and tonsillectomy. She denied tobacco and alcohol consumption and had no history of fractures. Her menarche occurred at the age of thirteen, and she had a hormonal intrauterine device in place. Her father had died from colorectal cancer, and she had second-degree relatives with inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis. Additionally, she reported occasional use of nonsteroidal analgesics and isotretinoin for acne treatment.
During the physical examination, it was noted that the patient had a weight of 54 kg and a height of 1.60 m. A regular heart rhythm was auscultated, and the abdomen appeared flat, soft, and depressible, with present bowel sounds and no evidence of organ enlargement. No palpable lesions were detected in the thyroid area. There were no peripheral edemas, melanotic skin hyperpigmentation, or jaundice observed in the conjunctiva or sclera.
The lumbar spine bone densitometry showed a T score of -1.8 and a Z score of -1.1, while the hip showed a T score of -3.0 and a Z score -2.5, and femoral neck bone showed a T score of -3.3 and Z score -2.6. Consequently, a laboratory evaluation was conducted, revealing a calcium level of 12.2 mg/dl, a phosphate level of 1.79 mg/d, a PTH level of 131 pg/ml, and positive autoimmunity for CD .
The ultrasound of the parathyroid glands revealed a solid nodule measuring 24 x 13 mm, hypoechoic, and located adjacent to the lower pole of the right lobe ( and ). 99mTc-sestamibi scintigraphy with SPECT showed a focal area of intense radiotracer uptake, below the right thyroid lobe, posterior to the trachea, and anterior to the vertebral column ( and ).
An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, which revealed low-height, comb-like Kerckring folds in the duodenum. The histopathological examination showed moderate to severe chronic duodenitis associated with marked and diffuse villous flattening and crypt hyperplasia. The estimated count of intraepithelial lymphocytes was forty elements per 100 enterocytes, consistent with a type IIIC lesion of the Marsh classification. These findings indicated severe damage to the small intestinal mucosa, suggestive of CD.
A minimally invasive parathyroidectomy (PTX) was performed. The lower right parathyroid gland was located and successfully removed. Intraoperative PTH levels significantly decreased following the resection of the lesion. The histopathological examination revealed a 35 mm nodular lesion without signs of atypia, capsular invasion, lymphovascular invasion, or perineural involvement, consistent with a parathyroid adenoma.