A frail 78-year-old woman with a malfunctioning Medtronic Core Valve 26 mm, implanted in 2011 via TAVI technique due to severe aortic stenosis, was admitted to our outpatient cardiology clinic due to worsening dyspnoea on effort [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III] and easy fatigue, despite the optimal medical treatment. The physical exam revealed a harsh crescendo-descrescendo systolic murmur at the right upper sternal border with radiation to the carotid arteries, blood pressure 119/71 mmHg, heart rate 70 b.p.m., oxygen saturation on room air 93%, respiratory rate 18/min, mildly elevated jugular vein pressure, bilateral basal crackles, and mild peripheral oedema. The screening echocardiography documented severe aortic stenosis with aortic valve area 0.75 cm2, mean transaortic gradient 40 mmHg and max transaortic gradient 61 mmHg, preserved left ventricular function and right ventricular systolic pressure 60 mmHg, while the coronary angiography ruled out any significant coronary disease. Arterial hypertension, dyslipidaemia, pulmonary hypertension, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation under anticoagulation were the main comorbidities, while a permanent pacemaker implantation was performed in 2011 post-TAVI due to complete heart block. Surgical risk scores were in favour of repeated TAVI (EuroSCORE II 5.67%), so the Heart Team of our hospital favoured percutaneous aortic ViV implantation over SAVR as the optimal strategy.
Based on computed tomography measurements , a 3D model was printed as a physical replica of patient’s unique anatomy, offering the chance to have the final implantation of the selected 26 mm self-expandable Evolut R valve visualized preprocedurally . The rationale comes from the need to understand simultaneously multiple elements of the complex aortic root anatomy (the shape and dimensions of the aortic annulus, sinuses of Valsalva and sinotubular junction; the relationship of the coronary artery ostia relative to these structures; the distribution of calcifications on the aortic leaflets, the left ventricular outflow tract, and the ascending aorta) while a new transcatheter valve has to be implanted into a degenerated one. The use of cerebral protection device was also considered as a necessary part of the procedure, to avoid the spread of calcified debris or thombi, from both the native valve and the TAVI valve, to the systemic circulation.
After informed consent was signed, the patient was transferred to the Catheterization Laboratory under general anaesthesia. While intravenous heparin infusion was used to achieve an activated clotting time of >200 s, a catheter Pigtail 6 F was placed to the aortic root for intervention guidance. At the same time, the Claret Sentinel device was placed from the anonymous artery to the left carotid artery via the right radial artery. Then, the bioprosthesis was carefully advanced through the stiff Confida wire via the left femoral artery and was deployed progressively in line with the visible margin of the previously optimally implanted CoreValve . Haemodynamic and echocardiographic measurements ruled out any significant valvular regurgitation after the implantation, but underlined the need for post dilatation with Z-med balloon due to high remaining transvalvular gradient. When the optimal haemodynamic result was achieved , the whole delivery system was removed and the left femoral artery was sutured with two Proglide percutaneous closure systems, while the findings from the Sentinel device proved to be aortic calcified debris. The patient was successfully weaned from the mechanical ventilation in the Catheterization Laboratory and was transferred to the Coronary Care Unit for further supervision., The echocardiography at discharge showed max aortic velocity 1.1 m/s and absence of significant paravalvular regurgitation, while the first month echocardiography confirmed the proper ViV function, with mean transvalvular gradient 2.6 mmHg across the valve ., A significant clinical improvement (NYHA I–II) was also reported.