A 37-year-old female presented to our department after noticing progressive enlargement of her jaw, ears, nose, and fingers. Physical examination and comparison to previous photographs confirmed acromegaly. Further neurological examination including formal visual field testing was within normal limits. A full spectrum of pituitary axis investigations was performed, which revealed increased levels of IGF-1 (1109 ng/ml) as well as increased levels of GH (15 ng/ml). All other hormonal laboratory results were within the normal reference range.
High-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast media was performed, which revealed a 17.5 mm × 15.7 mm × 17.4 mm pituitary macroadenoma with stalk displacement. The patient was admitted to our department for elective transsphenoidal surgery. During the preoperative review of MRI films, a subtle area of flow void was noticed within the right anterior aspect of the tumor .
The decision was made to perform a magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) for a more detailed visualization of the vasculature, which revealed a 2.5-mm cavernous ICA aneurysm pointing towards the sella.
A detailed discussion was then carried out with the patient about the natural history of adenomas and all available treatment options, including endovascular treatment of the aneurysm followed by TSS. We also discussed associated risks and benefits as well as the risks of leaving the adenoma untreated. The patient elected to first pursue medical treatment for pituitary adenoma with close follow-up for the aneurysm.
Shortly after initiation of monthly intramuscular injections of 30 mg of octreotide depot and twice a week administration of 0.25 mg oral cabergoline, the patient noticed a significant decrease in the soft tissue swelling of her face and extremities. IGF-1 levels showed a steady decline from 1109 ng/ml to 353.1 ng/ml over the follow-up period of 1.5 years. The efficacy of medical therapy was also confirmed by a steady decline in tumor size from 17.5 mm × 15.7 mm × 17.4 mm to 10.9 mm × 4.9 mm × 8.9 mm [Figure –]. Simultaneously, there was a gradual increase in the aneurysm size from 2.7 mm to 4 mm [Figure –].
Six months later a CT angiography was performed at an outside hospital where the patient was seen for a second opinion .
Given the steady increase in the size of the aneurysm and considering the absence of reliable data about the natural history of intratumoral aneurysms, the patient was again offered endovascular treatment and subsequently underwent a successful stent-assisted coil embolization of the aneurysm without complications . The stent was placed due to the relative low dome-width to neck-width ratio as well as to secure the coil in place in case subsequent TSS was required. One-year follow-up angiogram revealed complete occlusion of the aneurysm along with continuous decrease of IGF-1 levels . Currently, the patient remains asymptomatic and we shall follow-up with clinical, radiographic, and laboratory surveillance at regular intervals.