A 51-hour-old male neonate was admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit because of respiratory distress and feeding difficulties on June 30, 2020. The neonate was full-term, delivered by cesarean section, and with low birth weight was 2,450 g. Physical examination revealed a wide cleft palate, micrognathia, retrognathia, glossoptosis and cyanosis . Respiratory rate was 64 breaths/min, and arterial oxygen saturation was 80%. CT examination showed distance between the base of tongue and posterior pharynx wall was narrowed significantly (about 1.4 mm) with narrowing of the upper airway at the corresponding level (the second cervical vertebra to the fourth cervical vertebra), shortened and retracted mandible . Both clinical manifestations and CT images of this neonate showed prominent features and met the diagnostic criteria of PRS. At the meantime, no overlap of other more complex syndromes was found, such as ocular abnormalities, hearing loss, other skeletal abnormalities, cardiac abnormalities or other atypical abnormalities.
After the definite diagnosis, we performed modified mandible traction with wires for the neonate on July 02, 2020, because prone position did not completely relieve the symptoms of hypoxia due to airway obstruction. Four puncture points were marked approximately 2 mm near the upper and lower margins of the mandible, symmetrically on both sides, and about 8 mm from the midline. The neonate was placed in supine position and disinfected with iodophor according to routine. After spreading out drapes and disinfecting again, 0.25% lidocaine was injected along surgical area for local anesthesia. After anesthesia, a needle with wire was inserted from outside of mouth close to the lower margin of mandible to avoid damaging the sublingual gland, submandibular gland and other tissues. Then the needle was pulled out from inner side and through the homolateral upper marked point from inside out. The same procedure was performed on the other sides. Use epinephrine saline gauze to press wound to stop bleeding completely. Intraoperative blood loss was about 5 ml, and the operation took 25 min with a satisfactory result in improving airway obstruction.
After surgery, the neonate's vital signs were stable; arterial oxygen saturation increased to 99%. Mandible was hauled continuously with external wire traction equipment, and traction weight was gradually reduced from 150 g until the traction wire was removed 35 days later . In this period, only slight superficial skin infection at puncture sites was found, which could be controlled by topical application of antibiotic ointment and infusion of antibiotics. CT examination was repeated on postoperative day 6, 11, 16, 28 showed the distance between the base of tongue and posterior pharynx wall was 6.6 mm, 6.7 mm, 6.7 mm and 6.4 mm . The child was hospitalized for 38 days and discharged with a weight of 2.8 kg. The child performed cleft palate repair at 1 year and 2 months. CT examination showed the distance between the base of tongue and posterior pharynx wall was 13.6 mm . At the present follow-up until 2 years old, there were no significant differences in the maxillofacial appearance, teeth growth, breathing, feeding, growth and development between the patient and normal children.