In November 2018, a 54-year-old asymptomatic male with 20 pack-year smoking history received a health examination. A nodule on the left lower lobe, measuring 2.5 cm, and PAS were detected by chest computed tomography (CT) for the first time in his life. The patient had no respiratory symptoms or other illnesses and there was a history of pneumonia in his childhood, which had never relapsed after adolescence. No abnormal indicators were observed on physical examination, and the patient denied having lost weight in the past 6 months.
The patient's pulmonary function test results were normal. The forced vital capacity (FVC) was 3.73 L and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 3.35 L. FVC percent predicted (FVC % pred), FEV1 percent predicted (FEV1 % pred), and FEV1/FVC ratio was 80.7, 90.0, and 89.3%, respectively. The 99mTc-macroaggregated albumin pulmonary perfusion showed that the left pulmonary perfusion accounted for 31.4% of the total pulmonary perfusion, and the left lower lobe perfusion accounted for 56.5% of the left pulmonary perfusion. In addition, we performed a whole-body bone scan and head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for the patient before surgery, and it was confirmed that the patient had no distant metastasis. The carcinoembryonic antigen was increased slightly to 5.02 ng/mL (reference value < 4.70 ng/mL). Routine blood examination, arterial blood gas tests and electrocardiogram showed no abnormalities.
Chest CT showed PAS and a nodule on the left lower lobe, measuring 2.5 cm, which indicated the possibility of malignancy . Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed that the main pulmonary artery had only one outflow tract to the right pulmonary artery . However, we could not detect the beginning of the left pulmonary artery due to its deep position. In addition, neither obvious tracheal stenosis nor bronchomalacia was found by bronchoscopy . Three-dimensional CT angiography was used to demonstrate that the left pulmonary artery arose from the right pulmonary artery and passed between the main trachea and the esophagus toward to the left thorax .
Through comprehensive preoperative assessments, no obvious contraindication was found in this patient. After multidisciplinary discussion and providing signed informed consent, it was decided to perform lobectomy on the patient by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. The patient was anesthetized with double-lumen endotracheal intubation. During the operation, it was observed that the left inferior lobe artery was adjacent to the posterior mediastinum and above the inferior lobe bronchus. We firstly performed wedge resection of the lesion during the operation. After intraoperative frozen section proved the malignant nature of the lesion, we continued to perform lobectomy on this patient. We excised the left inferior pulmonary vein, left superior segmental artery, left common basal artery and left lower lobe bronchus and completely removed the left lower lobe. In addition, we performed systematic lymph node dissection for this patient, and the presence of PAS did not significantly increase the technical difficulties of lymph node dissection. The operation time was 195 min, and the total blood loss was 90 ml.
The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 4 days after the operation. Pathological results showed the nodule to be invasive adenocarcinoma, visceral pleura invasion, and the pathology stage to be IB (pT2aN0M0). There was no adjuvant chemotherapy or any other postoperative treatment prescribed.
Three months later, the patient's subsequent visit showed FVC of 2.87 L and FEV1 of 2.50 L. The FVC % pred, FEV1 % pred, and FEV1/FVC ratio was 91.4, 88.7, and 87.1%, respectively. Chest CT demonstrated the postoperative performance of the left lower lobe, which had been subject to the resection, and showed no other abnormalities. The 99mTc-macroaggregated albumin injection demonstrated that the left pulmonary perfusion accounted for 18.0% of the total pulmonary perfusion. The patient remained symptom free during the subsequent 3 years of follow-up.