A 44-year-old female with a history of ESRD secondary to Type 1 diabetes mellitus on hemodialysis presented to clinic with left leg pain 3 weeks after injuring her knee stepping out of her car. Immediately following the injury, she presented to an urgent care center, where plain radiographs demonstrated an anterior unicortical tibial disruption. Following appropriate orthopedic referral, additional X-rays, a computerized tomography (CT) scan, and magnetic resonance imaging were obtained, which confirmed a nondisplaced “stress” fracture of the left proximal tibia . After a thorough discussion of treatment options in clinic, she elected non-operative treatment and was placed in a patella tendon bearing (PTB) brace.
The patient utilized the brace for 6 weeks without resolution of symptoms. At this time, plain radiographs revealed progression and widening of the tibial fracture line. She continued to have pain in her left leg and was indicated for surgical repair. She underwent a reamed tibial intramedullary nail (IMN) 6 days later. The surgery was uncomplicated and adequate hardware placement was confirmed with intraoperative fluoroscopy . At the time of surgery, the surgeon was satisfied with the fixation. She was discharged later that day with a posterior plaster splint.
At 6 weeks post-operative, the patient reported persistent pain over her left proximal tibia and a sensation that her left leg was bowing out making it difficult for her to walk. X-rays were suggestive of a slight varus tilt and also demonstrated callus formation, lucency around the nail, increased bone resorption at the fracture site, and the backing out of a locking screw . The patient and surgeon decided it was best to pursue a revision surgery the following week with an additional lateral plate to increase construct stability. It was also discovered at the time that the patient’s PTH was over 1200 pg/ml, which was thought to be secondary to her ESRD. Her nephrologist was consulted. Discussion was centered around the need for a parathyroidectomy to correct her PTH levels in addition to supporting healthy bone formation.
At the revision operation, the fracture was grossly mobile around the IM nail and screws. The patient underwent an additional locking plate with linkage of the plate screws and IM nail. In addition, an iliac crest aspirate was combined with demineralized bone matrix that was packed at the fracture site. The patient was kept non-weight bearing. Over the next month, radiographs demonstrated failure of the plate and screws as well as the locking bolts within the nail . Once this secondary failure was identified, she was placed in a PTB cast, which was changed every few weeks.
Shortly after her revision surgery, she received a renal transplant which ultimately resulted in her PTH declining to 107 pg/ml. Over the next several months following transplant, she continued to improve clinically with regard to her fracture. She underwent multiple CT scans, which revealed increased callus formation, but incomplete healing at the fracture site with some varus alignment . Using the CT scans, in consultation with a musculoskeletal radiologist, it was determined that the overall bone quality in the proximal tibia had improved significantly. A discussion was had with the patient as to pursuing another surgery, now that her bone health had improved. The patient elected to pursue operative management for the nonunion. At 6 months post-operative from her revision surgery and 8 months following her initial surgery, she underwent a second revision with revision plate placement at the nonunion site as well as exchange of locking bolts in the IM nail. The patient returned to clinic at 1, 2, and 3 months post-operative from this 2nd revision surgery, where she reported her pain was well controlled and she was ambulating with one crutch. Radiographs demonstrated a radiographically healing fracture, good tibial alignment, and no signs of hardware failure (, ). At the patient’s 1 year follow-up visit from her initial IMN surgery (9 months after 1st revision and 3 months after 2nd revision), she was pain free and ambulating without difficulty. X-rays at this visit showed that her fracture had fully healed (, ).