A 50-year-old Caucasian man was referred with sudden-onset and persistent metamorphopsia and severely decreased vision in his right eye over the course of the last 2 months, after a stress episode. Other than a medically controlled systemic arterial hypertension diagnosed 15 years ago, the patient was a healthy person. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/80 and worse than Jaeger 14 in the right eye and 20/20 and Jaeger 1 in his left eye. Intraocular pressure was 16 mmHg in the right eye and 12 mmHg in the left eye, objective refraction was −0.75×170 in both eyes, and slit-lamp biomicroscopy of both eyes was unremarkable. Right eye fundus biomicroscopy and binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy showed a slightly elevated melanocytic lesion occupying largely the inferotemporal half of the optic disk, extending temporally with feathery margins to the retina and inferiorly to the neighboring choroid. Subretinal fluid was observed under the macula and peripapillary area, extending beyond the superotemporal and inferotemporal vascular arcades, with multiple refringent fine subretinal lipid deposits spread out through the nasal half of the posterior pole. A dense accumulation of subretinal lipids was observed under the inferior margin of the optic disk, and a yellow-orange, moderately protruding, subretinal mass was observed halfway between the superonasal macular area and the superotemporal optic disk margin, surrounded by a dense subretinal hemorrhage, with multiple fine subretinal folds radiating from it. In addition, a moderate optic disk edema and superior temporal and nasal retinal venous ingurgitation and tortuosity was observed . The left eye was normal.
Fluorescein angiography confirmed the presumption of an active CNV complex , with staining of the subretinal fluid around the optic disk in the very late angiographic phases. Time domain optical coherence tomography (Stratus®; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, USA) showed retinal edema and neurosensory retina detachment, with a central macular thickness of 532 microns. Systemic workup was irrelevant, and cerebral and orbital magnetic resonance imaging failed to evidence intraocular or orbital tumoral mass. The patient was treated with three consecutive doses on a monthly basis of intravitreal 1.25 mg/mL bevacizumab (Avastin®; Roche Diagnostic GmbH, Manheim, Germany). Visual acuity of the right eye recovered rapidly, but not totally, after the first injection, and at 4 months after treatment, BCVA of the right eye was 20/20 and Jaeger 1. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy of the right ocular fundus showed a marked reduction of the volume of the CNV complex and no subretinal fluid, and time domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a significant reduction of macular thickness (244 microns). No further treatment was performed. After 3 years of follow-up, BCVA remained stable; the right eye fundus showed a normal macular area, no evident optic nerve edema, normal retinal vein caliber and aspect, and no significant change of the tumor; the choroidal part of the tumor and the subretinal pigment dispersal were better visualized . Fluorescein angiography evidenced only late staining without leakage of the CNV complex, no macular edema, and no evident capillary telangiectasia . Spectral domain OCT (Cirrus®; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, USA) showed a normal macular anatomy , with a well-delineated domo-shaped homogeneous hyperreflective image at the level of the juxtapapillary CNV complex . No ocular or systemic complications were observed during follow-up.