A 27-year-old Iranian woman was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of worsening hepatic function. She first came to medical attention at the age of 10 when hepatosplenomegaly was noted incidentally on a routine physical examination at another hospital, so she was admitted to undergo further examination. Her liver function was found to be within normal limits as was her renal function. Both her growth and development were normal for her age. However, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly were noted. A liver biopsy revealed proliferation of collagen fibers surrounding the portal area, a finding that was compatible with congenital hepatic fibrosis. Our patient had no history of hematemesis or tarry stool, but esophageal varices were detectable beginning at 10 years of age. Propranolol was started but she discontinued her medication after a couple of months despite medical advice.
Our patient was followed regularly without any complications such as abdominal pain, jaundice, hematemesis, tarry stool, or increases in liver enzymes. No history could be elicited of alcohol abuse or previous hepatitis. There was no family history of liver or kidney disease. Markers for hepatitis B and C were negative; urine and serum copper levels were normal; and serum auto-antibodies were negative. The liver size gradually decreased and portal pressure increased as documented by ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) . Her portal vein diameter was 14 mm, and splenomegaly was observed. Grade 1 lower esophageal varices were reported during an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. Our patient was put on a waiting list for liver transplantation.
During preparation for transplantation, a 59 × 39 mm mass was observed in her right liver lobe, which was unnoted in previous evaluations . A percutaneous liver biopsy was reported to demonstrate HCC. Her serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) level was 1900 IU/ml (normal < 6 IU/ml), serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 72 IU/L, serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase 39 IU/L, alkaline phosphatise 120 IU/L, total bilirubin 3.2 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 2.3 mg/dL, albumin 2.7 g/dL, prothrombin time 16.1 seconds and her international normalized ratio 1.44.
She was removed from the transplantation waiting list and was admitted for staging and planning treatment strategies. During admission, she developed abdominal pain, worsening abdominal distention and hepatic encephalopathy. Because of a decreased level of consciousness and seizure, a brain CT scan was done which revealed unexpected left hemispheric atrophy with severe dilation of her left ventricle . Proper management accompanied by frequent abdominal paracentesis led to partial improvement.
Following radiofrequency ablation, the tumor size declined to about 25 mm with central necrosis and our patient was enrolled on to the liver transplantation waiting list again.