A 68-year-old man presented to the emergency department with five episodes of tarry stools for 2 d, associated with persistent dull and diffuse abdominal pain.
Six years ago, the patient developed melena without manifesting any obvious symptoms and no abnormalities were observed in the findings of colonoscopy and gastroscopy, which were performed in another hospital. Further, the patient reported that the passage of black stool was repeated 2 to 3 times in the last 6 years, and his condition improved after he was administered Yunnan Baiyao and omeprazole. The specific medication regimen is unknown, and the patient terminated the medication after the bloody stool disappeared.
The patient had no known comorbidities or past illnesses.
The patient had no relevant personal and family medical history.
On physical examination, the abdomen was negative for palpable masses and tenderness.
Laboratory data showed a red blood cell mass of 1.57 × 106/µL (normal range: 4.30–5.80 × 106/µL).
On admission, plain CT of the abdomen revealed an oval, well-circumscribed mass with soft-tissue attenuation, measuring 43 Hounsfield units (HU) on the right upper quadrant of the abdomen . The mass dimensions were approximately 4.1 cm × 3.3 cm × 5.0 cm in size. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scans 2 d later revealed a well-defined, non-homogenous enhanced lesion (density of 78 HU in arterial phase, 90 HU in venous phase), measuring 4.6 cm × 3.4 cm × 5.0 cm in the left upper quadrant . However, the mass present on the right upper quadrant had not been visualized. Clinical and imaging findings indicated a diagnosis of a highly vascularized, mobile small intestine tumor. We initially considered a GIST in the small intestine. DSA was performed because laboratory data showed a low range of red blood cells and immediate surgery was contraindicated. A selective superior mesenteric artery DSA revealed a mass in the left upper quadrant, with neoplastic vessels from the first branch of the jejunal artery. We observed visible contrast media retention in the intestinal lumen . For selective embolization, we used a microcatheter (Progreat, TERUMO, Tokyo, Japan). The microcatheters were inserted as near as possible to the lesion, and the embolic materials containing polyvinyl alcohol (COOK Medical, Bloomington, IN, United States) were inserted. A repeat DSA confirmed complete mass staining disappearance. However, melena recurred on the 4th postoperative day. Laboratory data showed a low range of red blood cells (2.16 × 106/µL). On repeat DSA, the first branch of the jejunum appeared to have moved to the right lumbar region, accompanied by vascular detour, thickening, and contrast concentration . The superselective arteriography and embolization were repeated . Two days after the second embolization, a contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed an annular irregularly enhancing mass (measuring 5.4 cm × 3.7 cm × 5.5 cm) with a large central area of liquefied necrosis (density of 38-47 HU), which was then located in the right lumbar region .