A 31-year-old Japanese woman who never smoked presented with severe headache and nausea, and a performance status of approximately three. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain confirmed multiple metastatic brain tumors and meningitis, and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest confirmed a solitary, spiculated lesion in the left upper lung lobe. She had normal liver and renal functions, and she had no history of liver disease, excessive alcohol intake, drug abuse, or hepatitis. Cytology of the transbronchial brushings of the left upper lobe and the cerebrospinal fluid obtained by lumbar puncture revealed adenocarcinoma, and she was diagnosed as having a primary NSCLC with multiple brain metastases and carcinomatous meningitis. EGFR gene mutation analysis did not show the presence of any mutation. She was started on erlotinib 150 mg orally once daily because she refused to receive the emetic regimen. Two weeks after starting treatment, her headache and nausea had disappeared, and an MRI revealed brain tumor shrinkage and improvement in the meningitis. However, about four weeks after starting erlotinib, her transaminase levels started to increase, peaking at 972 U/L for aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and 3,130 U/L for alanine aminotransferase (ALT) . The patient had not complained of any clinical symptoms such as fever, nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, or fatigue, and she had taken no other medications or supplements. Serologic testing for hepatitis B and C was negative. An abdominal MRI revealed a normal liver with no other substantial abnormalities. Thus, erlotinib-induced liver injury was suspected and treatment was discontinued. After stopping erlotinib, her transaminase levels began to normalize at once, but severe nausea and headache also recurred immediately. Therefore, gefitinib 250 mg once daily was started with careful monitoring of liver function. Her nausea and headache improved quickly, and she continued to take gefitinib for more than 15 weeks without hepatic toxicity or disease progression. She was lost to follow-up, and she died of her cancer at another hospital.