A five-month-old girl with bilateral mirror foot was referred to our orthopaedic department. She was born full-term by the caesarian section and was the firstborn of the couple. There was no family history of similar skeletal abnormalities and no history of drug or radiation exposure during gestation. The clinical and radiological assessment did not reveal any other skeletal abnormalities .
The child had eight toes on the right foot and seven toes on the left with fully developed metatarsal, proximal, middle, and distal phalanges. Radiographs were obtained at the age of five months and confirmed the diagnosis of mirror foot with a full complement of normal lateral toes and three additional complete rays medial to the right foot and two additional complete rays medial to the left foot.
Surgery was performed under general anesthesia, and a tourniquet was applied. The patient underwent ray resection and concurrent reconstruction of the medial arch of the foot. We decided to remove the first, second, and third toe from the medial side of the right foot and then the first and second toe from the left foot. A medial longitudinal incision was used to excised the right medial three rays and left medial two rays. The abnormal mid-foot cartilage was refashioned, and the excised accessory tendons were used to reinforce the ligaments of the medial arch . Duplication of the tibialis anterior tendon was observed and inserted into the medial polydactyly rays. This tendon was relocated to its normal insertion on the medial cuneiform to reinforce arch elevation. The toes were removed up to the metatarsal portion. Furthermore, for the restoration of stability, the intermetatarsal ligaments were sutured.
Post-operative clinical and radiological examinations were subsequently performed to observe the surgery's result. It is difficult to assess the functional capabilities of this patient since the patient is still five-month-old and has not been able to walk yet. The target of this surgical intervention was for aesthetic or cosmetic reasons and enabling the patient to allow shoe wear. Follow-up is required to assess the functional development of this patient later in life.