A 44-year-old man admitted to Department of Orthopaedics of the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University presented with a history of left thigh ulceration and swelling for 10 d.
The patient showed similar symptoms in 2018, some tests including bacterial and tuberculosis culture, acid-fast staining, and tuberculosis infection T-lymphocyte spot test (T-SPOT). TB tests, were negative at that time. And the patient recovered gradually after debridement. Through careful history investigation, we found that the patient had an open wound on the left thigh caused by trauma 18 years ago, which improved after debridement and suturing.
There is no relevant history of past illness.
The patient’s personal and family histories were unremarkable.
Two old scars were observed on the patient's left thigh, and there was a red and swollen ruptured wound above them. The skin temperature of the limb was normal, and no movement limitation was observed. A physical examination revealed no other positive signs. Breath sounds of both lungs were clear, no obvious dry or wet rales were heard, and there was no pleural friction rub.
On day 2 after admission, laboratory tests, such as routine blood examination, coagulation function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and serum biochemical indicators, did not show any significant abnormalities.
A radiograph of the left femur indicated no bone erosion . Bone single-photon emission computed tomography did not reveal any abnormalities in bone metabolism . On day five after admission, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left hip was performed, which revealed abnormal signals in the soft tissue of the left upper femur and oedema of the subcutaneous soft tissue. In addition, MRI revealed a chronic abscess with sinus tract formation . Computed tomography of the chest showed scattered nodules in both lungs . But the symptoms of tuberculosis are not obvious.
Considering that the abscess was large, we performed abscess resection of the left thigh and vacuum sealing drainage therapy. We observed inflammation and degeneration in subcutaneous tissue and cystic infected tissue wrapped in the deep layer, which had tough capsule walls and a size of approximately 8 cm × 6 cm . After incision of the purulent cyst, gelatinous necrotic tissue which was grey and white, was observed. Furthermore, we performed histological examination, bacterial culture, and NGS testing of the specimen.
Histological examination revealed fibrous connective tissue hyperplasia with necrosis, acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration, and focal granulomatous inflammation with multinucleated giant cell formation . Bacterial culture of the surgically excised specimen was negative on day seven after admission. However, MTB was detected by NGS simultaneously. The distribution of bacteria and fungi identified by NGS revealed that MTB was the main pathogen , and 24 sequence reads were identified .
The pathology department was then contacted for an additional acid-fast bacillus staining test of the intraoperative specimen, and scattered suspicious antacid staining positive rods were observed microscopically . Further, the T-SPOT. TB test results were positive.