A 38-year-old right-handed man presented to our center complaining of recurrent episodes of transient right hemiparesis and aphasia. The patient had a history of coronavirus infection and severe persistent, nonproductive cough 7 days before the onset of his symptoms. The right-sided symptoms had been occurring two times, each time lasting 10 minutes.
His medical history was negative for hypertension, and smoking or recent trauma. On physical examination, the patient was normotensive, intact neurological examination, and no carotid bruits were detectable. Bilateral peripheral pulses were normal and equal. Routine laboratory tests were normal. A computed tomographic (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was normal. The patient with diagnosis of transient ischemic attack (TIA) was immediately treated with intravenous heparin and oral antiplatelet agents. Carotid angiography showed tapered flame-like appearance in cervical portion of left internal carotid artery (ICA) starting about 2 cm distal to the carotid bulb caused complete occlusion of left ICA . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of ICA dissection. In right common carotid artery (CCA) angiography there was pseudo aneurysm in right cervical ICA just before the petrous segment. Left vertebral artery angiography revealed collateral circulation to bilateral ICA from bilateral posterior communicating arteries. We decided to treat the patient with simultaneous bilateral carotid artery stenting as he was symptomatic despite receiving medical treatment. A femoral artery approach was obtained and selective bilateral carotid angiogram was performed. The 8F guiding catheter was put to the left CCA and the PILOT 150 micro-guidewire was passed from occluded segment of left ICA after that (8×40 mm) self-expanding carotid stent (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was deployed in the ICA. Post-stenting angioplasty was performed with inflation (5×20 mm) NC balloon (Medtronic). We decided to put a stent in right ICA. There was a pseudo-aneurysm in distal cervical portion of ICA. The 8F guiding catheter was introduced to the right CCA and the lesion was crossed by PILOT 150 micro-guidewire and the stent was deployed in the distal cervical portion of ICA.There were no neurological complications. After 3 months in follow up catheter angiography there is evidence of complete occlusion of right pseudo aneurysm and recanalization of left ICA without stenosis .