We present a case report of a 38-year-old female who presented with difficulty in walking for the past 5 months associated with pain in the knee for the past 3 months. The pain was dull aching in nature, mild intensity. There was no diurnal variation. Physical examination showed mild tenderness. Overlying skin was normal with restricted range of movement due to pain. Blood investigations were under normal limits.
On evaluation radiologically, an expansile osteolytic lesion located in the head of the fibula with thinning and septations measuring 33 × 25 × 18 mm noted. Narrow zone of transition and no matrix mineralization noted. Cortex discontinuity noted in the lateral aspect. Joint space was normal and proximal tibial shaft appeared normal and soft tissue component was noted as shown in .
On magnetic resonance imaging, T1-T2 hypointense and short tau inversion recovery hyperintense lesion with thinning and endosteal scalloping of the cortex with focal break noted in the proximal fibula without any periosteal reaction as shown in .
Excision biopsy was planned and after obtaining consent from the patient, an en block excision was done. The resected specimen was sent to histopathological examination.
Gross examination showed a grayish-white ill-defined lesion at the epi-metaphyseal region measuring 2.5 × 1.5 × 1 cm which is focally extending into the adjacent soft tissue. On serial microscopic sectioning and examination as shown in revealed cellular neoplasm which was well demarcated from the adjacent osseous tissue arranged as vague nodules in chondroid background. The cells were round to oval with vesicular nuclei and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and displayed well-delineated cell borders. Mitosis is occasional 1–2/10 hpf.
Giant cells are noted in the periphery of the lesion. There was no evidence of calcification. With a suspicion for chondroblastoma, S-100 and epithelial markers were done which all came out to be negative establishing the diagnosis of CMF by exclusion. Although myxoid element was not much evident on histology considering the tumor to be in the earlier stages of evolution diagnosed, early diagnosis of CMF was made.
Postoperatively, the patient was put on partial weight-bearing for initial 2 weeks and later resumed full weight-bearing by 4 weeks. The case was followed up for 2 years without any recurrence till date as shown in