An 86-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital due to progressive dysuria for three years and worsening hematuria for three days. The patient reported dysuria and hematuria with frequent urination and urgency but no obvious urination pain, low back pain, fever, nausea or vomiting, or use of anticoagulant drugs. The patient had previous hypertension, posterior circulation ischemia, carotid atherosclerosis with stenosis, peripheral neuropathy, and neuropathy in the lower limbs. Digital rectal examination revealed that the prostate was enlarged, the central groove was shallow, and the surface was smooth with no nodules. No tenderness was palpated, and no bloodstains were observed on the gloved finger. At hospital admission, the patient’s liver, kidney, and blood coagulation function were considered normal, apart from an HGB of 114 g/L. The tPSA level was 3.25 ng/ml. Routine urine testing demonstrated 1 + white blood cells. Before hospital admission, a Doppler ultrasound revealed blood clot in the bladder measuring 4.7 cm × 2.8 cm × 3.3 cm. The prostate was enlarged to approximately 86 g. There was 40 ml of residual urine in the bladder after urination. Computed tomography urography (CTU) scan indicated that the prostate volume was approximately 6.0 cm × 6.7 cm × 5.5 cm with several nodules and an area of high density inside. There were multiple diverticulum formations in the bladder. A mass with uneven enhancement was seen toward the right of the prostate (approximate size: 4.6 cm × 2.7 cm). Further prostatic MRI scans also revealed benign prostatic hyperplasia. The bone scan was negative. On day seven, a Doppler ultrasound indicated a bladder blood clot with a size of 6.6 cm × 4.9 cm × 6.7 cm.
After discussion, the cause of the patient’s bleeding was determined to be benign prostatic hyperplasia. After admission, the patient underwent placement of an indwelling three-way urinary catheter to facilitate continuous bladder irrigation, hemostatic drug to stop the bleeding, and piperacillin sodium and sulbactam sodium to fight infection. On the third day after admission, the patient’s urine color turned clear, and bladder irrigation was stopped. The catheter was removed on the fourth day after admission. The patient was able to urinate on his own without obvious gross hematuria. On day seven postadmission, the patient recurred with obvious gross hematuria accompanied by difficulty urinating and underwent placement of an indwelling three-was urinary catheter to facilitate continuous bladder flushing. The flushing fluid was dark red with a darker intermittent color. Hemostatic and fluid rehydration treatments were provided simultaneously.
As the patient is elderly and has underlying diseases, routine transurethral resection of the prostate carries a high risk. The patient agreed to prostate embolization. The interventional department performed bilateral prostatic artery embolization under local anesthesia . After embolization, the patient’s urine color was clearer, but the urinary catheter was repeatedly blocked due to an old blood clot in the bladder. The urinary catheter to facilitate could not drain smoothly. The day after embolization, the bladder blood clot was cleared, and partial prostatectomy was performed through the urethra under spinal anesthesia in the operating room. After the operation, the patient’s urine color was clear, and gross hematuria did not recur.
On the second day after prostate embolization, the patient gradually developed glans pain, burning, and discomfort in the urethra and perineum. The glans was swollen with surface ecchymoses on day six postembolization. The patient was given a combination of oral and intravenous analgesics for pain relief and topical potassium permanganate and saline wet compresses, but the skin on the glans did not improve significantly.
On the tenth day after embolization, most of the skin on the glans was crusted and black . A burn physician diagnosed avascular necrosis of the glans and recommended surgical removal of the scab. However, the patient refused. The glans was cleaned with saline and a new rehabilitation solution twice a day. The crust gradually softened and was removed with a blade. We first utilized lidocaine cream to relieve pain and then used burn cream to promote wound healing. Approximately 30 days after embolization, most of the crust on the glans had fallen off, and the base was visible. There was obvious granulation tissue, the wound was pink, and a small scab was noted around the urethral orifice. The mucous membrane around the urethral orifice was white . Approximately 60 days after embolization, the glans had completely healed , there was no obvious burning or discomfort in the urethra or scrotum, and urination was unobstructed. Three months after the operation, the prostate size, IPSS, residual urine and maximum urinary flow rate were 4.8 cm × 5 cm × 4.1 cm (approximately 51 g), 7 points, 20 ml and 16 ml/s, respectively. The patient was satisfied with the treatment outcome.