A 47-year-old male patient who was previously followed up at the Chronic Wound Clinic of our hospital presented with a 10 × 15 cm wound on the dorsolateral surface of the right foot and a 2 × 3 cm wound on the outside of the right ankle . The patient had a history of Buerger’s Disease (Thromboangiitis obliterans) for 28 years. It has been learned that the patient continues smoking and lives in bad hygienic conditions. The patient received debridement of the wound at the Chronic Wound Clinic, and the sample was sent to our hospital’s Medical Microbiology laboratory for microscopy and culture. Before getting culture results, oral ampicillin sulbactam, ciprofloxacin, and topical mupirocin treatment were started to the patient empirically.
When we questioned the patient he said that he had previously applied to the Chronic Wound Clinic nine months before this admission. The patient had first come to the Department of Cardiovascular Surgery because stem cell treatment was being considered. The patient had his toe amputated at another medical centre one month before that. The patient was referred to the Chronic Wound Clinic for the treatment of the infected chronic wound at his foot before stem cell treatment. In the blood tests performed at the first visit, the white blood cell count was 9500/μL (65.1% neutrophils), hemoglobin 12.3 g/dl, hematocrit 38.9%, platelets 348.000/μL. Both the patient’s fasting blood glucose (95 mg/dL) and % HbA1c (6.1%) levels were found to be normal. The patient had higher than normal levels of CRP (12 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (55 mm/h). The patient’s coagulation tests were within normal limits (aPTT 31.8 s, prothrombin time 11 s, INR 0.99). The patient’s HBsAg, Anti-HIV, and Anti-HCV tests were shown to be negative with ELISA method (ETI-MAX 3000 analyzer; DiaSorin S.p.A., UK). The angiography of the leg showed left deep femoral artery had thin calibration, the right superficial femoral artery was occluded at the level of the ½ middle of the thigh, and there were intense collateral arteries on leg and thigh. Microscopic examination of the specimen taken from the wound revealed 4–5 polymorphonuclear leucocytes in each area. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated from wound culture. When antibiotic sensitivity tests were made this microorganism was found to be sensitive to tobramycin, colistin, ceftazidime, and gentamicin. The patient was given iv ceftazidime and metronidazole treatment for 14 days. The patient was hospitalized for one month, and treated with hyperbaric oxygen therapy. After skin grafting, the patient was discharged.
This time the previous graft was found to be lysed, and the wound was re-infected. The blood tests were performed and white blood cells were found 8200/μL (70% neutrophils), hemoglobin 14 g/dl, hematocrit 43.7%, and platelets 306.000 /μL. The patient’s CRP (7 mg / L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (65 mm / h) were found to be high.
Plenty of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and gram-negative bacilli were present in the Gram stained sample taken from the patient’s wound which was sent to our hospital’s Medical Microbiology laboratory. The material was inoculated on to blood agar and Eosin methylene blue (EMB) agar and incubated. Four different types of colonies were identified after 24 h of incubation at 37 °C on bloody agar and EMB agar. Out of these four colony types, the colonies predominantly grown on blood agar were light gray, had a dry appearance, and were large colonies with indented edges that tended to merge with each other, resembling Alcaligenes. However, unlike Alcaligenes there was no fruity odour and oxidase test was negative. These colonies were found to be indole-negative, urease-negative and strongly catalase-positive. The colonies grown on blood agar with second density were gray coloured and had swarming around the colony, were indole positive, urease positive, oxidase negative, hydrogen sulphide producing colonies. The third colony type was dirty-white-coloured, mucoid with smooth edges. They were indole negative, Voges-Proskauer test positive. The fourth colony type was smooth-edged, whitish mucoid colonies. Urease test was positive, indole positive and Voges-Proskauer test was negative. On EMB medium a mixed growth of one lactose-positive and three lactose-negative colonies corresponding to these four types of colonies was observed. Single colony passages were made from each of these four colony types in order to identify with Maldi Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) system, a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) system in our Medical Microbiology Laboratory. Antibiotic susceptibility tests of the bacteria were carried out on a Phoenix 100 (Beckton Dickinson, USA) device.
The passages made from the first colony type produced dry, light gray, opaque colonies, with irregularly indented, protruding edges, and swarming around the colonies on blood agar , and lactose-negative colonies on EMB. Gram-negative, short bacilli were seen in Gram staining of colonies from blood agar . These colonies were identified as Kerstersia gyiorum by Maldi Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) system with 2.348 Biotyper score (excellent identification). The identification of K. gyiorum with Maldi Biotyper was confirmed by 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing according to the predefined methodology [, ]. Briefly, the following steps were taken for this procedure. DNA was isolated from pure culture using DNeasy Blood & tissue kit (Qiagen, Germany). 16S rRNA gene amplification was performed using universal 27F (AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG) and 1492R (GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT) primers. In the PCR reaction, 1XTaq buffer, 2 mM MgCl 2, 0.2 mM dNTP, 0.4 pmol of primers and 1.25 U Taq polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) were used in a volume of 50 μL. DNA sequencing of the resulting product was performed using the Bigdye Cycle Sequencing Kit v.3.1 (Applied Biosystems, USA). Sequence analyzes were compared to the GenBank NCBI gene library data using the BLAST program . The sequence was found 100% identical to K. gyiorum. Antibiotic susceptibility tests for K. gyiorum were performed using the Phoenix 100 (Beckton Dickinson, USA) device and the E-test (Liofilchem, Italy) for six antimicrobial agents (ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, colistin, gentamicin, imipenem, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) on Mueller-Hinton agar in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. The results were evaluated according to the MIC breakpoints established by Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute for other non-Enterobacteriaceae . The results of antibiotic susceptibility tests for K. gyiorum are shown in Table .
Other microorganisms were identified as Proteus vulgaris, Enterobacter cloacae, Morganella morganii by Maldi Biotyper system, respectively. Antibiotic susceptibility results of P. vulgaris, E. cloacae, M. morganii are shown in Table .
Oral ampicillin-sulbactam and ciprofloxacin treatment was continued because the microorganisms were susceptible to these antibiotics. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy was used. Wound debridement and skin grafting were applied. The patient was discharged after one month of hospitalization. The patient was doing well in follow-up examination three-months later . Figure shows a timeline of events.