A 67-year-old woman presented with recurrent palpitation, which had initially emerged 2 years earlier. The patient had previously undergone two radiofrequency ablations for atrial fibrillation. Other than pulmonary vein isolation, line ablations were performed in the anterior wall of the left atrium, mitral isthmus, and cavotricuspid isthmus. A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated no enlargement of the atria and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 77%. The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) recorded during a palpitation episode showed AT with a 3:1 atrioventricular conduction rate. P' waves were prolonged in duration (ca. 220 ms) and were widely split in morphology (P'1 wave morphology was biphasic and P'2 wave morphology was positive in the inferior leads; the P'2 wave almost merged with the QRS complex) .
Then, an electrophysiological study was performed. The intracardiac ECG showed that the earliest atrial activation developed in the distal coronary sinus (CS), indicating that focal AT originated from the left atrium . Voltage mapping demonstrated a wide distribution of low-voltage areas in the left atrium, suggesting slow conduction between the left and the right atria, including the Bachmann bundle zone . The propagation map during atrial tachycardia indicated that focal AT arose from the left atrial appendage (LAA). The left atrial anterior line was blocked .
The tachycardia originated from the LAA, as confirmed by the mapping . Ablation was applied at the site of earliest activation, with power limited to 30 W and a temperature below 55°C. Following the gradual prolongation of the tachycardia cycle length, atrial tachycardia was terminated. Repeated intravenous infusion of isoprenaline and programmed atrial stimulation did not induce AT.
After ablation, the palpitation episode did not recur. The ECG recorded after the procedure showed a P wave in sinus rhythm, while the widely split P waves appeared to be absent . Considering the presence of intra- and interatrial delayed conduction, it was possible that the left atrial P wave may have merged with the QRS complex.