A 57-year-old white male, current heavy smoker, was referred urgently to our lung cancer service as “suspected lung cancer” following an abnormal chest X-ray performed to investigate a cough. The X-ray revealed a “coin lesion” in the left middle zone , and there was no previous imaging to compare. The patient had a strong family history of lung cancer (father and brother), and a personal medical history of hypertension (on amlodipine). He denied any pains, there were no palpable lymph nodes, no skin lesions, chest auscultation was clear, and there was no finger clubbing. Given the strong family history of lung cancer with excessive smoking, the primary differential diagnosis of lung cancer was considered. It was approached as a straightforward case of SPN, and we urgently organized a CT staging scan , which reported a left-upper-lobe 20 mm solid, non-spiculated, solitary nodule, without emphysematous changes, no enlarged lymph nodes, and no other extrathoracic metastases. The provisional staging for lung cancer was T1b N0 M0 (BROCK risk 28.1%). His PET CT a few days later confirmed a PET-avid 20 mm left-upper-lobe lesion (SUVmax 9.6), but surprisingly also a solitary posterior right paravertebral intramuscular lesion (erector spinae) at the level of T6 vertebral body, with SUVmax 10.1, which was not clearly visible on the staging CT scan, even with the benefit of hindsight . There were no enlarged or PET-avid mediastinal or hilar lymph nodes.
In our lung cancer service, we run a physician-led rapid access ultrasound (US)-guided biopsy service, and with the patient’s consent, we proceeded with a “same day” ultrasound-guided needle core biopsy of the paravertebral intramuscular lesion. Four cores of pale tissue were obtained under guidance, with 18G Tru-Cut needle, without complications. Histopathology revealed presence of tumor with associated fibroadipose tissue and skeletal muscle, with some of the malignant cells showing a plasmacytoid morphology. There was widespread nuclear atypia with hyperchromasia and pleomorphism and evident mitotic activity. Immunohistochemistry showed positive S100, Melan-A , and patchy pattern of human melanoma black-45 (HMB-45). Tissue was negative for AE1/AE3, CK 8/18, CK 5/6, CD45, CD138, napsin A, and thyroid transcription factor 1(TTF-1). The p-63 was positive, but the more specific marker of squamous cell cancers (SCC) p-40 was negative, steering the diagnosis further away from SCC. The combination of the morphology and immunoprofiling was consistent with a diagnosis of metastatic malignant melanoma (T0 N0 M1). His serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were normal. BRAF testing was immediately performed, and detected a “c.1799T>A p.(Val600Glu)” mutation, with ~90% tumor content. Following discussions between the melanoma and the lung cancer multidisciplinary team meetings, and normal investigations from ophthalmology, ear, nose, and throat (ENT), upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, bronchoscopy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain, and ultraviolet (UV) lamp examination, we decided to separately resect the SPN, in view of the high risk of a primary lung cancer and the absence of a primary melanoma. The patient had a video-assisted thoracoscopic (VATS) wedge resection of the peripheral 20 mm lesion, with clear margins of 9 mm (V0 R0) and had the same histopathological findings and immunoprofile, confirming MM. The patient did not consent to additional excision of the intramuscular lesion, so was offered an oral combination of dabrafenib and trametinib, for the recommended 12-month treatment course. He is currently doing well, recurrence-free over 5 years later, with complete regression of the intramuscular lesion, and no other lesions on annual CT scans thus far.