This is the case of a male infant born prematurely at 36-weeks and 6-days estimated gestational age to a 27-year-old mother G1P0 with a history of polycystic ovary syndrome, and a low-grade cervical lesion associated with human papilloma virus co-infection. The mother smoked cigarettes and used marijuana continuously during the pregnancy. Prenatal care with folate, iron, and routine ultrasounds was begun during the first trimester. At 35 weeks, an ultrasound showed symmetric intrauterine growth restriction and an abdominal wall defect. Labor began following premature rupture of membranes and was associated with late decelerations on fetal monitoring, prompting delivery by caesarean-section. At birth, the patient weighed 2070 g with a head circumference of 31 cm (<10th percentile). Physical exam showed ambiguous genitalia, bladder exstrophy, imperforate anus, and an omphalocele .
External evidence of myelomeningocele was not present and further spinal imaging was unremarkable. Operative repair was performed at eight months of age, once an adequate goal weight of 3500 g (∼7 lbs 11 oz) had been achieved, at which point the patient underwent modern staged repair for bladder exstrophy (MSRE) and ostomy, as described by Inouye et al. The major steps of the procedure included takedown of the cecal plate, tubularization of the cecum, and colostomy formation. During manipulation, the patient was noted to have a duplicated bifid cecum with a non-inflamed duplicated appendix, which was not removed. Additional intraoperative findings included the presence of complete duplicated bladders, each with a bladder neck and associated urethral plate connecting with a bifid phallus and hemi glans. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged.
When the patient was two-years and eight-months-old, he experienced several episodes of non-bloody, non-bilious emesis after feeding and was hospitalized with evidence of a bowel obstruction as seen on abdominal radiograph .
A nasogastric tube was placed and arrangements were made to proceed with operative intervention. The patient was significantly distended so open exploration was pursued over laparoscopy. Exploration revealed diffuse adhesions, particularly in the pelvis, and in internal hernia through a mesenteric defect with an obstructed loop of bowel, as well as significant malrotation. The bowel in the internal hernia was reduced then extensive lysis of adhesions allowed mobilization of the entire bowel from the duodenum to the colostomy. This included exposure of the cecum where duplicated appendices and numerous enlarge mesenteric lymph nodes were identified . One of the appendices was actively inflamed. Both the appendices were removed, along with a few of the adjacent enlarged lymph nodes, then the abdomen was closed primarily.
The child's post-operative course was uncomplicated, with return of bowel function and adequate urine output by post-operative day three. The patient's nasogastric tube was subsequently removed and oral intake was advanced, which the patient tolerated well until he was discharged on post-operative day eight. At a postoperative clinic visit, the child was recovering well without complication and was awaiting the second stage of the exstrophy repair with pelvic osteotomy.