A 13-year-old female was admitted to hospital for acute demyelinating polyneuropathy confirmed by electromyography and nerve conduction studies; later on a diagnosis of Guillain Barré Syndrome was confirmed. A complementary MRI performed as part of in-hospital management showed an incidental finding of a cystic lesion in the vertebral body of C2 . The only symptom reported by the patient was cervical pain irradiated to shoulders. The physical exam was unremarkable, and no deformities nor neurologic alterations were noted. The patient started using a Philadelphia collar and restriction of exercise was recommended.
The case was discussed at the neurosurgery, spine surgery, and neuroradiology service meeting and extension studies such as angiotomography of carotid arteries and vertebrobasilar system and bone scintigraphy were requested to determine the etiology of the lesion because the management and prognosis vary according to the type of tumor. Studies concluded it was a tumoral lesion with benign characteristics. Additionally, correlation with computed tomography (CT scan) revealed a focal hypodense lesion in the right half of the vertebral body of C2 with disruption of the inferior cortical. Because of the elevated risk of fracture and collapse of the vertebra due to the thinning of the cortical the optimal treatment considered was surgical resection of the tumor to prevent further neurological lesions. Cervical curettage followed by tumor excision was performed. A lateral submandibular approach to the upper cervical spine was used and bone resection was performed with a radiofrequency assisted burr, no instrumentation or fixation was required. Intraoperatively a cystic lesion with fibrotic and nodular material was evidenced; later histologic examination ruled out giant cell tumor and aneurismatic bone cyst . The stability of the defect was ensured by filling it with cortical/cancellous allograft and by prescribing a postsurgical plastic cervical collar to maintain neck immobilization.
Postoperative evolution was satisfactory. The patient remained with a CTLSO immobilization for 4 months. At 6 and 12 months, the patient presented no symptoms and the postoperative CT scan showed adequate integration of the graft as shown in .