A 3 -year-old boy was first seen in our department at the age of 20 days for a positive neonatal screening for PKU. He was born at 41 weeks of gestation to non-consanguineous parents, with a birth weight of 2810 g (10th centile). Family history was unremarkable for FD except for a maternal uncle deceased at the age of 53 years of cerebral stroke, and a grandmother suffers of systemic hypertension. A maternal niece has developed severe renal failure at birth and underwent to renal transplantation at the age of 19 years for polycystic kidneys . In our child an hyperphenylalaninemia due to BH4-deficiency was excluded by BH4 loading test (20 mg/Kg), analysis of urinary pterins, and determination of dihydropterine reductase activity on blood spot. Moreover, mutation analysis by restriction enzyme analysis was used to identify his genotype resulting homozygous for c.143 T>C mutation on exon 2 that changes in the protein Lys with Ser (p.L48S). The patient was subjected to a low-Phe diet and supplementation with Phe-free amino-acid mixtures. Treatment compliance was excellent with a mean of serum Phe value ~3 mg/dl during the day and good tolerance (440 mg Phe/day). Growth, neurological and psychological development were normal. At the age of 28 months, the boy began to show a slow growth, lack of appetite, severe abdominal pain and appearance often of episodes of gastroenteritis, resolving spontaneously and not related with the diet treatment. Laboratory routine investigations, sweat test, acid-base status, inflammatory parameters, stool culture, oven and parassite, faecal occult blood test, antigliadin antibodies (AGA), antiendomisium antibodies (EMA), tissue transglutaminase (tTG), were in the normal range. Symptoms of non specific enteropathy, such recurrent diffuse abdominal pain and diarrhea continued and at the age of 36 months he showed a deceleration of linear growth velocity (from 50th centile to 10-25th centile) although the BMI was in normal range. These symptoms combined with the familiar history, suggested us a possible FD. At clinical examination no angiokeratomas were found.
The diagnosis was confirmed by the reduced plasma a-galactosidase A (0,32 nmol/h/ml), decreased activity assayed in leucocytes [0,65 nmol/mg.prot/h (normal range: 26-80)] and the molecular analysis of GLA gene documented the hemizygous missense mutation g.5234G>A 2 in the exon 2 that changes in the protein Arg with Hys (p.R112H). In the mother, the mutation analysis showed that she carries the same heterozygous mutation. We performed a systematic pedigree analysis by the assay of GAL activity in the family and mutation analysis to brothers, sisters, nephews of the mother that resulted normal. The grandmother (II.2) and a brother (III.1) of the mother refused to undergo to molecular analysis .
Due to the lack of other clinical signs we decided not to start ERT but to perform a clinical follow-up every 6 months. Today the patient is 5-year-old, continues a diet therapy for PKU and severe abdominal pain is present periodically without triggering factors in absence of other symptoms.