In January 2016, a 58-year-old man with multi-level atherosclerosis on optimized medical therapy since 2005 (including aspirin, high-dose statin and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor) was admitted for interventional work-up due to episodes of right hemisphere transient ischaemic attacks (crescendo TIAs; aphasia, left-arm numbness and parestesia of increasing intensity; left-handed patient, dominant hemisphere). A similar clinical picture had preceded his right (dominant) hemispheric ischaemic stroke nearly 11 years earlier. Following stroke, the patient had undergone neuroprotected right internal carotid artery (RICA) stenting using a single-layer nitinol stent (Precise, Cordis) with an optimal angiographic result. Yearly clinical and duplex ultrasound (DUS) follow-up indicated, from the post-procedural Year 3 onwards, progressive in-stent velocities that were considered mild-to-moderate until Year 10 when they reached 3.1/0.9 m/s (peak-systolic/end-diastolic). With the neurological consultation (then) of ‘no contraindications to re-angioplasty’ the patient, in absence of clinical symptoms recurrence, declined reintervention. However, crescendo TIAs that followed several months later led to urgent admission for vascular work-up. Admission DUS showed turbulent flow throughout the stent with velocities of 4.7/1.8 m/s. NeuroVascular Team recommended RICA re-angioplasty (Ethics Committee-approved clinical registry with patient informed consent).
Routine femoral access was gained. Catheter angiography demonstrated an ulcerated, tight lesion throughout the stent length . Unfractionated heparin was titrated to activated clotting time >250 s. Following distal neuroprotection (filter) placement, intravascular ultrasound (IVUS, and Video 1) evaluation was performed with virtual histology (VH) modality to determine the in-stent lesion type .
IVUS demonstrated minimal lumen of only 1.5 × 2.8 mm (3.5 mm2) and in-stent plaque burden of 84.1% (cf. Video 1). The lesion was highly ulcerated (cf. ) suggestive of spontaneous cerebral embolism, as per the clinical presentation. Virtual histology revealed large irregular areas of necrotic core in contact with the lumen (example in ; thin-cap fibroatheroma—TCFA phenotype)., Upon 3.0 × 20 mm (undersized) balloon predilation, a nearly complete flow cessation occurred due to the filter basket obstruction with plaque debris (cf., ; Videos 2 and ). The angiographic ‘no-flow’ elicited ipsilateral cerebral ischaemia (clouded consciousness and aphasia, dominant hemisphere). A large (7F) aspiration catheter was used to reduce the filter load. The filter was then removed in a deliberate ‘half-open’ position , leading to immediate flow restoration and symptom resolution. A new filter was inserted. To sequestrate the plaque, MCS (CGuard 8 × 40 mm, Inspire MD, ) was implanted with a ≈5 mm margin on each end of the Precise stent . Consistent with our routine ‘coronary-like’ MCS post-dilatation strategy, the stent-in-stent was optimized to the point of lack of residual stenosis ( and Video 3). The (2nd) filter basket was empty , indicating an effective microNet prevention of plaque embolism. The angiographic result was optimal, with the absence of any residual stenosis and full reconstruction of normal anatomy . Post-procedural IVUS demonstrated an optimal vessel lumen and a complete exclusion of the plaque from the lumen ( and , Video 3). AngioSeal device was used for vascular access closure. The patient was discharged on continued optimal medical therapy (including aspirin, high-dose statin and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor).
After re-revascularization, yearly DUS showed normal, stable stent-in-stent velocities. Five years later, DUS remains normal and there is absence of any in-stent re-restenosis on computed tomography angiography , consistent with lasting angiographic reconstruction of normal anatomy and an effective clinical cure.