A 36-year-old previously healthy man presented to the emergency room with acute onset abnormal movements involving face and upper limbs for 10 days and gradually developing altered sensorium for last 6 hours. He was hospitalized in a rural health facility where his clinical picture was initially considered as due to prolonged seizure activity for which he received multiple anti-epileptic drugs. As he was progressively deteriorating, he was referred to a tertiary center. As per the caregiver’s description and medical records received from the previous hospital, he was having abnormal, involuntary, rapid, brief and jerky movements involving face and upper limbs (predominantly right sided). Although there was no history of headache, fever, vomiting, and any focal weakness, the patient had significant involuntary weight loss in last 4 months. Family history and drug history were non-contributory.
Clinical examination revealed the patient was drowsy, dehydrated, cachectic, afebrile, tachycardic (130/min), normotensive (100/60 mmHg) and tachypneic (36/min). He had faciobrachial myoclonic jerks with asymmetric involvement of right upper limb more than left upper limb (distal more than proximal), with tonic neck deviation to left side withoutany abnormal movement of bilateral lower limbs . The myoclonic jerks were not associated with any external cues or voluntary action. The tone and deep tendon reflexes of upper limbs could not be assessed due to persistent abnormal involuntary movements. The tone and deep tendon reflexes of lower limbs were normal; the plantar reflexes were flexor. Complete assessment of cranial nerves, sensory, cerebellar and autonomic functions could not be done. There was no sign of meningeal irritation and papilledema.
Acute onset multifocal myoclonus associated with encephalopathy with a background of addiction and recent onset progressive involuntary weight loss had narrowed the differential diagnoses to toxic-metabolic and neuro-infectious etiologies. Bedside CBG was measured immediately and was found to be 695 mg/dL (normal, <200). Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis revealed metabolic acidosis (pH- 7.28 [normal, 7.35–7.45], HCO3- -18 mEq/L [normal, 22–26], Na+- 117 mEq/L [normal, 135–145] [131 mEq/L when corrected for hyperglycemia], anion gap- 18 mmol/L (normal<12), with normal serum osmolality, pO2, pCO2, K+, and ionic Ca2+). Urine examination showed glycosuria (3+) and ketonuria (2+); plasma beta-hydroxy-butyrate level was found to be 3.6mmol/L (normal, <1.5). Thus, a diagnosis of DKA was confirmed. Adequate hydration was ensured with normal saline followed by treatment with continuous intravenous regular insulin (at a rate of 8 IU/h)., Once CBG came down to less than 400 mg/dL, approximately 3 h after therapy, all movements disappeared. His metabolic derangements were completely corrected by next 2 days and CBG was fairly controlled with basal-bolus regimen.
After stabilization he had absolutely normal hemodynamic and hydration status. Detailed neurological and other systemic examinations were within normal limits. His HbA1c was 10.62% (normal, <5.6), fasting and post-prandial blood glucose were 137 mg/dL (normal, <100) and 250 mg/dL (normal, <140) respectively. C peptide level was low [0.1 ng/ml (normal, 0.5–2.7)] with positive anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)-65 antibodies that established the diagnosis of T1DM. The patient’s oropharyngeal swab test for SARS-CoV-2, by qualitative real-time reverse-transcriptase–polymerase-chain-reaction assay, was negative.
All other tests of the metabolic panel (complete hemogram, lipid profile, renal, liver, thyroid function tests) were within normal limits. Autoimmune and paraneoplastic encephalitis profile [anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-thyroid antibodies, antibodies against leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 (anti-LGl1), contactin-associated protein-like 2 (Caspr2), and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDA-R)] were negative. Serological tests for HIV 1&2, and hepatitis B and C were negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), interictal electroencephalogram (EEG), and cerebrospinal fluid analysis were normal. The rest of his hospital stay was uneventful and did not have any recurrence of involuntary movements during a 2-month follow-up.