A 19-year-old German woman with polytrauma (Injury Severity Score [ISS] 27, Pediatric Trauma Score [PTS] 29) had a third grade open distal comminuted femoral fracture with a long distance metaphyseal osseous defect (AO-Cl: 33-C3.3) and she also lost a multiple centimeter large fragment of the diaphysis in a car accident . Further injury was an osseous avulsion fracture of her posterior cruciate ligament, a rupture of her quadriceps tendon as well as a Lisfranc luxation of her right lower limb. The patient additionally had a second degree traumatic brain injury with multiple contusion hemorrhage and a lung contusion on the left side. The initial treatment took place a half-hour after the accident. Therefore an external fixator, including the joint of her knee, was applied as well as the suture of her quadriceps tendon and surgical wound care of the multiple contused lacerated wounds.
After stabilizing the vital parameters and conditioning the soft tissue, the external fixator was exchanged through a retrograde intramedullary nail. The procedure started with the open reconstruction of the distal femur articular surface with the help of KFI screws (Königsee, Allendorf, Germany). The 6.5cm long metaphyseal osseous defect of her femur was treated by shortening the femur with a T2-supracondylar nail (SCN) osteosynthesis (Stryker, Duisburg, Germany; Figure ).
During further progression the osseous consolidation was delayed. For that reason, an autogenous cancellous iliac crest bone graft was carried out 3 months after the implantation of the SCN. Due to still missing consolidation after 9 further weeks, a second autologous cancellous and cortical bone graft out of her back iliac crest was implemented. During both surgeries the SCN was not revised. It followed a continuous progress of the osseous consolidation.
The leg shortening on the patient’s right side was primarily treated with a 6.5cm shoe sole compensation that did not satisfy the patient due to limited function and cosmetic reasons. Therefore a lengthening of the right femur was planned. With the help of a computed tomography scan the precise difference in leg length was measured and the eventual deviation in axis and rotation were defined. With these data the clinical-defined leg length difference of 6.5cm was confirmed; a deviation of the axis or torsion was ruled out. So 14 months after the trauma an ISKD was implanted.
The procedure started with the removal of the SCN of the femur and followed with implantation of the ISKD in one sitting. In order to keep the bone necrosis and the soft tissue damage to a minimum a drill-hole osteotomy was used. After that the intramedullary canal was prepared with a flexible reamer up to 14mm to gain an internal bone graft. An ISKD F 12.5mm caliber, 255 to 335mm nail was chosen. On the beginning of the fifth day, a distraction rate of 1mm a day was started. The patient was trained to handle the control monitor as well as the independent distraction mechanism. After releasing her into out-patient care, a sonographic or radiologic control was carried out on a weekly basis until the goal of 6.5cm lengthening was reached . In addition, an intensive physical therapy was implemented. Until reaching the lengthening maximum, the patient was mobilized through the use of a forearm crutch in order to relieve her right lower extremity. She temporarily had stretching pain on the iliotibial tract the more the distraction increased. Also there was a limited stretch function in her right knee. Both the pain and the limited function regressed quickly after the distraction procedure. Both complications were treated with physical therapy and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The entire length range was reached after 10 weeks as expected. Until the radiological consolidation of the distraction range, the patient was trained with partial weight-bearing of 20kg bodyweight. A radiological examination showed that the entire distraction range was filled with osseous material 9 months after the implantation . The ISKD was removed 2 years after implantation as specified by the manufacturer. Before the removal of the lengthening nail, the patient had no limitations in her daily life. Solely fast running and carrying heavy things led to pain in her right knee . The removal of the implant changed neither the clinical nor her subjective wellbeing.