A 58-year-old male with underlying ischaemic heart disease, heart failure (HF), dyslipidaemia, and Stage 3 chronic kidney disease presented to the clinic for follow-up. He was admitted 2 years prior for myocardial infarction and managed appropriately with percutaneous coronary intervention, followed by optimal medical therapy. His baseline left ventricular ejection fraction was 20%. Since diagnosis, he has been treated with the following medications: atorvastatin 80 mg daily, aspirin 100 mg daily, perindopril 4 mg daily, bisoprolol 5 mg daily, furosemide 40 mg twice daily, and spironolactone 25 mg daily. Despite compliance with his treatment, he has had five admissions for acute decompensation of HF over the past 2 years. We withheld the perindopril from his medication list 2 days prior to discharge. His baseline serum potassium level was 4 mmol/L, which is within the normal range; he also had normal hepatic function and no electrolyte abnormalities. Subsequently, we optimized his HF treatment with the addition of sacubitril/valsartan 49 mg/51 mg twice daily upon discharge.
Six days after discharge, he presented with progressively worsening myalgia, oliguria, generalized malaise, and lethargy. Upon admission, his blood pressure was 96/60 mmHg (mean arterial pressure 70 mmHg), heart rate 90 b.p.m., and his pulse oximetry was 97% under room air. Physical examination revealed bibasal crepitation on auscultation of the lung and bilateral lower limb oedema. Baseline laboratory investigation upon admission was significant for elevated serum creatinine (680 μmol/L; baseline 153 μmol/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 351 U/L (normal range 10–49 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 1499 U/L (normal range < 34 U/L), and markedly raised CK of 94 850 U/L (normal range 32–294 U/L). Other relevant investigations, such as high-sensitivity troponin I, serum potassium, electrolytes, full blood count, and coagulation profile, were unremarkable. A bedside transthoracic echocardiogram revealed dilated right and left atria, with a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 15–20%.
A provisional diagnosis of acute kidney failure secondary to rhabdomyolysis aggravated by sacubitril/valsartan was made. The cardiologist decided to withhold his atorvastatin and sacubitril/valsartan because of possible drug interactions. Intravenous rehydration therapy was initiated together with IV furosemide 40 mg twice daily. The amount of fluid infused daily was carefully guided by central venous pressure, which we aimed to maintain between 8 and 10 cmH2O. On Day 3 of admission, he developed anuria with worsening serum creatinine (931 μmol/L) and was referred to the nephrology team for urgent renal replacement therapy. The nephrology team commenced sustained low efficiency dialysis (SLED) and he developed hypotension and chest discomfort post-SLED. The post-SLED blood investigation showed improved serum creatinine of 584 μmol/L, CK of 40 956 U/L with repeated high-sensitivity troponin I of 3.89 ng/mL (normal range < 0.06 ng/mL). A provisional diagnosis of cardiogenic shock secondary to acute coronary syndrome was established. Coronary angiogram was not performed due to the increased risk of contrast-induced nephropathy. We commenced noradrenaline inotropic support and treated him with aspirin, ticagrelor, and fondaparinux in the cardiac intensive care unit. He required noradrenaline inotropic support for the next 4 days and dobutamine inotropic support briefly, which were subsequently tapered off.
On the 10th day of admission, his condition stabilized with markedly reduced serum creatinine, CK, ALT and AST. The patient was restarted on low-dose rosuvastatin 5 mg daily upon discharge because of persistently elevated serum low-density lipoprotein (LDL) of 4.1 mmol/L. An outpatient clinic follow-up 1 week later revealed normalized renal and liver function; hence, the decision to restart low-dose sacubitril/valsartan 24 mg/26 mg was made. He tolerated the co-administration of both low-dose rosuvastatin and sacubitril/valsartan as evidenced by static renal and liver profiles on the subsequent clinic visit .