The case mother was a 26-year-old African-American woman (case mother) with three reported past pregnancies and one living child; she had no significant past medical history and negative prenatal laboratory testing for hepatitis B, syphilis, group B streptococcus, and glucose intolerance. She had a 27-week urinary BPA concentration of 583 µg/g creatinine (1,250 µg/L). This was the highest BPA value recorded within the entire cohort (n = 389 participants and 1,100 urine samples) . Her other prenatal urinary BPA concentrations at 16 weeks and a birth were at the 84th (4.1 µg/g) and 49th (1.9 µg/g) percentiles, respectively. Because of concerns that the 583 µg/g urinary BPA concentration could be a spurious finding, we followed up with the CDC National Environmental Health Laboratory. The CDC confirmed this result by reextracting the sample twice to conduct repeat testing. The values obtained were very close to the value originally reported and higher than the highest standard on the calibration curve. They also documented that most BPA in the urine was conjugated and therefore did not reflect external contamination. The case mother had concentrations of serum cotinine, blood lead, and urinary phthalates ranging from the 25th to 84th percentiles within the cohort .
The mother of our case infant is an African-American woman with > 12 years of education. She was unemployed throughout the pregnancy and living with her 4-year-old daughter during the time she was pregnant with the case infant. The Home Observation for the Measurement of the Environment inventory (HOME inventory) scale score at the child’s first birthday was 31, which suggested a low quality and quantity of stimulation and support available in the home environment .
The case male infant was born in 2004, at term (39 weeks of gestation) by spontaneous vaginal delivery without complications. Labor and delivery were unremarkable, with Apgar scores of 9/9 at 1 and 5 min of age. The infant had a normal course in the newborn nursery and a normal NNNS at 14 hr and was discharged from the hospital approximately 38 hr after birth.
At the 1-month neurobehavioral assessment, completed on the 27th day of life during a home visit, the infant displayed the following clinical signs or symptoms: hypertonicity in the trunk and upper and lower extremities, setting sun sign, tremors, cogwheel movements and athetoid finger posturing, high-pitch cry, and extreme irritability . Compared with other infants in the HOME Study, this infant had high NNNS scores for excitability, lethargy, and stress abstinence (reflecting a higher level of the neurobehavioral dimension) and lower scores for regulation and quality of movement . Within the stress abstinence subscales, autonomic stress, central nervous system stress, and state stress were elevated compared with the rest of the cohort. Two dimensions of the NNNS—attention and handling—could not be assessed because the extreme irritability of the infant prevented completion of key items. In addition, habituation could not be assessed because it requires the subject to be asleep, which is uncommon at the 1-month examination because most infants are awake and interactive; approximately 89% of infants in the HOME Study cohort could not be assessed for habituation for this reason. The neurologic signs and behaviors noted on the individual exam for the case infant were clearly abnormal. The infant was referred to his primary care physician for follow-up and further workup, if indicated. All other general physical examination findings were reported as normal in the infant’s medical records. The infant went on to have annual neurobehavioral assessments at 1–5 years of age that were within normal limits. All neurologic assessments were performed by trained examiners within the HOME Study who were blinded to prenatal biomonitoring results.
To determine potential sources of the elevated urinary BPA concentration and to follow up on the development of the child, we used the prenatal questionnaire (completed in 2004) and conducted a focused follow-up telephone interview with the mother in the fall of 2009. We developed interview questions based on the mother’s responses to prenatal questionnaires collected at 22 weeks gestation, with the goal of potentially identifying specific sources of BPA exposure in the fall of 2004 when the 26-week urine sample was collected. From the 2004 questionnaire, we learned that the mother was single and unemployed. Although she reported being a nonsmoker with no exposure to second-hand smoke during pregnancy, her serum cotinine values in fact indicated exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke. Her values were not high enough for her to be classified as a smoker and were consistent across the pregnancy. The mother did report occasionally drinking wine between the estimated date of conception and 15 weeks gestation, but the amount never exceeded one drink in a typical day. She reported no illicit drug use and took no medications or supplements during her pregnancy except for prenatal vitamins during the first trimester. She reported drinking five canned soda beverages per week in the month before completing her prenatal questionnaire at 22 weeks gestation. These beverages included a combination of Pepsi (excluding Pepsi One), Coca-Cola (excluding Diet Coke), Ruby Red, Storm, Big Red, Snapple flavored teas, and KMX. Her diet consisted of canned or frozen vegetables one to three times per week and fresh vegetables four to six times per week. Her diet also included fish, meat, and dairy and was generally high in fat, including approximately four fast-food meals per week.
At the 2009 follow-up interview, the mother reported eating canned ravioli (generic brand) every day during the period in which the 26-week urine sample was taken. Her daily exposure to plastics included heating and use of plastic food storage containers in the microwave and eating and drinking from plastic plates and cups. She used a municipal water supply and did not know what kind of plumbing was used in her home. She did not report being hospitalized or receiving any kind of inpatient medical care during her pregnancy. Except for a tooth extraction before 16 weeks of gestation, she had no other dental work performed for the duration of the pregnancy. She was unemployed throughout the pregnancy and living with her 4-year-old daughter during the time she was pregnant with the case infant. Her home was within 2 miles of a whiskey factory, but there were no other industrial buildings in close proximity. Regarding her child’s medical condition, she stated that her primary care physician followed her child with normal checkups and did not note any abnormal behavioral or developmental findings or other health problems. The mother reported the child was in school and performing well.