We report the case of a 45 -years-old man, without any predisposing risk factor for coronary artery disease neither particular family history or psychosocial history. The patient has been followed for seven years for indeterminate colitis revealed by chronic abdominal pain and sub occlusive syndrome with signs of chronic inflammatory bowel disease not corresponding to ulcerative colitis or crohn's disease in the colon and gastrointestinal biopsy specimens. The patient was put under symptomatic treatment of abdominal pain without any clinical improvement. The patient was admitted to our hospital complaining of intense chest pain of 4 day's duration with abdominal pain and sub occlusive syndrome. Through questioning elicited the history of hospitalization, one week before his admission, for the management of acute aggravation of abdominal pain with diarrhea related to ascaris lumbricoides infection detected by stool examination and treated by albendazole 400 mg as a single dose. No history of allergic disease or recent traveling or drug usage was found. On admission, the patient had normal blood pressure at 110/70 mm Hg, pulse was 90 beats/min, respiratory rate was 18/min, and body temperature was 36.8 °C. Physical examination revealed diffuse abdominal sensibility and a pruritic rash over his lower limbs.The initial electrocardiogram, in comparison with a previous one that was within normal limits, objectified a regular sinus rhythm with ST-segment depression in septo-apico-lateral leads and negative T waves in the same territory and steep ST in the inferior leads (,A). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a non-dilated, non-hypertrophied left ventricle, with hypokinesis of lateral and inferior walls with preserved ejection fraction of 57% without any pericardial effusion (, A). Troponin T level was elevated at 6000 ng/l, reference value being less than 26 ng/l. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit of cardiology with the diagnosis of acute non ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), thus a coronary angiography was carried out revealing normal coronary arteries (A and B). Initial laboratory investigations revealed an inflammatory syndrome; CRP at 100 mg/L, white blood cells count at 28060/mm3 with 24,9% neutrophils, 7,3% lymphocytes, 3,8% monocytes, and 63,6% eosinophil's corresponding with an absolute eosinophil count of 17840/mm3 (normal range, 0–500/mm3) and platelets count was 256000/mm3. A complete 3 stool samples analysis detected ascaris lambricoid eggs. Tests for antinuclear antibody (ANA) and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) were negative. Serologies for human immunodeficiency virus, viral hepatitis and syphilis were negative along with positive IgG but negative IgM antibodies for both cytomegalovirus and toxoplasmosis. Therefore, the diagnosis of ascaris associated eosinophilic myocarditis was retained on the basis of clinical presentation, ECG and echocardiography findings with elevated troponins and normal coronary arteries associated with eosinophilia due to a large infestation by ascaris lumbricoides. Thoracic and abdominal computed tomography showed a stable appearance of digestive inflammatory thickening with submucosal edema of the right colon, duodenum and the last ileal loop with regular symmetrical and circumferential thickening of the lower esophagus. In addition, the CT scan also revealed a low-abundance right pleural effusion along with right basal alveolar-interstitial lung disease (loeffler's syndrome).
The patient was treated with albendazole 400 mg for 4 days and bisoprolol 5 mg for ventricular excitability revealed in ECG monitoring. Within one week of treatment, the patient's clinical symptoms improved, he reports less abdominal pain without chest pain recurrence. The leukocyte count decreased from 28060/mm3 to 14770/mm3 and the eosinophil count from 64 to 61%.
After three months, the control of ECG and echocardiography revealed no repolarization or segmental kinetics abnormalities with normalization of leukocyte count at 6670/mm3, eosinophilic count also remarkably decreased to 1307/mm3 corresponding to 19% of white blood cells (,B) (,B).