A 27-year-old man from Iran was referred to the physical medicine and rehabilitation outpatient clinic at Tabriz University of Medical Sciences on 23 April 2020. He had no significant medical, family, or psychosocial history. First, he noticed pain and weakness in his right hand when he woke up on the morning of 20 March 2020 (1 month previous). Then, thenar atrophy gradually developed. Thenar atrophy and numbness of the hand did not improve with conservative treatments such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, physical methods (such as ultrasound therapy (US), low-level laser therapy), wrist splinting in the neutral position, and home exercises. He was diagnosed with CTS according to the clinical history and physical examination. Therefore, surgical intervention was considered for him. He was referred to our EDX center for redocumentation before surgical release.
He had no history of any injection at this region, and no evidence of systemic disease. On physical examination, he had right-hand thenar atrophy and numbness. About 2 weeks after the onset of the symptoms, a nerve conduction study (NCS) showed unobtainable sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) in median innervated fingers, and poorly evoked compound muscle action potential (CMAP) in abductor pollicis brevis (APB) muscle. NCS in other nerves of the right upper and left limb was normal. Needle electromyography (EMG) study of right thenar muscles revealed a reduced recruitment pattern with severe acute neurogenic changes.
On admission, an impaired function of the thumb (lack of ability to abduct and oppose the thumb, and decreased grip strength decrease of the affected hand) and lateral thenar muscle atrophy was evident. But the point to consider was that all sensory modalities had been reduced in the median nerve distribution and thenar eminence. Given that the thenar eminence is supplied by the median nerve palmar cutaneous branch, which branches off proximal to the carpal tunnel, the decreased sensation over the thenar eminence is not a common finding in CTS. So, we suspected a median nerve lesion proximal to the carpal tunnel and performed further NCS, and searched for other EDX explanations.
We noticed that the SNAP of the right palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve was unobtainable. Additionally, the median nerve compound nerve action potential (CNAP) study in the forearm, while stimulating this nerve at the wrist and recording at the antecubital fossa, was unobtainable. By moving the nerve stimulation point toward the proximal, CNAP was still unobtainable up the junction of the distal one-third and proximal two-thirds at the forearm. Proximal to this junction, the nerve stimulation showed normal CNAP. The median nerve CNAP on the other side was normal. Needle examinations of median innervated right forearm muscles were normal.
These findings made us suspect “pseudo-CTS” (median nerve neuropathy at the lower forearm). This disorder is due to nerve entrapment or injury at locations other than the carpal tunnel, usually, the lower forearm, but shows similar signs and symptoms. By localizing the possible site of the median neuropathy by EDX, some potential causes of the median neuropathy at this region were compressive or sharp trauma to the forearm, a mass or ganglion cyst compressing the nerve, and vasculitis. The clinical exam was unremarkable for any penetrating injury or mass. Considering no history of any injection, and no evidence of systemic disease, we requested laboratory studies.
Surveys showed a mild increase in erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) to 35 mm/h. The full blood count and other serologic markers, including antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), antinuclear antibodies, paraneoplastic antibodies, and anti-Ro/La antibodies, the immunologic markers for syphilis, hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and serum and urine protein electrophoresis were unremarkable. Routine urine analysis was normal.
Accordingly, we diagnosed median nerve vasculitic neuropathy and recommended neuropathy site exploration and/or starting a high dose of prednisolone therapy. Unfortunately, the attending physician and the patient did not accept these impressions and recommendations, and surgical intervention was performed.
After 6 months of surgery, the patient was referred to our center again. Now, he had “progressive weakness and numbness” in his upper and lower limbs and was not able to walk independently. He used an axillary crutch. The matter was that, over the 6 months after surgery, the patient had seen several attending physicians and finally had been hospitalized for diagnostic workups and treatment. The nerve biopsy sample had exhibited a reasonably severe injury of myelinated nerve fibers, in addition to the epineural arteriolar walls surrounding endoneurial microvessels and perineurium inflammatory infiltrations.
After the surveys, “nonsystemic vasculitis neuropathy (NSVN)” was diagnosed for the patient. The patient was referred after intravenous steroid pulse therapy and relative improvement of weakness and pain, for managing the remaining disabilities and impairments.
In the examinations, the skin and cranial nerves were normal. We failed to detect any evidence of systemic lesion. The deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) were absent, and all sensory modalities had decreased. Muscle atrophy was evident in the lower limbs, and to a lesser extent in the upper limbs. Motor clinical assessment revealed asymmetrically diminished motor strength (measured by British Medical Research Council muscle strength grading ) in the four limbs (3–5/5 in upper limbs, and 2–3/5 in lower limbs). NCS data revealed asymmetric axonal peripheral polyneuropathy, compatible with mononeuritis multiplex.
A rehabilitation program, which involved daily 1-h physiotherapy (PT) sessions for 3 days a week, started immediately.
Rehabilitation led to gradual improvement and recovery of function and muscle strength, and after 18 weeks of treatment, no complications remained except mild leg paralysis.