The patient was a 1-year-and-7-month-old girl. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s family. The prenatal and perinatal courses were uneventful. She was born at 40 weeks with normal birth weight. Neonatal mass screening tests on the 4th day of life showed hypergalactosemia (10.78 mg/dL). Although the levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) were within normal limits, elevations of blood ammonia level (75 μg/dL) and total bile acid level (68.2 μmol/L) were observed on the 10th day of life. There was no sign of enzyme deficiency to explain galactosemia. Initially, she received no treatment other than careful observation. Subsequent ultrasound at 8 months of age revealed an IPSS with a communication between the right portal vein and the right hepatic vein at a peripheral location of the right liver lobe. She was admitted to our hospital with an IPSS. Her psychomotor development was within normal limits.
At 1 year of age, there was no sign of spontaneous closure of IPSS. Laboratory tests showed elevated levels of total bile acid (116 μmol/L), hyperammonemia (105 μg/dL), and hypermanganesemia (3.7 μg/dL). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with T1-weighted images at the age of 1 year and 3 months showed abnormal high signal intensity in the pallidum of the brain . Detailed examination of the IPSS using enhanced computerized tomography (CT) at 1 year of age revealed two IPSSs . One was a nidus forming a shunt between the right portal vein and the right hepatic vein; the other was between the right posterior portal vein and the middle hepatic vein at the peripheral location of the right liver lobe. Subsequently, there was no improvement of hyperammonemia and hypermanganesemia. Spontaneous closure was not observed. The possibility of closure of the IPSSs by interventional radiologic techniques was ruled out because of the nidus forming the shunt and the multiple shunts. Therefore, we performed a right hepatectomy at 1 year and 7 months of age.
During laparotomy, a catheter was inserted through the peripheral portion of the superior mesenteric vein and placed in the portal vein. We dissected the portal vein, and tested temporary occlusion of the right portal vein using vascular forceps. The portal vein pressure was measured, and portography was performed using this catheter before and after the temporary occlusion. The portal vein pressure was 13 mmHg before temporary occlusion of the right portal vein. Portography showed almost all portal vein flow draining into the hepatic vein through the IPSS before occlusion of the right portal vein. Although the left portal vein was not detected before occlusion, portography showed good contrast of the left portal vein, intrahepatic portal vein, and hepatic vein and showed no IPSS in the left lobe after temporary occlusion of the right portal vein . We evaluated the portal vein pressure and congestion of the intestine after temporal occlusion for about 20 min. The portal vein pressure was 16 mmHg after temporary occlusion of the right portal vein. There was no sign of intestinal wall edema and redness, as would accompany intestinal congestion.
Based on these intraoperative findings, we subsequently performed right hepatectomy. Liver parenchyma was resected along the right side of the middle hepatic vein. A collection of multiple vessels was observed that were thought to be shunt vessels during resection of liver parenchyma . No histopathological findings suggesting hemangiomas were found. Dilated blood vessels were observed, but the histopathological findings could not accurately reveal the dilated vessels as IPSSs. The intraoperative and postoperative courses were uneventful. There was no sign of postoperative liver failure, and ammonia and manganese levels decreased immediately after the operation . An MRI of the brain 8 months after the operation (at 2 years and 5 months old) revealed that the abnormal high signal intensity in the pallidum had disappeared . The patient had no sign of recurrence of IPSS and no elevation of blood ammonia level and serum manganese level 5 years postoperatively .