A 10-year-old girl was admitted to Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine with enlargement of the left lymph node for more than 7 mo . Two months before this attack, the patient underwent surgery to remove the enlarged lymph node at another hospital.
The patient’s symptoms started 7 mo before and showed progressive development. There was no discomfort except for enlarged cervical lymph nodes.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient had no special personal history or family history.
The patient had no fever since the onset of the disease. The left cervical lymph nodes were enlarged (the largest one was 5 cm × 4 cm and the smallest one was 3 cm × 1 cm) and ruptured, accompanied with purulent secretions, occasional bleeding, non-healing, being hard, and no tenderness, and the remaining superficial lymph nodes were not touched. Our clinical consideration was lymph node tuberculosis or a malignant tumor.
Leukocyte cell count (19.76 × 109/L), neutrophil count (16.95 × 109/L), platelet count (552 × 109/L), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (> 120 mm/h) were all elevated; liver function test showed elevated globulin (47.3 g/L). The immune results showed that immunoglobulin IgA (5.42 g/L), immunoglobulin IgG (24.80 g/L), and complement C3 (1.97 g/L) were increased. Mycobacterium tuberculosis nucleic acid test was negative. In the culture of wound secretion, no acid-fast bacilli or fungi were found, but Gram-positive cocci were found and sensitive to clindamycin.
Neck magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (1.5 T) showed that the left parapharyngeal space, carotid sheath area, submandibular region, cervical root, supraclavicular fossa, and supraclavicular region presented with multiple masses (with the largest measuring 6.5 cm × 5.9 cm × 8.1 cm), with low signal intensity on T1 weighted imaging (WI) and high signal intensity on T2WI. The left muscle group adjacent to the neck, the left subclavian vein, and the common jugular vein were invaded. Abdominal color ultrasound showed multiple hypoechoic masses in the spleen, the largest two of which measured approximately 59 mm × 42 mm and 28 mm × 26 mm, respectively. Multiple nodules were found in both lungs on a plain computed tomography (CT) scan. The largest nodule was located in the upper segment of the left lower lung with a diameter of approximately 1.2 cm .