A 63-year-old male with a history of kidney transplantation presented to the Emergency Department for altered mental status. His wife observed the patient to have intermittent confusion for the previous 2 weeks and also noted that he was sleeping more than usual. She denied fever, nausea, vomiting, neck rigidity, photophobia, or any gross motor or sensory deficits in the patient. The patient had not traveled outside Mississippi since his transplant 6 months prior to the onset of symptoms. He was taking mycophenolate and tacrolimus for his renal allograft. On the night of admission the patient was found unresponsive in his bed. Emergency responders found the patient with marked bradycardia and a temporary pacemaker was placed en route to the hospital.
Upon arrival to the hospital the patient was arousable but unable to answer questions or follow commands. Laboratory results included the following: white blood cell count – 9000/μL (90% neutrophils, 5% lymphocytes, 4% monocytes, 1% eosinophils), hemoglobin–10.3 g/dL, hematocrit–32.4%, platelets – 177,000/mL, sodium – 136 mmol/L, potassium – 6.8 mmol/L, chloride – 105 mmol/L, HCO3-2- 20 mmol/L, BUN – 42 mg/dL, creatinine – 3.4 mg/dL, lactic acid 3.7 mmol/L, troponin – undetectable. Chest radiograph demonstrated mild cardiomegaly with clear lungs. Computerized tomography (CT) of the head showed low density areas in the left parietal, occipital and frontal lobe thought to potentially be watershed infarcts. He was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of ischemic stroke.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed intracranial masses in the left frontal lobe as well as the left posterior temporal–occipital interface with edema. Dexamethasone was initiated to reduce edema and antiseizure medications were begun as well. Six days after admission, the patient underwent biopsy of the left frontal lobe lesion. This initial biopsy revealed numerous granulomata with extensive abscess formation and necrosis but no pathogens identified with special staining. Three days following the initial biopsy, another biopsy was performed in an effort to make a specific microbiological diagnosis. This second biopsy, of the left temporal region, showed multiple necrosis, gliosis, and protozoans highly suggestive of Acanthamoeba trophozoites . The patient was started on combination therapy with sulfadiazine, fluconazole, flucytosine, azithromycin, and miltefosine. His hospital course was complicated by declining kidney function, which ultimately required hemodialysis. The patient became pancytopenic and developed intractable fever despite broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy. He expired during his fifth week of hospitalization.