A 32-year-old caucasian man with a past medical history of bronchial asthma presenting with generalized fatigue, orthopnea with intermittent fevers as well as recurrent sore throat for 9 months. Those symptoms triggered multiple emergency room visits and for which he received the diagnosis of recurrent viral upper respiratory tract infection (URTI). The patient started to develop intractable headaches with facial and chest wall swelling for 2 weeks prior to his admission to our hospital. Physical exam showed a positive Pemberton sign (facial plethora when raising the upper extremities). Lumbar puncture was performed which revealed a significantly elevated opening pressure of 36 mmH20. With the suspicion of superior vena cava syndrome in mind, the patient subsequently underwent CT angiogram that confirmed the presence of SVC thrombosis that extended to involve the brachiocephalic vein . Extensive investigations including autoimmune, vasculitis, as well as thrombophilia workup were done and they were within normal. The patient’s BNP, troponin I, and creatine kinase were also normal. The only lab abnormalities of significance were the raised ESR of 68 mm/, CRP of 7.3 mg/dl, anda reactive thrombocytosis with platelets of 506x10E9/L. The patient continued to have orthopnea despite initiation of heparin infusion and improvement of his SVC thrombosis symptoms for which a transthoracic echocardiogram was done which revealed global hypokinesia with ejection fraction (EF) of 20–25%.
Upon further detailed history taking, the patient reported having mouth ulcers that used to erupt whenever he had a sore throat . He also reported unusual papules in his legs that matched the description of pseudofolliculitis . Furthermore, he reported a family history of BD in one of his distant family members. Pathergy test was not formally done, but there were skin reactions reported after blood draws. A diagnosis of BD was made after fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of the International Study Group for BD with recurrent oral ulcers alongside skin lesions of pseudofolliculitis and positive pathergy test. The patient was then started on methylprednisone.
The patient was also started on sacubitril/valsartan, carvedilol, aspirin, and atorvastatin given his new heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. He later underwent myocardium perfusion imaging that showed low normal EF with no reversible ischemia making the diagnosis of coronary artery disease with ischemic cardiomyopathy less likely. Coronary angiography wasn’t pursued given low suspicion for coronary artery disease and on-going SVC thrombosis. Aspirin was also discontinued given the same reason. Three days after the initiation of steroids, the patient continued to report significant improvement in his symptoms, he eventually underwent cardiac MRI that revealed an improvement of his EF to 52% with no evidence of myocardial scarring or fibrosis . The patient was discharged on oral prednisone, lisinopril, metoprolol succinate, and warfarin. The patient was in good condition upon discharge with follow-up with rheumatology, vascular surgery, and cardiology for his BD, SVC thrombosis, and heart failure with recovered ejection fraction.
On outpatient follow up, the patient remained to do well. His steroids were gradually tapered and he was started on colchicine after which he continued to be symptom-free.