A 49-year-old woman sustained a two-part olecranon fracture (AO 21-B1, Mayo type IIA ) in her left elbow. She was consequently treated by open reduction and internal fixation using the transcortical TBW technique. Immediately after surgery the patient complained about persistent pain in her elbow, wrist and shoulder as well as strong difficulties to rotate the forearm during physiotherapy. Despite the reported complaints the patient was advised to intensify physiotherapy. Follow-up radiographs 6 weeks postoperatively revealed not only union of the olecranon fracture, but also extensive protrusion of the K wires through the anterior ulnar cortex scratching the radial tuberosity . Both K wires were consequently removed in a second operation, but the tension-band cerclage remained at its position. After K wires removal, the patient was encouraged again to enforce physiotherapy.
Three months after trauma, the patient was presented to our outpatient clinic due to a total block of supination and pronation with the forearm fixed in neutral position. The extension–flexion arc of the elbow was 0°–5°–110°. Wrist and shoulder examinations showed a free range of motion (ROM); pain or sensomotoric restrictions did not exist. Radiographs showed a massive synostosis between the radial tuberosity and the proximal ulna where previously the K wires had penetrated the anterior radial cortex of the ulna . Based on clinical and radiographic findings the resection of the synostotic bone was indicated to restore forearm motion.
Two hours before revision surgery, a prophylactic radiotherapy (with a dosage of 7 Gy) focused on the proximal aspect of the forearm was performed to minimize the risk of synostotic recurrence [, ]. The previously used dorsal approach was reopened and the remaining cerclage wire was removed a priori. Next, the approach was extended distally and the supinator muscle was subperiosteally detached en bloc from the proximal ulna to expose the heterotopic bone formation . We decided for that approach to protect the posterior interosseous nerve (PIN) running through the supinator mass. The synostotic bone was first exposed from its proximal to its distal extent. Second, by subperiosteal preparation the heterotopic bone formation was dissected step-by-step to its radial extent at the radial tuberosity. This preparation was mainly performed by chiseling along well attached to the bone. Thereby, it was carefully observed not to damage the distal biceps tendon that was immured by heterotopic bone. The synostosis was finally removed all in one. Subsequent intraoperative examination revealed full pronation and supination movements before closure. For rehabilitation, active and passive elbow exercises including immediate free forearm rotation started under physiotherapist’s supervision the day after surgery. No splint or cast was applied. Indomethacin (50 mg 1–0–1 per day) was prescribed for 2 weeks for prophylaxis of ossification .
Ten weeks postoperatively the ROM of the elbow was 0°–10°–140° for extension–flexion arc and 75°–0°–90° for pronation–supination arc. At final follow-up 12 months after surgery, the ROM was unrestricted when compared to the uninjured arm side . Supination strength was also unlimited presenting grade 5/5 on both arms. The patient was free of pain and reported no restrictions in daily as well as sporting activities (swimming three times per week). Radiologic assessment showed no recurrence of heterotopic bone tissue.