A 79-year-old Asian woman with pseudoexfoliation syndrome was referred for cataract surgery in the right eye. Her past medical history was unremarkable. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/50 in the right eye.
She underwent right phacoemulsification under topical anesthesia. As she had a small pupil of approximately 5.5 mm diameter, CCC with a diameter of 5.0 mm was performed without iris manipulation. Phacoemulsification was completed without any intraoperative complication, and a foldable one-piece hydrophilic acrylic square-edged intraocular lens (IOL) (22.0 diopters, 6.0mm optical diameter, 10.75mm overall diameter, model number: CLARE®; Cristalens, Paris, France) was implanted through a temporal corneal incision. Postoperatively, anti-inflammatory treatment with topical prednisolone acetate 1.0% 4 times daily was applied for 1 month. The BCVA was 20/40 at 1 week, which improved to 20/25 at 1 month.
Two months after the surgery, she presented with blurred vision in the right eye. The BCVA was 20/40. Slit lamp examination after dilation revealed marked opacity and thickening of the anterior capsule. Anterior capsulorhexis opening reduced to a diameter of approximately 3.0 mm due to capsular contraction, and fibrous membrane occluding the capsulorhexis opening was observed . AS-OCT (Visante; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Oberkochen, Germany) confirmed the presence of the membrane . Slight anterior chamber (AC) cell reaction was found.
A neodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd:YAG) laser was used to clear the visual axis. The membrane was lysed with a total of 24 mJ (15 shots × 1.6mJ) Nd:YAG laser. As a clear anterior capsular opening with a diameter of 3.0 mm was attained , no further excision of the anterior capsule was done. Topical prednisolone acetate 1.0% 6 times daily for 1 month was prescribed to prevent intraocular inflammation.
One month later, her BCVA improved to 20/20 in the right eye. Slit lamp examination revealed clear visual axis . AS-OCT demonstrated no membrane or pit on the anterior surface of the IOL .