A 63-year-old, right-handed Caucasian woman with an unremarkable medical history was referred to the hand clinic at our institution with a large firm mass in her left hand that had been growing steadily over the previous 3 years (Figures and
). The mass had grown to a point that it interfered with many of her daily life activities. She complained of pain and occasional paresthesia in the first three rays of the hand. Ultrasound examination was inconclusive. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which revealed a large mass spanning almost the entire palmar aspect of the hand, superficially to the flexor tendons and with no evidence of bone involvement (Figures and
). A pre-operative angiogram showed a tumor with a rich blood supply (Figure
). The tumor vessels were given off by the deep palmar arch, the external branch of the superficial palmar arch and the palmar digital arteries of the first, second and third fingers. With the patient under local anesthesia, an incisional biopsy was performed, which identified a synovial sarcoma.
Subsequently, with the patient under general anesthesia, the mass was excised via a palmar approach, preserving the flexor apparatus of the fingers as well as all major vessels and nerves (Figures and
). Macroscopically, the tumor was grayish and had a maximum length of approximately 10cm (Figure
). The tumor was multinodular and rubbery and seemed to be circumscribed by a fibrous pseudocapsule. The post-operative period was uneventful. Recovery was fast, and the patient had no significant functional or aesthetic impairment (Figure
). She declined any physiotherapy treatments. Her only complaint was pain over the surgical scar that subsided approximately 6 months post-operatively. Pathological examination revealed the typical appearance of synovial sarcoma of the monophasic type (Figure
). The specimen margins were found free of tumor cells. There was no evidence of systemic disease on the computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis that had been done pre-operatively. The patient underwent post-operative radiotherapy and chemotherapy with good tolerance. Adjuvant chemotherapy consisted of one cycle of ifosfamide and doxorubicin following the recommendations described by Kampe et al.
. Ifosfamide was given for 6 days at a dose of 14g/m2. An equimolar dose of mesna was combined with the first dose of ifosfamide of 2g/m2. These two drugs were given as a 4-hour intravenous bolus. The subsequent ifosfamide treatment was given at the rate of 2g/m2/24 hours by continuous intravenous infusion. The patient received an additional dose of mesna at the end of the sixth day. Doxorubicin was administered as a 48-hour continuous intravenous infusion, corresponding to a total dose of 60mg/m2. Adjuvant radiotherapy was delivered at the end of chemotherapy, including not only the tumor excision site but also a 3cm margin. A total dose of 60 Gy was applied, fractioned in 2.0 Gy daily, 5 days per week, during 6 weeks.
The patient was followed at the hand clinic at regular intervals for 9 years. The CT scans of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis that were done regularly during this period failed to show any evidence of systemic disease. She then decided to stop coming to the outpatient clinic, arguing that she saw no point in going as she felt perfectly well. Eleven and one-half years after surgery, the patient returned to the outpatient clinic with a recurrence of a sarcomatous mass in her left hand. MRI of the hand showed a large hypervascular mass with foci of necrosis that occupied most of the anterior compartments of the hand and encroached into the metacarpal and carpal bones (Figure
). No evidence of metastasis was found.
A multidisciplinary team decided to propose left-hand amputation, which the patient declined. Twelve years after the initial diagnosis, she decided to stop coming to the outpatient clinic again and rebuffed any further contact. Six months later, she was found dead at her home, having had a massive hemorrhage from the recurrence in her hand.