A 14-year-old boy was admitted to our neurological intensive care unit (NICU) with headache, vomiting, fever and drowsiness. He began to feel head pains six days before, and did not get better after antivirals and analgesics treatment at the clinic. Three days before, he began to vomit violently, mainly gastric contents, then he started to have fever, accompanied by chills, sweating, general fatigue, muscle and joint pain. The day before admission, he developed drowsiness. He had a girlfriend with a history vaginitis.
On admission, he was drowsy and insensitive to painful stimuli. His pupil diameters were 2.5 mm, and he was sensitive to direct and indirect light reflexes. Other cranial nerve examinations revealed no abnormality. The muscle strength of the limbs was level 5−, with normal muscle tone and sensation. Meningeal irritation signs were positive, and tendon reflexes of the extremities were normal. Computed tomography (CT) on head and chest were normal. Blood tests revealed that C-reactive protein was high at 211.95 mg/L (normal:0.00–6.00 mg/L), and procalcitonin was at 2.83 ng/ml (normal:0–0.05 ng/ml). Blood culture was sterile. Widal test, Weil-Felix test, detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA and indicators of immune function were normal. A lumbar puncture was performed, and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was measured at 260mmH2O, slightly turbid. The CSF appeared a white blood cell count of 4620 × 10^6/L (90% neutrophils, 8% lymphocyte, 2% monocyte), protein of 2116 mg/L (normal:150-450 mg/L), and glucose of 2.42 mmol/L (normal:2.80–4.50 mmol/L).
Aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the CSF via blood culture bottles (bioMerieux) at 35 ± 1.5 °C for 14 days did not demonstrate any organism(s) growth. However, mNGS (Hugo Biotech Co., Ltd.) revealed positive results from CSF, with G. vaginalis being the predominant microorganism, showing 406 unique reads of G. vaginalis with the coverage rate at 0.95% of its genome . The results were confirmed by PCR tests (Hugo Biotech Co., Ltd.) with primers (forward, TTACTGGTGTATCACTGTAAGG; reverse, CCGTCACAGGCTGAACAGT) aligned to the 16S rRNA gene of G. vaginalis. Therefore, G. vaginalis was diagnosed as the causative pathogen.
According to the diagnostic result, we empirically administered intravenous meropenem (2 g, q8h) and linezolid (0.6 g, q12h) to the patient for a week. On the third day, with his headache alleviating and no vomiting, he was transferred out of the NICU. On the 6th day, the patient was awake, without headache, vomiting or fever. On the same day, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of his brain showed no abnormality. Reviewed examination of CSF showed that white blood cells at 10 × 10^6/L, protein level at 520 mg/L and glucose level at 2.91 mmol/L. Then, the patient was given oral amoxicillin for two weeks. After three months of follow-up, the patient had recovered completely.