A 65-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to Padova University Hospital for diffuse abdominal pain associated with generalized weakness, decreased oral intake, and weight loss of 20 kg in 2 months.
A physical examination at admission showed pale conjunctiva and skin, bilateral auscultation revealed clear lungs, and heart auscultation did not elicit any murmurs, rubs, or gallop.
An abdominal examination induced abdominal pain with rebound tenderness; bowel sounds were present in all quadrants. A right inguinal mass suggestive of lymphadenopathy was found on examination. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Patient history revealed ischemic cardiomyopathy treated with endovascular coronary revascularization, diabetes, and depression. Diverticulosis of the colon and sigmoid polyposis were reported in a colonoscopy performed the previous year. No family history of malignancy was reported. During the recovery, our patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which was negative, and a colonoscopy, which showed an ab-extrinsic compression of the cecum.
A total body computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, and it described a 10 × 8 × 10 cm mass invading the cecum and ascending colon with lymphadenopathy. No metastasis was found. Tumor markers were negative.
Our patient underwent an elective right hemicolectomy with extended lymphadenectomy in the hepatogastric and aortocaval areas, and renal fat excision. The post-operative period was uneventful and he was discharged from the surgical unit on post-operative day 6.
The pathologic diagnosis was rhabdoid tumor. The tumor stage was defined as T3N2M0 (13/38 positive nodes). Immunohistochemistry revealed cells positive for vimentin and epithelial membranous antigen (EMA), and negative for CK7, CD34, CD31, CD20, CD3, CD45, C-Kit, OCT-2. Immunostaining for integrase interactor 1 (INI-1) showed loss of nuclear expression, which is consistent with MERT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for the corresponding SMARCB1 was not performed in consideration of the immunohistochemical results. Our patient did not undergo adjuvant chemotherapy, and he is still alive and in good clinical conditions 48 months later, without recurrence .