A 54-year-old male patient complained of symptoms of right nasal obstruction for 3 months and intermittent epistaxis for 1 month. A flexible nasolaryngoscopy was performed which demonstrated old bleeding in the right nasal cavity, and a pigmented mass in the right inferior meatus as well as the middle turbinate . The mass could bleed easily when touched. High-resolution computed tomography (CT) scan of the paranasal sinuses disclosed a solid, large, irregular mass measuring 57.5 mm × 48.5 mm × 22.3 mm in the right nasal cavity with surrounding bone destruction, suggesting malignancy . In the meantime, for the purpose of in-depth diagnosis and treatment of this patient, positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) examination was executed and no any other positive sign in the body was suggested. Subsequently, an endoscopic resection was undergone.
Grossly, the specimen consisted of multiple pieces of fleshy, gray-white to brown soft tissue fragments with a total size of 65.0 mm × 40.0 mm × 10.0 mm. Its cut surfaces were off-white to brown with a medium texture.
Microscopically, a biphasic component morphology consisting of epithelioid and spindle-shaped parts was observed at low magnification . In the epithelioid areas, the tumor cells grew in nodular form and appeared epithelioid or rhabdoid features. Tumor cells were polygonal or oval in shape, medium to large in size, and distributed in sheets, with prominent nucleoli, prominent mitoses (thin arrow) , and pathological mitoses (thick arrow) . The intracellular pigment was observed in a small percentage of neoplastic cells . While in the spindle-shaped areas, the tumor cells were arranged in fascicles . These spindle-shaped tumor cells were characterized by infrequent eosinophilic cytoplasm, fusiform nuclei, dispersed chromatin, 1 or 2 prominent nucleoli, and pathological mitoses at high magnification (thick arrow) . Morphologically, melanoma in situ of nasal mucosa and its transition to the epithelioid area of the tumor in submucosa were observed .
Immunohistochemical detection of S-P method was performed on sections to further confirm the nature of the neoplasm.
The neoplastic cells of the epithelioid or rhabdoid areas were diffusely positive for melanocytic markers of S100 , HMB-45 , SOX10, Melan-A and PNL2, whereas only scattered cells of the spindle components were positive for S100 and SOX10. In the spindle neoplastic cells areas, a-SMA and H-caldesmon were diffusely positive . Desmin was negative for most of the neoplastic cells and partially was diffuse positive . However, in the epithelioid or rhabdoid areas, the neoplastic cells exhibited negative for a-SMA , and focally positive for H-caldesmon and Desmin . All tumor cells were positive for INI-1, H3K27me3 and failed to express MyoD1 , myogenin and all epithelial markers of CK, CK7, EMA .
In light of these radiological, histological and immunohistochemical findings, a diagnosis of primary SNMM with smooth muscle differentiation was established.