A 26-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a 24-h history of increasing abdominal pain with nausea and vomiting. Her past medical history was unremarkable and there was no notable family history. She had no Drug History and Allergies. She reported a change in bowel habits since 3 months.
Clinically, she was awake and conscious, with a temperature at 37.4°, blood pressure at 11/06 cmHg, heart rate at 110/min and respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min.
Abdominal examination revealed diffuse tenderness with a mobile mass on palpation in the mid-abdomen.
Laboratory studies showed a normal white blood cell count of 5.77 × 109/L (normal range, 3.50–9.50 × 109/L), elevated blood levels for C-reactive protein (203 mg/L; normal range, 0–10 mg/L) and normal kidney and liver tests.
Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a 23 × 11 × 10 cm intra-abdominal mass with small intestine compression and free intraperitoneal air and ascites .
Emergency surgery was performed by an associate professor in general surgery, under general anesthesia with the patient in dorsal decubitus position. Intraoperatively, a large poorly-circumscribed heterogeneous tumor was found, occupying the jejunum mesentery and infiltrating the jejunal wall causing its perforation into the abdominal cavity. The above imaging and intraoperative findings suggested a GIST invading the small bowel. En bloc resection of the tumor with a 30 cm segment of the small bowel was performed and a double-barrel ileostomy was carried out. The postoperative course was uneventful.
Gross examination showed a solid mass poorly-circumscribed, firm, whorled and white cut surface .
Histological examination showed fibroblastic and myofibroblastic proliferation with many bundles of spindle-shaped cells.In immunohistochemistry, it was positive for B-catenin, Desmin and , and negative for CD117, CD34 and S100 protein , supporting the diagnosis of desmoid-type fibromatosis.
Since postoperative total colonoscopy found no polyposis, the tumor was considered to be sporadic.
She recovered well and restoration of bowel continuity was performed two months after surgery. She had no evidence of recurrence 18 months after tumor resection.