A 57-year-old man underwent surgery for oropharyngeal carcinoma. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) revealed several cystic lesions in the right lower lung lobe with consolidation and without direct communication with the bronchus. Enhanced and three-dimensional reconstruction CT (3D-CT) revealed an anomalous artery branching from the abdominal aorta and a normal pulmonary vein ; thus, our diagnosis was Pryce type III ILPS. Laboratory findings were normal without any evidence of inflammation. The B7 bronchus branched anteriorly and posteriorly above the common basilar vein. The lesion was limited within the S7 posterior and S10bc, with normal remnant parenchyma. We planned a right S7 posterior + 10bc combined basilar subsegmentectomy via U-VATS based on the CT and 3DCT findings .
We made 4-cm utility incision along the midaxillary line in the sixth intercostal space. After adhesiolysis, an anomalous artery from the abdominal aorta in the lung ligament was ligated and divided. We dissected the lung parenchyma to expose V7. Subsequently, the plane between S7 anterior and S7 posterior was opened using a stapler along the V7 (intersegmental vein between S7 anterior and S7 posterior). The B7 posterior was identified beside the inferior basal pulmonary vein and was clipped and divided. Subsequently, the A7 posterior was identified and divided using a vessel-sealing system without proximal ligation. We meticulously dissected the pulmonary parenchyma along the inferior basal pulmonary vein, with the B10bc identified distally and divided using a stapler. After dividing these hilum structures, the pulmonary parenchyma was divided using the stapler. Thereafter, S7 posterior + 10bc combined basilar subsegmentectomy was performed . The operation time was 202 min, and the total blood loss was 180 mL. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 4 days after surgery. Histopathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of ILPS. At the 8-month postoperative follow-up, CT revealed no abnormalities . The case report was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata University (#2020-S-60, December 15, 2020). Informed consent to publish this report was obtained from the patient.