A 33 year old male presented with decreased vision in the left eye and left sided headache of 3 months duration. Examination revealed left eye blindness with primary optic atrophy and no other neurological deficit. Imaging revealed a bony tumor in the left ethmoid sinus invading the left orbit and compressing the left optic nerve. Intracranial extension into the anterior cranial fossa on the left side was noted . Core biopsy of the mass showed an osteoid osteoma.
A multispeciality team approach was devised to achieve radical excision of the tumor. Bicoronal scalp flap and pericranial flaps were raised separately. A single burr hole left fronto orbital bone flap was raised including the orbital roof and left zygomaticofrontal process . Dura was retracted and the bony hard whitish tumor visualised. This was excised using the high speed drill . Weber Ferguson incision was used to access the orbital portion of the tumor. Medially the tumor could be felt in the orbit but retraction of the globe was difficult. Hence inferior orbitotomy was done by removing the lower and lateral orbital margins. The intraorbital contents could now be retracted laterally and the tumor visualized . The tumor was then detached from the ethmoid sinus and the intraorbital extension excised. The ethmoidal portion was drilled and radical excision achieved . Dural tears were covered with temporalis fascia and glue. The ethmoidal sinus was packed with free temporalis muscle graft. Vascularised pericranial graft was used to cover the anterior skull base. The frontal sinus was exenterated and packed with gelfoam. The bone flap and orbital margins were replaced.
Post-operatively patient had a frozen left eye (possibly due to retraction of the orbital contents) with no improvement in the left eye vision in the immediate postoperative period. His postoperative period was otherwise uneventful. Histopathological examination revealed an osteoid osteoma . On follow up after 12 months patient was disease free .