A case is 47-year-old premenopausal woman with dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and chronic kidney disease. In March 2016, she was diagnosed with diabetes and dyslipidemia in preoperative examination of uterine myoma at hospital of referral source. When she was referred to our hospital, she had significant disorder of glucose and lipid metabolism. The data of her blood test were as below; HbA1c 14.2%, plasma glucose 364 mg/dL, total cholesterol (TC) 315 mg/dL, triglyceride (TG) 698 mg/dL, LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) 147 mg/dL and non HDL-cholesterol (non HDL-C) 261 mg/dL. We immediately started treatment for dyslipidemia with 2.5 mg of rosuvastatin, in addition to treatment for diabetes. In June of the same year, she was also prescribed 80 mg of fenofibrate to treat hypertriglyceridemia with fasting TG 579 mg/dL. Although levels of HbA1c and TG were improved to 6.4% and 247 mg/dL, respectively, fenofibrate was stopped because her renal function deteriorated to eGFR 43.3 ml/min/1.75m2 in September 2017. In March 2018, she was prescribed 400 mg of tocopherol nicotinate because the TG value was re-increased to 418 mg/dL, and TG level was continued in 200–300 mg/dL after dosing it. She was diagnosed as breast cancer in April of the same year and had the breast cancer operation in May and was prescribed 400 mg of tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy in August. In September of the same year, rosuvastatin was withdrawn by transient exacerbation of renal function due to dehydration. After then, serum TG concentration was continued in 200–270 mg/dL to December of the same year, but it was gradually worsened to 387 mg/dL in January and to 539 mg/dL in March 2019. She was hospitalized for treatment of hypertriglyceridemia in September 2019 because of the deterioration of TG level to 1881 mg/dL with asymptomatic increment of serum pancreatic amylase.
On admission, physical examination showed no goiter, no Cushing signs (e.g. central obesity, red striae cutis and buffalo hump etc.) and no obesity (BMI 22.6 kg/m2). No cutaneous and retinal signs of primary hypertriglyceridemia were detected. She had no alcohol abuse, but had an unbalanced diet with carbohydrates and no exercise habits. She also had no history of cardiovascular disease and acute pancreatitis. Although she had no family history of dyslipidemia or cardiovascular disease within the interview survey, we could not completely rule out hereditary disorders, such as familial combined hyperlipidemia, because we could not perform further investigation due to the patient’s special family situation. She was also prescribed 0.5 mg of glimepiride once daily and 0.75 mg of dulaglutide once weekly for type 2 diabetes, 400 mg of tocopherol nicotinate twice daily for dyslipidemia, 20 mg of tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy for breast cancer before admission.
She underwent fasting blood draws throughout the clinical course. The results in fasting blood sampling in the next morning of the admission were shown in Tables and and Fig. . As shown in Table and Fig. , lipoprotein fraction test by using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method indicated an increase of VLDL fraction mainly, and no chylomicron fraction. Serum standing test was also negative (data not shown), showing no presence of chylomicrons. This VLDL metabolic disorder was considered to be a factor in the marked increase of TG concentration. Remnant lipoprotein (RLP)-C and non HDL-C were also significantly augmented . The degree of increase of apolipoprotein CIII level was higher than that of apolipoprotein CII level , Furthermore, lipoprotein fraction test by using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) method revealed the fraction which was named “BAND 1” with the smaller particle size than LDL, implying the existence of small dense LDL . We also confirmed the existence of small dense LDL by calculating LDL-migration index (LDL-MI) and LDL-C/Apo B ratio , the indicators of small dense LDL . Furthermore, HbA1c level was 7.3%, and the image of abdominal computed tomography on admission revealed the presence of fatty liver because the hepatic parenchymal density fell in patchy fashion , although the index of hepatic damage, such as ALT, AST, γGTP, was not increased . Marked hypertriglyceridemia was thought to be due to multiple factors such as unbalanced diet, no exercise habit, uncontrolled diabetes, fatty liver, chronic kidney disease and tamoxifen therapy. On the other hand, there was little change in the clinical course before hospitalization of factors, such as eGFR, body weight and HbA1c, other than tamoxifen therapy. Therefore, we speculated that the main factor of rapid exacerbation of TG value was tamoxifen therapy.
Before hospitalization, asymptotic increase of serum pancreatic amylase, elastase 1 and lipase was observed . Although we considered hypertriglyceridemia-induced acute pancreatitis, we could not confirm any findings that positively suggested the onset of pancreatitis in abdominal computed tomography. Since the increase in exocrine pancreatic enzymes was relieved with the improvement of renal function, it was considered to be pseudo-hyperamylasemia . Therefore, we did not instruct fasting during hospitalization.
After discontinuation of tamoxifen therapy, there were no conspicuous changes in the percentage of each fractions in lipoprotein fraction test by PAGE method seven days after tamoxifen withdrawal , but the wave profile of each fractions changed prominently . These changes revealed that withdrawal of tamoxifen contributed to improvement of TG-rich lipoprotein metabolism, resulting in decrease of TG level. Furthermore, we prescribed pemafibrate, which is expected to have little effect on renal function, because improvement in renal function was confirmed after admission. After prescribing pemafibrate, the parameters, such as TG, non HDL-C and RLP-C, related with TG-rich lipoprotein metabolism were improved , but LDL-C was increased . On the other hand, lipoprotein fraction test by PAGE method revealed the loss of small dense LDL fraction . LDL-MI and LDL-C/Apo B ratio were also changed from 0.67 to 0.37, 0.51 to 1.10, respectively .