The patient was a 76-year-old male who was diagnosed with right renal cell carcinoma at our hospital and underwent a laparoscopic right nephrectomy at age 69. He was treated at our hospital for 3 years after the operation and was followed up by a referral doctor thereafter. This time, he visited a referring doctor because of jaundice. A pancreatic head tumor was identified on imaging, and the patient was referred to our hospital. Physical examination on arrival showed temperature 36.4°C, heart rate 90 beats/min, jaundice was observed throughout the body, incision was found on the left side of the abdomen, and no mass was palpable. At the medical examination, he complained no abdominal pain. Laboratory data showed elevated liver enzyme and bilirubin levels, but inflammation or tumor marker levels were not elevated . Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple nodular lesions with contrast-enhancing effects on the pancreatic head and mild dilatation of the bile duct. In addition, several small nodular lesions with contrast-enhancing effects were observed in the pancreatic body and tail (a, b). Contrast-enhanced CT performed before surgery for right renal cell carcinoma and non-contrast-enhanced CT performed 6 months after surgery revealed no pancreatic tumors (c, d). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed distal bile duct stenosis and dilatation of the upstream bile duct . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed no accumulation of tumors in the pancreatic head .
As obstructive jaundice due to a mass in the pancreatic head was observed, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed. Cholangiography revealed a 3 cm stenosis in the distal bile duct, and a biliary stent (ZEOTUBE™ 7Fr, 7 cm, Straight type, Zeon Medical, Tokyo, Japan) was placed (a, b). Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed a 29 mm-sized, clearly demarcated mass with abundant Doppler blood flow at the head of the pancreas, and fine-needle aspiration (EZSHOT3™ FNA needle, 22gauge, Olympus Medical, Tokyo, Japan) was performed (2 times punctures, each 20 strokes, slow pull methods, no rapid-onsite evaluation) (a, b). In the tissue, tumor cells with clear cytoplasm proliferated in an alveolar form, and immunostaining was positive for CD10 and pax8 and negative for CK7 and CK20, indicating clear cell carcinoma (a, b). Jaundice and inflammation improved after treatment, and the patient was discharged from the hospital.
He was scheduled to undergo pancreatic resection later, but 52 days after discharge, he presented with worsening jaundice and anemia and was readmitted. Gastroduodenoscopy was performed to investigate anemia and active bleeding from the duodenal papillae was observed, therefore, ERCP was performed. Cholangiography revealed an irregularly shaped defect within the bile duct, and a blood clot was suspected. After temporary nasobiliary drainage was placed (a, b), nasobiliary drainage was replaced with a fully covered metallic stent (HANARO STENT™ 10 mm × 60 mm, laser cut, Boston Scientific Japan, Tokyo, Japan), and the patient was discharged after confirming hemostasis (c, d).
Surgery was performed at a later date. During surgery, in addition to the head of the pancreas, small yellow nodules were observed in the body and tail of the pancreas. A spleen-preserving total pancreatectomy was performed. In the resected specimen, tumor tissue was observed not only in the pancreatic head but also in the body and tail, and the pancreatic head mass had invaded the bile duct wall and was exposed to the bile duct lumen (a, b). Histologically, tumor cells with clear cytoplasm proliferated in an alveolar form, and immunostaining showed that CD10 was concentrated in the cytoplasm, pax8 was positive in the nuclei, and keratin was negative. The final histological diagnosis revealed clear cell carcinoma (c, d).
Postoperatively, the patient developed an infection and required 2 months of treatment. The condition subsequently improved and was discharged from the hospital. Six months after his discharge, no bleeding or recurrence has been observed.