A 33 year old Caucasian gentleman presented to a local hospital with chronic right flank pain and was being evaluated for multiple cystic masses in the liver. On review of symptoms, he mentioned that he occasionally experienced shortness of breath, more so with exertion. His vitals, physical examination and laboratory data were unremarkable. Electrocardiogram displayed a normal sinus rhythm. However, his symptoms prompted an echocardiogram, which revealed a large, heterogeneous, non-mobile, obstructive mass in the right atrium that measured 45 x 40 mm and appeared to involve the inter-atrial septum as well, as shown in Fig. . Given these findings, cardiac MRI was performed for better tissue characterization.
The MRI demonstrated a lesion with increased T1 signal involving the myocardium of the right atrium and the inter-atrial septum. Multiple thin septations were noted in the mass. The mass had slightly decreased T2 signal relative to myocardium. The tumor also extended into the inferior vena cava and coronary sinus. The right atrial component of the mass measured 39 x 38 mm, while the component involving the inter-atrial septum and extending into the coronary sinus measured 93 x 47 mm with a cranio-caudal dimension of 65 mm. A venacavogram was also performed, which confirmed the presence of the intracardiac mass in the right atrium that extended caudally into the central intrahepatic segment of the inferior vena cava. The MRI findings are as displayed in Fig. (a-c).
Although the imaging findings were suggestive of an intracardiac lipoma, given the septations, size and invasion into the inferior cavoatrial junction and coronary sinus, a well-differentiated liposarcoma could not be excluded. Therefore, a pre-operative diagnosis was imperative before considering major cardiothoracic surgery with its associated morbidity and mortality. The right atrial component of the mass was biopsied by a right heart catheterization with the guidance of a transesophageal echocardiogram. Histopathology confirmed a lipoma with a negative MDM2 gene amplification by FISH, thus ruling out liposarcoma.
After weighing the risks and benefits of surgical resection versus conservative management with close follow-up, the patient chose to proceed with surgery. The patient underwent complete resection of the right atrial mass and debulking of the inter-atrial septal component of the tumor. A complete resection of the inter-atrial septum was not performed as this would increase the complexity of the surgery and the risks involved. Intra-operatively, it was also noted that the tumor could be palpated extending for about 2–3 cm into the coronary sinus. After extensive discussion with other cardiothoracic specialists and considering the potential risks and benefits, a decision was made to not excise the remaining components of the tumor. Ultimately, the remaining components of the tumor were felt to be unrelated to the patient’s symptomatology. The patient tolerated the procedure well without any complications and had an uneventful recovery. Three months into his follow-up, the patient feels well and has no shortness of breath.