A 78-year-old Caucasian female smoker was referred to our clinic with a non-tender left facial swelling that had been present for approximately three years. The patient was otherwise asymptomatic. She had no history of malignancy or autoimmune diseases. A firm mobile mass was present in the left parotid gland.
Examination revealed a 5 cm firm mobile mass in the superficial lobe of the left parotid. The left facial nerve was intact (House-Brackmann scale Grade I). No other abnormalities were found in the nasopharynx, oral cavity, larynx or ears. There was no pathological enlargement of the cervical lymph nodes. Laboratory tests were within normal limits. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) serologies were negative.
The patient had undergone ultrasonography-guided fine needle aspiration of the left parotid gland several months before. The cytological examination revealed mononuclear and inflammatory cells and a diagnosis of a chronic parotiditis was made. The patient was given antibiotics but with little effect. Unfortunately, the mass on the left parotid continued to enlarge. After admission to our clinic, a helical CT scan was performed which revealed a solid mass with an irregular surface in the left parotid gland .
The patient underwent resection of the left parotid gland with preservation of the left facial nerve through a preauricular incision . Identification of the branches of the facial nerve was made by using loupes magnification and with intraoperative electric stimulation of the identified branches of the facial nerve. The size of the resected tumor was 5 × 7 cm . The surgical specimen was sent for a histopathological examination.
The pathology report was consistent with a low-grade marginal-zone B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (MALT lymphoma) following BLL of the gland. According to the report, there was infiltration of the normal salivary tissue by a heterogenous mixture of lymphocytes and isolated blastic cells.
Postoperative recovery was uneventful and facial nerve function was intact. CT scan of the head, neck, chest and abdomen at two and six months after the surgery revealed no evidence of lymphoma infiltration. Our patient had isolated surgical treatment without chemotherapy. By the time this report was completed, the patient had been followed for 13 months without evidence of recurrence.