A 42-year-old woman presented at our observation with a 4-year history of a slow-growing, painful swelling on the posteromedial region of her left leg . X-rays evidenced the presence of a nodular mass at the proximal third of the left leg arising from the soft tissues next to the medial aspect of tibia ; multiple calcific components were also observed. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the presence of a 13 cm × 6 cm, 3 cm × 6 cm, 1 cm capsulated mass occupying soleus muscle, compressing, and displacing anteriorly gastrocnemius muscle . Moreover, the patient underwent vascular MRI of leg arteries which showed a posterolateral dislocation of the distal part of popliteal artery and tibioperoneal trunk , without alterations in canalization. Incisional biopsy was performed to assess the nature of the lesion. After the excision, specimens were immediately fixed in a 10% buffered formalin at room temperature for 48 h, cut into several tissue slices, and embedded in paraffin tissue blocks, as elsewhere reported [, ]. Histologically, the bioptic samples consisted mainly of hyaline cartilage containing chondrocytes with chondrocytic lacunae; a diagnosis of a chondroma was suggested. However, to exclude the possibility of chondrosarcoma, which is a common differential diagnosis, especially when dealing with small biopsies, a surgical excision of the entire tumor, including the capsule, was performed . On the basis of radiological and histopathologic findings, a diagnosis of EC was made. At the present moment, 1 year after the surgical excision, the patient is in good general conditions and no local recurrence has been observed.
Gross examination revealed a well-circumscribed, gray-white, nodular mass of 13 cm in greatest diameter . Histological examination showed an encapsulated lesion with multinodular growth, composed of the lobules of hyaline cartilage surrounded by mature adipose tissue . The tumor had low cellularity and consisted of bland-looking chondrocytes within lacunar spaces with no evidence of cytologic atypia, mitotic figures, or necrosis .
The tumor cells showed reactivity for S100, while the Ki67 index was <1%, confirming the benign nature.