Herein we present the case of a 28-year-old man, with a free medical history who presented to the allergology department of our hospital due to progressively worsening over the past 3 months facial oedema and erythema of the upper thorax markedly aggravated by bending forward.
At presentation, the patient demonstrated facial plethora with oedematous eyelids, dilated jugular veins and dilated chest wall collaterals . The rest of his physical examination was unremarkable apart from bradycardia (50 beats per minute). From his laboratory findings at presentation marginally elevated c-reactive protein (CRP: 7.07 mg/l, normal values < 5), d-dimers (0.61 μg/ml), high-sensitivity troponin-T (18 pg/ml) and thyroid stimulating hormone (4.3 mU/l, normal values 0.17–4.05) were notable. The patient’s electrocardiogram revealed a coronary sinus rhythm, while the chest x-ray was unremarkable.
A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) depicted a large, non-mobile mass infiltrating the interatrial septum and extending to both atria, mainly to the right atrium . The patient was admitted to the hospital and a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) demonstrated an heterogeneous mass infiltrating the interatrial septum, filling almost three quarters of the right atrium, which also occupied and occluding the superior vena cava at its junction with the right atrium . On the following cine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with an improved visualization of the mass and its extension, the presence of the cardiac tumor was confirmed, also demonstrating infiltration of the surrounding pericardium, a mild pericardial effusion and obstruction of the superior vena cava by the tumor . Mass extension was also noted in the left atrium causing some grade of ostial stenosis of the right pulmonary veins, while no lymph nodes were noticed . The lesion was seen with heterogeneous high signal by T2-weighted imaging while a strong enhancement of the lesion was revealed during the late gadolinium phase.
A total body contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a dilated azygos vein with no extracardiac localizations of the disease. The occlusion of the superior vena cava was also confirmed by venography. A 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18-FDG PET/CT) revealed an abnormal hypermetabolic lesion which was confined to the heart, involving the right atrial cavity and the superior vena cava . Further laboratory tests revealed serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase and β2-microglobulin within normal range. Bone marrow biopsy and immunophenotyping did not show abnormalities. The patient was subsequently submitted to an endomyocardial biopsy and the histopathological examination revealed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL, high grade Non-Hodgkin lymphoma, Fig. ).
The patient was started chemotherapy with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone (RCHOP). The first cycle drugs doses were divided in 2 with 15 days interval to minimize complications as arrhythmias and tissue rupture according to the literature . Ten days after his first chemotherapy cycle the patient presented with severe rhythm disorders, pauses of up to 12 s, on the 24-h Holter monitoring accompanied by convulsions and a temporary pacemaker was implanted through the trans-femoral route. The rhythm disorders gradually disappeared as the chemotherapy treatment continued and the pacemaker was removed 10 days later. After four cycles of chemotherapy there was regression of the tumor on TTE, TEE and MRI . However, the superior vena cava remained occluded, possibly due to fibrosis and thrombosis, and collateral vasculature was present. The treatment continued for another 4 cycles and at the end of chemotherapy, the patient underwent another 18-FDG PET/CT, which showed complete tumor remission . Serial echocardiographic studies at 3, 6 and 12 and 15 months after completion of treatment confirmed the absence of relapse, as did a follow-up 18-FDG PET/CT at 15 months.