A 39-year-old man was diagnosed in March 2019 with a SLE following the criteria of the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC), with multi-organ involvement. The cutaneous manifestations included a malar rash, nonscarring alopecia, photosensitivity, and a lupus strip on direct immunofluorescence taken from a skin biopsy. He had a proteinuria at 1.8 g/24 h, and the renal biopsy concluded in a lupus nephritis of classes 5 and 3 with an activity index of 1. On the articular plan, he presented a chronic, non-deforming and non-destructive inflammatory polyarthritis. Hematologically, he had an autoimmune anemia (hemoglobin level 8.9 g/dL with positive Coombs test), and a lymphopenia at 960/mm3. Immunologically, the anti-nuclear and native anti-DNA antibodies were positive, and the C3 fraction of the complement was low. He had polyserositis including pleural and pericardial effusions. Indicated treatments were high-dose, long-term CS therapy (1 mg/kg/day) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), 400 mg/day.
Two months after the start of treatment, the patient presented a painful buckling of both knees when walking, not responding to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). He developed total functional impotence 1 month later. When he consulted in our department, the patient was still on full-dose CS therapy, but had not started HCQ yet because he was scheduled for a complete ophthalmic check-up. He was unable to walk without crutches. The patellae were ascended, there was a gap in the right infrapatellar region, and the left knee was swollen . Active knee extension was impossible.
The standard profile x-ray showed bilateral patella alta (PA), with an Insall-Salvati ratio (ISR) of 2.25 in the right knee and 2.2 in the left (normal range 0.8–1.2) . MSUS revealed a complete rupture of the two patellar tendons . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), indicated before surgery, had an ISR of 1.87 on the right side and 1.88 on the left side (normal range 0.74–1.5). The diastasis measured 40 mm on the right side and 45 mm on the left, filled on both sides with an effusion of great abundance .
The patient was referred to trauma surgeons. The underlying SLE was stable: laboratory blood tests showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 13 mm, a C-reactive protein at 11.6 mg/L (normal < 5 mg/L). The surgery consisted in a repair of the patellar tendons with sutures, associated with a reinforcement wire cerclage in view of the poor tissue quality of the tendons. There were no postoperative complications. Physiotherapy was undertaken after immobilization by removable braces for 4 weeks. Sessions consisted in progressive extension/flexion movements, and walking rehabilitation using a walking frame. After 2 weeks the patient was able to perform 80° flexion of the right knee and 60° of the left. He was dispensed with the walking frame, replaced by a single forearm crutch after 1 month of rehabilitation. The 3-month follow-up x-ray showed patellae in their normal position . At 6 months postoperatively, the range of motion was 0°–120° of flexion in the right knee and 0°–110° in the left. He was able to mobilize independently. The SLE was stable under 15 mg/day of CS and HCQ 400 mg/day. The control MSUS showed the stability of the surgical repair .