A 15-year-old girl presented to our outpatient department along with her mother with complaints of fever for 1 month, and altered bowel habits and a lump over the lower abdomen for 2 months. She was in her usual state of health 2 months ago when she started experiencing alterations in her usual bowel habits. The frequency and consistency of stool had altered. The symptoms progressively increased, and she was having seven to eight episodes of loose stool at the time of presentation, which was mixed with mucus and bright red blood. These episodes were accompanied by lower abdominal discomfort, which improved after defecation, and a sensation of incomplete bowel evacuation. However, she did not experience any changes in stool calibre, mass per anum, or early morning diarrhoea. A few days after the onset of these symptoms, her mother noticed an abdominal lump. According to her mother, she palpated the lump over the lower abdomen while trying to relieve the discomfort. The lump was approximately the size of her hand, non-painful to touch, and had not increased in size over the past two months. The patient also experienced intermittent fever for the past month. The maximum recorded temperature at home was 102° Fahrenheit, accompanied by sweating and an evening rise in temperature. However, she did not complain of chills and rigors. In addition to these symptoms, she reported the onset of a new symptom: passage of foul-smelling, blood-mixed, feculent discharge per vaginum over the last 2 weeks. Family members noticed a significant loss of appetite and weight, with a recorded weight reduction of five kilograms during this period. She also experienced easy fatigability, evident by her inability to perform daily activities without resting in between, and had a generalized feeling of weakness. There were no lumps noticed in other parts of her body, and she had no history of prior recurrent diarrhoea, arthralgia, or perianal diseases. The patient did not report abdominal pain, vomiting, haematuria, increased frequency of micturition, burning micturition, passage of faecal material during urination, back pain, or bone pain. Additionally, she did not complain of palpitations, loss of consciousness, altered sensorium, or abnormal body movements. She and her family had no history of tuberculosis, and she had never experienced symptoms such as cough, chest pain, shortness of breath, or hemoptysis. She had not encountered similar episodes in the past and had not undergone any surgical procedures. The patient was unmarried, not sexually active, a non-smoker, did not consume alcohol, and followed a balanced non-vegetarian diet. In her family history, her grandmother’s death due to an abdominal malignancy was mentioned, although the documentation was unavailable. Her parents and four siblings were in their usual state of health. She had reached menarche 5 months ago and had regular menstrual cycles without excessive bleeding or pain. Before visiting our centre, the patient had visited another hospital where an ultrasound-guided aspiration of serous fluid had been done and she had received intravenous antibiotics. After getting discharged on request from there the patient presented to our centre.
On examination, the patient was alert, oriented to time, place, and person, and appeared thinly built. Pallor was appreciated on palpebral conjunctiva and she had no signs of icterus, dehydration, or clubbing, and no lymph nodes were palpable. Her BMI was recorded to be 16.6 kg/m2. She was afebrile at presentation and had a blood pressure of 100/70 mm of Hg, pulse of 70 beats per minute, and regular, respiratory rate of 16 per min and she maintained a saturation of 95% in room air. A visible lump was observed in the hypogastrium and the right iliac fossa, with normal overlying skin and no visible pulsations. Upon palpation, a globular, firm, non-tender mass measuring 10×8 cm in size was noted. The mass extended from the hypogastrium and right iliac fossa to the pelvis, with regular upper and lateral borders. It was fixed and showed no movement in any planes. The prominence of the mass increased when the patient was in the knee-elbow position and decreased during the straight leg-raising test. No pulsations were felt, and the mass produced a dull sound on percussion. The rectal examination showed normal anal tone, an empty collapsed rectum, and a polypoidal palpable lesion at the tip of the finger. The upper margin of the growth was not palpable, and the mass did not bleed upon touch. An anterior firm to boggy, regular, non-tender swelling was felt from the 9 to 3 o’clock position, with normal overlying rectal mucosa. Upon applying pressure over the swelling, there was a passage of feculent discharge per vaginum, and the examining finger was stained with stool mixed with altered blood. Subsequently, proctoscopy revealed the lower margin of a non-friable polypoidal growth, visible approximately 7cm from the anal verge at the 1 o’clock position. A per vaginal examination was not performed. The rest of the examination was within normal limits.
Based on the patient’s history and examination, a provisional diagnosis of rectal lymphoma with a rectovaginal fistula was made. To further investigate the condition, a complete blood count, renal function test, urine routine examination, chest X-ray, and ultrasonography of the abdomen were ordered [Table ]. The complete blood count revealed a decreased haemoglobin level, and the ultrasonography showed a heteroechoic area measuring approximately 11.9×8×8.9 cm (459 cm3) in the pelvic cavity. Additionally, an adjacent hypoechoic area was observed extending from the pelvis up to below the umbilicus, with more prominence on the right side. This was followed by contrast-enhanced computerized tomography of the abdomen which showed an irregularly defined, multiloculated, thick, peripherally enhancing, walled heterogeneous collection measuring ~12.9×7.6×6.4 cm with multiple hypodense areas of air attenuation in non-dependant part within it as well as areas of fluid attenuation in dependant part and few foci of calcifications in the Pouch of Douglas. An associated long segment asymmetrical bowel was thickening involving the rectum measuring ~15 mm and circumferential thickening of sigmoid colon measuring ~8 mm was noted. Uterus appeared enlarged with associated altered attenuation representing secondary changes [Figure A, B].
These findings were followed by a core needle biopsy of the mass, which confirmed rhabdomyosarcoma. Consequently, the diagnosis was changed to urogenital rhabdomyosarcoma with a rectovaginal fistula. The parents and the patient were informed about the diagnosis and counselled on the requirement of a multidisciplinary approach to treat this locally advanced malignancy. Induction chemotherapy was discussed and initiated, and the patient is currently undergoing treatment with Vincristine, cyclophosphamide and Actinomycin D, showing a positive response with a decrease in the size of the tumour. Vincristine was given at a dose of 1.5 mg/m2 at day 1, 8 and 15, cyclophosphamide was administered at a dose of 1.2 g/m2 on day 1 and Actinomycin D was given at a dose of 0.045 mg/kg on day 1. This regimen is planned to be repeated every 3 weeks for 44 weeks. To prevent the passage of faecal contents per vaginum, a temporary faecal diversion has been performed. The patient is scheduled for radiation therapy and excisional and reconstructive surgery after completing the induction therapy. Regular hospital visits for chemotherapy are being made, and the patient is participating in psychological support sessions to facilitate the process. However, the patient and the family are facing financial and psychological difficulties. The hospital administration has been providing the necessary assistance available, and they remain hopeful for a successful recovery.