A 51-year-old Greek female was initially referred to the Infectious Diseases
Department of the University Hospital of Patras for the investigation of fever up to
39o C and fatigue that had been present for the last two months. Daily fever was the
main complaint and arose at any time of the day.
The initial physical examination revealed no remarkable findings. From her past
medical history, she had hysterectomy and left oophorectomy when she was 43 years
old. The laboratory tests revealed raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) at 50
mm/hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) at 26 μg/ml (reference range
<5μg/dl) as well. All other laboratory tests, blood cultures,
echocardiography, chest and abdominal Computed Tomography (CT) scans were normal.
Since the initial extensive FUO workup was essentially negative, the patient was
then submitted to 18FDG PET/CT scan. The only finding was thyroid gland enlargement
with weak 18FDG uptake (SUVmax=3.5). Thyroid parameters were measured . Thyroid hormones were within
normal range, antibodies against thyroidal peroxiadase (AbTPO) and thyroglobulin
were negative while serum TSH was slightly suppressed, which could indicate a
previous thyrotoxic phase. Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland showed
hypoechogenicity, heterogeneity and reduced blood flow. The constellation of high
CRP, mildly elevated ESR, suppressed TSH, enlargement and diffuse uptake to thyroid
gland in PET-CT, the sonographic appearance of the thyroid gland and FUO raised the
suspicion of subacute thyroiditis (SAT) (de Quervain thyroiditis), even though the
thyroid gland was painless. The confirmation of SAT demands very low uptake in
thyroid scintigraphy, but due to a recently performed CT scan with IV iodinated
contrast media thyroid scintigraphy would be non-diagnostic and therefore was
deferred. Based on the above findings, we considered this as a case of atypical SAT
or SAT in remission and the patient was treated with methylprednisolone 16 mg twice
daily and became afebrile after 3 days. However, during the next few weeks of
treatment, the fever relapsed, and the patient started complaining about visual
disorders. Ophthalmological examination revealed bitemporal hemianopsia. Thus, the
patient underwent a pituitary MRI scan, which showed a large (30mmx24mm) mixed mass
of the pituitary stalk that compressed the optic chiasm . Endocrine evaluation of the anterior pituitary
function pointed out suppressed TSH, low LH and undetectable Estradiol E2 . The patient did not complain
about polyuria or polydipsia and urine specific gravity was 1011. The mass was
surgically excised, and histopathologic examination revealed a typical
adamantinomatous CP. After surgery, the patient had panhypopituitarism and diabetes
insipidus. She received replacement doses of L-thyroxine, hydrocortisone, and
desmopressin (DDAVP). Fever was subsided and the patient remained totally afebrile
thereafter.