A 31-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with an eight-day history of dysphagia, initially to solids then progressing to liquids. The patient denied any other neurologic or gastrointestinal symptoms. The patient had been seen in the ED multiple times for the same complaint, including two visits to other EDs and two prior visits to our ED. During the encounters at the other EDs, she had reportedly had a negative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. On the patient’s initial evaluation in our ED, she denied progressive symptoms and had a neurologic exam that did not reveal any bulbar weakness, ptosis, or gross motor weakness. The patient was noted to have chronic-appearing open wounds to her bilateral upper extremities consistent with a self-reported history of skin-popping/muscling; however, none of the wounds appeared to be acutely infected. After a discussion with radiology, it was felt a swallow study would not be clinically beneficial given her mild symptoms. As she was able to tolerate oral liquids without difficulty, she was discharged home and two days later followed up with neurology.
At the neurology follow-up appointment, the patient felt as though her symptoms were progressing. On physical exam the neurologist noted bilateral ptosis and was concerned for progressive bulbar weakness given the evolution of symptoms. She was sent back to the ED for further evaluation and possible MRI but subsequently left without being seen. She returned to the ED later that night and was evaluated again. During that encounter, the patient was found to have ptosis, which could be overcome with effort, while the remainder of her neurologic exam was determined to be normal and non-focal. Laboratory studies in the ED demonstrated a leukocytosis of 13.6 × 103/ microliters (uL) (reference [ref] range 4.0 – 11.0 × 103/uL), mild metabolic acidosis (bicarbonate of 16.0 millimoles (mmol)/ liter (L) (ref range 23 – 30mmol/L), and elevated C-reactive protein of 116.5 milligrams (mg)/L (ref range < 10mg/L). The remainder of her initial labs were normal. Contrast swallow study was obtained, which demonstrated aspiration of contrast material into the trachea that could be visualized in both mainstem bronchi .
The patient was admitted to the hospital and the following day was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for progressive respiratory weakness. She was subsequently intubated for airway protection as she had a negative inspiratory force (NIF) of less than −20 centimeters of water. While in the ICU, the patient underwent further study including lumbar puncture and additional imaging. She had normal cerebrospinal fluid examination, negative blood cultures, and normal computed tomography of the head, neck, and chest. She also had normal MRIs of the brain and cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine. On the second day of hospitalization, differential diagnosis was broadened, and serum, stool, and wound culture samples were sent to the CDC for botulinum testing. The wound tissue sample ultimately tested positive for a toxin producing strain of C. botulinum.
The day that wound cultures were obtained the patient was started on empiric botulism anti-toxin and underwent surgical debridement and wound excision for source control (, ). Simultaneously she was started on broad spectrum antibiotics. She exhibited mild clinical improvement but did require tracheostomy due to prolonged intubation and respiratory weakness. The patient remained in the hospital for approximately two weeks. Prior to discharge, she was determined to have such profound residual generalized motor weakness that she required transfer for rehabilitation and subsequent long-term care.