A 10-year-old male presented with swelling of the left lower face of 3 months duration with insidious onset, gradually growing to the present size. The swelling was accompanied by dull aching pain for 2 months, which was occasional and gradually progressed to being continuous. There was no fever at the onset of swelling or numbness of the cheek/lip associated. There were no known comorbidities. The patient had undergone extraction of the primary mandibular left second molar 1 month ago and had no symptomatic improvement. The boy appeared generally healthy for his reported age. The left cheek had a diffuse swelling that was firm and tender. An adequate mouth opening, mixed dentition status, and a dental age of 10–11 years were indicated by an intraoral examination. An oval well-defined, tender swelling of size 1.5 × 1.5 cm was palpable in relation to the left mandibular body region which was bony hard, and smooth suggesting an expanded outer cortex with eggshell crackling. The mucosa over the swelling appeared unattached to the swelling. There was no paresthesia of the left inferior alveolar nerve or submandibular lymphadenopathy. The teeth present in the region were the primary mandibular left canine with pre-shedding mobility, root stump of primary mandibular left first molar, healing socket of primary mandibular left second molar, and pit and fissure caries in relation to the permanent left mandibular first molar . A 1-month-old intraoral periapical radiograph obtained before the primary left mandibular second molar extraction showed a well-defined radiolucent lesion involving the unerupted permanent mandibular left second premolar tooth with about 50% root formation . A cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) of the region showed a radiolucent lesion measuring 2.2 × 2.2 × 1.7 cm with the expansion of the outer cortex . A provisional diagnosis of inflammatory dentigerous cyst and a decision to treat by marsupialization was made.
After obtaining written, informed consent from the parent, the primary left mandibular first molar root stumps and primary left mandibular canine were extracted and wide excision of the alveolar mucosa overlying the area along with cystic lining was performed under 2% lignocaine with 1:2,00,000 epinephrine anesthesia . The lining and mucosa were submitted for histopathologic examination, and the findings indicated an inflammatory dentigerous cyst. The associated permanent teeth spontaneously erupted into occlusion over the following 3 months, with no negative or unexpected outcomes ( and ).