A 49 years old white woman with a bulky laterocervical right mass, dysphonia and recurrent episodes of dysphagia arrived to our Division for a consult. After medical visit, she was hospitalized for investigation. We performed hematochemical routine tests and neck CT scan before and after contrast medium injection. Hemocromocytometric exam showed an elevated White Blood Cell (WBC) count and slight C-Reactive Proteine (CRP) elevation. The clinical examination showed a 3x2 cm right cervical mass with elastic consistency, hurting at palpation. Optic fibers laryngoscopy reveal oedema of glossoepiglottic fold, arytenoid and false cord on the right side. Neck CT scan showed a fluid polylobed collection with slight parietal enhancement in right para-laryngeal situs .
This collection extended from laryngeal vestibule to superior margin of thyroid cartilage (3x1.5x4 cm) associated with obliteration of right glossoepiglottic vallecula and omolateral pyriform sinus. Second smaller ovalar mass (1.1 cm of max diameter) revealed in the left anterior para-laryngeal space just under hyoid bone with soft tissue density. There was concomitant right internal jugular lymphadenopathy with max diameter of 11x7 mm.
During hospitalization, we detected a heart rate of 35 bpm in routine monitoring of vital parameters. Serial ECGs were then performed, revealing the presence of sinus bradycardia at 38 bpm on average. Cardiology consultation showed a normal cardiopulmonary examination and hemodynamic stability. Vital parameters and blood tests were normal. The rotation of the head to the left showed a slowdown of cardiac frequency on heart rate monitor without apparent severe bradyarrhythmias. She was subjected to a 24-hours ECG Holter, which showed pure sinus bradycardia. She started the antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam and high doses of methylprednisolone with a slight decrement of neck mass. After 10 days of medical therapy without real benefit, the patient underwent to marsupialization and drainage of the purulent collection in endolaryngeal CO2 laser surgery. During the post-operative course, bradycardia disappeared and she repeated 24-hours ECG Holter, that appeared normal.
Studying the patient's remote pathological history, we found out a previous admission to an ENT Department in 2015 for “suspected right parapharyngeal abscess”. During that hospitalization, the patient presented episodes of sinus bradycardia at 37 bpm on average. Therefore, she was subjected to a cardiological examination that revealed asymptomatic sinus bradycardia. Then, she did a neck CT scan with contrast medium, which showed the presence of a mixed right piolaryngocele .
She performed therapy with piperacillin/ tazobactam and high-dose corticosteroids and a subsequent surgical drainage of the piolaryngocele, leading to the resolution of bradycardia. Laryngocele marsupialization was not processed, suppurative process, indeed, relapsed.
The cardiologist evaluated past and current medical history and its pre- and post-operative course, confirmed our hypothesis of correlation between the presence of laryngocele and the appearance of CSS with sinus bradycardia due to compression of the carotid sinus.