A 23-year-old male patient, medically free, presented to the emergency department complaining of a facial rash that started suddenly after he woke up over his forehead extending to his upper and lower eyelid, cheeks, nose, and neck. The rash was not itchy, painful, nor exacerbated by sunlight, but was associated with fatigue, drowsiness, tongue biting, falling of the bed, and painless redness of both his eyes. No history of head trauma, photosensitivity, lip smacking, involuntary hand movements, blinking. Three months prior, a similar episode of tongue biting, drowsiness, syncope, and purpuric rash happened, which healed spontaneously within 2 weeks. Family history is remarkable for psoriasis. As for his social history, he lives alone and was not witnessing any abnormal movement. His physical examination upon presentation showed stable vital signs. He had an abrasion over his tongue (shown in ) and a small abrasion in the right distal thigh with well-circumscribed margins (shown in ). Numerous non-palpable, non-blanching, non-tender petechiae were seen on the forehead, periorbital area, mid-face, maxilla, neck, upper chest, and shoulders during skin examination (shown in , ). In addition, fundal examination was unremarkable, conjunctival examination revealed bilateral hemorrhages with a clear lens and cornea (shown in ). His blood work showed unremarkable complete blood count with differential, coagulation, and liver profiles. Urine creatinine was 21,692 mg/L and creatine kinase of 1,207 mg/L. Referring to the previous clinical findings and blood work the diagnosis was suggested to be recurrent postictal thoracocervicofacial purpura by dermatology initially. The patient was reassured about the purpura and did not require any further dermatological treatment. Electroencephalogram and CT brain were inconclusive. The patient was referred to neurology for further assessment, given his clinical features and elevated CK levels, a diagnosis of epilepsy was confirmed and levetiracetam 500 mg was given to the patient to control his seizure along with continuing further investigations to detect the etiology of recurrent seizures.