A 33 years-old caucasian woman, nulliparous, presented with a quick, suspicious growth of a congenital nevus located in the intermammary sulcus and which was ulcerated. After surgery in May 2009 she was diagnosed with stage IIC cutaneous epithelioid nodular melanoma, in vertical growth phase, with a Breslow thickness of 4.1 mm and a Clark’s level of IV. The tumor was highly melanotic, ulcerated, and presented scarce lymphocytic infiltration . The bilateral sentinel lymphnode biopsy was negative. After giving written consent she entered into a randomized Phase II/III clinical study comparing the CSF470 vaccine plus BCG plus GM-CSF versus IFN-alpha, and she was assigned to the vaccine arm. The clinical study (CASVAC0401) has been approved by the Comite Independiente de Etica para Ensayos en Farmacología Clínica, “Profesor Luís M. Zieher” Buenos Aires, Argentina. CSF470 vaccine consists in a mixture of four gamma-irradiated melanoma cell lines injected i.d. plus 106 cfu BCG plus 400 μg rhGM-CSF (divided in four daily injections, 100 μg GM-CSF each). She started the clinical study two months after surgery (July 2009) with a LDH = 287 U/L (normal range 230–460). She received a total of 13 doses of CSF470 vaccine (the first 4 doses, every three weeks, then every two months until completion of the first year and finally every 3 months in the second year) with good tolerance presenting only grade 2 toxicity (erythema, edema and pain) at the vaccination site. DTH reactions were quite strong and lasted at least three days after vaccination . During the course of the study, a cervical lymph node suspiciously enlarged, but then returned to normality and no biopsy was performed.
In June 2010, a control CAT scan depicted an ovarian cyst that suggested a functional cyst or endometriosis. In August 2011 she completed the clinical study of CSF470 vaccine and she was found to be disease-free by CAT scans of the brain, abdomen, thorax and pelvis . Her serum LDH was 309 U/L, and the patient returned to her hometown.
Between November and December 2011 she was treated by her gynecologist with three cycles of Pg, 200 mg/day for ten days, every two weeks (MAFEL, Raymos Laboratories, Argentina), to treat her ovarian cyst. At that time (November 2011) her serum LDH was 369 U/L and all other blood laboratory values were normal. Chest radiography was normal and abdominal ultrasound only showed a 4 cm diameter ovarian cyst, without adenopaties. No CAT scan was made at that time. In March 19/2012 the patient came to a new follow-up visit and ultrasound showed multiple liver heterogeneous diffuse nodules (20-25 mm) that were further confirmed by CAT scan, along with expansive lesions in both suprarenal glands and a spleen nodule . Her serum LDH value was 767 U/L. A fine needle biopsy of a liver nodule confirmed the presence of melanoma metastasis, with highly melanotic cells . The patient was treated with two cycles of biochemotherapy plus tamoxifen with no clinical response. Within the next two months the patient developed brain metastases, detected by MNR, and subcutaneous nodules in the neck. BRAF sequencing of the liver biopsy revealed the presence of V600E mutation and the patient started Vemurafenib treatment (960 mg b.i.d) in July 2012, attaining partial remission.
Lack of hormone receptors (ER and PgR) was found in the primary tumor biopsy by immunohistochemistry , but this finding could not be confirmed in the hepatic metastasis biopsy due to lack of material.