A 64-year-old Chinese woman presented to the clinic with a painless mass on the left breast. The mass had been present for approximately 1 year, with relatively slow progression, and had only rapidly increased in size in the past 2 months. She had no remarkable family history. A physical examination revealed diffuse erythema, skin ridging and peau d’orange appearance of the skin . Breast mass size was 7.0 cm×6.5 cm. There were multiple enlarged and fused lymph nodes in the axilla and supraclavicular region. Ultrasound showed a hypoechoic area with irregular shape and unclear border . Internally, the hypoechoic area was asymmetrical, and a strong increase in blood flow was detected within the lesion. Ultrasound also showed enlarged lymph nodes in the axilla and supraclavicular region. Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a heterogeneously distributed lesion of high signal intensity in the left breast on T1-weighted images. The breast mass was rapidly enhanced following the injection of gadolinium diethylenetriamine-pentaacetic acid . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT) indicated increased 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the left breast, in the nodes of the chest wall and the nodes of the left posterior basal lung. PET/CT also demonstrated additional uptake in the internal mammary, mediastinum (4R, 4L, 5 and 7 groups) and hilum of the lung (10 and 11 groups), and bilateral cervical, retroperitoneal and bilateral iliac blood vessel lymph nodes. Increased uptake in the liver was observed as well . Core needle aspiration was performed for the diagnosis of invasive ductal carcinoma of the left breast in July 2017. Diagnosis of breast carcinoma was made by both hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining and immunostaining. This breast carcinoma was immunohistochemically negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). The carcinoma was immunohistochemically positive for P53, E-cadherin and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) . Based on these pathological results, combined with the clinical characteristics, this patient was diagnosed with IBC (cT4N3M1). The patient was enrolled in a clinical study analyzing IBC genomic mutation status using NGS. Following verbal and written informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from tumor tissue. Tumor tissue DNA was sequenced by target region capture sequencing using a previously described NGS technique . TP53BP1 and ARID1A nonsense mutations and a CD74-ROS1 fusion gene were detected in the genomic DNA. The CD74-ROS1 fusion gene combined an exon 7 of CD74 and an exon 34 of ROS1, and the ROS1 protein was overexpressed, driven by this fusion oncogene in breast tumor tissues .
Chemotherapy (paclitaxel, 120mg) was given every week for a period of 3 weeks. Oral administration of capecitabine tablets (1.5 g twice daily, days 1–14 of a 21-day cycle) was given for three cycles due to unacceptable anorexia with paclitaxel. The patient refused crizotinib treatment for economic reasons and was confirmed dead in November 2017.