We report a case of a 29-year-old female who presented to us in August 2015, presenting with green discoloration and frothy urine associated with lower limb edema . These symptoms were not preceded by any infective episodes. She was previously well and was only admitted for previous childbirth of which all her blood investigations were normal in 2014. In addition, she did not have any extra-renal symptoms, such as arthritis, serositis, cutaneous, or hematologic involvement. She was not on any medications but admits to using an herbal supplement named ‘Super Kidney’ for the past 6 months, containing ginseng, plantaginis folium, orthosiphonis, strobilanthi folium and retrofracti fructus, which are plants used traditionally for improving general well-being and diuresis. The supplement was not registered with the National Pharmaceutical Regulatory Agency (NPRA), thus its safety profile and detailed content was not available. On further questioning, the patient admitted that the supplement was brought from overseas. During this visit however, urine dipstick revealed 4 + proteinuria and 24 h urine protein was 10 g. Her creatinine was normal at 47 μmol/L, albumin was low at 11 g/L and her peripheral blood counts were normal. Further investigations revealed a negative hepatitis B, C, and HIV serologies, ANA positive with 1:640 titer, C3 and C4 levels were low at 0.78 g/L and 0.14 g/L respectively, anti-smith antibody, anti-RNP antibody, anti-Jo antibody and anti-Scl 70 antibody were negative. However anti-SSA (anti Ro) antibody and anti-SSB (anti La) antibody were positive. We were not able to send anti-histone antibody due to the non-availability of reagent at that time. Unfortunately, we did not send the serum PLA2R antibodies. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was high 120 mm/hr. but her C-reactive protein was normal 1.86 mg/dl. The renal biopsy showed diffuse membranoproliferative pattern composed of rigid and thickened capillary walls with presence of subendothelial depositions and splitting of glomerular basement membrane in Masson Trichrome (MT) . Focal subepithelial vacuolation and focal regions of mesangial hypercellularity were observed. Immunofluorescence studies showed granular capillary loop and milder degree of mesangial immunopositivity for IgG (3+), IgA (3+), C3 (2+), C1q (3+), Kappa (1+) and Lambda (1+). Additional C4d immunohistochemistry showed granular positivity along the capillary walls. At this juncture, lupus nephritis ISN/RPS (2003) of Class IV-S (A/C) and V, and secondary membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis were considered. Putting the renal biopsy, laboratory parameters and clinical presentation into perspective, it is conceivable that this was likely an autoimmune lupus-like reaction triggered by the supplements that she had been taking. We withdrew the herbal medications and treated her with a course of 1 mg/kg prednisolone daily and low molecular weight heparin injection. Six weeks later, her edema significantly reduced, and her urine regained its normal colour. Her urine dipstick was still 4+, but her proteinuria improved to 3.8 g/24 h. Serum creatinine remained normal at 62 μmol/L and her albumin level improved to 15 g/L. Hydroxychloroquine and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) were added. Despite 9 weeks of intensive treatment, she was persistently proteinuric with serum creatinine 66 μmol/L, 24-h urine protein of 5.6 g and albumin 17 g/L. We then decided to start her on IV cyclophosphamide induction. She tolerated 6 courses of 5.5 g in the period of 6 months and had no undesirable side effects. Her response was favorable; she achieved remission after the 6th dose. We continued her on oral prednisolone and managed to taper it to a maintenance dose of 5 mg per day.