A 28-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the Department of Nephrology, Hypertension, and Internal Medicine for the diagnosis of accidentally detected, for the first time in her life, asymptomatic hypokalemia with a potassium concentration of 2.4 mmol/L. In the medical history so far, the patient denied the presence of chronic diseases. Five years prior, she had given birth to a healthy child. The laboratory tests performed at that time had not assessed the concentration of electrolytes in the serum. The patient’s family history was not burdened with kidney and genetic diseases. During hospitalization, the patient did not report any symptoms, and denied using laxatives and diuretics. She had an increased appetite for salted products as well as vegetables and fruits. Physical examination revealed overweight with a BMI of 28 kg/m2, without signs of cushingoid body structure and stretch marks. Blood pressure (BP) values were low as 90/60 mmHg. A differential diagnosis of hypokalemia was performed according to the algorithm presented on Fig. .
A computed tomography (CT) revealed normal anatomy of adrenal glands. The length of kidneys were 127 mm of right and 103 mm of left. A complete duplication of the renal pelvis was detected. Based on the angio-CT examination, the anatomical variant of the right kidney vascularization by 4 renal arteries was demonstrated, one of which originated from the right common iliac artery, and the others from the aorta. The left kidney had a single renal artery. There was no evidence of hemodynamically significant stenosis or fibromuscular angiodysplasia.
The results of laboratory test regarding urinalysis and blood serum are presented in the following Tables , and .
Additionally, an increased concentration of renin has been found with the simultaneous normal Aldo concentration and normal ratio of Aldo to direct renin concentration (ADRR). On this basis, primary hyperaldosteronism was excluded. A normal circadian rhythm of ACTH and cortisol secretion was also demonstrated, as well as the correct concentration of TSH and free thyroid hormones. Immunological studies did not reveal the presence of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) or anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCA).
A suspicion of tubulopathy was done based on the results of laboratory and imaging tests as well as a clinical manifestation. On the basis of gene sequencing using the Sanger method, the mutation c.2186G > T(p.Gly729Val) in one allele of the SLC12A3 gene and the coexisting mutation c.1247G > C (p.Cys416Ser) (reference sequences: NM_000339.2 and NP_000330.2) were confirmed . Both mutations are registered in the ClinVar database as pathogenic variants for Gitelman syndrome (ID: 992415 and 994,770 respectively). Unfortunately, due to the lack of consent of the patient’s parents to conduct genetic tests, it was not possible to determine the exact mechanism of inheriting the mutation.
Analysis was performed with Mutation Surveyor software. The mutants are marked with arrows.
The patient was recommended an oral supplementation of potassium chloride (6 tablets of 600 mg every 4 h) and magnesium chloride (2 tablets of 100 mg every 8 h) as well as a potassium-rich diet. Treatment with mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MCRA) or thiazide diuretics were not introduced into therapy due to the planned pregnancy.