A 5-year-old female was brought by her parents when they noticed their child having a deformity and limited range of motion of both elbows. They noticed the deformity when the child was 1 year old. There was no history of any associated trauma, or similar complaints in the family. On examination, no other congenital abnormality was detected. Probing her prenatal, intranatal, and postnatal periods was also uneventful. On inspection, the forearms were thin and a well-marked sulcus was seen at the posterolateral aspect of the proximal forearm corresponding to the normal position of the radial head. There was no swelling or undue bony prominence. No cubitus valgus or valgus instability. The range of motion at the shoulder and elbow was completely unrestricted and painless. Both the forearms were fixed in pronation . The right side was fixed at 70° of pronation with further pronation up to 90°. The left side was fixed at 10° of pronation with further pronation up to 90°. Hypermobility was seen at the wrist joint due to the laxity of the capsular ligaments. The radiological picture was suggestive of Type 2 congenital radioulnar synostosis according to Cleary’s classification . After performing all routine investigations and getting fitness for surgery, the patient was planned for derotation osteotomy for the right side.
The child was positioned supine on the operating table with the forearm by the side. After appropriate anaesthesia, parts were painted and draped. 2 × 1.2 mm K-wires were passed percutaneously in the shaft of the radius proximal and distal to the desired osteotomy site at an angle of 70°. Then, a 2 cm incision was taken on the dorsolateral aspect of the radius, the soft tissue was dissected, and extensor tendons retracted and protected. The periosteum was incised with number 15 blade, and bone was exposed. The corticotomy was performed with multiple drill holes with 1.5 mm K-wire and was completed using a straight osteotome. After completing the osteotomy, K-wires were made parallel to each other. After getting the K-wires parallel, there was still some resistance to get the desired correction. Hence, we decided to do an ulnar osteotomy. Another 1 cm incision was taken under IITV guidance just distal to the synostosis site, and ulnar osteotomy was performed in a similar fashion as the radius. The K-wires were made parallel to each other and connected to JESS clamps (mini external fixator) and connecting rods after getting the desired correction . The wound was washed and closed in layers. Postoperatively, the patient was placed in a long-arm slab.
The slab was converted to a long-arm cast after suture removal on post-operative day 10. The patient’s right arm was immobilized for a month after which the JESS fixator (mini external fixator) and cast were removed, and gradual mobilization was started. The patient regained full range of motion at the elbow and wrist at 2-month follow-up. At 4 years old follow-up, the child shows good functional outcome and the radiograph shows complete consolidation of the osteotomy site ( and ).