A 48-year-old man presented to the Emergency Department with acute nausea and vomiting for one day but did also endorse vague symptoms of nausea for the preceding two weeks. He also described having subjective fevers at home with rare right upper quadrant pain and without evidence of jaundice.
Patient described progressive right upper quadrant pain, jaundice, night sweats, weakness, and unintended weight loss for one month. His symptoms had worsened on the week prior to arrival, at which time he began to experience decreased oral intake with nausea. His acute onset of non-bloody, nonbilious vomiting on day prior to arrival is what led him to seek care. He initially presented to an urgent care center where computed tomography (CT) scan was done and showed acute cholecystitis. He was then sent to the emergency room.
The patient had a past medical history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension. His only home medication was a prostate medication of unknown name. He also had a remote history of laparoscopic appendectomy.
Family history was noncontributory. Patient denied any alcohol, tobacco or illicit drug use.
His vital signs on arrival were temperature 36.4 ℃, heart rate 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 125/82 mmHg. Physical exam was notable for right upper quadrant tenderness without peritoneal signs. His skin was jaundiced.
Laboratory findings were significant for leukocytosis (white blood cell count 18.3 K/mm3) and hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 14.5 mg/dL). The remainder of the complete blood count and blood chemistries, as well as liver function panel were normal. Tumor markers included CEA level of 1.2 µg/L and CA19-9 level of 21 U/L. Electrocardiogram and chest X-ray were also normal.
An abdominal ultrasound demonstrated a distended gallbladder with a thickened, edematous wall, gallstones, and an apparent defect in the wall, as well as intrahepatic and extrahepatic ductal dilation. A magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography identified a T2 hypointense right hepatic lobe lesion that involved the right hepatic artery and narrowing of the common bile duct (CBD). CT again demonstrated a contained perforation of the gallbladder, moderate intrahepatic ductal dilation, possible mass within the porta hepatis, and long narrowing of the CBD . Additional findings consisted of multiple large retroperitoneal and pelvic lymph nodes measuring up to 2.6 cm, located in proximity to the aortic bifurcation. Given the possibility of malignancy, a chest CT was performed to evaluate for metastatic disease, which demonstrated abnormally enlarged right hilar lymph nodes.