A 57-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of a huge abdominal mass causing abdominal distension and a significant reduction of food consumption for nearly 2 mo.
His past history was unremarkable.
His family history was unremarkable.
Physical examination revealed a huge, tough mass. The upper boundary of the mass was below the right costal margin. The lower boundary, which was in the pelvic cavity, was hard to touch. The surface of the mass was smooth. The mass was unmovable, and there was no tenderness associated with the mass.
Routine blood parameters were within the normal range. Tumor marker measurement results were as follows: Carcinoembryonic antigen, 0.00 ng/mL; alpha-fetoprotein, 4.10 ng/mL; CA19-9, 9.80 U/mL; and CA72-4, 1.19 U/mL. An enhanced abdominal and pelvic computed tomography scan revealed a right mid-lower abdominal cystic lesion of 35.6 cm × 14.3 cm × 9.6 cm compressing the intestine and right ureter. Multiple small cystic masses appeared on the peritoneum, greater omentum, small intestinal mesentery, and the surface of the spleen . Perihepatic effusion was also present. There was a huge mass in the abdominal cavity and the gastrointestinal tract structure was displaced. In order to exclude the extensive metastasis of gastrointestinal tumors, the patient underwent positron emission tomography–computed tomography. The examination revealed a high maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of the largest cystic lesion. The SUVmax of the lesion was 2.7. Mild radioactivity uptake was seen in the multiple cystic lesions on the peritoneum, omentum, small bowel mesentery, and surface of the liver and spleen. Possible preoperative diagnosis was peritoneal metastasis of appendix mucinous tumor.
Explorative laparotomy revealed multiple dark red masses on the small intestinal mesentery, peritoneum, and greater omentum, and surface of the liver and spleen. The diameter of the masses ranged from 2 cm to 5 cm. Dark red bloody cystic fluid was seen when the thin wall was incised. A huge soft tumor was found in the right abdominal cavity. The huge cystic lesion was tightly adhered to the small intestine and ascending colon, making it difficult to be separated from the organs. Dark red bloody cystic fluid was present in the mass. An incisional biopsy of the cystic wall and some other smaller cystic lesions was obtained . Intraoperative frozen section showed that the inner cystic wall was lined with flat endothelium without atypia. However, the high SUVmax and the wide distribution of the masses indicated the possibility of malignancy. Although the sensitivity and specificity of intraoperative frozen pathological examination was very high, we used treatments for malignant tumors considering that the malignant possibility could not be completely excluded after a consultation with the pathologist. We then performed complete aspiration of the seroperitoneum and successively embrocated iodine and carbolic acid on the inner wall of the largest mass. The patient underwent hyperthermic perfusion with 4000 mL normal saline at 43 ºC for 1 hr immediately after surgery.
Pathological examination showed that within the stromal components, the irregular vascular wall was thin. The vessel lumen was interlinked, and the lumen was lined with flat endothelium without heterogeneity. Hemorrhage and hemosiderin were present in the stromal components. Immunohistochemical staining of the endothelial cells showed positivity for CD31 and ERG and negativity for D2-40 . The Ki-67 value was 2%. The diagnosis was peritoneal cavernous hemangiomatosis according to the intraoperative findings and pathologic results.