A 68-year-old man had an open fracture of the right humerus due to a fall. The patient was sent to the hospital as an emergency case. The doctor performed debridement and suture of the patient’s wound. When all of the test indexes were normal, surgery of the humeral fracture was undertaken. Large bone defects in the middle and lower parts of the humerus were found during the operation. After proper shortening of the fracture end, a bone plate implant was embedded for internal fixation. .
A week later, wound secretions exuded through the original drainage tube. Escherichia coli was isolated from the wound secretion by culture. E. coli isolates were multidrug resistant as determined by antimicrobial susceptibility testing using the disk diffusion test. The procedure and interpretation of the results of the antimicrobial susceptibility tests were conducted in accordance with the CLSI 2018 guidelines . Antimicrobial drugs and Mueller–Hinton media for the disk diffusion test were obtained from Oxoid Company, UK. The results showed that the strain was resistant to cefazolin, cefotaxime, cefepime, aztreonam, ampicillin, piperacillin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, but sensitive to gentamicin, amikacin, imipenem, meropenem, ceftazidime, amoxicillin/clavulanate, piperacillin/tazobactam, cefoperazone/sulbactam and cefoxitin. Negative pressure attraction was performed with a progressive artificial skin cover and cefoperazone/sulbactam was used for treatment. Cefoperazone/sulbactam, which combined cefoperazone (2000 mg) with sulbactam (1000 mg), was used via intravenous infusion, once every 12 h.
Two weeks later, the drainage tube had been closed but yellowish cloudy secretions exuded on the lateral side of the arm incision. The doctors suspected that the deep wound was infected, therefore, re-debridement of the patient’s wound and external fixation of the fracture were performed .
Ten days later, another secretion from the wound was observed . RGM were isolated from the secretion by culture and were identified as belonging to the M. fortuitum group using an IVD-MALDIBIOTYPER (Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany). The isolated strain was identified as M. houstonense by sequencing analysis. Monoclonal colonies were scraped and genomic DNA of the isolate was extracted using a commercial kit (DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit; Qiagen, Germany). Primer design was based on the reports of Lane(1991) and CLSI MM18-A, and the primers for 16S rRNA PCR were as follows 27F: AGAGTTTGATMTGGCTCAG, 1492R: TACGGYTACCTTGTTACGACTT. The amplification conditions for PCR were based on those of previous reports [, ], and a PCR cycler (PTC220, Bio-Rad, USA) and first generation sequencer (Life Technology 2500 DX, ABI, Japan) were used. The amplified products were determined by comparing their restriction patterns with those available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information GenBank database. The results revealed sequence similarity (above 98.58%) with M. houstonense (GenBank accession no. NR_042913.1).
The TREK Diagnostic System (Thermo, Germany) was used to test the antimicrobial drug susceptibility of M. houstonense by the microbroth dilution method. The antimicrobial drug sensitivity results were interpreted according to the CLSI M24 A2 guidelines . The results, detailed in Table , showed that M. houstonense was only sensitive to levofloxacin, moxifloxacin and amikacin.
A daily intravenous drip of 0.3 g of levofloxacin and injection of 100 ml of sodium chloride, and injection of 0.2 g of amikacin and 250 ml of sodium chloride twice a day, were used for treatment. Three weeks later, the wound was healing well and no secretions were detected.