A 13-year old boy, the second child to non-consanguineous healthy parents, presented following an afebrile convulsion with no prior history, with the seizure morphology being focal. He had an uneventful birth history and was developmentally normal, attending age-appropriate mainstream school. However, he was reported to have poor school performance by his parents.
Past medical history revealed episodes of burning sensation of the hands and feet over the past 2 years with each episode lasting between one to 3 days and originating from the palms and soles. Further inquiry revealed the absence of sweating in hot weather or post-exercise and he also gave a history of recurrent fever for which a cause could not be established. At this point, Fabry disease was suspected and a detailed neurological examination was performed, which identified unremarkable motor and cerebellar system examinations. Sensory examination revealed features of peripheral neuropathy, such as tactile hyperalgesia, compression hyperalgesia, dysesthesia, and hypohidrosis, but with normal lacrimation, salivation, temperature sensation, vibratory and proprioception sensation. Cranial nerve examination demonstrated nonspecific visual field defects in all four quadrants and slit-lamp examination revealed the presence of bilateral Cornea Verticillata. Despite these findings, he had no visual complaints and had an unremarkable past medical, ocular, and family history and had never been on any treatments that could cause corneal deposits, such as amiodarone, chloroquine, and indomethacin.
His sixteen-year-old brother has had similar complaint of intermittent acroparesthesia for which medical attention had not been sought as it had settled spontaneously with time.
Basic investigations including blood counts, urine analysis, serum electrolytes, renal and liver functions were found to be normal. He also had normal motor and sensory nerve conduction studies, hearing assessment, ultrasonically normal kidneys, structurally and functionally a normal heart, electroencephalogram, and brain imaging.
Diagnosis of Fabry Disease was confirmed by enzyme analysis via fluorometry, which revealed low Galactosidase A levels of 0.34 nmol/hr./ml (3–20 nmol/hr./ml). The GLA gene was analysed by next-generation sequencing of the coding region which revealed a missense mutation in Exon 1 of GLA, c.136C > T (p. His46Tyr) which was likely to be a pathogenic variant.