The patient, a 35-year-old woman without prior heart disease or other comorbidities, was diagnosed with autoimmune hyperthyroidism (Grave’s disease) 2 years before the current event. She received standard treatment with thionamides (carbimazole) for 2 months after being diagnosed with Grave’s. Carbimazole was the discontinued due to development of neutropenia. The patient had untreated Grave’s disease for 2 years. Increased thyrotoxic symptoms forced her to see a doctor. Grave’s disease was again diagnosed (Free T4: 79 pmol/L, free T3: 47 pmol/L, and TRAB-thyroid receptor antibody were high). Treatment was started with carbimazole 10 mg twice daily and a non-selective beta-blocker (propranolol 20 mg 1–2 tablets daily).
One month later, 2 days after discontinuation of carbimazole due to recurring severe neutropenia, she was admitted to her local hospital. At the time of admission, she had high fever, sinus tachycardia (heart rate 110 beats per minute), and general fatigue. Physical examination revealed normal auscultation of the heart and lungs. A diagnosis was made of thyroid storm and a suspected neutropenic sepsis [leucocytes 0.8 × 109/L (ref. 3.5–10.0 × 109/L) and neutrophils 0.0 × 109/L (ref. 1.5–7.3 × 109/L)] related to clinical signs of tonsillitis. Treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics (penicillin 3 g four times daily and gentamicin 240 mg once daily, both intravenous), high dosage of glucocorticosteroids (hydrocortisone 100 mg four times daily intravenously), and increased dosage of the non-selective beta-blocker propranolol (20 mg four times daily) was initiated. Lugol’s iodine solution (4.5 mg three times daily) was added to the treatment on Day 3. High fever and tachycardia were still present. On the fourth day after admission, acute dyspnoea developed together with circulatory collapse and subsequent cardiac arrest with pulseless electrical activity (PEA). Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was started, and a return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was obtained after 4 min. After ROSC, she remained severely hypotensive (blood pressure 60/40 mmHg) with sinus tachycardia. She was transferred to the university hospital in a critical unstable state.
On arrival at the university hospital’s emergency department the initial clinical examination revealed a conscious, but cognitively impaired patient, respiratory rate of 30–50 per minute, blood pressure 60/40 mmHg, heart rate 120 beats per minute, temperature 37.8°C, normal respiratory sounds, Graves' ophthalmopathy, and arterial blood gas showed severe lactic acidosis [lactate 17 mmol/L (ref. 0.4–0.8 mmol/L), pH 7.2 (ref. 7.35–7.45) pCO2 2.9 kPa (ref. 4.7–6.0 kPa), and pO2 19 kPa (ref 10.0–14. kPa).
Acute pulmonary embolism was suspected as the cause of the cardiac arrest. Bedside echocardiography demonstrated severe biventricular cardiac failure (left ventricular ejection fraction <20%) with the paradoxical movement of the septum and tricuspid regurgitation. Pulmonary embolism could not be excluded based on these findings and computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiography was indicated but was not performed immediately due to the prohibitive requirement for iodine-containing contrast agents in this setting. Due to the patient’s clinical instability, thrombolysis was given to cover for the possibility of pulmonary embolism. Eventually, a CT scan was performed in the emergency department and pulmonary embolism was excluded.
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) in cardiogenic shock with ongoing circulatory support with high doses of norepinephrine, dobutamine, and phenylephrine. Immediately after arriving to the ICU, the patient experienced recurrent episodes of cardiac arrest with PEA with the only temporary effect of CPR.
As the patient was severely haemodynamically unstable due to refractory cardiogenic shock and recurrent cardiac arrest caused by the thyroid storm, the decision was made for a mechanical circulatory support by a veno-arterial extra corporal membrane oxygenation (V-A ECMO) circuit. Support on V-A ECMO was established without complications. Coronary angiography demonstrated normal coronary arteries and an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted. The thyroid storm was treated pharmacologically with escalating doses of iodine solution (Lugol’s iodine solution 22 mg three times daily) and glucocorticoids (hydrocortisone 100 mg four times daily intravenously). Rapid normalization of thyroid hormone levels was obtained ( and ). Beta-blockers were discontinued and levosimendan was commenced on the theoretical consideration of an enhanced inotropic effect compared to conventional β-adrenergic agonists. Myocardial function recovered rapidly . After 3 days, V-A ECMO was discontinued, and the patient was extubated the next day. Uneventful total thyroidectomy was performed 5 days later. The patient was discharged after 4 weeks of hospitalization without cognitive sequelae, without any symptoms of heart failure, with normalized myocardial function as judged by echocardiography, and with scheduled close follow-up by endocrinologist.