A 65-year-old woman presented with a complaint of bloody stools. The attending physician suspected a diagnosis of rectal cancer, and the patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation. On physical examination, her abdomen was soft and no mass was felt during palpation. Laboratory data on admission showed that the levels of tumor markers in the blood, including carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were within normal ranges. Colonoscopy revealed a circumscribed, localized, ulcerative tumor, 9 cm from the anal verge and 7 cm from the dentate line . Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed wall thickening in the rectum and a high standardized uptake value max (SUVmax) of 21.3 . No enlarged lymph nodes or distant metastases were observed. On 3D-CT, the IMA was observed to originate from the SMA and was accompanied by the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) . The line through which Japanese D3 lymphadenectomy would be performed was decided before the surgery . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed tumor invasion beyond the muscular layer of the rectum . We diagnosed the patient with rectal cancer (cT3N0M0, cStage IIa), and planned treatment with laparoscopic low anterior resection.
This case was enrolled in the following studies which aimed to investigate the usefulness and limitations of treatment by laparoscopic colorectal surgery using the detection rate of ICG fluorescence markings with near-infrared light . This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Sapporo Medical University, and informed consent was obtained from the patient. This clinical trial was registered in the University Hospital Medical Information Network (UMIN) Center (ID: UMIN000038982).
In this patient, the ICG solution was administered into the submucosal layer at two points around the tumor using a colonoscope 6 days before the laparoscopic colorectal surgery. Using a 26-gauge needle, 0.2 ml of normal saline solution was injected into the submucosal layer to form a submucosal elevation at two sites on the colonic wall opposite the tumor. Subsequently, 0.1 ml (ICG dose: 0.5 mg) of an ICG solution was injected into the elevated areas . During the laparoscopic operation, we detected ICG fluorescence by using a laparoscopic near-infrared camera system (1688 AIM laparoscope; Stryker, San Jose, CA, USA).
A small incision was made in the umbilical region, and surgery was initiated using a 5-port approach. The intra-abdominal cavity was observed, and no liver metastases or peritoneal dissemination were observed. The sigmoid colon was resected using the medial approach. The root of the IMA was not present at abdominal aorta; instead, at this site, we observed the presence of a plexus of the colic branch of the lumbar splanchnic nerve . The ICG fluorescence-illuminated lymphatics were interrupted near the root of the IMA, and no fluorescence was observed in the central region . The IMA did not originate from the abdominal aorta but from the accessory middle colic artery (aMCA), a branch of the SMA . We identified the IMA dorsally through the descending colon mesentery. By following it cranially, we were able to identify the branch of the aMCA and the root of the IMA. The IMA was ligated, and Japanese D3 lymphadenectomy was performed to preserve the aMCA at the level of the inferior border of the pancreas. An IMV was observed on the left side of the IMA in the mesentery of the descending colon, which was ligated next to the root of the IMA. All the fluorescence-illuminated lymph nodes were resected . After rectal evacuation and dissection, the intestine was guided out of the body, the margins of the oral and anal sides of the tumor were secured, the intestine was ligated, and the specimen was removed . ICG fluorescence imaging confirmed that blood flow resumed in the rest of the intestine 15 s after the intravenous administration of ICG and that there were no areas with poor blood flow, and the intestine was anastomosed using the double-stapling technique. After confirming that there were no leaks from the anastomotic site, the wound was closed. The operation lasted 220 min, and the estimated blood loss was 5 ml. No intraoperative blood transfusion was required.
Our department at the Sapporo Medical University is a part of a multi-institutional prospective observational study to validate the quality of pathological diagnosis, especially circumferential resection margin (CRM), by transverse slicing of semi-opened rectal specimens (UMIN000031735), and this case was included in this study. The tumor diameter was 80 mm × 30 mm. The pathological diagnosis was pT4aN1aM0 pStage IIIb because of serous membrane involvement of in the anterior wall and the presence of a positive lymph node (1/26 lymph nodes) . The CRM was 4 mm. ICG-fluoresced lymph nodes were observed anterior to the abdominal aorta, near a plexus of the colic branch of the lumbar splanchnic nerve, and there were no ICG-fluoresced lymph nodes at the position the root of the IMA .
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 10th postoperative day. Eight courses of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy (XELOX; Xeloda + oxaliplatin) were administered, and the patient was recurrence-free 1.5 years after surgery.