A 46-year-old male was successfully resuscitated for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation . Coronary angiography immediately after admission to the county hospital revealed coronary vasospasm but no coronary artery disease . After intracoronary administration of glycerol trinitrate the coronary system exhibited regular flow without any relevant stenosis . Pulmonary embolism, aortic dissection and other potentially reversible causes were ruled out by computer-assisted tomography (CT) of the chest and lab-testing. Mild therapeutic hypothermia was established for 24 h. For aspiration pneumonia he was treated with ampicillin and sulbactam.
Because of the development of a severe acute respiratory distress syndrome five days after admission our ECMO team established a veno-venous extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation (vvECMO) system using a 31 Fr bi-caval cannula and transferred the patient to our center . Another CT of the chest showed progressive bi-pulmonary infiltration but no pulmonary embolism. Subsequently sufficient oxygenation was delivered by combined ECMO treatment and lung protective ventilation.
During his stay in the intensive care unit the patient underwent recurrent episodes of cardiac arrest with pulseless electrical activity (PEA, Fig. , Fig. ) that were not associated with hypoxemia as he was on full ECMO support. There was no evidence for other causes for PEA like tension pneumothorax or embolism in the bedside ultrasonography and echocardiography. Disturbances in electrolytes could be ruled out be point-of-care testing. As we could not reach a return of spontaneous circulation after 15 min of resuscitation we successfully modified the established vvECMO to a veno-veno-arterial ECMO system by introduction of a 17 Fr delivering cannula into the right femoral artery in order to provide extracorporeal life support (ECLS). This procedure could be performed within 15 min without complications under ongoing CPR. During the following episode PEA was successfully terminated when coronary vasospasm was relieved by i.v. administration of glycerol trinitrate and verapamil while circulation was maintained by ECLS . In total, the patient had experienced five episodes of resuscitation till then. A combined long-acting nitrate and calcium channel blocker vasodilatory therapy was established and successfully prevented further events. ECMO therapy could be stopped 14 days after implantation, weaning from mechanical ventilation was successful after 35 days.
The patient has no family history of cardiac death. He underwent patch-repair for supravalvular aortic stenosis during childhood. On day 6 transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography revealed a remaining supravalvular aortic stenosis (Vmax 4 m/s, mean pressure gradient 37 mmHg) that was confirmed by CT . Older medical records showed, that the re-stenosis had been already detected during a rehabilitation exam 20 years ago but did not cause any symptoms. Since hemodynamics remained stable after initiation of vasodilatory therapy surgical repair was postponed until respiratory recovery. The stenosis was successfully relieved by supracoronary ascending aortic replacement on day 44 .
The patient had full neurological recovery and was discharged to follow-up treatment. A cardiac defibrillator was implanted for secondary prevention of the initial VF.