A 45-year-old Iranian woman was transferred to our center to be evaluated for abdominal pain and recurrence of a pancreatic cyst. One year ago, she underwent central pancreatectomy and cholecystectomy at another center because of incidental finding of a large pancreatic cyst, and the pathologic report was benign mucinous cyst adenoma. Then, she presented with upper abdominal pain, mildly elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level, and recurrence of pancreatic cyst, which were found on follow-up. She was a case of hypertension (HTN) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) for 5 years due to idiopathic nephrotic syndrome, and she was taking prednisolone, metoral, and amlodipine. She was dialyzed twice a week. She was a married housekeeper lady, G2P2A0L2, without any history of smoking or alcohol consumption. She had normal menstruation, and there was not any history of abdominal cramp, polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and recent weight gain. The patient’s psychologic and family history was not significant. On physical examination, blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg with normal pulse rate and temperature, 76 beats per minute and 37.1 °C, respectively. Her body mass index (BMI) was 24.5. Chest examination was unremarkable, and the abdomen was soft with no organomegaly. She had normal face and body fat distribution without any hirsutism or pink stretch mark on the abdomen and trunk. There was no significant problem on neurologic examination.
The patient had high blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine, 27 (6–20) mg/dl and 4.2 (0.6–1.3) mg/dl , respectively. Serum fasting blood sugar (96 mg/dl) and complete blood count (CBC) [white blood cell (WBC): 10.8 × 103/µl, hemoglobin: 13.2 g/dl, and platelet count: 224 × 103/µl] were within normal ranges. Liver enzymes including aspartate aminotransferase (AST), aspartate aminotransferase (ALT), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were 23(3–40), 21(3–40), and 146(80–306) IU/L respectively. Abdominal sonography showed a large cystic lesion in the body and tail of the pancreas. In addition to pancreatic cyst (measuring 10 × 8 × 4 cm), endoscopic ultrasound discovered a 2 × 2 × 2 cm solid mass at the left periceliac area. Exploratory laparotomy revealed the mentioned pancreatic cyst with tight attachment to the posterior wall of the stomach and jejunum and the periceliac lesion with suspicious attachment to the left kidney. For ruling out malignancy, the specimens of distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, and periceliac lesion excision were sent for pathologic evaluation. Gross sectioning of the pancreas showed a hemorrhagic cyst with 1 cm maximum wall thickness. The periceliac lesion was a round creamy yellow solid firm mass with heterogeneous cut surface.
On microscopy, sections of the periceliac mass showed an adrenocortical adenoma (ACA) with multifocal areas of adipose tissue admixed with bone marrow elements (including megakaryocytes), features in keeping with ACA (approved by immunohistochemistry) with myelolipomatous change, instead of malignancy . The pancreatic cyst histology was just a pseudocyst . During hospital admission, the patient received the previously prescribed medication with the same dosage in addition to a short-acting benzodiazepine (oxazepam 10 mg per night)as a sedative. In a follow-up visit 2 weeks later, the patient showed improvement in her symptoms, and during the 10-month follow-up visits, no clinical or radiologic deficits were noted. We requested and obtained the informed consent from the patient for publishing the case report and the publication of the accompanying images. Also, our institutional approval was not required to publish the case details.