A 17 years old girl was admitted to the emergency department (ED) with history of epigastric pain for 9 months duration along with severe symptoms of vomiting (undigested food and bloody content), drastic weight loss (around 4 kg over 4 months). Patient was not having any urinary symptom or any altered bowel habit.
-Past medical history: Instances of eating hair years ago.
-And no history of previous surgery.
-On Examination:
Temperature: 36.8 °C, Pulse rate: 125 beat per minute, Breathing rate: 22 breaths per minute and Blood pressure: 119/65 mmHg.
Abdomen: There was tenderness and hard mass over epigastria area extending towards the right hypochondrial area. Bowel sound was sluggish.
CBC, LFT, RFT was within normal limit.
CT scan of abdomen was performed at another Hospital: The stomach was grossly distended, compressed with displacement of the transverse colon. The colon was filled of intra-luminal abnormal mass like contents with mottled air pattern extended to fill the pylorus and first part of duodenum. Findings were the proofs for possible trichobezoar.
Endoscopic removal of hair was failed and the patient was prepared for the operation.
Upper midline incision was performed and was deepened using electrocautery. After entering the abdominal cavity, distended stomach with firm content was observed. Vertical gastrostomy was done using electrocautery of about 10–14 cm in length. The stomach was found with full of ingested hair, occupying most of the stomach. Ball of hair were then retrieved and removed (A and B). Suction and irrigation were done. Negative suction tube was inserted and the position was adjusted intra-operatively. The stomach was then closed in two layers at continuous manner. First layer was closed with full-thickness using 3-0 PDS and the other layer with Lembert technique using 3-0 PDS. Then the small bowel series or test relatively collapsed with no evidence of any distal obstruction. After suction and irrigation, homeostasis was achieved and then the abdominal wall was closed by using Loop PDS. Staplers were used in surgery in place of sutures to close the skin. The patient tolerated the procedure, recovered smoothly and then was sent to the recovery room with general stable condition.
Day 4: Post operation nasogastric tube (NGT) was removed and on the next day, the patient was discharged with outpatient clinic follow up (next week in 07/06/2017).
In clinic, the surgical wound was found to be infected with pus, but there was no sign of cellulites and dressing was done.
13/06/2017: Vacuum (VAC) dressing was applied.
22/06/2017: The wound was cleaned and VAC dressing was removed.
31/07/2017: Patient had an appointment at the psychiatric clinic and she was found stable with no active psychiatric complains.
20/09/2017: The wound was completely healed and the patient was discharged from the General Surgery Clinic.