A 48-year-old male with a previous medical history of CD presented with iron deficiency anemia. His hemoglobin level was 10.7 g/dL, with mild microcytosis (86.2 fL) and low levels of both serum iron (33 mg/dL) and transferrin saturation (9%). The patient reported melena approximately 1 month earlier but was currently asymptomatic. He denied abdominal pain, diarrhea, or weight loss. There were no other laboratory abnormalities associated with underlying disease activity, including leukocyte and platelet count and C-reactive protein levels, which were normal. Stool calprotectin level was also normal. His last ileocolonoscopy, performed 5 months earlier, was also normal with no signs of inflammatory activity along colon and terminal ileum. CD had been diagnosed 20 years earlier and was characterized by ileal involvement and stenosing behavior, with associated perianal fistulizing disease (Montreal classification: A2L1B2p). There was a history of segmental enterectomy for ileal stenosis and anal fistulectomy performed 4 and 6 years after initial diagnosis, respectively. His current medications included azathioprine and infliximab (5 mg/kg every 8 weeks), which he had started 16 and 10 years earlier, respectively. The last acute exacerbation of CD requiring induction therapy with intravenous corticosteroids had occurred 8 years before and CD appeared to be in clinical and endoscopic remission since then.
Intravenous iron replacement with weekly injections of 200 mg of iron oxide was started. However, after 8 weeks, hemoglobin level had decreased to 9.2 g/dL despite correction of iron deficiency. The patient remained asymptomatic and laboratory studies once again did not reveal leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, or elevated C-reactive protein levels. Computerized tomography (CT) enterography revealed multiple ileal strictures with wall thickening, vasa recta engorgement, and prominent mesenteric lymph nodes, suggestive of inflammatory strictures. In addition, a sacculation with circumferential thickening of proximal and distal bowel loops extending for 47 and 31 mm, respectively, was found at the region of ileo-ileal anastomosis, as shown in Figure . Therefore, the patient underwent double balloon-assisted retrograde enteroscopy which revealed several ileal strictures, easily traversed with the enteroscope, and an area of infiltrative appearance at the region of ileo-ileal anastomosis, with a polypoid component (as shown in Fig. ) and ulceration (as shown in Fig. ), producing a stenosis (as shown in Fig. ) that could not be traversed by the enteroscope. Biopsies of this area were performed. Remarkably, histopathological examination revealed tubular adenocarcinoma infiltrating the muscularis mucosae, as shown in Figure .
CT scan of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis did not reveal secondary involvement of lymph nodes, lungs, liver, or other organs. The patient underwent right hemicolectomy plus segmental enterectomy of the anastomotic region where the neoplasia was located. Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen confirmed a diagnosis of mucinous SBA with infiltration of muscularis propria and lymphatic and vascular invasion (postresection stage: pT3NxM0). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed expression of MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. After surgery, the patient started adjuvant chemotherapy with oxaliplatin, leucovorin, and fluorouracil. After 2 months, he is asymptomatic and follow-up CT reveals no evidence of recurrence.