S.H., a 29-year-old Palestinian female nurse, presented to our hospital with the complaint of blurry vision in her right eye and left eye ptosis for 2 days. Two months ago, the patient had a history of generalized fatigue with continuous documented fever with an average of 38.5°C, which was relieved by acetaminophen and ibuprofen. She also complained of continuous hiccups that increased at night and interfered with her sleep pattern and breathing; they lasted for 3 weeks and disappeared suddenly. She had also developed episodes of vomiting and could not tolerate food intake due to which she lost 6 kg within 3 weeks. Bowel and bladder habits were normal except for 1 month’s history of constipation. There was no history of seizures or vertigo. She had no known addiction history. The patient reported no personal and/or family history of cancer, any acute, repeat, or discontinued medications, any allergies, or any genetic or psychosocial issues. Past medical and surgical histories were free.
Upon admission, the physical assessment was done and the patient looked reasonable and afebrile with normal vital signs (temperature 36°C, O2 saturation 96% on room air, blood pressure 117/77 supine, right arm). Central nervous system (CNS) examination showed normal Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of E4V5M6; motor examination showed normal power (5/5), normal tones, and normal reflexes (+2) in all of her limbs; cranial nerve function tests were intact; sensory examination revealed normal findings at all levels: cerebral signs were negative; the patient can stand but sways more when her eyes are opened; there is no widened gait or limping when walking; walking one foot in front of the other was unsuccessful.
Furthermore, the ocular examination was performed and showed left eye ptosis, blurry vision in her right eye, normal ocular movements in all cardinal directions of gaze, no diplopia, pupils were normal in size and reactive, the visual field was intact in both eyes, and the face examination was unremarkable. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and gastrointestinal systems were normal except for mild epigastric tenderness, erythema of the pharynx, and pus over the right tonsil with obvious enlargement.
Systemic investigations revealed microcytic anemia with a low hemoglobin level of 10.6 g/dl, hematocrit of 33.3%, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 69.8 fl, and Mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 22.1 pg; her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 60 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 7.6; she had normal renal function tests (RFT) and liver function tests (LFT), normal blood sugar, thyroid hormone assay, urinalysis, and chest X-ray .
Further review of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed slightly elevated glucose levels and negative oligoclonal banding with no other significant findings. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) was positive, whereas double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), Sjogren’s syndrome-related antigen A (SSA) (anti-Ro) antibody, and Scl 70 were negative.
The patient was advised to undergo serum anti-AQP4 antibody testing and anti-MOG antibody testing, where both showed a negative result. While her NMO antibodies were positive. The patient was started on oral steroids and is currently under close follow-up with an internist, ophthalmologist, and rheumatologist for her case.
A multiplanar multisequence magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with no contrast was done on 1.5 T and showed an enhanced swollen left optic nerve with high T2-signal and preoptic fat stranding compared to the normal left side, suggestive of ON . MRI spine with contrast showed normal cervical curvature with no significant spinal cord stenosis or neural foramina narrowing and intact prevertebral and paravertebral soft tissue . The patient was followed up for 6 months with significant improvement. The patient also had a good tolerance for pharmacological agents without any reported complications or adverse events.