A 65-year-old woman was admitted to the neurosurgery department of our hospital in September 2021 with a headache. No neurological abnormalities were observed. Past medical history: the patient underwent aneurysm clipping in 1998 for a ruptured right posterior communicating aneurysm with subarachnoid hemorrhage, and no other aneurysm was found at that time. However, imaging data were missing. Computed tomography angiography and diagnostic digital subtraction angiography showed a giant supraclinoid aneurysm of the left internal carotid artery (Dmax 26.4 mm × neck 10.0 mm) and a large basilar apex aneurysm (Dmax 20.9 mm × neck 18.1 mm). In the basilar apex aneurysm with quadrifurcation of arteries, both posterior cerebral arteries and superior cerebellar artery emanate from the neck of the basilar apex aneurysm .
Because the aneurysm was incapable of coiling or neck clipping and given the risks of sacrificing basilar perforators and recurrence, we decided to treat the aneurysm with flow diversion. This technique diverted the flow from the aneurysm, allowing it to thrombose slowly. The aneurysm located at the basilar apex was the initial focus of treatment. The chosen approach used a pipeline embolization device (PED; Medtronic, Irvine, CA, USA) combined with flow-T stent-assisted coil embolization. The technical process is depicted in . Treatment of the supraclinoid aneurysm was initiated via PED-assisted coil embolization 2 weeks after the first therapeutic intervention. This is because simultaneous treatment of anterior and posterior circulation aneurysms can be fatal with thrombotic or bleeding complications. Moreover, the patient was an older individual, the physical condition was general, and the operation time was long, which increased the incidence of complications. After discussing the off-label use of the device, the patient agreed to a staged treatment regimen with flow diversion.
The patient was administered dual antiplatelet therapy (100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel) 7 days before the procedure. Treatment on thrombosis elastic figure detection arachidonic acid (AA inhibition rate) and adenosine diphosphate receptor pathways induced by blood plate inhibition rate (ADP inhibition rate) met the requirements.
The patient was put under general anesthesia, and bilateral femoral artery punctures were performed using the Seldinger method. A 5-Fr Navien catheter (Medtronic, Irvine, CA, USA) was placed in segment V3 of the left vertebral artery via a 6-Fr long sheath (Cook Medical, Indianapolis, IN, USA), while an ENVOY 6-Fr distal access guiding catheter (Codman Neuro, Raynham, MA, USA) was inserted into segment V4 of the right vertebral artery . Heparin was administered intravenously based on the patient's weight to achieve a therapeutic activated coagulation time of 2–3 times the baseline, with the maintenance of a tirofiban infusion during surgery. We used 5-s digital subtraction angiography to select multiple working angles that show the distal and proximal ends of the aneurysm parent artery and to choose the appropriate working projection accordingly. The first working position was selected, and the parent artery length, proximal and distal diameter, and aneurysm neck width were measured . We used a microcatheter (Synchro-14; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) assisted by a looping technique with an Echelon-10 microcatheter (Medtronic, Irvine, CA, USA) to achieve superselectivity of the right posterior cerebral artery. The Echelon-10 catheter support force facilitated the exchange of a Phenom 27 microcatheter (Medtronic) to reach the distal end of the right PCA . At the second operating angle, the Prowler Select Plus microcatheter (Cordis Corporation, Bridgewater, NJ, USA) was successfully selected for the distal left posterior cerebral artery, and the Echelon-10 microcatheter was introduced and positioned in the dome of the aneurysm (, ).
Using a Phenom 27 microcatheter, a 4.0 × 35-mm PED was slowly advanced into the distal portion of the right posterior cerebral artery, anchored in place, and then gently semi-deployed under fluoroscopic guidance to the middle segment of the basilar artery .
The coil was carefully embolized within the BAA. The middle and upper parts of the aneurysm were densely packed, while the lower part near the branch was loosely packed . To avoid the coils entering the branch vessels, a 4.0 × 23-mm Enterprise-2 stent (E2, Codman, Chaska, MN, USA) was selected, which was deployed into the left PCA. The E2 tail end was placed in a T shape close to the side of the PED so that the E2 stent and PED were almost in contact without a direct metal intersection. Repeated angiography confirmed no direct blood flow, and the bilateral PCA and superior cerebellar artery (SCA) were patent. The Echelon-10 microcatheter was slowly removed, and the PED was thoroughly deployed .
A control angiogram showed contrast stasis in the aneurysm dome but preserved flow through the perforator. The patient had an uneventful procedure, and recovery and remained neurologically intact (–). Dual antiplatelet therapy was continued after treatment.
The patient underwent treatment for the supraclinoid aneurysm by PED-assisted coil embolization 14 days later. The procedure and postoperative course were uneventful. The PED with satisfactory apposition to the vessel wall. A control angiogram showed contrast stasis within the aneurysm dome with preserved flow through the perforator, and the patient remained neurologically intact. The patient was given dual antiplatelet therapy for 6 months after the treatment and aspirin therapy for life .