The patient was a 17-year-old woman who presented with left abdominal pain and was admitted to our hospital. She had repeatedly presented with sudden abdominal pains since childhood, but she had been diagnosed with constipation without a detailed examination such as computed tomography (CT). An abdominal enhanced multi-detector CT demonstrated encapsulated cluster of small bowel loops in the left upper quadrant which passed through the dorsal side of the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV), and showed that blood flow of the prolapsed small bowel was preserved . Laboratory findings showed slightly elevated inflammation (WBC: 9100/μl, CRP: 0.02 mg/dl, Lactate: 0.70 mmol/L). We preoperatively diagnosed left paraduodenal hernia without ischemia or necrosis. Also we had concerned congenital factor and we carefully assessed CT with experienced radiologists. CT findings did not reveal any congenital factors, such as abnormal bowel rotation and revealed only a left paraduodenal hernia as an abnormal finding. We did not select emergency surgery since there were no signs of necrotic bowel in physical examination, blood test and CT findings. Four days after admission to our hospital, we performed elective SILS, because she was a young actress training school student and cosmetic benefit was thought to be important.
We made a 2.5-cm vertical single incision at the umbilicus and applied a sealing device (LAP-PROTECTOR™ Mini-type; Hakko, Nagano, Japan) to the wound. We used a single-port access device (E∙Z Access; Hakko) with inserted three 5-mm trocars (to accommodate a 5-mm flexible scope and surgical devices). Exploratory laparoscopy identified the protruded small bowel through the hernia orifice and we confirmed the definitive diagnosis as left paraduodenal hernia. First, we pulled out the protruded small bowel and the orifice was clarified . Next, we closed the defect with suture using a nonabsorbable yarn (V-Loc™ PBT; Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA) . The patient was discharged 3 days after the surgery with no complications.