A male patient in his 60s presented to the outpatient pain clinic with sharp left-sided facial pain. The pain was provoked by washing, chewing, and the application of his continuous positive airway pressure mask. TN was diagnosed in accordance with the International Classification of Headache Disorders. Symptoms were attributed to the maxillary and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve. Medical history included obstructive sleep apnea, depression, and one incident of probable transient ischemic attack of the brain. Treatment with carbamazepine provided adequate pain relief, but the patient was afraid of consequences to his driving ability with escalating dosage and was hesitant to long-term use.
MRI showed a vascular loop of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) without compression or displacement of the left trigeminal complex, and a prominent AICA on the right side. The other (trigeminal) anatomy showed no abnormalities. RF-G of the maxillary and mandibular divisions was scheduled.
The procedure was performed in a specialized outpatient interventional pain center by an experienced pain physician who performs an annual minimum of 20 RF-G procedures. Sedation was administered by a certified nurse sedation practitioner specialist using propofol. Maneuvering of the 22G cannula (SMK Radiofrequency Cannula—straight 10 cm with 2 mm tip; St. Jude Medical) was assisted by live fluoroscopy and executed in sterile fashion. Four positions of the cannula were tested under fluoroscopic guidance before acceptable sensory stimulation of the maxillary and mandibular divisions was attained. The final, and most cephalad, position of the needle tip was slightly past the angle formed by the petrosal ridge of the temporal bone and the clivus. Stimulation was performed awake to confirm correct needle positioning. As the ultimate sensory threshold of 0.3 V was on the edge of the target range, radiofrequency lesioning was performed directly at 70°C during 60 s, instead of starting at 60°C. Motor response was absent at 2.0 V. The sensory threshold rose from 0.3 to 0.8 V after the lesion was applied, and no subsequent lesions were made. Postoperative corneal reflex was intact; vision and facial sensibility were normal.
The day following the procedure, the patient complained of double vision and was examined at the emergency department by a neurologist. Diplopia was most pronounced when looking down. Monocular eyesight was normal, facial pain was absent. Postprocedural MRI of the brain showed enhanced signaling on the procedural side between the trigeminal ganglion and the brainstem , and (asymptomatic) sinusitis of the maxillary and sphenoid sinus. Ophthalmic consultation established a restriction in function of the left superior oblique muscle, which is innervated by CN4. Prism correction proved unhelpful and otolaryngology examination gave no new insights. Trochlear nerve function spontaneously recovered to normal 5 months after the procedure.
The patient approved publication of the case history.