A 53-year-old male patient with a history of rheumatoid arthritis undergoing treatment with methotrexate, and a Bentall procedure with mechanical prosthesis (St Jude Medical™ nº28/25) implantation 2 years before, without complications. One year after the procedure, due to a complete atrioventricular block, a pacemaker was implanted. A transthoracic echocardiogram, dated 2 months before the present event, while asymptomatic, revealed moderate regurgitation of the aortic mechanical prosthesis.
The patient presented to our hospital with fatigue and breathlessness for low-intensity exertion since the previous month. He did not complain of fever or any infectious symptoms. Laboratory analysis revealed minor inflammatory parameters elevation. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed a dilated LV, ejection fraction of 49%, diffuse hypokinesis and severe prosthetic valve regurgitation. Transesophageal echocardiogram showed blood flow surrounding the prosthetic ring due to dehiscence, with rocking and severe regurgitation. There was also a fistula from the aortic root pseudoaneurysm to the LV .
Angio-CT, performed to better characterize the complication, confirmed the presence of a large peri-prosthetic leak, on the left and posterolateral sides of the prosthesis.
It was decided to perform a second Bentall procedure. Surgery was carried out through a secondary median sternotomy, and adhesions lysis was performed. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established through the left femoral artery and the right atrial appendix. The patient was cooled to 30 °C, the distal ascending aorta was cross-clamped, and anterograde cardioplegia with a single dose of Custodiol® was administrated into coronary ostia. Then, the aortic conduit was transected.
Intraoperative findings after conduit transection were compatible with almost complete dehiscence of the proximal anastomosis of the composite graft, which was kept in place due to coronary anastomosis and adhesions between the conduit and nearby structures. As the conduit was detached, there was blood flow between it and the adhesions, similar to an aortic root pseudoaneurysm. The usual prosthetic skirt endothelialization was not present . Intraoperative findings were not compatible with present or past infection. No thrombus was found. Nonetheless, samples were sent to microbiology.
A new mechanical composite aortic valve graft (St Jude Medical™ nº 24/23) was implanted. Pledgeted U-sutures were placed circumferentially on the base of the anterior mitral leaflet, and on the interventricular septum, where the tissue is fibrous and resistant. By inserting the proximal portion of the composite graft on a lower level, it was possible to exclude the surrounding tissues, and debris of the first intervention. The composite graft was lowered into the left ventricular outflow tract, with the valve positioned under the aortic-mitral curtain level. The segments of the first conduit where the coronary ostia were initially sutured were reimplanted to the new one. The distal part of the new conduit was then sewed to the distal portion of the first one.
During hospital admission, all (pre- and postsurgical) blood cultures consecutively collected were negative. Series of infectious serologies were also negative. There was never evidence of infection, based on clinical signs, evolution of inflammatory parameters, serology, intraoperative findings and negative microbiology and pathology evaluations for infectious agents. However, it was decided to perform antibiotics after surgery with gentamycin (for 2 weeks) and vancomycin (for 6 weeks), as endocarditis is a major cause of prosthesis dehiscence.
There was never evidence of autoimmune disease recrudescence, based on clinical evaluation and serology.
Transesophageal echocardiogram reevaluations (during antibiotic course and 2 weeks after its conclusion) did not reveal any new findings.
As infectious or autoimmune endocarditis were not probable, it was hypothesized that the absence of prosthetic endothelialization was due to the immunosuppressive therapy, so the case was discussed with Rheumatology. It was decided to suspend methotrexate for more than 6 months, in order not to suppress valve endothelialization.
Two years later, the patient remains fully asymptomatic without any signs of heart failure. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed complete recovery of LV dimension and global function, and absence of prosthetic valve dysfunction.