A 57-year-old man with bilateral primary avascular necrosis of the femoral head, confirmed by postoperative pathology upon radiograph diagnosis , underwent cementless total hip arthroplasty (THA) of the right hip in September 2020 . The patient weighed 69 kg and had a body mass index (BMI) of 23.3. The operation was performed using Hardinge’s approach, with the patient in a supine position. The implants used were Pinnacle® acetabular with a 54 mm outer diameter, a TRI-LOCK® stem ( Depuy, J&J, Warsaw, IN, USA), a BIOLOX® delta ceramic liner, and a 36 mm head (CeramTec, Plochingen, Germany).
The surgery was conducted routinely by reaming the acetabulum to a 54 mm diameter, implanting a 54 mm acetabular cup, and then seating a 36 mm AMC liner. The cup was implanted with anteversion of 10° and abduction of 40°, and the liner impacted after seating. We ensured proper seating and rigid locking by visual and palpation check and pushing the liner’s rim with a hemostat. The femoral part was completed smoothly. Intraoperative fluoroscopy showed no sign of liner dissociation; however, no images were recorded because the whole procedure was so unremarkable that saving the radiograph seemed not necessary.
On the first postoperative day, a pelvic plain radiograph showed a prominence between the femoral head and the inferior rim of the acetabular cup, which implied dissociation of the ceramic liner . Considering the consequences of liner fragmentation and other complications, we recommended revision surgery. Although informed of the indication and necessity of revision, the patient refused since he had no symptoms. Given that consent for revision surgery was not forthcoming from the patient, we adopted a non-operative approach with routine rehabilitation protocol same as regular postoperative patients. The option of conducting revision surgery remains available when liner fragmentation or any related discomfort emerged in subsequent follow-up.
The patient ambulated full weight-bearing on the first postoperative day. On the eighth postoperative day, another radiograph showed no significant change of the liner’s oblique position . The patient was then discharged, and he returned to most daily activities without assistance six weeks after surgery. Asymptomatic creaking was noticed when the patient rose from a stool eight weeks postoperatively. The rehabilitation was uneventful. Eight months after surgery, the patient was admitted for THA of the contralateral side. His right hip recovered satisfactorily without any pain or functional obstacles during his everyday activities. Surprisingly, the preoperative X-ray demonstrated proper seating of the ceramic liner without prosthesis loosening or migration in the right hip , which was further confirmed by a CT scan . The oblique right hip acetabular liner spontaneously regained its normal position; hence, no intervention other than observation was prescribed. The surgery on the left side was uneventful. We implanted the same type of prosthesis with appropriate size.
The patient’s postoperative course was uncomplicated. The latest follow-up of the patient was 15 months from the first THA surgery and 6 months after the discovery of liner spontaneous reduction. He denied any discomfort in the right hip with a Harris hip score of 87, and the radiograph indicated no recurrence of liner dissociation .