A male Iranian preterm infant was born at 32 weeks’ gestation to a 28-year-old primigravida mother. The pregnancy course was uneventful, except for preterm premature (19 hours) rupture of the membrane and preterm delivery. The patient was delivered by vaginal delivery with Apgar scores of 9 and 10 at the first and fifth minutes after birth, respectively. GUC was detected postnatally as a very thick umbilical cord (about 6 cm in diameter), its length was about 50 cm, and when cutting the umbilical cord, clear mucoid fluid and huge fluctuating Wharton’s jelly (which allowed the simple recognition of three umbilical vessels) was seen . The umbilical ring was 11 mm. The examination of other organs revealed normal results, and growth indices were appropriate for the gestational age with a birth weight of 2180 g, length of 42 cm, and head circumference of 30 cm. The infant was the first child of a nonconsanguineous couple. The mother was under medical supervision during pregnancy, and she had no complications except preterm premature rupture of the membrane and preterm delivery. Diagnosis was missed by prenatal sonography. There was no relevant family history.
After birth, the newborn was transferred to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit for prematurity care, ruling out sepsis, and managing GUC. As he was transferred from another hospital, we have no information about the placenta or pathology (as it was not requested). The patient was well during hospitalization and only developed borderline indirect hyperbilirubinemia relieved by conventional phototherapy after 2 days. The umbilical cord was relatively dried and shrunk after 3 days . Laboratory data were normal, except for mild, indirect hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 11 mg/dL). Antibiotic therapy was discontinued after 48 hours because the blood culture was negative. The ultrasound findings of the kidney, ureters, and bladder and echocardiography were normal, and there was no sign of patent urachus. As the umbilical cord was relatively dried, the newborn was discharged with advice for cord drying care. On follow-up, although the newborn was well and the umbilical cord was dry, the cord was separated with delay . The dried umbilical stump was separated after 32 days, leaving a granulomatous structure without discharge . The patient was followed up for 4.5 months and had no problems except delayed separation of the umbilical cord .