A 75-year-old man was referred to our hospital due to an abdominal mass detected by abdominal ultrasonography performed during a health check. He had histories of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and gallstones. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed a gently sloping protruding lesion with smooth surface mucosa, located anterior to the lesser curvature of the gastric body . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a submucosal hypoechoic tumor with a diameter of 79 × 58 mm that seemed to be connected to the smooth muscle layer of the stomach . Due to the risk of dissemination, fine-needle aspiration biopsy was not performed. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a solid tumor, 70-mm in diameter, which also seemed to be connected to the lesser curvature side of the gastric body . Based on the results of EGD, EUS, and CT, we diagnosed this tumor as an extramural growth-type gastric submucosal tumor highly suspicious of GIST and planned surgical resection. Resection of the tumor through laparotomy was performed. The tumor was located at lesser omentum, measured 70 mm in its longer dimension, and was connected to the lesser omentum. The tumor was very close to the stomach; however, no connection was present between the tumor and gastric wall, and it could be resected without rupturing the pseudocapsule and did not contain any gastric component. The tumor had a smooth surface; the cut surface was solid with extensive hemorrhage and degeneration . Histological examination showed the proliferation of epithelioid to spindle-shaped tumor cells with oval, rather uniform nuclei . The mitotic count was less than 1 per 50 high-power fields (HPFs). The tumor cells were immunohistochemically positive for KIT, CD34, and discovered on GIST-1 (DOG-1) but negative for S-100 and alpha-SMA . The Ki-67 labeling index was 3.3%. We finally diagnosed the tumor as an EGIST originating from the lesser omentum.
According to Joensuu’s classification, the size was 70 mm (over 50 mm) and the location of the tumor was “nongastric,” we considered this tumor high-risk . Then, to determine the indication of adjuvant therapy, we performed a genetic examination of the tumor, which revealed no KIT mutation but instead revealed a PDGFRA D842V substitution. Based on a previous report that imatinib was less effective against GIST with a PDGFRA D842V mutation , adjuvant imatinib therapy was not indicated for the present patient. Instead, the patient has been carefully followed up by CT examination every 6 months and remains free of recurrence for 29 months after surgery.