A 44-year-old male with a past medical history of depression and chronic back pain presented to the emergency department (ED) with altered mental status. According to his wife, he had been in normal health early that morning. Later in the morning he began to have an abnormal gait “like Frankenstein,” but retained normal speech and mentation. His wife returned home to find the patient with his extremities convulsing, diaphoretic, and eyes open but unresponsive. The patient had reportedly consumed alcohol the evening before but did not use recreational drugs. Emergency medical services administered naloxone 2 milligrams (mg) intravenous (IV), lorazepam 2 mg IV, and one liter of normal saline IV without improvement in mental status. The ground crew called a flight ambulance who transported the patient to our Level I trauma center.
Upon presentation to the ED, the patient had tachycardia in the 130s but was normotensive, afebrile, and had normal oxygenation saturation on room air. On physical exam, he was extremely diaphoretic and tremulous, but he moved all extremities spontaneously. His eyes (pupils 5 millimeters [mm] and reactive) opened spontaneously, he withdrew from painful stimuli, and he made incomprehensible sounds (Glasgow Coma Score 10). The patient had clear breath sounds bilaterally, no abdominal distention or tenderness, and no obvious signs of trauma. The initial chest radiograph (CXR) showed no acute findings; point-of-care lab testing was significant only for mild lactic acidosis, 1.8 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range: 0.5–2.2 mmol/L). The treatment team ordered two 2-mg doses of midazolam in an attempt to control agitation, but the patient remained combative. Given the patient’s declining mental status and need for emergent clinical workup, the treatment team made the decision to perform RSI.
Intubation was performed successfully using etomidate and succinylcholine followed by propofol infusion for sedation. After CXR confirmed endotracheal tube placement, the patient was transported for computed tomography (CT). Non-contrast head CT showed no acute findings and initial laboratory work was significant for acute kidney injury with creatinine of 2.31 mg per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: 0.7–1.3 mg/dL) and a leukocytosis of 27,400 thousand per microliter (uL) (reference range: 4,000–11,000 thousand per uL) with 84% neutrophils (55–70%). Urine and serum toxicology studies, troponin level, and coronavirus disease 2019 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were all negative.
The team provided further fluid resuscitation, empiric antibiotic coverage for meningitis, and prepared for a lumbar puncture. Prior to the procedure, the patient developed rigid muscles diffusely and felt warm to the touch. Rectal temperature was 105.3° F, a significant increase from his triage temperature of 98.9° F approximately 90 minutes prior. His arterial carbon dioxide (pCO2) also increased to 65.3 mm of mercury (Hg) from 46.6 mm Hg (reference range: 35–45 mm Hg) immediately post-intubation despite no changes in ventilator settings. With concern for MH, the team began active external cooling measures, initiated our MH protocol, and consulted the anesthesia service for dantrolene administration. Fifty minutes after dantrolene administration, the patient’s rectal temperature decreased to 101.3° F. The patient’s rigidity resolved and pCO2 decreased to 31.2 mm Hg two hours after dantrolene. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) under the anesthesia service.
The patient received dantrolene for 24 hours while inpatient. Neurology service consultation led to an electroencephalogram, which showed no seizure activity. The ICU team added acyclovir to cover for possible herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection and performed a lumbar puncture. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was consistent with viral meningitis. HSV-1 and -2 PCR testing were negative, and the team discontinued antimicrobials on hospital day three. After full diagnostic workup, the final diagnosis made by the ICU team for his original presentation of altered mental status was determined to be viral meningitis. The patient passed spontaneous breathing trials, began following commands, and was subsequently extubated. He was discharged on hospital day four in good condition with planning for a CHCT through the University of Minnesota. The patient was lost to follow up; so, it is unclear whether he received confirmatory testing.