A 13-year-old girl with no significant pathological history was referred by family physician to our department of Paediatric Surgery for swelling associated with a right abdominal flank pain. The patient had no family, drug history or any past surgery nor a particular genetic predisposition to any diseases. Clinical examination found an apyretic child and in a good general condition. On abdominal examination, a right flank tenderness with a solid mass measuring 12 cm was characterized. Additionally, an abdominal ultrasound was performed and showed a poorly limited right para-uterine mass with 100*52 mm in size. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a right ovarian tumoral mass measuring 97*47 mm with irregular seams, on iso-signal T1, peripheral hypersignal and central hyposignal T2 in relation with a central necrosis . Moreover, serological alpha-fetoprotein (αFP) level was elevated (490.68 ng/ml) in contrast with a normal level of Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) (7.77 mU/ml). All other serum parameters were normal. No diagnostic challenges in our patient could be reported. An exploratory laparotomy by a pfannenstiel incision was performed. Intraoperative findings showed a huge mass originating from the right ovary. A right adenexectomy, biopsies of the uterus and a peritoneal fluid sample were carried out . The whole surgical intervention was performed by a senior paediatric surgeon with the aid of an assistant surgeon and two resident doctors. The postoperative time was uneventful with no hemmoragic or infective complications. The diagnosis of a mixed ovarian germ cell tumor comprising dysgerminoma, as predominant component, and yolk sac tumor as minor component, was made based on the histological appearance, elevated serological level of αFP and immunohistochemical results . Uterine biopsies and peritoneal fluid sample were found clean from any malignancy. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy using a combination of vinblastine, bleomycin and cisplatin 21 days apart after the normalisation of αFP in serum. An MRI control was performed and showed no recurrence or tumor residus after six months of follow up . Also, no negative incidents in terms of adherence and tolerability were observed. Taken together, the evolution of the disease in our patient, our management, and follow-up are summerized in the timeline of .