A 59-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for progressive dilatation of the descending aorta. Anamnesis revealed no drug use or family history for the condition. One year before admission, he was diagnosed with type B aortic dissection while during the same hospitalization period, he was later diagnosed with acute myocardial infarction. The primary tear was located in the distal aortic arch. Open stent-grafting to seal the primary entry and coronary artery bypass grafting were performed. Three months later, his abdominal aorta was replaced with a Y-shaped graft due to dilation of his abdominal aorta. Thereafter, he received computed tomography (CT) follow-up regularly. The diameter of the descending aorta decreased for the first six months; however, CT defined redilatation of the descending thoracic aorta one year after surgery. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed the presence of stent graft-induced new entry (SINE). The maximum minor-axis diameter of the descending thoracic aorta was 52 mm . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a reduced ejection fraction, 37.1%, and inferior-lateral hypokinesis. This patient had already undergone open stent-grafting and Y-shaped grafting. We deduced that this patient was at high risk of paraplegia after conservative descending aortic replacement. Thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) was considered; however, there were further SINE risks due to the patient’s history of type B aortic dissection and other aortic diseases. Thus, we decided to perform the procedure via minimal thoracotomy with a 3D endoscope to allow as much collateral circulation as possible. Cerebrospinal fluid drainage was performed on the day before the operation. The patient was placed in a modified right lateral decubitus position and the 5th intercostal space was opened by 8 cm and one-lung ventilation was started. Trocars for the IMAGE 1 SPIES 3D endoscope system (Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, Germany) and instruments were inserted through the 5th, 6th, and 7th intercostal spaces. Proximal and distal aortic clamps were inserted through the 4th and 9th intercostal spaces, respectively. Furthermore, a suction line was inserted through the 8th intercostal space . The patient underwent mild (35 °C) hypothermic partial cardiopulmonary bypass with the left femoral artery perfusion along with drainage of the right jugular and femoral veins. The endoscope was inserted through the 7th intercostal space for the proximal side procedure, and the 5th intercostal space for the distal side procedure. Surgical instruments were inserted through the main incision and another port separate from the endoscopic port. While carefully separating the descending aorta and avoiding injuring the esophagus, the proximal and distal aorta were clamped. Opening the descending aortic aneurysm revealed the entry tear due to an open stent graft . After sealing three intercostal arterial orifices , we performed distal anastomosis by a continuous-suture graft-inclusion technique with a 26 mm J Graft SHIELD NEO® (Japan Lifeline Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) using 3–0 polypropylene sutures with a bovine pericardium strip. Traction sutures for the aortic wall were applied to avoid sewing the esophagus. Subsequently, we performed proximal anastomosis directly to the open stent graft using 4–0 polypropylene sutures. A bovine pericardium strip was sewn to the inside of the open stent graft without aortic wall. The cardiopulmonary bypass time was 179 min. He was discharged on the postoperative day 11 without any complications.