In March 2019, a 12-year-old premenarchal girl was referred to our hospital for the definitive management of acute appendicitis. She presented with a 5-day history of increasing abdominal pain. On admission to our hospital, the abdominal pain was located in the epigastrium and at the right lower quadrant (RLQ). The pain was gradual in onset and progressively worsened. The pain was severe, 8 on a scale of 1–10, sharp, constant but non-radiating. It was associated with constipation but not with anorexia, nausea or vomiting. The patient did not report any history of dysuria or any change in urinary frequency. She had unremarkable gynecological, birth and developmental history.
On examination, the only abnormal sign was an ill-defined non-tender mass in the RLQ on deep palpation. The abdomen was not distended and without signs of peritonitis. A perineal physical examination was missed to be carried out by the attending surgeon and the admitting surgical resident. (This was a failure on the surgical team and a very important lesson we learned to avoid in the future). Based on the clinical symptoms of RLQ pain, tender mass and the migratory nature of the abdominal pain, a differential diagnosis of an appendicitis was made. The patient was prepared for an appendectomy. Her lab work was within normal limits: Hb: 12.5 g/dL (normal range: 12.0–16.0 g/dL), WBC: 9400 cells/uL (normal range: 4000–10,000 cells/uL), Platelets: 319,0000 cells/uL (range: 100,000–300,000 cells/uL). Since the patient’s presentation was classic for appendicitis, no imaging studies were needed. The patient was hydrated with intravenous (IV) normal saline and was started on broad-spectrum IV antibiotics (metronidazole and ciprofloxacin). Under general anesthesia, a RLQ incision over the McBurney point (located two thirds of the distance between the umbilicus and the inferior superior iliac spine) was made. On entering the peritoneum, an inflamed appearing appendicitis was noted. There was approximately 200 mL of dark blood in the peritoneum. We performed an appendectomy. Blood in the peritoneum was drained and the abdomen was thoroughly irrigated with warm saline solution. During the inspection of the bowel, we noted a ruptured, hemorrhagic right ovarian follicle and a bulky pelvic mass in the lower segment of the uterus. Under general anesthesia, a vaginal examination was conducted, and a slightly bulging imperforate hymen was identified (A). A hymenectomy was performed through a cruciate incision followed up with re-approximation of hymen edges with Vicryl 2-0 sutures (B). More than 500 mL of viscous old blood was drained from the vagina, uterus and the right salpinx. The bleeding right ovarian follicle was sutured. Both ovaries were of normal size on palpation. She was then discharged on postoperative day 4 without pain or vaginal bleeding. A repeat genitourinary examination 3 weeks later still showed a patent hymen.