A 64-year-old African-Ugandan woman of Bantu ethnicity presented to Mulago National Hospital following referral from a private health facility 80 miles from Kampala, Uganda’s capital. Though the referral was to the local regional referral hospital, her relatives opted for the national referral hospital. She had experienced symptoms of abdominal pain and partial constipation for one week. The pain was characteristically colicky in nature. One day prior to admission, she developed mucoid, bloody stool motions, but had no frank diarrhea or distinctively foul-smelling stool. She was also unable to pass flatus.
She had generally been unwell for over one year, with a dull abdominal ache of insidious onset; the pain was on and off, located mainly in the left hypochondrium and lumbar region. The ache progressed to cramp-like pain, especially after meals. Associated with this was diffuse abdominal bloating and flatulence with pellet-like stool motions. Her pain was slightly relieved by passing flatus. Otherwise, she had neither had hematochezia during that time, nor had she felt any swelling in her abdomen. Her appetite was good and she felt she had neither gained nor lost weight. She had not had dyspeptic symptoms and had not been vomiting.
No history of chronic disease was reported; specifically, diabetes mellitus and hypertension. She had a total abdominal hysterectomy five years ago (at the age of 57 years) for what she described as uterine fibroids and ‘continued’ menstrual periods. However, there were no accompanying medical records to back this. She was multiparous (para 7+0), and was not aware of any familial-associated gastrointestinal, breast, or genital malignancy.
On physical examination, she was an elderly woman in pain. She was moderately dehydrated, neither jaundiced nor anemic, and afebrile. Her abdomen was grossly distended, more peripherally, though generally amorphous. There was no visible peristalsis. She had a fine, midline, sub-umbilical scar. Superficially, there was generalized, mild tenderness, though with no characteristic features of peritonitis. This was tympanitic to percussion, and bowel sounds were reduced. A digital rectal examination revealed a largely empty rectum with a normal mucosa, and no masses were felt. There were small amounts of bloody, mucoid stool. Her pulse was 82 beats per minute and blood pressure 115/80mmHg. Her chest was clear. Other systems were unremarkable.
A diagnosis of large bowel intestinal obstruction secondary to intussusception was made. Our patient was resuscitated and prepared for an exploratory laparotomy. This was performed through a midline incision. On opening the peritoneum, bloodstained, odorless fluid exuded, and grossly distended loops of bowel were seen. These were delivered and inspected. A colocolonic intussusception was identified with the invagination extending from the middle part of the transverse colon to the descending colon, looping through the splenic flexure. No intraperitoneal adhesions were found. The gut involved was moderately edematous, though neither friable nor gangrenous. The intussusceptum was gently ‘milked’ proximally and freed. A large, polypoid, intraluminal mass was palpated (Figure
). It had a small stalk attached to the anti-mesenteric border of the distal third of the transverse colon. Notably, she also had only 6cm to 8cm of retroperitoneal descending colon, the rest being intraperitoneal. A left hemicolectomy was performed. Fresh, fully viable and non-edematous resection ends were fashioned. This allowed us to perform a primary, end-to-end anastomosis of the mid-transverse colon to the rectum, in two layers. The anterior abdominal wall was closed in layers.
The resected portion of gut revealed an intraluminal polyp as the ‘lead point’ for the intussusceptum. Its stalk (1.5cm) was attached approximately 12cm proximal to the splenic flexure. It measured 9.5×7.2×6.0cm, and was uniformly soft. The mucosa had patches of hyperemia, edema and hemorrhage (Figure
).
She generally had a good post-operative recovery. Post-operative laboratory investigation results were unremarkable. She was discharged on the 10th post-operative day. Her subsequent follow-up visits showed steady progress, with a return to normal diet and gradual normalization of bowel motions and stool consistency. We continue to review her monthly, and intend to perform a barium enema and colonoscopy to rule out any other lipomas and other pathological lesions.
Pathological examination revealed a polypoid mass, macroscopically fatty and nodular in nature. It measured 9cm at its widest diameter (Figure
). Histologically, there was non-specific, acute inflammation within the lobules of fat seen (Figure
). It was concluded that this was an infected submucosal lipoma.