A 37-year-old female patient, with typical symptoms of SIH and no history of trauma, was admitted to the hospital. Brain MRI showed peri hemispheric, subdural fluid collections, up to 4 mm thick ; reduced distance between the pons and the mammillary bodies to 4 mm, cerebellopontine angle reduced to 55°, and interpeduncular angle reduced to 51°. In addition, dilatation and rounding of the venous sinuses, rounding of the pituitary gland, absence of fluid in the optic nerve sheaths, and enhancement of the meninges were noted. MRI scan of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine showed no abnormalities. Conservative treatment including bed rest and intravenous fluid infusions and corticosteroids were implemented. Isotope cisternography showed no evidence of a fluid fistula site. CT myelography with subdural administration of contrast mixed with saline in a ratio of 40/60 showed the fluid leakage site through the spinal nerve root sheath at the level of Th12/L1 intervertebral foramen on the right side [ and ]. Since CSF leakage was found on the level of intervertebral foramen, we decided to seal it with the patient’s venous blood directly through the foramen instead of standard epidural puncture. For the procedure, the patient was placed on the CT table in the prone position. After confirmation of level Th12/L1 in the CT scout image, we, then, inserted 18G lumbar puncture needle to the intervertebral foramen Th12/L1 under the guidance of CT . Having previously taken 10 ml of the patient’s venous blood, we, then, injected it at the root exit site of the intervertebral foramen under CT guidance . It is worth noticing that we, then, positioned the patient laterally, but on the opposite side to fistula for better spreading of the injected blood around the damaged nerve root sheath. The patient remained in this position in her own bed for another 2 h. Patient’s verticalization started after the next 2 days. After the verticalization the patients, no longer complained about the headache during hospitalization and was discharged from hospital. During the follow-up visit, 1 month after hospitalization, the patient was completely free of headache and we found normalization of MRI image .