A 92-year-old male was brought to the emergency room (ER) in our hospital because of a depressed level of consciousness and shock. He had a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension. His baseline medications included telmisartan 20 mg, nateglinide 270 mg, and metformin 750 mg daily. His blood pressure was 55/34 mmHg, pulse rate 91 beats per minute and regular, and respiratory rate 26 per minute. His jugular venous pulse was elevated, and he had quiet heart sounds. Pulsus paradoxus was observed. His lower extremities were cold with no oedema. Because of his hypotension, depressed level of consciousness, and hypoxia, a bolus injection of 100 μg of norepinephrine, intravenous administration of saline, and 20 μg/kg/min of dopamine and mechanical ventilator support after intubation were immediately started. However, the hypotension did not satisfactorily improve and his blood pressure was 68/46 mmHg. The 12-lead electrocardiogram exhibited subtle-ST-elevation in lead aVL and flat T waves in leads I and aVL and precordial leads V4∼6 . The chest X-ray was unremarkable. Echocardiography yielded a preserved LV systolic function without any overt wall motion abnormalities but revealed findings of an entire circumferential effusion of the pericardial space of 10 mm (yellow arrows in ) and right atrial collapse. Thus, with a diagnosis of cardiac tamponade, a pericardiocentesis and insertion of a pericardial drain was immediately performed. After 490 mL of fresh blood was evacuated by the pericardial drain, haemodynamic stability was obtained thereafter, and the blood pressure improved to 104/62 mmHg. The white cell count was 10.9 × 103/μl, creatine kinase 273 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase 47 IU/L, lactate dehydrogenase 192 U/L, and creatinine 1.07 mg/dl . The emergency room doctor did not evaluate a troponin test. The head computed tomography was normal, however, contrast computed tomography (CT) also revealed an entire circumferential pericardial effusion (yellow arrows in ), but no evidence of an aortic dissection. Interestingly, findings of poor contrasting of the postero-lateral wall of the LV (white arrows in ) and leakage of contrast into the pericardial space were observed (red arrows in ). An emergent coronary angiography revealed an occlusion of the distal site of the left circumflex (LCX)-obtuse marginal (OM) artery without any collateral vessels (white arrow in ), 75% stenosis of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery (green arrow in ), and no significant stenosis of the right coronary artery . Then, a diagnosis of cardiac tamponade caused by an LVFWR associated with a subtle-STEMI developing into cardiogenic shock was made. Thus, the patient was urgently transferred to the regional cardiac surgery department to undergo an emergent cardiac surgery. Anti-platelet therapy was withheld as the patient was being considered for the emergent cardiac surgery for the LVFWR. Then, because the troponin test was positive, we made a definite diagnosis of a subtle-STEMI. The findings during the operation demonstrated an area with a haemorrhage on the pericardial surface of the LV postero-lateral wall surrounding a 3 cm LVFWR and transmural MI . A direct suture of a patch to cover the rupture and infarcted myocardium was performed. No coronary artery bypass graft was performed, because the LAD and LCX-OM arteries were very narrow and the perfused area of the LCX-OM artery was very small. Twelve days after the event, the patient was transferred to our hospital to undergo cardiac rehabilitation. Because of his frailty after the cardiac surgery, he needed a long hospital stay for his rehabilitation. Thirty-six days after the event, he was discharged from our hospital and transferred to a regional hospital to continue his cardiac rehabilitation. The echocardiography before his discharge revealed a normal LV systolic function without any overt wall motion abnormalities. The pharmacological therapy at the time of discharge was aspirin 100 mg, bisoprolol 1.25 mg, pitavastatin 1 mg, telmisartan 20 mg, and metformin 750 mg daily. He has remained well without any symptoms for 1 year after the event.