A 24-year-old female was seen in our Neurosurgical Department because of partial seizures of right upper and lower limbs. On the morning of admission, episodes of partial seizures, motor weakness, and numbness of right upper and lower limbs occurred. She did not bruise her head during partial seizures.
On examination, she was awake, alert, and oriented. No head injury such as skin bruises was observed. Cranial nerves were intact. Motor examination showed mild right hemiparesis. Sensory examination showed right upper and lower limbs numbness. After simple partial seizures on the right upper and lower limbs were controlled with diazepam and phenytoin, the numbness disappeared. Cranial computed tomography (CT) scans showed left-sided acute or early subacute subdural hematoma with neither subcutaneous hematoma nor skull fracture . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [Figure and ] at a day after admission and CT angiography at 6 days after admission showed no underlying brain lesion, arachnoid cyst, or vascular malformation.
She had no history of recent head trauma but reported headbanging at punk rock concerts at 17 and 3 days before admission. Her mother reported that she had been admitted to our department when she was 11 months old because of acute subdural hematoma on the same side after an accidental fall from a baby buggy. Although, she had an episode of generalized seizure when she was 20 years old, results of MRI and electroencephalography were normal at that time. Because she had no recent history of head trauma, we concluded that headbanging at 3 days before admission had caused a present subdural hematoma.
Carbamazepine was administered, and there were no episodes of seizure after the admission. On the second hospital day, her motor weakness improved, probably because of free of seizures. She was discharged home after 13 days. At 8-month follow-up, the patient remains free of seizures with the administration of carbamazepine. CT showed resolution of the subdural hematoma .