This study was approved by Ethics Committee of Dalian Maternal and Child Health Hospital, and the informed consent signed by the patient.
The patient was female, was 37 years old, was from Liaoning province in China, and had been examined at our hospital at 13 weeks of pregnancy. The color ultrasound results showed that the nuchal translucency (NT) value was 2.4 mm, and NIPT using an Ion Proton sequencer (CapitalBio Technology Inc., Beijing) at 16 gestational weeks was performed. However, the Z-score(102.835) for Chr8 was outside the normal range and suggestive of trisomy 8. Because most cases of complete trisomy 8 are spontaneously aborted in the early stages of pregnancy, we highly suspected that trisomy 8 was from the mother and that trisomy 8 was mosaic. Further examination by three-dimensional color ultrasound suggested a single live fetus with no abnormalities. The patient denied smoking, drinking or radiation, and was without chemical exposure. We evaluated the brain development and reproductive system of the fetus by ultrasound, there was no obvious abnormal clinical manifestations, and the fetus had developed normally. The patient had previously been pregnant three times, resulting in one cesarean section, one spontaneous abortion, and one birth to a girl who is currently 8 years old and in good health.
The peripheral blood from the patient was extracted for hemocyte classification analysis and smear microscopy detection. We found no abnormal juvenile cells in the peripheral blood by smear microscopy. Through the detection of leukocyte immune typing, we found that CD117+/CD34+ cells accounted for 0.30% of nuclear cells, that these cells were all normal myeloid primitive cells, and that granulocytes accounted for 41.46% of nuclear cells. Immature monocytes occupied 0.02% of nuclear cells (0.53% of monocytes). Bone marrow stem cells, B cells, T cells, and NK cells were normal, and no abnormal myeloid primitive cells (< 10− 4) were observed in this clinical report. In addition, the development model for cells was normal .
Then, the peripheral blood from the patient, her husband and her daughter and amniotic fluid from the patient were collected to undergo chromosome G band analysis. From these results, we knew that the peripheral blood karyotype of the patient was 47,XX,+ 8[67]/46,XX, while the amniotic fluid karyotype was 46,XX; the karyotypes for her husband and daughter were 46,XY, and 46,XX, respectively. In addition, trisomy 8 mosaicism was confirmed using Ion Proton sequencer (CapitalBio Technology Inc., Beijing) at 400 flows according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The amniotic fluid, pharynx, cheek, saliva and cervical abscission cells samples from the patient were undergone next generation sequenced. The retained reads were aligned to the human genomic reference sequences (hg19) using the BWA. The fetal DNA concentration was calculated as a quality control, as described in Yin’s paper . Combined GC-correction and Z-score testing methods were used to identify fetus autosomal aneuploidy for trisomy, as described in Liao’s paper . A Z score range from − 3 to 3 was considered to indicate a low risk for a trisomy chromosome, and if Z score was > 3, the sample was in the high-risk zone. The result was considered as a trisomy when the Z-score was far higher than the normal value and when the average score of the black curve was in + 20. When the Z-score was far below the normal value and when the average score of the black value curve was − 20, a monomer was considered. Chromosomal chimerism was considered 1) when the Z-score was greater than or less than plus or minus 3 but far less than the Z-score of complete trisomer or greater than the Z-score of the complete and 2) when the mean score of the black curve was greater than or less than 0 but far less than the mean value of the complete trisomer or greater than the mean value of the complete monomer. Chimeric proportion (%) = Z-score range /0.2/100 (female) or Chimeric proportion (%) = Z-score range /0.2/100/concentration of the sample (male). Moreover, NGS result suggested that the proportions of trisomy 8 in different tissues were obviously different . The proportions for trisomy 8 in cheek, saliva and cervical abscission cells samples were 5, 60, and 100%, respectively. In addition, the amniotic fluid was 0%, which suggested that the fetus was normal . Last, the chromosomes of the patient and her baby were further examined using chromosome microarray analysis (CMA) with the higher resolution CytoScan® HD platform (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) . The CMA analysis showed that the chr.8 detection result in the plasma of the patient was arr[GRCh37](8) × 3,11p15.5p13(230750–33,455,733) × 2 hmz, and the result of her baby was normal.