A previously healthy sixteen-year-old girl was referred to the Adolescent Medicine Clinic by her Family Physician for fearfulness, inquietude, sleep disturbance and hallucinations.
She had always been anxious, usually at school, despite her good performance. At the age of nine, she was followed up by a psychologist after having witnessed her mother’s seizure due to stroke.
Three years earlier, she began having frequent episodes of total paralysis upon waking (between 6:00‒7:00 a.m.). These lasted about two minutes and were more common during holidays when she slept through the morning. She mentioned increasing frequency and duration in the last year. The episodes were also more frequent when she slept in supine position and less frequent in lateral decubitus. She also mentioned dyspnea and auditory and tactile hallucinations (“I feel a claw of an animal in my head”, “someone holding my hands”, “tight around the neck”, “friends calling my name”). Although paralysis was transient, these episodes were very frightening and led to a persistent state of anxiety and fear of sleep with decreased sleep quality, insomnia, tiredness, daytime drowsiness, poor concentration and memory with worsening in school performance, demotivation, isolation and progressive withdrawal from her peer group. There were not episodes of cataplexy or symptoms of restless legs and she denied snoring or apnea.
Despite reporting daytime somnolence, Epworth Sleepiness Scale score was 1/24. She reported laying down at 10:00 p.m. listening to music or reading on her mobile phone and falling asleep half an hour later. She woke up at 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. during weekends and denied taking naps. She also denied alcohol and caffeine consumption, as well as use of medications or illicit substances. Her father and two paternal uncles described similar episodes, but they devalued those complaints.
Physical examination was normal, apart from her being notoriously anxious and sweaty, with adequate and cooperative discourse. Blood pressure was 113/69 mmHg (<90th percentile for age, sex and height percentile); pulse was 90 beats/min and regular. Weight was 49 kg, height 152 cm (3rd‒15th percentile) and body mass index was 22,1 kg/m2 (50‒85th percentile) (World Health Organization child growth standards). Upper respiratory tract (with Mallampati score 1) and neck, as well as cardiopulmonary and neurologic exams, were normal.
Our differential diagnosis was: inadequate sleep hygiene, narcolepsy without cataplexy, psychiatric disease, sleep-related epilepsy, and any chronic medical condition (anemia, cardiac disease, malignancy or metabolic disorder) or acquired central nervous system disorder.
Complete blood count, metabolic panel, thyroid function, vitamin B12 and D levels, electroencephalogram and cranial computed axial tomography were all normal.
Therefore, we assumed the diagnosis of RISP and she was referred to a pneumology/sleep appointment. Actigraphy showed regular sleep schedule with mean sleep latency of 36 minutes and efficiency of 81%. Mean total sleep time was 9 hours and 10 minutes.
Despite being advised about the benign course of the disease and sleep hygiene, the complaints persisted. One month later, she was consulted by a Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist and started treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (oral fluvoxamine 50 mg once-daily), without adverse effects. There was a significant improvement of all symptoms, so no other diagnostic workup was made. She was under fluvoxamine for seven months with total regression of symptoms and no recurrence six months after dose tapering.