A 63-year-old Caucasian male patient sought an otorhinolaryngology treatment in São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, complaining of continuous hoarseness. Patient reported being smoker and alcoholic for 40 years and having stopped smoking for five years and denied any systemic or local diseases. Clinical examination showed lesions in the piriform sinus during nasofibroscopy. Lesions were biopsied and the pathological diagnosis was moderately differentiated and invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Within a month, a laryngectomy was performed with a selective right cervical dissection followed by radiotherapy.
At the first routine monitoring, 12 months later, patient presented a vegetating lesion on soft palate, diagnosed as moderately differentiated, and invasive SCC, a second neoplasm. The excision of the soft palate and complementary radiotherapy were performed. Twenty-four months after the first diagnostic, patient presented erythematous lesions on the soft palate and left tonsillar pillar, both identified as moderately differentiated SCC, third and fourth malignant tumors. Thirty-six months after the first diagnostic, patient had an ulcerative-infiltrative lesion in right tonsillar pillar, diagnosed as SCC, which is the fifth malignant tumor. Forty-six months after the diagnostic, the first malignancy the patient developed symptomatic lesions in base of tongue was diagnosed as nonspecific chronic glossitis. The tissue adjacent to the lesion was evaluated with immunohistochemical staining for p53 with some focal areas in the basal and suprabasal layer with weak nuclear staining and Ki-67 with the positivity of basal and suprabasal layer.
A month later, another surgery was executed to remove a lesion located in the uvula, also diagnosed as moderately differentiated SCC, being the sixth malignancy. Likewise, immunohistochemical investigation was performed for p53 and Ki-67, contiguous to the lesion of the uvula and all lesions that preceded it. The tissue adjacent to the uvula expressed diffuse immunoreactivity for p53 and Ki-67 with strong nuclear staining in the basal and suprabasal layer. None of the neoplasms was accompanied by lymph node metastases. At the patient's return, 60 months after the first diagnostic, there was no evidence of other malignancies.