A 47-year-old woman with a history of SLE, APLS, recent bariatric surgery with rapid weight loss, and chronic kidney disease Stage III was transferred to our hospital for cardiogenic shock.
Six months prior to the index hospitalization, she underwent bariatric surgery with an ensuing 150-pound weight loss. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) prior to surgery reported a left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of 50% without significant valvular disease. She was on stable doses of hydroxychloroquine, mycophenolate mycortif, and warfarin for her known APLS.
Two weeks prior to admission, she developed nephrolithiasis, requiring left ureteral stent placement. The procedure was complicated by a large perinephric haematoma. Her home warfarin was held while vitamin K, fresh frozen plasma, and packed red blood cells were given. Repeat CT scan showed enlargement of the haematoma. An ensuing renal arterial angiogram did not demonstrate active haemorrhage and a right femoral pseudoaneurysm was treated with thrombin injection during the angiogram.
She remained in the hospital for pain control; however, 11 days later, she developed sudden onset chest pain and dyspnoea, followed by a cardiac arrest. She achieved return of circulation after one round of compressions, one ampule of epinephrine, and was intubated. Electrocardiogram (ECG) post-arrest demonstrated a new left bundle branch block (LBBB). Her emergent cardiac catheterization revealed non-obstructive coronary artery disease but a new globally depressed EF of 15% on ventriculogram .
An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was placed and later upgraded to an Impella 5.0 device. Repeat TTE revealed an EF of 15–20%, mild mitral regurgitation, and moderate aortic regurgitation. The patient was started on continuous norepinephrine, epinephrine, and vasopressin. Blood work demonstrated evidence of multiorgan dysfunction with elevated liver enzymes, rising creatinine, and troponin I of >40 ng/mL. Given worsening renal function, the patient was started on continuous veno-venous haemofiltration (CVVH). Methylprednisolone 1000 mg was started for 3 days as recommended by rheumatology. She underwent an endomyocardial biopsy on the day prior to transfer to our facility for evaluation of durable mechanical support.
On arrival to our hospital, she was intubated and sedated on dobutamine 2.5 mcg/kg/h, epinephrine 5 mcg/min, and vasopressin 1.8 units/h. ECG demonstrated sinus rhythm with a LBBB . Repeat TTE revealed that the Impella was inserted deep in the left ventricular cavity. Unfortunately, the device was dislodged during an attempted repositioning at bedside and could not be replaced due to a congenital vascular abnormality; the device was removed and replaced with an IABP.
Her physical examination was notable for diffuse nonblanching purpuric lesions with haemorrhagic bullae over the flank and abdomen with negative Nikolsky sign . Given the vasculitic appearance, dermatology performed a skin biopsy. The dermatopathology demonstrated coagulopathy with intravascular fibrin thrombi while the endomyocardial biopsy demonstrated mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates associated with myocardial damage. No vascular thrombi, vasculitis, giant cells or eosinophilic granulocytes were identified on the endomyocardial biopsy. Given the skin pathology and endomyocardial biopsy, the patient was continued on high-dose hydrocortisone for suspected CAPS and lupus myocarditis. She was also kept on unfractionated heparin with monitoring of factor Xa activity given elevated activated partial thrombin time in the context of APLS. Other laboratory work was notable for hypocomplementemia, positive ANA, and positive anti-SSA antibody.
The patient completed 5 days of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and began a slow steroid taper over 6 weeks. The IABP was removed on hospital day 5 and she was extubated the same day. Given the suspicion that her ongoing renal disease may be secondary to residual effects of CAPS, she was treated with eculizumab. She was also started on mycophenolate mycortif for her SLE.
On Day 11 of hospitalization, the patient suffered a premature ventricular contraction (PVC)-triggered Torsades de Pointes . Her arrhythmia self-resolved without intervention and no further episodes of sustained ventricular arrhythmia occurred during her hospitalization.
Over the following hospital days, she was weaned off of intravenous vasopressor medications though still required midodrine for blood pressure support. She was discharged to an acute rehabilitation facility on haemodialysis with good recovery of left ventricular function (EF 47%) with normal right ventricular function without guideline-directed medical therapy. She was maintained on warfarin. Infusions of eculizumab and mycophenolate mycortif were given in hopes of promoting renal recovery.