An 82-year-old Japanese woman presented at another hospital with right lower abdominal pain of 2 months’ duration. A colonoscopy revealed ascending colon cancer, and she was referred to our hospital. She had no previous history of abnormal bleeding. Her brother had pointed out any abnormalities in his blood coagulation test; however, we could not find the details because he had already died. Her family history except the brother was negative for bleeding tendencies, purpura, and hemophilia. She did not smoke or drink alcohol. She had no allergies. A total colonoscopy showed an ascending colon tumor with severe stenosis . Computed tomography revealed the wall thickness of the ascending colon . There were no distant metastases on the liver or lungs. Prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT 93.9 s) was found incidentally during a routine preoperative examination. However, the prothrombin time (11.2 s), platelet count (480 × 103/L), and liver function test results were all within normal limits. We conducted a cross mixing test, and she was diagnosed with a deficiency pattern . The activities of factors VIII, IX, XII, and von Willebrand factor were normal. The plasma activity of FXI was 3%, and the diagnosis of FXI deficiency was confirmed. It took about 2 weeks from confirmation of an abnormal APTT time to diagnosis of FXI deficiency. A total of eight units of FFP were transfused for 2 days before the operation. After the transfusion, APTT improved to 37 s, and FXI also increased from 3% to 25% as a result .
It takes about 3 days to obtain the result of FXI plasma activity in our hospital. We could not know the FXI plasma activity during operation; therefore, we used the APTT level instead of this and decided to do the operation. We performed laparoscopic ileocolic resection with our standard procedure. The operation time was 133 min and the intraoperative blood loss was 10 mL. We did not find the bleeding tendency in intraoperative findings, and we decided not to administrate FFP intraoperatively. The level of APTT on the day after surgery was 39 s. No complications including postoperative bleeding occurred in her postoperative course without additional transfusion of FFP. The final stage was T3N1M0 stage IIIa, according to the Japanese Colorectal Cancer Treatment Code 8th Edition. She was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.