A 42-year-old woman presented to our clinic 28 h after complete avulsion of her scalp by a rotating machine. Her scalp had been simply sutured in situ without anastomosis in a local hospital within 3 h after injury. After another 16 h of monitoring, there were no signs of improved perfusion in the scalp, so the patient was transferred to our hospital for salvage surgery. The patient was clearly conscious with stable vital signs. On physical examination, the avulsed scalp involved almost the entire hairy scalp and forehead, sparing the occipital region in the nuchal area . An ophthalmic examination revealed normal eye movements and pupil light reflexes. The laboratory tests showed an elevated white blood cell count (15.6 × 109/L, normal range 3.5–9.5 × 109/L) and absolute neutrophil count (11.7 × 109/L, normal range 1.8–6.3 × 109/L), indicating stress and acute inflammatory status. The patient also had mild anemia (90 g/L).
Measures were performed immediately to closely monitor the patient’s condition and prevent hemorrhagic shock. Considering the specificity of scalp tissue, immediate replantation was attempted despite the long ischemia time. After the onset of anesthesia, the patient was maintained in the supine position. The amputated flap was shaved and cleaned. The right temporal vessels, left supratrochlear vein, and left supraorbital artery were identified and carefully dissected out of the recipient area. Then, corresponding vascular stumps were identified and trimmed in the amputee. End-to-end anastomosis was performed between vessels in the recipient area and counterparts area with vein grafts from the forearm . The total operative time for anastomosis was 7 h, limiting the overall warm ischemia time to 35 h.
The entire scalp appeared well perfused, was flush red in color, and had positive pinprick bleeding and restored capillary refill . To confirm tissue perfusion, ICGA was conducted according to a previous study . Briefly, a 2-mL ICG bolus (2.5 mg/mL, Dandong Yichuang Pharmaceutical Co., China) was injected through a peripheral intravenous line. The fluorescent detector (SPY imaging system, Novadaq Technologies Inc., Canada) was placed approximately 20 cm above the skin surface to acquire video data. Unexpectedly, ICGA mapping showed hypoperfusion in multiple areas that adequately perfused by the clinical assessment . We tried to find other suitable vessels for anastomosis, but the attempts were in vain. The patient was carefully monitored in the intensive care unit. Within the first week after the operation, the replanted scalp was swollen with considerable subcutaneous drainage. However, Doppler ultrasound revealed patent anastomosed vessels, and the flap was viable based on pinprick bleeding; thus, early postoperative ICGA was not planned. Unfortunately, partial necrosis occurred 1 week later and became matured in 1 week. Tissue perfusion was assessed again with ICGA mapping, which showed a wide range of hypoperfused frontoparietal areas with a pattern in accordance with the intraoperative ICGA mapping results . The patient underwent major debridement surgery, during which we confirmed that the necrotic area correlated accurately with the hypoperfused areas that had less than 25% of maximal perfusion revealed by ICGA mapping at the time of replantation using quantitative SPY-Q analysis . Split skin grafting was performed with grafts from the back. All grafts survived, and the patient recovered uneventfully. Acceptable cosmetic results were achieved at the 1-month follow-up . The patient was satisfied with her final appearance.