A 13-year-old boy presented in 2018 with progressive kyphosis, without back pain or weakness. The patient visited orthopedic and pediatric doctors and was initially investigated for enthesitis secondary to juvenile idiopathic arthritis. However, serological workup was negative for HLA B27, rheumatoid factor, and ANA.
MRI pelvis in 2019 revealed posterior vertebral scalloping and widening of the neural foramina, which was initially misdiagnosed as dural ectasia. He was, therefore, followed up by pediatric rheumatology as an outpatient.
The patient gradually developed bilateral lower limb weakness and urinary incontinence and after two years presented to the neurosurgery outpatient department. Physical examination revealed kyphosis of the thoracolumbar spine. Upper limb power was Grade V throughout. Lower limb power was Grade II proximally (iliopsoas and quadriceps) and Grade I distally (tibialis anterior and extensor hallucis longus). Per rectal examination found loose anal sphincter tone and decreased perianal sensation. MRI whole spine revealed a large, expansile intradural mass that completely occupied the lumbosacral spinal canal. The tumor demonstrated T1WI hypointensity and T2WI hyperintensity as compared to the spinal cord and showed avidly homogenous enhancement postgadolinium contrast, extending from T10 to S3 and causing compression at the lower thoracic cord. The mass was not separate from conus medullaris. In the lumbar region, the mass extended into the neural foramina on both sides from L1-2 to S2-3 and the posterior vertebral bodies showed marked scalloping with mild kyphoscoliosis . Postgadolinium scan shows multiple enhancing intradural lesions scattered throughout the cervical and thoracic regions causing some degree of cord compression, without obvious compressive myelopathy . The impression after MRI was extensive disseminated thoracolumbosacral myxopapillary ependymoma from T10 to S3 vertebral level. The patient underwent T10 to L5 laminectomy; intraoperatively, the tumor was soft and suctionable, and was of grayish-purple color . Subtotal resection was performed, with residual tumor extending beyond the sacral neural foramina. The conus medullaris and nerve roots were carefully preserved with the aid of intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring. Postoperative MRI spine after 48 h showed residual tumor in levels S1 to S3, especially in bilateral neural foramina . Postoperative MRI brain showed a few nonspecific foci of white matter change in both frontal lobes but no evidence of intracranial tumor dissemination. Pathological examination of the resected tissue confirmed a diagnosis of myxopapillary ependymoma .
At follow-up 2 months postdischarge, the patient demonstrated reduced clinical weakness following rehabilitation. Power in the lower limbs was improved to Grade IV both proximally and distally. As of July 2020, the patient is undergoing whole spine radiotherapy for disease control. We plan to perform a lumbar puncture for CSF cytology following radiotherapy to monitor response to treatment.