A 78-year-old Sri Lankan man presented to the emergency department with acute onset upper and lower limb weakness for several-hour duration. The patient denied any limb weakness on the night prior to admission and was otherwise healthy. Upon waking up in the morning he found difficulty in getting up with weakness involving all four limbs. He was able to lift limbs but was unable to walk or dress himself. The weakness persisted and remained the same until the time of admission five hours later. Weakness was symmetrical and nonprogressive and involved all four limbs. There was no pain, numbness, or abnormal movements in limbs. Swallowing and breathing were not impaired. Urinary and faecal incontinence were absent.
Patient's past medical history consisted of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, and systolic heart failure. Home medications included Mixtard 18 U mane and 8 U vesper, Losartan 50 mg twice daily, Nifedipine 20 mg twice daily, Spironolactone 50 mg daily, Frusemide 40 mg daily, Atorvastatin 20 mg daily, and Amiodarone 100 mg daily. Dietary history revealed that he was drinking king coconut water 2–4 servings almost every day for past one week.
He was overweight (height: 166 cm, weight: 70 kg, BMI: 25.4 kg/m2). Xanthelasma and arcus senilis were present. He had elevated blood pressure (140/90) with cardiac apex lying in 6th intercostal space. Examination of limbs revealed symmetrical weakness with more distal involvement (proximal 4/5, distal 3/5). Limb reflexes were not impaired except for absent bilateral ankle jerks. Impaired sensation of pain and temperature was present in a glove and stocking type distribution. Joint position sensation was diminished in both upper and lower limbs. Examination of central nervous, respiratory, and gastrointestinal systems was normal.
Investigations revealed renal dysfunction (serum creatinine: 3.66 mg/dl-, eGFR: 15 ml/min, blood urea: 20.32 mmol/l, and arterial blood HCO3−: 12.7 meq/l). He had severe hyperkalemia (serum potassium: 7.02 mmol/l) with electrocardiogram showing tall, tented T waves and sine waves. Serum sodium was 129 meq/l. Renal ultrasound showed increased cortical echogenicity and impaired corticomedullary demarcation. Noncontrast computerized tomography of brain revealed normal findings. Electromyogram did not reveal acute radiculopathy, plexopathy, or myopathy. Nerve conduction studies revealed distal segmental axonal neuropathy suggestive of diabetic polyneuropathy.
Standard ward protocol for managing hyperkalemia was followed. Patient was initially given IV 10% calcium gluconate 10 ml over 10 minutes followed by a repeat dose. Spironolactone and Losartan were immediately withheld. He was given IV 50% Dextrose 50 ml with 10 U of Soluble Insulin. Patient was nebulized with Salbutamol 5 ml over 10 minutes and it was repeated twice. The interventions showed biochemical and electrocardiographic improvement in two hours (serum potassium: 6.1 meq/l). He was commenced on calcium resonium 15 g three times daily. Limb weakness showed rapid clinical improvement within 24 hours.