An 18-year-old primiparous Caucasian woman attended our hospital complaining of lower abdominal pain, chest pain, breathlessness and easy tiredness over the past three weeks. She was pregnant although she could not state precisely when her last menstrual period had taken place and had not yet begun her prenatal care. She denied complaints of fever, nausea, vomiting, heartburn, urinary symptoms and vaginal bleeding or discharge. However, she had a history of mild chronic constipation since childhood, with sporadic use of laxatives, which had never been investigated.
Upon physical examination, our patient was hydrated, well-nourished, had a normal blood pressure and heart rate, and had no respiratory distress. On gynecological examination, it was impossible to insert the speculum and bimanual palpation revealed a large abdominal mass of hard consistency extending from her right iliac fossa to her right upper quadrant, apparently displacing our patient’s uterus to the left. A large quantity of impacted stools was found within her rectum and anal verge.
A pelvic ultrasound revealed a single in uterus pregnancy of twelve weeks and six days (by biometric measures) and a solid dense tumor occupying the right quadrants of her abdomen, which made it difficult to correctly assess her ovaries.
To classify the nature of the tumor, we performed abdominal and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) because this is considered to be a safe imaging study with regards fetal exposure to radiation. The MRI demonstrated a large abdominal and pelvic mass consistent with a megarectum and megasigmoid , with fecal impaction, which exerted a mass effect over the adjacent structures, including her uterus. Her kidneys were normal and there was no free liquid in her abdominal cavity.
Routine laboratory blood tests were unremarkable. Her thyroid function was normal, and her results were negative for toxoplasma, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus infection and for tumor markers (α-fetal protein, carbohydrate antigen 125 and carcinoembryonic antigen).
After discussing the case in a multidisciplinary meeting (with Gastroenterology, General Surgery and Radiology) and considering the mild nature of our patient’s constipation, we decided to manage her megacolon during pregnancy with medical treatment alone. An osmotic laxative (magnesium hydroxide) was begun. A monthly prenatal appointment was planned to evaluate maternal complaints and weight gain as well as to monitor fetal development.
During pregnancy, our patient maintained mild constipation interspersed with short periods of diarrhea. She was admitted to our hospital in the 28th week for profuse diarrhea with no clinical or laboratory signs of infection and was discharged 24 hours later. The remainder of her pregnancy occurred with no other gastroenterological or obstetric incidents, including obstructive symptoms, with normal maternal weight gain and fetal development.
At 39 weeks of gestation, our patient returned to our hospital complaining of colicky abdominal pain. A nonstress test did not reveal any signs of fetal distress and showed an irregular pattern of uterine contractions. On vaginal examination, the fetal head was engaged but it was not possible to evaluate the uterine cervix because of a solid mass of impacted stools that was obstructing the pelvic outlet. A manual disimpaction was accomplished under intermittent fetal monitoring, but during the procedure a sudden continuous fetal bradycardia was detected. This required an emergency Cesarean section under general anesthesia, which occurred with no intraoperative complications. Eleven minutes later, a female neonate weighing 2900g was delivered, with a one-minute Apgar score of three and a five-minute score of five. Neonatal resuscitation was required. There were no anatomic abnormalities of the umbilical cord and placenta and a normal cord insertion to the placenta was present. The newborn baby was admitted to our Neonatal Intensive Unit Care until the 26th day of life for neonatal asphyxia, metabolic acidosis and seizures. A cerebral MRI revealed severe hypoxic–ischemic lesions and after discharge, the baby was referred to a cerebral palsy specialized center.
After delivery, the mother had a rapid recovery with reestablishment of normal bowel function 24 hours after the surgery. After being discharged, she started attending regular gastroenterological appointments. She maintained mild constipation that was easily controlled with magnesium hydroxide, but one year after delivery she attended our hospital with chronic constipation unresponsive to medical therapy. An MRI performed at that time revealed persistent dilatation of her colon and we decided to perform a rectosigmoid resection, which occurred without complications. A histopathological analysis revealed a significant reduction of nerve cells in the myenteric and submucous plexus and hypertrophy of the muscularis mucosa . The acetylcholinesterase activity was not evaluated because this test is not available in our institution.