AB, a 51-year-old African American male [height 195.6 cm, weight 141 kg, body mass index 36.9 kg/m2] with chart diagnoses of schizoaffective disorder, depressive type and post-traumatic stress disorder, was referred to a community mental health center in March of 2014 to address medication non-adherence and lack of medication effectiveness. AB’s symptoms were first reported in 2006 and included depressed mood and persecutory auditory hallucinations with command hallucinations to either self-harm (e.g. insulin overdose) or stop his medications. His referral in 2014 included details of treatment and symptoms since 2008. The referral notes highlighted a complicated psychiatric history with approximately eight psychiatric hospitalizations over the previous five years, predominantly attributed to depressive episodes and suicide attempts. His other medical history includes uncontrolled type 2 diabetes with diabetic neuropathy, hypertension, asthma, obstructive sleep apnea, diverticulitis, chronic musculoskeletal pain, and chronic headaches. His medication list at the time of this report (February, 2017) is provided in Table .
Between 2008 and 2012, he was trialed on and off multiple antipsychotic agents including risperidone (titrated up to 6 mg/day), haloperidol (titrated up to 15 mg/day), quetiapine (titrated up to 800 mg/day), and ziprasidone (titrated up to 200 mg/day); all for a duration of at least 12 weeks without significant improvement. A trial of olanzapine (titrated up to 15 mg/day) resulted in slightly improved psychotic symptoms; however, was ultimately discontinued due to worsening diabetes control. At this time, oral aripiprazole 5 mg/day was started (April 2012).
At the time of his referral (March, 2014), the patient was on oral aripiprazole 15 mg/day, which was titrated up to 30 mg/day through March 2015, and the patient reported improvement in auditory hallucinations, mood, and suicidal ideations. In March 2015, AB agreed to start long-acting injectable (LAI) aripiprazole with the goal to eventually discontinue the oral aripiprazole to provide a safeguard for non-adherence if the command hallucinations returned. Subsequently, aripiprazole LAI, 400 mg intramuscularly (IM) was administered into the gluteal muscle every 4-weeks combined with oral aripiprazole 30 mg/day. The plan was to reduce the aripiprazole oral dose to 15 mg/day at 2-weeks post-injection. Eight weeks after initiating aripiprazole LAI, a marked improvement in psychiatric symptoms was noted. Over approximately 12-weeks, the oral aripiprazole supplementation was reduced to 5 mg/day (June 2015); however, within 4-weeks of oral aripiprazole dose reduction to 5 mg/day, his auditory hallucinations returned and worsened. The oral aripiprazole dose was then increased back to 7.5 mg/day with a noticeable positive response. At a 2-week follow-up appointment after this dose increase (July 2015), auditory hallucinations were reported to be “not as bad” but worse 1-week prior to his aripiprazole injection, resulting in a modification of aripiprazole LAI frequency from 400 mg IM every 4-weeks to every 3-weeks along with the 7.5 mg/day oral aripiprazole. In October 2015, since he complained of worsening auditory hallucinations approximately 3 days prior to his next injection, oral aripiprazole 2 mg/day as needed (up to 2 times/week) was added to his current regimen (aripiprazole LAI 400 mg every 3-week and oral aripiprazole 7.5 mg/day) for this wearing-off symptoms.
The continuing need for oral aripiprazole and symptom breakthrough prior to his every 3-week aripiprazole injection prompted further inquiry as to which variables might be contributing to this pattern of response/non-response. Considerations included medications/substances interactions, pharmacokinetic characteristics, and administration techniques (i.e. site of administration, syringe length and gauge, etc.), all of which were ruled out as contributing factors. No significant drug/substance interactions were noted . Since adherence was not in question with an LAI medication, serum drug concentrations were not ordered. Pharmacogenetic variables influencing drug metabolism were then considered, and a commercially available psychiatry-focused pharmacogenetic testing panel was ordered in October 2015 .
Pharmacogenetic test results for drug-metabolizing enzymes cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) and CYP3A4 did not explain the patient’s need for high aripiprazole dose nor his breakthrough symptoms. However, the patient was found to carry a genetic variation in the dopamine receptor D2 gene (DRD2), −141C Ins/Del polymorphism (rs1799732). This polymorphism has been linked to variation in striatal dopamine receptor density [, ] and reduced response to some antipsychotics , which is consistent with AB’s reduced response to many antipsychotic agents.
With no clear pharmacogenetic influence on drug metabolism, yet a documented need for higher doses of aripiprazole, additional dosing strategies were explored. At this time, a new long-acting injectable formulation of aripiprazole, aripiprazole lauroxil, was considered due higher dosing options (aripiprazole lauroxil 882 mg every 4-weeks, equivalent to aripiprazole LAI 600 mg) [, ]. Therefore, in December 2015, the decision was made to switch to aripiprazole lauroxil 882 mg IM (gluteal) every 4-weeks. Although the plan was to continue the oral aripiprazole for 3 weeks, the patient discontinued the oral aripiprazole on his own after the first injection. The patient initially noted injection site pain with the lauroxil formulation after the first 2 administrations, but no other adverse reactions were reported. Due to the every 3-weeks (aripiprazole LAI) vs. every 4-weeks (aripiprazole lauroxil) dosing strategies, the approximate daily doses from two long acting formulations were similar (19 mg/day with aripiprazole LAI vs. 21 mg/day with aripiprazole lauroxil, respectively). As of February 2017, he continues to tolerate the aripiprazole lauroxil and reports not needing to use oral aripiprazole.