A 47-year-old female Chinese patient was admitted to our hospital in January 2018 due to complaints of continuous cough and a feeling of breathlessness for more than a week. The patient did not have a history of alcohol consumption or smoking. She refused to reveal a special occupational history and the medical history of her family.
A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large, irregularly shaped mass on the upper right lobe, accompanied by multiple nodules, plaques and consolidated masses of different sizes, randomly distributed in both lung fields. Nodular thickening of the interlobular septa and fissures, which suggested lymphangitis carcinomatosa, hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and bilateral pleural effusions, was identified by the CT scan as well .
An immediate drainage was conducted for the right pleural effusion, followed by a series of tests. Methylprednisolone (MP) at 80 mg/day was administered to alleviate dyspnoea associated with lymphangitis carcinomatosa. With oxygen therapy via a nasal catheter at a flow rate of 6 L/min, her arterial blood gas was measured to have values of a PaO2 of 55.0 mmHg, a PaCO2 of 32.0 mmHg, and a pH of 7.49. The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level in hydrothorax was 7.5 μg/L (normal 0–5 μg/L), whereas the serum CEA level was 12.4 μg/L. The rest of the important blood and sputum test indicators are described in Table .
With a poor performance status (PS = 4), the patient was unable to withstand tissue biopsy acquisition. A great number of tumour cells positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and cytokeratin 7 (CK 7) were confirmed by pathological haematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining examination of hydrothorax, combined with immunohistochemical staining. These observations led to a diagnosis of advanced lung adenocarcinoma with extensive dissemination in the chest .
Next-generation sequencing was then conducted on tumour cells of hydrothorax. The SDC4-ROS1 fusion gene was detected at an abundance of 19.8% in the malignant pleural effusion (MPE). Other mutations, such as those in the EGFR, ALK, KRAS, BFAF, HER2, PIK3CA, MET, and RET genes, were not detected . The patient was thus orally administered crizotinib at a dose of 250 mg twice per day. After three days of crizotinib treatment, the orthopnoea was greatly relieved, and MP medication was withdrawn. However, oxygen therapy was still required within a one-week time frame of administration. On the tenth day of medication, the patient had a low-grade fever and slight aggravation of dyspnoea. A chest CT re-scan revealed a significant shrinkage of intrapulmonary neoplastic lesions, lymphadenitis and lymphadenectasis. However, multiple new-onset ground-glass opacities and consolidations were detected throughout both lungs . The patient was then additionally treated with cefoperazone/sulbactam to exclude the possibility of infection.
In addition, a re-examination of blood tumour markers, infection-related indicators, and characteristics of hydrothorax, combined with percutaneous lung biopsy, was undertaken to clarify the cause. CEA in the pleural fluid and serum increased to 13.6 μg/L and 52.7 μg/L, respectively, after crizotinib medication. Other important indicators are described in Table . Consistent with the CT scan, the pathology of hydrothorax suggested a significantly reduced number of tumour cells. Three columnar specimens of percutaneous biopsy from the new-onset consolidation area on the lower left pulmonary were collected promptly, all of which were 1 cm in length and 18 gauge in diameter. Histological observation of these biopsies revealed a diffuse alveolar oedema, thickening of the septa , macrophages or foamy macrophages prominently present in differently sized alveolar spaces , mild infiltration of inflammatory lymphocytes, monocytes, fibroblasts, and myofibroblasts in the interstitium , rare and atypical hyaline membrane formations in alveolar spaces , multiple hyaline thrombi (microthrombi) in pulmonary arterioles of partial areas , and atypical hyperplasia of type II alveolar epithelial cells in localized areas . There was no evidence of infections and invasion of tumour cells. All these pathological changes were consistent with acute lung injury. The pathological stage was assumed to be a transition from exudation to organization. The patient denied having previous pulmonary-related diseases, and there were no other drugs that might potentially cause lung toxicity during crizotinib treatment. Therefore, we made a diagnosis of crizotinib-induced ILD.
MP pulse therapy (0.5 g once per day) was immediately substituted for the original crizotinib treatment and applied for three days. Tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were also undertaken because of progressive deterioration leading to respiratory failure. All necessary and additional treatment procedures were conducted to prevent ILD, but the patient died 20 days after the first administration of crizotinib. Upon approval of her family, next-generation sequencing analysis of a lung biopsy sample was performed, which revealed a de novo exon 19 deletion mutation in EGFR, not detected in MPE before treatment with crizotinib . On the other hand, the frequency of ROS1 rearrangement decreased after crizotinib treatment . The occurrence of this phenomenon deserves special consideration and investigation of current crizotinib treatment in NSCLC patients.
Written informed consent has been obtained from the patient’s family for the publication of this case report and accompanying images.