In 2011 a 60-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the Emergency Department of our hospital due to scrotal and perineal pain and fever (39°C). Blood analysis showed the following: leukocytosis (14.47×103/mm3), glucose 417mg/dL, creatinine 1.55mg/dL, sodium 136mmol/L, potassium 4.1mmol/L, hematocrit 37.2g/dL, bicarbonate 26mmol/L, total protein 5.1g/dL, and albumin 3.2g/dL. The coagulation parameters were fibrinogen 594mmol/L, partial thromboplastin time 31 seconds, prothombin time-international normalized ratio 1.18, and platelet count 255×103/mm3. Ultrasonography of the patient’s scrotum showed the bilateral presence of microbubbles, purulent corpuscular material suggestive for abscess, and a subcutaneous inguinal edema.
At physical examination the patient appeared obese, with a body mass index (BMI) of 31.8; the scrotum presented with a swollen, edematous, emphysematous and crepitant skin with a small circle of necrosis. In his clinical history the patient reported that 15 days prior he had been admitted to the emergency department of another hospital due to abdominal pain and was catheterized for 24 hours, then discharged with the diagnosis of bowel subocclusion.
We submitted the patient to surgical treatment, which consisted of abdominal wall debridement including the inguinal region and scrotum . A lack of resistance along the dartos fascia of the scrotum and Scarpa’s fascia of the lower abdominal wall, as well as minimal bleeding and the presence of gas and pus, were important signs to support the diagnosis of Fournier’s gangrene. Surgical management included wide tissue incisions to allow abundant washing with hydrogen peroxide and saline solution. One subcutaneous trans-scrotal drainage and two subcutaneous suprapubic drainages were inserted. After surgery, an abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan showed a right channel inguinal patchy area with predominantly soft tissue density, suggestive for abscess, with evidence of numerous gas microbubbles in contiguity with the scrotum. After the first surgical debridement, a microbiological culture was taken from the tissue sample. A single microorganism was isolated (Group A streptococcus), and antibiotic therapy was adapted to the antibiogram (daptomycin 500mg, piperacillin sodium-tazobactam sodium 4.5mg three times/day, metronidazole 500mg three times/day intravenously) in association with electrolyte replacement.
The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus was confirmed by glycated hemoglobin measurement (7.5%, 59mmol/mol), and five days after surgery, a scheduled combined therapeutic protocol with intermediate acting insulin and oral therapy (metformin 850mg twice/day) finally controlled glucose blood levels.
Debridements were repeated every 24 to 48 hours, and the patient was submitted to 14 sessions of hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) therapy (20 minutes each at 2.4 atmosphere absolute, 100% fraction of inspired oxygen), but the infection was not still completely controlled.
It was then decided to add a new adjuvant treatment – VAC therapy – already in use for diabetic foot ulcers, complex wounds, and abscesses involving the abdominal and chest wall. This VAC therapy (KCI, San Antonio, TX, USA) is a polyurethane sponge cut to the appropriate size and placed over the wound. The sponge, with a suction tube, is covered with a second sterile, adherent, occlusive dressing. Suction is applied to the sponge using a portable pump. The dressing needs to be changed every 24 to 72 hours.
The most important benefits of this therapy include a reduction in the wound area together with induction of new granulation tissue, effective wound cleaning, and the continuous removal of wound exudate. After 21 days of VAC therapy, the wound was stabilized, fresh granulation tissue formed with a consequent resorption of the gas microbubbles (confirmed on the next abdominal and pelvic CT), and an important neovascularization of the wound was observed (18 days after hospital admittance). The VAC treatment was so effective that the patient did not require reconstructive surgery. The patient was discharged one month after hospital admission (34 days) with the surgical wound almost completely healed , normal blood glucose levels, and a BMI of 28.7.