An Iranian 24-year-old primigravid woman from Kordistan province presented to our hospital with left flank pain. She had had the pain for a few days and had received adequate prenatal care until her referral to us. She was diagnosed as having had gestational diabetes mellitus since the 12th week of gestation (her fasting blood sugar was between 106 and 116 mg/dL). Insulin therapy was started at a dosage of 4 units of neutral protamine Hagedorn at bedtime. All fasting and postprandial blood sugars had been controlled well.
She also complained of having had pulsatile bi-temporal headaches for 2 years prior to her referral to us. Her headaches responded well to common analgesics. She also mentioned that she had hypertension of 140/90 mmHg at one of her prenatal visits during the 32nd week of gestation. However, the physician had not diagnosed hypertension by rechecking her blood pressure at that time. Although her gynecologist had assessed proteinuria via 24-hour urine sample, no proteinuria was detected (119 mg/dL). Her liver enzyme, creatinine, and platelet counts were all in normal range.
At the 37th week of gestation she had presented to us with left flank pain and no urinary symptoms. We did not detect costovertebral tenderness, fever, hypertension, or tachycardia at the primary examinations. Urine analysis was completely normal, so we did ultrasound imaging of fetus and kidneys. Ultrasound imaging revealed no problems with her kidneys, but we found a solid mass with fine cystic component of 119 × 87 × 79 mm above her kidney, highly suspicious for an adrenal-originating tumor. The fetus had no abnormality at the ultrasound imaging.
To evaluate the mass, we consulted with an endocrinologist to definitely diagnose the incidentaloma. Abdominopelvic magnetic resonance imaging without contrast showed a well-defined 100 × 95 mm heterogeneous mass in her left adrenal region above the kidney which contained some cystic areas and showed some restriction foci on diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging . No obvious signal drop was seen on the opposed phase image. Other organs seemed intact. Her 24-hour urine metanephrine, normetanephrine, and vanillylmandelic acid were assessed .
All workups were done according to association between pheochromocytoma and multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome. Thyroid-stimulating hormone and ultrasound imaging of her thyroid and parathyroid glands were normal. She had no dermatitis in her family history. After confirming the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma, she was transferred to our endocrinology ward and treatment with phenoxybenzamine was started. Atenolol was added because she showed one hypertensive crisis (150/100 mmHg). Ten days after the beginning of medical treatment she underwent laparotomy and cesarean section. After induction of anesthesia in the operation room, her blood pressure rose to 240/180 mmHg. Blood pressure fluctuations were managed by intravenously administered nitroprusside. First, a cesarean was done and a boy weighing 3300 grams was born. However, he had secondary apnea after some minutes. This was managed by positive pressure ventilation and he responded well. After repairing uterine incision, endocrine surgeons began tumor resection, which measured approximately 12 × 13 cm in diameter, but no surrounding organ invasion was detected . She was taken to our intensive care unit after the surgery. Her hemodynamic condition was monitored for 24 hours. She was discharged after 3 days while all her vital signs were normal.