A 60-year-old Moroccan woman, treated for hypertension, complained of persistent cough, chest tightness and wheezing. Three years previously she was diagnosed with bronchial asthma by her family physician. This diagnosis of asthma was retained for episodes of shortness of breath with recurrent respiratory wheeze. A chest radiograph appeared normal. Spirometry was performed and showed an obstructive syndrome, but its interpretation was difficult due to the poor cooperation of our patient. The flow volume curve was considered invalid. She was treated for probable asthma with inhaled corticosteroids. Despite her adherence to the treatment, her symptoms worsened with a progressive decrease in exercise tolerance, increased wheezing episodes and shortness of breath. She was then referred to our hospital with uncontrolled asthma.
A physical examination revealed a woman in good condition, a respiratory rate of 24 cycles per minute and no rales. The rest of the examination was normal. Her laboratory tests were unremarkable.
A chest X-ray showed a right laterotracheal opacity at the cervicothoracic junction. There was also a reduction of tracheal clarity, consistent in several chest radiographs.
Computed tomography (CT) of her chest with a three-dimensional reconstruction confirmed the presence of thickening of her tracheal wall tissue; it was circumferential and irregular, causing a significant reduction in her tracheal caliber . The lesion had intimate contact with her esophagus without evidence of invasion.
Bronchoscopy was performed and showed a yellowish tumor formation just below her vocal cords, extending along the entire height of her trachea and reducing its diameter by more than 50%. This lesion was larger in the posterior wall and covered the side walls of her trachea. The carina was normal .
The tracheal biopsies revealed a chorion occupied by massive amyloid deposits . These deposits showed a green birefringence under crossed polarized light after Congo red staining. An immunohistochemical analysis showed intense staining by anti-lambda light chain antibodies confirming the diagnosis of an amyloid light-chain (AL) amyloid tumor .
A search for systemic disease or monoclonal gammopathy remained negative. This review included immunoelectrophoretic analysis of her plasma and urine, salivary gland and rectal biopsies and X-rays of flat bones to look for myeloma.
In conclusion, our patient had a localized amyloidosis in her respiratory tract, revealed by a false asthma. A rigid endoscopy was performed to permeabilize her trachea. Three sessions were required to obtain a satisfactory tracheal size and resolution of symptoms. The last endoscopy was complicated by a wound in the mucosa with iatrogenic pneumomediastinum. A CT scan with ingestion of hydrosoluble product showed no esophageal injury. Our patient had no symptoms after this incident.
After 12 months, our patients respiratory symptoms have disappeared and endoscopic lesions are stable.