A 36-year-old female, 36 weeks pregnant, presented at the obstetric clinic with chest pain. Her first symptoms started 10 months earlier, prior to pregnancy, after intake of methylene dioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). After MDMA, the patient experienced continuous substernal pressure without radiation, aggravated by exercise, deep inspiration, and supine position. She was pale, sweating, and experienced palpitations. At initial presentation, blood pressure was 99/76 mmHg and heart rate 90/min. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with a prolonged corrected QT interval (QTc) of 473 ms without any ST-T segment deviation or PTa depression. QTc normalized spontaneously within 24 h. Laboratory tests showed normal D-dimer and rise-and-fall in troponin-I (max. 349 ng/L, reference range < 20 ng/L). Chest X-ray revealed no cardiopulmonary abnormalities. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular (LV) function and no pericardial effusion. Coronary angiogram showed normal coronary anatomy, without plaques/stenosis or coronary dissection. Although severe radial artery spasm occurred, no spontaneous coronary spasm was observed and an additional acetylcholine provocation test was not performed. Cardiac MRI showed normal volumes and function, normal T1 and T2 values, and no late gadolinium enhancement. Thus, showing no signs of peri(myo)carditis, myocardial infarction, or cardiomyopathy, the patient was diagnosed myocardial infarction due to non-obstructive coronary artery disease (MINOCA) based on coronary artery spasm provoked by MDMA abuse. A calciumantagonist, nitroglycerine sublingual, and acetylsalicylic acid were prescribed. The patient was discharged from the hospital free of symptoms and never used using MDMA again/afterwards.
Two months after the start of medical treatment, drugs were stopped due to her pregnancy because of potential teratogenic effects. Notably, during the first months of pregnancy, the patient became symptom free.
However, at Week 36 of her pregnancy, the patient experienced recurrent chest pain (lasting from 15 min to 1.5 h) provoked by exercise and stress, along with sweating, paleness, and tingling of the fingers. Blood pressure was 93/58 mmHg. ECG and echocardiogram showed no abnormalities. Laboratory results showed mildly elevated high sensitive troponin-T (max. 22 ng/L, reference range < 15 ng/L), elevated D-dimer 1.27 mg/L (reference range < 0.5 mg/L), and normal TSH value (1.4 mE/L). Computed tomography (CT) scan showed no pulmonary embolisms. To avoid unnecessary radiation during pregnancy, coronary angiogram was not repeated. Again, her symptoms were attributed to MINOCA. As symptoms decreased during admission, patient was discharged.
One week hereafter, she was hospitalized with recurrent chest pain, worsening at inspiration. Physical examination showed a blood pressure of 95/55 mmHg, heart rate of 100/min, and transient low peripheral oxygen saturation levels up to 85% without signs of deep venous thrombosis. Troponin-T and D-dimer were elevated (max. 653 ng/L and 3.77 mg/L, respectively; ), but NT-proBNP was normal (127 ng/L, reference < 130 ng/L). ECG was normal. Based on the YEARS algorithm, CT was repeated and showed no pulmonary embolism, but did show ground-glass opacities and septal thickening suggesting left-sided heart failure. Repeated echocardiography, though of limited image quality due to pregnancy and breast implants, showed severely reduced LV function without regional wall motion abnormalities or valvular disease (see , ). She was diagnosed as having acute left-sided heart failure. The differential diagnosis consisted of peripartum cardiomyopathy or MINOCA associated with coronary spasm. Due to maternal morbidity and foetal tachycardia, urgent caesarean section (C-section) was performed the same day. During C-section, flushes and a marked variability in blood pressure were noted, especially after administration of ephedrine. Metanephrines laboratory tests for pheochromocytoma were performed. C-section was uncomplicated, and the baby was born healthy. After C-section, the patient was transferred to the Coronary Care Unit for observation. Within 3 days after the C-section, LV function recovered completely and spontaneously, suggestive for Takotsubo, rather than MINOCA or coronary spasm. Patient remained free of symptoms for the first 3 days after C-section, but experienced progressive recurrent episodes of chest pain thereafter, provoked by mobilization and a couple days later also in resting conditions. ECG showed no ST-T segment deviation. Blood pressures remained within normal limits during the first days after the C-section, however, she experienced ‘spells’ of severely increased blood pressures up to 250/100 mmHg with chest pain and severe headaches starting from Day 5 after C-section. Electrocardiographic monitoring showed concurrent episodes of accelerated idiopathic ventricular rhythms (AIVR, ) and premature ventricular contractions. At Day 5 after C-section, (nor)metanephrines tests turned positive . CT of the abdomen revealed a solid lesion of the right adrenal gland of 3.7 cm in diameter, with an intermediate washout . The diagnosis of pheochromocytoma was confirmed. She was treated with an alpha-blocker and fluid supplementation (as dehydration is a potential worsening factor in pheochromocytoma). However, due to persistent symptoms, laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed within 2 days after the CT scan. Thereafter, blood pressure remained within normal limits, and she remained symptom free. Histopathology of the resected adrenal gland confirmed the diagnosis pheochromocytoma .