A 66-year-old man presented to our emergency department with a sudden acute onset of severe upper left abdominal pain and nausea. He was previously diagnosed with cancer of the esophagogastric junction, classified as T3N1M0 stage IIB based on TNM classification. He underwent laparoscopic proximal gastrectomy and D2 lymphadenectomy with double tract reconstruction 16 months prior to the current presentation. We opened the right and left crus widely to create sufficient space for esophagectomy and anastomosis and cut the left mediastinal pleura to open the left thoracic cavity through the esophageal hiatus. After the reconstruction, we continuously sutured the diaphragm and elevated small intestine using a 3-0 V-Loc® to prevent hiatal hernia. The patient also received postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. He had no history of any allergies for taking any routine medications. His weight on presentation was 68.5 kg, while his body mass index (BMI) was 22.6 kg/m2. He had lost 8.0 kg after the gastrectomy. Computed tomography of the abdomen with intravenous contrast revealed an incarcerated hiatal hernia through a hiatal defect, through which the dilated transverse colon herniated into the left hemithorax . No free air was visible. After the patient provided informed consent, an emergency laparoscopic hernia repair was performed to treat the EHH and transverse colon incarceration. Herniation of the transverse colon into the left thoracic cavity through a hiatal defect was confirmed . Since it was difficult to return the transverse colon into the abdominal cavity using forceps, the procedure was converted to HALS . The diaphragm on the left side of the hernia defect was dissected . The transverse colon could not be pulled back into the abdominal cavity, because the omentum was adherent to the transverse. Therefore, the omentum was separated from the transverse colon, which was pulled back into the abdominal cavity. No intestinal resection was performed because there were no signs of ischemia. The hernia defect was closed using non-absorbable sutures . The total operation time was 152 min, and the ascites loss was 600 mL. The intraoperative blood loss was low. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.