The patient was a 47-year-old man who was brought to the emergency department of Shahid Beheshti hospital with chief complaints of dyspnea and dry cough but no respiratory distress for two days before the admission. The patient had an amputated left leg and knee due to the previous trauma since childhood and was a heavy smoker (1 pack-year) and had inhalational opium addiction for more than 20 and 10 years respectively. The patient had no family history of any specific disease. The patient’s upright chest radiography and Chest spiral CT scan revealed bilateral primary spontaneous pneumothorax , and the patient underwent bilateral chest tube insertion (After local anesthesia, a conventional large-bore chest tube (32 French) was placed into the pleural space in the bilateral 5th-6th intercostal space in the posterior axillary line .
Two days after the insertion of the chest tubes, as there was no development of bullae within the lung parenchyma as the bullous lung disease, and after obtaining an informed consent from the patient, the patient underwent chemical pleurodesis with talc slurry at the right side, and on the next day chemical pleurodesis with bleomycin was done at the left side (Bilateral pleurodesis was done in two consecutive days). For talc slurry and bleomycin pleurodesis, 2 g of talc and 60 units of bleomycin were dissolved in 50 ml sodium chloride 0.9% respectively and were shacked to ensure the thorough mixing before flushing it with a 50 ml syringe into the chest tube and then the intercostal tube was clamped for 4 to 6 h. During this time, the patient was told to rotate to prone supine and left and right lateral decubitus positions for every 20 min to make sure good spread of the talc slurry or bleomycin in the pleural cavity, and then the chest tube was unclamped, and was removed within 48 h. The patient received heart monitoring and pulse oximetry during and after the administration of talc or bleomycin until the chest tube was removed. The patient was discharged and was followed afterward. He developed again with severe dyspnea and respiratory distress 14 month after the first presentation of the disease, so was admitted and the patient’s upright chest radiography revealed recurrent left-sided spontaneous pneumothorax . In Table , comparing of talc slurry and bleomycin pleurodesis is shown according to the side effects, complications, and pneumothorax recurrence. Left sided chest tube was inserted again for him, but unfortunately the lung was not expanded afterward, moreover, the patient intervention adherence and tolerability in using incentive spirometry was very poor, so the patient was candidate for surgery. Figures and show that the pneumothorax didn’t resolve.
The patient underwent posterolateral thoracotomy, pneumolysis, and wedge resection of apical segment of left upper lobe (bullectomy), apical pleurectomy, and scarification. We found an accidental and surprising finding in left lung during thoracotomy and that was that the left lung had 4 lobes with 3 developed fissures . Figure shows chest radiography after the operation.
The patient was then discharged with a good recovery after 7 days. Figure shows the chest radiography on the time of discharge from the hospital. There was no report of the recurrence afterward in follow-up visits.