A 67-year-old, male Caucasian livestock hauler presented to our acute medical unit with a 5-day history of lethargy and myalgia. He complained of dysuria with dark, malodorous urine, vomiting and hiccoughs. He was previously well with a history of bilateral inguinal hernia repair only. He took no regular medications but had been prescribed trimethoprim for presumed urinary tract infection 1 day previously.
On examination he was icteric, his temperature was 37.6°C and he was clinically dehydrated. Initial blood pressure (BP) was 118/65mmHg, heart rate 100 beats per minute. He had right upper quadrant abdominal tenderness but no evidence of peritonitis.
Initial blood tests revealed hemoglobin 78g/L (7.8g/dL), total white cell count 20×103/μL, neutrophils, 18.3×103/μL and platelet count 44×103/μL. Coagulation parameters were in the normal range. Serum creatinine was 4.87mg/dL (431umol/L) and serum urea 63.9mg/dL (22.8mmol/L). Bilirubin was 12.9mg/dL (221μmol/L), alkaline phosphatase 236IU/L, and alanine transaminase (ALT) 152IU/L. C-reactive protein level was 280.2mg/L (2660mmol/L). Urine dipstick was positive for blood, protein and bilirubin and Proteus mirabilis was isolated on urine culture. Ultrasonography revealed normal appearances of the liver and bile ducts, and normal-sized kidneys with a non-obstructing left-sided staghorn calculus. Leptospirosis was considered as a cause of his illness. Serological testing was requested and he was treated initially with piperacillin-tazobactam.
Within 12 hours of admission he became hypotensive with BP 60/40mmHg, developed new onset atrial fibrillation and his temperature rose to 38.5°C. He remained hypotensive despite receiving 4.5L of intravenous fluid, and was transferred to the critical care unit. He required circulatory support with metaraminol up to 70mg/hour and later norepinephrine up to 0.3mg/hour. He developed hemoptysis and his respiratory function quickly deteriorated necessitating non-invasive ventilation. Despite circulatory support, he became anuric and continuous renal replacement therapy was initiated. He was given intravenous hydrocortisone 200mg followed by intravenous methylprednisolone 500mg and doxycycline was added.
After 48 hours, he developed marked hyperbilirubinemia with bilirubin 32.2mg/dL (550μmol/L) and fulminant liver failure with grade II hepatic encephalopathy. Chest radiography revealed diffuse alveolar edema. Blood film revealed no evidence of micro-angiopathic hemolytic anemia and the most probable diagnosis was thought to be leptospirosis, although serological evidence was not yet available. On the 5th day after admission, plasma exchange was initiated. Over the next 48 hours he underwent two 4-litre exchanges using a combination of fresh frozen plasma and human albumin solution. Biochemical parameters, timing of renal replacement therapy and plasma exchange, as well as respiratory and circulatory support requirements are shown in Figure . Renal biopsy was not performed due to thrombocytopenia and the increased risk of bleeding after plasma exchange.
After two plasma exchange sessions, there was a dramatic reduction of the serum bilirubin to 10.5mg/dL (180μmol/L) and of the ALT to 2.7mg/dL (47μmol/L). His mental state and respiratory function also improved significantly. It was possible to gradually withdraw vasopressors and respiratory support and the patient became oriented and alert. Further plasma exchange sessions were not deemed necessary owing to this dramatic improvement. At this point, serological testing was negative for hepatitis A, B, C and E, human immunodeficiency virus, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus and Borrelia burgdorferi. Initial serology for Leptospira IgM was also negative.
Seven days after starting plasma exchange, he was transferred to our renal unit for intermittent hemodialysis, and after 9 days his renal function had recovered sufficiently to stop renal replacement therapy. After 14 days, Leptospira IgM was tested as positive, followed by a positive Leptospira microscopic agglutination test (MAT) tested 30 days after presentation. The patient remains well, with normal liver function tests and a serum creatinine of 1.52mg/dL (135umol/L).