A 62-year-old male patient was referred to the rehabilitation department because of a 2-year history of left limb weakness. He suffered from the first right hemorrhagic stroke 27 mo prior. He lived independently in the community and was ambulatory. However, there was residual motor and gait impairment due to his stroke.
He had a history of hypertension for 10 years, and his systolic blood pressure was up to 190 mmHg. Upon presentation, he took oral antihypertensive drugs to control blood pressure (Baixintong, Goteling, Dyvan, and Furosemide), and the blood pressure was controlled at 130-140/80-90 mmHg.
He had a history of smoking for more than 30 years.
The patient denied any family history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, or stroke.
The blood biochemistry and urine analysis were normal.
Laboratory findings, including routine blood, coagulation function, kidney function, and liver function tests, were within normal ranges. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings on December 12, 2018 revealed chronic infarction in the right part of the pons .
The clinical assessments, including lower extremity subscale of the Fugl-Meyer Assessment (FMA-LE), Berg Balance Scale (BBS), and Timed Up and Go test (TUG), were performed at day 1 (baseline/pretreatment), day 14 (posttreatment), and day 28 (4-wk follow-up) by a trained physical therapist.
Further examinations included plantar pressure analysis (FreeStep, Italy) and 3D gait analysis with synchronized EMG (BTS SMART, Italy). The patient underwent the plantar pressure analysis on days 1, 4, 7, 11, 14, and 28 to detect the dynamic changes of plantar pressure distribution on the affected side and unaffected side during walking. Moreover, the patient underwent 3D gait analysis with EMG on days 1, 14, and 28 to detect gait spatial-temporal parameters (mean velocity and cadence) and muscle activities of the lower limb [root-mean-square of EMG (RMS EMG)], which included the tibialis anterior (TA), gastrocnemius lateralis (GL), and gastrocnemius medialis (GM). The symmetric index (SI) of gait parameters (cadence and stride length) and mean RMS parameters were computed over the stance phase and swing phase. The formula for calculating the symmetry index is as follows: SI = [(Vaffected - Vunaffected)/0.5(Vaffected + Vunaffected)] × 100%, where V represents the parameters put into the formula. The lower the value of SI, the lesser the difference between the affected side and the unaffected side.