A 26 year old South-Asian female, having irregular menstrual cycles but was otherwise healthy presented with fever to the accident & emergency unit with severe generalized myalgia and arthralgia. Clinical assessment revealed a tachycardia with a pulse rate of 108 b.p.m and an initial blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg, indicating shock. Clinical picture favored dengue fever with the classic repertoire of symptoms. Since the patient had taken mefenamic acid, a non steroidal anti-inflammatory agent (NSAID) for myalgia for a few days, her complaint of fever for only one day at presentation suggested an erroneous timeline and a late presentation. Rest of the systemic examination was normal and clinically there was no evidence of leakage of fluid in the chest and abdomen on presentation. She was started immediately on an intravenous infusion of 0.9% saline. Preliminary whole blood analysis demonstrated a low haematocrit of 32% with a reduced haemoglobin of 10.4 g/dL (11–17) and a platelet count of 173 × 10 9/L (150–450). Despite fluid replacement her blood pressure declined to 80/40 mmHg with development of shock together with a reduction of the haematocrit to 29%. At this stage haemorrhagic shock was suspected on a background of NSAID usage. She was transfused with cross matched packed red cells urgently and stabilization of the haemodynamic parameters were noted with a borderline but stable blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg. Haematocrit also stabilized at 35%. An ultra sound scan failed to reveal either leakage of fluid into pleural cavity or the presence of ascitic fluid and intra-abdominal heaemorrhage. However the patient suffered heavy per vaginal bleeding which continued. She was observed in a high dependency setting and 8 hours after admission and clinical stabilization, she developed bradycardia, which was confirmed on electrocardiogram (ECG). In addition to sinus bradycardia, the ECG showed T wave inversions from V2- V5 . Cardiac insult due to dengue virus infection was suspected, although creatine kinase-MB was normal and Troponin I remained negative. ECG was done serially to monitor the progression and on the second day of hospitalization revealed the occurrence of complete heart block with atrio-ventricular dissociation and a junctional rhythm with a short P-R interval . Despite this, the blood pressure remained within acceptable safe limits. In view of satisfactory peripheral perfusion a clinical decision was made not to insert a temporary pacemaker, but to continue close observation for possible haemodynamic compromise occurring due to arrhythmia or worsening due to its presence.
Primary dengue virus infection was confirmed by the presence of positive IgM antibodies with negative IgG antibodies on day 2 of hospitalization. Platelet counts on day 2 of hospitalsation was 157 ×109/L(150–450), but haematocrit value started to rise to 42 and then 45 within a few hours, and clinical examination revealed a right sided pleural effusion which was confirmed on sonographic imaging with the presence of pleural fluid and additionally fluid in the hepatorenal pouch. Fluid resuscitation and replacement was carried out in accordance with the national guidelines on dengue management. Serum magnesium levels were within reference range, with a value of 2.07 mg/dL (1.58-2.55). Serum sodium and potassium values were within reference throughout her stay. Initial serum ionized calcium levels were found to be low normal with a value of 1.14 mmol/L(1.12-1.32) Subsequent ionized calcium levels were found reduced to a value of 1 mmol/L (1.12-1.32). In the background of ECG changes, hypocalcemia was corrected cautiously with intravenous calcium gluconate and the electrolytes were monitored regularly, though the cardiac rhythm remained unchanged. Post correction serum ionized calcium was 1.17 mmol/L and later 1.22 mmol/L (1.12-1.32). Two dimensional echocardiogram revealed an ejection fraction of 50% with normal valves, normal sized atria and ventricles with no systolic wall motion abnormalities though myocardial depression was observed. Liver function tests revealed elevated enzymes. Aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase were 141U/L (<40) and 119 U/L (<40) respectively and later rose to the highest recorded value of 320 U/L(<40) and 187U/L (<40) respectively. Gamma GT was also elevated at 347.5 U/L (7–50). Total protein was normal with a value of 62.4 g/L (60–85) but albumin was marginally reduced to 30.9 g/L (35–54). The patient remained clinically stable but the persistence of bleeding prompted a blood picture analysis to identify and exclude features of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Blood picture revealed moderately low platelets and reactive lymphocytes but no features of DIC. However thromboelastography revealed hypocoagulation, platelet deficiency and fibrinogen deficiency. In light of low platelets (lowest nadir of 10x109/L) and continuous per vaginal bleeding 4 units of factor VII complex was given. Normal sinus rhythm was noted on day 5 of admission, though she remained bradycardic till the time of discharge from hospital.
The bleeding ceased and platelet counts rose gradually. The patient made good clinical recovery with the pleural effusion subsiding and vaginal bleeding ceasing. ECG showed resolution upon review two weeks later.