A 42-year-old Caucasian female presented with a history of high-grade fever and yellow productive cough for one day. The cough was associated with pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath at rest. The patient described chronic dyspnea for approximately 15 years limiting her ability to perform household activities. A review of systems was significant for chronic fatigue and weakness for 15 years, and chronic loose stools with occasional constipation for 10 years. The patient had been transferred from the hospital to a rehabilitation facility one week prior following a prolonged stay in the intensive care unit with multiorgan failure secondary to septic shock. She required ventilatory support for two weeks and temporary hemodialysis for approximately two weeks secondary to acute kidney injury. She was discharged in a stable condition.
Past medical history included asthma for 15 years, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for 5 years, recurrent cough and sinus infections since adolescence requiring antibiotics, severe ear infection requiring emergent mastoidectomy 4 years prior, gastroesophageal reflux disease, irritable bowel syndrome for 10 years, migraine headaches and bipolar disorder for 2–3 years, and tonsillectomy as a child. She had a normal mammogram 4 years prior and a normal colonoscopy approximately 10 years prior, which was performed as part of a work-up for irritable bowel syndrome. She admitted to a 20 pack year smoking history, but denied any alcohol or illicit drug abuse. Medications included levalbuterol, montelukast, fluticasone/salmeterol for 10–15 years, lansoprazole and loratidine/pseudoephedrine as required for a few years, and hydrocodone, quetiapine fumarate and topiramate for approximately 3 years.
On examination, she appeared chronically ill and anxious. She had a temperature of 99.8°F, was tachycardic (137/min), tachypneic (26/min) with a blood pressure of 109/59 mmHg and was saturating 88% on 2 l/min nasal oxygen. Physical examination was significant for bibasilar rhonchi and a central venous catheter in the left internal jugular vein, which had been placed for hemodialysis. She had no clubbing or nasal polyps. The remainder of the physical examination was within normal limits.
Her white blood cell (WBC) count was elevated at 15,800/mm3; this was 8,000/mm3 at discharge. Her blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels were slightly elevated at 24/1.6 mg/dl; however, these were on a downward trend since discharge (29/2.4 mg/dl). Chest X-ray was significant for improving bibasilar infiltrates when compared with a previous chest X-ray at the time of discharge. Cardiac enzymes were normal and arterial blood gas (ABG) showed a pH of 7.5, PC02 of 32 mmHg, PO2 of 48 mmHg and HCO3 of 25 mEq/l on 2 l/min nasal oxygen. The A-a gradient was markedly increased at 104 mmHg. Computerized tomography (CT) of the chest following the pulmonary embolism protocol did not reveal any evidence of pulmonary embolism. Sputum Gram stain with cultures and blood cultures were sent for analysis and she was started on intravenous levofloxacin and vancomycin.
A high-resolution CT thorax scan without contrast was carried out for better delineation of lung parenchyma and was significant for bronchial wall thickening and dilatation predominantly in the lower lung fields consistent with bronchiectasis .
A CT scan of the sinuses revealed chronic maxillary sinusitis. The patient showed clinical improvement by the next day and the blood culture did not have any growth at 72 hours. Sputum culture showed moderate growth of Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Given the patient's recurrent respiratory infections since adolescence and bronchiectasis, a wide differential diagnosis was considered to include genetic conditions such as cystic fibrosis, immotile cilia syndrome, alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency and immunodeficiency. A work-up was initiated which revealed a negative sweat chloride test and normal alpha 1 antitrypsin levels. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) screening test was negative. Ig levels were significantly reduced: IgA 11 mg/dl (normal 70–400 mg/dl), IgM 2 mg/dl (normal 40–230 mg/dl) and IgG 53 mg/dl (normal 700–1,600 mg/dl). The presumptive diagnosis of CVID was confirmed by an inadequate antibody response to pneumococcal vaccine and tetanus toxoid. The patient was given 400 mg/kg of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). She was initially started on a four-week regimen of IVIG infusion, which was later switched to a three-week regimen as the patient had respiratory infections on the four-week regimen. Since initiation of this regimen 18 months ago, the patient has required no hospital admissions or antibiotic treatments and reported a significant improvement in quality of life.