A 63-year-old Caucasian male with known hepatocellular carcinoma presented with multiple cutaneous eruptive keratoacanthomas approximately three and half months after starting sorafenib 400 mg twice daily.
Past medical history included hepatitis C genotype 3A related hepatic cirrhosis (Child–Pugh class A), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, portal and hepatic vein thrombosis, hypertension, and motorbike accident leading to fourth cervical vertebral fracture. Regular medications included perindopril, amlodipine, docusate with senna, and cholecalciferol.
The patient had a known history of actinic keratosis and cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas (first diagnosed more than 4 years before starting sorafenib) and had two well-differentiated squamous cell carcinomas completely excised on his right cheek about 2 months before the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The patient had Fitzpatrick type II skin, and he had no peripheral stigmata of chronic liver disease particularly skin-related manifestations, including spider naevi, palmar erythema, or jaundice before starting sorafenib, although he had several skin tattoos.
The patient initially developed two hyperkeratotic erythematous nodules on the right and left forearm (approximately two and half months after starting sorafenib) with rapid growth over 1–2 months. Clinically, these lesions were assessed as keratoacanthomas; however, both lesions were excised with clear margins, and histology demonstrated features of squamous cell carcinoma with invasion into the deep reticular dermis.
One month later (three and half months after starting sorafenib), the patient presented with approximately 48 new skin lesions of varying size on the left ear lobe , left lateral cheek, right side of the nose, central back, left shoulder, left arm and forearm , right wrist, right arm, and forearm. These lesions appeared on sun-damaged skin and clinically correlated with multiple keratoacanthomas, appearing as multiple, firm, rounded nodules with central crateriform architecture and rapid growth over a month.
The patient subsequently underwent complete excision of 15 lesions as surgical resection of all the lesions was not possible due to a significant number of lesions. Histopathology confirmed that the lesions were eruptive invasive keratoacanthomas (Grzybowski syndrome) . Sorafenib was temporarily stopped for 3 weeks. No new lesions developed during this time; however, there was no spontaneous resolution of the existing lesions. After having a discussion with the patient and given the biochemical (reduction in alpha-fetoprotein levels) and the radiological response, it was decided to restart sorafenib at a lower dose (200 mg twice daily). Acitretin 25 mg daily was commenced for the remaining lesions at the same time when sorafenib was restarted, and no further keratoacanthomas developed during his treatment. The size of the remaining lesions was subsequently reduced with ongoing acitretin treatment. The patient developed pulmonary embolism and multiple cerebral embolic infarcts approximately 6 months later and died. No further lesions appeared or required surgical management, and the residual lesions reduced in size during this period. Sorafenib and acitretin were discontinued 2 weeks before his death.