A 32-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to the endocrinology department with 18-month history of right temporal headache, which was accompanied by visual acuity reduction as well as amenorrhea and galactorrhea. She also reported fatigue, weakness, nausea, and sporadic vomiting. Visual field evaluation demonstrated left eye amaurosis and temporal hemianopsia and lower nasal quadrantanopsia in the right eye. Hormonal evaluation was compatible with panhypopituitarism, and the patient was started on cortisol and T4 replacement therapy.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 4.0 cm diameter solid lobulated lesion with sellar and suprasellar components, predominantly isointense on T1 and hypointense on T2-weighted images and extension to both the cavernous sinuses and optic chiasm. Given that the lesion was associated with optic tract compression, a transesfenoidal surgery for nonfunctioning pituitary macroadenoma was performed. The pathological evaluation revealed pituitary adenoma. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that Ki-67 was positive in 3% of the cells and supporting the diagnosis of a canonical pituitary adenoma. In addition, p53 staining was positive in rare cells.
Although the headache persisted, the patient visual acuity significantly improved, as demonstrated by a striking improvement in visual field examination. The patient was started on cabergoline 0.5 mg 6 cps/week and remained free of progression for 4 years, when in a follow-up chest CT multiple pulmonary nodules with soft tissue density in both lung fields were detected, measuring 0.5–1.2 cm . In accordance with the hypothesis of lung metastasis.
F-18 FDG images showed a markedly increased uptake in the pituitary (SUV 33) as well as in multiple lung nodules (SUV 11.1), pancreas (SUV 6), liver lesions (SUV 10.4) and right kidney nodule (SUV 8.5). Lung biopsy via bronchoscopy confirmed a moderately differentiated neuroendocrine tumor immunohistochemically positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin, prolactin, and growth hormone. Ki-67 was positive in approximately 10% of the cells . Despite a normal chromogranin dosage and of whole body scintigraphy after Tc-99m HYNIC-octreotide injection showing no abnormal uptake in sellar region, the 3D PET/CT Ga-68 DOTATATE images showed moderate uptake in large pituitary lesion (SUV 4.4) and very mild uptake in some of the lung lesions; however, no increased tracer uptake was detected in the liver, pancreas, and right kidney lesions [Figures –].
Given the presence of a pancreatic lump, the diagnosis of a primary pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor was considered, however, the turcica sella MRI showed significantly increased tumor size and signs of chiasm and right optic nerve compression ; the patient was submitted to a transcranial neurosurgery, but only partial removal of the tumor was possible because of hardened consistency.
Tumor tissue of this second sample showed small neoplastic epithelial cells either cubic or polygonal, with slight to moderate nuclear pleomorphism, dense chromatin, and scant pink cytoplasm. The cells were arranged in dense blocks amid fibrous tissue, with extensive necrotic areas, which also showed phagocytosed hemossiderin granules and hematoidin crystals. Mitosis were rare. The diagnosis of pituitary adenocarcinoma was based on the previous lung biopsy which disclosed a metastatic neuroendocrine tumor. The extensive necrotic areas in the pituitary tumor also supported the diagnosis of malignancy . However, Ki-67 was positive only in approximately 4% and p53 in 3% of these cells.
After the diagnosis of pituitary carcinoma and based on PET-CT images obtained with F-18 FDG and Ga-68 DOTATATE, the oncology team indicated concomitant radiochemotherapy. The planned radiotherapy was a total of 5400 cGy (180 cGy × 30 days) plus temozolomide 75 mg/m2/day during the period of radiotherapy. However, on the 19th day of the treatment, the patient returned reporting of fatigue, sore throat, dry cough, and ecchymoses. Blood examination revealed pancytopenia, and despite intensive treatment, the patient died after 10 days due to generalized infection. A postmortem examination was not performed.