Polyhydramnios was detected in a 35-year-old primigravida at 21 weeks' gestation. Esophageal atresia was diagnosed at 28 weeks' gestation on the basis of a small stomach and polyhydramnios on an ultrasound examination. Other abnormalities detected included a dilated upper esophageal pouch and an atrial-septal defect. Our patient underwent periodic therapeutic amniocentesis (1500-1900 ml of fluid per procedure) from 28 weeks' gestation for relief of polyhydramnios and to prevent premature onset of labor. A male fetus with a birth weight of 1980 g was delivered by caesarean section at 37 weeks' gestation. Apgar scores were six and eight at one and five minutes respectively. A clinical examination showed type III EA, right choanal atresia, atrial-septal defect, telecanthus and hypertelorism without any obvious strabismus. His mother's history was negative for familial visual anomalies and there was no evidence of maternal infection or drug abuse during pregnancy. His karyotype was normal.
Uncomplicated esophageal anastomosis with closure of the tracheo-esophageal fistula was performed on the second day of his life. Due to the persistence of suction weakness, our patient was discharged two months later with a naso-gastric tube and enteral nutrition. The baby was referred for pediatric consultation at four months of age. A failure to thrive (length and weight, head circumference on third centile) due to gastroesophageal reflux was documented. A laparoscopic gastric fundoplication was performed. A jejunostomy was also performed to allow continuation of enteral feeding.
The baby underwent a complete ophthalmic evaluation at the age of four months: our patient showed erratic eye movements and was unable to fixate on a light. Horizontal slow nystagmus was observed. His pupil reactivity to light was absent bilaterally. A slit-lamp biomicroscopy of the anterior segment of both eyes was unremarkable. Funduscopy revealed severe bilateral optic disc hypoplasia and mild tortuosity of the retinal blood vessels. His optic discs appeared greyish and oval. F-VEPs were repeatedly non-recordable bilaterally.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans performed at the age of nine months showed normal eye bulb structures, absence of the OC and optic radiations, consistent with extreme hypoplasia or aplasia of those structures. His optic nerves were bilaterally traced only in the intraorbital portion and were of small appearance. There was no evidence of his optic nerves more posteriorly . His other cerebral structures were normal.
An evaluation at 10 months revealed delayed social skills and language development.
General examination at 18 months of life showed reduced stature, persistence of food aversion, and delayed social contacts and language development.