A 33-year-old primigravida, Asian, married, nonsmoker, nonalcoholic woman presented with a 3-week history of IVF-ET with documented history of two embryo implantations and 3-day history of painless vaginal bleeding to our outpatient department in May, 2015. The bleeding had increased in volume and she had passed an increasing number of clots over 1 day prior to the presentation. She had undergone right adnexectomy for a right ovarian cyst 1 year ago. She had no history of infectious diseases including sexually transmitted diseases. She had no significant family history including any inherited disorders. She belonged to the middle socioeconomic class.
On examination, she was conscious, cooperative, and well-oriented with stable vitals. Per abdominal examination revealed mild tenderness in the lower abdomen. Her quantitative beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) level was 9000 mIU/L. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed an anterior uterus (56 mm × 45 mm × 52 mm). A gestational sac (15 mm × 9 mm × 9 mm) with cardiac activity, and a 3.0-mm-diameter yolk sac was located in her uterine cavity . The cervical length was 43 mm. A second gestational sac (15 mm × 11 mm × 8 mm) with cardiac activity, showing a 2.9-mm-diameter yolk sac was located in her cervix . There was a 7 mm × 6 mm × 6 mm hypoechoic nodule (blood clot) at the bottom of her uterus. Her left ovary was normal.
Our patient was admitted with the diagnosis of heterotopic pregnancy. Her hemoglobin level was 110 g/L and leukocyte count was 1 × 109/L. She had continuous vaginal bleeding even after admission. Our patient and her family did not give consent for continuing the intra-uterine pregnancy due to risk of massive bleeding associated with cervical pregnancy. A bilateral UAE was done with an intention of controlling uterine bleeding and preserving the uterus . Two days after the UAE, hysteroscopy was proposed for our patient. Intra-operative findings included an enlarged cervical canal and the discovery of 2 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm and 2 cm × 2 cm × 2 cm dark red tissue in the posterior wall of her cervical canal and anterior wall of her uterine cavity, respectively. Removal of both the gestational products using vacuum suction followed directly by hysteroscopic removal using 7 Fr forceps was performed successfully. After the surgery, there were no retained gestational products inside her cervical canal or intra-uterine cavity. Intra-operative and postoperative bleeding were minimal . Histopathology reports confirmed the presence of chorionic villi and decidual tissue in both gestational products.
Our patient was doing well after surgery and her β-hCG titer level was normal 4 weeks postoperatively. Our patient’s vaginal bleeding stopped 1 week after the surgery.