In September 2021 a 29-year-old male was referred for HAT at our specialised treatment centre. He presented with heroin use disorder, cocaine use disorder, and trichotillomania. Previous medical documentation stated a psychiatric history of attention deficit disorder and combined personality disorder. He had first used heroin at the age of 17, started snorting the substance regularly at the age of 25, and transitioned to daily injection use at the age of 27. The patient has a history of injecting opioids in an unsanitary manner (lots of blood stains following injection) and has received multiple bans from several different harm reduction facilities (e.g., safe injection rooms) due to this. He did not suffer from injection related chronic infections such as HIV or Hepatitis C. His previous OUD treatment history included slow-release oral morphine (SROM) at adequate doses, which did not enable him to cease high-risk use behaviour. Despite receiving OAT, he still regularly injected illicit substances due to the rapid onset of effects provided through IV administration. At his HAT intake appointment, which provides an opportunity for the medical team to meet the patient, outline the therapeutic framework, assess patient's past psychiatric and substance use history, and conduct a medical examination, he emphasised a strong desire to start IV DAM and was deemed eligible for HAT. He was to continue on his SROM regimen until the start of HAT, after which he would receive injectable DAM twice daily and prescribed SROM as take-home medication if necessary.
His first IV DAM administration was scheduled two weeks after his intake appointment. This is the norm, as approval for the treatment must be obtained from the Swiss Federal Office of Public Health before DAM can be prescribed. As by our centre rules, first-ever DAM administrations require scheduled appointments so that patients can be supervised by the physician in charge.
In the first week of treatment, it was clear the patient was having trouble following the strict therapeutic framework of HAT, as he missed eight of 14 scheduled DAM administrations for the week . Moreover, when administering DAM, the patient also demonstrated unsafe injection practices. He had trouble finding suitable access veins, did not disinfect sites prior injection despite repeated requests of nurses, accidentally contaminated the application room with blood after injection, and continued to impulsively pierce his skin without palpating suitable veins. As a result, his IV DAM administrations often took approximately 45 min, either until he found a suitable vein, or until he proceeded to injecting intramuscularly (IM), which corresponds to a common practice in HAT despite off-label use. Small abscesses and erythema on his arms were also evident, which he stated were due to his IV use of street heroin and cocaine. We therefore asked the patient whether he preferred switching to n-HAT, but declined, insisting on continuing to inject. Hence, we prescribed the IM administration of DAM, but the patient was dissatisfied with the effects that IM DAM provided and continued to miss multiple consecutive DAM administrations. Due to repeated missed scheduled DAM administrations, our treatment protocols required DAM to be restarted in low doses as opioid tolerance could no longer be safely assumed.
In the sixth week of treatment, oral DAM was prescribed because the patient was continuing to try injecting intravenously and did not follow the safe injection regimen that is enforced at the HAT centre. He went on to miss 12 of 14 scheduled oral DAM administrations and expressed the urge to continue trying to inject intravenously. Indeed, on the 8th week of treatment, the patient dissolved and injected an SROM capsule in the lavatory of the HAT centre. He was therefore asked to discuss the incident with the physician-in-charge but became verbally aggressive and left the premises. As is the norm in the case of severe non-adherence to the centre's safety guidelines, the patient was referred to a different outpatient treatment centre that only offered traditional OAT options for a 2-week period (“time out”). Upon his return on the first day following this 2-week period, the patient entered the HAT centre and reached into the used syringe container in an effort to find syringes with remaining DAM from other patients. Due to this impulsive and aggressive behaviour, which could have caused harm to himself or others, the patient was once again referred to an outpatient OAT centre for another 2-week period.
Following this second 2-week period, the patient was restarted on oral DAM, but continued to miss most of his scheduled administrations . He continued to express a wish to begin IV DAM, stating that the reason for not attending regularly was that the tablets were not addressing his needs for a rapid onset of effects (“rush”). He also continued to present with skin infections (erythema and abscesses) in the crook of both arms due to intravenous use of illicit substance.
In order to align with the patient's wishes, on the 21st week of treatment, we prescribed injectable DAM additionally to the existing oral prescription, under the condition that he would only inject under the supervision of the physician-in-charge. Despite being provided with instructions during his IV administrations, he continued to have difficulties performing his administrations safely, often taking over an hour, and disinfecting his injection sites only if explicitly reminded to do so. He missed more than half of his scheduled IV DAM administrations during this week .
During the 22nd treatment week, he was offered two alternative treatment options: returning to oral DAM or starting IN DAM. He opted for IN DAM, despite having previously ruled this out as a treatment option, likely because he already knew that oral DAM would not fit his opioid needs. Followingly, he was prescribed 340 mg IN DAM twice daily. The patient received sterile DAM solution and administration was made possible by providing syringes with a screw-on atomizer instead of a needle. The IV dose was converted to IN DAM with the assumption that the bioavailability of morphine following nasal administration lies in-between the bioavailability of oral and IV administrations. After the first IN DAM administration, he reported being pleasantly surprised by the subjective effects. He expressed interest in continuing the IN DAM prescription. The patient started attending more frequently for the first time since initiation of treatment and consistently realised more scheduled DAM administrations than he missed. For the first time in his treatment trajectory, he had not needed to restart his DAM dosing due to missed appointments and possible loss of opioid tolerance. This made it possible to further increase his IN DAM dose in 30 mg increments until the patient stated the dose (two times 430 mg) to fit his needs. After 4 weeks of IN DAM (week 26), the patient’s skin showed a significant improvement (no erythema or abscesses). From a subjective perspective, he expressed that even though the effects of IN DAM were not as strong as IV, they were sufficient to reduce his craving for fast-acting illicit opioids. He stated being happy to see the progression of his skin healing and felt proud of being able to heavily reduce injections of illicit substances. He also stated relief and being under less pressure during the nasal administration process. This was because he had to spend less time in the administration room as the repeated and exhaustingly long search for suitable access veins was no longer necessary.