A 43-year-old White female presented with several days of dizziness culminating in a near-syncopal episode. She took multiple medications, including ivabradine 5 mg twice daily for symptomatic inappropriate sinus tachycardia, with a baseline heart rate around 110 bpm. After noticing a recent drop in her HR to 50 bpm, she discontinued her ivabradine 10 days prior to presentation. Her heart rate remained in the 50–55 bpm range prior to presentation. On arrival, she was afebrile, HR was 55 bpm, BP was 92/55 mmHg, and her oxygen saturation was 97% on room air. Orthostatic vitals were normal, and her physical examination was unremarkable other than a bradycardic pulse with regular rate. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated an ectopic atrial rhythm with HR of 41 bpm (PR interval 120 milliseconds, QRS 80 milliseconds, QTc 397 milliseconds) with overnight telemetry showing sinus arrest and intermittent junctional rhythm. Her baseline ECG demonstrating sinus rhythm is shown in Fig. .
She had a complex medical history including a qualitative platelet dysfunction disorder with multiple deep vein thromboses and pulmonary emboli on apixaban, granulosa cystic ovarian tumor, right nephrectomy for pyelonephritis, chronic pancreatitis, adrenal insufficiency, and hypertension. She worked in the pharmaceutical industry and did not consume tobacco, alcohol, or drugs. Her medication list included albuterol inhaler, apixaban, cetirizine, cholecalciferol, clonazepam, cyanocobalamin spray, eszoplicone, fludrocortisone, hydrocortisone, ivabradine, sertraline, potassium, and magnesium (Additional file ).
The differential diagnosis for a patient with bradycardia is wide. The first determination in a patient with bradycardia is whether it is the result of conduction abnormalities in the sinus node or the atrioventricular (AV) system . In the presented case, the normal PR interval and the absence of dropped beats suggested no AV conduction disease. Sinus bradycardia can be a manifestation of various intrinsic or extrinsic etiologies [, ]. Medications that can exacerbate sinus bradycardia include antihypertensive, anti-arrhythmic, and psychoactive drugs .
Given the acute presentation, an acquired cause was suspected. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) (3.51 μIU/mL), AM cortisol (13.3 μg/dL), serum creatinine (1.2 mg/dL), potassium (4.0 mmol/L), and magnesium (1.9 mg/dL) were normal. A recent echocardiogram showed normal ejection fraction and no major structural abnormalities. There were no signs of ischemia or heart failure (troponin T < 0.01 ng/mL, N-terminal pro BNP 64 pg/mL) and no evidence of situational syncope or carotid sinus hypersensitivity. After ruling out common intrinsic and extrinsic causes, ivabradine toxicity stood out as a potential cause of her bradycardia. Considering drug interactions, we found no agents on her medication list that exacerbate the effects of ivabradine .
Given her symptoms, ivabradine was withheld and she was discharged from the hospital after 2 days of observation in stable condition with discontinuation of ivabradine. Her heart rate upon ambulation was 70 bpm on discharge. Serum specimens were sent to the Toxicology Laboratory at Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center for analysis as measurement of ivabradine levels could not be performed at our institution. Ivabradine concentrations at admission, 12 hours and 36 hours post-admission were 42 ng/mL, 20 ng/mL, and 13 ng/mL, respectively. Ivabradine is expected to follow near-linear elimination with a half-life of 6 hours per the manufacturer, while clinical measurements estimate it at 11 hours . With chronic administration at 5 mg twice daily, the maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) expected is approximately 22 ng/mL 1 hour after oral administration and the mean steady-state plasma concentration is 10 ng/mL . Given the time of the last dose, the serum ivabradine levels should have been undetectable, but instead were twice the expected Cmax. Therefore, we concluded that her bradycardia was secondary to ivabradine toxicity.