A 64-year-old woman who complained of worsening nocturnal dyspnea was admitted to our hospital. Two and half years previously, the patient had felt exertional chest pain and lower extremity edema and had been admitted to our hospital. She did not have a history of hypertension, diabetes, or smoking. On her previous admission, chest X-ray showed an enlarged cardiac silhouette with a cardiothoracic ratio of 68.7% and right side pleural effusion. Electrocardiogram showed T-wave inversion in leads II, III, aVF, and precordial leads . Echocardiography showed that left ventricular wall motion was diffusely reduced with the left ventricular ejection fraction of 24% . The end-diastolic left ventricular dimension was 53 mm. Coronary artery angiography showed no physiologically significant stenosis and left ventriculography showed diffuse hypokinesis of the left ventricle . Histological examination of endomyocardial biopsy samples showed interstitial fibrosis, but neither amyloid deposition nor granulomatous degeneration was observed. Echocardiography 1.5 years later also showed the reduced global left ventricular contractility .
The chief complaint of the patient on the current admission was exertional dyspnea and edema of lower extremities. On admission, her body temperature was 35.8°C, blood pressure was 104/79 mmHg, and pulse rate was 100 bpm. Electrocardiography showed T wave inversion on leads I, II, aVF, and precordial leads, which was more prominent than that observed previously . Echocardiography showed dyskinesis of the apical and hypercontraction of the basal walls . Emergency coronary angiography showed, again, no significant stenosis in the coronary arteries and apical ballooning and basal hypercontraction were demonstrated by left ventriculography . Laboratory examinations showed elevated levels of serum creatine kinase, its MB fraction, and plasma B-type natriuretic peptide . In addition to the treatment with diuretic drugs, the patient was treated with anticoagulant drugs because of the thrombus formation in the left ventricular apex – intravenous administration of heparin for 12 days followed by the oral administration of warfarin. Administration of beta blocker, bisoprolol, was also started. On day 15, follow-up electrocardiogram showed no apparent changes in the giant T-wave inversion ; however, echocardiography showed the disappearance of hypercontraction of the left ventricular basal wall in addition to recovery of the contraction of the thickened apical wall (arrows). The patient was diagnosed with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy . Finding of electrocardiogram, T-wave inversion, normalized at 3 months after the discharge and it remained normal at 8 months after the discharge.