A 50-year-old male presented to us with complaints of swelling, measuring 10*9*4 cm in size over right scapular area since 2 months, which was gradually progressive. There was no history of trauma to the involved area. This swelling was tender, with some local warmth present. The patient had similar swelling on the anterior aspect of right shoulder about 4 months back, which drained spontaneously forming a sinus. At presentation, this sinus was healed but patient had a new sinus track in axilla draining pus. There was gross wasting of muscles and decreased range of motion of shoulder.
On eliciting further history, the patient gave history of evening rise of temperature along with loss of weight and a decrease in appetite. There was no history of Koch’s or Koch’s contact. No significant comorbidities. No other significant history was elicited. This patient was started on oral antibiotics by a general practitioner before presenting to us.
Radiographs of the involved part showed destruction of the humeral head along with sequestrum formation and generalized osteopenia.
Blood investigations showed an elevated Erythrocyte Segmentation Rate, C-Reactive Protein (CRP), and White Blood Cell counts.
Ultrasound demonstrated a hypoechoic collection measuring 10*4.4*8.8 cm with multiple central and peripheral foci within. Along with this, there was evidence of an irregular hypoechoic collection measuring 1.7*1.4*1.2 cm in right axilla tracking up to the skin surface.
MRI demonstrated moderate sized collection/abscess within subcutaneous plane of the back, measuring 10*4.3*10 cm overlying the infraspinatus muscle, communicating with joint cavity. Furthermore, there was complete destruction of humeral head with marked osteolysis and marrow edema. These findings were indicative of infective arthritis of the shoulder with humeral head destruction with associated abscess extending along the back and rotator cuff muscles.
We treated this patient with incision and drainage of the scapular abscess. Around 100 mL of pus was drained. Furthermore, anterior aspect of shoulder was exposed using deltopectoral approach to debride shoulder joint. Sequestrum was removed, which measured approximately 4*4cm. Tissue and pus samples were sent for bacterial culture, Acid Fast Bacillus smear, histopathology, and Xpert MTB/RIF test.
Mycobacterium TB (MTB) was isolated on gene expert and the patient was started on anti-TB treatment regimen (ATT; DOTS-category I). Along with this, he was advised high protein diet. On subsequent follow-up, the patient had complete resolution of symptoms within 4 months. His overall condition improved - his appetite increased and he also gained weight.