A 43-year-old female patient suffered from head trauma resulting from a car accident. She was seated in the passenger seat of a minivan was stopped at a signal light behind a truck, and another truck collided with her car from behind. The minivan then repeatedly collided with the trucks in front and behind. During that collision, her head repeatedly struck the minivan seat resulting in whiplash injuries. The patient reported that she did not experience loss of consciousness or post-traumatic amnesia. The patient’s initial Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15. After the head trauma, she felt pain in both legs, mild motor weakness in all four extremities, and memory impairment. Although she visited several hospitals to determine the cause of her pain, she was unable to obtain a precise diagnosis for her pain because the conventional brain and whole spine MRIs did not show any abnormality. At eight years from onset, she was diagnosed as CRPS type 1 with the clinical features of hyperalgesia and mild edema and motor weakness of both legs; moreover, abnormality was not detected on plain radiography for hand and leg, three-phase bone scan, and thermography. Nine years after the head trauma, she visited the rehabilitation department of our university hospital complaining of pain in the right arm and both legs. The characteristics and severity of the pain were as follows: Constant tingling and burning sensation with allodynia and hyperalgesia (visual analog scale score: Right arm and leg, 9; left leg, 7) . She also exhibited mild weakness of the four extremities (4−/4), mild edema of both legs, and memory impairment. However, trophic changes of the arm and legs, including skin and nails, were not observed. In addition, she mentioned that she did not experience the distal edemas on the right arm and both legs, which could observe during the acute stage of CRPS . Electromyography for all extremities and trunk failed to detect any abnormality (A). The patient provided signed, informed consent, and the study protocol was approved by the institutional review board of our university hospital (YUMC 2019-06-032, approved on 21 June 2019).