An 85-year-old Iranian, Caucasian woman presented with low grade fever, anorexia, abdominal discomfort and fullness in her left abdomen for the last six months. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan performed six months previously revealed a filling defect in her spleen, which was interpreted as a splenic cyst. No specific treatment was done at that time.
On examination, she was mildly anemic and complained of fatigability. On abdominal examination a markedly enlarged spleen was palpated. No peripheral lymphadenopathy was noted. Table shows her laboratory data. Unfortunately, her PTHrP measurement was not available to us. Her chest and mediastinal CT scan was unremarkable except for some fibrotic changes compatible with her age. No mediastinal lymphadenopathy was seen. In her abdominal CT scan, it was noted that her spleen was large and that it contained a definite mass occupying about two thirds of the splenic space. No abdominal or para-aortic lymph nodes were seen .
Her serum calcium was gradually corrected by the use of intravenous saline and furosemide over the next few days. She did not receive any other specific treatment for her hypercalcemia (such as calcitonin or bisphosphonates). On the fifth day of her admission, she underwent a total splenectomy and a huge spleen measuring 22 × 18 × 14 cm, weighing 1800 grams and harboring a firm mass was extracted. Microscopic evaluation revealed a high-grade malignant lymphoma with foci of necrosis . Her immunohistochemistry was positive for LCA, CD20, and PTHrP . After surgery her serum calcium levels were 8.5-9.6 mg/dl but her low grade fever and anorexia resumed. A bone marrow biopsy was performed and there was no bone marrow involvement. Based on the lack of lytic bone lesions, no bone marrow involvement, no plasmacytosis in her bone marrow, and the lack of gammopathy in her serum protein electrophoresis, other hematological malignancies, including multiple myeloma, were ruled out. She was treated with six courses of R-CHOP. Based on her age (85-years-old), weight (70 kg), height (1.58 m) and body surface area (1.7 m2), the dosage of the chemotherapy regimen was as follows: 350 mg/m2 of rituximab for a total dose of 600 mg, 600 mg/m2 of cyclophosphamide for a total dose of 1000 mg, 40 mg/m2 of Adriamycin (doxorubicin) for a total dose of 70 mg, 1.4 mg/m2 of Oncovin (vincristine) for a total dose of 2 mg per injection and 75 mg of prednisolone daily for five days. After the second course of chemotherapy, her general condition improved, her fever disappeared and her appetite resumed. Five months after therapeutic courses, there were no clinical or laboratory signs of disease. Figure shows an abdominal CT scan performed one year after surgery.