A 52-year-old man presented with complaints of headache and blurring of vision in the right eye for the past 1 year, with gradual deterioration of vision. MRI showed typical findings of pituitary macroadenoma . The patient underwent transsphenoidal microscopic resection of pituitary adenoma.
With a small footprint of less than 1.5 m × 1.5 m (5 ft x 5 ft), our pMRI machine requires minimal space and was parked in a corner inside the OR, with its ultra-low-field (0.064 T) magnet enclosed in a secure steel housing. Standard surgical instruments were used during the procedure, which includes microscopes, retractors, and drills. In addition, the monitors and anesthesia machines were not required to be MRI-compatible. After anticipated safe tumor resection, the patient underwent an intra-operative ultra-low-field pMRI scan to determine the extent of any residual tumor. This motor-powered pMRI scanner, controlled by a joystick, enables effortless maneuvering by a single technician, guaranteeing efficient and precise positioning without disrupting the operating room ecosystem. For safety, and to prevent any interference, the 5 Gauss (0.5 mT) field ring was extended. All the OR Equipments, such as IV pumps, ventilators, and other MRI-incompatible devices were placed outside this 5 Gauss (0.5 mT) line . This field ring extends only 36 centimeters from the magnetic center. In our experience, ferromagnetic objects can be brought close to the scanner without any significant attraction being felt.
After the completion of the surgical resection, the patient remained in the same surgical position on a standard operating room table. The pMRI scanner was subsequently brought to the head end of the operating room table, and the technicians carefully positioned the patient’s head inside the machine’s head coil. This coil is specifically designed to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of the acquired images. The scanner was then connected to a regular 110 V outlet before the initiation of imaging. Our imaging protocol for pituitary brain surgery was composed of a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery coronal, axial T1-weighted image without contrast and T2, Sagittal T2, and diffusion-weighted imaging and apparent diffusion coefficient sequences [-Intra-operative MRI]. This process added 30 min to the overall duration of the surgery. The pMRI images obtained confirmed that the intended resection goal had been achieved. The whole procedure concluded very smoothly and without any complications. Postoperatively (after 24–48 h), ultra-low-field pMRI exam was performed alongside conventional MRI for comparison [-Post-operative MRI]. pMRI performed on the 1st postoperative day showed comparable results.