A 90-year-old Syrian man with a 6-year history of an increase in size of his right scrotum, without pain presented to the urology clinic with enlargement of, and slight pain in, his right testis. He is a farmer with seven sons and has been smoking for 55 years. In his medical history, he had controlled hypertension and no history of testicular trauma or inflammation. A clinical examination showed the presence a painless, massive enlargement occupying his right scrotum, impermeable to light and with no inguinal lymph node palpable. His vital signs were within normal limits. A scrotal ultrasound scan showed a hypoechoic solid mass measuring approximately 10 cm in his right testis. Laboratory test results revealed tumor markers: alpha fetoprotein (AFP) of 3.1 KU/L (normal range 0.5–5.8 KU/L), the beta subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (βhCG) of 2.38 IU/L (normal range 0–2.5 IU/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 420 IU/L (normal range 200–400 IU/L).
Routine blood test results were within normal limits. The findings suggested testicular tumor and a computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen and pelvis was performed and showed no retroperitoneum metastases. His right testicle was removed radically by a right inguinal approach. The pathology test result showed a tumor that is very rare in elderly patients, a classical testicular seminoma. A histological study revealed a nodular solid mass measuring 95*80 mm, with a solid gray cut surface with focal necrosis friable in consistency. The tumor had invaded the hilar soft tissues and tunica albuginea, but without tunica vaginalis invasion. Consequently, the stage was pT2, which it is when the tumor is limited to the testis (including rete testis invasion) with lymphovascular invasion or when the tumor invades the hilar soft tissue or epididymis or penetrates the visceral mesothelial layer covering the external surface of tunica albuginea, with or without lymphovascular invasion. Histological sectioning showed sheets of large polygonal cells , which stained positively for CD117 and negative for cytokeratin and vimentin, which is consistent with a diagnosis of classical seminoma. A follow-up oncology consultation suggested outpatient surveillance without adjuvant chemotherapy. Our patient was hospitalized for 24 hours and discharged without complications. Tumor markers, hematological tests, and a CT evaluation were repeated after 6 months and again after 12 months, and all were within normal limits without any evidence for retroperitoneal metastases.