A 16-year-old male patient was hit by a bullet in the outer edges of the right anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS), where the exit point was about 10 cm lower and more inside the right buttock (see ). The patient's vital signs were stable at the time of the visit, and after performing primary and secondary measures, focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) was also performed, the result of which was negative. No wounds or evidence of other injuries were observed in the examinations. In the abdominal examination, the only positive finding was mild tenderness in the right upper quadrant (RUQ). Rectal examination was normal and no evidence of bleeding or damage to the rectum and anus was observed. In the initial tests, the only significant finding was the presence of leukocytosis in 17,000. There was no active bleeding from the patient's wound, and no connection with the abdominal cavity or pelvis was seen in the examination of the wound. The pulses of the upper and lower extremities were full and regular. Neurological examination was normal. There was no hematuria. Due to the stability of the patient's vital signs, a CT scan was performed instead of an abdomen X-ray. In the CT scan we could detect slight isodensity area between liver and hepatic flexure of colon suggesting a slight amount of ascites. Another notable finding in the CT scan was a small thickening of the colon (see ). Finally, as the severity of colon injury in the CT scan wasn't clear and the tenderness was spreading from RUQ to epigastric we performed laparotomy. The abdomen was opened with a midline incision, the abdominal cavity was clean, and no blood or digestive secretions were seen. The stomach and small intestine were examined from the ligament of Treitz to the end. No pathological findings were seen. The colon was also examined. A perforation of less than one centimeter was seen on the posterior surface of the hepatic flexure of the colon, which was sealed by the surrounding soft tissue (see ). Due to the cleanliness of the abdominal cavity, the initial repair of the colon was performed and after washing, the abdomen was dried and closed. The bullet wound was also washed and debrided. Finally, after 6 days, the patient was discharged with a good general condition.