A 38-year-old lady who was otherwise healthy presented with 6-month history of intermittent diarrhoea since her trip to Vietnam 2 weeks before the onset of symptoms. She had no fever, vomiting or abdominal pain. Her stool was watery with no blood or mucus. Her symptoms did not subside despite treatment prescribed by general practitioners. She also had severe weight loss of 5 kg over 6 months. She claimed that she had taken some homemade salad during her stay in Vietnam for her holiday. She worked as a dental nurse in Hong Kong while her husband stayed in Vietnam and used to visit her twice yearly. She did not take any long-term medications before the onset of symptoms nor have any sign and symptoms suggestive of hyperthyroidism. Her blood counts including hemoglobin, white blood cells and platelet counts were normal when she presented to us 6 months after onset of symptoms. The renal and liver functions tests were also unremarkable expect for a low albumin level of 33 g/L. Her thyroid function tests, fasting glucose, calcium and phosphate levels were all normal.
Microscopic examination and culture on repeated stool samples collected within 6 months’ time did not yield any bacteria, virus, or parasites initially. In view of the prolonged diarrhoea, an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (UGIE) and a colonoscopy were performed. The UGIE only identified mild gastritis and the duodenum appeared normal. The colonoscopy showed only a small area of erythema over the descending colon with normal terminal ileum and other parts of colon. However, numerous intracellular protozoa could be identified at the apical half of the enterocytes of both the terminal ileum and the duodenum. Villus blunting with non-specific inflammatory cells infiltration of the terminal ileum was also noted . The electron microscopy of the parasite demonstrated a typical morphology of an Apicomplexa organism. The merozoites were surrounded by layers of thick parasitophorous vacuoles . A binucleated schizont could be seen inside a parasitophorous vacuole . Mature merozoites could also be identified . Further stool samples using modified acid-fast staining showed typical Cyclospora oocyst . An unstained oocyst, the “ghost” cell, could also be found .
Further history revealed that her husband had multiple sexual partners in Vietnam. The lady was subsequently diagnosed to be HIV positive and the baseline CD4 count was only 98 cells/μL with HIV ribonucleic acid (RNA) of 420,000 copies/mL. She was initially treated with 2 weeks of ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily. However, her response was suboptimal. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) 960 mg twice daily was then introduced and her symptoms totally subsided after two weeks. Anti-retroviral therapy (ART) was also prescribed and her CD4 count went up to 153 cells/μL in half-year’s time. Her HIV RNA had become undetectable after 3 months of ART and she remained well. She also had weight gain of 5 kg after 6 months of ART.