A 35-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to the internal medicine clinic of our hospital with diarrhea, weight loss and abdominal pain. He had abdominal pain after food intake and had to go to the toilet after food intake. His stools were greenish and foul smelling and the abdominal pain subsided after defecation. He was admitted to our hospital 1.5 years ago for the same complaints. On physical examination mild tenderness was noted in his abdomen. Multiple painful subcutaneous lipomas of variable size were noted in his arms and legs. In addition, many papular lesions were found on the skin of his pubic region. His sister, his sister’s children and his uncle’s son had histories of celiac disease. In addition, his mother, brother, sister, his sister’s child and his uncle’s son had a history of multiple lipomas. The results of his blood tests and stool tests were within normal limits. Antigliadin IgA, antigliadin IgG and antiendomysium IgA antibodies (anti-EMA) were positive. A gluten-free diet was suggested for the patient, and his multiple subcutaneous lesions were referred to general surgery.In the first duodenal biopsies, four tissue samples, which were 0.2cm by 0.1cm in diameter and beige in color, had completely flattened villi and an atrophic appearance upon microscopic examination . Intraepithelial lymphocytes were present at a ratio of 45%, and a severe inflammatory lymphoplasmacytic infiltration was present in the lamina propria . After 3 months, slightly flattened villi were observed under the microscope in the four beige tissue samples from the control biopsy, which were 0.2cm by 0.1cm in diameter . In the lamina propria, the lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory infiltration was mild and the presence of intraepithelial lymphocytes was observed at a ratio of approximately 15% .
One month later, the lesions of his upper and lower limbs were excised by general surgery, with a prediagnosis of lipoma, and sent to the pathology laboratory. In macroscopic appearance, 33 mostly encapsulated solid yellow masses were observed from 0.3cm to 5cm in diameter. On histopathological examination the tumors were encapsulated and contained lipocytes . These lesions, which were taken from his legs and thighs, were reported as multiple lipomas. In addition, skin biopsies were taken from the lesions in his pubic region for histopathological examination during this operation . One skin biopsy that was 0.4cm in diameter was histopathologically reported as seborrheic keratosis.