A 57-year-old Caucasian woman complained of pain in the right hypochondriac region.
Fifteen days after a trip to Egypt, the patient was referred to a local hospital where her temperature was recorded at 38.5 °C. Laboratory examination showed increased cholestasis indices (alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase > 5-6 times higher than the normal range) and acute inflammation of gall bladder as discovered during US. The patient was transferred to our unit for a second opinion.
The patient’s medical history was unremarkable.
The patient’s family history was unremarkable.
Physical examination did not reveal any abnormality apart from painful sensations during palpation of the right hypochondriac area.
Increased cholestasis indices were confirmed, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were notably increased. Antinuclear, antimitochondrial, anti-smooth muscle actin, perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, and anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies, and viral hepatitis markers were negative. Alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were within normal limits.
Abdominal US scanning showed a coarse echostructure with irregularity of the liver surface, similar to that of a cirrhotic liver. Considering the marked inhomogeneity of the liver structure revealed by US scan, further contrast-enhanced US (CEUS) was performed , which showed some small areas of contrast washout during the portal phase. Due to the high suspicion of cirrhosis associated with neoplastic areas, an US-guided liver biopsy was performed . Histological examination hypothesized the diagnosis of liver hamartomas (small clusters of dilated biliary ducts surrounded by fibrous stroma with epithelial lining of biliary ducts formed by a single layer of cuboidal or flattened biliary epithelium) . Consequent MR cholangiography sequences enhanced with gadolinium-based contrast showed multiple hypointense nodular lesions on T1-weighted images, hyperintense lesions on T2-weighted images, and no enhancement in arterial phase after Gadolinium infusion. The lesions did not communicate with the biliary tract and a typical “starry sky” image was recorded . Based on the above-mentioned findings, the diagnosis of biliary hamartoma, first described by Von Meyenburg in 1918, was established.