Seven years before his admission to our hospital, a 44-year-old male (patient V: 4) experienced right lower limb weakness, leg stiffness, and unstable walking. The symptoms appeared without obvious inducement. The patient was from the Han Chinese population in Shandong Province, China.
Initially, he felt that his symptoms were mild. He was never treated, and his symptoms gradually worsened over time. In the 4th year after onset, he began to experience hotness in his right knee joint, his gait became increasingly slow, his legs felt stiff, and lumbago appeared. The patient’s lumbago symptoms were most severe at night during sleep and in the morning. Meanwhile, the patient felt that the range of motion of both knees was limited, which aggravated when he was tired. He could not run and had difficulty climbing stairs.
The patient was healthy before. The patient denied a history of surgery and trauma, diabetes mellitus, cardiac disease, or infectious diseases.
His family history revealed that he was born to non-consanguineous parents, but similar symptoms were found in several of his relatives.
Neurological examination showed that the cranial nerves of the proband were not abnormal. The proximal and distal muscle strength and muscle tone of double upper extremities were normal. Biceps reflexes, triceps reflexes, and radial reflexes were normal, and bilateral Hoffman signs were negative. The proximal and distal muscle strength of both lower limbs was normal. Lower limb hypermyotonia and bilateral knee reflex were enhanced. Bilateral Chaddock’s sign, Oppenheim sign, and Gordon sign were negative, while Babinski sign was positive. There was no muscle atrophy or abnormal involuntary movement.
The proband was initially suspected of having myelopathy. Further laboratory examinations, such as cerebrospinal fluid sample analysis and determination of the serum vitamin B12 level, were conducted. No inflammatory or immune lesions were detected. Neuro-electrophysiological examination suggested normal motor nerve conduction, sensory nerve conduction, and needle electromyography.
The magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spinal cord, thoracic spinal cord, and lumbar spinal cord revealed only intervertebral disc herniation of the cervical and lumbar spine. No obvious swelling, atrophy, or compression of the spinal cord was found.
After obtaining written informed consent from the proband and his relatives, a detailed investigation of this Han Chinese family from Shandong Province, China was conducted. This family was traced back to the sixth generation, with a total of 11 people suffering from the disease, with an AD genetic pattern . Five deceased individuals had spastic paraplegia in their lifetime, including four males (patients I: 1, II: 1, II: 2, and IV: 6) and one female (patient III: 2). Of the six living patients, five were male (patients IV: 2, IV: 4, V: 4, VI: 1, and VI: 3), and one was female (patient V: 3).
Other living and symptomatic patients initially showed weak legs or unstable walking. They developed different clinical symptoms as they grew older and the course of the disease progressed. The proband’s father (patient IV: 4) and uncle (patient IV: 2) were affected by the illness in middle age, with a long course of disease, severe symptoms, difficulty in lifting the legs, and a scissor gait. Neurological examination revealed the increased lower limb hypermyotonia and tendon hyperreflexia, and bilateral Babinski signs were positive. They started using crutches to assist walking approximately 20 years and 10 years after onset, respectively. The proband’s nephew (VI: 1), now 20 years old, developed a gait disturbance at the age of 10-years-old. Although there was obvious difficulty in walking, he did not need the assistance of appliances. The proband’s cousin (V: 3) was a female patient with an onset age of 46-years-old and a disease course of 2 years who presented with mild weakness of both lower limbs. The son (VI: 3) of the proband, aged 19-years-old, was an asymptomatic mutation carrier. The mean age of onset of symptoms was 36.6 ± 14.1-years-old. The disease course was 14.8 ± 10.9 years. All the surviving patients were intellectually normal with no cognitive impairment, peripheral neuropathy, bladder dysfunction, and claw-feet. No scoliosis was detected. Their age of onset, course of disease, sex, spastic paraplegia rating scale, and disability stage were recorded and evaluated. The spastic paraplegia rating scale is a composite measurement modality. It includes walking distance without pause, gait speed, quality of gait, climbing stairs, arising from chair, spasticity quality, weakness and contractures, pain caused by spastic paraplegia-related symptoms, and bladder dysfunction. The score for each item ranged from 0 (no dysfunction) to 4 (the most severe dysfunction), and the highest total score of all items is 52. Thus, higher spastic paraplegia rating scale scores represent heavier dysfunction. Additional data are presented in Table .