A 60-year-old female patient with no remarkable medical history was admitted to our hospital due to the presence of involuntary movements and weakness in her left upper extremity. Upon examination, her level of consciousness was Glasgow Coma Scale: E4V5M6, and she exhibited weakness, specifically in her left upper extremity. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a high-density area (3 mL) located in the right motor cortex, suggesting subcortical hemorrhage . Contrast-enhanced CT revealed no enhanced lesion . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), T1 weighted and T2 weighted images displayed a mass with mixed intensity and the abscense of surrounding flow void [ and ], and T1 weighted images wigh Gadolinium contrast exhibited a heterogenous intensity mass with surrounding with surrounding contrast enhancement [-]. No other abnormalities were observed in other regions. Cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) indicated the absence of vascular staining, abnormal arteriovenous shunts, or developmental venous malformations adjacent to the subcortical hemorrhagic lesion . Based on these findings, we established a diagnosis of cavernous hemangioma with hemorrhagic change. Despite the lesion being small and located within an eloquent area, it was symptomatic, and the presence of prolonged cerebral edema on imaging led us to decide on surgical intervention. The patient underwent a right frontal craniotomy under general anesthesia. Upon exposure of the cortex, edema, and swelling were observed, and the brain surface was pale above the lesion . A 15-mm cortical incision was made, revealing a reddish, nonencapsulated mass lesion with hemorrhagic change. The border between the white matter and the lesion was well-defined, allowing for complete tumor resection [-]. The excised specimen exhibited a reddish-black color [ and ]. Upon inspection of the lesion, no mulberry formations were identified , suggesting that this lesion might differ from cavernous hemangioma. Postoperatively, the patient experienced no complications, and her left upper extremity function recovered to a level of practical usefulness. She was discharged from our hospital on the 17th day following the surgery. Histopathological examination of the lesion revealed the presence of capillary-like vascular structures with thin-walled endothelial cells displaying irregular anastomoses and areas of hemorrhage [ and ]. There was no blood filling within the vessels, as seen in the histopathology of cavernous hemangiomas, and the extravascular area consisted of thick connective tissue. Immunostaining reveals numerous CD31 and CD34-positive capillary endothelial cells. Perivascular cells were positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA). The p53 was negative, and the Ki67 positivity was low (<3%), consistent with a benign hemangioma [-]. The epithelial cell marker, cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), is negative, ruling out metastatic clear cell carcinoma. The intercapillary cells were negative for inhibin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and glucose transporter-1 (GLUT1) (red blood cells were positive), excluding hemangioblastoma, meningioma, and hemangiopericytoma [-].