A 48-year-old man with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and asthma presented with fatigue, and night sweats, and there were no palpable lymph nodes in his physical examination. Initial complete blood- cell counts included a hemoglobin (Hb) of 12.5 g/dL, white blood- cell (WBC) count of 22.1 × 109/L with 67% blasts on peripheral blood smear, and a platelets count of 91 × 109/L. In the bone- marrow (BM) aspiration, blasts accounted for 88.1% of ANCs, which were positive for CD9, CD10, CD13, CD19, CD20, CD34, CD38, CD58, CD66c, CD123, HLA-DR, cCD79a, and TdT on flow cytometry. The karyotype was revealed as 46,XY,t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)/47,idem, + der(22)t(9;22) by chromosomal tests. BCR-ABL1 fusion was detected by FISH analysis and confirmed as a major transcript (b3a2). There was no specific familial history for any hematologic malignancies.
IKZF1 exon 4 ~ 6 somatic deletion was detected in the copy number variant analysis of the next- generation sequencing (NGS). Aside from the somatic ABL1 mutation (c.688C > T, p.Pro230Ser), we found two novel DDX41 mutations, c.639delC, p.Thr214Profs*8 and c.259C > T, p.Leu87Phe, and confirmed the frameshift variant of DDX41 being of germline origin by Sanger sequencing of skin fibroblast (see Additional file ). Both mutations were not reported in gnomAD, 1000 Genomes, and HGVD database. Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) calculated that p.Leu87Phe has deleterious effect and PolyPhen-2 predicted to be probably damaging.
Genetic analysis was performed on five patients, including the present study (Ph + B-ALL), two cases of Ph + B-ALL accompanying IKZF1 deletion without DDX41 mutation (Ph + B-ALL), one case of AML with double DDX41 mutation (AML), and one case of normal BM, whom were examined for HM at Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital, South Korea, from November 2018 to May 2020. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital (IRB no. 2021–01-003). The fresh BM, whole blood (WB), and skin fibroblast specimens were stored at -80 °C before genome sequencing and GEP.
Briefly, genomic DNA were extracted from proband’s skin fibroblast, WB, and BM samples at initial diagnosis using a QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, MD, USA) according to standard procedures. Targeted NGS with a hematologic malignancy comprehensive panel (Celemics, Seoul, South Korea), which examines 85 hematologic malignancy- associated genes (see Additional file ) were performed in all samples. We confirmed sequence mutations and exonal deletions by Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) (SALSA MLPA P335-C1 ALL-IKZF1 probemix, MRC Holland, Amsterdam, Holland), respectively.
To determine whether two mutations in different regions of the DDX41 of the patient were in different alleles, the cDNA including region of interest was amplified with the following primers (Forward, 5′-gaggaagagcagcaggacag-3′; Reverse, 5′-tcatgtcacggccagataga-3′). The PCR product was then cloned into the TA-cloning vector (Topcloner TA kit; Enzynomics, Daejeon, Korea) and ten clones were sequenced which included the corresponding regions of the DDX41.
RNA was extracted from proband’s BM samples at initial diagnosis using an RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen) and then evaluated with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) for RNA integrity. We obtained a total of 3.5 µg of cDNA after amplification with a GeneChip™ WT Pico Kit (Affymetrix, CA, USA) and processed it for GEP. GEPs were generated using the GeneChip Human Gene 2.0 ST Array (Affymetrix). A robust multi-average (RMA) method implemented in Affymetrix® Power Tools (APT) was used for data summarization and normalization. The results were exported to gene-level RMA analysis and differentially expressed gene (DEG) analysis was performed. Statistical significance of the expression data was determined using fold change. Gene-enrichment and functional annotation analysis for a significant probe list was performed using Gene Ontology and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, ). All data analysis and visualization of differentially expressed genes was conducted using R 3.3.2 (The R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).
We compared the differentially expressed genes of Ph + B-ALL with two cases of Ph + B-ALL in order to elucidate the role of DDX41 in leukemogenesis. Assessment of differential expression between samples was conducted employing linear models for microarrays in R, and genes with fold change ≥ 3 and p < 0.05 were to be considered significant. For a DEG set, hierarchical cluster analysis was done in all samples in order to assess the degree of relatedness; and samples were clustered using complete linkage and Euclidean distance as a measure of similarity.