The patient was a 19-year-old male who had been in a motorcycle accident. The patient was admitted to our department as an open tibial plateau fracture 3 h post-injury. The emergency medical staff at the scene of the injury provided simple dressing and stabilization. The main complaint of the patient was pain and bleeding with limited movement of the knee.
On physical examination, after an advanced trauma life support protocol was performed in the emergency department, the patient’s blood pressure and pulse were within normal limits. There was a 5-cm-long wound without active bleeding on the anterior aspect of the knee joint . The femoral condyle was exposed, the suprapatellar pouch was empty, and the injury endpoint was visible at the quadriceps tendon. Internal and external stress tests of the knee joint were negative, and anterior/posterior drawer tests were not able to be performed, as the patient could not tolerate them. The patient had a normal dorsalis pedis pulse without neurovascular injuries or any other accompanying injuries. Plain radiographs showed complete intra-osseous dislocation that locked into a tibial plateau fracture. Computed tomography showed a partial avulsion fracture of the patella and intercondylar eminence .
The patient was taken to the operating room for emergency surgery. Intraoperatively, the patella was found to have rotated 360° and was completely locked into the tibial plateau fracture. The dislocated patella was found inside the tibia, approximately 10 cm below the tibia plateau. There were avulsion fractures of the anterior/posterior cruciate ligament insertions on the tibia and a partial patellar avulsion fracture with a “hat-off” type rupture of the quadriceps tendon at the attachment point on the patella; these operative findings confirmed our preoperative diagnosis. After thorough surgical debridement, the patella was pulled out. The tibial plateau fracture was restored and stabilized using an anatomical steel plate (Double Medical Technology, China). The quadriceps tendon was repaired with 3 anchors (Arthrex, USA) in the upper pole of the patella, and then a 2-mm transverse tunnel was established by using K-wire in the middle of the patella, and a 1-mm wire was guided to the patella and crossed the quadriceps tendon, leading to a tension band fixation . Knee joint movement confirmed stable fixation, and the anterior/posterior drawer tests were positive (grade 2). As preoperative imaging did not show any apparent displacement of the tibial intercondylar eminence after the avulsion fracture, we performed no special procedure to manage it.
Postoperative wound healing was satisfactory, without infection or other complications. Postoperative imaging showed anatomical restoration of the tibial plateau fracture, with satisfactory positioning of the patella . The patient started functional rehabilitation with the use of a brace at 3 weeks postoperatively. The early physiotherapy focused on gradually regaining ROM, including contiguous passive motion and quadriceps function with closed chain exercises. The knee range of motion was 0–110° at 6 weeks postoperatively. Partial weight-bearing exercise was planned to start at 6 weeks postoperatively, with wire removal at 8 weeks postoperatively. The patient returned at 3 months post-surgery; he was able to walk without a limp and gained full range of knee motion without any complaint of patellar or knee subluxation and was already back to normal life. A stable joint had been obtained, and the quadriceps tendon strength was grade 5/5. The patient’s knee function was evaluated subjectively using the IKDC 2000 knee-ligament standard evaluation form. The IKDC score of the injured knee was 85 at the final follow-up. Written informed consent for the case report was obtained from the patient and his family.