A 11-year-old male presented to the pediatric ED with epigastric pain, vomiting and palpitations.
Patient’s medical history included a pauci-symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection in the previous six months, confirmed by the finding of Immunoglobulin (Ig) G for SARS-CoV-2 in the absence of IgM, and was negative for syncope or other cardiac manifestations. There was no familiarity for congenital heart disease or sudden cardiac death.
At admission general conditions were not so poor, with body temperature of 36.5 °C, oxygen saturation in room air of 99%, respiratory rate of 15 breaths/min, systemic blood pressure of 95/65 mmHg, except for a heart rate (HR) of 250 beats/min. The anthropometric parameters were: weight 32 kg, height 135 cm, body surface area 1.095 m2.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed supraventricular tachycardia with a narrow QRS; atrial rate (AR) was equal to ventricular (VR) and was 230 b/min. Echocardiography revealed mild depressed biventricular function with ejection fraction (EF) of 53%, left atrial dilatation and moderate mitral regurgitation.
Adenosine was administered twice: first dose 0,1 mg/kg; second dose 0,2 mg/kg - both ineffective.
The administration of adenosine (0,1 mg/kg), however, allowed us to make diagnosis of atypical atrial flutter (AFL) .
Therefore, therapy with intravenous flecainide (2 mg/kg in 15 min) was attempted with no response.
Continuous intravenous amiodarone (300 mg/m2/d) was started leading to unsatisfactory heart rate control and, above all, unsuccessful rhythm control.
Due to the persistence of AFL, synchronized direct current cardioversion (first shock at 75 J and second one at 100 J) was performed without success.
Therefore, oral propranolol (1 mg/kg/d) was added to therapy with a better heart rate control but not as expected. After 24 h intravenous amiodarone was discontinued and oral amiodaron (150 mg/m2/d) was started.
In the following days, further attempts at both synchronized direct current cardioversion and transesophageal atrial pacing were ineffective to stop dysrhythmia.
Therefore, propranolol posology was increased to 1.5 mg/kg/d and oral flecainide (4.7 mg/d) was introduced. The result was represented by a gradual reduction of ventricular response and, after two days of this therapy, ECG demonstrated the dysrhythmia disorganization with the appearance of polyfocal atrial tachycardia.
Due to the persistence of protracted phases of ectopic atrial tachycardia, flecainide was further increased to 5 mg/d with progressive reduction of the arrhythmic pattern.
During the hospitalization the patient was monitored using continuous ECG, several Holter ECG and 12-lead ECG more than once a day, as well as echocardiographic evaluation and periodical biochemistry (the latter always within normal range).
Combined therapy with amiodarone (150 mg/m2/d), propranolol (1.5 mg/kg/d) and flecainide (5 mg/Kg/d) was able to ensure satisfactory heart rate control, but without restoring sinus rhythm and appearance of stable upper left atrial rhythm with HR of 85 beats/min .
Echocardiography also showed normalization of ventricular function and atrial size. Mild mitral regurgitation persisted due to kneeling of the anterior valve leaflet.
In consideration of evident clinical and echocardiographic improvement, the patient was discharged and underwent follow-up.
After one month of follow-up, to date, this therapy continues to show satisfactory results in terms of clinical conditions and control of dysrhythmia.
As further confirmation, we asked the parents for a previous ECG of the child and we learned that he already had a baseline left upper atrial rhythm two months before the arrhythmic event.
Subsequent diagnostic investigations, such as cardiac magnetic resonance and endomyocardial biopsy, may be useful to define the nature of this rare case of adolescent atrial flutter and its future therapeutic management.