A 27-year-old Indian man presented with complaints of a clicking sound upon partially opening his mouth. He had experienced this symptom for the past year.
Relatives had observed that the sounds were absent when he was asleep. Our patient had had a single episode which was suggestive of mania with psychotic symptoms seven years prior to presentation. Since then he had been taking a combination of lithium and carbamazepine continuously as he felt there had been mild fluctuations in his mood when he had attempted to discontinue the drugs. There had been no changes in his drug dosage prior to the onset of his palatal problems. He had no history of using antipsychotic medication. He also had no other significant personal, medical or family history of neuropsychiatric illness. On his detailed psychiatric evaluation, no anxiety, mood or psychotic symptoms were found.
The results of our patient's physical examination revealed bilateral rhythmic oscillations of his soft palate associated with a clicking sound and tremors of the tongue,which were not synchronous with his palatal movements. The clicking sound was not audible when his mouth was closed or wide open. With distraction, his tongue tremors reduced in intensity but no obvious change in the clicking sound was noticed. As such, there was no obvious evidence that our patient's palatal movements were under voluntary control. He had no difficulty in speaking or swallowing. There were also no abnormalities in his eye movements.
An examination of his other systems did not reveal any abnormalities. The results of his routine blood tests, as well as liver, kidney and thyroid function tests, were all normal. The results of his brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), electroencephalography (EEG), electromyography (EMG), and a laboratory work-up for Wilson's disease were also normal. His serum carbamazepine and lithium levels were 5.47 mcg/mL (target blood level 4 mcg/mL to 12 mcg/mL) and 0.57 mmol/L (target blood level 0.8 mmol/L to 1.2 mmol/L), respectively.
We considered a diagnosis of tardive PT, so his lithium dosage was tapered off and then stopped. We continued his carbamazepine dosage and started him on a therapy of clonazepam at 0.25 mg twice daily. Subsequently, his visible tongue tremors were reduced in a week and by the end of one month he subjectively reported an improvement of about 60% in his tremors and clicking sound. Over the next three months of follow-up, our patient reported a periodic fluctuation in the intensity of his symptoms but with no further sustained improvement.