A 46-year-old woman was admitted to our neurologic clinic due to progressive gait disturbance. Three months before admission, she developed vitiligo in her right anterior neck area, and she noticed unsteadiness of her gait. There was no family history of neurologic disorders and the patient had no exposure to toxins such as alcohol or drugs.
A neurological examination revealed that she had cerebellar dysfunction: dysarthria, nystagmus, and ataxia. Ataxia was observed in all four extremities, but was worse in the left limbs and trunk. The patient had marked gait disturbance due to ataxia. Speech analysis revealed that her speech disturbance was a mixed type of dysarthria with ataxic, hyperkinetic, and flaccid components. Gaze-evoked nystagmus of both eyes was found in all directions. Motor power and sensory examinations were normal. She had no parkinsonian features, her deep-tendon reflexes were normoactive, and her plantar responses were flexor bilaterally. She had mild depression and persecutory delusions related to her husband.
Laboratory tests were positive for speckled-type antinuclear antibody, anti-Ro/SSA (4.5 S/C ratio), and anti-La/SSB (1.0 S/C ratio). Her antinuclear antibody titer was elevated by 1 : 160. The following parameters were all normal: complete blood counts, biochemical screening, erythrocyte segmentation rate, C-reactive protein, thyroid function test, anti-hepatitis C virus, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test, serum C3, C4, and CH50, anti-ds-DNA, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, serum folate, vitamin B12, anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody, HIV antigen, and paraneoplastic antibodies (anti-Hu, anti-Ri, anti-Yo, and anti-CRMP5). The following malignancy screening procedures produced unremarkable results: whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (18F-FDG PET), tumor markers (alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, CA-125, CA-19-9, and CA 15-3), cerebrospinal fluid cytology, mammography, and abdomen-pelvic computed tomography scan. The findings of brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were normal .
Her ataxia and gait disturbance progressively worsened over the next 6 months. She had mild cognitive impairment and scored 25 on the Korean version of the Mini Mental Status Examination. Her Montreal Cognitive Assessment score was 14. The patient exhibited impairment in frontal executive function, visuospatial function, attention, calculation, and delayed recall on bedside examination. Oculomotor examination revealed mild saccadic pursuit eye movements and saccadic dysmetria. Positional nystagmus of both eyes was purely horizontal, and was triggered by an apogeotropic head position, which was not associated with vertigo. The nystagmus was not improved by repetitive canalith-repositioning maneuvers. She suffered from moderate xerostomia and xerophthalmia.
Follow-up brain MRI revealed marked cerebellar atrophy with an enlarged fourth ventricle and cisterna magna . Brain 18F-FDG PET revealed decreased glucose metabolism in the bilateral cerebellum . Mutation analysis for dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy and spinocerebellar ataxia types 1, 2, 3, 6, and 7 were negative. A salivary scan revealed no uptake of the parotid and submandibular glands . Biopsy of a minor salivary gland revealed focal lymphocytic infiltration involving exocrine glands . The result of Schirmer's test was strongly positive. The patient was diagnosed with PSS according to American and European criteria.
Intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg/day) was administered for 3 days and then maintenance therapy with oral methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) was continued for 1 month. Hydroxychloroquine (200 mg, t.i.d.), quetiapine (12.5 mg/day), escitalopram (5 mg/day), and buspirone (10 mg, t.i.d.) were also administered. However, there was no improvement in her neurological and psychiatric abnormalities. Unfortunately, her gait disturbance and dysarthria progressed further, with persistent psychiatric symptoms during the 18-month follow-up period.