A 64-year-old man with hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related cirrhosis for ten years, and positive for a hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) with high-level hepatitis B virus replication (HBV-DNA was 8.11×104 IU/mL), and he had no remarkable chief complaints. He was followed up regularly by a local hospital as he was an asymptomatic hepatitis B virus carrier, and the abdominal ultrasonography at that clinic revealed a mass in the right lobe of the liver with right renal vein and inferior vena cava thrombosis. He was referred to our department for further examination and treatment. The abdomen was soft and flat. Any digestive symptoms such as abdominal pain or weight loss were not observed (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group: 0). Laboratory investigation results revealed an aspartate aminotransferase level of 69 IU/L (normal range, 8 to 40 U/L), alanine aminotransferase level of 53 IU/L (normal range, 5 to 40 U/L), alkaline phosphatase level of 99 IU/L (normal range, 40 to 150 U/L), a gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase level of 21 IU/L (normal range, 11 to 50 U/L), albumin level of 41.8 g/L (normal range, 35 to 55 g/L), and the total bilirubin level of 29 μmol/L (normal range, 0 to 21 μmol/L). The parameters of the blood routine and coagulation were within the normal range. Among tumor markers, the serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was markedly elevated at 8165.8 ng/mL (normal range, 0 to 20 ng/mL). carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 1.2 ng/mL (normal range, 0 to 5 ng/mL), CA125 level was 40.5 U/mL (normal range, 0 to 35 U/mL) and CA19-9 level was 11.9 U/mL (normal range, 0 to 37 U/mL). The abdominal ultrasonography revealed an isoechoic mass (3.5cm×1.0 cm in size) in the posterior right lobe (–), and a hypoechoic strip-like area measuring 3.7 cm × 1.9 cm was noted in the retrohepatic segment of the inferior vena cava (tumor thrombosis suspected) (–). The contrast enhanced-computed tomography (CECT) scan showed that an irregular tumor mass located in segment V of the right lobe of the liver with renal vein and inferior vena cava involved. The tumor had enhancement in the arterial phase and was washed out in the venous phase . Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) displayed enhancement in the arterial phase and a defect in the venous phase . The chest CT scan showed multiple nodular lesions in both lungs (–) and pulmonary metastasis was considered.
Using both his medical history and imaging findings, he was diagnosed as having advanced HCC with RV-IVCTT and pulmonary metastasis according to the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) criteria, and the clinical stage was BCLC stage C. The multi-kinase inhibitor sorafenib was recommended as the first-line therapy for him. But he refused sorafenib because it was not on the list of drugs covered by National Health Insurance at that time though it had become available in China. Therefore, we had to seek alternative therapies for him.
TACE is widely used when curative therapies cannot be performed, and it is recommended for intermediate-stage HCC and as a palliative treatment in advanced-stage HCC. Additionally, traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), such as Huaier granule, functions as chemotherapy or adjuvant chemotherapy attracted much attention for easy to obtain and exhibited significant antitumor effects accompanied with less toxic and side effects. Many studies suggested that the combination of TCM with TACE may synergistically affect the advanced HCC. Therefore, as the patient had normal hepatic function with good performance status, DEB-TACE loaded with doxorubicin combined with Huaier granule was planned for him. After three cycles of DEB-TACE from 9th September 2016 to 22nd August 2017 and combined with Huaier granule 20 g three times a day orally, the level of AFP had decreased from 8165.8ng/mL to within the normal range (1.7 ng/mL). In April 2018, the level of AFP was still normal and the follow-up chest CT demonstrated that the lung metastases disappeared (–) and the DCE-MRI displayed that the liver tumor and RV-IVCTT showed complete response according to the modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors criteria. Huaier granule was discontinued in July 2019 after he maintains his excellent serological and radiological complete response for 14 months.
At his last follow-up, nearly 5 years have elapsed since the diagnosis of HCC, and it is up to 20 months since treatment discontinued. He was in very good condition, without evidence of disease progression till now. Currently, 54 months have passed, and he is still alive without recurrence.