A 64-year-old woman with a history of rheumatoid arthritis was diagnosed with SAH based on head computed tomography (CT) after presenting with headache and nausea. The initial neurological examination was normal, but she subsequently developed lethargy due to worsening hydrocephalus, which reversed after a ventriculostomy was placed. Cerebral angiogram revealed a 2.5-mm anterior communicating artery aneurysm that was coiled successfully on day 2 post-SAH. On admission, the patient was loaded with phenytoin (Dilantin) for seizure prophylaxis, and this was continued for the first 3 days of her hospital stay. She remained neurologically stable for the first 6 days of her hospitalization.
On day 7, she developed aphasia with perseveration, dysnomia and disorientation. She also manifested new motor deficits, with right facial weakness and dense right hemiparesis. The head CT was unchanged. Hemodynamic augmentation was immediately initiated, including increased fluid administration and the blood pressure titrated up until a clinical response was noted (mean arterial pressure [MAP] was increased to 110 and then 120-130 mmHg using phenylephrine). An angiogram confirmed severe vasospasm involving the left anterior cerebral artery, which was treated with intra-arterial nicardipine. There was also mild to moderate vasospasm involving the right anterior and bilateral middle cerebral arteries (MCA). Immediately post-procedure, she had persistent dense hemiparesis and aphasia post-procedurally. MAP was further increased and she received a transfusion of packed red blood cells for hemoglobin of 8 g/dl. With maximal hemodynamic therapy (target MAP 140-150 mmHg), her deficits improved with minimal residual facial weakness, antigravity movement on the right side and improved naming. Head CT on day 8 revealed a small new hypodense lesion in the left MCA territory, but this was otherwise unchanged.
She continued on stable doses of vasopressors with further improvement in her neurological status. By day 10, she was fully oriented, minimally aphasic and had only pronator drift on the right side. However, later that evening, she had a brief tonic-clonic seizure associated with decreased mental status, for which she was intubated. She received a 2-mg dose of lorazepam (Ativan), after which her blood pressure fell to MAPs of 60-70s mmHg for approximately 15 min, necessitating a transient increase in vasopressor requirements. She was subsequently loaded with Fosphenytoin (Cerebyx). Emergent head CT showed evolving infarct in the left parietal lobe but no new lesions . On reexamination post-ictally, she exhibited worsening of her neurological deficits, with right hemiplegia and impaired comprehension, which persisted despite continued aggressive titration of hemodynamic therapy, including fluids and vasopressors. Her worsened expressive language deficits were more obvious after extubation on day 12. Head CT at that time showed a new large area of mixed hypo- and hyperdensity in the left anterior cerebral artery territory consistent with hemorrhagic infarction . Vasopressor therapy was continued till day 14 and then weaned off when no neurological improvement was observed. She required a gastrostomy tube for feeding due to persistent dysphagia. She was ultimately discharged to a rehabilitation facility on day 28, with no further seizures on AED therapy. When seen at the 1-month follow-up, she had minimal speech output, a spastic right hemiparesis and cognitive deficits involving memory and attention.