A 47-year-old man with a 10-year history of hypertension complained of exertional chest discomfort. On physical examination, he was alert, his height and body weight were 168.5 cm and 78 kg, respectively, body temperature 36.3 °C, systemic blood pressure 152/82 mmHg and heart rate 56 bpm. The percutaneous oxygen saturation on room air was 97%. A III/VI systolic murmur was heard at the apex, radiating to the left axilla, without manifestation of cardiac decompensation. He had no sign of Marfan’s syndrome. The laboratory tests revealed a 4.0 × 103/mm3 white blood cell count with 66% granulocytes and 27% lymphocytes, a 20.4 × 104/mm3 platelet count, 15.7 g/dl haemoglobin concentration, and 0.03 mg/dl C-reactive protein serum concentration. A chest roentgenogram showed a 48% cardiothoracic ratio, and the 12-lead electrocardiogram showed a high QRS voltage in the lateral precordial leads. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed MR with prolapse of the posterior leaflet without vegetation or aortic regurgitation. The echocardiographic left atrial and left ventricular (LV) dimensions and LV ejection fraction are shown in Table . A two-dimensional transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) showed mitral valve prolapse and MR with a significant proximal isovelocity surface area (PISA) . On three-dimensional (3D) TEE, a 6-mm in diameter aneurysm was present on the posterior mitral valve leaflet, which was not clearly visible on TTE . 3D full-volume colour TEE was also useful for illustrating the spatial relationship between the MVA and the MR jet . A LV angiogram showed grade 3–4 MR and coronary angiograms showed no significant stenosis. The pressures measured during right heart catheterization are shown in Table . Cardiac index was within normal limits .
The patient underwent open-heart, triangular resection of the P2 segment of the mitral valve and annuloplasty with a 28-mm Séguin ring. Intraoperative inspection confirmed the presence of an aneurysm on the posterior mitral leaflet . High- and low-power histopathologic microphotographs showed myxomatous degeneration, without active mitral valve endocarditis or inflammatory cellular infiltration of the posterior leaflet . The postoperative course was uneventful and the chest discomfort resolved during the postoperative rehabilitation program. The patient was discharged from postoperative rehabilitation, 2 weeks after the operation, and has remained free from significant MR over a 2-year follow-up.