A 79-year-old female initially presented with acute kidney injury with proteinuria of 5 g/24 hours, reduced urine output and serum creatinine of 97 μmol/L from a baseline of 57 μmol/L. She was a known case of SSSS with gastroesophageal reflux disease and pulmonary involvement with positive ANA 1:100 (dotted nucleoplasm pattern), anti-centromere protein B antibody level of 490μg/mL [reference range (RR) 0-10 μg/mL] and a positive nail fold capillaroscopy test. Biopsy of her enlarged left submandibular lymph node in April 2018 showed a CD20, CD79a and BCL2 positive nodal marginal zone lymphoma. Subsequent CT and PET Scans assessed it as a stage 3 NMZL on the basis of cervical, mediastinal, abdominal and inguinal nodes involvement.
Serum protein electrophoresis/immunofixation was negative for monoclonal gammopathy and C4 levels were low. Other co-morbidities included atrial fibrillation and uncontrolled HTN for which she was prescribed four antihypertensive medications. Serology for cryoglobulins, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and human immune deficiency virus was negative.
A kidney biopsy was done at that time. It contained 22 glomeruli (3 of them globally sclerosed) which showed segmental duplication of capillary walls and endocapillary hypercellularity comprising mainly of mononuclear cells with fewer polymorphonuclear leukocytes . A single subcortical scar and few small cortical scars were seen populated by a sparse mononuclear cell infiltrate that was composed of CD3, CD20 and CD68 positive cells; CD5 and BCL2 were negative. Mild arteriosclerosis was seen. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed granular capillary wall positivity for C3 (1+), IgM (1+), kappa (2+) & lambda (1+). Mesangial C3 (1+) & IgG (traces) as seen. . Electron microscopy revealed podocytes with vacuolated cytoplasm and 90% effacement of their foot processes. There were segmental small electron dense deposits and interposition of lipid-laden mesangial cells in the subendothelial space. Few small electron densities were seen in an expanded mesangial matrix. Most capillary lumina were filled with macrophages & swollen endothelial with occasional polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Tubuloreticular inclusions were not detected .
She was started on Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and showed an improvement in proteinuria from 4.5 to 2.1 grams/24 hours, while her serum Albumin was 32 g/L (RR 38-50g/L). Her serum Creatinine was 80 μmol/L (RR of 49-90) and estimated glomerular filtration rate was 55 ml/min/1.73m2. The patient’s parameters remained stable on regular follow up. She was kept under observation for her indolent, stage 3 NMZL.
At this stage the clinical working diagnosis was NS with diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis associated with scleroderma that was responding to conservative measures.
The patient presented 19 months later with 2 weeks history of progressive shortness of breath, dry cough, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, uncontrolled HTN and worsening lower limb oedema with proteinuria of 4.7 g/24 hours and an increase in serum Creatinine levels from a baseline of 84 to 165 μmol/L.
A pleural tap yielded an exudate with reactive T-cell lymphocytosis and no malignant cells on flow cytometry. A pleural biopsy was unremarkable.
Urine Analysis revealed microscopic haematuria. Complements 3 value was 0.85 g/dL (RR 0.9-2.07 g/dL) and complement 4 value was 0.06 g/dL (RR 0.17-0.56 g/dL). Hepatitis B and C, cryoglobulins, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies (ANCA) and Antiphospholipase A2 Receptor (PLA2R) antibodies were all negative. ANA was repeated at the time of second biopsy and was again positive. On the other hand, Anti-DsDNA was done at the time of the first and second biopsy and were both negative.
A serum protein electrophoresis was reported as ‘a monoclonal gammopathy with an excess of free kappa light chains cannot be excluded’ (kappa/lambda ratio= 1.78; RR =0.26-1.65) with a simultaneous increase in free lambda light chain caused possibly by increased synthesis by an autoimmune process or due to renal damage (free kappa light chains= 62.7 mg/L; free lambda light chains= 35.2 mg/L).
Second kidney biopsy performed at this stage included 9 glomeruli, all perfused showing lobulated profiles with segmental duplication of glomerular basement membrane and endocapillary hypercellularity (an membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis pattern) and one segmental cellular crescent . Five small arteries showed severe fibrointimal thickening. Congo Red & Thioflavin T stains for amyloid were negative. Immunohistochemistry for lymphoid markers (CD3, CD5, CD20, CD43, CD68 and BCL2) showed no evidence of lymphoma. Immunofluorescence microscopy was positive for IgG (1+), IgM (2+) and C3 (2+) along capillary walls and mesangium. A positive staining for kappa light chain in a similar distribution, with a negative one for lambda, was consistent with kappa light chain restriction .
Electron microscopy revealed podocytes with marked cytoplasmic vacuolation and 90% effacement of their foot processes. There were groups of microtubules with hollow centres of a mean diameter of 39 nanometres mostly in a parallel arrangement in subendothelial spaces, while adjacent capillary loops displayed thinner, solid microfibrils with a mean diameter of 9 nm #in a mixed random and parallel arrangement in an intramembranous location . Mesangial areas showed an increase in mesangial matrix. Most capillary lumina were filled with macrophages & swollen endothelium with occasional polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
The kidney function continued to deteriorate with serum creatinine reaching a maximum of 315 μmol/L. with reduced urine output. The patient developed pulmonary oedema with significant volume overload, requiring intensive care unit admission with intubation and received few sessions of renal replacement therapy.
Decision was made to start the patient on rituximab at a dose of 375 mg/m2 weekly for four doses then to continue every 2 months. She was also given methylprednisolone 40 mg once daily intravenously for 1 week which was then tapered over 1 week. The kidney function gradually improved, leading to cessation of renal replacement therapy. She received a total of 4 doses of rituximab over a span of 6 weeks prior to discharge. Her ACE inhibitors were resumed. On discharge, her creatinine was back to normal (51 μmol/L) with a creatinine clearance of 87 ml/min/1.73 m2, serum albumin improved to 34 g/L with no evidence of volume overload and an improved urinary output with final discontinuation of diuretics .
After discharge, the patient continued the rituximab regimen every 2 months and had completed 1 year on maintenance therapy (a total of 6 maintenance doses to date). She will continue rituximab every 3 months for another year. The 24-hour urinary protein on follow up a year later was 0.67 g/24h with normal kidney function. No side effects were experienced from Rituximab.