A 70-year-old man was referred to our hospital for the surgical management of a tumor in the thoracic upper esophagus. A physical examination and laboratory data revealed no remarkable findings. Computed tomography (CT) revealed that the tumor, which was located in the upper thoracic esophagus, had not locally invaded other organs, but there was a metastasis in the right recurrent laryngeal nerve lymph node. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a 2.5-cm-long ulcerated type 2 tumor in the upper thoracic esophagus. The extent of tumor invasion was estimated to be T2. A histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen revealed the lesion to be squamous cell carcinoma. Pathologic findings showed squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, (cT2, N1, M0, cStage II), determined based on the Japanese Classification of Esophageal Cancer, 10th edition. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (FP) was performed before surgery. The patient received 2 cycles of the following regimen: intravenous infusions of cisplatin (80 mg/m2) on Day 1 and continuous intravenous infusion of 5-fluorouracil (800 mg/m2) from Days 1 to 5, every 4 weeks. The tumor and lymph node metastasis were reduced after two cycles, and the neoadjuvant chemotherapy evaluation was deemed a partial response (PR).
The patient underwent subtotal esophagectomy and three-field lymphadenectomy (mediastinal lympadenectomy accompanied with neck and abdominal lymphadenectomy) via thoracoscopy and hand-assisted laparoscopy, and esophagogastrostomy was performed for reconstruction at the neck via the retrosternal route. The thoracic duct was preserved, because the thoracic duct did not approach the tumor and there was no remarkable damage to the thoracic duct during the operation. The histological diagnosis was moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus (pT1b, N1, M0, pStage II) based on the Japanese Classification of Esophageal Cancer, 10th edition.
Postoperatively , a large amount of cervical effusion discharge (100–450 ml/day) flowed continuously from the cervical drainage tube. From the second postoperative day (POD2), due to the amount of discharge from cervical drainage tube increasing by 200–300 ml/day, we suspected chylous leakage at the neck point and administered an elemental diet (Elental) via an intestinal fistula catheter. But the amount of discharge did not decrease. We started octreotide (300 μg/day) on the POD5 and etilefrine (120 mg/day) on POD6. The amount of discharge decreased only slightly, so we consulted a radiologist at our hospital and performed lipiodol lymphangiography on POD8. The bilateral inguinal lymph nodes were directly accessed under ultrasound guidance with a 23-gauge needle. Lipiodol was manually injected at about 1 ml per 5 min. The lipiodol injection was observed under fluoroscopic guidance in order to confirm appropriate access by the needle . After approximately 10 ml of lipiodol had been injected, a fluoroscopic image showed accumulation of the lipiodol at the ductus thoracicus .
A day after lymphangiography, CT showed the accumulation of lipiodol at the left venous angle . After lymphangiography, the amount of discharge from the cervical drainage tube decreased immediately. On POD9 (1 day after lymphangiography), the patient resumed normal enteral nutrition via the intestinal fistula catheter. On POD10 (2 days after lymphangiography), the cervical discharge disappeared. On POD13 (5 days after lymphangiography), the drainage tube was removed. Cervical discharge was not seen at all after the removal of the tube. On POD22 (14 days after lymphangiography), the patient was discharged home.