A 61-year-old male without any noteworthy medical history presented with sudden severe headache (World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies grade II). Computed tomography (CT) revealed SAH, which was particularly prominent in the posterior fossa (Fisher group 3). Subsequent CT angiography revealed dissecting aneurysm of the left VA arising distal to the origin of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA). Both VAs were co-dominant.
Endovascular treatment under general anesthesia was performed immediately after diagnostic angiography . A 6-Fr introducer sheath was placed into the femoral artery via a percutaneous route and a 6-Fr guiding catheter (Envoy; Cordis Endovascular, Miami Lakes, FL, USA) was introduced into the left VA. A microcatheter (Neurodeo; Medico's Hirata, Osaka, Japan) was passed into the distal left VA via the aneurysm over a microguidewire (Silverspeed-10; Micro Therapeutics, Irvine, CA, USA), then navigated to the true lumen of the dilated segment of the aneurysm in an attempt to occlude the dissection site. Nine Guglielmi detachable coils (Target; Stryker, Fremont, CA, USA) were placed in the dilated segment only. The dissecting aneurysm and affected left VA were completely occluded with preservation of the left PICA. The opposite right VA adequately supplied the posterior circulation and left VA perforators arising from the left VA distal to the aneurysm with retrograde flow .
The patient showed good recovery from general anesthesia and his consciousness was clear. Posttreatment clinical course seemed uneventful. However, 16 days after embolization, routine follow-up magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) performed to ascertain improvement of cerebral vasospasm showed suspected recanalization of the aneurysm because of newly apparent flow in the left VA distal to the aneurysm in comparison with the examination on day 1 after the first operation . Additional angiography was therefore performed. This demonstrated recanalization of the treated left VA with blood supplying the dilated segment of the aneurysm, which showed morphological changes between just proximal to the coil mesh and just distal to a coil. Antegrade blood flow into the basilar artery (BA) was seen through the region of morphological change, not through the dilated segment of aneurysm . Additionally, skull radiography did not show coil compaction of framing coil in comparison with the examination at first day after first operation .
Further endovascular treatment was performed under local anesthesia, occluding the dilated segment of aneurysm, which showed morphological changes and the segment of the left VA proximal to the dilated segment . At both 1 and 7 months after initial treatment, follow-up MRA showed no sign of recanalization of the aneurysm . As of the last clinical follow-up, the patient had made a complete recovery and had returned to his previous work.