A 64-year-old woman presented to a local doctor in 2000 with blurred vision in her right eye. She was diagnosed with chronic iridocyclitis and treated with topical corticosteroids with limited improvements. More detailed examinations were not performed at that time. In 2003, she consulted a neurologist for depression, and thereafter was diagnosed with CNS lymphoma by brain MRI. On presentation, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, and intraocular pressure was normal. A slit-lamp examination showed KPs and inflammatory cells (2+) in the anterior chamber of the right eye. A fundus examination of the right eye revealed vitreous opacities (3+). Slit-lamp and fundus examinations of the left eye showed no abnormalities. Since the identification of lymphoma cells in the vitreous is required for a diagnosis of PVRL, we performed diagnostic vitrectomy. A vitreous biopsy sample indicated increased IL-10 levels (379 ng/mL) and an elevated IL-10 to IL-6 (12.6 pg/mL) ratio. A cytological analysis also showed large atypical lymphoid cells, resulting in DLBCL. She was diagnosed with PVRL with CNS involvement and started treatment. She underwent one course of intravenous HD MTX chemotherapy (3.5 g/m2) and radiotherapy to the right eye of 40Gy. Brain recurrence has not been observed since then.
Bilateral involvement was detected during the observation period. KPs and anterior chamber cells are also observed in the left eye. She had been repeatedly treated with a dose of 400 μg of intravitreal MTX and a dose of 1 mg of intravitreal rituximab for recurrent intraocular lesions between 2004 and 2011: intravitreal MTX; 7 times for the right eye/3 times for the left eye: intravitreal rituximab; 7 times for the right eye. The MTX injections were administered using a 30-gauge needle after application of a topical anesthesia and 5 % povidone iodine disinfection in the superior temporal quadrant 3.5 mm posterior to the limbus. Intravitreal rituximab was also administered to the recurrence from 2008 to 2009 and was temporally effective; however, the iridocyclitis as the side effects of injection was developed each time. Therefore, intravitreal rituximab was discontinued. In 2012, she presented at our hospital with blurred vision in her right eye. BCVA in her right eye was 20/250. A slit-lamp examination of the right eye showed a 2-mm high viscous pseudohypopyon, anterior chamber cells (3+), and flare (2+) . KPs were not observed. A fundus examination of the right eye showed (3+) strong vitreous opacities ; however, subretinal invasion was not observed. There was no abnormal finding in her left eye at the time of right eye recurrence. Anterior chamber biopsy revealed the presence of atypical lymphocytes, indicating the recurrence of DLBCL . Intravitreal MTX was initiated. One week later, pseudohypopyon completely disappeared, while anterior chamber cells (1+) remained . Vitreous opacities also disappeared. Symptoms resolved completely within a few months by the sequential treatments.
The recurrence of PVRL with pseudohypopyon appeared 14, 15, and 18 months after the first appearance of pseudohypopyon . An intravitreal MTX was indicated for the management of each recurrence, resulting in the resolution of symptoms. Moreover, the recurrence of PVRL with KPs and subretinal invasion were also noted (5 times for KPs/1 time for subretinal invasion). Intravitreal MTX was also an effective treatment for recurrence . Recurrence with pseudohypopyon was not simultaneously observed with KPs, vitreous opacities, or subretinal invasion. In May 2015, there had been no recurrence for 6 months. Visual acuity remained at 20/50 in her right eye and 20/20 in her left eye. The subsequent clinical course of left eye was uneventful. No CNS involvement was noted during the observation period.