A 71-year-old man was transported to our hospital with acute myocardial infarction due to total occlusion of the obtuse marginal branch of the circumflex coronary artery. After prasugrel and aspirin loading, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) under intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) was performed. Since circulatory collapse and ventricular fibrillation occurred after reperfusion of the coronary artery, mechanical ventilation with tracheal intubation was commenced and VA-ECMO was established via the left femoral artery to the left common iliac artery and right femoral vein to right atrium cannulation. The flow rate of VA-ECMO at the start was 3.8 L/min. Using transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), mitral regurgitation (MR) due to papillary muscle rupture and moderate tricuspid regurgitation was diagnosed and emergency MVR using a bioprosthetic valve was planned 5 h after PCI on the same day. Intraoperative TEE before the surgical procedures showed severe mitral regurgitation due to a flail anterior leaflet, spontaneous echo contrast in the sinus of Valsalva, slight movement of the aortic valve cusps, and diffuse severe hypokinesis of the left ventricle (LV) . The preoperative activated clotting time (ACT) was 234 s, and was prolonged to 534 s after administration of 10,000 units of heparin (200 units/kg). Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established with ascending aortic cannulation and venous drainage via the superior vena cava and right femoral vein. MVR with a bioprosthetic valve (Epic 27 mm, St. Jude Medical, MN, USA) and tricuspid annuloplasty (Tailor Band 29 mm, St. Jude Medical) were performed. At the time of weaning from CPB, TEE showed diffuse akinesis of LV, no thrombus in the left atrium, and disappearance of the spontaneous echo contrast in the sinus of Valsalva.
However, since the patient could not be weaned from CPB because of severe ventricular dysfunction, VA-ECMO via the left femoral artery and right femoral vein cannulation was established again with the concomitant use of IABP with 1:1 support, and he was transferred to the ICU. There was no effective pulse pressure after weaning from CPB. Before leaving the operating room, 50 mg of protamine was administered via a peripheral vein, resulting in decrease of ACT to 211 s. In the ICU, heparin was continuously administered at about 2000 units/hour, measuring ACT and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) with targeting an ACT of 140–180 s due to concerns about the risk of bleeding , and the VA-ECMO flow rate was adjusted to 3 L/min/m2. However, the measured VA-ECMO flow rate decreased to 1.3–1.7 L/min/m2 after 10 h of admission to the ICU, and blood transfusion was required to maintain the VA-ECMO flow rate at 2 L/min/m2. Thus, exploratory TEE was performed in the ICU to determine the cause of the reduced VA-ECMO flow rate on postoperative day (POD) 1. Unexpectedly, TEE revealed a left atrial thrombus extending to the ostium of the right superior pulmonary vein, obstruction of the prosthetic valve by the thrombus , and right ventricular collapse due to an intrapericardial hematoma, and no opening of the aortic valve. Considering the patient’s critical status, the surgeon decided to perform only re-exploration for intrapericardial hematoma removal on POD 1. Mechanical circulatory support was continued to maintain systemic perfusion to prevent and improve organ dysfunction. As a result, the patient's general status improved, including a return to sinus rhythm, improvement in left ventricular wall motion, and increased urinary output.
Subsequently, on POD 4, the patient underwent left atrial thrombectomy and re-MVR with a bioprosthetic valve (Epic 27 mm, St. Jude Medical). Blood clots adhered to the bioprosthetic valve and were diagnosed as prosthetic valve thrombosis . Intraoperative TEE showed the left atrium filled with thrombus at the start of the operation, with no thrombus in the cardiac chambers after the re-MVR . The patient was returned to the ICU under central VA-ECMO support with ascending aortic cannulation and right femoral vein drainage and was finally weaned from central VA-ECMO on POD 15 without ECMO flow problems and IABP with 1:2 support on POD 16 after the initial surgery. Tracheostomy was performed on POD 27 because of postoperative pneumonia and ICU-acquired respiratory muscle dysfunction. After improvement of the patient’s respiratory status, he was discharged from the ICU on POD 39, discharged from the hospital without any neurological complications on POD 50, and transferred to a rehabilitation hospital. Tracheostomy tube was removed on POD 86.