We present the case of a Caucasian 63-year-old man who had an 8 –week history of 10 kilogram weight loss, profound fatigue and cervical lymphadenopathy.
As an outpatient he underwent a neck ultrasonography (US) in another center which identified a big hypoechoic lesion in the right lobe with ill-defined margins. Cytological analysis of the lesion was defined as malignancy according to the Bethesda System for reporting thyroid cytopathology and the patient was referred for possible thyroidectomy. Thyroid function tests showed the following results: thyrotropin level 5.5 μU/ml (normal 0.46-4.68), free triiodothyronine 3.12 pg/ml (normal 2.75-5.26), and free thyroxine 1.07 ng/dl, (normal 0.77-2.19). Antibodies against thyroperoxidase and against thyroglobulin were negative, and serum calcitonin was normal (8 pg/ml, normal < 18).
Subsequently, he referred to our ward to perform further analysis. Neck US was repeated using a high frequency linear probe (15 L8W, 7.5-14 MHz, Acuson Sequoia 512, Siemens, Mountain View, California, USA). A thyroid hypoechoic mass of 30 mm in the maximum longitudinal size was detected in the right lobe of the gland, associated with round and enlarged lymph nodes in laterocervical part of the neck, especially on the right side. After conventional US, a contrast enhancement US (CPS, Siemens, Mountain View, California; Sonovue, Bracco, Italy) focused to the thyroid gland and lymph node was performed . Nodule and lymph node showed a similar pattern. In the central part, they exhibited a hypovascular aspect in all phases of contrast US (typical for malignant lesions), except for the presence of small vessels. The enhancement was located only in the peripheral part of both nodule and lymph node.
An US-guided core biopsy (Selectcore Inrad, 20 gauge, 10 cm in length) of the nodule was performed.
On microscopic examination, histological sections revealed a pseudoglandular proliferation of atypical epithelial cells embedded in a fibrous stroma with atrophic thyroid follicles . Furthermore, on immunohistochemical findings, thyrocytes showed immunoreactivity for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) in spite of negativity in the neoplastic cells . All these features were consistent with the diagnosis of metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Therefore, we measured tumor markers which revealed elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (15.98 ng/mL, normal <5), cancer antigen 19–9 (8731.52 U/ml, normal <37), and slightly elevated cancer antigen 125 (240.10 U/ml, normal <35). Additional laboratory blood tests were consistent with biliary obstruction and liver damage.
A contrast CT scan demonstrated an enlargement of the pancreatic body with a 22 mm hypodense lesion with ill-defined margins, dilatation of the pancreatic duct, diffuse retroperitoneal, paraaortic and cervical lymphadenopathy and secondary lesions in the liver (1–4.2 cm) . A needle biopsy of the largest hepatic lesion revealed hepatic tissue infiltrated by poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma which was similar to the neoplastic tissue found in the right lobe of the thyroid.
The patient referred to the oncology unit for palliative treatment, and died two months later.