An 84-year-old male presented to the emergency department with sudden onset dyspnoea. He had a history of coronary artery bypass grafting of the LCX with the left internal mammal artery (LIMA) and simultaneous bioprosthetic (21 mm valve) SAVR 10 years before presentation. He also had a history of peripheral vascular disease. On admission, he was taking aspirin (1 × 80 mg/day), ramipril (1 × 2.5 mg/day), and rosuvastatin (1 × 20 mg/day). Laboratory tests showed an elevated NT-pro-BNP {3625 ng/L [normal range (NR): <738 ng/L]} and troponin-T that increased over 4 h from 0.056 to 0.183 ng/L (NR: <0.013 ng/L). The resting ECG showed no signs of ischaemia while the chest X-ray showed signs of pulmonary oedema. Treatment with diuretics was initiated with good effect. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function with a significant gradient over the prosthetic aortic valve (AV) (peak 66 mmHg, mean 42 mmHg, peak velocity 4.1 m/s, AVAV area of 0.9 cm2). Subsequent coronary angiography showed a patent LIMA–LCX bypass with a moderate-to-severe stenosis in the RCA . The patient’s clinical status improved and he was discharged with oral diuretics, appropriate heart failure, and antianginal medications.
Several weeks later, he was admitted for further work-up. His dyspnoea was stable but he also complained of stable angina. An invasive functional assessment of the lesion in the mid-RCA was performed. The FFR was 0.84 (significant: ≤ 0.80), the RFR was 0.80 (significant: ≤0.89), the coronary flow reserve [CFR was 1.1 (normal ≥2.0) and the index of microvascular resistance (IMR) was 15 (normal <25)] . Since there was still doubt about the ischaemic potential of the coronary stenosis, a myocardial perfusion Single Photon-Emission Computed Tomography with the use of regadenoson was performed. This showed a reversible perfusion defect of 15% in the inferior and inferolateral segments .The case was discussed in the heart team meeting and since the valvular stenosis was deemed most important the patient was planned for a valve-in-valve TAVI without coronary revascularization.
The patient’s dyspnoea improved significantly, however, 6 months later he still complained of angina under optimal medical therapy. A new invasive functional assessment showed a significant decrease in FFR (0.72), with an increase in CFR (1.4) and a relative stable/slightly increased IMR (20) . The RFR remained positive (0.80). The lesion was successfully treated with implantation of two drug eluting stents . The patient reported complete resolution of angina 12 months after the PCI procedure.