A 46-year-old woman was brought to the emergency department of our hospital because of transitory right hemiplegia and language disturbance of sudden onset.
On admission, she was afebrile with normal vital signs and general examination. No mucocutaneous alterations were detected. Neurologic examination revealed a decrease of pinprick sensation in the right members. Her past medical history was notable for migraine and an episode of numbness of the left limbs lasting more than 2 days, 3 years before, for which she never sought medical attention. She did not smoke, consume use alcohol, or use illicit drugs. There was no history of other vascular risk factors. She has first-degree relatives with breast, ovarian, and uterine cancer.
The patient underwent DWI-MRI that showed several hyperintense cortical lesions in the left middle cerebral artery distribution with low apparent diffusion coefficient values. FLAIR revealed an old ischemic lesion in the right middle cerebral artery distribution. Cervical and brain MR angiography sequences excluded carotid or intracranial arterial stenosis.
Blood gas analysis was normal. Extensive laboratory with assessment of thrombophilia, including antithrombin III, C protein, S protein, factor VIII, antiphospholipid antibody, lupus anticoagulant, factor V Leiden, and homocysteine was normal. Thyroid-stimulating hormone, free T4, ANCAs, SSA, SSB, anti-nuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, C3, C4, and Lyme serology were within normal limits.
No cardiac rhythm abnormalities were noted on 24-hour Holter monitoring and a duplex ultrasound of the carotid vessels did not reveal any abnormalities. A transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiogram had no evidence for patent foramen ovale, congenital cardiac defects, patent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary hypertension, or aortic arch plaque. A contrast-enhanced transcranial Doppler ultrasonography (CE-TCD) was performed and showed late passage of a higher number of microembolic signals with a curtain pattern in the middle cerebral artery, compatible with a significant right-to-left shunt.
Given the right-to-left shunt, in absence of cardiac structural anomalies, we considered the hypothesis of pulmonary shunting. Thus, the patient underwent thoracic 3D CT angiography that showed a single PAVF in the lateral segment of the middle lobe. The feeding artery had an average diameter of about 1.7 mm, the nidus measured 3 × 1.4 cm, and the drainage vein about 1.9 mm.
Lower extremity venous duplex ultrasound and an abdominal-pelvic-lower limbs venous-phase CT did not revealed occult venous thrombosis. The pursuit for occult neoplasm was unremarkable.
On the following days, the Interventional Radiology Team performed a selective right pulmonary arterial angiography and proceeded to selective embolization with microcoils of the PAVF. Technical success was achieved in the control angiography . The patient was discharged the next morning. Her repeat TCD, 2 months later, was normal, with resolution of the right-to-left shunt .