We present a case of a 77-year-old patient, active smoker, hypertensive under therapy calcium channel blocker 10 mg, valsartan 160 mg and hydrochlorothiazide 12.5, with a pace maker in 2018, already operated with the placement of a total knee prosthesis for gonarthrosis at an advanced stage, vaccination against COVID received, and he has no declared allergic history. Seen in the emergency room of Dieppe hospital for abdominal pain and hepatic colic, with palpation of a mass in the right hypochondrium. Testicular examination revealed no abnormality and the rectal exam was negative with no trace of blood. The patient was referred to a CT scan which revealed multiple focal intrahepatic lesions of secondary appearance, with peritoneal carcinosis and ascites of low abundance (, A) ( A and B).
Positron emission tomography with 18F-FDG showed heterogeneity of hepatic fixation with intense hypermetabolism around hypodense lesions, notably the tip of segment VI (SUVmax 6.5), the left liver (SUVmax = 5.6), with moderate to intense hypermetabolism around voluminous peritoneal tissue structures at the perihepatic, subparietal (SUVmax 6.3), right and left parietal gutters, intramesenteric and pelvic levels (SUVmax 6.2). In parallel, an echo-guided liver biopsy was performed without any particularity .
In the absence of a diagnosis of a primary tumor, the general surgery team at the Dieppe hospital center, in consultation with the patient, decided to perform an exploratory laparoscopy, which revealed numerous nodules ranging from a few millimeters to 6 cm in the parietal peritoneum , in the hypochondria, but also the pelvis, and above all, a nodular greater omentum. Note that the appearance is pinkish and not whitish as is usual. It should be noted that the surgical procedure went well, and the postoperative care in the surgical department was uneventful.
Histological analysis of our specimen (6 cm) showed a tubulo-papillary tumor proliferation made of atypical columnar cells accompanied by mitoses and large patches of necrosis, the immunhistochemical study in kerosene was positive to EMA, Keratin 7, Calretinin, BER EP4, HBME, CD15, P53 and negative to desmin Keratin 20, CD X2, TTF-1. These morphological and immunophenotypic results suggested a primary serous tumor of the peritoneum of high grade in a man, so we deepened our investigations in clinical and paraclinical examination of the testicle and paratesticular but without contributory results .
The primary lesion was the omentum; the patient was diagnosed with PPSC, and chemotherapy was performed as first-line treatment with TAXOL and CARBOPLATAIN. Unfortunately, the patient died one month after his diagnosis while undergoing chemotherapy and palliative care. No autopsy was performed.