A 40-year-old Chinese woman presented to our hospital complaining of low back pain that had been radiating to the left leg for the past 2 months. She reported significant weight loss of 7 kg, but no fever, chills, night sweats, productive cough, headache, dizziness, nausea or vomiting. One year earlier, she had been diagnosed with RA and took oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in the first 3 months after the diagnosis. She had no history of tuberculosis or exposure to patients with tuberculosis. There was also no history of trauma to the back or leg and no loss of bowel or bladder function. She worked as a housewife and kept pigeons as pets, which she fed daily.
On admission, the patient was in considerable discomfort. She was apyrexial. Cardiac and abdominal examinations were normal, but on examination of the chest inspiratory crepitus was detected in the lower right lung base. Mild tenderness was found in the back around the L4 area and movement of the spine was restricted. Motor examination was normal, with normal power in both legs, but tactile hypoesthesia of the right medial femoral condyle was evident. The straight leg raising test (SLRT) elicited pain at 70° on the left and was pain free to 90° on the right. The right patellar reflex was normal, but it was diminished on the left. There were no skin nodules.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) undertaken in August 2010 demonstrated osteolytic lesions of the fourth lumbar vertebral body (L4) that involved the left pedicle and transverse process causing secondary spinal canal stenosis at that level . Moreover, a paravertebral soft tissue mass was seen on both sides that was larger on the left. The intervertebral discs were relatively preserved. Single photon emission-computed tomography (SPECT) showed increased uptake of technetium-99 m in the L4 vertebra . Routine blood tests revealed: a white blood cell count of 6500/μL with 73.1% neutrophils (normal range: 50-70%), 16.3% lymphocytes (normal: 20-40%), 1.1% eosinophils (normal: 0.5-5%), 0.2% basophils (normal: 0-1%) and 8.5% monocytes (normal: 3-8%); a hemoglobin of 10.7 g/dL (normal: 11.0-16.0 g/dL) and a platelet count of 368,000/μL (normal: 100,000-300,000/μL). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 22 mm/h (normal: <20 mm/h) and the C-reactive protein (CRP) was 1.45 mg/dL (normal: <0.80 mg/dL). Tumor markers (including alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, β2-microglobulin, ferroprotein and estradiol) were not elevated, serum cryptococcal antigen and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies were negative, but the tuberculin test (PPD skin test) was strongly positive.
A definitive diagnosis could not be established at this stage. Fourteen days later we performed a CT-guided needle aspiration biopsy and sent the material for culturing of bacteria, Mycobacteria and fungi, and also for histopathological analysis. The latter revealed atypical granulomas and large quantities of necrotic tissue with scattered fungal organisms that were identified as Cryptococcus by subsequent periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and Gomori’s methenamine silver (GMS) staining . No malignant cells or epithelioid granulomas were observed in this specimen. Microbial culture revealed the growth of Cryptococcus sensitive to fluconazole (FLC) and flucytosine (5-FC), while Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture was negative. Because of limited clinical laboratory facilities, we could not conduct tests to distinguish CNVN from CNVG. Considering the antimicrobial sensitivity test results and the side effects of amphotericin B (AMB) and 5-FC, the patient was administered FLC 400 mg/d orally. The patient declined lumbar puncture that would have allowed examination of cerebrospinal fluid.
After 3 months of FLC, the patient complained of pale hands brought on by cold and a sensation of stiffness under the skin in the face and distal extremities: these areas felt indurated on palpation. Laboratory tests found: an elevated γ-globulin (22.3%, normal range: 9.0-16.0%); reduced albumin (57.9%, normal: 60-71%); an immunoglobulin G of 1960 mg/dL (normal: 751-1560mg/mL); a rheumatoid factor (RF) of 29 IU/mL (normal: <29 IU/mL); a circulating immune complex (CIC) of 18 U/mL (normal: <13 U/mL) and an anti-citrulline-containing peptide antibody (anti-CCP) of 20.9 U/mL (normal: <12 U/mL). Also, extractable nuclear antigen anti-Smith surface antigen antibody (ENA anti-SSA antibody), extractable nuclear antigen anti-U1 ribonuleoprotein antibody (ENA anti-U1RNP antibody) and extractable nuclear antigen anti-Scl-70 antibody (ENA anti-Scl-70 antibody) were all positive and antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer was 1:400 (normal: <1:80). ESR had risen to 56 mm/h. As a result, she was diagnosed with scleroderma and was treated with total glucosides of paeony capsules for 16 days. Immunosuppressants were avoided because of concerns about ongoing disseminated infection.
During treatment with FLC, a plain X-ray of the lumbar spine was taken every 4 weeks . The X-ray taken in December 2010 showed no significant changes when compared with that of the previous month , suggesting that the destruction of the lumbar vertebral body had abated. Meanwhile, the MRI of November 2010 showed that the size of the paravertebral mass had decreased when compared with the examination undertaken in August 2011 and the spinal cord compression had been substantially alleviated. After 6 months of continuous oral FLC, her low back and left leg pain had completely resolved. Meanwhile, tactile sensation over the right medial femoral condyle, the SLRT of the left lower limb and the left patellar tendon reflex had recovered to normal. The patient was discharged having made a full recovery and remained asymptomatic and with no radiological evidence of relapse at 12-month follow-up.