A 42-year-old female was seen by a primary care physician, whose examination of the oral cavity revealed smooth bilaterally enlarged tonsils, with the right tonsil being slightly larger than the left. No surface abnormality was evident. She was prescribed two courses of amoxicillin but did not improve. She was then referred to our otorhinolaryngology department. Her medical history was unremarkable. We found no unexplained cervical lymphadenopathy, no significant systemic symptom, no malignancy, and no immunocompromise. All laboratory parameters were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance (MR) images of the palatine tonsils did not reveal any obvious mass lesion. Axial noncontrast T1 (600/8/2 [TR/TE/NEX]) and coronal STIR MR (5700/80/1) images of the palatine tonsils showed that the right tonsil was larger than the left. No mass or abnormal T2 prolongation (suggestive of a tumor) was evident. An axial T2-weighted image (4400/100/2) and a postgadolinium T1-weighted image with fat saturation (550/8/1) also failed to reveal any mass in the right tonsil, but on postcontrast MRI, the left tonsil showed mucosal crypts with linear enhancement, while on the right side the crypts were partly obliterated by a large mass and did not display enhancement .
The patient underwent complete surgical resection of the right tonsil because of a possible malignancy. Histological examination of the specimen revealed diffuse sheets of monomorphous plasmacytoid cells with abundant, eosinophilic finely granular cytoplasm, and eccentric nuclei. Occasional binucleated and pleomorphic cells with giant nuclei and prominent nucleoli were also observed, as were mitotic figures. No amyloid deposition was apparent. Immunohistochemically, the plasma cells were diffusely immunoreactive for the λ light chain (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), IgG (DAKO), and CD43 (DAKO); partially positive for epithelial membrane antigen (DAKO); but negative for the κ light chain (DAKO), IgA (DAKO), IgM (DAKO), and CD20 (DAKO). Additional immunohistochemical staining showed that the cells were positive for the plasma cell markers CD138, MUM-1, and CD56. Thus, we diagnosed a plasmacytoma .
A metastatic workup was performed to search for multiple myeloma/light chain disease. Laboratory testing revealed the absence of anemia, and the serum calcium, albumin, total protein, and creatinine levels were normal. The urine lacked Bence-Jones protein. The bone survey was negative. Bone marrow biopsy revealed < 5% plasma cells, ruling out plasmacytoma of the bone. No monoclonal gammopathy was evident, precluding an immunofixation disorder. The kappa-to-lambda ratio was normal. No adjuvant treatment was indicated, and the patient remains clinically free of disease after 6 months of follow-up.