The patient, male, 46 years old, married, college degree, bank clerk, has a history of schizophrenia for 24 years. In 1997, he was admitted to a mental hospital due to suspiciousness, hallucinations, delusions of persecution, emotional instability, insomnia, and behavioral disorders. After that, he was treated with CLZ (150 mg per day) and his symptoms were well controlled. In 2009, due to the discontinuation of CLZ treatment, he relapsed and was hospitalized again. This time, he showed basically the same symptoms as last admission. The dose of CLZ gradually increased to 6–14 tablets (25 mg per tablet, 500 mg/day). His psychiatric symptoms were well controlled, but his sleep was still poor, so he started taking alprazolam, gradually increasing the dose from 1 tablet to 5 tablets (0.4 mg per tablet, 2 mg/night). Later, his sleep improved very well, and the patient was discharged after getting better. After being discharged from the hospital, the patient took the medication on time.
By 2012, the patient had insomnia again. To enhance sleep quality, he changed alprazolam to CLNAZ as prescribed by the doctor and gradually increased from 1 tablet to 4 tablets (each 2 mg, 8 mg/night). The patient then received rifampicin for treatment of tuberculosis. The patient felt that the drugs were not as effective as before, so he increased CLZ to 6–26 tablets (25, 800 mg/day), and CLNAZ from 4 tablets to 13 tablets (2, 26 mg/night). He has been taking the above dose for 3 years.
In April 2021, the patient recovered from tuberculosis and stopped rifampicin, but still had poor sleep quality, and again increased the doses of CLZ and CLNAZ by himself. About 2 months before admission, he took CLZ 6–45 tablets (25 mg per tablet, 1,275 mg per day) and 13 CLNAZ tablets (2 mg per tablet, 26 mg per night). He did not feel any particular discomfort. In order to adjust the dosage of the drug, he was admitted to our hospital for treatment on May 26, 2021. The patient signed an informed consent upon admission. Due to routine medical care, the approval of the ethics committee is not required.
He reported no history of heart or respiratory disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, epilepsy, or drug allergy. The patient did not had a history of druge abuse/misues or previous excessive use of benzodiazepine.