A 65-year-old Caucasian German woman complained of left abdominal pain 3 months before referral. Under the suspected diagnosis of acute sigmoid diverticulitis, she had received nonspecific antibiotic therapy with ciprofloxacin for 5 days. Two weeks later, colonoscopy revealed numerous polypoid lesions located in the ascending colon. The histology of a biopsy specimen revealed normal colon mucosa. Nevertheless, she was referred to our hospital for hemicolectomy with the diagnosis still suspected to be polyposis coli.
Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus had been diagnosed 12 years earlier. Since then, she had taken 150 mg acarbose every day. There were no other episodes of abdominal problems during that 12-year period.
Her medical history included hypertension, typhus abdominalis with ulcer 57 years previously, and hysterectomy and ovariectomy one year previously.
Physical examination showed normal blood pressure (120/60 mmHg), regular heart rate (76 beats/minute), and a body temperature of 36.6°C. Heart sounds were clear and the rhythm was regular; breath sounds were normal without rales or bronchial obstruction. The abdomen was not distended and regular peristaltic sounds were audible. Neurological examination revealed no pathological findings, in particular, no signs of diabetic polyneuropathy. Laboratory tests revealed the white blood cell count and C-reactive protein levels to be normal, but blood sugar (120 mg/dl) and HbA1c levels (6.3%) were raised.
We repeated a colonoscopy and it revealed multiple polypoid formations of varying sizes (1-3 cm) in the ascending colon, covered by normal mucosa with superficial vessels , and diverticulosis of the sigmoid colon. After biopsy, the cysts collapsed and disappeared. Furthermore, only colon mucosa was found in the biopsy specimens . While X-ray film of the abdomen did not reveal any pathological findings, CT confirmed conspicuous gas bubbles in the ascending colon .
At that time, we stopped the acarbose treatment. Whilst a diabetes diet was continued, neither further oral antidiabetics nor insulin were required to control diabetes mellitus. Additionally, the patient was treated with oxygen for 7 days (3 L/minute intranasally). After having discontinued the acarbose treatment for 3 months, the gas-filled cysts disappeared completely, as demonstrated by colonoscopy. Fortunately, the patient had not undergone hemicolectomy for initially suspected 'polyposis coli'. The patient has remained free of abdominal symptoms for a further 19 months.