A 42-year-old peruvian woman residing in Japan for 11 years, and who had stayed in Peru for 1 month, 9 years ago, was emergently transferred to our intensive care unit because of generalized tonic seizures. She had suffered from occasional headaches for 3 years and anorexia and weight loss for 4 months. She had presented to a primary care physician 2 weeks ago with exacerbating headache, fever, and night sweats, for which antibiotic therapy was initiated on suspicion of pyelonephritis. She had no previous relevant medical history but had a family history of neurocysticercosis (her older sister in Peru).
On admission, her body temperature was 38.0°C; blood pressure, 95/58 mmHg; heart rate, 108 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 27 breaths/min; and SpO2, 100% (O2 2 L/min). Her consciousness was impaired (Glasgow Coma Scale, E3V3M5), and she was agitated. She had no anisocoria, nuchal rigidity, or hemiplegia.
Hematology results indicated no abnormalities; white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level were within the normal ranges. Chest X-ray detected no abnormal shadows. Head computed tomography (CT) identified multiple micronodular lesions in the brain parenchyma . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed several lesions. Some were isointense on T1-weighted imaging and hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging. Others were hypointense on T1-weighted imaging and showed a hypointense area with a hyperintense fringe on T2-weighted imaging. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI showed ring-enhancing lesions . There were no findings suggesting bleeding on T2* imaging.
After intensive care unit admission, the patient became conscious, but her fever exceeded 39°C and she complained of intense headaches. Antipyretics and analgesics had almost no effect, and she occasionally cried due to severe headaches. Based on the radiologic findings, the patient's home country, and family history, neurocysticercosis was strongly suspected and we started treatment with praziquantel. Although cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis on day 2 suggested tuberculous meningitis , the CSF findings for tuberculous meningitis are often atypical. Furthermore, CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis was negative and no tuberculosis foci were identified at other sites, including the lungs.
Serum immunoblotting assay was negative for Taenia solium antigen on day 7; however, on day 9, the peripheral blood interferon gamma release test result (T-SPOT; Oxford Immunotec, Abingdon, UK) was positive. On day 10, high adenosine deaminase (ADA) activity (23.4 U/L) was detected in the CSF sample collected on day 2. Considering these laboratory findings, cerebral tuberculoma was suspected rather than neurocysticercosis, and we started antituberculous chemotherapy with isoniazid, pyrazinamide, rifampicin, and ethambutol. As the high fever and intense headaches persisted, prednisolone 60 mg/day was started on day 9, which was later adjusted due to exacerbated headaches and persistent fever . After her symptoms improved and oral food intake was resumed, she was discharged on day 29. The sputum and gastric fluid PCR analyses carried out before the initiation of antituberculosis therapy were negative.
Eight months later, gadolinium-enhanced brain MRI confirmed reductions in the nodular shadows. Based on her favorable clinical course after the initiation of antituberculous chemotherapy, a diagnosis of cerebral tuberculoma was ultimately established.