A 75-year-old Japanese man complained of a swollen right scrotum, which had grown slowly for 1 year. A huge elastic hard mass was palpable in his right scrotum. The surface of the skin showed no redness, rash, ulcers, or other skin abnormalities. He had neither pain nor obstruction of urination. He had worked as a farmer for a long time. He had a smoking history (20 pack-year) but did not consume alcohol. There was no history of disease or surgery. There was no specific family history, including of cancer. Physical and neurological examinations were normal, except for a 26 cm tumor in his right scrotum and right inguinal lymphadenopathy (3 cm). His blood pressure was 146/80, heart rate 86, and temperature 36.8 degrees. Laboratory findings are shown in Table ; there were no abnormal findings. The findings by computed tomography (CT) were shown in Fig. a. In addition, multiple lung nodules were detected on chest CT . Our patient underwent radical orchiectomy and lymph node dissection. Histological analysis revealed the proliferation of spindle and pleomorphic cells containing bizarre hyperchromatic nuclear cells with both poorly and well-differentiated areas. On immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, desmin, S-100, STAT6, BCL-2, and MIC2, but positive for smooth muscle actin, CDK4, and MDM2 . These findings led to a pathological diagnosis of dedifferentiated PTL. Histological examination showed no microscopic invasion to the testis. Based on the soft tissue sarcoma classification, the disease was T2bN1M1 (IV) stage. At 2 months after surgery, the lung nodules showed rapid progression (+ 40% for 2 months) . First-line treatment was then started with gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2 day 1) plus docetaxel (30 mg/m2, day 1) chemotherapy every 2 weeks. The metastasis in his left lung was set as a target lesion by chest radiography. The time course of the imaging studies is shown in Fig. . The disease was well controlled by gemcitabine plus docetaxel chemotherapy for 1 year without any adverse events until its progression. We subsequently performed second-line eribulin (1.4 mg/m2, day 1, 8, every 3 weeks) chemotherapy. Despite the progression of the lung metastases, his symptoms remained stable. However, at 4.5 months after second-line chemotherapy, chest radiography showed progression of metastatic nodules and the presence of pleural effusion. In all, he underwent chemotherapy for 18 months and died at 22 months after diagnosis. An autopsy was not performed.