A 26-year-old previously healthy female nurse, who was working on a COVID-19 inpatient unit, presented to the emergency department (ED) with rhinitis and anosmia. Of note, she had been taking OCPs for the previous 2 years. On physical examination, she was afebrile with a normal heart rate and blood pressure and no respiratory distress. Her body mass index (BMI) was normal at 20 kg/m2. Reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction was performed, confirming the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Due to symptoms compatible with mild COVID-19 infection, she subsequently isolated at home with routine telehealth follow-up.
COVID-19 disease evolved favourably over the following 14 days that she spent on isolation; therefore, she was instructed to discontinue quarantine at the end of that period.
On the 15th day after the onset of the disease, the patient presented with NYHA class 2 dyspnoea. By using a digital pulse oximeter, she noted an oxygen saturation of 99% and a rapid heart rate, which led her to a cardiology consultation. Physical examination revealed: temperature: 36.5°C, blood pressure: 110/60 mm Hg, respiratory rate: 16 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation (SpO2): 99% on room air, and heart rate: 120 b.p.m. Chest X-ray was normal . The electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia without any other abnormalities .
Based on 2019 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of acute PE, the Geneva score was used to estimate the probability of PE, which showed an intermediate risk of 20–30%. Therefore, a complete blood work was ordered including a D-dimer level . The use of this predictive tool and an elevated level of D-dimer in blood led to performing a computed tomography pulmonary angiography, which confirmed a bilateral inferior subsegmental PE . Echocardiography and compression ultrasonography of lower limbs veins were normal. The patient’s OCPs treatment was suspended and she was initially started on anticoagulation with low-molecular weight heparin. Her anticoagulation treatment was switched to Apixaban 5 mg twice a day with a minimum 3-month treatment goal once other causes of VTE such as pregnancy or anti-phospholipid syndrome, which would contraindicate the use of novel oral anticoagulants were ruled out. Additionally, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), and viral serologies tests were performed, all of them with negative results .
Clinically, the patient progressed favourably without dyspnoea though she continued to have tachycardia on mild to moderate exertion until the 1st week of anticoagulant treatment.