A 30-year-old obese male with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia and mild scoliosis presented with subtle clinical features of myelopathy. He endorsed one week of left plantar foot paresthesias exacerbated by activity, gait instability and mid-thoracic back pain. On physical examination, he had poor proprioception in his left lower extremity. CT revealed osseous lesions at T7-10 extending into surrounding paraspinal tissues causing severe spinal canal stenosis. MRI of the spine demonstrated an expansile sclerotic osseous lesion centered at the right lamina and pedicle of T9 with central lucency, enhancement and narrowing of the spinal canal at T9-10, as well as multifocal OLF most pronounced at T6-7 and to a lesser degree at T7-8 and T8-9 . Together, these findings were suggestive of osteoblastoma with associated OLF and reactive bone and soft tissue inflammation, often described as the osteoblastoma flare phenomenon .
The patient consented to surgical intervention and underwent thoracic decompression and stabilization. Wide laminectomies at the T6-10 levels were performed. The ligamentum flavum was found to be significantly calcified, at times requiring high-speed pneumatic drilling for removal. Decompression was carried down through the pedicle at T9 to adequately manage the critical stenosis caused by the bony mass at T9-10. After decompression, T6-10 stabilization was performed. Post-operatively, the patient had mild left lower extremity weakness which improved spontaneously within 24 h (4+/5). At his 3-month follow up visit, the patient had complete resolution of his neurological symptoms with stable imaging findings .
The surgical pathology report noted osteoblastoma associated with OLF. The OLF was characterized as reactive, benign chondro-osseous tissue. Histology demonstrated anastomosing trabeculae of osteoid and woven bone with prominent osteoblastic rimming and scattered osteoclastic activity. Loose fibrovascular stroma with focal hemorrhage and vascular congestion was seen between the trabeculae, consistent with the diagnosis of osteoblastoma .