A 60 year old female presented to our outpatient department with a painless, progressive swelling on the anterior part of the chest for the past 2 years. On examination, pulse rate was 78/min, blood pressure 130/80 mmHg and respiratory rate was 14/min. A 15 cm × 8 cm vertically aligned, non-tender, well defined swelling was present on the pre-sternal region, with consistency ranging from soft to firm . The swelling was fixed to the underlying tissues. There was no visible neck swelling and retrosternal extension of this swelling was not appreciated. A 3 cm × 2 cm, hard, fixed level IV lymph node was palpable on the right side. Ultrasonography (USG) revealed a large mass of 15 × 7 cm with multiple cystic areas. Fine needle aspiration cytology was inconclusive twice. Patient had undergone a total thyroidectomy for papillary carcinoma 10 years back. No records were available and there was no history of radio iodine ablation therapy. Patient was taking 100 micrograms thyroxine daily. Her thyroid function tests were normal (TSH 3.1 uIU/ml; refence range 0.35–5.50). Her hemoglobin was 11 g % and laboratory parameters including kidney function tests within normal range. Computed tomography findings revealed a large 15 × 6.6 × 7 cm lobulated, pre-sternal, soft tissue lesion with solid & cystic components . No underlying bony destruction or retro sternal extension was seen. No cervical lymphadenopathy was seen besides a 3 × 2 cm level IV node. The mass was infiltrating the right sided strap muscles and sternocleidomastoid. In view of invasion, Magnetic resonance imaging was also done, which revealed a large 14 × 6.5 × 7 cm well defined, multicystic lesion with solid components in the anterior aspect of lower neck extending inferiorly in the pre-sternal region . The lesion shows ill-defined planes with bilateral sternocleido-mastoid muscles and the strap muscles.
A suspicion of recurrence of papillary thyroid cancer was thought in this rare location. Thyroid scan could not pick up any activity in the mass. Henceforth a PET scan was done that showed increased FDG uptake by the lesion and the level IV lymph node . USG guided fine needle aspiration cytology was done again and showed Bethesda IV category. The patient underwent wide excision of the mass with right functional neck dissection. The mass was attached to the sternal head of the right sternocleido-mastoid and other strap muscles. The mass was removed with both sternal head of sternocleido-mastoid, the strap muscles and the surrounding fascia .
The gross specimen revealed solid components with multiple cystic areas . Histopathology confirmed well differentiated papillary thyroid carcinoma with presence of typical cells, nuclear groves, inclusions and clustering. Focal area of necrosis and hemosiderin laden macrophages were also present . Resected margins were clear. Labelled lymph node showed deposits of papillary carcinoma thyroid; included fibro collagenous tissue also showed deposits of papillary carcinoma thyroid. Post-operative radioactive iodine ablation 70 mCi was given approximately 8 weeks after the surgery. The thyroglobulin levels have been less than 1 microgram/L. The patient has been following regularly and is healthy with no recurrence up to 30 months of follow up.