A previously healthy 32-year-old Egyptian lady presented to the outpatient medical clinic with a 3-month history of right-sided abdominal pain exacerbated by movement and relieved with over-the-counter analgesics. The pain was related to food intake. She described the pain as stabbing in nature and radiating to the back. She denied any history of melena, dysphagia, weight loss, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting as well as history of fever or night sweats. She did not complain of vaginal discharge or menstrual abnormalities.
She is a nonsmoker and denied any personal or family history of venous thromboembolism. Her gynecological history was remarkable for five pregnancies. She had normal vaginal deliveries except for the last one, which required an emergency Cesarean section at 36 weeks and 5 days of gestation due to placenta previa type III. One month after delivery, the patient was started on desogestrel (0.075 mg oral daily) for contraception, which she continued for 2 years. Her menstrual period was irregular, and the last withdrawal bleeding was 2 weeks prior to clinic visit.
During the initial clinic visit, her vital signs were within normal limits (temperature, 36.7°C; heart rate, 78 bpm; blood pressure, 100/66 mmHg). Abdominal examination was significant for a mild tenderness in the right upper quadrant. Bowel sounds were noted.
Initial laboratory findings, including complete blood count, renal parameters, and electrolytes, liver function, lipase, and amylase levels, were within normal limits. Beta-hCG was negative. Initial differentials included cholecystitis, hepatitis, or hepatic abscess. Thrombosis of the portal vein is a possible differential diagnosis; however, in the absence of significant risk factors in the patient's history, further evaluation by ultrasound of the abdomen is required.
Abdominal ultrasound showed multiple hyperechoic focal lesions, the largest measuring 15 × 15 mm in the right hepatic lobe, suggestive of hemangiomas, indicating further evaluation by abdominal gadolinium-enhanced MRI, which confirmed hepatic hemangiomas; additionally, right OVT was suspected. Therefore, pelvic MRI with gadolinium-based contrast was requested, which revealed a prominent right ovarian vein measuring 8 mm in diameter with loss of flow void and persistent central nonenhancement with mild peripheral enhancement, indicating partial thrombosis of the right ovarian vein. Furthermore, the left ovarian vein was patent. Mild pelvic congestion and a small follicular cyst in the right ovary was noted (, ).
Further laboratory investigations were performed to evaluate the underlying cause of the thrombosis, including factor V Leiden mutation, ANA, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, beta-2 microglobulin, and JAK2 mutation, which were all negative . Few thrombophilia tests such as anti-thrombin III, Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene, and protein C were not performed.