Here we report the case of a 60-year old obese male patient, with severe cardiac problems, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, and arteriosclerotic vascular disease. This patient underwent heart surgery on July 17, 2016, four days after an ST-elevation myocardial infarction following pulmonary edema. During the procedure, a complete arterial revascularization was performed (LIMA to LADA, LRA → LIMA /Y graft/ to OMA, RIMA to RCA, LRA → RIMA /Y graft/ to PDA). On September 11, 2016, this patient was admitted to the Department of Cardiology of the Military Institute of Medicine in Warsaw, Poland due to severe circulatory failure [New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III, N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) serum concentration = 2987 pg/mL]. His body temperature was 38 °C. He had a purulent wound in the lower part of his sternum, with a fistula approximately 2 cm long. There were also signs of inflammation in the surrounding tissues, and the middle section of his sternum was moderately unstable. His laboratory tests revealed an increased number of white blood cells (15.5 × 109/L), and his C–reactive protein serum level was 34.9 mg/dL.
Specimens were collected from the wound, blood, and urine for the microbiological analyses. Microbiological identification was performed with VITEK2 analyzer (BioMérieux, France), according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) values for different antimicrobial agents were determined with Etest (BioMérieux, France). Because the isolated pathogen was susceptible for vancomycin, such antimicrobial agent (1 g every 12 h) was started. A computed tomography scan of his thorax showed no signs of mediastinitis, and the blood and urine samples were microbiologically negative. MSRA was isolated from the wound, and this pathogen was susceptible to vancomycin (MIC = 0.75 mg/L), rifampicin, gentamycin, teicoplanin, daptomycin, linezolid, tigecycline, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and dalbavancin (MIC = 0.064 mg/L) .
Although the serum concentration of the vancomycin was within the therapeutic range (10–15 mg/L), we observed lacks of both local and clinical improvement. In this situation, rifampicin (300 mg every 12 h) was added to the vancomycin; however, the patient still complained about the pain during breathing and chest palpation. Purulent secretions from the wound were also observed. Therefore, a decision was made to administer dalbavancin (1500 mg intravenously), with refixation of the sternum. Surgery was performed on September 22, 2016, after an improvement in this patient’s general condition.
Intraoperatively, there were signs of mediastinitis, with a few pus reservoirs under the sternum. Impaired wound healing with a separation of the sternum was diagnosed. The necrotic tissues were removed, the mediastinum was rinsed with antiseptic, and irrigated drainage with gentamycin was started. A second dose of dalbavancin (1500 mg) was administered after 14 days of the therapy. Overall, the postoperative period was uncomplicated, with normal wound healing observed, as well as improvement in the circulatory function and a decrease in the serum inflammatory markers. On September 28, 2016, after seven days of dalbavancin therapy, a microbiological examination of the removed drains did not reveal the pathogens. The changes in the serum concentrations of the biochemical markers of inflammation are presented in Fig. .
This patient was discharged in good local and general condition on October 7, 2016, fifteen days after the surgery.