A 66-year-old obese male, with unconfirmed history of alcoholic liver disease and recent lymphedema of the left leg, presented to the emergency department with hematemesis, haemodynamic instability and impaired consciousness.
The patient was initially evaluated by the Medical Emergency Team and found to be lethargic, tachypneic, and hypotensive, ultimately progressing to cardiac arrest with an initial rhythm of pulseless electrical activity (PEA). Prompt instigation of Advanced Life Support (ALS) led to Return of Spontaneous Circulation (ROSC) after 15 min of cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, requiring the administration of a total of 5 mg of adrenaline. Inhalation of gastric contents was evident during intubation. Further diagnostic workup, including a CT scan, revealed a moderately enlarged esophagus with a thickened wall, along with liquid hypodense material in the esophagus and stomach. Liver cirrhosis with diffuse collateral vessels was also identified. Upon admission to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), the patient was found to be afebrile, tachycardic, and with severe hypotension necessitating high dose vasopressor support with Norepinephrine. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed severe metabolic acidosis with hyperlactatemia. An emergent EGDS was performed revealing diffuse severe mucosal changes characterized by pale and granular esophageal mucosa with distal black membranes, suggestive of diffuse necrosis with initial scarring ( a, b). The gastric mucosa and duodenal bulb appeared hyperemic with scattered small erosions.
The patient was treated with high doses of intravenous pantoprazole. The insertion of a nasogastric tube was avoided to prevent further damage to the ischemic mucosa. Therefore, total parenteral nutrition was initiated.
Ongoing aggressive resuscitation was required, including high-dosage vasopressors, hemocomponent transfusions, and renal replacement therapy due to evolving liver failure with coagulation factor deficit. Empirical broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was also initiated.
After seven days, a second EGDS revealed pale and granular esophageal mucosa covered with delicate granulation tissue, consistent with an advanced phase of scarring. The gastric mucosa was hyperemic and atrophic, with signs of scarring developing on the previously identified areas of erosion.
The patient's neurological status was poor, with a fluctuating Glasgow Coma Scale, initially at 6 (E4V1M1), and neurophysiological studies showed no abnormalities. The patient's prognosis was adversely affected by post-cardiac arrest syndrome and liver failure, and unfortunately, he succumbed to his conditions in the ICU on day 17 since admission.
Despite advancements in endoscopy leading to increased diagnosis, AEN remains a rare syndrome. Hematemesis and/or melena are commonly observed in patients, along with sepsis-associated signs such as lactic acidosis, tachycardia, and hypotension, as evident in the case being presented.
The injury pattern reported in AEN has been described by the “two hit” hypothesis. According to this theoretical model, the first insult is caused by initial systemic event (i.e. low-flow state), that predisposes the esophageal mucosa to a secondary direct injury (i.e. reflux of acid and pepsin). In addition, esophageal reflux can be increased by concomitant gastric outlet obstruction. This model is supported by the observation of extensive esophageal necrosis in patients that suffers from a temporary reduction of esophageal blood supply, that is rapidly resolved upon restoration of normal flow .
With regards to the case presented, co-existing conditions, such as chronic alcohol abuse, may have compromised the protective mechanisms of the esophageal mucosa, making it more susceptible to injury. The low-flow state associated with cardiac arrest and subsequent hemodynamic instability could have led to ischemia. Additionally, the acute hemorrhage observed on the chest CT that was potentially attributed to the damage to bronchial or intercostal arteries during cardiopulmonary resuscitation, might have caused further reduction in blood supply to the middle esophagus. On top of that, reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus could have caused direct injury leading to esophageal necrosis.
Given the limited specificity of thoracic CT findings, endoscopy remains the preferred and most reliable method for diagnosing AEN. The treatment approach for patients with AEN involves aggressive resuscitation and timely intervention. There is no specific medical or surgical intervention to reverse the damage; however, if detected early, AEN can be reversible.
Immediate initiation of aggressive treatment for underlying medical conditions, including hemodynamic resuscitation, glycemic control, nil-per-os restriction, and high-dose intravenous proton pump inhibitors for acid suppression, should be implemented in these patients [,].
Nevertheless, despite aggressive resuscitation efforts, the mortality rate for AEN remains high at 32 % [,,]. The clinical picture presented in this case report was consistent with the evidence described in literature. The work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria.