In August 2020, an 11-year-old Austrian girl visited the crater lake Specchio di Venere (“Mirror of Venus”) on Pantelleria Island, Italy with her parents and 7-year-old sister. After swimming in the lake, she spent an hour soaking in one of the hot pools at the lake’s edge . She was lying in a pool about 20 cm deep and did not rinse off after leaving.
The pools are a major tourist attraction and are heavily used. There were five pools, with up to five people per pool, both adults and children, and frequent coming and going, with people waiting for a space to be vacated. The girl and her father were never alone in the pool. Her younger sister bathed in a different pool with her mother.
Two days after bathing in the pool, the girl developed vulvovaginal burning and discharge. The burning kept her from swimming in the sea for a couple of days, which caused disappointment whenever she tried to enter the water. Her symptoms partly settled but did not completely resolve with the use of antifungal cream purchased over the counter. The family returned to their home country Austria 2 weeks later, and she was then was seen by her pediatrician. She had no signs of sepsis, with no elevated temperature or pulse. Vaginal examination was normal, but a vaginal swab returned a positive aerobic culture for Neisseria gonorrhoeae. A second swab taken the following week confirmed the diagnosis of gonococcal vulvovaginitis. The parents and the younger sister were tested for gonorrhea with negative results (see Fig. for the case timeline).
The possibility of sexual transmission was explored. The child adamantly denied any sexual contact. The family had been traveling together on holiday when the symptoms started, and there was no evidence or opportunity identified for sexual transmission. It was therefore concluded that she must have acquired the infection from pool water contaminated by gonococcus after a 2-day incubation period .
Once the diagnosis was established and the illness explained to her, her first reaction was fear that her new classmates might hear about this infection, as she had started high school immediately upon arrival in her hometown. The stress of adjusting to a new school coupled with the infection led to crying and fatigue, particularly just before treatment, as she was very afraid of the infusion.
However the pediatrician was gentle, both parents were present during treatment, and she coped well. She was treated with ceftriaxone infusion 50 mg/kg body weight followed by oral azithromycin 500 mg the next day. Her pediatrician also advised whey baths for 2 weeks to help restore her vaginal flora. Her vaginal symptoms settled within a couple of days. She experienced slight anorexia and loose stools for a couple of days post-treatment, but then made a full recovery. After being treated, she adapted well to her new school environment.
A repeat swab 4 weeks later was negative. Slight delays in getting swabs taken and treatment initiated occurred because the country was reentering lockdown for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), as well as the school year starting under pressure because of the imminent lockdown. She made an uneventful recovery and remains well.