A 54-year-old male presented with a 4-week history of the left arm and leg weakness and clumsiness followed by multiple seizures 2 weeks prior to admission. The patient had no past medical history or history of hereditary diseases. Physical examination was unremarkable. Neurological examination revealed left-sided weakness with no sensory deficits.
Brain MRI revealed a dural-based mass in the right frontoparietal region, extending to the intraaxial compartment, measuring 46 mm in antero-posterior, 34 mm in cranio-caudal, and 23 mm in the lateral dimension. The mass was heterogeneous on the T2-weighted sequence with no significant post-contrast enhancement of the solid tumor component after intravenous administration of gadolinium-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid. Tortuous peripheral enhancement correlated with dislocated cortical venous vessels. Markedly increased choline (Cho) and lipid peak were noted on MRS . No surrounding edema was noted. Imaging findings mainly were consistent with a solitary fibrous tumor.
After usual prepping of the operative field, right parasagittal craniotomy was performed for tumor resection. The lesion was in the right parietal parasagittal region in contact with falx, pink in color, with an approximate largest diameter of 3.5 cm. Gross total resection was performed with the assistance of neuromonitoring. Tissue samples were taken intraoperatively and sent for frozen section and histopathology examination. The patient postoperative course was uneventful.
On histopathological examination tumor cells manifested scant to moderate amounts of eosinophilic cytoplasm and irregular nuclei with “salt and pepper” chromatin. Brisk mitotic activity was noted . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that tumor cells nuclei strongly and diffusely expressed TTF-1 associated with high proliferative Ki-67 index . These features were compatible with non-microcellular neuroendocrine lung cancer metastatic disease. PET/CT revealed a stellate lesion, with spicules radiating out from the central portion of the mass, within the right upper lung lobe, compatible with primary lung cancer, measuring 17 mm × 2 8mm .
Patient remained progression free for 2 years, developing multiple metastases in cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres, lungs, and adrenal glands. Further institutional protocol-based adjuvant therapy included etoposide with cisplatin chemotherapy (EP) and radiation treatment for the tumoral bed with fractioned external beam irradiation to a total dose of 40 Gy divided into 20 fractions, which was interrupted after 17th fraction due to patient’s personal will. Extensive dissemination of malignant disease resulted in lethal outcome three years after the initial diagnosis had been established.