A 73-year-old male was admitted due to severe symptomatic aortic stenosis for further diagnosis and treatment. The patient demonstrated with hypertension and history of ischaemic cerebral stroke 2 months prior to presentation. An echocardiography confirmed severe aortic stenosis with an aortic valve area of 0.4-0.5 cm2 and the transvalvular gradient of 74/48 mmHg. The left ventricle ejection fraction was 60%, with mild hypokinesis of the anterior wall and anterior part of the interventricular septum. Carotid artery ultrasound revealed critical stenosis of the left internal carotid artery (95%). Coronary angiography showed 80% stenosis of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) in the proximal part including the first diagonal branch (Dg) . After coronary angiography, the case was discussed among our “Heart team” and the patient was scheduled for subsequent transcatheter aortic valve implantation, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the proximal LAD and carotid artery stenting. PCI of the LAD was performed. One 6 French Extra Backup 4.0 guide catheter was used, a BMW Universal II (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, California, USA) guide-wire was placed in the LAD, and after several attempts with other non-hydrophilic wires, ASAHI Sion Black (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, California, USA) was placed in the first diagonal branch. Predilatation with a balloon catheter (3.0 x 12 mm 10 atm.) was performed in the proximal Dg . Afterwards, we implanted a DES Resolute stent (3.5 x 22 mm in LAD 16 atm.) . The Proximal Optimization Technique (POT) was performed with a non-compliant balloon catheter (3.5 x 6 mm up to 20 atm.) We visualized a type B dissection in the proximal edge of the stent which we placed in the LAD. There was no contrast extravasation before removal of the guide-wire located in the Dg . Immediately after removing the guide-wire from the Dg, contrast extravasation appeared distally . Due to the increase of clinical features of cardiac tamponade (drop in blood pressure to 80/60 mmHg) and in subsequent coronary angiographies, there was no response to pharmacological treatment, pericardiocentesis was performed. A total of 300 ml of blood was removed with resolution of clinical tamponade symptoms. After clinical stabilization, a Fielder XT-A guide-wire was put into the Dg. Afterwards, two unsuccessful passages through stenotic lesions were attempted with 1.5 x 15 mm and 1.25 x 10 mm balloon catheters. The same difficulties appeared with the use of a Finecross micro-catheter. Due to the hemodynamic destabilization, we decided to finish the procedure and give the patient 30 mg of protamine sulphate. Over the next several hours after the procedure, 180 ml of blood was removed from the pericardium. Two days after the procedure, pericardial effusion stabilized and the pericardial catheter was removed. Due to progressive anaemia, the patient was transfused 2 units of packed red blood cells 8 days after the CAP. Increased pericardial blood was noted 10 days after the procedure and the pericardial sac was punctured again resulting in the removal of 680 ml of blood. In the following three days, 440 ml and 480 ml were removed from the pericardium. Fifteen days after the PCI coronary, the angiography revealed no signs of contrast extravasation . The patient was discussed by the “Heart team” and scheduled for surgical revision of the pericardial sac, concomitant aortic valve replacement surgery and left internal carotid artery endarterectomy, scheduled for the sixteenth day after the PCI. During surgical revision, several clots, haemolyzed blood and signs of pericardial adhesions and inflammation were seen in the pericardium. The operation was performed with hypothermia (32°C), extracorporeal circulation and crystalline cardioplegia. After the surgical opening of the ascending aorta, the pathologic aortic valve was removed and replaced with a new biological aortic valve Medtronic Hancock II 23 A (Medtronic Minneapolis, MN, USA). Decompression of the tamponade was performed and clots were removed. Interestingly, bleeding from the entire surface of the pericardium and visible signs of inflammation were seen. Laboratory tests did not show decreased platelets (165,000/µl), prothrombin time was 14.1 sec, and activated partial thromboplastin time was 40.5 sec on the day of surgery. During the cardiac surgery and postoperative period, the patient required transfusion of 6 units of packed red blood cells. The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was discharged 7 days after the operation and transferred back to the referring hospital for further treatment.