A 53-year-old man with normal height (175 cm) and overweight (102 kg, body mass index = 33.3 kg/cm2) initially presented with low back pain and bilateral legs pain for 4 years and bilateral lower limps numbness for 2 years.
Four years ago, this patient gradually developed low back pain, radiating to hip and lateral side of both legs. The pain worsened after long time standing, walking and working and relieved when bending and crouching. Numerical rating scale (NRS, an 11-point scale where 0 = no pain and 10 = the worst pain) scored 4. The patient tried some unknown painkillers but they did not work. The intermittent pain lasted for years until 2 years ago when he started to have numbness of both lower limps, ranging from both sides of calfs to the dorsum of feet. Intermittent claudication occurs within 500 m’ walking. No cauda equina syndrome (CES) appeared. It should be noticed that this man gained 55 kg in weight during the past 20 years. Relevant history included hypertension for 10 years, smoking for 30 years and drinking for 30 years. In recent two weeks there was a fluctuation of blood sugar but no formal monitoring record was available. This patient had never received steroids medications.
A full endocrinologic workup was conducted in patient to rule out underlying endocrine abnormalities and type 2 diabetes mellitus was diagnosed. On physical exam, the patient showed 5/5 strength, normal muscle tone and intact superficial sensation in the upper and lower extremities bilaterally. Tendon reflexes of the right knee was absent and several myelopathic signs were recorded as follows: Chaddock sign ( +) on the left, Oppenheim sign ( +) on the left and Babinski sign suspected ( +) on both sides. CT scan indicated typical signs of LSS: intervertebral foraminal stenosis, ligamentum flavum hypertrophy, disc paracentral herniation and spinal stenosis from L2 to L5 , and MRI showed epidural abnormal fat deposition in the spinal canal from L2–L5 . According to a previous study of Borre et al., SEL could be graded on basis of the degree of epidural adipose tissue occupying the spinal canal (extradural fat [EF]-to spinal canal [SC] ratio); grade I, 41–50% of the canal; grade II, 51–74% of the canal; and grade III, > 75% of the canal . This patient’s imaging revealed grade II (60% EF/SC ratio) lumbar epidural lipomatosis .
Based on the patient’s symptoms, history, physical examination and radiological imaging, a primary diagnosis of LSS and obesity-induced idiopathic SEL from L2–L5 was proposed. The compression of the cauda equina came from anterior protruding lumbar disc and posterior adipose tissue and ligamentum flavum, and pressure on nerve root is caused by intervertebral foraminal bony stenosis. Since refractory radiculopathic symptoms had appeared, indication of surgery was clear. Mimimally invasive surgery like endoscopic technique was insufficient to relieve bony stenosis, so extensive decompression was necessary. Internal fixation and bone graft fusion were adopted to maintain the stability of responsible vertebrae. Although the modified articular fusion had never been reported in such a rare disease, it was performed successfully in a large amount of obese patients with lumbar degenerative disease only. This was our first application of this modified surgical style on obesity SEL.
After a preoperative use of prophylactic antibiotics (cefuroxime 1.5 g, intravenous), the operation was performed under general anesthesia and in a prone position. Following careful stripping of the paraspinal muscles, spinous process, bilateral articular processes and roots of transverse processes were exposed. Afterwards, titanium polyaxial pedicle screws (6.5 mm in diameter, 50 mm long, Legacy, Medtronic, USA) were inserted bipedicularly from the L2 to L5 vertebrae. We chose used F4 reverse thread screws providing a tightening power in horizontal direction and minimizes the possibility of pulling out. This is quite important for such a patient with hight body weight. Then, pre-bended titanium rods were implanted and intraoperative fluoroscopy confirmed satisfactory position and length of screws. The resection range included spinous processes (L3, L4 and small portion of L2 and L5), 2/3 of the inferior L2 lamina, L3 and L4 lamina and 1/5 of upper L5 lamina, as well as the corresponding supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, ligamentum flavum and joint capsule. Then hyperplastic medial portion of facet joints, atrophic ligamentum flavum, stenosis of lumbar lateral recess and accumulation of epidural adipose tissue contributing to dural sac compression was visible . Decompression range of L2–L3 included medial 2/3 of the L2 bilateral inferior articular process, 1/3 of the medial side of bilateral superior articular processes of L5 and hyperplastic medial portion of L3 superior articular processes. Medial 2/3 of the bilateral L2 inferior articular process and 1/3 of the medial side of bilateral superior articular processes of L3 was carried out with a chisel and the lateral 2/3 portion was preserved for bone grafting. Management of L3–L4 and L4–L5 was the same as the above description. Following the decompression was resection of epidural adipose tissue with bipolar cautery .
Subsequently, inspection verified an adequate relaxation of nerve root and full decompression of dural sac. Removed tissue had the appearance of normal adipose tissue. A round head grinding drill was then used to prepare the inter-articular space as grafting bed for autograft and allograft cancellous bone. After that, the surgery field was rinsed with saline before bone graft was pressed into the inter-articular space. Finally, a drainage tube was put in place and the wound was closed up. Intraoperative hemorrhage was 586 mL.
The patient showed full muscle strength and sensation once regained consciousness. Preoperative symptoms relieved obviously during the following days, and NRS scored 1. We removed the drainage tube and encouraged the patient to stand and walk on the third day after operation. Radiographs of lumbar spine were taken to verify the good location of screws and rods , and MRI confirmed complete decompression and elimination of excessive fat tissue . The patient was permitted to discharge with referral for outpatient rehabilitation. We also mobilized this patient to lose weight.
By now the man has come back for follow-up regularly and his low back and radiating leg pain has completely resolved, and NRS scored 0. X-Ray, CT and MRI at different follow-up time points showed persistent stability and graft and satisfactory fusion rate, and no evidence of reoccurred SEL was detected .