A 70-year-old woman with a past medical history of pulmonary sarcoidosis and high-degree atrioventricular (AV) block status-post pacemaker implantation presented to a nearby hospital for persistent chest pain, nausea, and dizziness. On presentation, she was tachycardic to 103 beats per minute (bpm) with a blood pressure of 93/55 mmHg. Initial labs showed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 15,900/mm3 and platelets of 435,000/uL; complete metabolic profile (CMP) demonstrated a sodium of 125 mEq/L, creatinine 0.9 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 332 IU/L, and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 346 IU/L. Peak high-sensitivity troponin was 9,180 pg/ml and N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP)was 30,919 pg/ml (normal < 100 pg/mL). She was diagnosed with non-ST elevation myocardial infarction due to her presenting symptoms and rise in troponin levels. Left heart catheterization (LHC) showed non-obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD) , with a left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) of 35 mmHg. TTE showed an ejection fraction of 30–35%, left ventricular septal wall akinesis, moderate tricuspid and mitral regurgitation, and mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. The patient was commenced on intravenous (IV) diuresis and goal-directed medical therapy for decompensated heart failure. She quickly decompensated and developed increasing pressor and inotropic agent requirements in the setting of multiorgan failure. Transfer to our institution for further evaluation and management was initiated.
Upon transfer, the patient was admitted to our cardiac intensive care unit for cardiogenic shock. On arrival, she had a blood pressure of 85/52 mmHg, heart rate of 119 bpm, temperature of 36.4℃ (97.5℉), respiratory rate of 29 breaths/minute and oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. Her physical exam was notable for cool distal extremities and weak peripheral pulses. Labs revealed a WBC count of 20,900/mm3 and CMP showed a sodium of 122 mEq/L, creatinine of 1.85 mg/dL (baseline 0.75 mg/dL), AST 2,394 IU/L, ALT 3,314 IU/L. Lactic acid was 3.9 mmol/L and b-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) was > 4,900 pg/mL (NT-proBNP was not performed at our institution) . Electrocardiogram (ECG) obtained on admission is shown in Fig. . The differential diagnosis for this patient’s biventricular heart failure leading to cardiogenic shock included CS, giant cell myocarditis, infectious myocarditis, stress cardiomyopathy, and other infiltrative cardiomyopathies. TTE at our facility showed severe biventricular systolic dysfunction with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20–25% with akinesis of the basal, mid-inferior, and septal walls in addition to moderate tricuspid and mitral valve regurgitation. The patient was started on IV dobutamine and IV norepinephrine for management of cardiogenic shock at the referring institution, which were continued upon arrival. She was subsequently taken to the cardiac catheterization laboratory for RHC. Right heart catheterization (RHC) demonstrated severely elevated biventricular filling pressures with a depressed cardiac index of 1.2 L/min/m2 . Pulmonary artery pulsatility index was reduced to 0.56, suggestive of concomitant right ventricular dysfunction. Mechanical circulatory support was provided via right femoral intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) placement with anticoagulation achieved with IV heparin.
Two days after IABP placement, our patient experienced ventricular tachycardia (VT) arrest with return of spontaneous circulation achieved after one round of cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defibrillation. She converted to normal sinus rhythm and was started on IV amiodarone and IV lidocaine infusions . Due to her significant transaminitis and concern for structural heart disease, she was subsequently transitioned to oral mexiletine. She was started on intense medical management for refractory volume overload with continuation of IV furosemide and initiation of IV chlorothiazide. Ivabradine was added at 5 mg and increased to 7.5 mg twice daily. A short-term dialysis catheter was placed in anticipation of possible ultrafiltration requirements given her initial anuria, however this soon resolved following optimized diuretic dosing. IV acetazolamide was required briefly due to metabolic alkalosis. The patient demonstrated hemodynamic improvement with this multimodal approach and was eventually able to be weaned off inotropic and vasopressor support (timeline of administered medications is demonstrated in Fig. ). However, when attempting to wean her balloon pump, she experienced frequent episodes of VT requiring several IV boluses of amiodarone. Eventually, she was weaned off IABP support successfully.
At this stage, suspicion for cardiac sarcoidosis heightened given the patient’s frequent VT episodes, presence of advanced AV block, and history of biopsy-proven pulmonary sarcoidosis. To rule out other possible cardiomyopathies as an etiology for her cardiogenic shock, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was performed. It showed significant late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), T1 and T2 prolongation in the septum, inferior, and lateral walls, in addition to associated pericardial LGE, indicative of severe myopericarditis . With the support of suggestive findings on CMR, we diagnosed our patient with cardiac sarcoidosis. Other underlying causes of her decompensation had been reasonably excluded. As a result, she was started on immunosuppressive therapy with IV pulse dose steroids followed by oral steroids, to which she had responded well. She was initiated on mycophenolate mofetil at 1000 mg twice daily and infliximab 10 mg/kg. Afterwards, she continued to demonstrate clinical improvement with end-organ recovery. She underwent replacement of her existing pacemaker device to a biventricular implantable cardioverter-defibrillator given her history of sustained VT and chronic RV pacing, shortly after the CMR. She was discharged to an inpatient rehabilitation facility on sacubitril/valsartan, metoprolol, mycophenolate, and oral prednisone. Figure displays a timeline of major events during this hospitalization.
The patient was seen in our Heart Failure Clinic two weeks after discharge and was noted to be euvolemic and making progress in her rehabilitation.