A 69-year-old Asian man presented to the department of urology of our hospital due to increasing PSA, growing from 1.765 ng/mL in the previous to 2.680 ng/mL in the presenting year, pointed out in the annual checkup. We performed a TRUS: prostate volume was 28.4 mL and there was a clearly localized hypoechoic area in the left peripheral zone of the prostate . MRI revealed the suspicion for prostate carcinoma (T2 low, diffusion-weighted MRI high) in the identical area as in the TRUS . He neither had family history of prostate, breast nor ovarian carcinoma.
Transrectal prostate needle biopsy was performed. The result was adenocarcinoma, Gleason score 4 + 4, in 3/14 cores. The clinical diagnosis was adenocarcinoma of the prostate, cT2aN0M0.
Laparoscopic radical prostatectomy and left-sided obturator lymph node dissection were performed. The pathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma of the prostate with NED, Gleason score 4 + 3, ly0, v1, pn0, sv0, EPE1, RM0, N0(0/4), and IDC-P (+). The main tumor, sized 20 mm, was located in the left peripheral zone as shown in the imaging . Venous invasion of tumor cells on the very left basal side of the tumor was evaluated as EPE positive .
HE staining showed clearly shaped rosette formations inside the dominant tumor nests. Despite the malignant pathology, necrosis and nuclear atypia were not prominent. These phenomena suggest NED of the tumor cells .
Consequently, we performed immunohistochemical staining with neural (synaptophysin, CD56), endocrine (chromogranin A), and proliferation markers (Ki67) . About 40% of the tumor were positive for the neuroendocrine markers. Ki67-labeling index was high in the area without NED but low in the area with NED. Paradoxically, PSA staining was negative for the tumor but positive for the rest of the prostate.
Retrospectively, we reviewed the biopsy specimen and did additional staining for neuroendocrine markers. In the biopsy specimen, the corresponding rosette formation could be detected. The immunohistochemical staining also showed identical results as in the surgery specimen, that is focal positivity for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, CD56, and Ki-67 .
The patient has not received any adjuvant therapy. In the regular follow-up, no recurrence nor metastasis have been detected and his postoperative PSA remained <0.009 ng/mL during the follow-up period of 2 years.