A 54-year-old female with a history of metastatic colon cancer presented to the ED with persistent right-sided abdominal pain refractory to her prescribed home pain regimen. The patient had numerous recent ED visits and admissions for persistent abdominal pain. She had been placed on methadone 35 milligrams (mg) daily for opiod use disorder yet continued to have breakthrough pain after a prescribed oral protocol (from the outpatient pain management service) of hydromorphone 4 mg every six hours in conjunction with gabapentin 300 mg every eight hours. All her other labs were similar to her previous visit five days earlier except for an elevated alkaline phosphatase of 490 units per liter (U/L), which trended up from 275 U/L (reference range: 44–147 U/L). Three days prior to the ED visit, a computed tomography of the abdomen had shown numerous hepatic metastatic lesions. After four intravenous doses of 8 mg of morphine and one intravenous dose of 25 mg of ketamine (over a three-hour ED visit), the patient’s pain persisted.
The emergency medicine team planned for an inpatient admission for persistent, intractable abdominal pain. Because of the patient’s severe and refractory pain, a right-sided ultrasound-guided ESPB was offered to her. After consenting her for the procedure and placing her on a cardiac monitor, a 13–6 megahertz linear transducer was placed longitudinally and paraspinal on the right lower thorax. The patient remained in a seated position at the edge of the bed, and ultrasound was used to locate the transverse process at the ninth thoracic vertebra (T9). The area was disinfected with chlorhexidine, and a wheal of local anesthesia was placed. A 21-gauge × 100-millimeter SonoBlock II Facet S block needle (The Pajunk Group, Geisingen, Baden-Württemberg, Germany) was advanced in-plane from cranial to caudal direction until the needle tip touched the superior portion of the transverse process of the T9 .
To ensure correct placement of local anesthetic, 10 milliliters (mL) of normal saline was used to hydrodissect the dorsal fascial plane of the erector spinae muscle overlying the transverse process. After negative aspiration, 20 mL of 0.5% bupivicaine was gradually injected in 3–5 mL aliquots. After the anesthetic was gradually placed in the fascial plane below the erector spinae muscle, 10 mL of normal saline was again injected to flush the line as well as dilute the anesthetic.
Thirty minutes after the ESPB was performed the patient reported complete resolution of her pain. She was able to sleep comfortably and reported 1/10 pain when awakened by the admitting medicine attending. The patient was evaluated by the inpatient internal medicine service who contacted her oncologist. She was discharged with an increased oral pain protocol and a 24-hour follow-up with her oncologist. There were no reported complications from the ESPB.