A 4-year-old girl with bilateral International Intraocular Retinoblastoma Classification (IIRC) group D retinoblastoma diagnosed at the age of 20 months was treated with intraarterial injections of combined melphalan and topotecan for a relapse in the left eye. Previous treatments of that eye included 2 cycles of systemic chemotherapy (carboplatin, etoposide), 2 intraarterial and 10 intravitreal melphalan injections as well as numerous focal treatments (cryotherapy and thermotherapy). After the third intraarterial injection, she developed a total rhegmatogenous RD secondary to the formation of an atrophic hole at the basis of the regressed relapse. Scleral buckling without drainage but with an intraoperative anterior chamber tap to allow a sufficient tightening of the band was done, resulting in a complete reattachment of the retina. One year later, she developed a cataract impeding the fundus view and underwent lens aspiration with posterior capsulorhexis, anterior vitrectomy and intracapsular lens implantation. Two and a half years after cataract surgery, at the age of 7, vision in that eye suddenly decreased to light perception. Fundus examination showed a total macula-off tractional retinal detachment with no identifiable retinal break . PPV under melphalan perfusion (5 μg/ml) was performed. The exclusively tractional nature of the detachment originating from retinal dragging by the tumor scar was confirmed intraoperatively, since no retinal break was identified, and subretinal fluid could not be evacuated after perfluorocarbon liquid injection. To allow the retina to re-applicate, a retinectomy was created around the tumor scar, followed by laser photocoagulation and silicone oil tamponade. Cytologic examination of the vitrectomy fluid did not find any malignant cells. Silicone oil was removed 4 months later. At a 15-month post vitrectomy follow-up, the child had remained relapse- and metastasis-free without recurrence of RD and a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/32 in the vitrectomized eye .