A 45-year-old female, never smoker and without comorbidity, presented with cough, low grade fever and mild weight loss. There was no haemoptysis. She had no contact with tuberculosis patients but she had travelled to endemic countries in Asia and Africa. There was no history of recurrent infections in the past. She was diagnosed with pneumonia and treated with various courses of antibiotics but without resolution of symptoms. Physical examination revealed decreased breath sounds in the left upper lobe. Chest X-ray revealed a consolidation in the upper left hilum and left upper lobe . CT scan showed a central nodular intraluminal lesion with bronchial thickening and postobstructive pneumonia in the left upper lobe. No other endobronchial lesions or focal intrapulmonary pathology was found. There was no lymphadenopathy and no pericardial or pleural effusion . Bronchoscopy showed a well-defined endobronchial tumor in the apicoposterior segment of the left upper lobe. The patient was subsequently referred to our hospital for endobronchial treatment. Rigid bronchoscopy with electrocautery was attempted, but unsuccessful due to the difficult location of the lesion . Subsequent left upper lobe lobectomy was uncomplicated and resulted in a radical resection, pT1bN0R0. The resected lobe showed a perihilar mass with dilation of distal bronchi that were filled with mucinous material. The peripheral lung parenchyma contained multiple ill-defined, white to yellow consolidations . Histology and mitotic count was consistent with atypical carcinoid . In the peripheral lung parenchyma, granulomatous inflammation was found . Ziehl-Neelsen staining demonstrated unequivocal acid fast bacilli . PCR for Mycobacterium genus and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) complex performed on the resection specimen were negative. Three cultures from the surgical specimen were negative for the MTB and NTM. Because tuberculosis could not be ruled out, we advised the referring hospital to start treatment with antituberculous drugs. However, at the referring hospital it was decided not to treat because of the negative PCR and culture. Since then (now 14 months of follow-up) the patient has been well, without signs of infection. CT scan of the chest during follow-up showed no signs of active tuberculosis or recurrence of the carcinoid.