A 70-year-old woman with a severe headache, vertigo, fever, and arrhythmia, suspected with Parkinson's disease was admitted to Mazandaran Heart Center, Sari, north of Iran, in 2017. She had a history of symptomatic sever mitral stenosis probably due to rheumatic heart disease in her childhood for which she underwent mitral commissurotomy when she was 25 years old. After her first surgery, she administered penicillin G benzathine 1.2 million units IM once a month up to her last admission. She was also subjected to echocardiography every 6 months.
In 2010, the patient suffered from persistent fever, which was unresponsive to antibiotics for 2 weeks. Echocardiography revealed infective endocarditis; however, no microbial strain was isolated from blood culture. After treatment, symptoms reduced; nonetheless, a few days after discharging from the hospital, her blood cell profile was deteriorated gradually. The diagnosis of MDS was eventually confirmed after performing bone marrow aspiration for three times. Thereafter, the patient was subjected to androgen therapy with danazol (10 mg/kg b.w./day), and Prednisolone (1 mg/kg b.w./day). When the white blood cell count became normal, danazol was discontinued; however, the consumption of prednisolone (5 mg/day) was continued. During the long-term use of prednisolone, she was afflicted with steroid-induced diabetes and oral lichen planus due to the impairment of immune system.
On October 2015, due to the deterioration of patient's general condition, she was transferred to Tehran Heart Center for further evaluation. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed severe mitral valve (MV) stenoses; as a result, she was subjected to percutaneous transvenous mitral commissurotomy.
On May 2016, the patient was admitted to hospital due to persistent fever and general weakness, and was detected with MV regurgitation. She was prescribed vancomycin (20 mg/kg), gentamicin (1 mg/kg), and ciprofloxacin (10 mg/kg). She had a fever of up to 40°C that was unresponsive to antibiotics and persisted after a week. Imipenem was replaced with ciprofloxacin and continued for 6 weeks. The TEE showed mobile MV vegetation that involved more than 3/4 of the valves. Therefore, the patient underwent MV replacement with a biological (porcine) prosthetic valve.
Following the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, she was diagnosed with Candida onychomycosis and recurrent Candida vulvovaginitis, and therefore prescribed fluconazole (150 mg) for 3 weeks and caspofungin (intravenous [IV]; 50 mg three times a day) for 6 weeks, coupled with vancomycin and gentamicin.
On February 2017, she presented flu-like symptoms, such as fever and chills, dizziness, severe headache, and heart arrhythmias for 5 days prior to hospital admission. She was admitted to the Cardiac Care Unit of Mazandaran Heart Center in Sari and prescribed ceftizoxime (IV, 500 mg). Echocardiography revealed a large vegetation on the MV annulus.
Two consecutive blood samples were obtained from the patient and inoculated into biphasic brain heart infusion medium. After one week of incubation at 37°C, the blood cultures were positive. The yeast isolate was presumptively identified as C. albicans using conventional methods including chlamydospore production test, germ tube test, and appearance on CHROMagar Candida.
On March 2017, the patient’s condition deteriorated. The blood cultures were negative. She underwent the second prosthetic valve replacement. The surgery revealed the formation of huge fungal white and creamy vegetation and abscess overall the prosthetic valve. The explanted valve and vegetation were sent to laboratory for further evaluations. Direct examination (KOH 20%) and calcofluor white staining of the sample showed lots of budding yeast cells.
To identify the species, the yeast colonies were yielded on Sabouraud dextrose agar medium after a 24-hour incubation at 27ºC. The isolated yeast was identified as Candida albicans using the conventional methods. The diagnosis was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay using the two universal primers, namely ITS1 and ITS4 . The amplicons were sequenced and compared with the GenBank database; then, they were submitted to GenBank and received accession number MG763751.
Amphotericin B, deoxycolate (1 mg/kg/day), caspofungin (70 mg/kg on the first day and 50 mg/kg in the next days), and voriconazole (6 mg/kg bid on the first day and 4 mg/kg bid in the next days) together with broad-spectrum antibiotics, including vancomycin (20 mg/kg bid) and gentamicin (1 mg/kg bid) were administered. However, 48 h later, the patient presented with dyspnea, decreased consciousness, and decreased blood cells, resulting in a coma. The patient passed away due to sepsis probably related to the candidemia and Candida PVE with antifungal-resistant Candida
albicans.
In vitro antifungal susceptibility testing of Candida
albicans isolate was carried out based on the clinical and laboratory standards institute (CLSI) M27-A3 and M27-S4 guidelines [8]. Based on the breakpoint, the isolate was resistant to voriconazole (16 μg/ml), itraconazole (16 μg/ml), fluconazole (64 μg/ml), posaconazole (16 μg/ml), and amphotericin B (4 μg/ml). Furthermore, it was susceptible to anidulafungin (0.008 μg/ml) and micafungin (0.008 μg/ml), and intermediate to caspofungin (0.5 μg/ml).
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.