Our patient was a 64-year-old Japanese housewife who was treated for anxiety disorder at our psychosomatic clinic for 10 years. In March of the 11th year after her first visit, she felt dizziness, but no neck pain. She developed the abnormal thought that someone might tell her of past failures, and this idea grew rapidly into delusions and hallucinations. She reported that she often left her home and sought someone who told her about her failures. She complained of sleeplessness but not of a depressive or manic mood. Although she denied our advice to admit herself, she underwent a thorough medical workup.
Our patient's medical history was significant for diagnoses of Hashimoto's thyroiditis, hypertension and hyperlipidemia at the age of 48. At the age of 54, she had consulted our clinic because of dry oral sensation, palpitations, sweating, anxiety and sleep disturbances. Her thyroid function was normal at that time, with serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels of 1.8 μIU/mL (normal range, 0.4 μIU/mL to 4.0 μIU/mL) and free thyroxine (fT4) levels of 1.25 ng/dL (normal range, 0.8 ng/dL to 1.9 ng/dL). Serological examination by passive hemagglutination showed antimicrosomal antibody (MCHA) levels of 400 (normal range < 100) and antithyroglobulin antibodies (TGHA) levels of less than 100 (within normal range). She was diagnosed as having generalized anxiety disorder and was treated with supportive psychotherapy and anxiolytics (alprazolam, 1.2 mg). She continued to complain of various anxieties after a slight improvement in her fear for her health.
Our patient had five episodes of delusions and hallucinations, which lasted for one to three months each and occurred once a year for the first five years after her first visit. These episodes were diagnosed as a psychotic disorder, not otherwise specified, and she was treated with haloperidol during the episodes. After her fourth episode, she was prescribed a low dose of haloperidol in order to prevent another episode. Her thyroid function test was reexamined after the fifth episode and found to be normal.
At reexamination, her consciousness was alert, and convulsion or myoclonus was not observed. She politely complained that she heard someone telling her about failures, for example, "She had spoken ill to her neighbor," and she felt regret for her past faults. She had little insight into her abnormal thoughts, but she easily agreed to further medical examination. No psychomotor agitation, mood swing, or disruption of thought was observed. A physical examination showed that her blood pressure was 130/90 mmHg and that her small goiter was palpable. Laboratory data showed negative C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, low serum TSH levels, and normal free triiodothyronine (fT3) and fT4 levels. Tests were positive for thyroid autoantibodies, including MCHA, TGHA, antithyroglobulin antibody (anti-Tg) and thyroid peroxidase antibody (anti-TPO) (both measured by radioimmunoassay), while TSH receptor antibody (TRAb) was negative. Under an iodine-unrestricted diet, radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) was immediately measured and found to be low: 1.8% after one hour and 2.2% after one and a half hours (normal range: see Discussion). Ultrasonography revealed a diffuse goiter and a left lower parathyroid cyst. A brain computed tomography scan was normal.
These results definitively suggested painless thyroiditis. Antithyroid drugs were not delivered, while the dose of haloperidol was increased to 6 mg. Chlorpromazine (37.5 mg) was added, but she refused to take all of the psychotropic medications. In April, her serum TSH (2.07 μIU/mL) and fT4 (1.37 ng/dL) levels returned to normal. Her delusions weakened and disappeared in June .
No delusions or thyrotoxicosis developed for four years after the last delusional episode (14 years after her first visit). Her generalized anxiety disorder recovered without any psychotropic agents.