A 63-year-old female patient presented to the Department of Internal Medicine with a fever (>38 °C) that had persisted for two days and lower abdominal pain. The patient was admitted to the hospital due to gait disturbance that started two months earlier. Brain electromyography, brain magnetic resonance imaging, and nerve conduction study failed to reveal the cause of gait disturbance. Positron emission tomography showed mild uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose in the soft tissue around the nose and posterior neck muscle area at the C1 level. Skin biopsy showed hyperkeratosis, mucin deposition and upper dermal perivascular mononuclear infiltrates . In addition, muscle biopsy showed many perifascicular atrophic myofibers and subsarcolemmal accumulation of swollen mitochondria by electron microscopy. The patient was diagnosed with DM. She was treated with high-dose steroid therapy. Intravenous methylprednisolone (MPD, 50 mg daily) was initiated, but there was no clinical response. Thus, azathioprine (50 mg daily) was added while tapering MPD. In the fourth week of hospitalization, fever above 38 °C persisted and she was diagnosed with pneumonia. She was treated with ceftriaxone (2 g daily) and clindamycin (600 mg every 8 h). The ceftriaxone and clindamycin therapy was replaced after 2 days with meropenem (1 g daily). Although her symptoms subsided gradually over the first week, they recurred thereafter and did not remit despite adding intravenous vancomycin (1 g every 12 h). Three weeks after the pneumonia diagnosis, she complained of sudden onset of abdominal cramping. On physical examination, she was pale and in distress due to continuous abdominal pain. Abdominal CT scans showed a moderate amount of free air and fluid within the upper abdomen. Initial hematology evaluation showed the following: hemoglobin 9.0 g/dL, white blood cells (WBC) 5.7 × 103/μL (absolute neutrophil count 4470/μL), and platelets 50 × 103/μL. She had high-grade fever (39 °C). Although her purse rate was high (118 beats/min), blood pressure (123/80 mmHg) was normal. Following an emergent surgical consultation, the patient was diagnosed with pan-peritonitis due to small bowel perforation and promptly transferred to the Department of Surgery, whereby a diagnostic surgical exploration was performed. A 2 × 1 cm sized perforation in the antimesenteric border of proximal jejunum was identified . A moderate amount of dirty ascites with small bowel contents was found intraperitoneally, and the surface of jejunum and its mesentery were covered with pus. In addition to the perforation, a 10 cm discoloration was observed on both sides of the perforation site, suggesting an ischemic change. Approximately 50 cm of discolored jejunum, including the perforation, was resected and end-to-end anastomosis was performed . Upon opening the specimen, the mucosa revealed marked hemorrhage and necrotic change. Representative sections were embedded for histological analysis. On histologic examination, the serosal surface showed hemorrhage and inflammatory exudates with perforation. Pathologic examination showed mesenteric small-vessel vasculitis (-A). In addition, there was vascular thrombosis with a perivascular inflammatory cell infiltration (-B). After surgery, the patient was kept in the intensive care unit. Until the fifth postoperative day, she experienced episodic hypotension and her hemoglobin decreased continuously. Two units of packed red blood cells and 6–7 units of platelets were transfused daily. On the third postoperative day, both blood and sputum cultures revealed Candida parapsilosis. Cultures continuously remained positive despite intravenous administration of fluconazole (400 mg daily). Finally, she developed multiorgan failure and expired 11 days after surgery.