A 69-year-old male with a past medical history of insulin dependent diabetes (A1C = 6.3%), diabetic peripheral neuropathy, and no known coronary artery disease (CAD) or prior dysrhythmias was evaluated. He had a distant history of a transient ischemic attack, long standing hypertension, and no history of seizures or prior cerebrovascular accident (CVA). He presented to the emergency department (ED) shortly after a syncopal event while in the parking lot walking from his car to a grocery store. He had three prior syncopal events in the last year requiring hospitalization. He reported feeling dizzy prior to the most recent fall. As a consequence of the fall, he struck the right side of his face against the asphalt. He then regained consciousness and was able to resume an upright posture immediately. Upon arrival in the ED he was asymptomatic as he denied chest pain, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, headache, changes in vision, speech, strength, sensation, or gait. He noted that he often felt dizzy at least twice per week and that this persisted over the last several months. His current meds included simvastatin, clopidogrel, gabapentin, insulin, lisinopril, amlodipine and clonidine. He denied tobacco/illicit drug use and endorsed occasional alcohol use. He denied over the counter medications or therapies.
Upon arrival, he was afebrile, pulse 42 BPM, respirations 16/min, blood pressure 164/62 mmHg, and O2 saturation was 97% on room air. His physical exam revealed an alert, oriented male with normal cognition. The remainder of his exam including a detailed neurological exam was unremarkable. Chest x-ray and head CT were normal. Blood work revealed normal electrolytes and glucose, with a negative troponin. Electrocardiogram (EKG) revealed marked sinus bradycardia. The patient was admitted and placed on telemetry for recurrent symptomatic sinus bradycardia. There were no ST or T wave or other EKG changes and the QT and QTc were normal (496 and 419 ms respectively). Further questioning revealed the patient was started on the clonidine for hypertension about 18 months prior. Due to a high degree of clinical suspicion early on in the hospital course, clonidine was discontinued from 0.3 mg BID over the course of five days to avoid severe rebound hypertension from sympathetic surge . His bradycardia resolved by day 2-3 of the taper and recurrent hypertension was alternatively treated. The patient was discharged with a pulse of 78 BPM and BP of 160/82 mmHg.
Over the course of his hospitalization, other potential etiologies were considered, including polypharmacy leading to pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interactions as well as complications due to diabetes including autonomic neuropathy . Diabetic autonomic neuropathy was less likely given that the cessation of clonidine relieved the bradycardia, although a synergistic effect of the drug and diabetes certainly cannot be ruled out.