A 24-year-old female doctor with no medical history complained of a sore throat, nasal congestion, fever ranging between 38°C and 38.5°C, chills, non-producing cough, and headache. She reported having a 1-night shift in the COVID-19 ward 5 days earlier with direct prolonged contact with a COVID-19-positive patient without wearing proper personal protective equipment. These symptoms persisted for about a week, after which she suffered from episodes of arthralgia, redness, pain, and swelling of phalangeal joints with pain in both knees, wrists, and shoulders. These were accompanied by an erythematous nonpruritic rash on the abdomen, hands, forearms, and thighs. She also suffered from a daily persistent fever that spiked up to 41°C at midday and had a good response to acetaminophen for a while only to peak up again to 40°C at night .
A measured high-grade fever (41°C), tachycardia (110 beats per minute), normal blood pressure, and a high respiratory rate were revealed on physical examination. In addition, the proximal interphalangeal joints (PIP) of the first and third fingers of the right hand, all metacarpophalangeal joints, the first and fifth PIPs in the left hand, and both wrists were swollen and tender . Tenderness in both knees and shoulders was also noticed. No other important findings in other organ systems were found.
Laboratory tests done to the patient throughout the course of the disease are presented in .
The symptoms were managed so far with acetaminophen and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); Naproxine 500 mg b.i.d, and indomethacin 25 mg t.i.d daily for about a month with unsatisfactory results. As such, it was considered an inflammatory state with joints involvement induced by a prior respiratory infection justifying an opinion to start empirical treatment with steroids. Parenteral dexamethasone 8 mg per day was administered for 10 days with a drastic improvement of all of the symptoms, but pausing the treatment resulted in the recurrence of the symptoms within 2 days, and resuming it produced re-improvement.
To reach a conclusive diagnosis and to exclude other infectious, neoplastic and autoimmune etiologies, she was admitted to the hospital and a battery of tests was performed. These included urine analysis, echocardiography, blood cultures, Widal and Wright tests, and scanning computed tomography (CT) imaging, which came out all negative. Abdominal echography revealed mild splenomegaly (the spleen measurement was 15.5 cm on its largest diameter), which was confirmed with the CT imaging. Lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis were excluded because of the negative antinuclear antibodies (ANA), the normal anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide IgG antibodies (Anti-CCP) level, the normal rheumatoid factor (RF) level, and the negative anti-DNA antibodies . A high ferritin level > 3000 ng/ml brought to the mind AOSD. At this point, a month and a half after the first symptoms occurred, COVID-19 IgM antibodies were measured with positive results (32 S/Co index, normal range up to 8 S/Co), which retrospectively confirmed a recent infection with the virus.
With the aforementioned symptoms that persisted for about 60 days and after excluding all other potential causes, a diagnosis of AOSD was achieved according to Yamaguchi criteria, and subsequent treatment with prednisolone 50 mg daily was started. Two days later, a significant improvement in all the symptoms was observed. This dose was administered for 2 weeks and then tapered gradually over 3 months with no recurrence of symptoms. Following the patient up to 1 year of that incidence, no recurrent symptoms were observed.