This is a 60-year-old male patient, with hypertension and diabetes mellitus under treatment. He underwent heart transplantation on 2017 in Spain, and currently under immunosuppressors: Tacrolimus 1mg and Mycophenolate mofetil 0.5mg, twice daily.
He reported a recent trip to Spain two weeks before the symptoms for a check-up with his doctors, but had no contact with any known-SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals.
The patient had a history of fever, runny nose, sore throat and dry cough evolving for 8 days prior to his admission. His evolution worsened and he developed dyspnea and chest pain, motivating his visit to the emergency room.
Clinically, the patient was conscious, hemodynamically stable, with an oxygen saturation of 78% in ambient air; 96% under 15L oxygen with a high concentration mask. He also had a normal body temperature.
Biologically, he had a lymphocytopenia at 220 elements/m3, a normal troponin level of 17 ng/mL, with positive inflammation markers: C-reactive protein level at 106 mg/L, Ferritin level 679 mg/L; fibrinogen level at 8.7 mg/L, Lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) level at 370 mg/L. A SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcriptase PCR was performed and came back positive.
Arterial blood gas was performed and showed a hypoxemia with a PaO2 at 41 mmHg.
He also benefitted from a thoracic CT-scan with an extent of pulmonary damage of 75%, and a cardiac evaluation with a normal transthoracic echocardiography.
A non-invasive ventilation based on High Flow Nasal Cannula (HFNC) was started at the 2end day of his admission; the immunosuppressors were discontinued and he was put under: Azithromycin, Vitamin C 2g/day, Zinc 45mg/day, Enoxaparin 0.6UI/12h, Dexamethasone 6mg/day; Aspirin 160mg/day and antibiotics: 3rd generation Cephalosporins 2g/day and quinolones (Ciprofloxacin 200mg/12h). He also received two doses of Tocilizumab (400mg with a 10 day interval).
His antibiotics were changed to Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4g/8h, Amikacin 1,5g/day and Voriconazole 200mg/12h when nosocomial infection was confirmed by culture.
The patient unfortunately presented complications, such as acute respiratory distress syndrome in the 3 erd day of admission, and was intubated and put under intensive mechanical ventilation. The progression of the disease was very fast for his case He presented a multi-organ failure (acute kidney injury and disseminated intravascular coagulation) and a refractory septic shock in 2end days after intubation, that resulted in his death at one week of his admission.