A 26-year-old woman was suspected of having MS in 2011. The following year a diagnosis of relapsing–remitting MS (RRMS) was confirmed and recombinant human interferon beta-1a initiated. Following two relapses accompanied by brain MRI, interferon β1a was discontinued and fingolimod initiated. At that time, her JC virus (JCV) antibody index was positive at 2.56. During fingolimod treatment, she exhibited lymphocytopenia (lymphocyte count 0.3–0.8 × 109 per liter) and experienced a few mild opportunistic infections including (shingles and stomatitis; however fingolimod therapy was not interrupted. She had two relapses while on fingolimod including internuclear ophthalmoplegia in one instance and right hemihypesthesia in the other. Both resolved following treatment with pulsed intravenous methylprednisolone 1000 mg. The disability assessed by Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) during fingolimod treatment was 2—2.5.
On the August 24, 2020, the patient discontinued fingolimod to attempt conception. The patient made this decision on her own despite the recommendations of her treating physicians. On the September 20, 2020, her brain MRI showed signs of disease activity and progression (more than five new hyperintense lesions on T2-weighted images, a few new gadolinium-enhancing lesions).
The patient was informed about the risks associated with disease and disability progression; nevertheless, she refused to continue DMT and delay pregnancy. Pulse therapy with methylprednisolone was given for three days; and her neurologic condition stabilized. On the October 3, 2020, the patient presented to the emergency department with right facial paralysis and received three days course of pulsed methylprednisolone. Partial recovery after treatment was achieved, but on the October 21, 2020, the right facial paralysis worsened and was accompanied by dysarthia and dysphagia. Two days later the patient was hospitalized.
On admission, neurological examination revealed right facial hemiparesis, dysphonia, intermittent dysphagia, absent gag reflex, pathological Babinski reflex on the right and ataxia with right limbs. Laboratory testing showed mild lymphopenia (lymphocyte count 0.7 × 109 per liter). Three days of high dose methylprednisolone was administered intravenously, rehabilitation initiated. No clinical improvement was observed and therapeutic plasmapheresis therapy was initiated. Despite these efforts, the patient continued to worsen with progressive speech impairment and dysphagia (requiring the insertion of a nasogastric tube for nutrition), disorientation and confusion. The working diagnosis was MS-IRIS, but her inexorable progression despite aggressive treatment raised concerns for PML. A brain MRI from October 28, 2020, revealed enlargement of previously detected lesions and new hyperintense T2W FLAIR lesions with uneven gadolinium-enhancement mostly in the periphery; magnetic resonance spectroscopy showed a lactate peak with decreased N-acetyl aspartate, increased choline and creatine peaks. Some lesions were suggestive of PML but overall, the findings were believed to be most consistent with rebound MS. Despite more aggressive plasmaphereses, her disease worsened. Examination revealed global aphasia, an altered mental status, left hemiparesis; she became unresponsive and bedridden with complete incontinence. Repeated brain MRI showed further expansion of her lesions with broad edematous areas and ventricular compression .
The diagnostic possibilities for these radiological findings of broad edematous, gadolinium enhancing lesions included MS-IRIS due to fingolimod withdrawal versus PML-IRIS. Lumbar puncture was performed, but cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed no signs of infection and JCV real-time polymerase chain reaction (JCV-PCR) was negative. Her JCV antibody index remained nearly the same (2.57). Biopsy, which was not pursued, was the only reliable method to distinguish between these two possibilities as a negative CSF JCV PCR was insufficiently sensitive to entirely exclude PML. Because of concern about possible PML, mirtazapine 15 mg a day was initiated. She was also started on intravenous dexamethasone 32 mg daily. Within several days of this regimen, her condition began to improve and she was able to sit, began walking with assistance, and started to communicate by signs with medical staff, although she remained mute and highly dependent. Lymphopenia worsened (from 0.7 to 0.1 × 109 per liter) which was attributed to the corticosteroid administration. Intravenous immunoglobulin (3 doses; a total of 30 g) was administered because of concern about secondary immunodeficiency and to prevent infectious complications. However, with the lowest levels of lymphocyte counts, the patient suffered another clinical decline and was diagnosed with staphylococcal sepsis (S. aureus) and pneumonia requiring antimicrobial therapy. Repeat brain MRI performed 18 days after the last revealed decreasing lesions and diminishing mass effect as well as new, gadolinium-enhancing T2W FLAIR hyperintense lesions in cerebral hemispheres and brainstem.
Another course of pulsed methylprednisolone therapy was administered after the antibiotics therapy had been completed and her lymphocyte count normalized. Gradual improvement to full independence eventually occurred with complete resolution of aphasia, dysarthria, dysphagia, hemiparesis and ataxia; however, her cognitive functions remained impaired.
On December 10, 2020, the patient was discharged from the hospital. A brain MRI from January 9, 2021, showed a decrease in the size of the lesions, an improvement in the mass effect and fewer gadolinium-enhancing zones lesions. As of June 2021, she is clinically stable with impaired (but gradually improving) cognitive functions on ocrelizumab.