A 71-year-old Japanese female had visited another hospital with the complaints of general fatigue and severe anemia, with a 3.5-g/dL hemoglobin level that was detected by laboratory examination. After the patient was administered a 1680-mL red blood cell transfusion, she was referred to our hospital's Department of Hematology for a further investigation of her anemia. Her medical history included appendectomy, hysterectomy for myoma, left hemithyroidectomy for follicular adenoma, and Alzheimer-type dementia. She had also undergone a distal gastrectomy with cholecystectomy for stomach cancer and gallstone 15 years earlier. She was a habitual smoker and alcohol consumer. She had no other symptoms at presentation, including fever, body weight loss, abdominal pain, change in bowel habit, and melena. No specific findings were observed in the physical examination, with neither abdominal distention nor a palpable tumor. Laboratory examinations showed a red blood cell count at 350 × 104 /μL and hemoglobin level at 9.3 g/dL. The mean corpuscular volume (MCV), 85.1 fL, was within normal limits, and the mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) value, 26.6 pg, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) at 31.2% were slightly lower than the normal limits. The patient's serum iron and vitamin B12 levels were 34 µg/dL and 294 pg/mL, respectively. The serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 levels were within normal limits, whereas the soluble interleukin-2 receptor level at 538 U/mL was slightly higher than the normal limit (range 122–496 U/mL).
A diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia was made, and oral iron therapy was commenced. Screening computed tomography (CT) for gastrointestinal bleeding of obscure origin demonstrated a tumorous lesion with contrast enhancement in the terminal ileum, with the proximal small intestine slightly dilated . Capsule endoscopy showed a polypoid lesion with erythematous and irregular mucosa in the terminal ileum. Temporary capsule retention was observed, but detailed images could not be obtained . Based on these clinical and radiological findings, an ileal tumor was considered as a possible cause of the patient's occult hemorrhage and anemia, and she was referred to our department for surgical intervention.
Exploratory laparoscopy revealed an intussusception in the terminal ileum , which was drawn through the mini-laparotomy wound and reduced by using Hutchinson's maneuver. The lead point was an intraluminal tumor with a serosal pit 70 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve . A partial resection of the ileum including the tumor was thus performed.
The macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a polypoid tumor at the tip of an inverted diverticulum-like structure . The tumor was histologically composed of well-to-moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with subserosal invasion, accompanied by the ectopic gastric mucosa . No metastatic lymph nodes were observed in the resected mesenterium. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the glands in the tumor was positive for mucin core protein (MUC)5AC and MUC6, but negative for MUC2 and CD10 . Based on these macroscopic and microscopic characteristics, we considered the tumor a completely gastric-type adenocarcinoma arising from the ectopic gastric mucosa in the Meckel's diverticulum.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from our hospital on day 7. She has been on the close follow-up course due to the scarce evidence of adjuvant therapy for this disease.