A 7-year-old male patient reported to the Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology with the chief complaint of swelling in the upper front tooth region since 25 days. Swelling was small initially, which gradually increased to the present size. Swelling was associated with pain, which was continuous, dull, and mild in nature. Patient gave history of trauma to the upper front tooth region 2 years back. There was no history of pus discharge and ulceration associated with the swelling. On examination, extraorally diffuse swelling in the right maxillary anterior region in the middle third of the face was noted with upward displacement of nares . The swelling was tender on palpation, hard in consistency with no rise in local temperature. Intraorally swelling extended from labial frenum to distal aspect of maxillary right first deciduous molar (tooth number 54) with obliteration of labial and buccal sulcus. Discoloration and proximal caries was seen in relation to maxillary right deciduous central incisor (tooth number 51). Also, maxillary right permanent central incisor (tooth number 11) was clinically missing and maxillary left permanent central incisor (tooth number 21) was erupted . Upon palpation, intraorally swelling was hard in consistency and tender. Mobility in relation to 51 and 52 was also observed. Based on the history and clinical findings, a provisional diagnosis of radicular cyst of 51 and a differential diagnosis of dentigerous cyst in relation to clinically missing 11 was given.
Patient was then subjected for radiographic investigation. Intraoral periapical (IOPA) radiograph and occlusal radiograph revealed proximal caries involving enamel and dentin without pulpal involvement in relation to 51, well-defined radiolucency in the periapical regions of 51 and 52, and this radiolucency was enveloping the coronal portion of 11 and 12. Root resorption of 51 and 52 were noted. Occlusal radiograph also revealed the presence of buccal cortical plate expansion .
Cone beam computed tomography revealed osteolytic lesion with sclerotic margin in the periapical region of 51, measuring about 1.8 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm in dimension. The tooth 11 was displaced apically, root resorption of 51 and 52 was seen. Thinning of nasal floor with buccal cortical plate expansion was present ( and ). Based on CBCT features, radiographic diagnosis of radicular cyst of 51 was given. Cyst was enucleated with extraction of 51 and 52 and preservation of 11. Histopathologically the specimen revealed cystic epithelium and fibrous connective tissue capsule. The epithelium showed arcad-ing pattern, with dense collagen fibers in the connective tissue. These histopathological features confirmed the diagnosis of radicular cyst in relation to 51.