A 57-year-old male was referred to the Institute of Oncology Cluj-Napoca for a second opinion, with suspicion of a multiple myeloma. The patient presented with diffuse post-traumatic pain in the left thorax and the left tibial diaphysis. The clinical exam revealed a tumor lesion localized in the left deltoid region and another one in the anterior cervical region, suggestive of thyroid nodules. Right lateral cervical enlarged lymph nodes were also described. Conventional radiological examination highlighted areas of osteolysis in the right IVth costal arch and areas of osteolysis with ballooning in the left IVth, Vth and VIIth costal arches, as well as deformation and erosion of the cortical area of the bone.
Radiography of the tibia revealed a left tibia diaphysis with an irregular aspect of the compact bone . Suspicion of a multiple myeloma or metastases in the bones with an undetermined origin was raised. Immunofixation electrophoresis of proteins was negative and therefore excluded a diagnosis of multiple myeloma. The patient was directed to the nuclear medicine department for a bone scintigraphy, which revealed the pathological uptake of tracer at the level of the costal arches and in the left diaphysis of the tibia .
A blood sample was collected in order to determine the levels of tumor markers, which were at physiological normal levels: CA 19-9 = 25.2 U/mL (N.V. <27), CEA = 2.2 ng/mL (N.V. smokers <3.4; non-smokers <4.3), PSA = 1.31 ng/mL (N.V. <60 years old ≤3.1). Whole-body MRI showed multiple bone lesions localized at the level of the costal arches, left tibia, and left pubic branch, and an incidental tumor localized in the clivus that extended to the right sphenoid sinus . In addition, there were multiple suspicious lymph nodes in the neck and in the right supraclavicular area and an inhomogeneous lesion in the right thyroid lobe . The patient, at this point, was tentatively diagnosed to have thyroid cancer with bone and cutaneous metastases.
Blood samples were collected to determine thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and free-thyroxine-FT4 levels, which were found to be within normal limits. The thyroid peroxidase (TPO) test was also negative, thereby excluding a chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis. Calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels were also within normal limits, which excluded a parathyroid pathology, while a normal calcitonin level excluded a medullary thyroid carcinoma. Biopsy of one of the right cervical lymph nodes was performed and histology revealed a papillary thyroid cancer lymph node metastasis. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of TTF-1 and thyroglobulin (TG) were positive in tumor cells. A total thyroidectomy and right selective lymphadenectomy were performed. This confirmed the diagnosis of a papillary thyroid carcinoma with lymph node metastasis (T3N1bMx stage IVA) .
Radioiodine therapy was indicated and given at a total dose of 96 mCi (3.55 GBq). Figure shows a whole body scan (WBS) at 48 h after the radioiodine cure and shows pathologic radioiodine uptake in the right thyroid bed, within the mediastinum area and in a left lateral cervical lymph node, but there was no uptake in the bone. There were at least three possibilities as to what the bone lesions were: 1) a less differentiated thyroid tumor, confirmed by the relatively low level of the specific tumor marker, TG = 28 ng/mL (N.V. <0.04 ng/mL in cured thyroid cancer patients, and negative for anti-TG antibodies) determined under stimulated TSH; 2) non-avid radioiodine lesions, confirmed by the lack of radioiodine uptake, both in the bone lesions and in the shoulder mass; and 3) the absence of any relation between the bone, the muscle pathologies and the thyroid cancer.
A biopsy of the shoulder tumor lesion was taken from the left deltoid area and the histology exam revealed a macroscopic white-translucent specimen of 3.5/3/2 cm, and of gelatinous consistency, without any areas of necrosis. Microscopic examination revealed tumor proliferation consisting of fusocellular and star cells, without any nuclear atypia and mitosis in a myxoid stroma. Tumor proliferation infiltrated into the rib muscles and resected margins came in contact with proliferating tumor cells. IHC was negative for S100, actin and desmin; the histologic aspect and IHC were specific for an intramuscular myxoma . The association between the histology of the tumor and the bone lesions, with aspects of fibrous dysplasia, led to the diagnosis of Mazabraud’s syndrome. Biopsy of the tibia confirmed the diagnosis.
At 2 years after surgery and irradiation, patient status revealed that: clinical tests and thyroid ultrasound were negative, antithyroglobulin (anti-TG) was <10 UI/mL (N.V. ≤115), TSH was 21.91 μUI/mL, TG was 0.82 ng/mL (N.V. athyroid patients <0.04) and I-131 WBS was negative . The patient was therefore considered cured of his thyroid cancer and yearly follow-up was implemented; the bone lesions attributed to osseous dysplasia were stable.
During the follow-up at 3 years after the initial diagnosis of Mazabraud’s syndrome a bone scintigraphy was performed and confirmed the bone tumor lesions already known, as well as a new lesion in the left ankle articulation, further corroborating the diagnosis of Mazabraud’s syndrome . No clinical signs of relapse were noted in the left deltoid area. No genetic testing for mutations in the GNAS1 gene was performed because it was not available nationally. The cerebral lesion described in the MRI was not biopsied, being refused by patient, and was therefore strictly monitored by the neurosurgery specialist.