We report the case of an 18-year-old Romanian man with short stature, external ophthalmoplegia, palpebral ptosis, myopathy, sensorineural hearing impairment, cerebellar ataxia, cardiac conduction defect, diabetes mellitus, hypoparathyroidism, and hyperaldosteronism. The patient presented initially with endocrinological abnormalities such as failure to thrive, hyperaldosteronism and hypoparathyroidism. Despite his palpebral ptosis and progressive encephalomyopathy with cerebellar ataxia, the initial diagnosis was not KSS. Subsequently, he developed progressive external ophthalmoplegia, retinopathy, heart block, and diabetes mellitus. The diagnosis was delayed for many years.
The patient's initial infant development was normal . The first physical sign noted by his parents was growth retardation, but initially this was not related to any disease or disorder. During the first 3 to 4 years of his childhood, the most striking clinical sign was the failure to thrive. The child was seen by several doctors, and based on clinical examination and laboratory tests, an initial diagnosis was made. In a different hospital, the patient was diagnosed with renal tubular dysfunction with decreased urine-concentrating ability, and excessive excretion of potassium and magnesium. The renal dysfunction was thought to have resulted from Bartter syndrome, due to the presence of hyperaldosteronism and hypokalemia. The renal phenotype characterized by hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hyperreninemia, hyperaldosteronism and nephrocalcinosis, resembling Bartter syndrome, was diagnosed when the boy was 4 years old. Replacement of substances lost in urine was started (potassium, vitamin D, calcium), when carpopedal spasms occurred, therefore, spironolactone was added. Despite the presence of metabolic acidosis, the Bartter syndrome diagnosis was maintained, and oral bicarbonate was added. In addition, drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis) bilaterally was also noted during his childhood , but was very mild and was probably ignored. Other muscles involved in coordinating eye movements were affected next, growing progressively weaker and resulting in paralysis of eye movements (chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia) at 9 years of age. Muscle weakness extended to other portions of his lower legs, then his face, throat (pharynx), neck, and shoulders. Muscle weakness affected talking and swallowing, as the disease progressed . His upper arms and legs were affected, resulting in progressive impairment of coordinated movement and a very difficult gait. The patient also developed visual difficulties as a toddler, due to the abnormal accumulation of colored (pigmented) material on the delicate membrane that lines the eyes (atypical retinitis pigmentosa) and progressive degeneration of certain portions of the eye (pigmentary degeneration of the retina). Additional physical characteristics and symptoms in this patient included: developmental delay; short stature ; diminished muscle tone; hearing loss; mental retardation; progressive memory loss and deterioration of intellectual abilities; and multiple endocrine dysfunction. The combination hypo/normotension, high serum renin and high serum aldosterone suggested secondary hyperaldosteronism. Renal tubular wasting of potassium and magnesium was documented. Also, low immunoreactive parathyroid hormone levels in the presence of hypocalcemia confirmed a diagnosis of hypoparathyroidism. The very first of these disorders occurring in association with KSS was hypoparathyroidism with hypocalcemia and hyperaldosteronism. The patient's evolution showed progressive insufficiency of the renal tubule: hyperphosphaturia, hyperaminoaciduria and, later, also glucosuria (de Toni-Debré-Fanconi syndrome), a syndrome, to date, rarely diagnosed in association with complete Kearns-Sayre syndrome.
The final diagnosis was established in our department, when our patient developed diabetes mellitus and was admitted with severe keto-acidosis, based on clinical manifestations (since mitochondrial disorders affect respiratory chain function, the disorders may be expected to have the greatest effect on cells or organ systems with the highest energy requirements, for example, the brain, skeletal and cardiac muscle, sensory organs, kidneys), muscular biopsy and additional laboratory findings and tests: low magnesium and parathyroid hormone, increased lactic acid, creatine phosphokinase and protein in CSF, abnormal electroretinography and visual-evoked potential testing. Southern blot analysis and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification revealed the presence of a deletion in the mtDNA.
Investigations revealed lactic acidosis, electrolytic imbalance and urinary loss of glucose and electrolytes secondary to proximal renal tubulopathy consistent with Fanconi syndrome.
The diagnosis of Kearns-Sayre Syndrome was established based on the three primary characteristics: CPEO, atypical retinitis pigmentosa, and cardiomyopathy-cardiac conduction defects. Soon after the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus was established, we diagnosed the cardiomyopathy; the presence of a complete right bundle branch block with left anterior hemiblock and Mobitz type 2 second degree atrioventricular (AV) block .
Microscopic examination of muscle biopsy tissue samples revealed the presence of the ragged-red fibers.
The brain computed tomography scan was used to identify abnormal lesions affecting certain areas of the brain - this procedure revealed signs of generalized cerebral and cerebellar atrophy and areas of hypointensity in basal ganglia and the brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a combination of high-signal foci in subcortical cerebral white matter and in the brain stem, globus pallidus and thalamus. Treatment of heart problems required a pacemaker for AV block. He improved soon after the implantation of a permanent endocardial pacemaker. Neurosensorial hearing loss assessed by audiometry necessitated bilateral hearing aids.
Diabetes mellitus was treated with insulin, using a combination of rapid-acting analogues and lente insulin and hypoparathyroidism with 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol and ketosteril (amino acids plus calcium). Coenzyme Q10, riboflavin, and vitamins C and K were added to his treatment. At 15 years of age, the patient started to develop progressive kidney failure, and a treatment with erythropoietin was started as well.