A 32-year-old man was brought to our emergency department, having sustained extensive trauma of the right eye and orbit after being hit by a steel pipe for 3 h. On physical examination, the patient exhibited marked periorbital swelling unilaterally and a full-thickness, oblique laceration on the right lower eyelid. Upon retraction of the right eyelid, marked conjunctival edema and hemorrhage were noted, and no globe was found on visual inspection. The patient had a Glasgow coma score of 15 with no evidence of any neurological dysfunction. No cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage was noted. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed that the slightly compressed, deformed globe had extruded into the anterior cranial fossa through large fractures in the orbital roof, accompanied by cerebral contusion . No fractures were noted in the optic canal, but the optic nerve appeared kinked .
Following the diagnosis, the patient was immediately transported to the operating room for globe repositioning and repair of the skull base under general anesthesia. The dura was opened, and the eyeball was found situated at the inferior surface of the frontal lobe. After removal of the thin bone fragments in the skull base, the neurosurgeon made two attempts to push the globe back into the orbit cavity. However, the eyeball could not be repositioned and slowly retruded into the cranial cavity.
Next, an orbital exploration was performed using a transconjunctival approach. After dissecting the orbital rim through a pre-existing tissue laceration, the globe was noted to have been displaced superiorly with exposure of the sclera. Forceps were used to grasp the residual Tenon’s capsule attached to the eyeball to guide the globe inferiorly, from the orbital roof into the orbital cavity, and then to rotate the eyeball with the cornea facing forward. Care was taken not to abruptly retract the globe in order to avoid incurring any additional injury to the optic nerve.
The status of the extraocular muscles was next assessed. The medial and inferior rectus muscles were torn, nearly from the middle of the muscle belly. However, we were unable to find the distal sections of the medial and inferior rectus muscles. On gross examination, we noted no signs of eyeball rupture and the pupil appeared almost normal with slight hyphema.
After removing the globe, CSF leakage was noted. Debridement and irrigation were performed at the wound tract. Some bone fragments were placed back at the bone-defective region. The dura was sutured as naturally as possible. Periosteal flaps with pedicles were then transferred to the anterior cranial fossa to cover the dural defect. Biomedical fibrin glue was injected into the flaps to enable adherence. Next, an artificial duramater was used to reinforce the repair. Finally, the wound was closed and a dressing was applied.
The patient received intravenous antibiotics and a high dose of corticoids. Tropical steroid drops were used as anti-inflammatories. One day after the surgery, the patient showed signs of ptosis of the right eye. On lifting the upper eyelid using a cotton swab, he reported seeing signs of hand movement in front of his right eye. On a bedside slit-lamp examination, his cornea was clear, blood clots were present in the anterior chamber with a nonreactive pupil (4.0 mm), and the intraocular pressure was 11 mmHg. A CT scan was performed on the first postoperative day, revealing the correct anatomic positioning . The optic nerve was seen to be continuous . One week postoperatively, the blood clots in the anterior chamber were partially resolved with an increase in visual acuity of 2/20, despite continued ptosis. Three months following surgery, there were no abnormal findings in the anterior or posterior segments, except for slight symblepharon and a nonreactive pupil. The patient has undergone 12 months of follow-up during which his visual acuity increased to 12/20. The globe had slightly deviated to the inferolateral side from the primary position, but infraduction, abduction, and adduction were proven to be possible as shown in the video (Additional file ). However, the ptosis persisted and was associated with complete loss of supraduction. The patient gradually developed moderate enophthalmos.