A 61-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with chest pain, difficulty breathing, haemoptysis and general discomfort. His body mass index was 35, which is consistent with obesity, and he also had hypertension based on anamnesis. The patient was conscious, but there was a lack of cooperation and orientation. The Glasgow Coma Scale was 13 (eye = 6, motor = 4, verbal = 3), S1 (+) and S2 (+). His heart rate was 120/min, body temperature was 37 °C, oxygen saturation was 89%, systolic blood pressure was 90 mm/hg and diastolic blood pressure was 60mm/Hg. The ECG results diagnosed RBBB and deep S wave (S1) in I; derivation, Q wave and T negativity (S1Q3T3) in III; derivation, ST elevation in aVR and T negativity in II–III and aVF . After the patient was diagnosed with hypotension, chest pain and ST elevation in aVR, coronary angiography for myocardial infarction displayed normal results, and medical follow-up was suggested for the plaques. In order to isolate the right myocardium, another ECG was performed, and it displayed normal results. In addition to a positive Homan’s sign, there was swelling and erythema of the left leg. Doppler ultrasound displayed hypoechoic thrombus material with echogenic focus points inside the lumen throughout the left superficial femoral vein proximal to the distal femur level. According to the Geneva scoring chart included in the 2019 European Society of Cardiology Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism, there was a high clinical probability of PE, with 14 points, due to heart rate higher than 95/min (5 points), haemoptysis (2 points), unilateral oedema (4 points) and unilateral lower leg pain (3 points). The Wells score also indicated a high probability of PE, with 8.5 points, due to heart rate higher than 100/min (1.5 points), haemoptysis (1 points), clinical signs and symptoms of deep venous thrombosis (3 points) and alternative diagnosis less likely than PE (3 points). CTPA was conducted to confirm the diagnosis. The CTPA results reinforced the probability of a massive PE and displayed filling defects inside the two main pulmonary artery lumens; the right was more apparent. Another filling defect was observed in the pulmonary artery lumen leading to the upper lobe of the left lung, again reinforcing the probability of PE . Laboratory tests indicated hypoxemic hypocarbia and acidosis in the blood gas analysis (pH:7.16, pCO2:35 mmHg, PO2:83 mmHg, SO2:92%, lactate:11.2 mmol/L and anion gap: 24 mmol/L). The following parameters further favoured the diagnosis of PE: urea:48 mg/dL, creatinine:1.5 mg/dL, AST:48 U/L, ALT:39 U/L, WBC:15.7 K/µL, Hb:16 g/dL, PLT:209 K/µL, CRP:15 mg/L, troponin I:41 pg/ml and D-dimer:4529 ng/mL. Due to the hypotensive status of the patient, continuous fluid infusion was administered upon admittance to the emergency department. Continuous oxygen support (4 L per minute) was also provided. Intravenous heparin was injected (5000 IU). During the observation period, further laboratory investigations revealed high CRP:65 mg/L and troponin I:2191 g/mL. LMWH treatment (2 × 6000IU) was started. After two days of observation and treatment in the coronary intensive care unit, the patient was discharged for outpatient care.