A 41-year-old Japanese male presented impairment of consciousness by wide QRS tachycardia . Although his systolic blood pressure has been kept around 60–70 mmHg during the tachycardia, his conscious level was moderately impaired to E1V2M4 in the Glasgow Coma Scale. At his arrival at a hospital, he was immediately sedated and intubated by emergency physicians who assessed his condition as a cardiogenic shock. The tachycardia self-terminated soon after the administration of the sedative. He had a history of a surgical closure of an ASD at 20 years old. After that surgery ~ 20 years earlier, his QRS interval had gradually increased to 198 ms, and in the 2 years prior to his presentation at our hospital, right bundle brunch block morphology became evident . Because the QRS axis of the tachycardia matched that of sinus rhythm, we suspected supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). After the initial assessment, we decided to observe his condition overnight in an intensive care unit under the sedated and intubated condition.
In the intensive care unit, his sinus bradycardia seriously worsened during that night while he was under sedation, and he developed polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) followed by ventricular fibrillation which required a cardioversion. As a marked sinus bradycardia continued, transcutaneous ventricular pacing was initiated, which increased his heart rate and successfully suppressed the recurrence of ventricular tachycardia. We considered that this arrhythmia was not identical with that observed in the initial event where the QRS morphology was stable and the blood pressure was kept above 60 mmHg. During these arrhythmic events, no prolonged QTc interval was recorded.
In an electrophysiological study, programmed electrical stimulation (PES) from the right ventricle easily induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia that sustained and degradated to ventricular fibrillation. Sustained monomorphic VT was never induced during the study. The patient’s SVT was identified as right atrial incisional tachycardia circulating around the scar in the right atrium . The post-pacing interval at the upper end of the scar matched the tachycardia cycle length . At this site, radiofrequency catheter ablation successfully terminated the tachycardia .
To prevent sudden death by further attacks of ventricular fibrillation, the patient underwent implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implantation. His bradycardia was treated by the pace-making therapy afforded by the ICD. Under an 80-bpm DDD-pacing condition, his heart beat was fully paced, and the polymorphic ventricular tachycardia was successfully suppressed. During 18 months’ follow-up, he has never experienced further arrhythmic events and there were no adverse events related to interventions he received. He returned to work as before, and is satisfied with the treatment results he received.
The patient’s severe sinus bradycardia, progressive QRS widening, high voltage amplitude of R’ wave in the right precordial leads, and recurrent ventricular arrhythmias indicated that the patient had cardiac sodium channelopathy like PCCD and Brugada syndrome. We then performed genetic screening for inherited arrhythmias by targeted gene sequencing. The genetic analysis revealed a heterozygous SCN5A c.4037–4038 del TC, p. L1346HfsX38 variant . The 2-bp deletion in exon 23 of SCN5A induced the truncation of mRNA, leading to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), and thereby decreasing the expression level of the cardiac sodium channel Nav1.5. The same variant was also detected in the genomic DNA from the patient’s asymptomatic mother. Her ECG manifested only mild QRS widening with 130 ms QRS interval and slight sinus bradycardia (HR 50-56 bpm). This variant had not been reported in large genomic databases such as gnomAD and TOGOVAR .
In the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guideline, this variant is classified as “likely pathogenic” with one PVS1 (null variant) and one PM2 (not observed in population databases).
We diagnosed this patient as having a PCCD and polymorphic ventricular tachycardia due to the SCN5A loss-of-function variant. Postoperative SVT with wide QRS morphology was a by-standing comorbidity related to the history of cardiac surgery which could miss lead the diagnosis.