A 75-year-old female was admitted with recently aggravated low back pain.
Patient’s low back pain started 2 mo ago and was aggravated despite epidural block. The pain was continuous and the patient had no trauma history.
The patient had hypertension, unstable angina and congestive heart failure. Although the chest computed tomography (CT) scan found pulmonary edema 2 mo ago, a microbiological study revealed no TB from sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) specimens.
The patient had a free personal or family history and denied the history or contact with TB.
The patient was afebrile, and the neurological examination produced normal findings. The patient was free of any pulmonary symptom including dyspnea, hemoptysis or cough.
Routine laboratory examination showed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level (59 mm/h and 7.718 mg/dL, respectively) (normal range: 0-20 mm/h and 0-0.75 mg/dL, respectively), although the white blood cell (WBC) count was within the normal range (6700/µL) (normal range: 3800-10000/µL).
Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated spondylitis covering the fifth lumbar and the first sacral (L5-S1) vertebrae and that a significant amount of the SEA involved the spinal canal and psoas muscle .
Peripheral blood culture identified Staphylococcus hominis (S. hominis) preoperatively. They were positive from 2 sets of blood cultures and both were identical in genus and species level (S. hominis genus and hominis species).
The patient underwent L5-S1 laminectomy and SEA drainage via a posterior approach, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (S. epidermidis) was identified from intraoperatively acquired abscess culture. Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen showed no evidence of TB.
Thus, vancomycin was administered based on the final microbiological report of drug sensitivity for the identified pathogens. Whereas the low back pain improved, the CRP level did not decrease below 5.0 mg/dL despite 9 wk of postoperative vancomycin treatment.
The low back pain deteriorated two weeks after the completion of vancomycin treatment. Despite an intact neurological status, MRI revealed SEA recurrence in the same area . Although the symptoms of infection were vague, the ESR and CRP level were elevated (74 mm/h and 5.525 mg/dL, respectively). The patient underwent second surgery for lumbar corpectomy and SEA removal as well as spinal instrumentation. Corpectomy, debridement, and interbody fusion were performed via a retroperitoneal approach. Then, epidural abscess removal and pedicle screw fixation were performed via a posterior approach.