A 74-year-old woman developed discomfort in the right eye and visited the local clinic that had prescribed her RGP contact lenses. However, no abnormalities were detected. The symptoms persisted, and she visited another eye clinic, where a foreign body was found embedded in the right upper eyelid. She was then referred to our hospital.
At the time of the patient's initial visit to our hospital, she had been experiencing symptoms for 5 months. She had a history of rheumatoid arthritis and had been receiving oral treatment with penicillamine, salazosulfapyridine, and loxoprofen sodium for 13 years. She had been treated for a peripheral corneal ulcer related to rheumatoid arthritis 10 years previously in the right eye. The Simplified Disease Activity Index and Clinical Disease Activity Index, which are used to assess the activity of rheumatoid arthritis, were 13.8 and 12.5, respectively, indicating that she had moderately active disease. The patient's daughter also had rheumatoid arthritis. The patient's corrected visual acuity was 0.7 in each eye, and the intraocular pressure was 10 mmHg and 12 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. No abnormalities were observed in the eye position or movement. Although neither eyelid swelling nor ptosis was observed, an elastic soft mass was palpated in the right upper eyelid skin. The corneal stroma was opacified around the inferior corneoscleral limbus . Although hyperemia was detected in the upper segment of the bulbar conjunctiva, fluorescein staining showed no abnormalities of the cornea or conjunctiva. Mild cataracts were observed in both eyes, but there were no abnormal findings in the fundus. Eversion of the upper eyelid revealed a transparent foreign body and a mass approximately 11 mm in diameter covered with granulation tissue at the center of the eyelid. The foreign body was smooth-surfaced with approximately 6 mm exposed, and there was underlying fatty tissue . The patient had been using RGP contact lenses for 20 years. When questioned, she reported that she had never lost a contact lens.
Computed tomography (CT) was performed to confirm the depth of the foreign body. It revealed tissue under the eyelid skin with a density different from that of the surrounding tissue. Because CT could not differentiate the foreign body from granulation tissue, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. There were two hyperintense and smooth-surfaced masses showing as areas of low intensity in T1-weighted images and high intensity in T2-weighted images indicating that an object rich in water was present in the right upper eyelid . We determined that the discomfort was caused by the foreign body and the surrounding granulation tissue.
Surgery was performed to remove the foreign body at Saitama Medical University (Sho Ishikawa). After resection of the overlying granulation tissue, the foreign body was removed. It was circular with a diameter of 9 mm and appeared to be an RGP contact lens. It was embedded with its convex surface facing toward the cornea. After removal of the contact lens, fatty tissue and the tarsus were identified beneath it . Culture of the ulcer base, where the contact lens had been embedded, yielded no bacteria. When we asked about the loss of an RGP contact lens again after completing the surgery, the patient's family told us that she lost an RGP contact lens 7 years ago when she bumped her eye on a doorknob. After the trauma, she had purchased a new set of RGP contact lenses and had been using the replacement contact lenses for the past 7 years. Histological examination revealed that the granuloma around the contact lens contained mucosal tissue covered with squamous and pseudostratified columnar epithelium and granulation tissue under the epithelium. Two months after removal of the contact lens, the symptoms disappeared, and the defect in the upper eyelid gradually healed without complications.