A 76-year-old woman who was incidentally diagnosed with a tumor of the right ventricle by screening cardiac ultrasonography was referred to our hospital for further examination. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed the cardiac tumor, which was approximately 40 mm in size , and multiple pulmonary nodules. The patient had elevated serum tumor markers (CEA, 724 ng/mL; and CA19-9, 54 U/mL), and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed abnormal uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose in the cardiac mass, the pulmonary nodules, and the transverse colon . Colonoscopy confirmed a 25-mm type 2 tumor in the transverse colon, which was diagnosed as a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with wild-type KRAS on histopathological examination . With regard to the cardiac tumor, dynamic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an irregular 54- × 32- × 31-mm mass that was nearly isointense to the intact myocardium on both T1-weighted and T2-weighted images and was characterized by a ring enhancement . The tumor was lateral to the outflow tract of the right ventricle , fixed to the endocardium, and infiltrated the myocardium. Tissue biopsy was considered unsafe because of the location of the tumor. There were no electrocardiographic abnormalities, and there was no sign of systolic or diastolic dysfunction on the echocardiogram. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 69%, and the Doppler studies showed normal blood flow that was unobstructed by the tumor. The tumor was deemed inoperable by cardiovascular surgeons because of the myocardial invasion. Thus, based on imaging study findings, we diagnosed the heart and lung lesions as cardiac and pulmonary metastases from the primary colon cancer (UICC cT2N0M1b Stage IVb).
The patient was treated with a modified 5-fluorouracil (400 mg/m2 bolus then 2400 mg/m2 46-h infusion), leucovorin (200 mg/m2), and oxaliplatin (85 mg/m2) (mFOLFOX6) regimen plus panitumumab (6 mg/kg) every 2 to 3 weeks. A follow-up CT after 4 courses of chemotherapy showed that the cardiac tumor size decreased from 40 to 26 mm in size and the multiple pulmonary nodules were also diminished. The serum CEA and CA19-9 levels were markedly decreased, from 724 to 29 ng/mL and 54 to 10 U/mL, respectively. The patient tolerated the treatment well. The most severe toxicity according to the common terminology criteria for adverse events (CTCAE, version 4.0) was grade 2 neuropathy that emerged after 6 courses of chemotherapy and was associated with the oxaliplatin. A follow-up MRI after 8 courses of chemotherapy indicated that the patient had sustained a prolonged significant response . Oxaliplatin was discontinued after 10 courses of chemotherapy due to neuropathy. The dosage of chemotherapy was also reduced (5-fluorouracil [320 mg/m2 bolus then 1920 mg/m2 46-h infusion], leucovorin [200 mg/m2], and panitumumab [4.8 mg/kg] every 3 or 4 weeks). The patient remained asymptomatic with a prolonged partial response 10 months (12 courses of chemotherapy) after initial treatment . However, a follow-up CT after 15 courses of chemotherapy indicated progressive disease. The primary CRC remained undetectable by CT, but the cardiac tumor increased to 31 mm in size. Both the serum CEA and CA19-9 levels continued to increase. Despite our recommendation for further treatment by a second-line regimen, the patient elected to receive only best supportive care. Currently, the patient is alive over 2 years after the diagnosis of the cardiac metastasis.