A 28-year-old G7P0060 female at 15 weeks, 6 days gestation was admitted for hypertensive crisis. At 7-weeks gestation, she had normal vitals. At 12 weeks, proteinuria and hypertension were noted. After dietary modifications, the next visit revealed resolved proteinuria but worsened hypertension, for which she was admitted. The patient reported intermittent sharp left flank pains over the last 2 years, which worsened during pregnancy. She noted dyspnea, palpitations, and facial hair growth during the pregnancy. She reported no diaphoresis, unexplained weight changes, nor striae/acne. Initial workup revealed labs as noted in .
Renal ultrasound revealed a left suprarenal mass and magnetic resonance imaging detailed a 12 × 10 × 8cm adrenal mass with innumerable lung nodules. Biopsies were requested by oncology and general surgery to determine what treatment options they might offer. Biopsy of the suprarenal mass showed extensive necrosis with fragments of adrenal cortical tissue consistent with adrenocortical neoplasm. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated a high Ki-67/MIB proliferative index, focal inhibin staining, and diffuse synaptophysin positivity. Lung nodule biopsy showed malignant cells with inhibin/synaptophysin positivity and CD68 negativity, consistent with metastatic ACC. Given the severe metastatic lung burden, adrenalectomy was not offered during hospitalization.
As seen in , the patient lacked diurnal variation in serum cortisol levels, which is usually preserved in pregnancy. These labs were drawn while the patient was hospitalized, which potentially affected the results secondary to high-stress environment; mitigation was attempted by repeating testing on multiple days. Of note, cortisol levels are known to follow a gradual increase throughout pregnancy, peak at delivery, and have a sharp decline to baseline within the first 3 days postpartum. Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and testosterone levels were severely elevated, consistent with adrenal hyperandrogenism . 17-hydroxyprogesterone was elevated beyond expected for the patient’s stage of pregnancy, where levels up to 941 ng/dL can be seen in the first and second trimesters and levels up to 2772 ng/dL in third trimester.
The patient was diagnosed with Stage IV adrenocortical carcinoma with Cushing’s syndrome (CS) and hyperandrogenism. Palliative chemotherapy after abortion was offered but treatment was deferred in hopes of viable pregnancy. A spontaneous abortion occurred at 17-week gestation.
Postpartum day 1/hospital day (HD) 19 labs are noted in . HD 25 serum cortisol was 59 mcg/dL while on dexamethasone 2 mg twice a day for back pain secondary to bone metastases. Given the continued unsuppressed serum cortisol and ACTH levels on dexamethasone 2 mg twice a day, CS was confirmed, despite absent Cushingoid appearance.
After fetal demise, palliative chemotherapy was planned. The regimen included cisplatin, etoposide, adriamycin, mitotane, and metyrapone for CS. The patient declined treatment initiation inpatient and was discharged on HD 26.
She presented on HD 39 with dyspnea and edema and was readmitted. She began leuprolide for fertility preservation prior to chemotherapy. The patient was then started on mitotane 500 mg three times a day (increased to 1000 mg twice a day the following day, 1500 mg twice a day 1 week later, and 2000 mg twice a day 2 weeks later), metyrapone 250 mg three times a day (1 week later increased to Q6h), and spironolactone 50 mg daily for androgen excess. The patient’s labs after initiation of mitotane and metyrapone are noted in . Mitotane ultimately was discontinued due to GI symptoms without reaching therapeutic range.
A repeat computed tomography revealed an enlarging necrotic/hemorrhagic left adrenal mass 10.6 × 14.3 × 16.3cm, with renal and diaphragmatic invasion. Chemotherapy started on HD 44 with cisplatin, etoposide, and adriamycin. While on chemotherapy, the patient was started on high dose dexamethasone (12 mg daily) due to concerns for adrenal insufficiency while on mitotane.
The patient was on day 1 of chemotherapy cycle two when the chemotherapy was stopped for hospice initiation. She died 3 months after initial presentation, after undergoing 31 days of mitotane and 1 cycle of chemotherapy. Genetic testing showed that the patient was heterozygous for the p.Q301H variant of unknown significance in the protection of telomeres 1 gene. Variants in this gene have been associated with a predisposition to certain types of cancers.