A 63- years-old woman with chief complaint of chronic abdominal pain and recent worsening referred to surgery department of Sina hospital affiliated to Tehran University of Medical Sciences in November 2019. She didn't have complained any other symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite, weight loss, skin rashes or flushing. In physical examination, vital signs were normal. Abdomen was soft in palpation without any tenderness and appearance abnormalities. Cardiopulmunary, skin and other organ systems examination were unremarkable. She had no familial history, past medical, and past surgical history. Laboratory analysis showed mild leukocytosis, other hematologic, biochemical and urine tests were all unremarkable. On imaging, one mass in cecum was seen. Patient was scheduled for right hemicolectomy and para-aortic lymph node dissection by expert colorectal surgeon. The specimen was received at Sina hospital pathology lab for histopathologic examination consists of a segment of colon, cecum, terminal ileum and appendix. Colon and terminal ileum were 26cm in length and 4.5cm in maximum diameter. On opening a whitish solid submucosal mass was seen in cecum measuring 2x1.5 × 1cm. Also, a 0.7cm whitish lesion was noted in the base of appendix. Microscopic examination for both cecal and appendiceal lesion revealed infiltration of monotonous neoplastic cells with round to ovoid nuclei, eosinophilic cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli and distinct cell boundaries distorting the normal colonic mucosal architecture, also many eosinophils were present admixed with neoplastic cells . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining showed positive result for leukocyte common antigen (LCA), CD117, CD68, Mast cell tryptase and CD99 in tumor cells. Ki67 show proliferative activity in about 30% of neoplastic cells . The specimen labeled as Para-aortic lymph nodes consists of three pieces of fibrofatty tissue involved by tumor with the same histopathologic features mentioned above. According to microscopic examination and IHC study diagnosis of Mastocytosis was confirmed. After surgery the patient transferred to Intensive Care Unit (ICU) due to critical condition and after few days she expired due to unstable situation.