A 79-year-old female presented with progressive deterioration of her cognitive function over a period of 10 months. She became bedridden and was referred to our department due to convulsive seizure. She scored only three points with a mini-mental state examination (MMSE) at the time of admission. Magnetic resonance imaging diagnosed prominent DAVF in the right transverse sinus. Numerous flow voids corresponding to varicose veins were observed over the superficial and deep surfaces of the brain. A subsequent diagnostic angiogram showed DAVF at the junction of the right TSS fed by several branches originating from the right external carotid artery, involving the middle meningeal artery, occipital artery, posterior auricular artery, and accessory meningeal artery. The tentorial artery arose from the right internal carotid artery also fed the fistulae [Figure and ]. The right sigmoid sinus and left transverse sinus were occluded. The patency of the right jugular bulb and an internal jugular vein was obscured by the angiogram. Retrograde venous drainage was directed toward the straight and superior sagittal sinuses. Markedly dilated cortical veins were noted. A reverse flow was primarily observed in the dilated left superficial middle cerebral vein toward the cavernous sinus and vein of Labbe toward the left sigmoid sinus [Figure and ]. The DAVF was diagnosed as Cognard Type IIa + Type IIb and Borden Type II.
The cerebral circulatory disturbance was due to venous congestion, which was caused by TSS DAVF and bilateral venous sinus occlusion . The clinical symptoms of the patient were considered to be due to this cerebral circulatory insufficiency, and therefore sinus restoration may be a more preferable treatment than TAE or TVE to improve the cerebral venous return. Considering the sinus restoration strategy, we performed computed tomography (CT) venography preoperatively, which precisely revealed an occluded segment and the right jugular bulb and internal jugular vein were both patent. The patient and her family were thoroughly informed of the nature of the intended procedure; they understood its potential risks and benefits and agreed to the treatment. The patient was given 100 mg of aspirin and 75 mg of clopidogrel daily, started 7 days before the intervention.
The endovascular procedure was performed under general anesthesia. Bilateral groin access was used. A 4-French diagnostic catheter was advanced into the right external carotid artery to obtain the diagnostic angiograms and roadmaps. An 8-French guiding catheter (Launcher; Medotronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN) was advanced into the right internal jugular vein, and a 0.035” guidewire (Radifocus; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) over a 4-Fr diagnostic catheter was successfully penetrated through the occluded portion and advanced to the right transverse sinus. Subsequently, the Radifocus wire was replaced with a 0.014” micro guidewire (Chikai; Asahi intecc, Aichi, Japan), which was advanced to the superior sagittal sinus. Balloon angioplasties (Gateway 3 mm × 12 mm; Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA) were repeatedly performed from the distal (closer to the torcula) to the proximal (further from the torcula) portion. A subsequent angiogram showed that antegrade venous flow was restored , and an additional balloon angioplasty (Bandicoot RX 6 mm × 40 mm; Kaneka, Osaka, Japan) was performed at the lower part of the sigmoid sinus . Next, a self-expanding stent (Precise 8 mm × 40 mm; Codman, Raynham, MA) was deployed between the sigmoid sinus and jugular bulb, which resulted in complete restoration of the venous flow in the occluded right sigmoid sinus ; the Cognard Type II DAVF was converted to a Type I. After stenting, cortical venous reflux had disappeared and only antegrade flow into right jugular bulb remained. Bilateral internal carotid angiograms showed a remarkable improvement in cerebral perfusion . After the treatment, the patient showed no complication or convulsion. She was discharged our hospital with independent gait 6 months after the treatment. Her cognitive function gradually improved with MMSE score improved 26 points at 12 months after the treatment. She received the aforesaid double antiplatelet therapy until 3 months after the stenting, but was continued on a single 75 mg dose of clopidogrel for 1-year.