An 81-year-old lady presented to the ENT department with increasing dysphagia, shortness of breath, and stridor. Her past medical history included radiotherapy to the mediastinum for Hodgkin's lymphoma 14 years prior to presentation and radiation induced interstitial pulmonary fibrosis. She was on long-term Azathioprin and Prednisolone immunosuppressive therapy for this. One year prior to presentation she was treated for a fungating moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the tip of the nose with surgical excision. Histologically this measured 12mm x 11mm x 3mm with involvement of the deep margin, with no perineural or lymphovascular invasion. There was no lymph node metastasis, and the patient underwent 5 sessions of radiotherapy at 35Gray to treat the deep margin.
The patient was also investigated for symptoms of a lower respiratory tract infection 5 months prior to the latest admission with stridor. A sputum culture grew Haemophilus influenzae and Mycobacterium kansasii and the patient was advised 2 years of rifampicin, ethambutol, and clarithromycin by the respiratory team as per the British Thoracic Society recommendations . Due to the duration of work-up of the diagnosis and need for 3 confirmatory sputum samples, the patient only had 6 weeks of triple therapy treatment prior to presenting with stridor.
Examination of the patient during the acute admission using nasoendoscopy revealed a left anterior vocal cord granulation and an exophytic pedunculated lesion from the right vocal cord causing ball-valving of the glottic inlet and diminished right vocal cord mobility. With the patient's history in mind, the initial working diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma and a differential diagnosis of mycobacterial disease.
The patient was initially commenced on broad-spectrum antibiotics and steroids. As there was no response to medical treatment, the patient was taken to theatre for debulking to reestablish an airway and tissue samples were sent for both histological and microbiological examination. Figures and reveal pictures of the larynx both before and immediately after debulking. The patient was discussed in the joint head and neck multidisciplinary meeting pending the results of histological analysis.
Histology showed a spindle cell proliferation with intersecting fascicles and easily identifiable mitotic figures . Initially the differential diagnosis included a low-grade sarcoma, especially as there was strong expression of desmin and weaker expression of smooth muscle actin. However, the lesion demonstrated bland uniform nuclei and there was an inflammatory cell infiltrate of neutrophils and plasma cells. Immunohistochemistry also showed expression of CD68, suggesting a significant histiocytic component to the lesion, but no true granulomata were identified. Focally the surface had a slightly palisaded appearance with necrotic debris on the surface, possibly representing an element of caseous necrosis. Staining with Ziehl-Neelsen and Wade-Fite showed numerous acid-fast bacilli.
The bland nuclear morphology, inflammatory cell infiltrate, and mycobacteria indicate an inflammatory pseudotumour secondary to mycobacteria infection. The lack of epithelioid granulomata may be related to the underlying immunosuppression. The strong expression of desmin and the weaker smooth muscle actin, although slightly unusual, would be acceptable for a myofibroblastic proliferation.
After confirmation of the histological diagnosis, the patient continued to show respiratory deterioration despite the surgical debulking and being started on broad-spectrum antibiotics and steroids. The long-term antimycobacterial medications were not stopped during the admission. Indirect laryngoscopy of the vocal cords was performed at the bedside one week after debulking showing reproliferation of the granulation tissue with compromise of the airway. Given the overall poor prognosis and resistance to medical and surgical interventions, and taking the patient's wishes into consideration, treatment was withdrawn. The patient's condition unfortunately deteriorated following this and she died shortly afterwards.