The patient in this case study is a 71-year-old male with a primary school education. On September 11, 2020, four days prior to medical consultation, his memory suddenly declined, and he couldn’t find his way home. He became unresponsive and his ability to comprehend the world around him decreased. In addition, the patient also appeared to suffer from a decline in language ability, an unchanging, indifferent expression, urinary and fecal incontinence, and an inability to recognize hunger and satiety. His motor function, sensory function, and swallowing function were not damaged. The patient was immediately sent to the hospital for emergency treatment by his family where he first underwent brain CT examination to rule out the possibility of cerebral hemorrhage. He then received thrombolytic therapy with urokinase (the specific dosage is unknown), but after this treatment his cognitive function did not improve. The patient then underwent brain CT and MRI examination one day later. CT showed that the patient had bilateral low density lesions in the anterior thalamus . DWI showed symmetrical bilateral hyperintensities in the anterior thalamus , as did T2 weighted imaging and FLAIR .
The patient had a history of hypertension: his highest measured blood pressure was 150/90 mmHg, and his normal blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg. He did not take drugs regularly and had previously incurred a lateral thalamic infarction (lateral lesion on left thalamus Fig. B-E). The patient also had a history of smoking and drinking. Laboratory test results were as follows: D-dimer: 2.5ug/ml, plasma protein S: 72% (reference range: 77–143%), antithrombin III: 77% (reference range: 80–120%). There were no abnormalities found from routine blood, urine, stool tests, biochemical tests, hypersensitive C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, thyroid function, tumor, anticardiolipin antibody, rheumatism, or immunity tests. However, carotid artery ultrasound showed bilateral carotid plaque formation, and CTA of head and neck showed moderate stenosis of the lower trunk of the right middle cerebral artery and moderate to severe local stenosis of the P3 segment of the left posterior cerebral artery . MRI venography (MRV) of the skull showed that the left transverse sinus and sigmoid sinus were both thin, which was considered to be the result of congenital development. No abnormalities were found during the fundus examination.
Physical examination of the patient’s nervous system after admission yielded the following results: clear mind, fluent speech, short-term memory decline, normal time orientation ability, normal place orientation ability, computational decline, normal object naming ability, normal language repetition ability, and normal distant memory function. Both nasolabial sulci were symmetrical, tongue extension occurred in the middle, and other cranial nerves were deemed normal. The Muscle strength of both limbs was Grade V, and muscle tension was normal, with bilateral tendon reflex (++) and bilateral Pap’s sign (-). The bilateral deep and shallow senses were normal, as was ataxia movement. Daily living ability was assessed as 75 points in accordance with the Barthel Index; the patient’s MMSE score was 6, his MoCA score was 2, and his clock drawing test score was 0. Finally, his Glasgow score (GCS) was 15; NIHSS score was 2 points (question 2); his Frog field drinking water test was Grade 1; and his Modified Rankin Scale (mRS) was Grade 3.
Interestingly, after ten days’ treatment with antiplatelet aggregation, which lowered his blood lipids and improved his circulation, the patient’s symptoms improved significantly. He could communicate simply, and his speech volume increased, although his reactions were slightly slow. At this point his NIHSS score was 1 point (question 1); his MRS was Level 2; and his Barthel Index was 85 points. The patient was subsequently discharged since his condition had improved. One month later, a telephone follow-up showed that his symptoms were significantly relieved, he was completely able to perform self-care. Only a slight short-term memory decline remained present. His mRS at this point was Level 1, and his Barthel Index was 90 points. Two years later, we found through telephone follow-up that the patient’s symptoms had not changed significantly and that he was still able to care for himself completely, with normal reaction time and only a slight decline in short-term memory. Here, his mRS score was Level 1, and his Barthel Index score was still 90 points.