The patient was a 32-year-old man who was admitted to our hospital with complaints of cognitive function decrease, diplopia, and unsteady gait for more than 6 mo.
More than 6 mo prior to admission, he developed diplopia and his right eye showed outward inclination after long-term emotional stress and fatigue. Because the lower limbs were difficult to control when walking, he reported an unstable gait. He also experienced memory loss and personality changes, and his family felt that his personality became naive.
He had a remote history of blood transfusion during leg surgery. He denied a history of infection, diarrhea, fever, or other previous medical history.
The patient was a married 32-year-old man with a height of 180 cm and weight of 62.5 kg. He had no history of drug use, drinking, or bad sexual life, but had a history of smoking. His parents are both in good health.
He lost 15 kg in 1 mo. On assessment, his vital signs and eye movement were normal. Clinical neurological examination revealed slow response, right eye abduction, diplopia, personality change, attention and short-term memory impairments, euphoric mood, static and postural tremor of the head and limbs, positive left Babinski sign, and limb ataxia, without any other pathological signs. Our primary clinical consideration was neurosyphilis, followed by intracranial infection.
There were no significant abnormalities on routine blood tests, including biochemistry, coagulation, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, and pelvic and liver tumor markers. The syphilis rapid plasma responsive ring card test was positive (1:2). Electroencephalogram, brain electrical activity mapping, and electromyography were normal. Oncologic tests, including chest computed tomography, CA199, and carcinoembryonic antigen, were all negative. The patient’s score on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment examination was 24/30. His Mini-Mental State Examination score was 28/30.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans 1 mo before admission showed T2 hyperintensity of the brain stem, bilateral internal capsules, and the right frontal lobe; the right ventricle was enlarged . Repeat brain MRI scans on admission showed abnormal symmetrical signals in the pons, mesencephalon, bilateral medial temporal lobe, and bilateral basal ganglia .
Lumbar puncture showed normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with routine testing, including biochemistry and cytology. The immunoglobulin G (IgG) index was 2.95 mg/dL. Because neurosyphilis was considered, ceftriaxone 1.0 g im QD was given for 15 d, but the patient's condition was not improved. Repeat lumbar puncture showed normal CSF (glucose, 2.71 mmol/L; protein, 0.2 g/L; cytology, 3 /mm3). CSF bacterial culture was negative. Central nervous system demyelinating disease serology tests, including anti-aquaporin 4 antibodies, NMO-IgG, anti-MOG-IgG, and anti-MBP-IgG, were negative. His CSF IgG test was positive and oligoclonal bands were present, suggesting intrathecal antibody production. Serum IgG test was negative. Anti-NMDAR CSF test was positive, but serum testing was negative. Other autoimmune encephalitis antibodies were negative in both CSF and serum. Repeat syphilis confirmatory and rapid tests were positive. Repeat lumbar puncture after 1 mo of treatment with immunoglobulin and methylprednisolone therapy showed CSF that was almost acellular (6/mm3) with normal protein (0.43 g/L) and glucose (2.82 mmol/L). CSF bacterial culture was normal. CSF IgG index was elevated (50.6 mg/L). Paraneoplastic tests including Hu, Yo, Ri, CV2, Ma2, Amphiphysin, ANNA-3, Tr, PCA-2, and GAD were negative, except for anti-NMDAR antibody positivity (+1:1) in CSF and negativity in serum. Repeat serum syphilis rapid plasma responsive ring card test was positive and treponemal antibody was elevated (33.4).