In February 2021, a 64-year-old woman was brought to our emergency room due to disturbed consciousness. Her Charlson Comorbidity Index score was 2 (rheumatoid arthritis and bronchial asthma). One day before admission, the patient was febrile, experienced general fatigue, and vomited three times. On admission, her level of consciousness was I–2 on the Japan Coma Scale. Her blood pressure was 91/60 mmHg and respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute, giving her a quick Sequential Organ Failure Assessment Score of 3.
Abdominal computed tomography revealed right hydronephrosis due to a 6-mm upper ureter stone . She was diagnosed with urosepsis due to right acute pyelonephritis. Preoperatively, her serum lactate level was 5.8 mmol/L. We indwelled a 6-Fr 24-cm silicon ureteral stent into her right ureter. Postoperatively, her systolic blood pressure was 110 mmHg with the support of a continuous injection of noradrenaline at 0.20 μg/kg/min. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a LVEF of 60%. Since her hemodynamics remained unstable, we transferred her to the coronary care unit and initiated systemic management. Three hours after surgery, her blood pressure decreased to 49/42 mmHg despite intensive treatment with noradrenaline, vasopressin, and dobutamine. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a decreased LVEF of 20% with severe diffuse hypokinesis. No asynergy was recorded. Four hours postoperatively, she was diagnosed with SIC, and VA ECMO was initiated immediately. She was administered meropenem to protect against bacterial infections, including ESBL-producing strains. Her condition improved gradually. VA ECMO and vasopressor agents were discontinued on POD-3, and she was extubated on POD-4. Her LVEF recovered to 71%, without asynergy.
On POD-3, ESBL-producing Escherichia coli was detected in both urine and peripheral blood cultures. On POD-7, she was transferred to the general ward, and rehabilitation therapy was initiated. She was discharged from our hospital on POD-23 . Since her ureter stone size was 6 mm in diameter, we expected that it would be excreted naturally. However, the stone position remained unchanged for 6 months. Subsequently, we surgically removed the ureter stone using a basket catheter without lithotripsy in August 2021. The stone was composed of 57% calcium oxalate and 43% calcium phosphate. Fourteen months later, she recovered well without any recurrence of urinary stones or symptomatic UTI.