A 62-year-old Moroccan man, retired from the army, married, father of five children, a chronic tobacco smoker who did not consume alcohol, without any medical history, underwent concomitant chemoradiation for stage IIIB SCC of his right lung in 2007 . The protocol included radiotherapy using gamma photons of 1.25 Mv energy, delivered at a total dose of 60 Gy, 2 Gy by fraction, in 6 weeks, with two opposed fields including the right scapula. In combination with the RT we used chemotherapy according to the vinorelbine-cisplatin regimen: vinorelbine 25 mg/m2 day 1 and 8; cisplatin 75 mg/m2 day 1 repeated every 3 weeks until the end of RT. A total of three cycles was delivered. Following this therapy he was in good health, his regular follow-up evaluations did not reveal any notable pathologic findings, and he did not need to take any specific medication. However, 10 years later he presented a right scapula pain. He stopped smoking tobacco in 2007, and suffered from right scapula pain for 3 months. On admission his temperature was 37.5, his pulse 90 beats per minute, and his blood pressure 135/75 mmHg. A clinical examination found a fixed, sensitive right scapular mass that measured 10 cm at its big axis . A neurologic examination showed a conscious patient well oriented with preserved memory. A cranial nerve examination showed no disturbance in olfaction or in visual fields. Ocular motricity is well conserved as well as facial sensation and motricity. The rest of the cranial nerve examination did not reveal any dysarthria, hearing loss, tongue weakness, or neck weakness. Motricity of arms and inferior members was well conserved without any involuntary movements. Muscular force was preserved as well as sensitivity (light touch, temperature, vibration, joint position sense). He suffered from a slight neuropathic pain of his right arm whose intensity was estimated to be 4/10 according to the visual analogue scale. Biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, knee (patellar), and ankle (Achilles) reflexes did not reveal any abnormalities. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a tumor process on his right scapula, with sequela lung injury in the territory of the first tumor . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the scapular region showed malignant tumor process centered on the supraspinous and infraspinous muscles with hyposignal at T1 and heterogeneous hypersignal at T2 measuring 90 mm on the longest axis and 60 mm on the shortest axis. There was no involvement of his right shoulder joint . Data from a bone scintigraphy were in favor of a hyperfixation focus at the right scapula . A single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)-CT examination showed an osteocondensing and lytic aspect in the spine of his right scapula . Laboratory tests did not reveal any abnormalities, showing good liver and renal functions. A surgical biopsy of the tumor was performed. Histopathological examination showed a grade 1 chondrosarcoma . An extension assessment, including CT of his chest and abdominal ultrasonography, did not find distant metastasis. After a multidisciplinary staff meeting a surgical resection was performed with safe margins. The surgical procedure consisted of a resection of his right scapula, with fixation of his right arm thanks to osteosynthesis equipment. No adjuvant treatment was necessary because of the free margins after surgery and the low grade of the chondrosarcoma. A follow-up at 6 months (clinical examination and CT scan) did not show any sign of recurrence or specific complication.