In 2000, a 54- year-old male patient underwent a left neck node dissection of levels 2–5 and multiple biopsies (larynx, base of the tongue, amygdaloglossus sulcus, and tonsil) for a metastatic node with no clinically evident primary lesion. The histology confirmed a malignant lymphadenopathy with the presence of a single lymph node metastasis with extranodal lymphatic vascular infiltration. The primitive lesion was not detected. The metastatic tissue showed a tubular, follicular, and microcystic glandular structure with hyaline stroma and crystalloid and amorphous material deposition. The sample displayed necrotic foci, while cancer cells showed poor nuclear atypia and irrelevant mitotic activity. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed α-SMA positivity in peripheral spindle cells of tubular structures and S100 focal positivity. Thyroglobulin, calcitonin, and chromogranin staining were negative. The other lymph nodes appeared with reactive and aspecific modifications. Therefore, the pathologic diagnosis identified a cribriform variant of a lymph node metastasis with low-grade histologic features and probably originated from a primitive neoplasia of the salivary gland, pathologically staged as TX N1 M0. No adjuvant chemotherapy or other treatments were performed due to the low-grade nature of the lesion.
In January 2020, the patient referred to the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Unit of Cesena “Bufalini Hospital” for a swollen nodule in the left of the oral floor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), using T1-weighted high-resolution isotropic volume examination (THRIVE), confirmed the presence of a single lesion in the left portion of the oral floor involving the unilateral sublingual space . The mass was well delimited and in contact with the mandibular cortex, with no signs of bone infiltration: diameters of 2.4 × 3 cm in the axial sequence, 2 × 2.8 cm in the coronal sequence, and 3. cm in the sagittal sequence. In the loco-regional seat, the bone cortex of the jaw appeared remodeled and thin but not interrupted and with no alteration signal, while reaching the ventral surface of the lingual root and the mylohyoid muscle. A biopsy was subsequently performed. On the back, the lesion was widespread since the ventral surface of the tongue root. The mass reached the left mylohyoid muscle with the removal of adipocytic cleavage floor. However, the lesion did not appear to have passed the muscle and was not extended to the submandibular space. The left submandibular gland was characterized by a poor oversized extra- and intraglandular ductal system. The Wharton duct appeared dilated as probably due to the obstruction/infiltration of the excretory duct by the cancer lesion. The volume of the left parotid gland was poorly increased as compared to its counterpart and showed two formations visible in the deep lobe: one of 10 mm characterized by mixed signal (hypo- and hyper-intense) and the other of 14 mm with hemorrhagic component. An additional formation of 15 mm in the inferior pole of the parotid gland (level IIA) and a neoformation in the left oral floor were revealed.
In February 2020, a biopsy was performed and the pathology report described a glandular parenchyma partially substituted by malignant components with cribriform aspects. Tumor cells appeared monomorphic, without significant atypia, with nuclei of medium dimension, vesicular and no evident nucleolus. The H&E staining revealed the presence of low- and high-grade tumor features , with different biomarker expression on immunohistochemistry assays. The whole tumor tissue was positive for cytokeratin 7 , while Ki67 staining showed a lower cell proliferation in the low-grade areas with respect to the high-grade counterparts . Cells of the low-grade areas showed higher expression of p63 and lower expression of S100 . The whole tumor areas were negative for p40 . Owing to the histological features and to the tumor site, the case was diagnosed as a cribriform variant of a salivary gland PAC and considered as a recurrence with HGT of the metastatic lesion of unknown primary resected in 2000, the lesion being a cribriform variant of a salivary gland PAC. The tumor was classified as a recurrence of the unknown primitive of 2000 due to the very similar histological features.
In March 2020, 18F- fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) images revealed a focal uptake of the left oral floor with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 9. Two concomitant areas of radiotracer uptake were also present in the left submandibular (SUV max = 4.9) and ipsilateral mandibular (SUV max = 3.8) lymph nodes . No other uptake areas were detected. Therefore, the MTB (ENT and maxillofacial surgeons, pathologist, radiologist, medical, and radiation oncologists) opted for radical surgery.
In May 2020, the patient underwent complete parotidectomy and dissection of the level 1 lymph node . The surgery did not require microvascular or local flap reconstruction and no complications arose, allowing patient discharge after 7 days. The pathology report described a well-delimited solid mass (3.5 × 2.5 × 2 cm, weighing 15 g) , not capsulated and showing marginal foci with infiltrative aspects. The tumor cells were atypical, with vesicular nuclei and evident nucleoli. The growth pattern was mostly solid , with areas characterized by tubular and cribriform patterns , as well as cystic areas with luminal papillary projections . Vascular and perineural invasion were present , together with multiple comedonecrosis foci . Three lymph node metastases were detected. The degrees of lymph node involvement and growth patterns were variable (solid, cribriform, tubular, papillary, and cystic), but no aspects of extension to perilymphatic soft tissues were detected. The biggest measured was 1.4 cm ; therefore, the disease was staged as pT2, N2b according to TNM classification . The patient had no complications after surgery and he was discharged after 7 days.
Because of the presence of multiple lymph node metastases, the MTB referred the patient to adjuvant radiotherapy, completed in August (60 Gy/30 fractions to the tumor bed and ipsilateral nodes, 54 Gy/30 fractions to contralateral nodes). The treatment caused the onset of odynophagia, oral mucositis, and epitheliolysis in the left base of the neck, treated with supportive care and quickly resolved; the single long-term sequela was mild xerostomia.
In May 2023, the patient was still alive and MRI and PET/CT showed no sign of recurrence.
To the best of our knowledge, only one case of PAC with HGT has been molecularly characterized. Here, we performed NGS profiling and microsatellite instability (MSI) status using DNA and RNA extracted by tumor tissue. Sequencing analysis did not detect any alteration in the 52 genes of the NGS panel employed ; MSI status was obtained through the investigation of eight markers ( and ). The analysis revealed an overlapping stable trend of the curves showed a ΔTm melting temperature (Tm sample − Tm positive control) ≥ −3 (unstable markers are considered for a ΔTm < −3) . These results demonstrated the microsatellite stability of the sample.