A 59-year-old Caucasian female presented five years prior to the presentation of this case report with symptoms of chronic sinusitis and, upon biopsy, was found to have ACC in her right inferior turbinate and right maxillary sinus tissue. The work-up for metastatic disease at that time, including computed tomography with positron emission tomography (CT/PET), was negative. She underwent surgical resection of this neoplasm shortly after diagnosis and two months later received adjuvant radiation therapy for one month. She did not experience any signs or symptoms of local recurrence or distant metastasis until a surveillance CT/PET scan was performed three years after her initial presentation , which revealed multiple bilateral lung masses. A biopsy of one of her right lung lesions confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic ACC. At this time, these lesions were deemed unresectable and she was referred to medical oncology for palliative chemotherapy.
Our patient was initiated on palliative chemotherapy with CAP regimen (cisplatinum 50 mg/m2, Adriamycin (doxorubicin) 50 mg/m2, and cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2) for six cycles. She experienced progression of the disease on therapy and was switched to second-line therapy combining carboplatin (area under the concentration curve = 5) and docetaxel (75 mg/m2). She was preparing to start cycle three of carboplatin and docetaxel, however she was found to be pancytopenic, including grade three thrombocytopenia. The third cycle of chemotherapy was postponed and she was transfused with packed red blood cells and placed on growth factor support. During this delay restaging was performed, and once again she had experienced progression of the disease . After failing two lines of palliative chemotherapy, she was initiated on sorafenib at 400 mg orally twice a day. Sorafenib was chosen in this setting because it is an easily administered oral medication with a favorable side effect profile and has a wide variety of molecular targets. A surveillance CT/PET scan performed after two cycles of this therapy revealed stable disease, a clinical response that could not be attained with prior conventional cytotoxic agents . This response was based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) . According to RECIST, stable disease is defined as neither partial response, which is a 30% decrease in the sum of the two longest diameters of the tumor, nor progressive disease, which is a 20% increase in the sum of the two longest diameters of the tumor. Our patient did require a dose reduction of sorafenib of 12.5% due to the fact that she experienced hand-foot syndrome, which consists of reddening, swelling, numbness and desquamation on the palms and soles that can occur after chemotherapy in cancer patients. She also experienced occasional epistaxis. Otherwise, our patient has tolerated sorafenib well and continues on it due to disease stabilization for six months at the time of writing.