A 51-year-old woman presented with progressive exertional dyspnoea. She had intermittent exertional chest pain for 3 years but was never evaluated. She had a medical history of hyperthyroidism and an old lacunar infarction in the right cerebellum. The initial lab data showed normal N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (99.3 pg/mL) and cardiac enzymes (TnT/CK-MB <3.00 pg/mL/0.61 ng/mL). On pre-procedure echocardiography, the left ventricular ejection fraction was 64% and there were no residual wall motion abnormalities. In a treadmill test, 1.4-mm horizontal ST-segment depression in leads II, III, aVF, V5, and V6 developed at peak exercise capacity. On cardiopulmonary exercise (CPEX) testing, decreased exercise function was observed (VO2 65%, VO2/kg 18.67, VE/VCO2 (minute ventilation/carbon dioxide production) 40, 5.3 METs (metabolic equivalents)). CCTA showed no significant coronary stenosis. However, a CAF with tortuous vessel and several markedly dilated aneurysmal sacs was observed at the pre-pulmonic space, and the largest aneurysm was measured to be approximately 10.5 mm × 6.0 mm . The drainage diameter was 2.5–3.1 mm. The differential diagnosis of exertional dyspnoea and chest pain included coronary steal syndrome as a major concern, while variant angina and microvascular disease were less concerning.
To assess coronary haemodynamic changes caused by the CAF, CAG and physiologic assessments were performed. On CAG, the fistula originated from the distal left main (LM) quadrifurcation and drained into the main pulmonary artery trunk (Videos 1 and 2). Vasospasm was not induced by an ergonovine provocation test. Resting and hyperaemic average peak velocities (APVs) and coronary flow reserve were measured in the coronary arteries [left anterior descending artery (LAD), left circumflex artery (LCX), and ramus intermedius artery (RI)] and CAF using a Doppler wire and a ComboMap System (Philips Volcano, San Diego, CA, USA) . Based on the radius measured from CCTA and the Doppler-derived APV, the mean aortic absolute flow rate (Qa), mean distal flow rate (Qd), and flow division ratio (Qd/Qa) of each vessel at the LM quadrifurcation area were calculated. The aortic flow rate (Qa) was measured at the entrance of the left main trunk with a catheter. We observed a large amount of blood flow drained by the CAF and a relatively small amount of blood reaching the LAD . The Qd/Qa ranking of each vessel showed the same trend both at baseline and during hyperaemia. In addition, we determined the time-averaged wall shear stress (WSS) and oscillatory shear index (OSI) of the fistula by CFD . Low WSS and focal high-OSI lesions were observed in aneurysmal sacs . Due to the size of the CAF, which was larger than 10 mm, a large amount of persistent flow steal, extremely high focal OSIs at aneurysmal sacs on CFD analysis, and suspicious ischaemia during the treadmill and CPEX tests, we decided to perform surgical treatment. Computational fluid dynamics analysis was performed using Fluent software (ANSYS, Canonsburg, PA, USA). Multiple ligations of the CAF were successfully performed. On post-operative CCTA, no remnant fistula or aneurysmal sacs were observed .
Two weeks after the operation, angina assessed by the Seattle angina questionnaire was improved. A treadmill test showed no exercise-induced abnormalities. To assess changes in coronary haemodynamics, CAG and physiologic investigations were performed. The sizes of the coronary arteries (LAD, RI, and LCX) were increased compared to the pre-operative sizes. This finding suggested that the coronary arteries had smaller vessels during the presence of the CAF. We describe the potential mechanism of this condition associated with microvascular resistance and flow steal in . Although the resting and hyperaemic absolute flowrates in the LM were decreased, the absolute flowrates through the LAD, RI, and LCX were increased, compared with the pre-operative rates . The resting and hyperaemic Qd/Qa values reflected an increased flow rate distribution through the LAD, RI, and LCX after surgical treatment. After a year and a half, follow-up CPEX testing showed an enhanced result without remaining symptoms. (VO2 58–92%, METS 4.1–8.5, VE/VCO2 37.7–32.7).