A 55-year-old Brahmin man presented to our emergency department with complaints of headache, vomiting, double vision, and unsteady gait for 2 weeks. The sudden-onset headache, localized to left temporal region, was also associated with frequent bilious, non-bloody, projectile vomiting. He had reported double vision on the same day in all directions of gaze and unsteadiness of his lower limbs, which led him to tilt toward the left without support, and slowness and incoordination while walking. Furthermore, he had difficulty in holding objects and gripping. There was no fever, loss of consciousness, abnormal body movements, slurring of speech, nasal regurgitation, shortness of breath, chest pain, or palpitation. He occasionally consumed alcohol and was a tobacco smoker without any other significant medical or drug history and no family history of any cardiac disease.
On examination, he was alert, hemodynamically stable, and conversant. His vital signs were stable with blood pressure of 150/90 mmHg. Respiratory, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and thyroid examinations were otherwise unremarkable. A neurological examination revealed jerky nystagmus with fast component to the left. Hypotonia was present bilaterally on both upper and lower limbs. Past pointing was pronounced on his left hand with heel shin test affected on the left side. He had a wide-based gait and dysdiadochokinesia with normal speech findings suggestive of cerebellar involvement.
A complete blood count, lipid profile, thyroid function test, rheumatoid factor, and antinuclear antibody (ANA) test were normal. C-reactive protein (CRP) was positive and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was increased to 47 mm/hour. Electrocardiography showed normal functioning heart. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain revealed acute/subacute posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) territory infarct of the left cerebellum with small acute/subacute lacunar infarct of the left pons. Computed tomography (CT) angiography of cerebral vessels showed normal patency of vessels supplying his brain.
In order to assess the cause of infarct in his brain, transthoracic echocardiography was performed which showed a 2.5 cm × 2.2 cm mass attached to intra-atrial septum prolapsing through mitral valve with normal systolic and diastolic function suggestive of left atrial myxoma as shown in Fig. . Even though it is considered a surgical emergency, due to the financial and time constraints of our patient, it was planned that he would undergo surgery 6 weeks after presentation and follow-up every 2 weeks or whenever necessary. He was kept on anticoagulants.
However, 5 days after admission, he complained of severe generalized abdominal pain for which a CT scan and other necessary investigations were advised. A CT scan of his abdomen and pelvis was performed which showed non-enhancing hypodense areas in lower pole of his spleen with a defect in one of the branches of the splenic artery suggestive of splenic infarct as shown in Fig. . Similarly, a wedge-shaped hypo-enhancing area was noted in bilateral kidneys which had extended into the sinus, which was suggestive of bilateral renal infarct. Furthermore, in a CT scan of his chest, an irregular non-calcified soft tissue density mass measuring 3.4 cm × 3.2 cm was seen in the left atrium arising from intra-arterial septum with non-enhancing areas suggestive of necrosis as shown in Fig. . All findings were evocative of left atrial myxoma.
He underwent excision of left atrial myxoma as shown in Fig. . His chest cavity was entered through median sternotomy. He was heparinized with checking of activated clotting time. Aorto-bicaval cannulation of 21 FR was done and a cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established for 29 minutes. In order to minimize cardiac manipulation to prevent further embolic complications, an aortic cross-clamp was applied for 20 minutes. His heart was arrested with antegrade cold blood cardioplegia. Both the cavas were snugged and his right atrium was opened. The surgeon preferred development of Sondergaard’s groove to expose the left atrium. A 4 cm × 4 cm soft mulberry-shaped mass in our patient’s left atrium arising 1 cm away from posterior lateral commissure was excised. His left atrium was closed in layers and root was vented. His heart was de-aired and the aortic cross-clamp was removed. His heart did not require defibrillation and spontaneously returned to normal sinus rhythm. Upon reaching normothermia, he was weaned off from CPB on no pressor or inotropes. Protaminized decannulation was done and hemostasis was secured. His chest was closed in layers. He tolerated all the following procedures well and was monitored in an intensive care unit for 24 hours and moved to a ward later.
Histopathological examination of the excised mass showed marked loose myxoid stroma with scattered spindle cells without atypia confirming the diagnosis of atrial myxoma as shown in Fig. .
His postoperative period was uneventful and he recovered well. He was doing well at 4-month post-surgery follow-up.