This full-term female infant was born via spontaneous vaginal delivery to a 32-year-old gravida 4, para 1 Caucasian mother at 40 and 5/7 weeks gestational age. Mother's medical history was unremarkable and pregnancy, labor, and delivery were uncomplicated. Birth weight was 3330 grams. Apgar scores were 8 at 1 and 5 minutes of age, respectively. After delivery, oxygen saturation was 93% and a 2/6 systolic murmur was noted. During a workup for infection and respiratory distress, oxygen saturation dropped to the 80s. Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly. Cranial ultrasound demonstrated a large vein of Galen arteriovenous malformation with MRI with contrast confirming the diagnosis. Dopamine was initiated for treatment of hypotension. Secondary to high flow AVM, this patient was monitored closely for increased risk for heart failure with serial BNP levels starting on DOL 4 when it was found to be 2450 pg/mL. Echocardiogram on DOL 6 showed high-output heart failure and the combination of a large sinus venosus ASD, with partial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR; right upper pulmonary vein to superior vena cava) and patent ductus arteriosus with pulmonary hypertension resulting in right to left shunting. On DOL 9, a cerebral angiogram and Vein of Galen aneurysm embolization were performed, reducing the flow to 50%. BNP level obtained on DOL 10 was over 5000 pg/mL. Post-procedure, patient was placed back on high frequency oscillator, inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) was started at 20 parts per million, and continued for 6 days. A second embolization treatment that significantly reduced the flow was performed on DOL 16. By DOL 21, BNP levels dropped to 426 pg/mL with pulmonary hypertension still evident on echocardiogram. At 3 months of age, cardiac catheterization showed significant blood return to the superior vena cava, likely a result of the VGAM, and pulmonary hypertension. Sildenafil was started and BNP levels dropped below 100 pg/ml, as the patient's condition improved. The patient was discharged home on oxygen, diuretics and albuterol. She was readmitted 1 week later for shortness of breath and tachypnea. BNP level was 218 pg/mL. She went into CHF quickly and required a third coil embolization at 5.5 months of age after BNP levels reached 2020 pg/mL.
By six months of age, the patient required placement of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt for hydrocephalus. She had one other brief hospitalization for an upper respiratory infection but remained stable and has not been hospitalized since. In no apparent respiratory or cardiovascular distress on DOL 295, her BNP level was 49 pg/mL. Figure displays serial changes in BNP levels throughout her NICU and early pediatric hospital course.
Developmental evaluation at 46 weeks of age identified global functional developmental delays. However, at 22 months of age, her functional development was within normal. At the time of her last brain scan, no obvious shunting through the VGAM was detected.