The patient is a 31-year-old man who presented with a history of recurrent throbbing headaches of 10 weeks duration (Visual analog score 7-8/10). There were associated focal seizures involving the left upper limb which resolved with the administration of antiepileptic medications, personality changes characterized predominately by aggressive and irrational behavior as well as gradual onset but progressive weakness of the left side of the body.
Examination revealed that he was fully conscious with dysarthria. He had left facial nerve palsy upper motor neuron type, but vision, hearing, and other lower cranial nerves were normal. He also had left-sided spastic hemiparesis with a power of 3 to 4-5 (medical research council scale) and a significant left hemisensory deficit. The gait was grossly ataxic with associated recurrent falls predominately to the left. His Modified Rankin Score (mRS) was 4 at presentation. He had a course of low-dose oral steroids in the referral hospital before presentation to our center without any improvement.
Brain MRI showed multiple heterogeneous lesions in the right cerebral hemisphere, brainstem, and cerebellum. The largest lesion was in the right capsuloganglionic area extending into the deep white matter and displaying alternating isointense and hypointense concentric rings/ bars on T1WI . The T2WI [- and -] images showed similar isointense and hyperintense lamellae with a patchy enhancement pattern on the administration of gadolinium contrast [ and ]. Similar lesions of varying intensities were noted in the right frontal, left occipital, and left cerebellar regions [- and -]. Cervical MRI was normal [ and ].
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) oligoclonal bands were negative, and CSF chemistry and cell count were normal. CSF culture was negative; however, the cytology showed fluffy cotton wool exudates in keeping with the presence of a possible degenerative or neuroinflammatory lesion. CRP was normal (<2.50 mg/dl.)
He was treated with a combination of steroids and immunosuppressive agents. The first course was high-dose steroids (intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 5 days followed by a maintenance dose of oral prednisolone). He made remarkable improvement after treatment with resolution of the headaches, speech deficits, and hemibody weakness. He had significant improvement in his personality; however, the gait and coordination problems persisted causing some limitations in his ability to carry out activities of daily living (mRS of 2).
Five months after the first course of steroid therapy, he had progressive worsening of speech, gait, and limb weakness that necessitated a repeat course of treatment and maintenance with oral azathioprine. He made a gradual but progressive improvement and almost complete resolution of the speech deficits, hemibody weakness, gait, and coordination problems for 2–3 months. Brain MRI repeated 2 months after the second course showed almost complete resolution of the lesions with no associated edema or contrast enhancement [ and ].
He had regular physical therapy and rehabilitation and was able to return to work with mRS of 1 at 18 months follow-up.