A 39-year-old Thai man was referred to our institute for a pericardiectomy. He initially presented with progressive exertional dyspnea, increased abdominal girth and leg edema for nine months. He denied having cough, fever, chills, night sweats or weight loss. He was diagnosed as having HIV infection and pulmonary tuberculosis six years previously, which was complicated by pericarditis and cardiac tamponade. He was subsequently treated with antituberculosis therapy, which resulted in a cure, and he was started on a combination of stavudine, lamivudine and nevirapine.
On physical examination, he was afebrile with the presence of marked edema in the lower extremities. His jugular veins were distended up to the mandible. He was found to have decreased breath sounds in the left lower lung area. The results of an abdominal examination were remarkable for ascites as evidenced by shifting dullness.
The results of a sputum examination were negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The chest radiograph revealed minimal fibroreticular infiltration in the right upper lung, a left-sided pleural effusion and a calcified pericardium . Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated normal left ventricular size with preserved left ventricular systolic function and bi-atrial enlargement. The Doppler findings were consistent with the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis.
Thoracocentesis yielded a milky fluid with a total protein level of 1.6g/dL, albumin 0.9g/dL, glucose 130mg/dL, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 128U/L, triglyceride 475mg/dL, cholesterol 39mg/dL and an adenosine deaminase (ADA) level of 40.6U/L (normal <45U/L). The cell count of the pleural fluid was 78 cells/mm3 with 55% lymphocytes and 29% neutrophils. Abdominal paracentesis also revealed a milky fluid and showed a total protein level of 1.7g/dL, albumin 0.9g/dL, triglyceride 535mg/dL and a cell count of 160 cells/mm3 with 79% lymphocytes and 16% neutrophils. All tests for M. tuberculosis, bacteria, and fungi from the pleural and peritoneal fluids and blood cultures were negative. In addition, a cytological examination was negative for malignant cells.
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a left-sided pleural effusion and multiple lymphadenopathies at the right hilar, right paratracheal and precarinal region . An abdominal CT scan showed multiple small intra-abdominal lymphadenopathies. A left adrenal gland mass 3.4×1.5cm in size was noted, and a small nodule at the right adrenal gland was also detected. A percutaneous CT-guided biopsy of the left adrenal mass was performed. A histopathological examination revealed a granulomatous inflammation containing a monomorphic yeast-like organism, which was morphologically suggestive of a Histoplasma species.
A bone marrow aspiration demonstrated no tumor or granuloma; cultures for bacteria, fungi and mycobacteria were negative.
A lymphoscintigraphy with combined single-photon emission computed tomography/CT (SPECT/CT) imaging revealed an absence of radioactive accumulation within the pleural or peritoneal cavity in the early phase, thus excluding significant leaks from the main lymphatic tracts. On delayed images, there was radioactive accumulation in the abdomen that suggested an increased abdominal lymphatic production and a restriction of lymphatic drainage at the left subclavian vein.
Our patient underwent a pericardiectomy and intra-operative findings demonstrated a calcified, thickened pericardium with adhesion to the heart. Histopathological findings showed pericardial fibrosis with focal calcification and no granulomas. The mediastinal lymph nodes showed a reactive change and pericardial tissue cultures for bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria were negative.
He was given a high-protein, low-fat diet with medium-chain triglycerides, and amphotericin B was administered to treat the disseminated histoplasmosis with adrenal involvement. Our patient was discharged home one month after the operation with resolution of his ascites and pleural effusion.