A 71-year-old Caucasian man with a past medical history significant for type-2 diabetes, coronary artery disease, atrial fibrillation, chronic pericardial effusion and hypothyroidism presented with 5 weeks of increasing fatigue and 1 day of dizziness.
Physical examination revealed that the patient was afebrile, had a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg, an irregularly irregular heart rate of 102 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute. There was no pulsus parodoxus. Examination of the head and neck showed pale conjunctiva, no palpable lymphadenopathy, jugular venous distension or bruits. Auscultation of the chest revealed scattered rhonchi. The patient was mildly tachycardic with no S3 or S4 heart sounds, murmurs or rubs appreciated. There was no hepatosplenomegaly, clubbing, cyanosis or edema and stools were guaiac negative.
An electrocardiogram (EKG) on admission demonstrated atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response with low voltage QRS complexes; electrical alternans were not present. The chest radiograph showed a very minimal pleural effusion with no cardiomegaly, infiltrates or masses.
Laboratory analysis revealed a white blood-cell count of 12,900/L, with a normal differential, and a hemoglobin and hematocrit of 7.2 g/dl and 23.4%, respectively. The platelet count was 387 thousand/L. The red cell indices were microcytic and iron studies revealed an iron deficiency anemia. Liver function tests were normal. The lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 167 U/L (within normal limits). The thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was 16.49 mcIU/ml and the free T3 was 57 mcg/ml.
The patient was admitted for anemia and worked up for a gastrointestinal bleed. Three units packed red blood cells were transfused. Upper endoscopy revealed a mass just below the gastroesophageal junction and three nonbleeding gastric ulcers. To further evaluate the gastric mass, an endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was performed demonstrating a 30 × 17 mm polypoid mass visualized in the gastric cardia limited to the mucosa/submucosa. The biopsy revealed gastric adenocarcinoma, staged as T1N0M0 by EUS, and was Helicobacter pylori-negative.
A two-dimensional echocardiogram was preformed to evaluate an 8-month old pericardial effusion. It demonstrated a 2.0 × 2.7 cm mass associated with the right atrium (RA). To better define the mass and its anatomic relationship within the RA, several imaging procedures were performed: 1) transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) showing a 5.7 cm2 shaped echodensity within the wall of the RA and a second, 16 cm2 echodensity, that extended across the atrioventricular groove ; 2) a contrast computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis negative for metastasis, but significant for a large pericardial effusion without pericardial thickening and a 2.6 × 2.1 cm filling defect in the right atrial appendage ; and 3) a cardiac MRI demonstrating a homogenous enhancing mass along the lateral wall of the right atrium. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan demonstrated a hypermetabolic region in the heart corresponding to the mass observed on CT.
At this point, our differential diagnosis included a primary gastric adenocarcinoma with metastasis to the heart as well as two separate primary neoplastic processes (one involving the heart and one involving the stomach).
To determine the etiology of the cardiac mass, a biopsy was accomplished via a pericardial window through an anterolateral thoracotomy. At thoracotomy, the parietal pericardium appeared normal. Visual inspection revealed several nodular areas over the body of the right atrium, superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC). There was no evidence of a thickened, constrictive layer surrounding the heart. Two hundred milliliters of straw-colored fluid was recovered from the pericardial cavity. The fluid was negative for malignant cells and consisted of a few benign and reactive mesothelial cells mixed with inflammatory cells and proteinaceous debris. Viral, bacterial and mycobacterial cultures of the pericardial fluid were negative. Biopsy revealed a normal parietal pericardium and myocardium. However, the visceral pericardium showed a lymphoplasmocytic infiltrate diagnostic of epicarditis . After thoracotomy, the patient had a partial gastrectomy to remove the adenocarcinoma. The postoperative course was complicated by infection, requiring a 3-month stay in the intensive care unit. During this time, there was no evidence suggestive of constrictive physiology. Since the patient continued to remain asymptomatic from the epicarditis, no further imaging studies or procedures were performed to follow the "mass." The patient eventually succumbed to infection.