A healthy 39-year-old man was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for a severe trauma brain injury and a moderate thoracic trauma caused by a motorcycle accident. After initial computed tomography (CT-scan), the patient had immediate craniectomy and hematoma evacuation surgery with an antibiotic prophylaxis by cefazolin. An Enterobacter aerogenes ventilator associated pneumonia was diagnosed on day 14, and treated by cefepim for 8 days. After 30 days in ICU, neurological examination showed a minimally conscious state and right lower limb monoplegia. A percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) was therefore positioned on day 31 with an antibiotic prophylaxis by amoxicillin/clavulanate (2 g). A surgical tracheotomy was also performed on day 33, as we use to do in our trauma ICU. Antibiotic prophylaxis was not administered during this procedure. There was no local complication or fever immediately around the surgical tracheostomy. The patient was weaned on day 40. On ICU discharge (day 54), neurological examination was unchanged. The patient was thereafter transferred to a rehabilitation centre.
During the second week of rehabilitation stay, fever, purulent pulmonary secretions, dyspnoea and cervical pain with progressive tetraplegia appeared. The patient was rapidly readmitted to the ICU where a broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy including piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g four times a day), amikacin (30 mg/kg) and linezolid (600 mg twice a day) was initiated after multiple bacteriological samples. CT-scan and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed C6-C7 vertebral osteomyelitis associated with a C2-T3 epidural abscess, a right C6-C7 paravertebral abscess and a cervical myelitis . Among bacteriologic assessment, Parvimonas micra, Dialister pneumocintes and Veillonella parvela were isolated in three blood cultures. The anaerobes were susceptible to amoxicillin/clavulanate, imipenem and metronidazole, but resistant to clindamycin. The antimicrobial therapy was thus targeted to metronidazole (500 mg every 8 h) and amoxicillin/clavulanate (2 g every 4 h). Cultures of arterial and central venous catheters were negative. Complementary investigations by oral examination, nasofibroscopy, facial and cervical CT-scan, and transoesophageal echocardiography did not reveal any infection source. Two weeks later, cervical vertebrae laminectomy was performed because of persistent fever and tetraplegia. Surgical vertebral biopsies cultures performed under antimicrobial therapy were negative. After laminectomy and a total of 5 weeks of antimicrobial therapy, the patient was apyretic and recovered mobility of the four limbs. He was discharged to the rehabilitation centre after 44 days, treated by amoxicillin/clavulanate and rifampin (900 mg a day) according to susceptibility test. Treatment was well tolerated.