An 85-year-old man with a previous history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus presented with progressive weakness in the lower limbs, associated with urinary retention for 1 day. He did not have a fever. Neurological examination revealed paraplegia with no sensory disturbance, vision impairments or signs of meningeal irritation. He had delirium during the first night of hospitalization, followed by coma the next day. Except for an H1N1 influenza vaccination 3 months ago, there had been no preceding infections or other vaccinations. No recurrent oral ulcerations and urogenital lesions were found.
Extensive laboratory investigation showed an only slightly elevated white blood cell count (11.6 × 10^9 /L, Reference Range: 3.5–9.5), C-reactive protein level (10 mg/L, Reference Range: 0–8), and positive for antinuclear antibodies (1:1000, negative < 1:100). Serum sodium concentration, anti-dsDNA and ENA antibodies, ANCA and RF were all in the normal ranges. The tumor markers were unremarkable. A chest CT and abdominal ultrasound did not find evidence of cancer. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed normal intracranial pressure and his CSF was a crystalline fluid with 2 leukocytes/uL, containing 6.11 mmol/L of glucose (Reference Range: 2.5–4.5). His CSF contained 0.63 g/L of protein (Reference Range: 0.15–0.45). The IgG index of the CSF was elevated at 4.13 (Reference Range: < 0.85). Oligoclonal bands (Type III) (HYDRAGEL 3 & 9 ISOFOCUSING gel) were found in the CSF. Antibodies in the CSF for cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus and herpes simplex virus were all negative. No infectious pathogens were identified in the blood or in the CSF. Anti-Hu, anti-Yo, anti-Ri, anti-Amfi, anti-CV2, anti-Ma2, anti-NMDAR, anti-VGKC, anti-AMPAR, anti-GABAB, anti-AQP4 and anti-MOG antibodies in the blood and CSF were all negative.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain on the night of hospitalization demonstrated focal symmetrical bilateral lesions in the thalamus with hyperintense T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR). A head MRI after 17 days showed enlargement of the bilateral thalamic lesions with low density changes in computed tomography. The diffusion-weighted images (DWI) showed a slightly high intensity . No evidence was found of signal changes in the deep cerebral veins or the straight sinus. There were also progressive multiple lesions in the subcortical white matter, brain stem and a hyperintense long segment of T2 in the thoracic spinal cord. The cranio-cervical computerized tomography angiography (CTA) was unremarkable. (Supplementary materials).
Given the advanced age of this diabetic patient, we did not offer treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone. Despite treatment with IV immunoglobulin (IVIG) (0.4 g/kg/d, for 5 days), the patient remained unconscious. He developed pneumonia and passed away 38 days after onset from respiratory failure.