A 35-year-old Caucasian woman presented with an 8-year history of progressive dyspnea on exertion. She had no history of prolonged intubation, airway trauma, or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and was a lifetime non-smoker. Apart from insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, she had no other chronic disease.
The breathing problem started after a septorhinoplasty under general anesthesia, performed due to a spontaneous deformation of the cartilaginous nasal septum. To identify a supposed underlying autoimmune disease, blood tests and histopathologic examinations were performed. Autoimmune panel [Anti–Sjögren syndrome A antibody (SS-A); Anti–Sjögren syndrome B antibody (SS-B); antinuclear antibody (ANA); anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA); anti-topoisomerase I antibody (Scl-70); anti-histidil-tRNA synthetase antibody (Jo-1); anti-Smith/Ribonucleoprotein antibody (Sm/RNP); anti-Centromer-B antibody; anti-myeloperoxidase antibody (MPO); anti-proteinase-3 antibody (PR3)] showed negative result, and the histopathology findings of the nasal cartilage and mucosa were normal. In the next 8 years, no symptoms occurred other than dyspnea with slow progression. Finally, a computed tomography scan revealed an approximately 10 mm long, subglottic, circumferential soft-tissue mass with a lumen diameter of 4 mm . No clinical or radiological evidence of the disease was observed outside the larynx. Direct laryngotracheoscopy under general anesthesia with jet ventilation revealed a circumferential fibrotic subglottic stenosis (SGS) . No other airway abnormality was identified by the endoscopic examination. The patient underwent a slide laryngotracheoplasty as described in an earlier publication . Partial midline anterior laryngofissure was performed after the exploration of the laryngotracheal complex and careful dissection of the cricotracheal junction. The cricoid and thyroid cartilage was divided in the midline until the level of the anterior commissure . Then, the plate of the cricoid cartilage was incised in the midline. Increased attention was paid to the preservation of the posterior perichondrium, posterior cricoarytenoid, and pharyngeal constrictor muscle integrity. Laryngeal release and mobilization of the distal trachea were also performed. Accordingly, the anterior cartilage rings of the trachea could be easily pulled up to the level of the anterior commissure. The posterior membranous part of the trachea was sufficiently cropped in order to perfectly fit the posterior subglottic mucosa .
Finally, an anastomosis was created between the trachea, anterior cricoid, and midline incised thyroid cartilage with double-armed continuous locked sutures .
Histologic findings revealed the replacement of the respiratory epithelium by metaplastic non-dysplastic squamous epithelium. The submucosa was thickened by dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates and focally storiform fibrosis. The plasma cell infiltrates proved to be polyclonal, with the abundance of IgG4-positive plasma cells. The ratio of IgG4-positive plasma cells per IgG-positive plasma cell was 75%. Obliterative phlebitis, tissue eosinophilia, or granulomas were not detected .
No major perioperative or postoperative complications occurred. The patient was discharged on the 9th postoperative day with good swallowing and breathing. The postoperative ultrasound did not show any fibro-inflammatory disorder in the thyroid and salivary glands. The serum IgG4 level of the patient was 366 mg/l one week after the surgery. In addition, 6 weeks after the intervention, the patient was able to return to her premorbid way of life. During the follow-up period of 22 months, endoscopy revealed no significant restenosis . The serum IgG4 level did not significantly change (317 mg/l in the 16th postoperative month).
The peak inspiratory flow increased from 2.3 to 3.8 L/sec (change: 1.54 L/sec; 167% of the baseline) . The improvement of the quality-of-life score by 53% (from 15 to 7) also showed the patient’s satisfaction with her respiratory function . All the objective voice parameters were within the physiological range in the 22nd postoperative month: Fundamental frequency: 250.1 Hz; Jitter%: 0.33; Shimmer%: 2.82; Harmonics-to-Noise Ratio: 26.2 dB; Maximum Phonation Time: 19.6 s . The Voice Handicap Index demonstrated that the patient’s voice also improved (decreased from 20 to 2; 10% of baseline) .