Over a five-month period, a 62-year-old Hispanic woman who was previously healthy developed tremor in the right arm, enuresis, slowness in performing her daily activities, walking difficulties and trouble with getting dressed. Additionally, her relatives observed transient episodes of disorientation and inappropriate irritability.
Initially, the patient was admitted to another hospital, where she was found to have apraxia, dysphasia, attention deficit and amnesic episodes. She had no sensory or motor deficits.
Laboratory studies at that time revealed the presence of antithyroid antibodies as well as slightly high serum thyrotropin (TSH) concentration . Examination of the CSF was normal. Magnetic resonance images (MRI) showed nodular focal subcortical lesions suggestive of demyelination . A diagnosis of encephalitis and hypothyroidism was made, and the patient received levothyroxine.
Fifteen days later, the patient had two episodes of inappropriate behavior and transient anterograde amnesia. With these symptoms, she was admitted to our hospital.
The laboratory examination showed no significant change compared with the patient's previous laboratory results except normalization of hemogram values. Additionally, antinuclear antibody titer, anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-hepatitis B core antigen, hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-hepatitis C virus, lupic anticoagulant and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test results were negative. Also, the anticardiolipin antibody IgG level was 10.8 U/GPL (reference range, <23 U/GPL), anticardiolipin antibody Ig M was 5.9 U/MPL (reference range, < 11 U/MPL), porphobilinogen deaminase level was 10.3 nmol/seg/L (reference range, 9.2-19.1 nmol/seg/L), 24-hour urine porphobilinogen was 1.22 mg/24 h (reference range, 0.2-2.00 mg/24 h), and 24-hour urine-delta-aminolevulinic acid level was 2.46 mg/24 h (reference range, 0.1-4.5 mg/24 h).
Considering the clinical and laboratory findings, a diagnosis of encephalopathy of undetermined origin was made. The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a slow background activity with theta waves and paroxysmal activity at the hyperventilation maneuver . The thyroid biopsy showed lymphocytic chronic thyroiditis, and a diagnosis of HE was considered.
At discharge, the patient was treated with prednisone at doses of 1 mg/kg body weight. Thirty days later, she was experiencing a mild improvement in her symptoms. However, she never returned for her scheduled follow-up medical appointments.