The patient was a 44-year-old man who had gone to a regional hospital with worsening dyspnea on exertion and lower extremity edema approximately 2 months prior to admission. He was referred to our hospital for diagnosis and treatment. The patient did not have an obvious history of occupational or incidental exposure to asbestos. The physical examination at admission revealed jugular distension and lower extremity edema. His blood pressure was 120/58 mm Hg and heart rate was 120 beats/min. Transthoracic echocardiography and computed tomography showed massive pericardial effusion, with a maximum diameter of 53 mm at the apex of the pericardial sac and a large tumor (95 × 99 mm in diameter) occupying the lateral to posterior pericardial space (A, B). The tumor showed heterogeneous contrast enhancement, and its border was unclear. Computed tomography showed lymphadenopathy of the mediastinal and subcarinal lymph nodes. Coronary angiography revealed that feeding vessels of the tumor extended from the circumflex artery . Thoracentesis and pericardiocentesis were performed; however the signs/symptoms of tamponade remained. Cytological findings of the pericardial fluid specimen was grade II and was negative for malignant cells. After a preoperative discussion, our team decided upon a surgical intervention for the definitive diagnosis and to reduce the tumor mass as much as possible to improve the patient’s symptoms. A median sternotomy and pericardiotomy were performed, and the bloody pericardial effusion was removed. The pericardium was thickened. The large tumor was adherent to the epicardium and pericardium and extended from the lateral to posterior side (A). We performed a blunt dissection of the adhesions. The margins between the tumor and epicardium were unclear and most of the tumor was bluntly dissected. Some of the pericardium with adhesions to firm tumor tissue was removed, and the opened pericardium was not repaired so that pericardial fluid could drain to the thoracic space to alleviate cardiac tamponade. Only the tissue that included the feeding vessels was ligated and cut with an Endo GIA surgical stapler (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States) in order to cut and ligate safely. Cardiopulmonary bypass was not needed for removal of the large tumor, which was resected as much as possible. We resected the large tumor by dividing it into sections. The weight of the resected tumor was 480 g (B). The histopathological diagnosis of the resected tumor specimen was malignant mesothelioma, sarcomatoid type . The pericardial fluid obtained at surgery showed grade V cytology. It showed irregularly shaped nuclei and numerous mitotic divisions, and the cells were identified as malignant cells. The patient’s symptoms improved and his early postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative computed tomography showed reduction of the tumor mass (A). We recommended adjuvant therapy for the patient because of his young age and he and his family agreed to proceed. At 3 weeks after surgery, he was administered carboplatin and pemetrexed; however, the tumor progressed. The tumor was irradiated, with a temporary reduction in size. However, 2.5 months after surgery, the tumor regrew and compressed the left ventricle (B). Heart failure developed. Chemotherapy was discontinued because of hematotoxicity. Despite maximum radiotherapy, the tumor started to increase in size. The patient was transferred to hospice care for palliative therapy and died 7 months after surgery.