A 74-year-old Caucasian man with a history of hypertension and stage I clear cell type renal cell cancer underwent right nephrectomy in 2004. In 2009, he was found to have a right upper lobe lung metastasis and underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery with lung node resection. He had since been doing well without recurrence. In March 2016, he presented with a 1-month history of intermittent chest pressure, predominantly occurring at night times.
On physical examination, his blood pressure was elevated at 183/96 mm Hg with a normal heart rate of 78 bpm. The patient's lungs were clear on auscultation with no abnormalities in the cardiac examination. The abdomen was soft and nontender, and no masses were palpable.
Complete blood count, chemistry panel, thyroid function, and cardiac enzymes were normal. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm, with T wave inversions in leads II, III, avF, and V4-V6. A transthoracic echocardiogram followed which revealed reduced ejection fraction of 35% with hypokinesis of the apical segments and a suspicious lesion in the left ventricle. In view of the patient's age and risk factors for coronary artery disease and heart failure, he was scheduled for cardiac catheterization. Cardiac catheterization was performed and did not show significant coronary artery obstructions but revealed an abnormal accumulation of contrast in the apex, suggestive of a highly vascular mass . To further characterize the mass, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which confirmed the findings of a left ventricular mass measuring 4.2 × 3.6 × 3.1 cm with full-thickness involvement of the myocardium, causing moderate dyskinesia of the left ventricular wall . Open myocardial biopsy was performed, and pathologic evaluation was consistent with metastatic clear cell RCC.
Given the location of the mass and its involvement of the full thickness of the left ventricle, the patient was not felt to be a surgical candidate, and the use of TKI therapy was discussed with the patient. He was initiated on treatment with pazopanib at 800 mg daily, and the size of the tumor decreased to 0.4 × 0.4 cm in 5 months. The dose of pazopanib was later decreased to 200 mg daily due to therapy-related hypertension and severe fatigue. In January 2017, serial imaging revealed that the tumor size had enlarged to 4.0 × 3.0 × 3.0 cm despite the initial response. Due to tumor progression on pazopanib therapy, he was initiated on treatment with nivolumab in March 2017. His last serial echocardiogram done in January 2018 showed a stable mass, measuring 4.1 × 3.6 cm with cortical necrosis. He continues to be functional with minimal dyspnea on exertion.