A 68-year-old Caucasian man with severe chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension and progressive decline to New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class IV was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) because of respiratory failure and need for mechanical ventilation. His medical history included repeated episodes of deep vein thrombosis and two episodes of pulmonary embolism despite adequate anticoagulant therapy. Upon completion of the pulmonary hypertension investigation, his pulmonary thromboembolic disease was considered non-operable and was treated with bosentan and inhaled iloprost. Following the initiation of mechanical ventilation he was switched to intravenous iloprost and three months later our patient demonstrated a significant hemodynamic improvement, allowing him to undergo PEA. Details on his hemodynamic status and management are described elsewhere .
During his hospitalization, our patient had two episodes of ICU-acquired microbial and fungal infections including a catheter related candidaemia due to Candida albicans and Staphylococcus epidermidis (isolated from the catheter tip of a left internal jugular central venous catheter, treated with caspofungin for 15 days and linezolid 600 mg twice a day for 14 days), and an episode of ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) due to Acinetobacter baumannii treated according to the detected antimicrobial susceptibilities with imipenem (1 g every six hours) and colistin (3 × 106U every eight hours).
Immediately prior to PEA, our patient was given 1 g of vancomycin as surgical prophylaxis with the induction of anesthesia. During the first post-operative week he was febrile without an apparent site of infection and received antibiotic treatment according to the surveillance cultures. On the eighth post-operative day an exudate drained automatically from the surgical wound; cultures grown in Sabouraud dextrose agar revealed a fast-growing isolate with cottony texture identified as Aspergillus spp. Microscopically, a potassium hydroxide mount confirmed the presence of septate and hyaline, and dichotomously branched hyphae. Conidiophores were uncolored producing spherical to ellipsoidal accessory conidia, covering the entire surface of the biseriate species. Further subcultures in potato flake agar (PFA) were prepared in-house and incubated at 35°C, and identified the presence of Aspergillus flavus. The isolate grew rapidly, producing olive-green colonies. When examined by tape mounts, a slide culture prepared on PFA cultured isolate revealed globose vesicles up to 20 μm in diameter, a biseriate arrangement with metulae and phialides, and globose conidia (3.0 to 6.0 μm in diameter); all features similar to those produced in Sabouraud dextrose agar and characteristic for A. flavus. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his thorax revealed no specific signs of mediastinitis. Serum and bronchoalveolar-lavage galactomannan tests were not performed, as they were not available at the time. No specific signs of mediastinitis were seen either.
A combination of liposomal amphotericin B at a dose of 3 mg/kg daily and voriconazole (6 mg/kg twice a day for the first day followed by 4 mg/kg twice a day thereafter) were added because of the severity of the infection, and surgical debridement of the wound was performed. Despite all the therapeutic measures, the results of culture tests remained positive for A. flavus (surgical wound necrotic tissue test results were positive for hyphae on direct microscopy after the addition of KOH) and our patient died on the 26th post-operative day because of severe septic shock. Our patient underwent a whole body autopsy. Samples from the sternum, lungs and myocardial tissue fixed in a 10% buffered formol solution were embedded in paraffin; sections 4 μm thick stained with hematoxylin and eosin, PAS and Grocott's silver impregnation stains confirmed the presence of hyphae with morphologic characters pertaining to the genus Aspergillus .
A detailed investigation of all patients undergoing surgical operation during the same period was performed. A total of 50 environmental samples were collected from various sites in the operating room. Four plates were left open for one hour, one of them on the surgical table and the other at various sites on the floor, focusing on the air conditioning system vents. Various surfaces were also sampled with cotton-tip swabs. The filters of the air conditioning system in the surgical room were replaced and samples culture tested. The central supply rooms that housed equipment used in cardiac surgery operations were all inspected for visible signs of mold contamination or damage that might lead to mold growth. Routine scheduled maintenance and replacement protocols for equipment and air filters were reviewed.
None of the patients undergoing surgical operation during the same period developed infection of the surgical site due to Aspergillus spp. and the results of environmental samples tested 17 days later were negative. In two of the tested samples hyphomycetes classified as Cladodosporium spp. grew on the 17th day, however these were considered as laboratory contamination. These positive samples derived from a storage area in the surgical room. No further isolation of fungi was noted from the plates, which were kept for one month after the environmental sampling inoculation. Additionally, a subsequent investigation was performed on the ICU staff using nasal cultures for possible nasal colonization with Aspergillus spp., also giving negative culture test results.