A 48-year-old Caucasian woman, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status 1, was diagnosed with locally advanced rectal carcinoma infiltrating the dental line with lymph node metastases. She was diagnosed by computed tomography (CT) and proctoscopy (no image available) after presenting with problems with defecation, constipation, and tumor-related anemia (see Table for treatment timeline). In fact, painful stenosis prevented endoscopic ultrasound. Significant preexisting diseases were not known, except hypothyroidism or any history of cancer in close family members. She had no occupational noxae. She did not smoke or drink substantial quantities of alcohol. Histological examination of a biopsy specimen of the tumor, which occupied the entire circumference of the rectum, revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with a large cell NEC component confirmed by strong diffuse staining for synaptophysin and CD56 and comprising > 30% of the tumor in the biopsy material. The result of chromogranin A testing was negative. The patient’s Ki67 index was > 80%. Histology of the NEC component was consistent with grade 3 (G3) NEC of large cell type . More than ten metastases were also detected in both lobes of the liver by CT scan , so the patient’s TNM stage was cT3cN1cM1.
The patient received a regimen of cisplatin (CDDP; 20 mg/m2 on days 1–5, every 4 weeks) in combination with irinotecan (IRI; 50 mg/m2/day on days 1/8/15, every 4 weeks), an agent known for its efficacy in both colorectal cancer and NEC [, ]. In parallel, conventionally fractionated pelvic radiotherapy up to 50.4 Gy (reference point dose, intensity-modulated radiation therapy) was performed with the primary goal of alleviating pain and preventing obstruction by achieving maximum response. Initially, the patient received a red blood cell transfusion and sodium picosulfate against constipation. For antiemetic prophylaxis during all chemotherapy cycles, she received aprepitant (125 mg/day, d1; 80 mg/day, d2–5), ondansetron (16 mg/day), dexamethasone (12 mg/day, d1; 8 mg/day, d2–5), and pantoprazole 40/mg/day and enoxaparin sodium 40 mg/day.
At the end of chemoradiation, the patient experienced rectal pain, which was treated with tramadol (3 × 100 mg/day), and fatigue. Parenteral nutrition was required because of diarrhea (Common toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0 [CTC] grade III) and dehydration (CTC grade III). The patient had port-related sepsis (Staphylococcus epidermidis in blood culture), which was successfully treated with vancomycin (2 × 1 g/day, intravenous), and a urinary tract infection (Escherichia coli), which was treated with ciprofloxacin (2 × 400 mg/day, intravenous). She needed red cell blood transfusions for anemia during the first cycle (CTC grade III) (see Table ) and filgrastim 480μg/0.5 ml for 6 days for the treatment of leukopenia (CTC grade IV) at the end of the second cycle of chemotherapy. There were no unexpected events or clinical examination results. A summary of relevant laboratory parameters at baseline and during treatment is provided in Table .
As the CT examination performed immediately after the end of radiotherapy showed only partial remission of the liver metastases , four additional cycles of modified CDDP/IRI (CDDP 20 mg/m2 on days 1–4, every 4 weeks; IRI 50 mg/m2/day on days 1/8/15, every 4 weeks) with prophylactic treatment mentioned above were administered after the end of chemoradiotherapy. No toxicity CTC grade III or IV was observed, but the patient had temporary need of a fentanyl patch for rectal pain treatment. Ultimately, she had ECOG I with no pathologic findings in the physical and neurological examinations.
In light of clinical complete remission of the deep rectal cancer and improvement of rectal stenosis, confirmed by simple proctoscopy with direct visualization, surgical resection was not performed, owing to uncertainty regarding the chances of preserving fecal continence. Complete remission of the liver metastases seen in the CT scan was also achieved after a total of six cycles of CDDP/IRI .
Recurrence of an initial metastasis in segment I was detected after a treatment-free interval of 3 months . Examination of a liver biopsy specimen revealed poorly differentiated NEC . The patient underwent eight new cycles of CDDP/IRI (CDDP 20 mg/m2 d1–3; IRI 60 mg/m2 d1, d8, d15; cycles IV to VIII with 60% of the dose) with the same prophylactic treatment and stereotactic body radiotherapy of the liver metastasis within the first cycle of chemotherapy. The fractionation scheme was 15 × 3 Gy (reference point dose), 60 Gy (equivalent dose in 2-Gy fractions with α/β = 10). During this treatment, there was a port infection (CTC grade III, S. epidermidis) treated with vancomycin (2 × 1 g/day, intravenous), but no other higher-grade toxicity or relevant neurologic or physical findings during hospital stay or outpatient visits, which took place at least once per week.
Treatment resulted in complete remission of the metastasis . Serum neuron-specific enolase, an independent marker of overall survival of NETs (upper limit of normal, 17.49 ng/ml), also decreased in parallel with the treatment cycles .
The patient was followed up by CT scan of the chest and abdomen, as well as MRI of the liver every 6 months, and was tumor-free and symptom-free for 5 years and had no signs of impaired liver function or late toxicity after rectal radiotherapy. Results of all clinical and laboratory investigations remained unremarkable . The patient’s last follow-up examination was in the autumn of 2018.