A 78-year-old male patient who complained of low back pain was diagnosed with spinal stenosis.
He was admitted to receive a unilateral laminectomy with bilateral decompression.
No other past history was reported.
The patient had been diagnosed with hypertension four years earlier and asthma more than 70 years earlier and was prescribed fluticasone furoate and vilanterol inhalers for the treatment of asthma; However, these medications were not used consistently.
Physical examination of the patient was not significant.
The results of pulmonary function tests were forced vital capacity 2.53 L (61%), forced expiratory volume at 1 s 1.37 L (52%), and forced expiratory volume at 1 s/forced vital capacity 54.
Chest radiographs showed subsegmental atelectasis in the left lower lobe and mild cardiomegaly . Transthoracic echocardiography performed prior to surgery showed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, trivial mitral regurgitation, and a mild relaxation abnormality with other findings within normal limits. As premedication, hydrocortisone 100 mg was administered on the morning of surgery. Lung sounds confirmed after the patient entered the operating room were normal, and anesthesia was initiated after prophylactic administration of salbutamol inhalants.
General anesthesia was induced with thiopental 250 mg and fentanyl 100 mcg, and the patient was intubated without special difficulty after administration of rocuronium 50 mg. Anesthesia was maintained at 50% N2O and 5%-7% desflurane. The operation was performed with the patient in the prone position, and there were no special events during the operation. The arterial blood gas analysis performed during the operation showed FiO2 0.5 to pH 7.420, pO2 242.5, pCO2 36.7, and base excess-0.6, and hemoglobin level was 12.2 g/dL. At the end of the operation, sugammadex 200 mg was administered for reversal of muscle relaxation, the patient’s position was changed from prone to supine under deep anesthesia, and the bispectral index score at that time was in the 40s. Subsequently, several aspiration attempts were made to remove the secretions from the trachea and oral cavity in order to manage the tracheal tube, but the patient was clenching his teeth and did not open his mouth. At this time, airway obstruction occurred for several minutes, making ventilation difficult. Oxygen saturation decreased by 40% on pulse oximetry, even though 50% of oxygen was provided and the concentration of inhalation anesthetics were not reduced. An additional 200 mg sugammadex was administered owing to severe airway obstruction caused by the patient clenching his teeth. After a few minutes, the patient stopped clenching his teeth, but a large amount of bloody discharge from the endotracheal tube was observed.