We present the case of a 68-year-old male with a background of psoriatic arthritis for which he was medicated with regular leflunomide and intermittent courses of steroids for symptomatic flares. He had also taken alendronic acid for 10 years before it being discontinued 6 months before his fracture, as his dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan confirmed normal bone density.
Following a fall from standing height, the patient had initially been asymptomatic but gradually developed pain in the right hip on weight-bearing over the subsequent 2 weeks, leading to his delayed presentation. On assessment, he had pain over the lateral aspect of his right hip in the subtrochanteric region, with radiographs demonstrating an impending fracture . At this stage, the patient was advised that a prophylactic nail was indicated but declined surgical intervention at that stage to travel abroad on business matters.
While abroad, the patient suffered another fall which completed the subtrochanteric fracture and was treated locally with a dynamic condylar screw (DCS) . On his return to the UK at 2 weeks from the index procedure, it was apparent that the metalwork had failed, albeit with no clinical sign of infection. Revision fixation was undertaken 2 weeks later with the DCS being exchanged for a 95° blade plate . All microbiology cultures sent at the first revision surgery were negative, including for tuberculosis and fungi.
One month following revision, the patient presented with wound erythema and discharge. Radiographs were unremarkable but an ultrasound scan demonstrated a large collection along the length of the plate . This was washed out and antibiotics were commenced, however, samples from this surgery grew no organisms. A second washout a month later for a similar presentation grew Staphylococcus epidermidis on enrichment culture only. Despite 3 months of antibiotics, the patient suffered ongoing issues with his wound and a third washout was performed which grew Staphylococcus haemolyticus. These samples were described as having an “unfavorable antibiogram” by microbiology colleagues. Of note, the radiographs now demonstrated failure of at least two of the diaphyseal screws of the blade plate.
A computed tomography scan performed 1 week later showed no evidence of bony union and gas within the soft tissues . Revision was performed with resection of devitalized bone margins, compression, and stabilization with a full-length blade plate . Unfortunately, 6 weeks after this second revision fixation, he developed tenderness and fullness again in his wound, and at this point, a wound swab grew Proteus mirabilis and Klebsiella pneumoniae. The patient was treated with IV piperacillin-tazobactam, vancomycin, and oral ciprofloxacin. He made steady progress, and in line with the patients’ wishes, it was decided to attempt suppression until union.
Five months into antibiotic suppression, the patient suffered ongoing pain, wound erythema, and pyrexia. Plain radiography and cross-sectional imaging showed further gas within the soft tissues and non-union. Revision fixation was felt to be inappropriate due to resistant infection and the lack of union despite stable fixation. Taking into account, the patients’ wishes to be pain free and to regain mobility, the decision was made to proceed with a two-stage proximal femoral replacement. All metalworks were removed, followed by proximal femurectomy and radical debridement with RIA treatment to the femoral intramedullary canal. The”‘Cement-a-TAN” custom proximal femoral spacer was then made as described below and implanted . All samples obtained at this time grew Proteus mirabilis, and the patient was commenced on a prolonged course of oral ciprofloxacin. Following discharge from hospital, the patient able to mobilize fully weight-bearing reported minimal pain and was able to return to driving. The surgical incision healed uneventfully.
The Cement-a-TAN remained in situ until the infection was felt to be controlled, with C-reactive protein persistently below 10 mg/L. After 4 months, the Cement-a-TAN was explanted and converted to a proximal femoral replacement (Stanmore METS, Stanmore, UK) . At 20 months follow-up, the patient was pain free and mobile, with a stable range of hip movement and a fully healed wound .