A 21-year-old woman presented with a sudden headache. Brain computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a thrombosed aneurysm on the quadrigeminal cistern [ and b]. A cerebral angiogram revealed a partially thrombosed aneurysm in the left PCA P3 segment . We performed a balloon test occlusion (BTO) to evaluate whether bypass was required when the parent artery was occluded. A dual-lumen balloon catheter (Scepter C; MicroVention Terumo, Tustin, CA, USA) was placed in the PCA P2 segment just proximal to the aneurysm. The patient presented no changes in neurological status during the 20-min vessel occlusion, and rich collateral blood flow through the anterior circulation was observed. Based on the results of the BTO, we planned trapping without bypass through the OTA. Her headaches improved within several days, and we decided to proceed with elective surgery 3 months later. However, she was admitted to the hospital unscheduled because of recurrence of a severe headache 1 month after the initial attack. Except for the headache, no abnormal neurological findings were observed. CT scans demonstrated an enlarged thrombosed aneurysm without subarachnoid hemorrhage , while MRI and cerebral angiography revealed that the blood flow into the aneurysm had changed [, , and ], indicating the progression of thrombosis in the aneurysm. We considered that thrombectomy of the aneurysm might be necessary when it would be difficult to secure the proximal artery of the aneurysm, which is thought to be behind the aneurysm through OTA approach, due to the narrow surgical corridor and large aneurysm size. Therefore, endovascular coil embolization is performed in cases of partial thrombectomy to obtain a wider space. In addition, the distal artery of the aneurysm was embolized to make it a landmark during surgery. The aneurysm was roughly packed only near the proximal neck so that the coil would not interfere with the thrombectomy . Cerebral angiography after embolization showed the disappearance of blood flow into the aneurysm . The following day, trapping of the aneurysm was performed through the OTA. Intraoperative findings exhibited that the coils of the distal vessel embolized the previous day were visible during the approach to the aneurysm, which were good landmarks . Due to the disappearance of the blood flow into the aneurysm, we could retract the aneurysm effectively to confirm the proximal vessel and trapping of the aneurysm . However, some blood vessels feeding the wall of the aneurysm were observed. We decided to perform a partial thrombectomy to obtain a wider view of the abnormal vessels. The coils in the aneurysm were observed; however, were not disturbed during partial thrombectomy . Endodecompression and detachment from the surrounding tissue revealed some blood vessels through nearby arteries feeding the wall of the aneurysm . All arteries coagulated and the aneurysm was completely removed . Indocyanine green video angiography showed no avascular area in the operative field after the aneurysm resection. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative MRI showed no residual lesions or ischemic changes . At the 2-year follow-up, no recurrence of the aneurysm was observed.