A 16-year-old Chinese female with no significant past medical history presented with one-day history of low-grade fever and cough. She also complained of painful swelling of fingers for 3 weeks. Physical examination revealed dactylitis of all fingers, arthritis of both wrists, papules over palmar surface of fingers and small ulcers over interphalangeal joints, periungual regions and finger pulps . There was hyperpigmentation over the dorsal surface of interphalangeal joints, but no definite Gottron’s papules. Nailfold microhemorrhage was seen using a handheld dermatoscope. She also had erythematous plaques over the neck. She had no muscle weakness. The laboratory tests revealed mildly elevated alanine transaminase (ALT) at 64 U/L (normal range 8–24 U/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) at 360 U/L (normal range 130–250 U/L). Creatine kinase (CK) level was normal at 129 U/L (normal range 37–173 U/L). C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal. Anti-nuclear antibody was positive with a titer of 1:160 with speckled pattern. Rheumatoid factor was positive at 37 units (positive: > 9 units). Anti-extractable nuclear antibody (anti-ENA) panel revealed positive anti-Ro52 antibody. Other autoantibodies studied including anti-Scl-70, anti-Jo-1, anti-double stranded DNA and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide were negative. Her chest radiograph showed left perihilar opacity. Although her younger brother was admitted on the same day with mycoplasma pneumonia, her sputum was negative for bacteria including mycoplasma. She was treated for pneumonia and arthritis before being discharged with a course of amoxicillin/clavulanate and naproxen.
Upon follow-up examination 1 month later, she complained of persistent cough and presented new symptoms including muscle pain over proximal limbs and oral ulcers. Examination showed new findings of malar rash, Gottron’s papules , calcinosis over external ears and bilateral crepitation at lung bases. She had mild proximal weakness over lower limbs with muscle power of Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 4. The Childhood Myositis Assessment Scale (CMAS) score was 42/52 and the Manual Muscle Testing-8 (MMT8) score was 148/150. Blood test showed elevated CK at 858 U/L, LDH at 407 U/L and ferritin at 2006 pmol/L . Anti-MDA5 antibody was detected in the myositis-specific antibody (MSA) panel, but quantitative test for the antibody was not available. The left perihilar opacity on chest radiograph persisted. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple subpleural and peripherally located consolidations in both lungs . No infective organism was isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage. Echocardiogram was normal with no features of pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary function test showed reduced diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) to 59% of the predicted value. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of pelvis and thighs showed T2-weighted hyperintensity over bilateral pelvic and thigh muscles, consistent with systemic inflammatory myopathy. A diagnosis of JDM with ILD was made without muscle biopsy.
She received a 3-day course of pulse methylprednisolone at 1 g/day, followed by a combination of prednisolone of 1 mg/kg/day and tacrolimus. There was an initial improvement with resolved arthritis and muscle weakness, and decreasing blood CK level . Two weeks later, the patient developed hoarseness of voice, shortness of breath on exertion, and new vasculitic ulcers over her fingers. Her muscle power deteriorated to MRC grade 3 to 4 over proximal limbs with rebound of blood CK level. Videofluoroscopic swallowing study showed mild pharyngeal dysphagia. A 3-day course of pulse methylprednisolone at 500 mg/day and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) were added in view of the deterioration.
At week three of treatment, she complained of neck and chest pain. Diffuse neck swelling was noted with crepitus at the anterior neck. She was not in respiratory distress and her oxygen saturation was normal. She was given empirical low flow oxygen supplement. Chest radiograph showed subcutaneous emphysema over the cervical region and PNM. Chest CT showed an increase in consolidative changes in addition to PNM . The treatment was intensified with addition of rituximab (1 g each on day 1 and day 15), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (2 g/kg every 2 weeks for 4 doses, then every 4 weeks for 1 year) and intravenous cyclophosphamide (every 4 weeks for 6 months, cumulative dose 5.75 g/m2). Two doses of oral methotrexate (MTX) were given but discontinued due to new elevation of ALT up to 400 U/L. Prescription of tacrolimus was stopped to avoid over-immunosuppression.
With aggressive treatment, PNM subsided 1 month later and digital ulcers, cough, hoarseness and muscle weakness were completely resolved after 2 months . Follow up chest CT after 2 months showed interval resolution of consolidative changes with replacement by fibrosis . MTX was reintroduced after ALT normalized, and the dose of prednisolone was tapered. Follow-up pulmonary function test 8 months from diagnosis showed improved DLCO to 80% of the predicted value. At her follow-up 1 year from diagnosis, she had no recurrence while on prednisolone 5 mg daily, maintenance MMF, MTX and monthly IVIG. Her CMAS and MMT8 score were normalized. She did not experience severe side effects such as marrow suppression or severe infection other than elevated intraocular pressure, which was controlled by timolol eye drops.