A 19 years old healthy boy was bitten by a snake in his left foot while he was walking in his garden. The killed snake was brought to the hospital and identified as Echis carinatus by the attending medical officer and one of the authors (CAG). On admission to the local hospital, there was mild local bleeding at the bite site, but there was no clinical evidence of systemic envenoming. Three hours after the bite he had developed progressive headache and his blood was found to be incoagulable by the 20 minutes Whole blood clotting test (20WBCT). He was treated immediately with 10 vials of polyvalent antivenom serum (AVS) {Vins Bioproduct}, raised against Indian Daboia russelii, Echis carinatus, Naja naja and Bungarus caeruleus venoms, each vial was dissolved in 10 ml of sterile water and diluted with 200 ml of normal saline to a total volume of 300 ml and was infused intravenously over an hour to restore the coagulability. Despite of restoration of coagulability, the headache persisted throughout without any demonstrable neurological deficit.
Following day, he had developed right sided complete ptosis with fixed dilated pupil. On detection of these neurological features the boy was immediately transferred to the University Medical unit, National Hospital of Sri Lanka.
On admission to our unit, his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 13/15. Cranial nerve examination confirmed right sided complete ptosis with fixed dilated pupil. Fundoscopic examination failed to revealed papilloedema. Upper and lower limbs were neurologically normal. His blood pressure was 130/80 mm Hg with pulse rate of 66 beats/min and respiratory rate was 14/min. There was no evidence of external bleeding. The blood was coagulable by 20WBCT. The urgent non-contrast CT brain showed a massive left temporo-parietal region intra-cerebral haemorrhage with intra-ventricular extension . His vital parameters and GCS were monitored regularly.
Laboratory investigations revealed a haemoglobin of 13.2 g/dl, total leukocyte count of 13,500, with 80% neutrophils, platelet count of 178,000/mm3. Coagulation profile showed prothrombin time (PT) 18 seconds (control 12 s) with INR of 1.44 thromboplastin time with kaolin (PTTK) was 38 seconds (control-35 s) and fibrinogen degradation products was 2.72 mg/l (Normal-<0.20 mg/l). The biochemical investigations including blood urea, serum creatinine, plasma glucose, serum bilirubin and transaminases were with in normal limit.
An urgent Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) of the intracranial vessel was performed and which was normal excluding the possibility of ruptured aneurysm or an arterio-venous malformation. Since his clinical parameters were improving, he was managed conservatively without any neurosurgical intervention. He was discharged home a week later in good health without any neurological deficit.