A 66-year-old man presented to the gastroenterology department of our hospital to address a 3-d history of vomiting and acid reflux.
The patient began experiencing dark vomit 3 d prior after eating soup, with acid reflux and belching. He did not have obvious abdominal pain or diarrhea.
The patient had a history of coronary heart disease for 8 years that was treated with oral clopidogrel bisulfate, rosuvastatin calcium, and bisoprolol fumarate. Three months ago, he was diagnosed with renal insufficiency and took calcium dobesilate. He also previously had surgery for varicosis of the great saphenous vein.
The patient had a 40-year history of drinking and smoking. He denied any allergy history and had an unremarkable family history.
The patient’s temperature was 36.2°C, heart rate was 136 beats per min, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per min, and blood pressure was 119/58 mmHg. Abdominal examination showed slight abdominal tenderness in the epigastric abdomen without rebound tenderness. Abdominal auscultation showed slightly hyperactive bowel sounds. Lung examination was normal.
Routine blood tests revealed an elevated white blood cell count (10.79 × 109 cells/L; normal range: 3.5-9.5 × 109 cells/L) and predominance of neutrophils (80.7%) as well as elevated levels of amylase (85 U/L; normal range: 13-53 U/L), serum urea (16.1 mmol/L; normal range: 3.6-9.5 mmol/L), creatinine (199 µmol/L; normal range: 59-104 µmol/L), and uric acid (771 µmol/L; normal range: 202.3-416.5 µmol/L). Fecal occult blood test was negative. Transaminase and lipase levels and coagulation function were normal. Tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigens 19-9 and 72-4 were normal. Serum gastrin levels and heavy metal blood test were normal.
Abdominal plain computed tomography (CT) showed gastric retention and a nodule (35 mm × 23 mm) in the anterior wall of the pylorus , abdominal aortic wall calcification, and partial calcified endometrium inward migration . The CT scan showed gastric retention, an antral nodule, and possible intramural hematoma of the abdominal aorta. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a normal bile duct and pancreatic duct, and gastric retention . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed multiple erosions in the distal esophagus 30 cm from the incisors, gastric retention, an antral ulcer (6 mm), and a duodenal bulbar ulcer (8 mm). The descending part of the duodenum showed slight edema and obvious luminal stenosis .