A 62 year old male patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease GOLD grade 4, centrilobular lung emphysema, normal alpha-1 antitrypsin levels and oxygen therapy during exertion was listed for bilateral lung transplantation. He had a smoking history of 80 pack years, but had stopped smoking 6 years before listing. A video-assisted lung volume reduction surgery 4 years prior to listing had resulted in a significant improvement in the patient’s exercise capacity and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). The beneficial effect lasted for 2 years, until a further decrease in his pulmonary function occurred. Before listing, forced vital capacity (FVC) was 1.45L (38% predicted), FEV1 was 0.47L (16% predicted) and FEV1/FVC was 32%. An examination by right heart catheter revealed a mild precapillary pulmonary hypertension with a mean pulmonary artery pressure of 34 mmHg. One month after listing, a suitable donor organ from a 75-year old non-smoker was allocated. A chest computed tomography (CT) of the donor showed normal parenchymal structure and bronchoscopy revealed a clear bronchial tree. The graft procurement was performed according to a standard procedure . No heart procurement was performed. During lung procurement, the atrial cuff around the orifice of the right inferior pulmonary vein was inadvertently cut too short leading to a retraction of the remaining vein into the pulmonary hilum .
Upon arrival at the implant site, the lung block was carefully inspected on the back table and the pulmonary veins were flushed with preservation fluid in a retrograde fashion. The right inferior pulmonary vein was circumferentially amputated, separated from the right superior pulmonary vein and retracted into the hilum. Since the inadequate size of the donor left atrial cuff was not noticed during procurement, no additional pericardial or atrial donor tissue was brought along for the reconstruction of the atrial cuff. While a reconstruction with allogeneic pericardial tissue would have been preferred, our reconstruction was therefore performed using an acellular, biological patch (Supple Peri-Guard®, Lamed, Germany). The patch was cut out centrally to match the pulmonary vein’s orifice and sutured to the remaining cuff using a 4–0 polypropylene running suture. The biological patch was then folded into a cone-shaped form to match the wider diameter of the recipient left atrium. In a second step, cone’s superior margin was sutured to the superior vein’s atrial cuff, thereby creating a neoatrial cuff . The bilateral lung transplantation was then completed in a usual fashion and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, where he was extubated on the 1st postoperative day. Following reconstruction, a high-dose prophylactic anticoagulation (anti-Factor Xa between 0.2 and 0.3 IU/ml) with unfractioned heparin was continued for 6 weeks. A ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan performed before discharge (day 29) showed a symmetrical perfusion of the donor lung . Apart from an acute-on-chronic renal failure that improved upon conservative measurements and did not require renal replacement therapy, the patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on the 30th postoperative day.