A 42-year-old woman, married and with two children, was referred to our hospital outpatient gastrointestinal clinic for a 4 months’ history of post-prandial heartburn with frequent regurgitations, fatigue and change in bowel movements (4–5 soft stools). At the moment of the first consult, a written informed consent on the publication of personal information was obtained from the patient. She had experienced unintentional weight loss of 3 kg in about one month despite normal or even increased food intake. In her clinical history no previous significant gastrointestinal symptoms were present. The patient’s older sister had been diagnosed of coeliac disease at age 20. Her personal and family history was otherwise unremarkable. She first underwent biochemical investigations including immunoglobulin A (IgA) anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies (anti-tTG) and stool parasitological and cultural analysis. Serological testing showed normal IgA levels and negativity for anti-tTG levels and antiendomysial antibodies (Ema). The patient’s ferritin was 33 mg/l (n.v. 30–400 mg/l), serum folate was lower than 5 nmol/l (n.v. > 7 nmol/l), haemoglobin level was normal as well as white blood cells and platelet count. The result of stool analysis was negative for parasites and ova. Since symptoms persisted, she was then referred for an upper GI endoscopy. Esophageal and gastric mucosa did not show any macroscopic alterations. Duodenal folds were normally represented as well as mucosa. Multiple gastric antrum and corpus-fundus mucosa biopsies were taken along with biopsies from the bulb and second part of duodenum (at least four).
Gastric biopsies showed a Helicobacter Pylori (HP) pan-gastritis while duodenal mucosa showed villous atrophy associated with an increase in intraepithelial T lymphocyte (IEL) numbers up to more than 40 IEL/100 epithelial cells (EC), recognized by CD3 immunostaining . The histologic features were consistent with a diagnosis of coeliac disease Marsh type 3b [, ]. She was informed of the result and advised to begin gluten-free diet (GFD). After 4 weeks of GFD the patient didn’t experience any improvement of symptoms, and bowel movements with abdominal pain increased to around 6–7 daily; she was advised to prompting repeat further stool examinations. Genetic evaluation for alleles HLA specific for coeliac disease was also requested. At the same time, in order to re-evaluate initial diagnosis, duodenal biopsies were reviewed and a careful study of the duodenal mucosa showed the presence of scattered crescent-shaped randomly oriented trophozoites of Giardia on the luminal surface of the duodenal wall . The organisms were minute, easily overlooked or mistaken for detached intestinal epithelial cells or erythrocytes. Subsequently, results of the second stool examinations revealed the presence of G. lamblia with findings of trophozoites and cysts. The patient was consequently treated with metronidazole, 500 mg twice daily for 6 days, showing a prompt response with a reduced frequency of diarrhea in the following days. The genetic results showed DQA1*03 and DQB1*03:02 alleles codifying for HLA-DQ8, otherwise compatible with CD diagnosis. In the following weeks, the patient intermittently maintained a GFD, but observed no difference in her well-being. Stool examination was repeated 2 months after the end of antibiotic therapy with negative results. After about 2 months of GFD she was invited to discontinue it. She subsequently performed eradication therapy for HP with triple therapy of metronidazole, tetracycline and bismuth (Pylera®).
Around 6 months later, the patient did not complain gastrointestinal symptoms. In January 2017 she repeated serological tests and a follow-up esophagogastroduodenoscopy. No alterations were found in haemoglobin, folic acid, cholesterol, triglycerides and antibodies (anti-tTG and Ema) levels. Multiple duodenal biopsies were performed, showing normal histologic appearance of the mucosa with normal finger-like villi, no evidence of increased IEL numbers and complete absence of crescent-shaped Giardia trophozoites . The gastric biopsies showed resolution of active HP gastritis. The patient showed no clinical signs of CD and the conclusion was that the clinical scenario could be fully explained by giardiasis.