A 61-year-old female was prescribed iron supplements for iron-deficiency anemia by her family doctor, as progression of anemia had been noted. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a neoplastic lesion in the duodenum, and she was referred to our hospital. Her previous upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed 2 years earlier had shown no abnormalities. Her height was 158.0 cm, and body weight was 51.4 kg. Laboratory findings included a hemoglobin level of 11.7 g/dL, indicating mild anemia, with no significant abnormalities in liver and biliary enzymes, pancreatic enzymes, and tumor markers. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a 10-mm tumor protruding into the lumen of the duodenum . The contrast effect was weaker than the pancreatic parenchyma, and the tumor had a distinct boundary with the pancreas. There was no dilatation of the main pancreatic duct and common bile duct. The accessory pancreatic duct could be recognized. There were no findings of lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy performed in our hospital revealed a submucosal tumor-like lesion with a central concavity in the descending part of the duodenum on the slightly oral side of Vater’s (major) papilla . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed a well-defined hypoechoic tumor measuring 10 mm. The tumor was in proximity to the pancreatic parenchyma, but we could not confirm the boundary with the pancreatic parenchyma on EUS. Histopathological examination of biopsies obtained by endoscopy and EUS-guided method revealed a solid tumor consisting of neoplastic cells with round nuclei and granular cytoplasm, with focal small gland-like structures . Immunohistochemical findings included negative Synaptophysin and Chromogranin A staining and positive Trypsin and BCL10 staining. The Ki-67 index was 80%. A diagnosis of carcinoma with acinar cell differentiation was made.
We diagnosed the tumor as duodenal carcinoma cT1b/cN0/cM0 cStage I according to the 8th edition UICC-TNM classification. The tumor appeared to be localized in the accessory papilla region. However, the reason for the expression of specific markers of pancreatic acinar cells remained unclear because the CT scan suggested that the tumor was separated from the pancreatic parenchyma where ACC originally develops.
We performed pancreatoduodenectomy. Intraoperatively, a 10-mm mass without serosal invasion was palpated in the descending part of the duodenum. There were no liver or peritoneal metastases. Intraoperative ultrasound revealed an expanded pancreatic duct in the pancreatic head, which was suspected to be the accessory pancreatic duct. The bile duct was transected at the common bile duct, and the pancreas was divided on the ventral side of the superior mesenteric vein. The resection margins did not reveal tumor cells in rapid pathological examinations. The reconstruction was performed by Child’s procedure. The operative time was 7 h and 1 min, with a blood loss of 190 mL.
The resected specimen had a 15-mm nodule on the oral side of Vater’s papilla. The dilated accessory pancreatic duct was connected to the tumor, as revealed by the pancreatogram of the resected specimen, leading to a diagnosis of a tumor located in the accessory papilla region . In histopathological examination, we observed the tumor cells growing monotonously in a solid fashion, focally showing gland-like structures . Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for pancreatic acinar markers of Trypsin and BCL10. The tumor was limited to the submucosa of the duodenum, with no continuity with the pancreatic tissue. Beneath the lesion was the accessory pancreatic duct; no tumor cells were identified within the pancreatic ducts around the tumor. We also observed normal pancreatic tissue in the accessory papilla region . Notably, the normal pancreatic tissue was located next to the tumor , which allowed us to consider the origin of ACC occurring in this rare location. Based on these findings, we diagnosed this tumor as ACC in the accessory papilla region (tumor size 15 × 10 mm, pT1b/pN0/cM0 pStage I). The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on day 15 after surgery. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered. The patient has undergone 6 months of postoperative follow-up without any recurrence.