An 81-year-old male presented to our hospital with complaints of dry cough and progressive shortness of breath for the last 3 months. He also had low grade fever for the last 15 days. There was no history of orthopnea, weight loss, pain abdomen or pedal edema. Significant past history included hypertension for the last 10 years and coronary artery disease and percutaneous angioplasty performed 5 years back. He was on aspirin, beta blockers and ramipril. On examination, there were stony dullness with decreased breath sounds in left infra scapular and axillary region. Chest roentgenogram suggestive of left side pleural effusion and aspiration showed pus in pleural cavity. Laboratory evaluation of collection was exudative in nature and was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis on ZN staining (20% H2SO4) and gene-Xpert. BacT/Alert liquid culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis was also negative. Patient was treated with empirical antibiotics (amoxicillin-clavulanate 1.2 g intravenous 3 times a day) with mild symptomatic improvement and was discharged subsequently. However, he was re-admitted after 20 days with complaints of swelling on back (left posterior chest wall). The development of swelling was within the last 20 days and it did not bother the patient until recently when it became painful.
At presentation, his vitals were stable except tachypnea (respiratory rate of 24/min). He was afebrile and maintaining oxygen saturation of 93% on ambient air. Physical examination revealed pallor and a soft, fluctuant, non-tender swelling of size 12 cm X 8 cm on the left lower posterior chest wall. On auscultation, air entry was reduced on the left infra scapular and infra-axillary region with decreased vocal fremitus. Rest systemic examination was unremarkable. Blood investigations showed anemia (hemoglobin 8.9 g/dl), raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (58 mm), elevated highly sensitive C-reactive protein (91.5 mg/dl, normal < 1 mg/dl), and mildly raised procalcitonin (0.80 ng/ml, normal < .02 ng/ml). Chest roentgenogram again suggestive of left-sided pleural effusion. His aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures were sterile. On further investigation, Computed tomography of the chest revealed left-sided moderate pleural effusion with a posterior chest wall collection of size 12.8 × 8.2 × 3.2 cm below the latissimus dorsi with the evidence of fifth rib osteomyelitis. Since the disease was progressive despite taking antibiotics, we kept the differentials of tuberculosis and malignancy however we did not have any evidence of malignancy on radioimaging. In addition, gene Xpert was also negative which ruled out tuberculosis.
Ultrasound guided aspiration of the posterior chest wall collection was performed. Gram staining and modified Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) staining (1% H2SO4, Modified Kinyoun method) of the aspirated pus revealed plenty of pus cells and numerous gram positive, acid fast thin slender, beaded, branching bacilli, suggestive of Nocardia Spp . Routine aerobic culture on 5% sheep blood agar and Mac Conkey’s agar showed the growth of small whitish to brown, dry, stony hard colonies after 5–6 days of incubation at 37 °C. The isolate was identified as Nocardia Spp based on colony morphology and characteristic staining .
The patient was managed with therapeutic aspiration of chest wall collection and chest tube was inserted for empyema. Three-drug regimen consisting of oral trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole (600 + 3000 mg/day in two divided doses), intravenous amikacin (900 mg once daily) and intravenous ceftriaxone (1 g twice a day) was started. MALDI-TOF confirmed the species as Nocardia farcinica. The isolate was susceptible to most antibiotics (ceftriaxone, imipenem, amikacin, cotrimoxazole, minocycline and linezolid) except ampicillin. On day 14 of hospitalization, patient showed significant improvement and shifted to oral trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole which was scheduled to continue for the next 6 months.