A 52-year-old woman was presented to the emergency room with acute epigastric pain and cold sweating. Admission electrocardiography (ECG) indicated ST-segment raising in the inferior leads ; and the patient was managed with trinitroglycerin (TNG) and fibrinolytic therapy.
Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed and showed severe stenosis in the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and right coronary artery (RCA) ( and . Biochemical tests showed troponin level of 7.1 ng/ml (normal < 0.01 ng/ml); and other important factors such as complete blood count (CBC), fasting blood sugar (FBS), blood sugar (BS), triglyceride (TG), total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), Na, K, Mg, Ca, Cr, prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and international normalized ratio (INR) were at normal levels. The patient did not any have risk factors such as diabetes, smoking, alcohol consumption, use of ergonovine or other drugs, family history of cardiovascular disease, hypercholesterolemia, or history of angina.
Since the patient showed stable vital signs and did not experience any chest pain, revascularization was planned for 48 hours later, based on the literature. Suddenly, after a day, the patient developed polymorphic ventricular fibrillation (VF) and was treated with successful defibrillation.
After defibrillation, ECG showed ST-segment elevation in anterior leads; thus, coronary stenting was urgently performed in the LAD. Surprisingly, there was no stenosis at the prior position when we proceeded with RCA revascularization; this indeed signified a spasm that had shifted to the proximal site. Furthermore, we understood that stenting of the LAD was mistakenly performed on a spasm because stenosis had shifted slightly in relation to the last performed angiography. Interestingly, in spite of spasm, the patient did not have ischemic symptoms during the intervention.
Finally, the patient was placed on oral diltiazem, isosorbide mononitrate, and nicorandil to suppress coronary artery spasm attacks. During a one-year follow-up, the patient was free of symptoms.