A 14-year-old boy twisted his left knee while at school and developed left knee pain. Two months of rest showed no improvement; therefore, the patient visited a local clinic. Examination and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at a local clinic revealed a lateral meniscus injury in his left knee. He was immediately referred to our hospital because of worsening pain in the left knee joint. At our hospital, a physical examination revealed pain at the lateral femorotibial joint of his left knee as well as a restriction in the range of motion (ROM), with an extension and flexion range of −10° and 150°, respectively. The McMurray test revealed left knee lateral discomfort and lateral clicking during flexion and extension of the knee joint. No signs of intra-articular effusion were observed. As for the right knee, there was no ROM limitation or pain, although clicking was observed on the lateral side of the femorotibial joint. The lateral femoral condyles in both knees were hypoplastic, but there were no additional indirect indications of a discoid lateral meniscus, such as an increased joint space, a high fibular head, or hypoplasia of the lateral tibial plateau, as seen on the X-ray . Both Mikulicz lines were slightly shifted medially on full-length frontal plain radiographs of the lower extremities. The % MA was 30.7% on the left side and 25.8% on the right side. Right and left femorotibial angles were 177° and 179°, respectively . MRI showed incomplete DMM in both knees, with horizontal hyperintense areas on proton density-weighted fat-saturated images. The lateral menisci of both knees had a complete DLM with a horizontal hyperintense area on proton density-weighted fat-saturated images in the left knee . The symptomatic left knee underwent arthroscopic surgery immediately. The lateral meniscus was a complete type discoid with extensive longitudinal tears centered on the popliteus hiatus and severe posterior instability. Saucerization was performed, leaving a 6 mm margin. The medial popliteus tendon was sutured using the inside-out method with a 2–0 thread, and the lateral popliteus tendon was sutured using the all-inside method. Because there was an anterior longitudinal tear, we sutured using the outside-in method with a 2–0 thread. Incomplete DMM was not treated because of the absence of symptoms, intraoperative instability, or damage . After surgery, the patient wore a knee brace for 1 week to maintain full extension of the knee. ROM training was started at postoperative week (POW) 1, limited to 90° until POW 3, and full flexion was allowed after POW 3. Partial weight bearing of 1/3 was started at POW 3, and full weight bearing gates were started at POW 5. The patient’s pain and ROM restrictions disappeared 2 months after surgery, and 6 months later, we permitted him to resume his sport activities. The right knee showed only slight clicking on the lateral femorotibial joint and no symptoms such as pain or locking were observed and it was still under observation without surgery.