This is a case of a 68-year-old male who presented to our institution for evaluation of the right TKA. He underwent his index TKA in December 2018 at an outside institution. He did not have any significant medical history. He had a good recovery after surgery, but 6 months postoperatively he developed discomfort in the right knee. He presented to our office approximately 2 years after his index procedure for evaluation of his right knee after failing conservative management . He subsequently underwent testing to rule out component loosening and infection. His clinical examination as well as a bone scan suggested loosening of the tibial component. His laboratory workup including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, white blood cell, and joint aspiration was negative for prosthetic joint infection. After a lengthy discussion regarding the risks and benefits of the procedure, he elected to proceed with right rTKA with Mako robotic assistance. A Stryker Triathlon revision knee system was planned to be used for this case.
In the operating room, the patient underwent spinal anesthesia. Physical examination confirmed a flexion stop at 105 degrees, a 15-degree extension lag, and stable varus/valgus balance. A tourniquet was used during the procedure and the limb was prepped with chlorhexidine prior to draping.
A midline incision was used over the previous surgical scar, and a medial arthrotomy was performed. On inspection of the joint, the femoral and tibial components appeared to be appropriately sized and in good rotation. The patellar button was also of appropriate size. The knee was found to be tight in flexion and somewhat loose in extension. The 9 mm polyethylene tray was first removed and then the femoral and tibial checkpoints along with the Mako array pins were secured into the distal femur and proximal tibia. Hip center of rotation was then obtained, followed by plotting the femoral and tibial reference points on the existing components . The 9 mm polyethylene insert was then placed back into the tibial tray in order to obtain our starting flexion and extension numbers. We used a tensioner with the implants in place to determine our flexion and extension gaps. This information was used for our operative plan to determine our resections and possible needs for augmentation . The press-fit femoral and tibial components were then carefully removed with an osteotome. This did not result in any significant bone loss to either the femur or tibia. The patellar button was thoroughly examined and found to be well-fixed and in good position and was left intact. Utilizing our operative plan, the Mako robotic arm with saw attachment was used to perform very minimal fresh cuts to the distal, anterior, and posterior femur, as well as the chamfer cuts. The posterior femur cuts did not resect any bone either medially or laterally. By using robotic technology, we were able to move the plan for the posterior femoral cut 5 mm anterior in order to resect to the level of posterior bone. With this adjustment, we were able to plan to use 5 mm posterior augments both medially and laterally . We then turned our attention to the tibia and again performed a robotically assisted minimal fresh cut according to our Mako plan.
An intramedullary tibial alignment rod was used for centering the conical reamer in the tibia, and this was reamed to a size A cone. The TS femoral box cuts were performed, and conical reaming was again performed over an intramedullary guide on the femur to a size 1-2 cone. Trial components were then inserted and the knee was found to balance very well with a 13 mm trial polyethylene insert. All remaining cement was then removed from the bone surfaces, and remaining osteophytes were removed from around the patella. The joint was copiously irrigated with Irrisept (Irrimax Corp, Gainseville, FL) and normal saline. The tibial and femoral components were then cemented into place. A 13 mm polyethylene insert was used and the knee balanced quite well in full extension, mid flexion, and flexion to 90 degrees. The knee ranged from 0 to 135 degrees and had smooth and centered patellar tracking. Post-operative AP and lateral radiographs can be seen in .
The patient was given a postoperative adductor canal block. His postoperative course was uneventful. He completed his hospital physical therapy regimen and was discharged home on postoperative day two in excellent condition. The patient followed up at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months postoperatively. He participated in 3 months of outpatient physical therapy to help with his range of motion and strength. The patient’s visual analogue scale (VAS) pain scores decreased at each clinic visit. By his 6-week appointment, his VAS pain score was 1/10 and he was not taking any narcotic pain medication. At most recent follow-up, the patient was able to ambulate without assistive devices and only took ibuprofen for occasional soreness after strenuous activity. His range of motion was 0-135 degrees, and his strength was equal to his other leg.