Ms. J, a 50-year-old female, started her first psychiatric outpatient clinic when she was 29. She showed restricted affect at the time and was experiencing delusion of being controlled with auditory hallucination of a commanding nature, and was diagnosed as having schizophrenia. Risperidone was prescribed within the range of 2 to 6 mg with favorable response, and her symptoms gradually improved. However, after 2 years of remission periods, she decided on her own to discontinue taking the prescription, and this led to a recurrence of symptoms similar to those occurring at the time of her first episode. From then on, she has taken her prescription consistently and has been in stable condition. The patient has maintained remission with risperidone 2 mg monotherapy. In addition, she has never experienced any kind of mood episode.
In November 2016, the patient reported chronic cognitive discomfort, such as difficulty in concentration and short-term memory impairment. We first used acetyl-L-carnitine for 1 month and then it was switched to choline alfoscerate, both of which had no effect on her complaint. The prescription was thereafter switched to Ginkgo biloba, 80 mg twice a day. In the meantime, she was functioning well enough to get a part-time job. However, in January 2017, Ms. J reported symptoms such as irritability, difficulty in controlling anger, and agitation after taking Ginkgo biloba for 1 week. She said that these symptoms were the first she had experienced during her illness. She stopped taking Ginkgo biloba after these adverse events and the symptoms disappeared after about 2 or 3 days. During the same period, the patient continued taking risperidone 2 mg as usual and did not experience any of the previous thought problems or perceptual disturbances. Owing to these adverse reactions, she was instructed to discontinue the use of Ginkgo biloba. Nevertheless, 1 month later, in February 2017, the patient once again reported that she had tried Ginkgo biloba against our instructions because of the subjective cognitive discomfort which still remained. About 5 days after resuming Ginkgo biloba intake, she experienced the same symptoms of mood dysregulation such as irritability, difficulty in controlling anger, and agitation as earlier. She immediately stopped taking the drug and the symptoms disappeared within 2 days. She has remained stable after discontinuation of Ginkgo biloba. Her PANSS (Positive And Negative Syndrome Scale) and BPRS (Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale) scores were 40 and 4, respectively during her progress.