A six-month-old female infant living in urban Yaoundé, Cameroon presented to our emergency department with a fever, difficulties in breathing and refusal to feed, all of progressive onset. These symptoms lasted 48 h before consultation, and no medication was given to the infant before her presentation. Her past history was relevant for several points. Firstly, her mother did not attend any antenatal care visit during pregnancy. However, her mother reported she had vaginal delivery at home at nine months of pregnancy without professional care. The infant had a vigorous cry at birth. The mother of the child sought neonatal and postpartum care at day one postpartum in a nearby health center where the neanate's diagnosis was surprisingly overlooked. She was the first child born to a 29-year-old HIV woman, with histories of psychiatric disorders and bilateral club foot. We could not have more information on the father of the infant because he abandoned her mother during her pregnancy. However, there was no consanguinity between both parents. There was no contact history of passive smoking and/or acute, sub-acute or chronic cough and her psychomotor development were adequate for her age. There was no family history of similar congenital malformations.
On physical examination of the infant at admission, she was conscious, ill-looking, had a temperature at 38.8 °C, heart rate of 108 beats per minute, a respiratory rate (RR) of 42 cycles per minute and a peripheral oxygen saturation of 89% at ambient air. She had the following dysmorphic features: bilateral cryptophthalmos , syndactyly, nasal malformation, anal imperforation with a nearby anal fistula (where she passes out feces) and an external genitalia anomaly . She had no sign of dehydration. Respiratory examination showed signs of respiratory distress (tachypnoea, nasal flaring and chest recessions) and signs of consolidation of the base of the a left lung. Confronted with these dysmorphic features, they prompted a quick diagnostic review focusing on her clinical features, thereby advocating the diagnosis a community acquired pneumonia associated with Fraser syndrome in a six-month-old infant. The differential diagnosis thought of was Manitoba oculotrichonal syndrome. A chest x-ray showed a confluent homogenous opacity of the lower lobe of the left lung, suggestive of pneumonia. A laboratory panel requested on her admission revealed complete blood count: white blood cell count (WBC) 16,700/mm3 with neutrophilia (13,000/mm3 or 78%), haemoglobin 11.8 g/dl, platelet count of 238,000/mm3; random capillary blood glucose 92 mg/dl, and raised C-reactive proteins (CRP) at 96 mg/l. Her blood and urine cultures were sterile. She was hospitalised in the pediatric department and treated with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid 100 mg/kg/24 h intravenously (IV) in three divided doses, paracetamol 15 mg/kg/06 h IV. She was equally administered oxygen through nasal prongs at 3 l/min.
On the second day of hospitalization, she had no fever and signs of respiratory distress but was still ill-looking. On the fifth day of hospitalization she had a good general state. Repeat blood tests showed normal WBC 10,900/mm3, haemoglobin 12 g/dl, thrombocytosis 298,000/mm3, and CRP negative (less than 6 mg/l). At the 10th day of hospitalization, she had no fever, no respiratory distress and was not ill-looking. Our health facility not being equipped with a peadiatric surgical unit, she was referred to the paediatric surgical department of the Yaounde Obstetric and Paediatric Hospital in Cameroon for surgical management of her bilateral cryptophthalmos, syndactyly, nasal malformation, anal imperforation and ambiguous genitalia external.