A 33-year-old woman presented to the emergency room at Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden, with a history of confusion, fatigue, impaired memory and headache. Symptom onset and duration was unclear; the patient had experienced an upper respiratory tract infection 10 days earlier. The medical history was unremarkable, except an episode of acute idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) 15 years earlier. After admission, the confusion progressed and the patient experienced mild speech difficulties in terms of response latency and difficulty in finding words. She also had memory impairment and motor agitation. The patient was swaying whilst performing the Romberg test and had tremors. Altered mental status with confusion and impaired memory aroused suspicion of limbic encephalitis. Initial blood tests including leukocyte count (9.5 x 109/L) and C-reactive protein were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) had a high concentration of albumin, as a sign of barrier injury, and normal cell count. The patient was admitted to the Neurology Department of the same hospital and empirically treated with acyclovir under suspicion of herpes simplex type I (HSV-I) encephalitis. As CSF tested repeatedly negative for HSV-1 DNA by a high sensitive real-time PCR , acyclovir was discontinued.
On Day 9 after admission, a short loss of consciousness was reported, and on Day 10 the patient was found unconscious, with tonic extensions/spasms of the extremities, involuntary loss of urine and tongue bites. Despite administration of Diazepam and Fosphenytoin, the patient remained unconscious and was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) . She thereafter entered a catatonic condition. Continuous electroencephalography (EEG) monitoring showed frontal bilateral sparse hints of sharp waves/epileptic activity but no certain seizure activity. After this episode, the patient had several seizures in form of tonic extensions/spasms of the extremities with autonomic influence and she was treated at the ICU at 4 more occasions. Repeated EEG examinations did not show any epileptic or seizure activity even when the patient experienced tonic extensions/spasms.
At Week 3, the patient presented myoclonic jerks in all four extremities with irregular pattern, which were triggered by auditory and sensory stimuli. Occasionally, the patient also exhibited ophistotonus. EEG examinations was performed while the patient exhibited these jerks, but no signs of epileptic changes or seizure activity were found, suggesting cortical myoclonus and brainstem evoked decerebration seizures.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) head scans did not show any signs of cerebrovascular insult, or malignancy. Nevertheless, accumulation of contrast signal was detected by MRI in pons, brainstem, thalamus and in the cerebellar leptomeninges , which was judged as a non-specific sign of inflammation.
The patient had elevated liver enzymes and hepatomegaly at CT examination, which led to the suspicion of autoimmune liver disease. In support of this, the patient exhibited hypergammaglobulinemia and anti-nuclear, anti-smooth muscle cell and anti-SS-A52 autoantibodies. Several other autoantibodies were also detected, including anti-MitoM2, M2-3E, gp120, Sp100, PML and anti-mitochondrial autoantibodies indicating primary biliary cirrhosis as well as anti-Ro52, anti-Ro60, SS-B and anti-dsDNA antibodies as in Sjögren’s syndrome or systemic lupus erythematosus. However, a biopsy of the lip salivary gland was negative for histological hallmarks of Sjögren’s syndrome and no other systemic autoimmune disease could be confirmed.
CT scan and MRI showed only a rudimentary spleen. Notably, the patient’s former medical history of ITP did not involve splenectomy.
At Week 23 after disease onset the total T-cell count was normal (5x109 cells/L), but low levels of CD4+ T cells and increased levels of CD8+ T cells were observed (38% and 87% of total T cells, respectively). The B-cell count was lower than normal and T- and B-cell proliferation upon mitogen stimulation was impaired (data not shown).
At admission, serum and CSF samples tested negative for varicella–zoster virus, borrelia, Treponema pallidum, and toxoplasma and revealed past contact for Epstein-Barr virus, adenovirus, and measles. Of note, a serum sample tested negative for anti-CMV IgM, but borderline for anti-CMV IgG by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Because of the unclear result for specific IgG, a blood sample was analysed at Week 5 and tested positive for CMV DNA, indicating active CMV replication . A CSF sample collected at admission was retrospectively analysed and CMV DNA was detected by PCR. Two serum samples, obtained from the patient at admission and ten days later, retrospectively showed a positive specific IgM profile by immunoblot analysis (method described in ) and low IgG avidity, suggestive of primary CMV infection.
Empirical treatment with intravenous high-dose cortisone was initiated during Week 3 , followed by oral prednisone and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg) at Week 4. When the diagnosis of active CMV infection was confirmed, intravenous ganciclovir treatment was initiated in combination with prednisone; administration of antivirals and steroids was continued daily in a course of 5 months, while IVIg were administered in an intermittent way in nine doses . This therapy resulted in a dramatic amelioration of the patient’s neurological status. Radiological examinations of the brain showed regression of pathological signs . Liver enzymes normalized . CMV DNA load decreased and then tested negative . After four months, the patient was discharged to a rehabilitation ward. She remained on antivirals for a total of five months while prednisone was diminished on a scalar basis until complete discontinuation after 11 months. One year after admission the patient exhibited a nearly complete cognitive recovery with mild deficits in attention and memory. At neurological examination the only sequelae were oscillating eye movement at abduction, minor sporadic myoclonus and slightly impaired balance. The patient is now living by herself and attending college.
At Week 10, IFN-γ production by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells was low in response to CMV antigens. In addition, T-cell responses to S. aureus Enterotoxin B (SEB) were also low, indicating a general impairment of cellular immunity . CMV-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell response, particularly to the immunodominant antigen pp65, was impaired up to Week 62 . Conversely, high levels of IFN-γ were observed in plasma at Week 2 (499 pg/mL) and were maintained at Week 21 (154 pg/mL; reference values obtained from 13 healthy donors; 10 ± 28 pg/mL, mean ± standard deviation (data not shown).
At Week 12 low levels of BDCA-1+ (CD1c) and BDCA-3+ (CD141) myeloid dendritic cells (DCs) and BDCA-2+ (CD303) plasmacytoid DC were detected and remained impaired up to Week 24 .
Since the patient presented with clinical signs of limbic encephalitis (cognitive impairment, seizures and pathologic MRI-scan), the presence of autoantibodies against antigens known to be involved in triggering this pathological condition was investigated . Serum and CSF samples were negative for anti-Hu, anti-Ma, anti-voltage gated potassium channel, anti-collapsin response mediator protein-5 as well as for autoantibodies against the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Further, we screened for the presence of neuronal autoantibodies, by applying patient serum to sections of murine brains as described . A strong staining in neurons of cortex and hippocampus but not in glial cells was observed . To assess the specificity of this finding, sera from 3 healthy CMV IgG-negative and 6 CMV IgG-positive controls were investigated; very weak or absent staining was observed . Interestingly, many – but not all – neurons in hippocampus that were stained by the patient serum were also immunoreactive for glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) .