A 63-year-old woman was admitted to our service due to urinary ultrasound revealing right renal and ureteral calculi.
In the past four years, the patient did not have any urinary tract symptoms. Until 48 h prior to admission, she was examined by urinary ultrasound for follow-up of the renal cell carcinoma, which revealed a right kidney stone and upper ureteral stone. She had no fever, no lower back pain, no urinary tract irritation, no gross hematuria, or any other uncomfortable symptoms.
Four years ago, LPN for a minute right renal mass was performed in our hospital. During surgery, a mass of 2.5 cm × 2.3 cm in the lower pole of the right kidney was identified. The renal tumor was completely removed along the edge of the renal tumor (0.5 cm margin), and the capsule was intact. Post resection, a fissure was found at the ureteropelvic junction. Therefore, a 3-0 Vicryl was applied to repair the fissure, and a 2-0 Vicryl was applied to the edge of the renal parenchyma. Furthermore, surgical bed hemostasis had been achieved with automatic non-absorbing surgical clips. The postoperative course was uneventful, and pathology confirmed this to be renal cell carcinoma of the right kidney (T1a/N0/M0). Consequently, the patient was discharged from hospital and instructed to have regular re-examinations.
There was no family history of urinary calculi or tumors.
Physical examination showed positive percussion pain of the right kidney and no other positive signs.
No obvious abnormalities were found in hematological indicators and routine urinalyses for this particular patient.
B-ultrasound demonstrated that the right kidney collecting system was separated and a plurality of liquid-segregated dark areas could be visualized, with a strong echo of 1.1 × 0.8 cm within, and the upper part of the right kidney ureter was dilated, with a strong echo of 2.1 cm × 1.1 cm within. Physical examination revealed right costovertebral angle tenderness, and the rest had no positive signs. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated that the lower pole of the right kidney was absent post-surgery, with a high-density fringe, and two opacities could be seen in the right renal pelvis (A:1295HU) and proximal ureter (B:1335HU), respectively . A preliminary diagnosis of right hydronephrosis with nephroureteral calculi was concluded.