A 78-year-old man presented with a 3-month history of gradually worsening memory disturbance without headache. Neurological examination on admission showed dementia (Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE): 21/30), hemiparesis of the left lower limb (manual muscle test: 4/V) and gait disturbance. On the other hands, there were not any neurological signs of urinary incontinence, retention and sexual disturbances were not recognized. Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed ventricular dilatation (Evans index: 0.4) (A). Lumbar puncture was performed, and the CSF pressure was 150 mmH2O (institutional reference ranges: 60–180 mmH2O). CSF analysis showed a normal cell count (4.0 cells/μL) and a highly elevated level of protein (3842 mg/dL). Gadolinium (Gd)-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine demonstrated a homogeneously enhanced intradural, extramedullary mass compressed the nerves at the cauda equina level (B). Based on MRI findings, preoperative differential diagnoses included spinal tumor, for example, schwannoma or meningioma. However, when the clinical course was taken into account, we suspected schwannoma and the highly elevated concentration of protein in the CSF was attributed to this schwannoma. We considered that this tumor was causing NPH and prioritized tumor resection. Under the general anesthesia, surgical resection by a posterior approach was performed in the prone position. Posterior L3–4 laminectomy was performed, the dural sac was opened, and cloudy arachnoid membrane was found. After dissecting the arachnoid membrane, the tumor was found to be compressing the nerves of the cauda equina. The tumor had apparently arisen from a root of the cauda equina, and electrical stimulations confirmed that the root was not a motor root of the limbs. Total removal (so called R0 resection) was performed, including the root (A). Histological examinations with hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated mixed Antoni A and Antoni B components and a palisading pattern, matching the typical features of benign schwannoma (B). No tumor cells were recognized in the nerves of the resected edge of the tumor. Postoperative MRI showed no residual tumor (A). The perioperative course was uneventful, and this intervention resulted in marked recovery of cognitive dysfunction (MMSE: 29/30) and gait disturbance with no sequelae. Lumbar puncture was performed 4 months postoperatively, and CSF analysis showed a decreased protein level (16 mg/dL) and a normal cell count (1.0 cells/μL). Postoperative CT after 4 months showed slight narrowing of the ventricles (Evans index: 0.35) and clear depiction of the cerebral sulcus (B), with no other symptoms or signs of NPH.