A 53-year-old Mexican man, who was overweight and had a history of serological antibody tests for toxocariasis positive, brucellosis, gout, conjunctivitis, rhinitis, seasonal allergies, sneezing, and nasal congestion, presented with generalized pain, fatigue, intermittent fever (38.5–40 °C), dry cough, and dyspnea. SARS-CoV-2 diagnosis was confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using a nasopharyngeal swab. The patient was admitted to the hospital with an SpO2 of 74% and oxygen support of 14 L/min. Chest radiography demonstrated massive lung damage and fibrosis caused by severe pneumonia. At the hospital, the patient was treated with ceftriaxone and prednisone, along with enoxaparin injections and oral aspirin. After 10 days at the hospital, the patient improved, and he was discharged from the hospital. However, the patient still presented with generalized fatigue, and oxygen support (2 L/min) was still required for sleeping and eating. Therefore, ten days after discharge from the hospital, the patient sought complementary treatment with PBMT-sMF to improve his health status.
The patient’s response to the PBMT-sMF treatment was evaluated by monitoring SpO2 [,] from the time of admission to the hospital (baseline), until discharge from the hospital, 10 days after the start of treatment, immediately after the end of the treatment, and 4 months after the end of the treatment with PBMT-sMF. In addition, we evaluated the progression of the imaging findings in the chest X-ray from the first X-ray at baseline, until 10 days after the start of the treatment, and 4 months after the end of the treatment with PBMT-sMF. Finally, to quantify the extent of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the lungs, the severity score was calculated from chest X-rays. The adapted and simplified Radiographic Assessment of Lung Edema (RALE) score was used [,]. A score ranging from 0 to 4 was assigned to each lung based on the extent of consolidation or ground glass opacity: 0, no involvement; 1, <25% involvement; 2, 25–50% involvement; 3, 50–75% involvement; and 4, >75% involvement. The final severity score was calculated as the sum of the scores for each lung. The RALE score was calculated at baseline, 10 days after the start of treatment, and 4 months after the end of the treatment with PBMT-sMF.
Ten days after discharge from the hospital, the patient started the multi-wavelength PBMT-sMF treatment. PBMT-sMF was irradiated using a cordless, portable MR5 LaserShower™ device (Multi-Radiance Medical™, Solon, OH, USA). Six sites in the lower thorax/upper abdominal cavity were irradiated in addition to two sites in the neck area . At each treatment session, the patient received a total of 31.50 J per irradiated site. The treatment time per site was 60 s, yielding 480 s per treatment session. The treatment was performed once daily for 45 days. The dose and irradiation sites were established based on previous studies [,]. describes the PBMT-sMF parameters.
After 10 days of PBMT-sMF treatment, the SpO2 of the patient increased from 89% to 93% at 2 L/min oxygen. After 40 days of treatment with PBMT-sMF, the patient was able to leave the oxygen support. After 45 days, at the end of treatment with PBMT-sMF, the patient’s SpO2 was at 96–98%. Finally, in the last evaluation, 4 months after PBMT-sMF treatment, the patient’s SpO2 was at 98% .
shows the extent of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the lungs. In addition, this was the basis for measuring the RALE score. When the patient was admitted to the hospital, his RALE score was 7 (A). However, on the second chest radiograph, his RALE score worsened to 8 (B). Finally, on the last radiograph, at 4 months follow-up evaluation, his RALE score was 0, indicating total recovery of the lungs (C) .
At the 4 months follow-up, spirometry was performed to assess the sequelae after COVID-19. Respiratory mechanics parameters were found according to their prediction, that is, what is normal in both the pre-and post-bronchodilator . The patient did not report any adverse events associated with the use of PBMT-SMF.