We investigated a 10 year old female proband and her 28 year old father of Polish origin, both affected by isolated BDE (a family tree is shown in Figure ). Skeletal manifestations of the proband comprised shortening of the Vth right metacarpal without shortening of IVth metacarpal bones, bilateral shortening and broadening of the Ist metacarpals, bilateral shortened, trapezoid middle phalanges of Vth fingers resulting in rather severe clinodactyly, as well as contractures and deviations of the fingers II-IV. Upon clinical examination feet of the proband showed broad halluces and no clinically recognizable BDE phenotype. Unfortunately, since no X-ray was available, we were unable to rule out all possible skeletal foot abnormalities. The proband's father manifested finger contractures, shortening of the Vth fingers and toes most probably due to shortened Vth metacarpals and metatarsal, shortened finger nails of the Vth fingers most likely resulting from hypoplastic distal phalanges, as well as short thumbs. Unfortunately, the patient decided not to undergo X-ray examination, thus we were unable to delineate skeletal findings in more detail. Both patients had normal stature and normal psychomotor development.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes according to salting-out method . The entire coding sequence of the HOXD13 gene comprised of two exons and the flanking intronic regions (GenBank ) were amplified in PCR reactions and directly sequenced using dye-terminator chemistry (kit v.3, ABI 3130XL). Sequences of the primers used for amplification and sequencing PCR reactions are given in table . PCR conditions used for HOXD13 amplification where as follows: 40 cycles, denaturation in 95°C (30'), annealing (30') with temperature starting from 63°C, decreasing to 55°C (touchdown PCR -0.2°C per cycle), and elongation in 72°C (45'). Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for both exons of the HOXD13 was performed by means of P179 commercial kit according to the manufacturer's protocol (MRC Holland).
The proband and her father carried a nonsense heterozygous mutation c.820C > T(p.R274X) in the HOXD13 gene . Presence of this mutation was excluded in 208 ethnically matched control chromosomes. MLPA ruled out intragenic copy number changes within the HOXD13 in both proband and her father (i.e. deletion/duplication).