An 89-year-old male with a right above knee amputation presented to the Emergency Department after sustaining a ground level fall. He had undergone an above knee amputation when he was a teenager after an accident involving a shotgun blast. He was carrying several guns he thought were unloaded when he tripped and dropped them causing one of the guns to fire, unloading into his right leg. It was deemed to be unsalvageable at that time, so an above knee amputation was performed. Since then, he had been ambulating with a prosthesis. Before the fall, he functioned independently for all activities of daily living.
Our encounter with him began in the emergency department after he tripped over a pew while in church. The patient underwent a full clinical and radiographic evaluation. On examination, he was 74.8 kg, unable to ambulate, had pain with log roll of the residual limb, and had limited range of motion of his right hip due to pain. He was neurovascularly intact distally. Plain radiographs (, ) demonstrated a status post above knee amputation with a displaced right femoral neck fracture (OTA 31-B2) and retained bullet fragments. Due to the patient’s prior history of independence, he was counseled and surgical repair was recommended.
Due to the length of the residual limb, the difficulty to manipulate it for proper dislocation and reduction, and the lack of appropriately sized implants for the length of femur remaining, open reduction internal fixation was chosen as the treatment option for the patient over arthroplasty. The patient was positioned supine on a standard fracture table with the non-operative leg in lithotomy position and C-arm on the contralateral side. To obtain proper reduction in the operative leg, a traction pin was placed in the distal femoral shaft paying careful attention to avoid any vascular structures (-). A Kirschner bow was applied to the wire and a rope was attached and wrapped around the boot of the fracture table on the right side. Traction, rotation, and adduction were then applied under fluoroscopic guidance until appropriate reduction was obtained. A standard femoral neck system technique was then utilized for dissection and final implant insertion (, ). The wound was closed in layers and the patient had an uneventful post-operative course. Due to the proximity of the incision to where the patient’s prosthesis would be, he was made non-weight bearing until the incision had healed. Physical and Occupational Therapy was started on post-operative day 1 and the patient was discharged home on post-operative day 5 to a skilled nursing facility due to a lack of assistance at home.
The patients’ first post-operative clinic visit was at 2 weeks after the operation. Radiographs were taken showing adequate placement of the FNS with appropriate initial healing. The incision was deemed to be healed, so staples were removed, and he was allowed to progress weight bearing to toe-touch until the subsequent visit in 6 weeks.
At the next clinic visit, 2 months since the surgery, radiographs showed great alignment of the fracture without any changes. The patient was transitioned to weight bearing as tolerated and scheduled for follow-up in an additional 6 weeks.
During the subsequent visit, the patient had been ambulating with the assistance of crutches. He reported that his pain was 0/10 and that he had not been taking any medications for pain and/or inflammation. Imaging was taken with his prosthesis in place that showed well healing fracture with intact instrumentation without evidence of failure or loosening. He was instructed to follow-up in 2 months.
Six months after the surgery, the patient reported that he continued to do well. He presented with no complaints of pain or discomfort in his right hip, and he has continued to ambulate without difficulty. He had returned to his normal activities without any limitations. One year after the injury, the patient progressed well and reported no issues, complaints, or concerns with his hip.