The patient was a 26-year-old female, who referred to our center, Infectious disease, Alzahra Hospital, Isfahan, Iran, by the chief complaint of headache, vomiting and fever from the day before admission. She also was complaining from arthralgia in wrists and knees, accompanied with generalized pain. Also, some hemorrhagic ulcers in her mouth and fulminant pethechia/purpura on her limbs and buttocks were prominent . On admission, she was in hypotensive state with some degree of agitation. A mild periorbital edema was also present. So, she was hospitalized by the clinical suspicion to meningococcal septicemia. Injection of Ceftriaxon plus Vancomycin was started empirically, and lumbar puncture (LP) performed. Despite of the normal CSF, antibiotics therapy was continued, up to getting the results of blood culture, ready. Suddenly, on the 3rd day of antibiotic therapy, hemorrhagic bullae were evolved from those purpuric lesions . These bullae were extending beyond the previous margins. Due to the negative cultures from blood and bulla contents, antibiotics were discontinued.
The positive findings in lab data and paraclinical examination were as follow: Leukocytosis (WBC: 20100/μl), immune hemolytic anemia (Hb: 7 g/dl) plus positive direct Coobms test, thrombocytopenia (platelet: 53000/μl) and high ANA/dSDNA level. C3 and C4 level were 42 (normal range: 55–170) and 12 (normal range: 10–55), both in low levels. 3 omg/dl protein was present in the derived urine sample. Skin biopsy demonstrated some epidermal necrosis, basal layer degeneration, leukocytoclasis, dermal neutrophil infiltration, RBC extravasation plus immune complex deposition in dermoepidermal junction. By rheumatologic consultation, the diagnosis of SLE was made (fulfilling 4 criteria of 11). Cellcept was prescribed for the patient; in combination with 60 mg of daily Prednisolone. After beginning of the treatment the skin lesions was controlled but convert to disseminated necrosis. By gradual disappearance of acute phase of the disease, Anti-dSDNA and ANA were tested again, which was as high as the first checking.