An 8-year-old Hispanic girl was referred to our institution for a growth in her right conjunctival fornix. Her mother had noticed the mass over the past few months and felt that it was enlarging. Our patient did not have any other medical conditions and denied undergoing prior trauma or surgery. Her only ocular history involved multiple, recurrent episodes of redness in the right eye that were diagnosed and treated as either bacterial or viral conjunctivitis by the referring physician. The mother also reported that she had discovered pieces of hair in her daughter’s right eye tear film over the past couple of years.
On presentation, the patient’s eye looked relatively normal, and she had uncorrected visual acuity of 20/20 in both eyes, with an otherwise unremarkable gross examination. Slit lamp examination of her right eye revealed a mildly injected palpebral conjunctiva with a moderate-sized, fibrous, tan-colored mass that had arborizing, centrally coursing blood vessels. Upon manipulation of the mass, a large tuft of normal appearing eyelashes emanated from the inferior conjunctival fornix .
The mass was easily mobile, firm and non-fluctuant, so a decision was made to surgically remove the mass. The patient was taken to the operating room, and the base of the mass was carefully resected with sharp Westcott scissors. The tumor had a wide based pedicle and was easily removed. The specimen was placed in formalin and sent to pathology for analysis. The remaining conjunctival edges were easily reapproximated without tension, so no sutures were placed. On post-operative day one, the patient was comfortable and the conjunctival fornix was completely healed. She returned for her post-operative month one visit and had a pristine inferior conjunctival fornix, without any evidence of tumor recurrence.
The pathology specimen revealed nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium with multiple goblet cells and an underlying chronic mononuclear inflammatory cell reaction. The bulk of the lesion was made of relatively loose, irregular connective tissue with multiple small hair shafts in longitudinal and transverse cross-section and a small amount of adipose tissue. The pathology report was consistent with dermoid choristoma of the conjunctiva .