A 32-year-old Caucasian male patient presented with a chief complaint of sudden blurred vision and paracentral visual scotoma in the left eye for the past 15 days. He denied previous similar episodes, ocular pain, flu-like symptoms or other systemic manifestations. Medical and ophthalmological antecedents were unremarkable. Familial history included treatment of his spouse and son for pulmonary tuberculosis in the past year.
Ophthalmological exam disclosed best corrected visual acuity of 20/20 (1.0) in the right eye and 20/25 (0.8) in the left eye. Anterior biomicroscopy was unremarkable, and pupillary exams showed a left relative pupillary defect. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye.
Right fundus exam was unremarkable, and left fundus exam revealed a pink optic disc with sharp margins, normal vessels and gray-whitish deep retinal dots predominantly in the upper nasal quadrant .
As an ancillary exam, fundus autofluorescence (FAF) showed peripapillary hyper-autofluorescent confluent lesions with adjacent focal circular hyper-autofluorescent lesions in the left eye . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed early and late hyperfluorescence in the same regions as the lesions detected by FAF, and some of the lesions had a wreath-like appearance. Mild disc staining was also present, just like the peripapillary vessels .
Swept-source optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the left eye revealed focal disruptions of the ellipsoid zone in the areas corresponding to the lesions seen on FAF. Choriocapillaris thinning with subadjacent pachy vessels was observed at the same locations . FAF, AF and OCT of the right eye were unremarkable. OCT-angiography (OCTA) showed normal vascular structures in the superficial, deep and choriocapillaris layers of both eyes. En face OCT showed normal superficial retina, deep retina, outer retina and choriocapillaris in both eyes. Manual correction of automatic segmentation of retinal layers was performed to avoid segmentation artifacts. In this case, en face OCT did not reveal hemorrhages or opacities, which may lead to shadowing and projection artifacts.
Laboratory workup included normal complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 3 mm (upper threshold of 15 mm), negative treponemal and nontreponemal syphilis tests, negative IgG and IgM toxoplasmosis, and negative hepatitis B, hepatitis C and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serologies.
However, a tuberculin skin test (TST) was positive with a 19-mm induration. Chest radiography and pulmonary workup were unremarkable. Cranial contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed increased thickness of the left intraorbital optic nerve with late contrast enhancement.
The patient received treatment for presumed tuberculosis with systemic rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol for 2 months, followed by 4 months on rifampin and isoniazid only. Five months after treatment, the patient presented improvement of visual acuity in both eyes (20/20), with no white dots on fundus examination, and FAF and FA exams were also improved .