A 34-year-old Caucasian female presented at the emergency department with an 8-hour history of nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. The patient had suffered from occasional and transient episodes of abdominal discomfort during the last year. At the day of presentation the patient first experienced diffuse upper abdominal discomfort with later sudden pain in the right lower abdomen. The patient had palpable tenderness in the right lower quadrant, without signs of peritoneal irritation. The patient was afebrile and had a hemoglobin level of 145 g/l and a white blood cell count of 10.7 E9/l. The level of C-reactive protein was normal. Urine analysis was negative as well as analysis for human chorionic gonadotropin. The patient responded poorly to analgesic medications and a gynecological consultation was requested to exclude torsion of the ovary. Vaginal ultrasonography revealed a regular cystic mass between the uterus and the right ovary. This finding was verified with transabdominal ultrasonography, which showed a tubular mass of unknown origin. In order to characterize the finding further an MRI of the lower abdomen was performed. On MRI a fluid-filled appendiceal mass (8x3x3 cm) with relative wall-thickening was observed. The surrounding structures showed inflammatory changes with edema of the appendiceal mesentery. Abrupt tapering of the appendix was seen at the base of the mucocele (Figure ). Based on the imaging results and acute clinical presentation a laparoscopic appendectomy was performed immediately the following working day. A distended and necrotic appendix was observed with a 720 degree clockwise torsion of its base (Figure ). The abdominal cavity was otherwise macroscopically normal, with no signs of dissemination. Detorsion of the appendix was performed and the specimen removed using a bag according to normal operative protocol, taking care not to perforate the specimen. The appendix was cut open and a yellow gel-like content was observed (Figure ). An additional resection of the base of the caecum was performed using a stapling device and surgical margins were confirmed by histopathological diagnosis. Frozen tissue sections of the mucocele showed necrosis of the appendicular wall making histological typing of the mass difficult, and the caecal resecate showed normal intestinal histology. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged from the hospital the following day. The final pathological analysis showed distension of the appendix with flattening of the mucosa. Secondary necrosis and hemorrhage was observed in the appendicular wall with no signs of epithelial atypia. The muscular wall was not invaded by mucus or epithelium and the appendix was intact with no signs of mucus extravasation. The base of the caecum showed normal intestinal histology with no signs of mucus deposition or cellular atypia on permanent tissue sections.