A 58-year-old African American male was seen in hepatology clinic for a surveillance liver ultrasound following a diagnosis of hepatitis C. The patient had experienced mild intermittent upper abdominal pain consistent with a history of gastroesophageal reflux disease. He had no weight loss, change in appetite or bowel habits, jaundice, or general malaise. Past medical history included hyperlipidemia, peptic ulcer disease, and hepatitis C (antibody positive, PCR negative). The patient's physical examination and laboratory studies were otherwise normal. A surveillance abdominal ultrasound demonstrated a well circumscribed mass measuring 3.4 × 2.9 cm within the head of the pancreas. A computed tomography (CT scan) further confirmed an enhancing mass involving the head of the pancreas . No evidence of extra-pancreatic disease was found on further evaluation. Although tumor-associated antigen levels (CEA, CA 19-9, and CA-125) were normal our differential diagnosis still included adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) guided needle biopsy was then performed but the pathological findings were non-diagnostic. Our concern for possible undetected malignancy remained and a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed followed by PD. The patient recovered well following the procedure and was discharged home on the 15th postoperative day. He continues to receive close outpatient surveillance without additional treatment.
Within the PD specimen, a protuberant 4 × 3 × 3 cm circumferential mass at the superior border of the pancreatic head was appreciated . The external surface of the mass was tan/gray, firm, and smooth. Cut sections of the mass also revealed a partially encapsulated large nodule with tan/gray fleshy to firm parenchyma infiltrating the pancreas at its distal portion. Surgical margins were clear . Regional lymph nodes were identified near the mass; microscopic examination revealed that all were hyperplastic lymph nodes. The remaining surgical margins were negative.
This lymphoid lesion within the pancreatic head showed marked vascular proliferation and hyalinization of germinal centers. Involuted germinal centers were surrounded by concentric rings of small lymphocytes. i.e. "onion-skinning" penetrated by hyalinized vessels . Moreover, the interfollicular zones were rich in plasma cells and hyalinized vasculature. These features are consistent with localized hyaline-vascular type CD. Distribution of T and B cell markers (CD20, CD3, CD45) was normal and markers indicative of lymphoid malignancies (i.e. CD30, CD15, CD5, CD10, BCL-2) did not show evidence of such entities. Furthermore, PCR analysis of paraffin-embedded tissue revealed no clonal rearrangement of the immunoglobulin heavy chain or T-cell receptor gamma and beta chain genes. MALT1 (18q21) clonal rearrangement by FISH was negative. Together, these morphologic and immunohistochemical findings are most consistent with a diagnosis of CD.