She is a 34-year-old woman, trader and farmer who
lives in Ago-are area of Oyo State in western Nigeria.
She presented to a surgical outreach with complaints
of progressive painless swelling in the left groin.
Symptoms were said to have been noticed after a left
inguinal repair which she had three months earlier at a
secondary health facility for an inguinal hernia. The
procedure was said to be largely uneventful. There
was no family history suggestive connective tissue
disorder and she neither takes alcohol nor smoke
cigarette. There is no history of chronic cough, constipation, or abdominal swelling. There were no
features suggestive of intestinal obstruction.
On general examination, she was not found to be
obese, no swelling on the right groin region, the left
groin revealed a previous well-healed scar, no positive
cough impulse, an irreducible left Inguinolabial swelling,
with soft consistency and non-tender, measuring
approximately 10 × 4 centimeters. Transillumination
was unremarkable and vital signs were within normal
limits.
A preoperative clinical diagnosis of Left Recurrent
Irreducible Inguinolabial hernia was made. .
Laboratory investigations done were within normal
limits. The patient was prepared for surgery as per the
routine for groin swellings and consents were obtained. A left groin exploration was done under a sub-Arachnoid block type of anaesthesia. The findings of
dilated left canal of Nuck with a cystic swelling
containing serous fluids were in keeping
with a left non-communicating hydrocele of the canal
of Nuck (Type 3).
This cystic lesion extended up to the deep ring, and this was excised after high ligation of the sac
with Vicryl 2/0 suture and the external oblique
aponeurosis, subcutaneous layer of the surgically
created groin wound were repaired with non-absorbable
suture. The immediate post-operative
period was uneventful.
The patient was discharged on the second postoperative
day. A follow-up visits to the clinic in the
second and sixth post operative weeks showed
satisfactory wound healing.