A 77-year-old woman who developed general fatigue with a temperature of 36.8°C presented to our hospital. She had no previous history of cardiac disease. She was alert and had a blood pressure of 84/68 mmHg and a pulse rate of 109 b.p.m. She denied chest pain and dyspnoea. No rash was identified. Heart and lung sounds were indistinct. There were no murmurs or pericardial rubs, but her jugular vein dilatation was noted in the supine position. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed low voltage at the electrodes attached to all limbs . X-ray images revealed cardiomegaly. Echocardiography showed a moderate pericardial effusion with right atrial collapse. Left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) was preserved (=60%). We diagnosed the pathological condition as pericardial tamponade with paradoxical pulse. Emergency pericardiocentesis yielded 200 mL of exudative fluid, and symptomatic relief was immediate. Systemic blood pressure increased from 84/68 to 163/86 mmHg. Blood analysis showed a leucocyte count of 8600/μL (normal range 3300–8600/μL) with 6.7% eosinophils of 576/μL (normal range 0–10%) and an elevated TnI value of 2.3 ng/mL (normal range <0.00156 ng/mL). Cytology of pericardial effusion showed 7.5% eosinophils of 1420/μL. Coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis.
Her body temperature increased above 39°C and blood pressure began decreasing on the 2nd day. The ECG monitor showed a ventricular rhythm of wide QRS complex. Eventually, she had pulseless electrical activity through complete atrioventricular block in 20 min . Immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation did not fully restore her spontaneous circulation and haemodynamics remained severely compromised. Thereafter, we inserted a temporary pacing catheter, an intra-aortic balloon pump, and veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation after artificial ventilation. Left ventricular ejection fraction was extremely reduced (<10%) with 14-mm diffusely oedematous LV wall on echocardiography . We suspected fulminant myocarditis and performed endomyocardial biopsy, while the patient was on the cardiopulmonary support devices on the 3rd day. Despite the lack of definite hypereosinophilia, the biopsy showed massive infiltration of eosinophils, which partially formed eosinophilic clusters . We diagnosed ANEM and initiated 1000 mg/day of IV methylprednisolone. Thereafter, high-dose corticosteroids administered for 3 days dramatically improved wall thickness and almost normalized LVEF on the 6th day. We no longer needed mechanical circulatory support and removed all the devices by the 8th day without any neurological sequelae. Troponin I level peaked at 17.8 ng/mL just before steroid therapy and rapidly decreased . Thus, we completed the treatment with corticosteroids and conducted a careful follow-up to detect recurrence, while monitoring the TnI value. Fortunately, the TnI level did not increase again and no relapse of myocarditis was observed without taking any oral prednisolone. Conversely, peripheral eosinophil count remained normal throughout the clinical course. She was re-hospitalized 6 months later for endomyocardial biopsy. No inflammatory cells including eosinophils were identified . Echocardiography showed normal LVEF (=72%, ), indicating clinical and histological recovery of eosinophilic myocarditis.