A 40-year-old woman who underwent kidney transplantation 5 years 6 months before presented to our emergency department with complaints of oliguria, generalized edema, and general weakness 6 days after receiving ATG treatment for acute T-cell-mediated rejection.
She was diagnosed with severe AA 8 years before on the basis of a bone marrow biopsy that revealed < 5% cellularity without cytogenetic abnormalities and with an inadequate response to ATG. Thus, she was managed conservatively with intermittent red blood cell and platelet transfusions without cyclosporine owing to concomitant chronic kidney disease. End-stage renal disease developed 7 years before, for which the patient had been receiving peritoneal dialysis (PD) for 1 year. She was transferred to our hospital for simultaneous kidney and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. At that time, we planned a sequential transplantation (kidney transplantation followed by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation) with her mother as the donor. The ABO blood type was compatible, and two mismatched human leukocyte antigen (HLA) types were found. Panel reactive antibodies were 75% positive for class II. The donor-specific antibody was DR04, and the median fluorescence intensity was 1865. Rituximab (375 mg/m2) and basiliximab (20 mg) were administered as induction therapies. Tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), and glucocorticoids were used for maintenance immunosuppression. However, MMF was changed to mizoribine after the patient experienced severe diarrhea and dyspepsia 3 years 6 months after receiving the KT.
After kidney transplantation, the AA improved gradually without a hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The complete blood cell count (CBC) improved with a hemoglobin (Hb) level of > 9 g/dL and platelet (PLT) count of > 50,000/μL, indicating that blood transfusion was unnecessary. The bone marrow biopsy findings improved 16 months after the kidney transplantation . Graft function was also well-maintained; however, the serum creatinine (Cr) level increased gradually 5 years after kidney transplantation, reaching 2.41 mg/dL 5 years 5 months after transplantation. The graft biopsy revealed acute T-cell-mediated rejection type IA. We initially managed the patient with methylprednisolone pulse therapy (125 mg twice daily) for 5 days; however, her renal function deteriorated further after 1 month . Thus, we administered ATG 1.5 mg/(kg·day) for 5 days. At that time, we pre-medicated the patient with methylprednisolone for 5 days, with 500 mg once and subsequently with 125 mg twice daily for the following 4 days.
On the day of admission, the patient complained of general weakness and generalized edema and showed a pretibial pitting edema. Blood testing revealed high serum blood urea nitrogen and Cr levels with hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hyperkalemia, consistent with TLS. Urinalysis revealed > 100 uric acid crystal particles, and the uric acid-to-Cr ratio was 1.06, which was consistent with acute uric acid nephropathy .
Two hemodialysis sessions were completed because of oliguria (urine output, < 200 mL/day). After hemodialysis, the patient’s serum uric acid and Cr levels remained at 3.3 and 3.96 mg/dL, respectively, with a daily urine output of > 1500 mL, and she was discharged . TLS was suspected to be the cause of the acute uric acid nephropathy; therefore, post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder was considered a possibility. Epstein-Barr virus was not detected, and the imaging studies showed no findings indicative of lymphoma. Thus, the patient was reevaluated for the underlying hematologic disease. Flow cytometry of the paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) clones revealed a 2.9% glycophosphatidyl inositol (GPI)-deficient granulocyte and a 2.9% CD24-deficient granulocyte expansion, which suggest that either the AA transformed into myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or the original underlying disease was MDS. Unfortunately, the patient progressed to graft failure 2 months after discharge and resumed PD.