A 58-year-old man with hypertension, dyslipidemia, old cerebral infarction, and stage 4 chronic kidney disease had been an outpatient at our hospital’s nephrology department for 6 months poior to the cardiovascular event due to autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. He had no history of smoking or cardiovascular events. The initial work-up revealed normal findings in the chest X-ray ; calcification of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and slight calcification of the right coronary artery (RCA) by computed tomography ; and cerebral infarction of corona radiata by brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); stenosis of the left middle cerebral artery by brain magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) ; and a serum creatinin level of 2.05 mg/dL by blood examination. ECG and echocardiography 3 months prior to the cardiovascular event had revealed normal findings . Baseline echocardiography had shown no asynergy due to myocardial ischemia. After taking lunch, the patient felt severe crushing retrosternal chest pain, had one episode of vomiting, and called an ambulance. He reached our emergency department approximately 40 min after the onset of symptoms.He experienced cardiogenic shock (systolic blood pressure was 62 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure could not be measured, and heart rate was 44 beats/min) on arrival at the emergency department. ECG recorded 5 min after arrival revealed complete atrioventricular block (CAVB) and ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, aVF, and V1–V6 . As a rule, we administer 200 mg of aspirin (loading dose) to patients with AMI at the emergency department, but it was not employed in this case due to the patient’s agony.
Emergency coronary angiography (CAG) performed 30 min after arrival revealed total occlusion of the proximal LAD and proximal RCA , with no collateral flow to the LAD or RCA (Additional files and ). A transvenous cardiac pacing catheter was temporarily inserted, and the patient became hemodynamically stable. We decided to treat the RCA lesion before the LAD lesion; we considered the RCA to be the culprit vessel for AMI due to the presence of vomiting, which is a symptom specific to inferior myocardial infarction. A 0.014-inch floppy guidewire (ASAHI INTEC, Aichi, Japan) was easily passed through the RCA lesion, and red thrombi were aspirated. Thrombolysis in myocardial infaction (TIMI) grade II flow was confirmed by aspirating around the culprit lesion twice; therefore, we did not inject any thrombolytic drug into the RCA. After passing the Filtrap embolic protection filter (Nipro, Osaka, Japan), a 4.0 × 23 mm drug eluting stent (DES) was successfully deployed. TIMI grade III flow was observed in the RCA and the CAVB disappeared. However, ST-segment elevation in precordial leads on ECG and the patient’s symptoms of shock persisted. Echocardiography showed hypokinesia of not only inferior but also anterior and septal walls and post-stenting angiography revealed no collateral flow from the RCA to the LAD. We then performed percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the LAD with mechanical hemodynamic support from the Impella CP (Abiomed, Danvers, MA, USA). After tracheal intubation, we administered 200 mg of aspirin and 20 mg of prasugrel (loading dose) via the nasogastric tube. A 0.014-inch floppy guidewire (ASAHI INTEC, Aichi, Japan) was advanced through the LAD lesion. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) revealed no ruptured plaque and some low echoic area, which was suspected as a thrombus, in the culprit vessel. A paclitaxel-coated balloon and 2.75 × 38 mm DES were successfully deployed in the D1 and LAD, respectively, and TIMI grade III flow was achieved . PCI was completed approximately 3.5 h after the initiation of CAG. ST-segment elevation significantly decreased after LAD stenting, and the patient was transferred to our coronary care unit for further intensive care. The following were atarted the next day of the procedure: aspirin, 100 mg/day; prasugrel, 3.75 mg/day; atorvastatin, 20 mg/day; and lansoprazole, 15 mg/day. The Impella device was removed on the fourth postoperative day. The patient’s hemodynamic parameters were stable, and his inotropic requirement rapidly decreased. Renal function generally remained unchanged. Echocardiography revealed a mean ejection fraction of 48% with mild hypokinesia of the anterior, septal (certainly due to transient occlusion of the LAD), and inferior (certainly due to transient occlusion of the RCA) walls compared with the pre-AMI levels. However, right hemiparesis appeared, and MRI performed 8 days after Impella device removal revealed acute or subacute cerebral infarction of the left corona radiata . The patient continued receiving dual antiplatelet therapy. On the 57th day of hospitalization, he had New York Heart Association class II heart failure and was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital to promote post-stroke recovery of manual dexterity.