A 28-year-old Japanese woman had infertility, with G5 P1, but not antiphospholipid syndrome. Owing to protein S deficiency, she was treated with aspirin 100 mg per day and heparin therapy, which was discontinued because of a subchorionic hematoma at 12 weeks of gestation. At 16 weeks, she presented with proteinuria and edema in the lower extremities and was transferred to another hospital. A high dose of oral glucocorticoids (prednisolone, 40 mg) was initiated for presumed primary glomerulonephritis before 20 weeks of gestation with severe hypoalbuminemia (1.8 g/dL) and severe proteinuria (10 g/gCre) were suspected. In addition, 40 mg of nifedipine per day and 750 mg of methyldopa hydrate per day were administered for hypertension. Her condition failed to improve, and bilateral pleural effusion appeared. Therefore, she was transferred to our hospital at 21 weeks and 3 days of gestation.
Her medical history was unremarkable, except for infertility. Her birthweight was within the normal range (3260 g). Her height was 156 cm, blood pressure was not high at 128/91 mmHg, and she weighed 53.3 kg. She had remarkable edema in her lower extremities. She did not have sclerodactyly. Laboratory test results were as follows. Serum total protein and albumin levels were very low at 4.9 and 2.2 g/dL, respectively. Serum creatinine and uric acid were slightly high at 0.65 and 6.9 mg/dL, respectively, owing to her gestation. Serum total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglycerides were 510, 329, and 439 mg/dL, respectively. C-reactive protein was 0.37 mg/dL, and urine protein content was 5.6 g/day, with no hematuria. Antinuclear antibody was low titer (1:40), and anti-centromere antibody was positive at 29.3 IU/mL. In addition, anti-dsDNA, anti-β2-glycoprotein I antibody, and anti-phospholipid IgG antibody, lupus anticoagulant were negative. Serum IgG, IgA, C3, and C4 levels were 131, 85, 64, and 10 mg/dL, respectively. Serum IgM and IgE levels were 139 and 133 mg/dL, respectively. Further, protein S activity was in the normal range (95%) in our hospital.
She met the criteria for nephrotic syndrome. However, it was difficult to diagnose primary nephrotic syndrome due to PE before 20 weeks without kidney biopsy. Therefore, we examined serum soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) and placental growth factor (PlGF) levels since the ratio of sFlt-1/PlGF (> 36) in pregnant women have been demonstrated as a predictor of PE . The sFlt-1/PlGF ratio turned out to be very high (sFlt-1, 13,400 pg/mL; PlGF, 21.9 pg/mL; serum sFlt-1/PlGF ratio 611.9), so that we diagnosed her nephrotic syndrome because of PE, and we discontinued oral glucocorticoids. We used furosemide and human albumin solution, however, her fetal growth curve was lower than 2 standard deviation after 21 weeks and, further, she had a reflux of uterine artery blood flow. Therefore, she had a cesarean section at 24 weeks 3 days. Five weeks after delivery, we performed a kidney biopsy. The core kidney tissue contained 21 glomeruli without global sclerosis. Two of the 21 glomeruli showed focal segmental sclerotic lesions, with epithelial cell hyperplasia and foam cells in the tubular poles . In addition, spike formations and bubbly appearances of the glomerular basement membrane were absent . In addition, hyaline arteriolosclerosis and intimal thickening in the interlobular arteries were not found .
Immunofluorescence (IF) staining demonstrated diffuse, linear, peripheral patterns of C4d, slight paramesangial patterns of IgM and negative results for IgG, IgA, C3, and C1q. Electron microscopy revealed diffuse subendothelial edema without electron-dense deposits. Further, diffuse foot process effacement was not observed . The histological diagnosis was severe glomerular endotheliosis with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) lesions. For the histology of the placenta, hemorrhagic infarction around the umbilical cord and syncytial knots were consistent with PE . As shown in her whole clinical course , 8 months after delivery, her proteinuria disappeared completely without anti-hypertensive agents, which was also compatible with PE. The neonate was diagnosed with respiratory distress syndrome, rickets, and retinopathy. His weight increased from 303 g to 2806 g 171 days after birth.