A 55-year-old female presented with chest pain and anterior ST elevation on electrocardiogram. She had no medical history and was taking no regular medications. Coronary angiography demonstrated occlusion of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery at the level of the first diagonal (D1) bifurcation. The patient went on to have primary percutaneous coronary intervention and both the LAD and D1 were wired with a Sion (Asahi Intecc) and Sion Blue (Asahi Intecc) wire, respectively. The procedure was performed with therapeutic unfractionated heparin (6000 units) and monitoring of the activated clotting time. A stent was deployed to the LAD. Proximal optimization technique was performed and the D1 was re-wired with the Sion Blue wire. During kissing balloon inflation, the Sion Blue wire migrated distally in the D1 causing an Ellis type 3 wire tip perforation in the distal D1 . The D1 was initially occluded with a semi-compliant balloon to stop the bleeding into the pericardium. Despite this, the patient became increasingly unstable with pulsus paradoxus initially seen on the arterial line tracing and subsequent haemodynamic collapse. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a large pericardial effusion with evidence of cardiac tamponade. Emergency pericardiocentesis was performed however the 8 French (8 Fr) pericardial drain was inadvertently inserted into the RV. This drain was left in situ and the 3-way tap placed off to drainage. A second pericardial drain was successfully inserted into the pericardium with complete drainage of the pericardium and subsequent stabilization of the patients’ haemodynamics. A hilal straight coil was deployed to the D1 to seal the coronary perforation. Both pericardial drains were left in place , and the patient was transferred to coronary care unit (CCU).
Echocardiography post-procedure demonstrated no re-accumulation of blood in the pericardium; however, the patient had severe impairment of left ventricular (LV) function and peak troponin was >10 000 ng/L (normal 0–14 ng/L). Clinically, the patient was persistently hypotensive with evidence of congestive cardiac failure on examination. Following discussion with the cardiothoracic team if was felt that the 8 Fr hole in the RV would not self-seal and surgical management was a high risk given the patient’s precarious clinical status. The patient had a normal body mass index (BMI) (height: 155 cm, weight: 53 kg, BMI: 22), and it was decided to attempt percutaneous closure with an 8 Fr angio-seal in the catheter lab under echocardiographic and fluoroscopic guidance. The pericardial drain correctly placed into the pericardium was left in situ for this procedure to provide backup in case of bleeding into the pericardium post removal of the RV drain. Additionally, the cardiothoracic team kept the theatre on standby in case of any serious complications.
A 0.038 guidewire was inserted into the RV pericardial drain under fluoroscopic guidance, and the pigtail drain was retracted over the guidewire . Echocardiography demonstrated flow of blood into the pericardium, and blood was also aspirated from the pericardial drain in the pericardium. The 8 Fr angio-seal was then deployed over the 0.038 guidewire to seal the RV perforation . No further pericardial effusion was seen on echocardiography. The pericardial drain in the pericardium was removed 24 h later when it was confirmed that there was no re-accumulation of pericardial fluid. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging performed 4 days later did not demonstrate any residual pericardial effusion. However, the LV function was severely reduced (25%) with eight segments of full-thickness infarction and apical thrombus. This case highlights that the angio-seal vascular closure device can be used to successfully treat an iatrogenic RV perforation. During her inpatient stay, the patient’s medication regimen was optimized with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ramipril), beta-blocker (bisoprolol), mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (eplerenone) in addition to dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and ticagrelor). The patient was discharged home on Day 10 post-infarct and repeat echocardiogram 8 weeks post-event again demonstrated absence of any recurrent pericardial effusion.