A 56-year-old woman had undergone a mastectomy with axillary lymph node dissection at 32 years of age (T2N1M0). She received tamoxifen for 2 years after surgery. When she was 42 years old, she was diagnosed with lung metastasis from the breast cancer, and a right upper lung lobe resection and lymph node dissection were performed. Images of the invasive ductal breast carcinoma that was resected when the patient was 32 years old and the lung metastasis from the breast cancer that was resected when the patient was 42 years old are shown in Fig. a and b, respectively.
More than 10 years after the lung resection, when the patient was 56 years old, she was referred to our hospital after complaining of dyspnea on exertion. She had a 3-month history of weight loss and a left neck mass. On hypopharyngoscopy, a tumor lesion was found in the left anterior wall of the hypopharynx, and the patient experienced bilateral vocal cord paralysis . A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck revealed a 24-mm heterogeneously enhanced tumor that extended through the left anterior wall of the hypopharynx . We performed a tracheostomy, hypopharyngeal biopsy, and lymph node extraction. Moreover, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography revealed high-level accumulation in the primary tumor, with a maximum standardized uptake value of 5.6, and metastatic neck lymph nodes. There was no evidence of a primary lung tumor or other distant metastases .
A pathologist analyzed the hypopharyngeal biopsy sample and diagnosed the neck lymph node lesion as a hypopharyngeal metastasis from breast cancer. The biopsy sample was estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, progesterone receptor (PR)-positive, and human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2)-negative . The patient completed oral aromatase inhibitor therapy and has remained alive after laryngeal preservation and hypopharyngeal tumor resection for the past 3 years. There was no evidence of any other active disease. The patient responded well, but she showed no objective improvement in laryngeal nerve function with a tracheostomy tube. This patient provided written informed consent under a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Boards at the Hamamatsu University School of Medicine.