A 23-year-old Japanese woman sustained severe injury in head-on car collision to a utility pole when she was in a passenger seat. Her friend called 119, and the fire station simultaneously dispatched a doctor helicopter from our hospital. She was brought to our hospital by a doctor helicopter, where she underwent primary survey of trauma and initial fluid administration. She had no remarkable past medical history and family history, and no history of pregnancy or childbirth. There were no particulars in her social and environmental background that needed to be mentioned. She had been working in a hotel restaurant since the age of 22 years regarding her employment history. She has no history of alcohol or smoking. Her airway was patent; her respiratory rate was 26 breaths/minute, and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 99% with an administration of oxygen at 10 L/minute. Her pulse rate and blood pressure were 75 beats/minute and 115/56 mmHg, respectively. Her consciousness level was 14 points (E3, V5, M6) according to the Glasgow Coma Scale, and no apparent paralysis of limbs was observed. No obvious trauma findings were observed on the head and face, except for a contusion on the right front forehead. There were no deviation of the trachea, subcutaneous emphysema, or jugular vein dilatation. She had tenderness in her posterior neck but no paralysis or sensory disturbance in her extremities. There were no obvious trauma findings on her chest and pelvis. Seat belt marks were noted on her right anterior chest and lower abdomen. Voluntary guarding and rebound tenderness were observed on her abdomen. She had marked spontaneous pain and tenderness in the upper lumbar spine, but had no abnormal neurological findings. There were no obvious abnormal findings on her extremities. Focused assessment sonography for trauma (FAST) revealed no hemoperitoneum. A whole-body contrast-enhanced CT was performed as her vital signs were stable. On abdominal CT, the head and body of her pancreas were remarkably swollen accompanied with hematoma, and an extravasation of contrast media from veins around the injured lesion was observed . Furthermore, the CT scan revealed a liver injury with extravasation of contrast media , injury of the lower lobe of spleen , left adrenal injury , fracture of the seventh cervical spinous process, and fracture of the first lumber vertebral body. The laboratory data of the patient on arrival at hospital are presented in Table .
We first performed an angiography to evaluate whether the patient had internal arterial hemorrhage. Since the main source of the bleeding was from vein around pancreatic injury, we could not perform transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE). Then, an endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP) was performed to identify pancreatic duct injury. The catheter was inserted into the pancreatic duct from the ampulla of Vater, and a disruption of main pancreatic duct was observed when the contrast agent was injected through the catheter. We tried to cannulate endoscopic pancreatic stenting tube (EPST) both from the ampulla of Vater and the accessory ampulla to the distal pancreatic duct passing through the transected part; however, we were unable to insert the EPST. Although the guidewire was able to pass through the distal pancreatic duct, endoscopic nasopancreatic drainage (ENPD) tube could not be placed to the distal duct over the injured region . Abdominal CT revealed major leakage of contrast media and free air in the intraperitoneal and retroperitoneal space around the pancreas following ERP . Therefore, we decided to perform an emergency laparotomy.
During the crash laparotomy, major hematoma and moderate hemorrhage on the pancreatic head were observed. A laceration with a diameter of approximately 2.5 cm and diffuse complex contusion were found on the cranial side of the pancreatic head after the Kocher’s maneuver and entering omental bursa . Since continuous bleeding from the laceration and diffuse contusion were observed, we decided to perform damage control surgery (DCS). We did an abbreviated surgery in which gauze packing to control bleeding and leakage of pancreatic juice in the initial surgery was performed, followed by the second surgery where pancreatic resection in the injured region and drainage of pancreatic juice by the placement of pancreatic duct tube was performed. Then, reconstruction with pancreaticogastrostomy was performed in the third surgery. In the initial abbreviated surgery, peripancreatic gauze packing was performed, fitting bilateral surfaces of the laceration, and then temporary abdominal closure was performed with ABTHERA (total surgical time was 65 minutes). The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) after the surgery.
On day 3, we tried to perform ERP again before the second surgery. A 5 Fr ENPD tube was successfully placed in the distal pancreatic duct from accessory ampulla passing through the injured part . Simultaneously, a 5 Fr EPST was inserted right next to the injured main pancreatic duct from the ampulla of Vater. Then, a second operation was performed. We confirmed that the bleeding from pancreatic injury had stopped, and the tissue damage around the pancreatic head was very partial and limited to a small area when the gauze was removed. The gauze packing played an important role in the control of both bleeding and leakage of pancreatic juice. The cholecystectomy was performed, and transcystic biliary drainage tube was placed in the common bile duct (CBD) from the cystic duct for external drainage of bile juice. The surgical drainage tube was placed on the posterior side of the pancreatic head and the anterior surface of the pancreatic laceration, and the abdominal wound was closed.
A peripheral venous line was inserted into the left upper extremity in the prehospital field, and a central venous (CV) line was inserted into the right internal jugular vein on admission. Midazolam was continuously administered from CV line as a sedative in the range of 0.5–1.0 mg/kg/hour, and fentanyl was continuously administered from CV line as an analgesic in the range of 1.0–1.5 μg/kg/hour according to the scale of sedation and analgesia during ventilation. Cefazolin (3 g/day) was administered via peripheral intravenous line until day 4. A proton pump inhibitor (60 mg/day) was administered as an antacid. From day 4, central venous nutrition (total parenteral nutrition, TPN) was administered from the CV line.
Her respiratory condition and circulatory status were stable after the second surgery. The tracheal tube was removed on day 4, and she was discharged from ICU to the general ward on day 7.
The patient was managed on nothing per os (NPO) until day 6, and then started oral liquid nutrition with limited fat in combination with TPN on day 7. On day 14, the patient’s nutrient intake was completely shifted from TPN to general hospital foods.
The amount of drainage of pancreatic fluid from the ENPD tube was approximately 400–500 ml/day. The amount of discharge from anterior and posterior surgical drainage tube around the pancreatic head tended to decrease as a maximum at about 125 ml/day on day 6 and 7, respectively . The amylase value of those drainage fluid peaked at 2462 IU/l and 1094 IU/l on day 4, respectively, and then gradually decreased. The value of serum amylase became normal on day 5. The drainage of the pancreatic duct with ENPD was very effective, and it was replaced by a 5 Fr endoscopic pancreatic stenting tube (EPST) for internal drainage on day 9 . Fluid collection around the pancreatic head was not remarkable, and a pseudoaneurysm and an extravasation of contrast media in her abdominal cavity were no longer observed on CT on day 14. The posterior and anterior surgical external drainage tube around the pancreatic head were removed on day 18 and 20, respectively . On day 38, 8.5 Fr of endoscopic biliary drainage (EBD) tube was placed in CBD from the ampulla of Vater for internal drainage in place of external drainage with C-tube.
Subsequently, her general condition improved, and the patient underwent rehabilitation for the first lumbar vertebral fracture. The patient’s medical condition fully recovered, and she was discharged on foot from our hospital on day 51.
Three months after discharge from the hospital, the bile duct stent and the EPST in the Wirsung duct were removed endoscopically. There were no abdominal symptoms after the removal of these tubes, and no elevation of biliary or pancreatic enzymes was observed. Five months after discharge, the EPST remaining in the Santorini duct was removed. She had no symptoms and no abnormal findings on blood tests and CT scan after the removal of the EPST. As a result, the follow-up was completed about 7 months after the injury.