A 7-year-old girl presented with an intellectual disability and four years of tic disorders. She was born to nonconsanguineous parents with unremarkable family history. Auxological parameters at birth were within the normal range. Her motor and language developmental milestones were delayed. At the age of 9 months, she was unable to turn, crawl or sit independently. Clinical and neurological examination revealed hypotonia, reduced movements, funnel chest, and hyperextended knees. The audiometric evaluation showed bilateral hearing impairment. The patient could not walk or speak single words until age 2. She underwent intensive speech training with slow improvement. At age 3, she developed involuntary bursts of screaming and has since experienced eye blinking, facial grimacing, and shoulder shrugging (Video S1). A diagnosis of TS was established one year later. Risperidone was initially tried without significant improvements. Aripiprazole and clonazepam were added, relieving her motor tics for a short duration. In the subsequent years, she developed several comorbidities, including attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and self-injurious behavior (SIB) for the presence of inattention, hyperactivity, cleaning rituals, rage attacks, picking at the finger skin to bleeding and repetitive slapping on the head (Video S1). The patient went to special education school due to learning difficulties.
Physical examination revealed dysmorphic craniofacial appearance including brachycephaly, broad forehead, arched eyebrows, epicanthal folds, midface retrusion, low-set ears with thickened helices, everted lower lip and tented upper lip as well as hyperextended knees . Insuppressible motor and vocal tics were frequently observed. The patient could only answer a few simple questions with slurred speech. Routine laboratory tests, including metabolic and genetic screening (whole-exome sequencing), were unremarkable. Brain MRI revealed periventricular white matter hyperintensities . Suspecting KS1 due to the typical facial features, CNV-seq was performed for the family after written consent. The parents’ CNV-seq screening was negative. The patient demonstrated a de novo 320-kb deletion in the 9q34.3 region (chr9:140721998–141,041,998) encompassing the EHMT1 gene.