A 68 year-old woman, 150-cm in height, weighing 45-kg with traumatic left femur fracture admitted to the hospital for total hip arthroplasty. She had been diagnosed of SSc ten years ago. Before surgery she was receiving deflazacort 13.5 mg/day every other day, pentoxifyllin 400 mg/day, acetylsalicylic acid 300 mg/day, cyclophosphamide 50 mg/day, colchicine 1 mg/day and risedronate sodium 35 mg/week. Deflazacort, acetylsalicylic acid, cyclophosphamide and colchicine were quited preoperatively.
On her physical examination, she has waxy, smooth and tight skin, decreased oral aperture (3 cm) and thyromental distance was 6 cm, the patient was almost bedridden secondary to severe flexion contractures of all four extremities. She had borderline hypertension (150/90 mmHg). She had chronic cough with bilaterally reduced lung sounds. Inspection of her back revealed kyphoscoliosis. Because of severe dyspne, she had echocardiyagram, the result was compatible with normal left ventricular size and contractility, minimal right atrial enlargement, minimal dilated hypo kinetic right ventricle. Bibasal pulmonary fibrosis was detected on her chest radiogram. The arterial blood gases and pulmonary function tests result were as fallow; fraction of inspired oxygen 0.21, PaO2 : 88.6 mmHg, PaCO2 : 18.8 mmHg, and pH: 7,51; forced expiratory volume in 1st second (FEV1):1,5 L, forced vital capacity (FVC): 1.9 L, total lung capacity 2,95 L. The liver and renal function tests were normal. The complete blood caunt was as follows. Hemoglobin:10.5 g/dl, platelet (plt) : 202 K/uL, protrombine time (PT):11.88 s (range:11.5–15 s) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT): 23.22s (range: 20–33 s).
The patient received 150 mg of ranitidine and 10 mg of metoclopramide thirty minutes before the regional block. In the operation room, arterial blood pressure (BP) was 153/92 mmHg, and her heart rate (HR)was 95 bpm. A 16 gauge venflon catheter was inserted into a vein in the dorsum of right hand, and 500 ml of 0.9 % NaCl solution was infused over the next 20 min. Standard monitoring was used throughout the procedure, including continuous ECG (Lead II), heart rate, non-invasive arterial blood pressure measured in every five minutes and continuous pulse oximetry. A senior experienced anesthesiologist performed the combined spinal- epidural (CSE) anesthesia. The patient was placed in the left side position and a disposable 16 gauge Toughy needle (portex) was introduced trough the L2/L3 epidural space under full aseptic condition without difficulty. The epidural space was located 5 cm from the skin via the loss of resistance technique with the midline approach. Then after 25 gauge 123 mm Whitacre spinal needle was inserted through the epidural needle, and free – flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was observed. Hyperbaric bupivacaine 0.5% 12.5 mg was injected over 30 sec without further CSF aspiration (speed of intrathecal injection approximately 0.05 ml.sec-1). Epidural catheter was inserted for the management of postoperative pain. The catheter was secured at 3 cm in the epidural space. Nothing was injected trough the catheter at this stage. The patient was kept in the left side position for 15 min.
The sensory block was evaluated by the pinprick test (22-gauge hypodermic needle), whereas motor block was evaluated by a modified Bromage scale (0 : no motor block; 1: hip block; 2: hip and knee block; 3 : hip, knee and ankle block). Ten minutes after the injection of local anesthetic solution, the sensory block level reached bilaterally to T8 dermatome level and the motor block level reched to Bromage 3 on both lower extremities.
Then, the patient was positioned supine on the operating table and surgery started at the 15th min. In order to avoid the vasospasm of Reynaud's phenomenon; the temperature of the operating room was kept at 24°C and intra arterial cannula wasn't inserted.
Estimated blood loss during 70 min. surgery was minimal (approximately 250 ml). In addition to infused metilprednisolon 20 mg/six hours and regular insulin 8 IU/six hours, total fluids given during surgery was 2500 ml of 0.9% NaCl. There was no remarkable variation on hemodynamic and SpO2 values with respect to baseline values throughout the procedure.
After the spinal injection, the motor block was completely regressed at 195th min and the sensory block was regressed at 225th min. Because the patient appeared to be pain free in recovery room, nothing was given through the epidural catheter. The patient had been monitorized in post anesthetic care unit for 2 days, and catheter was removed on postoperative day 2. Then, she was transferred to the orthopedic ward. She was discharged from the hospital at postoperative day 14 uneventfully.