A 73-year-old female, who wore disposable soft contact lenses presented to a Canadian Eye Department. Two weeks prior to admission, the individual began to experience irritation in her left eye and diminished sight, which were not resolving. On examination, she received a presumptive diagnosis of HSK. She was treated with combination therapy comprising of Zovirax eye ointment (an anti-viral drug with the active ingredient Aciclovir) and topical antibiotics.
Immediately on return to the UK, the patient attended their local Scottish National Health Service (NHS) Eye Department. Clinical symptoms consisted of photophobia, redness and intense pain in the left eye. A 3 week treatment course was given, including a continuation of Zovirax eye ointment along with antibacterial and topical steroids. Symptoms worsened with the patient describing rapid deterioration of vision combined with severe left-eye pain.
The patient was then referred to a specialist Scottish Ophthalmology centre where sight deterioration continued with visual acuity described as hand movements, and able to count fingers. Following a slit-lamp examination, a ring infiltrate of the cornea was visible in the patient’s left eye. On performing the slit-lamp examination, a typical appearance of an Acanthamoeba ring-like form was observed . Treatment for AK was started on a clinical basis, which comprised of the combination therapy, biguanide and diamidine. Corneal tissue derived from scraping the surface of the eye following the addition of fluorescein was removed, placed into transport media and sent directly to the Scottish Microbiology Reference Laboratories (SMiRL), for molecular testing.
On arrival at the laboratory, the sample was subjected to automated DNA extraction (easyMAG, BioMérieux) and molecular amplification using a real-time PCR assay. The DNA from each sample was ampliﬁed in duplicate as described by Alexander et al. . Ampliﬁcation of the human albumin gene was also included as an internal control . The cycling conditions consisted of 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 60 s and 40 °C for 5 s in a 25 µl reaction volume. A positive control (A. castellanii, reference 1501/1A) and a negative control, with no template and consisting of transport medium were run in each assay.
The presence of Acanthamoeba species DNA was reported by molecular testing, providing supportive laboratory evidence for an AK diagnosis. Following 4 weeks of treatment, a further corneal tissue was submitted for molecular testing, which was also shown to be positive. On a monthly basis, a total of four follow-up corneal tissues were submitted and all four samples were reported to contain Acanthamoeba DNA.
Despite continued topical treatment, the keratitis failed to resolve, with molecular evidence of persistent Acanthamoeba activity. Following unsuccessful topical treatment, a corneal transplant was performed 8 months after the initial diagnosis. This first transplant was unsuccessful due to tissue dehiscence possibly due to persistent Acanthamoeba infection. A positive Acanthamoeba PCR finding was noted 19 days post-transplant. A second transplant was performed 10 weeks later. Further molecular testing was performed 11 days later after this second transplant and was found to be negative. No clinical recurrence was observed and the second transplant was deemed successful. The timeline of prognosis to being treated is highlighted in .