A 16-year-old Indonesian male patient was admitted to the emergency room of our hospital with a complaint of severe pain in his knee in the last three months that was not relieved with analgesics. The patient came from a low socio-economic family and was from a small district. At birth, the parents noticed a bluish lump on the right scrotum but did not consult any doctor. At 4 years old, a mass started to show on the right ankle of the patient. He underwent surgery to reduce the mass, but this did not result in a visible significant reduction. Since around that age, some parts of the right leg started to enlarge slowly and causing asymmetry. At 10 years old, the patient started to experience pain and underwent another surgery in the right thigh area and the pain subsided. After the last surgery, the patient had not experienced disturbing pain until three months before admission. Due to the lack of a prior definitive diagnosis, the patient was not advised to use compression garments daily and was only prescribed analgesics for pain.
At the time of the admission, the physical examination showed multiple areas with bulging varicosities in a bluish color and soft tissue enlargement in the right lower limb, a slightly shorter right lower limb, and asymmetry (A). The right scrotum was also enlarged and bluish in color. The enlargement areas on the right lower limb were compressible, and the knee area was painful spontaneously and on palpation. The pain was aggravated when walking and lessened when lying down. The venography showed that the contrast filled the superficial-deep veins on the right foot, the superficial vein of the right leg, the right popliteal vein, and the right thigh superficial vein. These features were indicating aneurysmal enlargements. Vascular calcifications (phleboliths) of the soft tissue swellings were also found on the right thigh, knee, leg, and foot. The MSCT angiography showed multiple solid calcified lesions on the right scrotum, thigh, pelvis, and leg (B). Right bone hypotrophy (thigh, tibia, fibula) was also confirmed by MSCT (C). The physical and supporting examinations were like the features of KTS except that this patient had bone hypotrophy instead of bone hypertrophy. This led to the diagnosis of the rare SMS.
At our hospital, the patient was prepared for surgery. The patient underwent surgical excision of the venous malformations for pain and hypertrophy in the right knee region in a supine position (A, B) by a thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon. The patient was advised to wear elastic bandages postoperatively. During the one-month follow-up, the patient felt significantly reduced pain and was advised to use compression garments routinely to prevent trauma. Family consent for patient data and photographs was obtained. The patient was also scheduled for follow-ups. A multidisciplinary approach to this patient is required for better maintenance of the symptoms and to limit disabilities.