An 80-year-old male with HF with reduced ejection fraction (EF, 20%) due to ischaemic cardiomyopathy NYHA Class III symptoms and a recent admission for HF was referred for CardioMEMS implantation. He has a past medical history of atrial fibrillation, moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic kidney disease, peripheral artery disease, and implantable cardiac defibrillator placement. Heart failure was being managed with metoprolol tartrate 25 twice a day (b.i.d.) and torsemide 10 mg every other day, for atrial fibrillation he was receiving apixaban 5 mg b.i.d., and for COPD he was receiving a combination of fluticasone, umeclidinium, and vilantero along with ipratropium–albuterol. Echocardiogram showed an EF of 20% with moderately dilated left ventricular cavity, mild mitral regurgitation, and moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation. Apixaban and clopidogrel were held 24 h before the procedure. During the deployment procedure, the PA systolic/diastolic/mean pressures were 52/21/36 mmHg, respectively, and the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure was 23 mmHg. The CardioMEMS device was deployed in the left lower lobe segmental PA. The patient developed haemoptysis and dyspnoea during the procedure and was given intravenous furosemide 80 mg for suspected acute pulmonary oedema in the cardiac catheterization laboratory, after which the patient reported considerable improvement. Post-procedure chest radiograph showed right-sided transudative pleural effusion, which was managed with thoracocentesis along with new consolidation in the mid-left lung on the side of the device placement .
Laboratory testing post-procedure showed down-trending haemoglobin from 9.9 to 6.1 gm/dL and international normalized ratio of 2.1 even after transfusion of 1 unit of packed red blood cell (pRBC) and two units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP). The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 45 mg/dL and creatinine were 1.6 mg/dL. To further manage post-procedure haemoptysis, the patient was transferred from the community-based hospital to a tertiary-care centre. On evaluation, injury to the distal branch of the PA during CardioMEMS placement was suspected. The patient developed intermittent episodes of small-volume haemoptysis with ongoing conservative management (intravenous fluids, supplemental oxygen therapy, pRBC, and FFP transfusion). As the patient was considered stable, he was taken for a computerized tomographic angiography (CTA), which showed a 3.4 cm pseudoaneurysm with active extravasation from the superior segmental branch of the left PA . After a multi-disciplinary meeting with the patient, embolization of the pseudoaneurysm was planned by the interventional radiology service.
For the pseudoaneurysm embolization procedure, ultrasound-guided right common femoral vein access was obtained. The pulmonary angiogram showed a large pseudoaneurysm arising from a branch supplying the superior segment of the left lower lobe in the left mid-lung . The decision to perform coil embolization was made, a 2 mm coil was placed in the distal PA branch beyond the pseudoaneurysm neck, a coil scaffold was created across the neck using a 40 mm × 6 cm detachable ruby framing coil (Penumbra, Alameda, CA, USA), and a 3 mm × 1.2 cm coil was placed along the proximal aspect of the inflow feeding artery along with multiple additional 2 mm packing coils. The final left pulmonary angiogram showed complete stasis and no further filling of the pseudoaneurysm sac . The patient was extubated and transferred to the intensive care unit for monitoring and conservative management (intravenous fluids, pRBC, torsemide 20 mg started). Investigations the following day showed improvement in dyspnoea with stabilization of haemoglobin (7.9 mg/dL) and improvement of creatinine (1.44 mg/dL) and BUN (38 mg/dL), after which the patient was discharged home.