The patient was a 36-year-old Japanese female with hearing discomfort in the left ear and a feeling of depression. Patient details were as follows: Occupation: housewife; Ethnicity: Japanese. Since 2002, she was being treated as a case of Meniere disease in another hospital. In 2003, she experienced insomnia and an appetite loss, and her condition was diagnosed as major depression along with an avoidant personality disorder in department of psychiatry. She visited department of psychosomatic medicine in another hospital. She was diagnosed as major depression and medical treatment was introduce with fluvoxamine maleate 150 mg (t.i.d.), zolpidem tartrate 5 mg, ethyl loflazepate 0.5 mg and trazodone hydrochloride 25 mg (v.d.s.). She was referred to our department because of the hearing discomfort in the left ear. We could not find out any organic abnormality by physical examinations. We carefully ruled out the potential disorders provoking earfulness including TMJ (temporomandibular joint) dysfunction, and dental infection and so on with the help of dentist who is specialized in oral surgery. There were no tender points to be sufficient to make diagnosis as fibromyalgia. The results of pure tone audiometry indicated normal hearing; hence, the symptom was considered to be a manifestation of depression. She wanted to continue to be treated in our department of otorhinolaryngology; we had started her treatment after informed consent. The results of the psychological examination were as follows: Self-rating Depression Scale (SDS), 52; Japanese version of the Cornell Medical Index (CMI), IV; Manifest Anxiety Scale (MAS), 31, and Y-G (Yatada-Guilford personality inventory); AE. We diagnosed her as major depression by DSM-IV because of her depressed mood most of the day, markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, significant weight loss, and insomnia.
We decided to focus on treating the patient's anxiety and depression with our clinical psychologist. At the beginning the dose of fluvoxamine maleate was increased up to 200 mg/day and sulpiride 100 mg (b.i.d.). After 1 month following the patient's first visit, a clinical psychologist introduced cognitive therapy and autogenic training (AT). The cognitive therapy focused to improve her low self evaluation. AT was introduced by a clinical psychologist so as to ease her mental stress. The psychotherapy consisted of one 45-minute session every 3 to 4 weeks. The first session began with a brief introduction to the general background information about the cognitive approach, after which the patient was instructed how to perform AT. Thereafter, the patient performed AT in a relaxed sitting position on a chair for 10 minutes 3 times a day. No self-monitoring was advised. The patient was instructed to carry out slow and deep abdominal breathing at the beginning of AT and regular breathing during AT. Autogenic training session was conducted by the following instructions.
The patient was instructed to sit in the meditative posture and scan the body and to imagine the phrase consists from background formula to sixth formula. The background formula is "I am quite relaxed and my mind is extremely calm". The following formula was introduced. The phrase of first standard formula is "my both arms and legs are heavy". The second standard formula is "My both arms and legs are warm" followed by canceling. She diligently and regularly continued this AT routine 3 times a day from background formula to canceling at her home, according to a written timetable. She learned background, first and second standard formulas of AT in 6 psychotherapy sessions. Astonishingly, after the introduction of AT, her mood stabilized and her ear discomfort and insomnia disappeared in a few weeks.
The patient appreciated the effect of AT and admitted a drastic reduction in her distorted cognition. Eventually, her depressive state, anxiety as well as the hearing complaint was markedly alleviated.