A 29-year-old male patient experienced left heel pain with swelling after the assault as he was hit by an iron rod 8 days prior. There was no history of chronic illness.
According to Beavis et al. classification, the fracture was Type 2 (Beak fracture) . A 2 × 2 cm blister was present on the posterior aspect of the heel . The patient was classed as Stage I by anesthetic profile according to the American Society of Anaesthesiology.
After spinal anesthesia and tourniquet application to the thigh; the patient was given prone position on OT table. Before starting with the incision; the blister over the fracture fragment was debrided thoroughly. A posterolateral ankle approach skin incision was made to expose the calcaneal tuberosity. After exposure, the displaced fracture fragment was pulled distally and held in place with a ball tip reduction clamp to achieve anatomical reduction. A 6 mm CC screw guide wire was passed perpendicular to the fracture plane under Fluoroscopic guidance (Screw “A”). A second 6 mm CC screw guide wire was passed in an oblique fashion distal to the previous wire (Screw “B”). Both the guide wires were checked for position and trajectory under C-Arm and were measured. Two 6 mm CC screws of measured length were passed over the guide wires along with washers to take plantar calcaneal cortex purchase. Care was taken not to over-penetrate the cortex so as to prevent potential plantar fascia irritation. The second oblique CC screw serves to nullify Achilles tendon force thereby preventing re-avulsion ( and ). Posterior heel blister was debrided again and covered with cotton gauze .
Post-surgery, the leg was immobilized in a below-knee slab with the foot in equinus position for 2 weeks. At 2-week post-surgery, after removing the sutures and confirming the healthy skin condition; the slab was replaced by a below-knee cast in an equinus position and the patient was encouraged to start partial weight bearing with the help of a walker. 4 weeks after surgery, the cast was removed and ankle range of motion (ROM) was started and he was allowed to walk with complete weight bearing wearing a heel raise. The height of the heel raise was reduced each week and the heel raise was removed completely at 6 weeks.
The patient could walk with a single crutch at 4 weeks. The radiological union was appreciated at 3 months without any fracture displacement. There was no restriction or apprehension in ankle ROM at 6 weeks. The skin and blister was healed in 2 weeks. The patient could resume pre-injury day to day activities within 1 month.