A 61-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital on February 3, 2021 because of a 4 month history of cough and expectoration accompanied by multiple red rashes, edema, and painful subcutaneous nodules in the legs. She had been initially admitted and treated at a local hospital. Purified protein derivative (PPD) test result showed positive, but she was nonresponsive to piperacillin–tazobactam and hormone therapy. The vital signs during the initial examination were as follows: body temperature, 36 °C; blood pressure, 112/72 mmHg; heart rate, 106 beats/min; and respiratory rate: 20 breaths/min. Physical examination revealed painful subcutaneous nodules in the left calf. The patient had no previous history of immunodeficiency or exposure to immunosuppressants.
Initial laboratory examinations indicated that elevated levels of white blood cells (WBCs) and C-reactive protein (CRP) and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and immunoglobulin E (IgE) level . Notably, other routine biochemistry, kidney, and liver function tests yielded normal findings. Lymphocyte subset counts and percentages were normal. HIV serology and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction for COVID-19 were negative. Chest computerized tomography (CT) revealed bilateral pulmonary consolidation with hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy . Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was negative. The biopsied tissue from the skin of her left leg showed chronic suppurative inflammation. M. tuberculosis was identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption–ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI–TOF MS) from biopsied tissues. Despite the lack of evidence of NTM infection, we did not rule out NTM infection because the patient presented with skin and lung lesions and rapid disease progression. Therefore, empirical anti-NTM treatments with cefoxitin, moxifloxacin, azithromycin, anti-tuberculosis rifampicin, and ethambutol regimens were successively administered, but no improvement was observed.
By the end of February 2021, the patient was hospitalized twice for recurrent cough and expectoration. Meanwhile, she presented with swelling and pain of the bilateral calf and started experiencing fever. The maximum body temperature was 39.5 °C. Chest CT displayed progressed consolidation in the bilateral lungs . We sent BALF for mNGS again, and Mycobacterium intracellulare was detected. The patient continued antibacterial therapy (comprising rifampicin, ethambutol, moxifloxacin, and azithromycin). However, the patient was hospitalized again because skin lesions (including the submental and right submandibular skin, hands, and back) increased, and redness in her right eye was observed during 2 months of follow-up . Thus, moxifloxacin was stopped, and isoniazid was added to the treatment regimen. Ultrasound showed bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy, and the re-examination of chest CT indicated that the lung lesions were slightly absorbed . The emission CT showed a significantly increased uptake in multiple bones, including the skull, sternum, multiple ribs, left iliac bone, right forearm and femur, and bilateral ankle joints . To obtain definitive pathogen evidence, we performed MALDI-TOF MS, and pathogens from the right cervical lymph node were cultured. M. tuberculosis was detected by MALDI-TOF MS, and T. marneffei was cultured from the biopsied lymph node. Amphotericin B was added as antifungal therapy, and the antibacterial regimen was simultaneously adjusted to rifampicin, ethambutol, isoniazid, and levofloxacin because of an adverse reaction of the gastrointestinal tract to azithromycin. The patient was anti-IFN-γ autoantibody positive with a titer of 1:2500, as determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The patient was diagnosed as positive to IFN-γ autoantibodies with disseminated T. marneffei, NTM, and M. tuberculosis infections.
After nearly 6 months of anti-infective treatment, the patient’s clinical condition remained stable, skin symptoms improved, and lung lesions were absorbed. However, she complained of amaurosis, redness, photophobia, and tearing of right eye with obvious fatigue . The patient’s WBC count was normal, but immunological and inflammatory tests revealed elevated CRP (47.64 mg/L), ESR (123 mm/h), and IgE concentration (269.8 g/L; Table ). The ophthalmic clinic examination revealed conjunctivitis, hyperemia, and edema of the right eye, and the corneal fluorescein staining showed pseudodendritic lesions. We suspected that the root cause was immune-mediated allergic conjunctivitis caused by anti-IFN-γ autoantibodies. This condition followed the patterns of types I and IV hypersensitivity mechanisms. Corticosteroid treatment (methylprednisolone 16 mg every 24 h) and local application of tacrolimus eye drops were initiated. After 2 weeks, the ocular symptoms improved dramatically, and inflammation, immunoglobulin level, and the titer of anti-IFN-γ antibody were reduced . Thereafter, the patient’s clinical condition remained stable without relapse.