A previously healthy 5-year-old Japanese girl presented with gait disturbance that rapidly progressed over 4 days. She could not stand and was referred to the Juntendo University Hospital in August 2021. The results of the physical examination were as follows: manual muscle testing of the hip joint was 2/3, knee extension was 2/3, ankle dorsiflexion was 2/4, deep tendon reflex of the kneecap was +/+, Achilles tendon was −/−, Babinski reflex was +/+, and superficial limb sensory examination revealed +/+ results for both the right and left sides. Additionally, the right and left sides demonstrated severe dullness, and bladder–rectal disturbances were present. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine revealed an extramedullary tumor at T5 without bony destruction or metastasis . Preoperative differential diagnoses by a radiologist included ependymoma or schwannoma. The tumor was almost completely removed macroscopically by the surgeon; however, adhesions to the nerves were prominent. Intraoperative findings indicated that the tumor was extramedullary. The patient regained the ability to walk with assistance. We awaited pathology results to determine additional treatments. One month after surgery, the patient experienced symptoms of recurrence, including lower-extremity sensory deficits and bladder–rectal disturbances. We performed cranial and spinal MRI, which confirmed an enlarged tumor in the same region without metastases. Pathological analysis revealed ATRT at the time. The tumor comprised small cells with indistinct differentiation, pale nuclei with distinct nucleoli, and vacuoles. The cells expressed various cell lineage markers such as vimentin and synaptophysin, and INI-1 expression was lost in tumor cell nuclei. Chemoradiotherapy was promptly initiated according to the European Rhabdoid Registry (EU-RHAB) protocol., Radiotherapy was started immediately; therefore, we followed the protocol and administered a single methotrexate intrathecal injection before the start of radiotherapy. Cerebrospinal fluid cytology revealed no malignant findings; hence, we decided to administer local extended tumor region irradiation by photon stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) with 54.0 Gy (1.8 Gy/day, five fractions/week). One month later, MRI revealed that the tumor had disappeared and complete remission (CR) was achieved. Consequently, we administered high-dose chemotherapy with carboplatinum (500 mg/m2 from day −6 to day −4) and thiotepa (300 mg/m2 from day −6 to day −4) followed by autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (day 0) based on EU-RHAB., The patient completed the treatment without any adverse events other than hematological toxicity and remained in CR. The patient regained the ability to walk unassisted through rehabilitation intervention, and her bladder–rectal disturbances were resolved.
The patient remained in CR and attended school unassisted for 5 months. However, the patient developed an ataxic gait, and MRI revealed cerebellar recurrence . No recurrence was observed in the spinal cord . The neurosurgeons completely resected the tumor macroscopically. Postoperative MRI resonance imaging confirmed that the tumor had been completely removed. Regarding additional treatment, chemotherapy was considered ineffective because of early recurrence after chemotherapy, including high-dose chemotherapy. Regarding radiotherapy, the radiologist determined that re-irradiation of the already irradiated area was associated with a high risk of neurological necrosis; therefore, local irradiation of 54.0 Gy (1.8 Gy/day, five fractions/week) by intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) at the tumor bed of the cerebellum was performed.
The patient regained the ability to walk unassisted; however, 1 month after RT, she developed pain and paresthesia in the lower extremities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed recurrence at a non-irradiated site in the lumbar spinal cord (mass lesion at T10-L1 and contrast effect at T6 to cauda equina; Figure ). Local irradiation with SRT photons (20.0 Gy) was administered at the T12–L3 level for symptom relief. The patient's lower extremity pain and sensory disturbances resolved, but her ataxic gait persisted.
One month later, follow-up MRI revealed recurrence in the cerebrum , and spinal cord MRI incidentally revealed lung metastases . There were no lesions in the lungs as far as they could be observed on MRI at the time of the initial onset and at the time of the first recurrence, and there were no lesions in the kidneys or liver. The patient had no family history of malignancy among her grandparents, parents, or brothers. Computed tomography revealed multiple lung tumors but no other affected sites . We considered this to be pulmonary metastasis of ATRT. At the parent's request, we performed tumor resection of the right lower lung to differentiate between a benign tumor, a second cancer, and ATRT metastasis. The tumor was composed of undifferentiated small cells with a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio similar to the initial presentation. Extensive necrosis was observed in the tumor. INI-1 was negative. The patient could play and perform personal care in a sitting position but could not stand alone. We considered the possibility of enrolling the patient in a phase I study of enhancer of zeste homolog (EZH) 1/2 dual inhibitors, which are considered effective for malignant rhabdoid tumors, but decided against it because the patient did not meet the eligibility criteria. The patient's Lansky score was less than 50 because the patient could not stand by herself.
Two weeks later, although the patient was in good general health except for difficulty in walking independently, contrast-enhanced MRI showed enhancing effects from the brain surface along the spinal cord, with the tumor disseminated throughout the entire CSF space . No non-pulmonary or new pulmonary metastases were observed. The tumors were aggressive and refractory to treatment. We introduced home healthcare and transitioned her to palliative care according to the parents' wishes. The patient was discharged home and died 3 weeks later, 15 months after the initial diagnosis.