A 57-year-old male from rural Nepal presented to the emergency department with pain on the left upper abdomen for 1 week. He was diagnosed with dengue infection (NS1 Ag positive) following a febrile illness 10 days back at his local hospital. The pain was continuous, dull aching in nature, nonradiating, relieved partially by analgesics, and moderate in severity. His past medical history, personal history, family history, and allergic history were unremarkable. On examination, he was ill-looking with vitals within the normal limits. There was a marked tenderness over the left hypochondrium. Other systemic examinations were noncontributory. Initial investigations revealed, hemoglobin 12.3 g/dl, total leukocyte count 8.3×103/µl (N=70%, L=22%), platelet count 60 000/µl. Renal function test showed value of urea 70 mg/dl, creatinine 1.6 mg/dl, sodium 132 mEq/l, potassium 3.4 mEq/l. Serum amylase, total serum bilirubin, and direct serum bilirubin, and coagulation profile and liver enzymes were within normal limits. Dengue profile revealed serum NS1 Ag and immunoglobulin M antibody positive. Urgent Ultrasound Guidance of the abdomen and pelvis revealed splenomegaly with splenic subcapsular collections with low-level echogenicity within measuring 4.1×4.8×2.1 cm/22 ml suggestive of splenic subcapsular hematoma. He was resuscitated with intravenous fluid. Two pints of platelet rich plasma were transfused in line with his low platelet count and evidence of hemorrhage. Contrast enhanced computed tomography scan of the abdomen was done, which confirmed grade II splenic hematoma which was planned to be managed conservatively. On the third day of admission, there was a drop in his blood pressure requiring inotropic support. He was intubated for deteriorating consciousness and mechanical ventilation was started. His lab parameters showed rising leukocyte count 16.5×103/µl (N=81%, L=16%). Sepsis with septic shock was considered and broad spectrum antibiotics were started. On the fifth day of admission, his chest radiography findings showed patchy consolidations over the right lung field suggestive of hospital acquired pneumonia. He remained hypotensive despite maximal inotropic support and fluid resuscitation. A bed-side ultrasonography of the abdomen was considered in the view of a possible splenic rupture. However, it showed no evidence of hematoma rupture or free intraperitoneal fluid. Since his vitals were unstable, a repeat computed tomography scan of the abdomen could not be performed. He subsequently passed away on the fifth day of admission due to refractory septic shock.