A 15-year-old boy was referred to with an uncontrolled IOP in the left (LT) eye. Irrelevant medical and family history and no past interventions.
Examination revealed features of unilateral SWS on the left side of the face. The skin showed capillary angiomas in the distribution of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve with dilated episcleral vessels on the surface of the LT eye and gonioscopy revealed reddish coloration of the trabecular meshwork. The best corrected visual acuities (OU) were 1.0 oculus uterque [right (RT) eye: +0.25, −0.75 @5°, (LT) eye: +1.5, −0.25 @115°]. IOP was 18 mm Hg on the RT eye and 40 mm Hg in the LT eye using Goldmann applanation tonometry, under a combination of topical B-blockers and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors eye drop applied twice daily only to the LT eye. The slit lamp examination was normal. Optic nerve head examination showed thinning of the neuroretinal rim. B-scan ocular ultrasonography showed diffuse choroidal thickening in all quadrants .
Color fundus photography showed diffuse redness with enhanced visibility of the RNFL defects, being darker in color and easily distinguishable, from the surrounding retina .
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the peripapillary RNFL [Optovue, Fremont, California (CA), US] showed thinning (average total is 94 μm, average superior 74 μm, and inferior 85 μm) together with a mild reduction of the GCC thickness in the macular region. The 30-2 visual field-testing showed moderate glaucomatous damage (MD −5.99, outside normal glaucoma hemifield testing with superior and inferior arcuate defects).
The uncontrolled glaucoma was managed by trans-scleral diode cyclophotocoagulation. A total of 24 nonoverlapping spots were applied circumferentially sparing the 3 and 9 clocks’ meridians. The laser parameters were 1500 MW power and 3 seconds. Laser treatment was done under general anesthesia using the fiber-optic Iris G-probe (OcuLight SLx, Iris Medical Instruments, Mountain View, CA, US).
At the 12-month visit, the IOP reached 20 mm Hg under a combination of topical β-blockers and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors eye drops applied twice daily only to the LT eye. At this point, a topical α-agonist is added and the patient is awaiting further evaluations and a possible laser redo .