An 81-year-old man was admitted to our institution with a five-month history of a painful enlarging mass at the right popliteal fossa and calf. There was no history of trauma. His past medical history was unremarkable. He had undergone a primary total knee arthroplasty of his right knee seven years previously for degenerative knee osteoarthritis.
Clinical examination showed painful restriction of the range of motion of the right knee, and a palpable mass at the posterior-medial aspect of the knee . The calf was slightly painful during palpation and passive stretching.
Plain radiographs of the right knee showed narrowing of the medial compartment, varus deformity of the arthroplasty, and features of loosening including radiolucent lines next to the femoral and tibial components. Some degree of polyethylene wear, especially in the medial compartment, was suspected . Magnetic resonance imaging of the right knee showed a cystic lesion located at the postero-medial aspect of the knee joint mimicking a popliteal cyst or soft tissue sarcoma . Plain radiographs of the chest were normal. A routine laboratory examination including complete blood cell count, serum chemistries, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein reported values within normal ranges. Triplex ultrasonography showed no evidence of deep venous thrombosis.
Fine needle aspiration biopsy was carried out, but it was non-diagnostic. A core-needle biopsy revealed a black fluid containing thick, amorphous metallic debris and fragments of broken polyethylene. Histological sections showed necrobiotic tissue, wear debris and metallic particles, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells. Nucleous atypia and mitotic features were not observed. Gram stain and cultures were negative for infection.
Revision knee surgery showed massive metallosis, osteolysis of the distal femur and the proximal tibia and extensive polyethylene wear and deformation distributed asymmetrically over the medial and lateral joint surfaces . Debridement of the knee joint was done followed by revision of the femoral and tibial components and the polyethylene insert, in addition to patella arthroplasty . The patient's recovery was uncomplicated. His rehabilitation included strengthening and a range of motion exercises, which he started on the second postoperative day. The patient was discharged uneventfully after seven days of hospitalization. At the latest examination 2.5 years post-operatively the patient had a painless and stable knee joint without any clinical or imaging evidence of wear, metallosis or infection.