The patient was a 75-year-old Caucasian woman who presented to our clinic in 2019 complaining of dermatochalasis of the upper eyelids (blepharochalasis) and asking for upper eyelid rejuvenation. Her past medical history was otherwise unremarkable. In the past 2 years she had been injected several times with an HA filler on her upper eyelids at a private clinic (she received three injections, once every 4 months), but the treatment worsened her clinical presentation. Indeed, an excessive amount of HA was injected (the patient reported more than 1.5 mL for each eyelid), and instead of improving the shape and contour, the filler caused increased weight of the superior eyelid, resulting in worsening of her symptoms.
She reported nonspecific eye symptoms, such as a sense of heaviness and asthenopia, and cosmetic concerns, as it gave the patient a tired and dull look to the face, compared to the situation before HA injection .
After a thorough assessment of the patient, we decided that further medical treatments were not ideal in this situation; for this reason, we agreed that a bilateral upper eyelid blepharoplasty was the best choice.
Upon preoperative marking and injection of mepivacaine 20 mg/mL with adrenaline, we performed exeresis of the excess musculocutaneous tissue of the upper eyelids, appropriate hemostasis, opening of the superior orbitopalpebral fascia, removal of excess adipose tissue hernias and suturing of the skin flaps.
During the procedure we found a ribbon of hard, fibrous material, which was carefully removed .
Histopathological examination showed the presence of irregular, amorphous, light grayish to bluish material that separated from dispersed collagen bundles with sparse inflammatory cell infiltration in the lower dermis and subcutaneous areolar tissue. The amorphous material stained blue with Alcian blue, pH 2.5. These findings were considered to be consistent with HA.
The patient had a good recovery, and sutures were removed 1 week postoperatively. Superficial ecchymosis resolved in 10 days; no postoperative complications including superficial hematoma, wound dehiscence, scar abnormalities or upper eyelid overcorrection were observed .
The aesthetic result obtained includes sharp and precise supratarsal crease with pretarsal show; appropriate lid position, with the upper lid extending down 2 mm below the upper limbus and the lower eyelid resting at the inferior limbus; and smooth lid-cheek junction.
The patient reported resolution of functional eye symptoms owing to the reduction of upper lid heaviness, which also resulted in subjective improvement of visual acuity.
Patient satisfaction was assessed pre- and postoperatively (3 months from surgery) using the Blepharoplasty Outcomes Evaluation (BOE), a six-item free questionnaire evaluating appearance, function and social acceptance. Each of the six items is scored on a scale of 0–4, with 0 representing the most negative response and 4 the most positive. Dividing the total score for each instrument by 24 and multiplying by 100 yields the scaled instrument score. This range is 0–100, with 0 representing the lowest patient satisfaction and 100 representing the highest patient satisfaction .
The overall satisfaction reported by the patient was 25% preoperatively, while her level of satisfaction 3 months after the procedure was 95.8 %.