A 66-year-old woman presented at a hospital with chest pain. Her history included diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. On examination, the patient had a pulse of 100 beats/minute and blood pressure of 150/80 mmHg. Her electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and blood test results were normal. Multislice computed tomography (CT) showed a saccular LMCA aneurysm and significant stenosis in the LAD artery . Coronary angiography revealed a saccular LMCA aneurysm measuring 9.8 × 7.5 mm with 75% stenosis in the proximal portion of the LAD artery. The operation was performed under general anesthesia. A median sternotomy was performed, and after a longitudinal pericardial opening was made, the heart was inspected. The LITA was removed from the inner chest wall in a skeletonized fashion using electric cautery. A distal segment of 1.5–2 cm was procured and reserved for use as a patch repair. Before aortic cannulation, the ascending aorta was dissected from the pulmonary artery. Under cardiopulmonary bypass, coronary artery bypasses of the left internal thoracic artery to the LAD artery were constructed in the beating heart. After aortic cross-clamping, the LMCA saccular aneurysm was exposed without main pulmonary artery transection. The saccular LMCA aneurysm was carefully dissected and completely excised. There was no thrombus in the lumen. Then, the LITA was longitudinally divided and trimmed to fit the incised LMCA. The small internal thoracic artery patch was sutured to the normal and firm lateral coronary arterial wall with a continuous 7–0 Polypropylene suture. Resection of the saccular aneurysm and closure using a small internal thoracic artery patch was then complete. The aortic cross-clamp time was 120 min, and the CPB time was 147 min. The patient had an uneventful hospitalization and was discharged on aspirin therapy. Follow-up multislice CT 10 days after the operation revealed the complete disappearance of the aneurysm and a successful repair with no luminal stenosis by the internal thoracic artery patch. The LITA graft was also found to be patent . The patient has been followed up yearly since 2009. Fortunately, at the 9-year follow-up, the patient was still asymptomatic, and there were no changes in the ECG and UCG. The patient included in the follow-up had preserved preoperative left ventricular function, and there was no coronary incompetence. Pathology of the aneurysm revealed that the aneurysm wall was very thin due to a lack of trilaminar arterial structure from the remarkable atherosclerotic changes .