A 63-year-old man presented with superficial lymphadenopathy for more than 4 months and severe rashes for 3 months.
Symptoms and signs began 4 months ago, and the rashes recurred, gradually increasing in size and severity.
The 63-year-old man noticed a 1.5 cm × 1 cm mass on the right neck and a 2 cm × 1 cm mass under the right armpit 4 months before admission without overt causes. The patient experienced fatigue, poor appetite, acid regurgitation, heartburn, and nausea, but no vomiting, fever, or night sweats. A routine blood test at the local hospital revealed a platelet count of 55 × 109/L; a color Doppler ultrasound examination revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes throughout the body. A biopsy of the right cervical lymph node was performed at the local hospital, and pathological analysis showed a tendency toward B-NHL. Following the recommendations of the local hospital, the patient was orally administered 80 doses of a traditional Chinese medicine preparation, but the symptoms did not significantly improve. Three months before admission, the patient developed red maculopapular skin rashes on both lower limbs, which gradually expanded to cover the head, face, trunk, and limbs with ulceration and pus. The patient self-administrated prednisone acetate at 20 mg/d for 3 d, but the symptoms continued to progressively worsen. Consequently, the patient was admitted to our department for a definitive diagnosis of lymphadenopathy and rash etiology. Patient weight was unchanged before the 1st half-year of admission.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
Large areas of dark red rashes were observed on the face, chest, abdomen, back, and limbs, with some being ruptured and purulent, and others scabbed, without tenderness . The patient had multiple enlarged lymph nodes that were palpable in the neck, clavicular region, axilla and inguinal region of both sides, with the largest one of approximately 3 cm × 2 cm found on the right neck. The lymph nodes were hard, mobile, nontender, and nonadherent to the surrounding tissues. No specific positive signs were observed in the heart and lungs. The abdomen was flat and soft. The liver was not palpable under the ribs, while the spleen was palpable 8 cm below the ribs without tenderness. The patient also had bilateral lower limb edema.
Routine blood test revealed white blood cell (WBC) count at 7.15 × 109/L, hemoglobin at 142 g/L, lymphocyte count at 1.85 × 109/L, and platelet count at 112 × 109/L.
Biochemical analysis showed alanine aminotransferase at 46.56 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase at 46.90 IU/L, serum albumin at 24.47 g/L, and β2 microglobulin at 6.48 mg/L. No obvious abnormality was detected in blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, lactate dehydrogenase, electrolytes, immunoglobulin (Ig) A, IgG, IgM, infectious diseases (including hepatitis B virus-DNA and hepatitis C virus-RNA), antinuclear antibody spectrum and hematuria immunofixation electrophoresis.
Inflammatory indicators were C-reactive protein at 44.84 mg/L, and procalcitonin level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate within normal ranges.
To avoid hypersensitivity in the patient’s skin due to enhancers, which would aggravate the rash symptoms, plain computed tomography (CT) of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed, revealing splenomegaly and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the neck, clavicular region, axilla and inguinal region of both sides, as well as the mediastinum and retroperitoneal region .
The pathological analysis of right cervical lymph nodes showed that the lymph node structure disappeared in most areas, with diffuse and consistent infiltration of small lymphocytes with predominantly small centroblasts. The cellular morphology suggested that atypia was not obvious; mitotic cells were rare, and a small number of lymphoid follicles remained locally, indicative of follicular implantation. Immunohistochemistry showed CD20 (diffuse +), CD3 (scattered low +), Ki67 (about 15%), CD10 (-), BCL-6 (-), CD5 (-), CD23 (-), CyclinD1 (-), MUM-1 (scattered low +), CD21 (low residual follicular dendritic reticulum), C-myc (-), BCL-2 (+), P53 (about 60%), and CD30 (scattered low +) . Skin pathology suggested mild hyperplasia of stratified squamous epithelium with parakeratosis, scattered T cell-dominated lymphocyte infiltration in the epithelium, focal erosion and small abscess formation, and T cell-dominated lymphocyte infiltration in tissues under the epithelium. Combined with immunohistochemical data, there was insufficient evidence to diagnose lymphoma . Immunohistochemistry suggested CD20 (partial +), CD3 (majority +), CD5 (majority +), CD23 (dendritic cell +), CyclinD1 (scattered +), Bcl-2 (partial +), p53 (-), CD30 (-), Ki-67 (20% +), CD43 (majority +) and CD79α (partial +). Interestingly, next-generation sequencing of lymph node samples detected a TP53 mutation (NM_000546.5 on exon 6) with the nucleotide change of c.659a > G resulting in the amino acid change of p.Tyr220cys (dbSNP, rs121912666; mutation frequency, 3.85%). However, BRAF/V600E and MYD88L265P mutations were not detected. Analysis of bone marrow morphology showed active proliferation, normal proportion and morphology of mature lymphocytes, and visible lymphoid histiocytes. Bone marrow biopsy showed focal or scattered distribution of lymphocytes and no morphologically abnormal lymphocytes . Bone marrow immunophenotyping revealed abnormal B lymphocytes, accounting for 6.67% of nuclear cells, expressing CD19, CD20, Kappa, IgM and CD81; partially expressing FMC7; and not expressing CD103, CD10, CD43, CD11c, CD200, CD25, CD23, CD38, CD5, IgD, and Lambda .