A 35-year-old male was brought to the emergency department after suffering repeated episodes of drop attacks. He was being studied by an ENT specialist because he had complained of drowsiness, gait instability, left neurosensorial hypoacusia, cervicalgia, and multidirectional nystagmus during the last 2 months.
In the initial neurological examination, he scored 13 in the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (E: 3; V: 4; M: 6), and presented mild papilledema, horizontal-rotatory nystagmus, and instability.
Emergent computed tomography (CT) revealed a heterogeneous fourth ventricle mass causing acute obstructive hydrocephalus (HCP). An emergent insertion of an external ventricular drainage (EVD) was carried out and the patient experienced a complete recovery of his level of consciousness. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then obtained [Figure -], which confirmed the presence of a fourth ventricle lesion displaying signs of both intra and extratumoral hemorrhage with SS. These findings suggested a radiological diagnosis of myxopapillary ependymoma versus cavernoma. The panspinal MRI excluded the presence of additional lesions.
The tumor was resected through a bilateral telovelar approach with neurophysiological monitoring . The EVD was withdrawn on the second postoperative day.
Histologically, the lesion presented a capsule and was mainly composed of great cavernous vessels, with areas of hemorrhages and hemosiderin deposits, thus resembling a cavernous malformation. A scarce tumoral component was found in the periphery of the lesion, which was frequently arranged around hyalinized vessels. Tumoral cells showed an eosinophilic, unclearly delimited cytoplasm and pleomorphic nuclei, with finely granular chromatin and small nucleoli. These tumor cells were glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) positive, and they showed dot-like intracytoplasmic epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) immunoreactivity .
The patient experienced an almost complete recovery from his initial symptoms in the following month, although he still had persistent neurosensorial hypoacusia and nystagmus. Serial follow-up MRI performed 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery showed compensated triventricular dilation and a stable tumoral remnant on the rostral part of the fourth ventricle; however, the patient refused further treatment.