The patient was a 70-year-old woman. She had an elder sister with oculomotor nerve palsy who had undergone clipping for an internal carotid artery aneurysm. The patient was also concerned about an aneurysm but had never experienced a severe headache. She visited a local clinic because she suddenly developed the symptom of smelling burning rubber, which occurred a few times per week for the previous month. She underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and was found to have a right internal carotid artery aneurysm. She was then referred and admitted to our hospital. She had clear consciousness, without any particular neurological deficits or any abnormalities in blood chemistry. Even after hospitalization, she had sudden episodes of phantosmia, which, however, were not associated with loss of consciousness. No obvious spikes were observed on scalp electroencephalogram (EEG). On magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the head, we noted a dumbbell-shaped aneurysm, 10 mm in diameter, appeared to have extended from the right internal carotid artery to pierce the medial temporal lobe cortex . Plain T1-weighted MRI revealed an area of high signal intensity in the distal dome of the aneurysm, suggesting thrombosis. The surrounding brain showed high signal intensity on the T2-weighted image . Cerebral angiography revealed that the principal site of the aneurysm was the posterior communicating artery (P-com) bifurcation, and contrast medium retention was observed in the distal dome . Post-contrast constructive interference in the steady state (CISS) imaging revealed that the aneurysm dome intruded into the entorhinal sulcus and reached the amygdala . As its long axis and shape suggested a risk of rupture and its nature being an unruptured intracranial aneurysm presenting with olfactory hallucinations, the condition was determined to be an indication for surgery.
A right pterional craniotomy was performed using a trans-sylvian approach to the right internal carotid artery. After confirmation of the presence of the aneurysm, 16 electrodes were placed over the lateral temporal lobe cortex to record temporal cortical EEG. As a result, clear spike discharges were detected from some electrodes . After reaching the aneurysm, we found that the P-com was separated from the proximal neck, and the right oculomotor nerve was compressed. The aneurysm intruded into the medial temporal lobe cortex, which was slightly discolored to a brownish tone . We performed neck clipping after confirming the position of the anterior choroidal artery distal to the aneurysm neck as well as the positions of the P-com and its perforators. Thereafter, the discolored medial temporal lobe cortex was incised and resected, and thrombosis of the distal dome was confirmed . After detaching it circumferentially, we removed the dome as a mass at a position slightly distal to the clip. Thereafter, the medial temporal lobe cortex was resected by aspiration until normally colored white matter was exposed, and the posterior cerebral artery was visually identified at the bottom . After these procedures, EEG was again recorded from the lateral temporal cortex. In the EEG, although slow waves appeared in part, no obvious spikes were detected, and the operation was completed .
The resected aneurysm wall was a pseudoaneurysm without an arterial wall structure; the internal elastic lamina was composed of thin fibrous tissue with a mild inflammatory response . The excised temporal lobe tissue showed degenerated, ganglion cell-like neurons in the cortex, and edematous changes in the white matter accompanied by the presence of reactive astrocytes. There were no changes suggestive of an old hemorrhage .
The patient had an uneventful clinical course, and the olfactory hallucinations resolved. Postoperative 3D-CT angiography confirmed the disappearance of the aneurysm and the patency of the P-com . In addition, contrast-enhanced MRA showed the extent of resection of the medial temporal lobe cortex. She was discharged ambulating independently under treatment with oral levetiracetam 1000 mg, which was discontinued at the sixth postoperative month. Since then, she has not experienced seizures.