A 38-year-old African American female identifying as Jehovah’s witness, presented with complaints of fatigue and generalized weakness for the past 2 months, worsening over a 3-day period. She had a medical history of discoid lupus, iron deficiency anemia, sickle cell trait, prediabetes, schizophrenia, and a recent emergency visit to an outside hospital for acute psychosis.
On physical examination, the patient was hypotensive with a blood pressure of 89/47 mm Hg and a pulse rate of 97 beats per minute. She appeared weak and cachectic, had bitemporal hair thinning, pale and dry oral mucosa, and hyperpigmented facial scars. Lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly were not observed on the physical exam. Laboratory studies on admission are shown in . White blood cells and platelet counts were normal, but normocytic normochromic anemia was seen. Peripheral blood smear showed marked red blood cell anisopoikilocytosis, hypochromia, and significant agglutination with multiple rouleaux formation. There was no evidence of hemolysis. Schistocytes and nucleated RBCs were absent. The morphology of polymorphonuclear cells and platelets was normal.
She was admitted for severe symptomatic anemia with profound reticulocytopenia suspicious of PRCA aplasia. She refused blood transfusion in accordance with her religious beliefs. Patient was started on daily 200 mg intravenous iron injections, in addition to erythropoietin 40,000 units twice daily. Daily prednisone 1 mg/kg body weight was administered due to the likelihood of an underlying autoimmune process. Further workup revealed hypergammaglobulinemia 30.6% on protein electrophoresis. Serum immunofixation showed a biclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) protein with kappa specificity.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, shown in , demonstrated characteristic findings of marked erythroid hypoplasia. There was a small population, shown in , representing 2.5–5% of total cells, of monoclonal kappa B cells (CD19+, CD20+, CD22+ co-expressing CD5, and CD23). The immunophenotype was consistent with a clone of CLL. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with acquired PRCA secondary to B-CLL. The immunohistochemistry of B19 parvovirus was negative. Staging computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis identified a prominent left axillary lymph node measuring 1.4 cm. She was treated with rituximab (infusion of 540 mg/m2).
Eleven days after hospitalization, patient’s hemoglobin levels remained low at 0.8–1.9 gm/dL, with normal white blood cell and platelet counts. She deteriorated rapidly after an episode of profuse vomiting that led to a cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation attempts failed, and she subsequently expired.