A 64-year-old female with past medical history of hypothyroidism, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and panic attacks presented with double vision, unsteady gait and memory loss. She had been experiencing abdominal bloating for the past 3 months, associated with nausea and vomiting, and modified her diet to consist solely of small amounts of unfortified farina. She had similar gastrointestinal symptoms 10 years ago, for which an evaluation including endoscopy and colonoscopy was unrevealing. At that time, she was started on paroxetine for a presumptive diagnosis of IBS and her symptoms resolved after 6 months. She reported no other risk factors for thiamine deficiency, such as alcohol use, or excessive tea and/or coffee consumption. Three months prior to admission, when her symptoms recurred, her psychiatrist empirically reinitiated her on paroxetine, but discontinued this medication when her symptoms did not improve. Three weeks prior to presenting to our institution, she was noted to have double vision and inability to move her eyes laterally. A week later, she experienced a decline in her memory, and was unable to remember recent events and recognize family members. Concurrently, she developed an unsteady gait with frequent falls, which prompted an admission to a community hospital. Computed tomography of the head and abdomen were performed which were unremarkable. She was subsequently transferred to our institution for further workup including a brain MRI. The neurological exam demonstrated impaired short-term and long-term memory, near absence of horizontal eye movements with maintenance of vertical gaze, bilateral dysmetria, diminished sensation to all modalities, as well as an inability to ambulate. MRI of the brain with and without gadolinium demonstrated symmetrical hyperintense signal in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences around the periaqueductal grey matter, third ventricle and bilateral dorsomedial thalami. Serum thiamine level at admission was 26.8 nmol/L (normal range 66.5–200 nmol/L). Folate, vitamins B2 and B12, copper and zinc levels as well as thyroid and liver function tests were within normal range. With a clinical diagnosis of WE, she was started on high dose thiamine supplementation of 500 mg three times daily. After the first dose of thiamine, the patient’s horizontal eye movements greatly improved and returned to near-normal within 3 days of supplementation. Her memory impairment did not significantly change with thiamine administration.