A 49-year-old male was referred to the orthopedic department of a tertiary hospital with pain in both hips for 19 months and the X-ray examination showed bilateral femoral head collapse and secondary osteoarthritis (ARCO stage IV osteonecrosis of the femoral head, ONFH) . He underwent craniocerebral surgery for craniopharyngioma approximately 2 years ago and had a long-term history of prednisolone administration (5 mg orally, twice daily for 2 yrs.). This patient received bilateral light bulb surgeries (removal of necrotic bone and impaction of artificial bone through a window at the femoral head-neck junction) 16 months ago and after that, hip pain was relieved for several months but aggravated 6 months ago. Considering his good physical condition, one-stage bilateral total hip arthroplasties were performed through a posterior approach. Two cementless press-fit endoprostheses were implanted on both sides using 52-mm PINNACLE cups with POROCOAT porous coating (Depuy, Warsaw, IN) and polyethylene liners with size 11 CORAIL stems (Depuy) with 36-mm ceramic heads .
Two hours after returning to the general ward, the patient suddenly had violent limb twitching and loss of consciousness which spontaneously relieved within 1 min. We consulted the neurology department, and then performed cerebral MRI and electroencephalogram (EEG). Before any further intervention was applied, another episode of generalized convulsive seizure with severe extremity contractions occurred 4 h after the first one. There was no evidence of open wound, falling from bed, external trauma, bruising or distal neurovascular deficits during seizure episode and afterward. The patient was not a known epileptic before.
Associated symptoms being controlled, this patient complained of severe pain and immobility of both hips. Meanwhile, both lower limbs were externally rotated and markedly foreshortened on clinical examination. Plain radiographs and CT of the hip joints showed backward and upward dislocation of the right femoral head, displaced oblique fracture of the proximal right femur involving greater trochanter, upward dislocation of the left hip joint involving acetabular endoprosthesis components, fracture of the left acetabular and avulsion fracture of left lesser trochanter . Cerebral MRI demonstrated a large encephalomalacia focus (4 cm × 3.5 cm × 3 cm size) located at the right frontal lobe and communicating with the lateral ventricle .
Since the patient was vulnerable after the last operation, a bilateral revision of total hip arthroplasty was performed in one session on the 21st day after THA when the patient’s condition has stabilized, with anti-epileptic drugs and prednisolone continuing to be administered before revision. The posterolateral approach was followed on both sides. The right hip surgery was performed first: after removal of the femoral prosthesis, fracture flats of the proximal femur were restored and fastened with three titanium cables; then a new set of non-cemented long-stem prosthesis (DePuy) and 36-mm ceramic head was installed, and the dislocated hip joint was reducted. As to the left hip joint, since the superior acetabular bone was defective, an allogeneic femoral head was trimmed and fixed to the region of bone loss by using three cannulated screws. Acetabulum being carefully polished, a new porous 54-mm PINNACLE acetabular cup (Depuy) was placed and fixed with 4 cancellous bone screws; then a 36-mm highly cross-linked polyethylene lining was embedded and dislocated femoral head was reducted.
After the operation, the patient was shifted to the intensive care unit and closely monitored for the first 24 h. The postoperative practices including straight-leg elevation, ankle pump and quadriceps isometric contraction were started on the 1st day after surgery and the patient began progressive bedside standing and ambulating.2 weeks later. On 6-month follow-up, there was a good union of fractures both clinically and radiologically ; On 2-year follow-up, the patient was pain-free, capable of full weight-bearing walking without support . Since continuing anti-epileptic therapy, the patient has experienced no further seizures.