A 34-year-old male patient presented to us with a history of severe right knee pain that had persisted for the past 15 years. The onset of pain was gradual and progressively worsened over time. It was aggravating to do activities such as walking, sitting, squatting, and climbing stairs. Initially, the patient found some relief through rest and analgesics, but these measures were no longer helpful later on. This persistent, severe pain significantly affected his daily activities. He reported a history of multiple joint deformities since birth and underwent a THR on the left hip joint in 2015 due to ankylosing spondylitis. He was non-diabetic and normotensive.
On examination of the right knee, joint line tenderness was present, while the patellar tap for knee effusion was negative, and joint crepitus was absent. Increased intermalleolar distance, indicating asymmetry . An asymmetrical gait caused by the left equinus foot. The valgus stress test showed a positive result (8°), while the varus stress test was negative. The knee was flexed up to 0–130°, but the extension was limited to 5°. Anterior and posterior drawer tests were negative. The squat test was omitted due to the patient’s history of left-sided THR. The sub-scale score for pain was 11, for stiffness was 3, for physical function was 37. The total Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) score on presentation was 51. Neurological (sensory) function was intact and systemic examination revealed normal findings. All blood tests performed as part of the pre-operative assessment were within normal ranges, with the exception of HLA B27 detection. X-rays of the right knee were taken from the anterior-posterior (A/P) and lateral views .
Pre-operative X-ray findings, including both A/P and lateral views, revealed significant degenerative changes. The A/P view revealed reduced joint space, along with medial condyle sloping and reverse sloping of the proximal tibia, indicating altered alignment. The lateral view indicated significant osteoarthritic changes including complete articular destruction on the lateral condyle and evident fragmentation of the patellar articular surface.
TKR was executed under a subarachnoid block and with strict aseptic precautions . We employed a medial parapatellar approach. Arthrotomy was performed just medial to the patellar tendon . Following the medial release, the patella was dislocated laterally . Precise bony cut was performed on the lower femoral and upper tibial surfaces, guided by proper measurements using a suitable valgus guide and jig fixation (, ). The tibial base plate size was carefully selected so it aligned with the anterolateral tibial border and the appropriate knee prosthesis size was carefully chosen . To ensure proper prosthesis fixation, we meticulously prepared the bone surfaces, removing all osteophytes. Removed blood, fat, and marrow by thorough washing. Then bone cement was applied to both the femoral and tibial components of the prosthesis and the bone segments. Finally, the appropriate knee prosthesis was carefully placed .
Dislocation of the patella during surgery was difficult due to the fragmented and underdeveloped patella. During dislocation, the patellar ligament was found very thin and friable, and there was a chance of rupture. Hence, patellar dislocation was performed with care, and a more extensive medial soft-tissue release was done to help this delicate maneuver.
During the femoral bone cut, the medial condyle was found hypoplastic and underdeveloped, and a huge bone cyst was detected, raising worries about potential bone loss and further complications. To resolve this issue, the cyst was meticulously removed and no bone cut was done medially.
In addition, the reverse slope of the tibial upper end further complicates the surgical procedure. Due to the increased risk of injuring posterior blood vessels and nerves, we avoided the posterior bone cut of the tibia. To mitigate these risks and adjust the alignment appropriately, a cautious approach was taken, necessitating a more precise and deliberate bone cut. During the fixation of the tibial tray, the bone of the upper tibia was found osteoporotic, and due to this, a tibial extender was used to prevent further periprosthetic fracture.
The patient had a successful post-operative course and was released on the 5th day following TKR. Oral analgesics and physiotherapy facilitated a progressive recovery. Initially, the patient used a walker for non-weight-bearing ambulation, then progressed to crutches, and ultimately to independent walking without assistance. Following surgery, the patient experienced a progressive return to regular daily activities, with no recurrence of the valgus deformity. Of 12 months following surgery, the sub-scale score for pain was 0, for stiffness was 0, for physical function was 5. The total WOMAC score was 5, suggesting significant improvement. Furthermore, post-operative X-rays of the right knee acquired from both A/P and lateral views revealed that the mechanical axis was maintained and there was no loosening of the implant , confirming the successful outcome of the procedure.