We report a case of a 46-year-old man, without chronic underlying conditions, who developed TSS from S. epidermidis following an influenza type B infection. The patient was brought to the hospital on an ambulance. He was admitted to the hospital for a 7-day history of general malaise, headache following a recent influenza type B infection, who gradually developed vomiting, diarrhea, diffuse erythroderma and fever during the last three days before admission. The consciousness level on admission, body temperature, blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, and peripheral oxygen saturation were E3V4M6, 39 °C, 87/50 mmHg, 130 beats/minute, 38 breaths/minute, and 91%, respectively. The main laboratory findings on admission were as following: leukopenia (WBC 800/mm3), thrombocytopenia (Plt count 78,000/mm3), elevated urea, creatine levels and increased inflammatory markers (CRP 248 mg/ml) [Table ]. The patient had clinical and radiological evidence of pneumonia with chest computed tomography (CT) showing diffuse bilateral airspace opacification [Fig. ]. Head CT was normal.
On the second day, both sets of blood cultures obtained from two different peripheral venous sites (left and right arm) were positive for S. epidermidis, but the organism was unavailable for toxin testing. According to the antibiogram, the strain was resistant to methicillin (Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis, MRSE). Urine cultures were negative. After intubation for sedation and procedures, both sputum and endotracheal cultures showed growth of only normal upper respiratory flora. The results of the full respiratory pathogen PCR panel, including SARS-CoV-2, were negative. The patient’s condition deteriorated on the same day, presenting acute respiratory failure, and he was admitted to the ICU. His clinical signs and symptoms fulfilled at that stage four out of five clinical criteria of TSS with a fever of 39 °C, diffuse erythroderma, multisystem involvement and hypotension [Table ] . Based on the clinical diagnosis of probable CoNS induced TTS and the critical condition of the patient, the following treatment was initiated during the first days of hospitalization: meropenem (1 g every 8 h), vancomycin (1 g every 12 h), levofloxacin (750 mg 24 h), clindamycin (600 mg every 8 h). The choice of the initial empirical antibiotic therapy was based on local guidelines due to high antimicrobial resistant rates (AMR) rates. The addition of clindamycin was based on the high suspicion of TTS. IVIG (2 g/kg) and hydrocortisone (100 mg every 8 h) were administrated to the patient due to high suspicion of TTS The mechanism responsible for the efficacy of gamma-globulin (IVIG) therapy may be neutralization of the circulating toxins, inhabitation of TNF-alpha production via nonspecific inhabitation of monocyte or T-cell activation, or inhibition of other staphylococcal virulence factors. The patient became afebrile within the first 72 h of ICU admission. During the first 5 days of ICU stay, his PLT and WBC count reached its nadir. Finger desquamation mainly on his feet appeared on the 9th day of hospitalization, fulfilling at that stage five out of five clinical criteria for TSS [Fig. ]. During the ICU stay, the patient presented acute renal failure and he received renal replacement therapy with hemofiltration for 21 days. The platelet count remained low and due to the increased risk of central nervous system (CNS) bleeding, the patient received additionally after PLTs transfusions, PLT growth factor, eltrombopag (75 mg 24 h), and dexamethasone (8 mg every 8 h) for 4 consecutive days, after having a hematologist expert consultation with the indication of persistent refractory thrombocytopenia. All drug doses were accordingly adjusted. The patient gradually improved over the following 2 months, and he was discharged from the hospital without sequelae.