A 49-year-old woman sought specialized care due to abdominal cramps, a change in her bowel habits, tenesmus, and weight loss of 4 kg in the past 6 months. A physical examination showed multiple café-au-lait spots on the trunk and limbs, numerous skin tumors, freckles in the inguinal and axillary regions , and Lisch nodules in both irises. The familiar heredogram confirmed that the patient allowed the clinical diagnosis of NF1, and she has a daughter and a grandson with a characteristic cutaneous manifestation of NF1 . She had undergone a total thyroidectomy 8 years ago, whose histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of MTC. She denied a familiar history of thyroid neoplasia. The abdomen and digital rectal examinations were found to be normal, and no palpable mass was identified. She had a positive fecal blood test, and she underwent a colonoscopy to investigate the positivity of the fecal blood test. Colonoscopy revealed an extrinsic compression of the colon walls due to an oval lesion measuring about 6 cm in diameter and occupying 50% of the colon lumen in the upper rectum, 15 cm from the anal margin. Colonoscopy also showed a similar second submucosal tumor measuring 2.0 cm in its largest diameter and located just above the first described lesion. Both lesions were covered by mucosa with edema and mild hyperemia, from which fragments of the major tumor were collected by means of a deep biopsy of the lesion for histopathological study. To assess a possible tumor located outside the colon wall, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen was performed, which confirmed only the presence of the expansive and infiltrative formation located in the wall of the intraperitoneal rectum, measuring 6.0×2.0 cm in size. The tumor was isointense to muscle on T1-weighted images with a target signal on fluid-sensitive sequences, with variable enhancement without early arterial intensification. The lesion involved the mucous and submucosal layers of the rectal wall, with a loss of definition of the muscle layer itself without signs of extension beyond the serous layer. There was no increase in the regional lymph nodes. The adrenal glands were normal. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 0.9 ng/mL and Ca 19-9 antigen was 6 U/mL.
Histopathological examination of colonoscopy fragments showed colonic mucosa with linear colonic glands and preservation of the goblet cell population. Exaggerated proliferation of elongated or spindly cells, with oval nuclei, blunt edges, and eosinophilic cytoplasm, spreads in multiple directions, forming intersecting cellular bundles in the chorion. These cells had a low mitotic index in high magnification fields (1/10 fields). Cell atypia was not identified.
With the diagnosis of neurofibroma of the rectum, the patient underwent a laparoscopic anterior resection of the rectum and sigmoid with primary mechanical anastomosis as proposed anteriorly
. She presented evolution without complications and was discharged on the third postoperative day. During the procedure, two skin nodules were resected for histopathological study. The anatomopathological study of the resected specimen showed the presence of a yellowish tumor in the rectal wall, with a diameter of 6 cm, covered by normal mucosa with areas of hyperemia and edema, and a second tumor with diameter of 2 cm, located just above the major tumor . Histopathological study of the surgical specimen showed mesenchymal proliferation consisting of elongated cells, with wavy nuclei and loose stroma, affecting the mucosa and submucosa. In the immunohistochemical study, irregularly expanded nerve fascicles were found in the submucosa, Auerbach’s myenteric plexus, and pericolic adipose tissue . This mesenchymal proliferation was positive for S100 (polyclonal) and SOX10 (BC34) and negative for CD117, desmin, CD34, smooth muscle actin (1A4), GLUT1, and claudin-1 . Concurrently, an epithelial proliferation consisting of a monotonous population of cells with rounded nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm was identified in a trabecular arrangement . This epithelial proliferation presents a strong immunostaining to chromogranin A (DAK-A3), synaptophysin (DAK-SYNAP), and cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), confirming the presence of NET . The Ki-67 marker showed that both tumors have a low rate of cell proliferation (1%). summarizes the results of the immunohistochemical panel used. These findings were compatible with the PN of the rectum, associated with a well-differentiated NET. The histopathological study of the two removed skin nodules confirmed the diagnosis of cutaneous neurofibroma.
Due to the diagnosis of NF1, to clarify the type of mutations on the NF1 gene, the patient was submitted to sequence analysis and deletion/duplication testing of the 84 genes (Invitae Multi-Cancer Panel, San Francisco, CA, USA), which included NF1 (MedGen UID: 18013). One pathogenic variant was identified in NF1 (deletion, exons 2–30) heterozygous, classified as pathogenic. This variant is an in-frame deletion of the genomic region encompassing exons 2–30 of the NF1 gene. It preserves the integrity of the reading frame. The region of the NF1 gene that includes exon(s) 2 and 9–12 has been determined to be clinically significant
. It is important to note that this variant has not been reported in the literature in individuals with NF1-related conditions.
The genetic panel did not find mutations in the RET gene, moving away from the possibility of MEN2, but identified a variant of uncertain significance (VUS) in the POLE gene (POLE, exon 14, c.1370C>T, p.Thr457Met), heterozygous. This sequence change replaces threonine with methionine at codon 457 of the POLE protein. The threonine residue is moderately conserved, and there is a moderate physicochemical difference between threonine and methionine. This variant is not present in population databases (ExAC no frequency). This variant has not been reported in the literature in the germline of individuals with POLE-related conditions. ClinVar contains an entry for this variant (variation ID: 240390). Algorithms developed to predict the effects of missense changes on protein structure and function are either unavailable or do not agree on the potential impact of this missense change. In summary, the available evidence is currently insufficient to determine the role of this variant in disease. Therefore, it has been classified as a VUS.
Currently, the patient is feeling well 3 years after surgery and is having an annual MRI of the skull, chest, and abdomen to screen for the appearance of new PNs or NET in other sites.