A 16-year-old girl was admitted to another centre with dizziness, nausea and abdominal pain. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed free fluid in the abdomen. The patient underwent laparoscopy with the suspected diagnosis of ovarian torsion, and diagnostic fluid was drained. She had four episodes of cardiac arrest (asystole) following severe bradycardia during and after this procedure, and a temporary pacemaker was inserted. The patient was referred to our clinic under emergency conditions for permanent pacemaker insertion. The physical examination in our clinic was normal, except for decreased bilateral breath sounds in the lower zones. When the patient and family were insistently questioned regarding intoxication, no information was obtained on this subject. The chest radiogram revealed bilateral minimal pleural effusion and the thoracic tomography demonstrated minimal pleural effusion in both hemithoraces. The blood levels of the acute-phase reactants were normal, blood cultures were negative and rheumatologic investigations were normal. The effusion disappeared with antibiotic treatment for pneumonia during follow-up. The echocardiographic examination, which was performed to exclude myocarditis due to the history of unexplained sudden cardiac arrest, and the cardiac enzymes were normal. The 24-hour Holter monitorization revealed rare premature ventricular contraction. ECG examination showed an incomplete right bundle branch block (RBBB)-like pattern on V1-V2 . No pathology was detected on selective coronary angiography, which was performed to exclude coronary artery abnormalities. Third costal position ECG, which has a higher sensitivity in unmasking type I BrS ECG was used ). Electrocardiogram showed typical BrS findings in the third costal position during the ajmaline test; however, simultaneous ECG in the fourth costal position was completely normal . Because of the history of cardiac arrest and the positive ajmaline test, implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation was recommended to the patient. The bradycardia and cardiac arrest were attributed to verapamil; however, the positivity of the ajmaline test could not be explained by this, and the test was repeated after the patient had recovered from bradycardia, producing another positive result. ICD insertion was recommended for the development of cardiac arrest (asystole) with bradycardia in our patient. When we insisted on ICD insertion, it was revealed that the patient had attempted suicide by taking a high dose of verapamil. The patient's cardiac arrest was attributed to verapamil intoxication. BrS was diagnosed incidentally in this patient. There was no history of sudden cardiac death and no evidence of BrS on ECGs and genetic screening tests performed on the patient’s family. ICD insertion was not performed because of asymptomatic BrS; the patient was discharged, and follow-up was continued. Using the DNA sample from the patient’s peripheral blood, the presence of c.87A>G (p.A29A) (heterozygous), c.3183A>G (p.E1061E) (heterozygous) and c.5457C>T (p.D1819D) (heterozygous) was identified in the DNA sequence analysis of the SCN5A gene. The patient and her family were provided with information about this current work, and informed consent forms were signed.