The proband is a 33-year-old previously healthy female, gravida 1, para 0, who was referred for a non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) in gestational week 12 + 2 after an increased risk score was given from a combined ultrasound and blood test (risk 1:181 of trisomy 21). The NIPT showed an increased risk of trisomy 21 with a normalized chromosome value of 5.97 (normal < 4) and an increased chromosome 21 coverage of 2%. The fetal cell-free DNA fraction was 8% and thus, the expected increased coverage should have been around 4% if a chromosome aneuploidy had been present in 100% of the cells of the fetus. Hence, an aneuploidy restricted to the placenta (CPM) or fetal mosaicism was initially suspected.
As per routine, the test result was followed up with an invasive test, CVS, during gestational week 14 + 2. Rapid aneuploidy detection using quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) was performed on genomic DNA extracted from uncultured chorionic villi and gave a suspicion of mosaic trisomy 21 . The results for chromosome 13, 18 and sex chromosomes (XY) were normal. To further investigate the plausible mosaic trisomy 21 a chromosome analysis was performed. However, the chromosome analysis did not show trisomy 21, but rather an aberrant chromosome 21 that initially was suspected to be an isochromosome 21 in all cells examined (n = 26). Closer characterization of the chromosomes with fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) ruled out an isochromosome 21. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) performed on genomic DNA extracted from cultured chorionic villi revealed that the chromosome material attached to the chromosome 21 originated from chromosome 10p (10p11.21pter, ~ 36.4 Mb). Hence, the karyotype was established as 46,XY,der(21)t(10;21)(p11.21;q10) with a normal chromosome 21 and a duplication of almost the entire short arm of chromosome 10 . A new sample from amniotic fluid was recommended to the referring physician.
QF-PCR and aCGH were performed on genomic DNA extracted from uncultured amniocytes. The QF-PCR showed results consistent with complete trisomy 21 . This was confirmed by the aCGH, which detected an increased signal from chromosome 21 with trisomy 21 in 100% of the cells, but a normal signal from chromosome 10. A chromosome analysis of the amniocytes showed one normal chromosome 21 and one isochromosome 21 consisting of the long arms of chromosome 21 in all cells .
Lymphocytes and genomic DNA extracted from the peripheral blood of the woman were used for a chromosome analysis, QF-PCR, FISH and aCGH. All these analyses showed normal results. A total of 26 metaphase cells were examined for the chromosome analysis, and a total of 100 interphase cells and 25 metaphase cells were examined for the FISH analysis. Finally, in order to rule out tissue specific mosaicism, fibroblasts and genomic DNA extracted from a skin biopsy of the woman were used for a chromosome analysis (51 metaphase cells) and aCGH. These analyses also showed normal results. Markers from the QF-PCR of the woman were compared to the markers from the analyses of the CVS and the AC, and the aberrant chromosome 21 could be determined to be an isochromosome of maternal origin . The anonymous sperm donor had a normal chromosome analysis. The pregnancy was terminated in gestational week 16 + . Gonadal mosaicism could not be ruled out and hence, the woman was counselled regarding the possibility of an invasive prenatal testing in subsequent pregnancies.
The woman became pregnant by another sperm donor approximately one year later. NIPT was performed as a first analysis and showed normal results for chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and sex chromosomes (XY). AC was recommended as a follow-up analysis and performed during gestational week 15 + 2. QF-PCR on genomic DNA extracted from uncultured amniocytes showed normal results for chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and sex chromosomes (XY). A chromosome analysis of the amniocytes showed a normal karyotype 46,XY.
A summary of the results of the different tissues in the first pregnancy is presented in Table .