A 34-year-old woman with a history of urachal carcinoma was referred to our department (Department of Liver and General Surgery) in January 2015 in order to surgically treat a disease relapse presenting with a liver metastasis. The patient was an otherwise healthy woman. The first symptoms of the disease occurred in December 2011 and included urinary frequency, dysuria, and episodic gross hematuria. In January 2012, the patient sought medical attention. The primary care physician diagnosed urinary tract infection and ordered antibiotics. After two months, an abdominal ultrasound was performed, however with an empty bladder, and the disease focus was not recognized. It was not until April 2012 that the patient came directly to the emergency department and was for the first time consulted by a urologist. At that point, the diagnosis of urinary bladder tumor was made. A CT scan showed a pathologic mass in the region of the bladder dome extending toward the umbilicus which is a typical appearance of urachal carcinoma . It was adherent to the sigmoid colon, and there were signs of the surrounding adipose tissue and peritoneum involvement. No sites of distant metastases on abdominal CT scan and chest X-ray were noted.
In June 2012, the patient underwent radical cystectomy including hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy, partial resection of the sigmoid colon, and partial resection of the rectus abdominis muscle with the fascia, skin, and umbilicus. A urinary diversion with a Studer-type orthotopic ileal neobladder was constructed. Intraoperative histologic examination of two ileal lymph nodes was negative. However, a post-operative examination of these lymph nodes revealed one metastatic focus. The full specimen was described in pathology report as a 22 × 19 × 17 cm in size, with tumor extending between the uterus and umbilicus involving the urinary bladder and extending beyond its wall. On microscopic examination, a mucous-producing adenocarcinoma consistent with urachal carcinoma was diagnosed. The involvement of the sigmoid colon was caused by an inflammatory response. Other resected organs as well as surgical margins were free of neoplastic infiltration. The patient received four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin.
A follow-up CT scan performed a year after surgery (July 2013) showed no signs of disease recurrence. In November 2014, another CT scan revealed a hypodense mass in the right liver lobe of max 40 mm in diameter. A collection of fluid in the region of the right iliac vessels with calcifications was also noted (in a region where in previous imaging studies a simple lymphocele was described). A subsequent PET-CT scan of entire body proved a high probability of disease recurrence in the liver and in the region of the right iliac vessels . A biopsy of the liver mass confirmed a focus of metastatic disease. After presentation of possible therapeutic options to the patient, she chose a surgical treatment. The surgery took place in January 2015. Intraoperative findings with the use of ultrasonography included a tumor of max 80 mm in diameter in the right liver lobe with a small satellite focus on the liver phrenic surface. Despite the probability of local recurrence in the pelvis, a right hemihepatectomy was performed. This decision was based on a large tumor size and a possible expansion into the vena cava inferior and liver hilum . The pathology report revealed a metastatic urachal carcinoma and a positive surgical margin. Magnetic resonance imaging performed a month after the surgery confirmed enlargement of the pathologic mass in the pelvis. No other sites of the disease were noted. Patient was qualified to a second-stage surgical treatment and underwent an excision of the tumor mass in the region of the right iliac vessels in April 2015; however, complete resection has not been achieved.
Following the surgery, the patient received three cycles of adjuvant gemcitabine-based chemotherapy. Subsequent imaging studies showed gradual disease progression. The patient died of the disease in March 2016.