A 36-year-old woman was noted in her 20s to have occasional episodes of palpitations and breathlessness. She presented at the age of 27 years in atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 204 b.p.m. She was given intravenous amiodarone and converted to sinus rhythm. A repeat electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a short PR interval with a delta wave consistent with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome . A transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal biventricular function and no significant valvular disease. She was prescribed flecainide 200 mg as needed.
At a follow-up evaluation by her cardiologist, she denied palpitations, syncope, or falls. Her pulse was 70 b.p.m., and her blood pressure was 115/84 mmHg. Her jugular venous pressure was normal, and her exam revealed normal heart sounds. Her ECG was consistent with a left anteroseptal accessory pathway.
The following year, it was discovered that the patient’s Mother also suffered from Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and had a PRKAG2 mutation. In addition, her maternal grandfather reportedly had a history of ‘hypertrophic cardiomyopathy’, atrial fibrillation, and complete heart block requiring permanent pacemaker implantation. Upon evaluation by a cardiac geneticist, the patient was confirmed to have inherited the PRKAG2 mutation. It was recommended that she continue to receive long-term cardiology surveillance with serial echocardiograms, treadmill exercise stress tests, and ECGs.
Over the next 8 years, the patient was maintained on daily bisoprolol 1.25 mg with flecainide 200 mg as needed. Periodic Holter monitors were performed demonstrating heart rates in the 40 s at times without symptoms. Routine blood tests at the age of 31 years demonstrated borderline abnormal renal function with a serum creatinine of 92 µmol/L (normal range 44–80 µmol/L) and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 61 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal eGFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2).
By the age of 35 years, her creatinine had risen to 107 µmol/L, her blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 7.3 mmol/L (normal range 2.1–87.1 mmol/L), and her estimated GFR was 61 mL/min/1.73 m2. A urinalysis showed 2+ proteins and 3+ glucose. On follow-up evaluation by a nephrologist a few months later, her laboratories were notable for a creatinine of 151 µmol/L, BUN 10.5 mmol/L, and GFR 51 mL/min/1.73 m2. Her urine protein/creatinine ratio was 75. Her parathyroid hormone was reportedly 75 pg/mL (normal range 15–65 pg/mL). Her C3 and C4 levels were normal. An abdominal ultrasound showed normal kidneys bilaterally. A renal biopsy established a diagnosis of IGAN , with mild-to-moderate mesangioproliferative activity and evidence of some chronicity. Focal, global, and segmental glomerulosclerosis, and focal interstitial fibrosis/tubular atrophy was present. Also noted in the renal parenchyma were vacuolated tubular cells and interstitial foam cells, which have been associated with subsets of genetic abnormalities including glycogen storage diseases, but are not usually found in IGAN. Additionally, her blood pressure was 143/83 mmHg. She was started on ramipril 2.5 mg daily for both her hypertension and proteinuria.
She remains stable 10 years and 4 months since her initial diagnosis from both cardiac and renal perspectives.