A 65-year-old man affected by AS presented at the emergency room for psycho-motor agitation and hallucinations, acutely emerged after a severe chronic sleep deprivation, without any previous psychiatric history. He was also affected by RLS since the age of 10 years and, at time of our visit, was treated with pramipexole 0.75 mg/day. He had hearing but not major visual impairment and has been on peritoneal and then on hemodialysis for 1 year. A previous skin biopsy had revealed an abnormal distribution of the alpha chain of type IV collagen with the absence of the alpha 5 chain. The genetic test showed an X-linked (hemizygote) missense mutation of COL4A5 gene (c.3319 G > A; p. G1107R). The genetic analysis was extended to the other family members. His 83-year-old mother, as well as his daughter, two sisters, a niece, and two dead brothers suffered of RLS and presented the same AS mutation . All the female members in the family carrying the AS mutation presented proteinuria and hematuria, with normal creatine clearance. The patient reported that his two brothers died because they were unable to undergo hemodialysis because of their severe RLS, which did not allow them to stay still long enough to carry out dialysis sessions. The patient had suffered peritoneal perforation for five times because of his need to move and inability to stay still during peritoneal dialysis; this led to the decision to shift to hemodialysis.
A video-polysomnography (v-PSG) one year before our evaluation and under treatment with pramipexole 0.5 mg/day at 9 pm, showed disrupted sleep with sleep efficiency of 64 % and a PLMS index (number of PLMS per hour of sleep) of 72/hour (very severe, pathological threshold > 15/hour) . Serum ferritin, transferrin saturation, vitamin D, folate and vitamin B12 were normal. During the last week preceding our evaluation, he had presented an unusual aggressive behaviour and, for the first time, he had refused his regular nephrological check-up. RLS symptoms were very severe (IRLS Rating Scale score 34, range 0–40). A clear augmentation phenomenon was diagnosed, based on the intensification of symptoms during the day, an extension of them to the upper limbs and trunk, with impossibility to rest and failed attempts to increase the dosage of pramipexole. His wife reported that the patient had several sleep attacks during the day, with one of them occurring during walking and causing a fall and a zygomatic bone fracture.
A fourteen-day actigraphic recording showed a complete sleep disruption in the first week of recording . Following a modification of the treatment protocol, from pramipexole 0.75 mg/day at 9 pm to prolonged release pramipexole 0.75 mg plus clonazepam 0.5 mg, at bedtime, strongly improved his sleep-wake pattern. The improvement was documented by actigraphy in the second week of recording . The IRLS Rating Scale score decreased to 22.
One year later, the patient underwent kidney transplantation. During the procedure, the RLS therapy was acutely withdrawn, with the appearance of a severe state of motor agitation that almost compromised the surgical outcome and needed opioids in addition to the previous therapy to be controlled. Two months after transplantation, RLS symptoms considerably improved (IRLS Rating Scale score 4), and then remained stable.
A v-PSG performed 5 years after transplantation showed a normal sleep efficiency and the disappearance of PLMS. The last clinical follow-up, performed 8 years after transplantation showed a good control of symptoms obtained with pramipexole extended release 0.375 mg/day at 4 pm, rotigotine transdermal patch 3 mg/day and clonazepam 0.5 mg/day.