A 55-year-old Chinese man presented to our centre with a 3-month history of proteinuria and bilateral eyelid oedema from 15 August 2017. This patient did not have any other significant comorbidities. His complete blood count was normal. Urinalysis showed microscopic haematuria with a red blood cell count (RBC) of 20–30/HP and proteinuria fluctuating between negative and microscale, with a 24-h urinary protein quantity (0.13 g/24 h). Biochemical tests showed normal kidney function and serum electrolyte levels, while the total protein level was decreased along with hypoalbuminemia and normal immunoglobulin level. The quantitative detection of immunoglobulin subclasses showed significant elevation of immunoglobulin A and decreased levels of immunoglobulin G and immunoglobulin M. The urine kappa light chain level was normal while that for urine lambda light chain was significantly increased (0.571 g/L, normal range < 0.005 g/L). In addition, the serum-free lambda light chain level was also greatly elevated (8.05 g/L, normal range 0.005–0.026 g/L), whereas the serum-free kappa light chain level was normal. M protein was detected by serum protein electrophoresis, while IgA-lambda-type monoclonal immunoglobulin bands were identified by immunofixation electrophoresis. Furthermore, bone marrow biopsy showed a bone marrow plasma cell (BMPC) of 42.5%. The β2-microglobulin level was slightly increased. Based on the above, we believe that this patient had IgA-lambda-type multiple myeloma (D-S: stage I group A; ISS: stage II), although bone lesions were not detected by positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT). The echocardiogram of this patient showed symmetrical thickening of the left ventricle, with thicknesses of 1.2 cm in the interventricular septum and the posterior wall of the left ventricle. Heart-enhanced MRI suggested delayed myocardial enhancement. These findings suggested cardiac amyloidosis; however, the patient refused to undergo a biopsy so the diagnosis could not be made.
To clarify the cause of renal injury in this patient, we performed a renal biopsy on 21 November 2017. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed the deposition of granular C3 in the mesangial area . Kappa light chain staining was negative . Granular deposition of the lambda light chain was observed in the renal tubular epithelium . Under light microscopy, glomerular mesangial cell hyperplasia was noted . Mild segmental hyperplasia of the stroma with a small amount of eosinophil deposition, granular degeneration of renal tubular epithelium, and renal interstitium with small focal lymphocytes and infiltrating monocytes were also detected. Additionally, electron microscopy showed dense deposits in the mesangial areas . Abnormal lysosomes in the cytoplasm of proximal tubular epithelial cells were also noted . The patient had marked hypocomplementemia with reduced complement C3 level, but normal complement C4 level. In addition, his levels of C3 nephritic factor, complement factor H antibody, complement factor H concentration, and vWF-cleaving protease (ADMAMTS13) activity were also normal.
The patient was diagnosed with C3GN along with light chain proximal tubulopathy without crystal deposits resulting from multiple myeloma. The patient showed a very good response to four courses of bortezomib plus dexamethasone (BD) treatment. Chemotherapy was suspended due to the need to mobilise and collect autologous stem cells; however, the efficiency of mobilisation and collection was poor and required significant time. On 19 April 2018, the patient showed a disease relapse. He was then treated with one course of bortezomib plus doxorubicin and dexamethasone (PAD). To further consolidate the therapeutic effect, a BEAM (bis-chloroethylnitrosourea [BCNU], etoposide, cytarabine, and melphalan) pretreatment protocol was administered for 6 days, followed by autologous stem cell transplantation on 11 July 2019. The patient again achieved a very good partial response with stable renal function. The timeline of kidney function, proteinuria, C3, serum-free lambda light chain, and urine lambda light chain levels relative to treatment are shown in Fig. and Table . The patient then went to another hospital for treatment and died of cardiac arrest on 13 May 2020.