A 27-year-old woman, who first complained of upper abdominal pain, was referred from a local clinic with the impression of a retroperitoneal haematoma after blunt abdominal trauma 4 months ago. Magnetic resonance tomography (MRT) of the abdomen revealed the presence of a large, well-circumscribed, right-sided retroperitoneal mass measuring 10 × 8 cm in size with an irregular echogenicity . The mass compressed the right kidney and the caval vein without renal involvement. No chylous ascites was present. No clinical evidence of tuberous sclerosis was present and there was no family history of cancer or known genetic disorders. Based on the MRT, the retroperitoneal mass was removed completely by laparotomy . During the postoperative course the patient complained of exertional dyspnoea. The subsequently performed computed tomography (CT) scan of the lung showed the typical image of LAM with numerous thin-walled cysts throughout both lungs, but without spontaneous pneumothorax or chylous pleural effusions .
Macroscopically, the 10 × 6 × 4 cm sized mass had a soft consistency and was circumscribed, but not truly encapsulated. On cut sections, large, central areas of haemorrhage could be observed, giving it an impression of an old haematoma. On frozen sections, it became obvious that the wall of the cystic mass consisted of nests of tumour cells with a uniform, spindle shape. There were no overt signs of malignancy. On permanent sections, the tumour displayed fascicles and nests of elongated epitheloid tumour cells with a clear to pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, arranged around numerous ectatic blood vessels . Sometimes, the tumour cell proliferations seemed to evolve directly from the walls of medium-sized blood vessels. Occasional mitoses and foci of haemorrhage and necrosis were present . Immunohistochemically, most of the tumour cells showed a positive reaction for alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA), Desmin and HMB45 . About 50% of tumour cells showed a weak positivity for the oestrogen receptor. Proliferative activity, as measured by an antibody against the Ki-67 antigen, was 10% of tumour cells. Cytokeratins, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), synaptophysin, S100, and CD117 (c-kit) were negative. CD31, CD34 and D2-40 decorated the endothelial linings of the numerous vessels. The diagnosis of a tumour with perivascular epitheloid cell differentiation, a so-called PEComa, was made. Based on the histological findings on permanent sections, a malignant potential was suggested. The margins of resection were free of tumour cells.