A 39-year-old man fell from the height on his outstretched hand and injured his left, non-dominant forearm. Physical examination of the left forearm revealed generalised tenderness and swelling of the forearm. He had a limited range of movement of both the elbow and forearm, but we did not examine his elbow in detailed because he denied the injury of elbow. He had no nerve dysfunction. Radiographs demonstrated a comminuted fracture of the proximal third of the radial shaft but with no apparent dislocation of the distal or proximal radioulnar joints or the elbow . Seven days after the injury, we fixed the radius with a reconstruction locking plate, applied through Henry’s volar approach. The immediate postoperative radiograph revealed satisfactory reduction and stable fixation . Considering his high BMI index, the limb was immobilized in an adjustable brace for 4 weeks with the elbow flexed at 90° and the forearm in supination. However, from the first day after surgery, we allowed gradually active flexion and extension of elbow twice a day and no forearm rotation. However, a radiograph done at the 4th week postoperatively showed that the radial head was dislocated , but the patient did not complain of any particular discomfort during the recovery. We planned to perform the magnetic resonance imaging of the elbow to assess the ligaments around it and suggested the patient to take an open reduction of the proximal radioulnar joint but he refused, so we only had to try a manual reduction under anesthesia. There was no doubt that we failed, the patient opted not to pursue any additional treatment. At the time of 1 month after surgery, he currently has a restricted range of elbow flexion and forearm rotation: elbow flexion 70°, full elbow extension, forearm pronation 60°, forearm supination 20°. At the time of 1 year after surgery , he achieved an acceptable range of motion : elbow flexion 120°, full elbow extension, forearm pronation 80°, forearm supination 80°, but he still complained the pain around the elbow, with a Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand scored of 32.