A 66-year-old female presented with a 2.5-year history of a progressive thoracic paraparesis (i.e. relative sensory level T5) without sphincter involvement. The spinal MRI performed with and without intravenous gadolinium demonstrated a dumbbell-shaped, heterogeneously enhancing lesion almost encircling the spinal cord from T3 to T5 plus left-sided foraminal T4/5 extension. Maximal compression was present at the T4 level resulting in rightward cord displacement and increased T2 signal in the cord. The CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis did not reveal any additional extra-spinal malignancy or metastases. Further, the calcification seen on CT, and lack of bony destruction was consistent with a benign lesion .
When preoperative spinal angiography was performed, it demonstrated that the left superior intercostal trunk was the main feeding artery (i.e. originated from the T5 level giving off the third, fourth, and fifth intercostal arteries) to the tumor. This was safely embolized.
Surgery included a T3–T5 laminectomy, unroofing of the left T4/5 foramen, and resection of the head of the T4 rib. Tumor was dissected off the dura between T3 and T5, including the left T5 nerve root, following which a T3–T5 fusion was performed (i.e., pedicle/screws). A near-complete resection was achieved, leaving only a thin film of tumor extending rostrally in the left paravertebral gutter near the 3rd rib head.
The intraoperative frozen section report was consistent with a WHO Grade I meningioma. The lesion was mengiothelial in morphology (i.e., whorling architecture, occasional psammomatous calcification, and intranuclear inclusions) and infiltrated through a fibrous dura and into the surrounding fibroadipose tissue. There was less than 1 mitotic figure seen in any 10 high-power fields. The tumor was positive for EMA and PR. The Ki-67 was 2% .
Three months postoperatively, the patient fully recovered except for mild residual left-sided T2–T5 numbness. The repeat thoracic MRI showed complete tumor resection.