A 43-year-old female patient with no cardiovascular risk factors, weight 57 kg, height 170 cm, presented to our hospital with constrictive chest pain at rest radiating to both arms for 20 min disappearing spontaneously. Admitted to the coronary care unit for monitoring, clinical examination was normal, blood samples found elevated ultrasensitive troponin at 236 for a normal <14 pg/mL. She was not pregnant. The electrocardiogram recorded sinus rhythm at 63/min with negative T waves at V1 and V2 leads. The echocardiography showed a moderate left ventricle dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction 45%) with severe apical and anterior wall hypokinesia.
The patient was referred to our Cath lab after receiving Aspirin 250 mg IV, oral Ticagrelor 180 mg, and Fondaparinux 2.5 mg subcutaneous. Coronary angiography showed a long (22 mm) moderate smooth stenosis (50%) of the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) analysis highlighted an intramural coronary haematoma starting at the ostium of the artery to its middle part without a dissection plane visualized .
The patient was admitted to our intensive cardiac care unit for monitoring. She has been treated with aspirin 75 mg, bisoprolol 2.5 mg, and atorvastatin 80 mg orally. She was asymptomatic with no signs of haemodynamic instability and normal clinical examination. Five days later, she presented several recurrences of chest pain with good response to nitroglycerine administration associated to an increased level of troponin; average blood pressure was 125/85 mmHg. The angiogram control revealed a significant worsening of the stenosis with an extension of the wall haematoma towards the middle part of the LAD with normal run flow (TIMI 3).
After heart-team discussion, a conservative strategy was decided upon with hospital monitoring and medical treatment with aspirin, beta-blockers, and nitrates. Chest pain totally disappeared without recurrences. Angiogram control at 2 weeks showed an extension of the haematoma to the distal LAD.
In the following days, the patient remained totally asymptomatic and was then discharged with the same treatment. Strict rest was also suggested.
The patient has been consulting in our centre once a week for 3 months.
After 3 months, she was totally asymptomatic. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed limited apical myocardial late gadolinium enhancement with normal left ventricle ejection fraction. Coronary angiogram showed a quite normal appearance of the LAD . Optical coherence tomography control showed a significant regression of the LAD wall haematoma with dispersed, vanishing haematoma remnants .
At 1 year, she remained asymptomatic and her echocardiography showed persistent limited apical akinesia with normal left ventricular function.
An angio computed tomography (CT) scan revealed diffuse atheromatous infiltration of both carotid and vertebral arteries. An aortic and renal artery CT scan did not find any sign for fibromuscular dysplasia.