A 31-year-old male from Udupiddy Jaffna, in the Northern Province of Sri Lanka, presented to the medical casualty with fever of 1 week duration as his first ever medical consultation. He gave a history of recurrent febrile episodes which resolved spontaneously over the preceding 2 months. Clinical examination showed the presence of reticulate skin pigmentation interspersed with hypopigmented macules involving the face, neck and extremities, hyperkeratosis of palms and soles and nail dystrophy , which he claimed to have had since the age of 15-years. He had noticed progressive worsening of the skin changes since then. In addition, he had leukoplakia of the tongue, premature graying of hair, watery eyes and dental caries.
He was a product of a non-consanguineous marriage. Several of his maternal male relatives, including two deceased maternal uncles and three maternal cousins were reported to be affected with a similar disease condition . One of his sisters had similar localized skin pigmentation in the hands and nail changes. However, clinical and genetic confirmation were lacking in the family members. Analysis of the pedigree constructed from the proband’s mother’s recollections suggested a possible X-linked pattern of inheritance. Clinical diagnosis of DC was made based on the classical clinical features at presentation. Initial investigations showed pancytopenia (Total white blood cells: 2.48 × 103/μl [4 – 11 × 103/μl], neutrophils: 1.39 × 103/μl [2 - 7 × 103/μl], lymphocytes: 0.44 × 103/μl [0.8 - 4 × 103/μl], monocytes: 0.61 × 103/μl [0.12 -1.2 × 103/μl], red blood cells: 3.24 × 106/μl [3.5 - 5.5 × 106/μl], platelets: 90 × 103/μl [150 - 450 × 103/μl]), ESR: 60 mm/1st hour [0 - 22 mm/1st hour] and C - reactive protein: 83 mg/l [0 - 6 mg/l]. He had a macrocytic anemia with a haemoglobin level of 11.3 g/dl [13.5 - 17.5 g/l] and Mean Corpuscular Volume of 101.6 fl [80 - 96 fl]. Blood film showed pancytopenia. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy confirmed bone marrow failure. Ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed splenomegaly of 13 cm. Initial chest radiograph was unremarkable.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the genetic analysis. DKC1 gene was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and sequencing of both DNA strands of the entire coding region and conserved exon-intron splice junctions. A previously unreported hemizygous, non-synonymous likely pathogenic variant (NM_001363.4: c.1054A > G: p.Thr352Ala) was identified. This variant was predicted as probably damaging using the software analysis tools Provean, Mutation Taster and Align-GVGD. It is located in a moderately conserved nucleotide and highly conserved amino acid position with small physiochemical differences between the exchanged amino acids (Alamut v.2.7.1). It resides in a functionally important domain of the DKC1 gene known as the PUA domain, near Ala353Val which is a common hot spot of the DKC1 mutations. This novel variant was not found in the Exome Aggregation Consortium database (which comprises approximately 60,000 subjects), or in any of the other population specific databases (1000 Genomes). It was also absent in our existing 50 de-identified Sri Lankan exome/genome sequences.
Genetic counseling and familial co-segregation analysis in the mother, unaffected brothers and sisters, maternal sisters and their affected sons, and affected maternal uncles could not be done as the family members were unwilling to provide consent for genetic testing. DC is also commonly confirmed by molecular diagnosis when a patient’s peripheral blood mononuclear cell telomere length is shorter than 99% of the age-matched population (i.e. below the 1 percentile) or by determining decreased telomerase RNA levels. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) for relative telomere length measurements was performed in the proband (extended family members were unwilling to undergo testing). Relative telomere length determination by qPCR measures the ratio of telomere (T) signals, specific to the telomere hexamer repeat sequence TTAGGG, to autosomal single copy gene (S) signals. This ratio is normalized by control DNA samples to yield relative standardized T/S ratios proportional to average telomere length. In this technique reactions are performed independently, so a standard curve of pooled genomic DNA samples is utilized to assess the amount of each signal, while compensating for inter-plate variations in PCR efficiency. This telomere length measurement assay was adapted from the published method by Cawthon . The results showed that his relative telomere length (T/S ratio) was 0.38, compared to a control median of 0.71 (range 0.44-1.19) by qPCR, indicating that the patient, indeed, had very short telomeres, which is consistent with the DC diagnosis .
Functional characterization of the novel DKC1 variant to determine the effects of the variant on protein level could not be performed as the resources needed to conduct such complex and highly technical assays were not readily available at our centre. However, based on the data outlined above and the typical phenotypic features in the proband along with the strong family history suggestive of X-linked inheritance pattern, it is likely that hemizygosity for the novel variant resulted in DC in this patient. Repeat bone marrow biopsy done 3 months later confirmed the diagnosis of evolving bone marrow failure, compatible with a congenital bone marrow failure syndrome. He was re-admitted 3 months after the initial diagnosis with 1 week history of fever, and clinical features of pneumonia. His disease took a rapidly progressive course with severe dysphagia and vomiting developing over 3 weeks. In addition, he developed severe pancytopenia with acute liver failure and succumbed to his illness 4 months after the initial diagnosis.