This is a 38-year-old woman – with no history of pregnancies – with a cutaneous form of SLE diagnosed 12 years ago. Five of the criteria of the American Rheumatism Association from the year 1992 are present: butterfly rash; discoid lupus lesions; arthritis/arthralgias; immunological abnormalities (ANA, ADNA). Oral therapy with methylprednisolone and hydroxychloroquine has been administered for 12 years. SLE has been in remission – according to the clinical and laboratory results – for the last 2 years, and patient has been on maintenance therapy with reduced doses of the medical treatment. PAP smear 3A, and visible from colposcopy gross leukoplakia area (L2) were found on a prophylactic examination of patient; the leukoplakia area was with a section of mosaic (M2), and sizes of 1.5 × 2 cm in the region of exocervix, extending into the cervical canal. A loop excision of the described section was performed with histological result of adenocarcinoma of uterine cervix and involvement of the resection lines. A repeated examination of histological preparation was accomplished, which confirmed the initial result – villoglandular adenocarcinoma with infiltration to the native squamous epithelium of uterine cervix. Patient was admitted at this Clinic for continuation of treatment .
In view of the preceding disease (SLE) and histological result, a decision was made – after a thorough discussion – for performing of robotic radical hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy, combined with pelvic lymph node dissection (DaVinci Si®, Intuitive Surgical). Based on the assessment of the attending rheumatologist, a preoperative preparation with Methylprednisolone 60 + 60 + 40 + 40 + 20 mg was appointed, which began two days before the operation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of lesser pelvis, and pelvic and paraaortic lymph node chains, was performed, in which changes in uterine cervix were found with diameter of less than 10 mm and lymph nodes enlarged within referent range of up to 10 mm that were not suspected to be metastatic . The operative intervention passed with no complications, with a total surgery time of 185 minutes, console time of 160 minutes, and total blood loss of 50 ml. The histological examination showed a high grade of glandular endocervical dysplasia (HCGIN), with no presence of residual carcinoma after the conization performed .
Seventeen lymph nodes were removed on pelvic lymph node dissection – two of them were sent for frozen section analysis due to their enlarged sizes, with no metastases found in them . The final pathological examination did not reveal any lymphatic metastases.
The early postoperative period passed with significant lymphorrhea – respectively, 300 ml, 500 ml, 600 ml, 500 ml, 600 ml, 700 ml, 700 ml from the first to seventh day – which required a more prolonged hospitalization. Patient was discharged on seventh postoperative day, after which the abdominal drain was removed, and therapy was appointed for improvement of the condition of lymphedema. Within one month the lymphorrhea was significantly limited. In view of the histological result and according to the decision of the Oncological Committee, radiotherapy was not appointed. In the course of follow-up, presence of lymphocele was found three months after the intervention, in the area of left and right external iliac lymph node chains, with sizes of respectively 3 × 2 cm and 2 × 2 cm; there was reduction of their sizes, with one centimeter each, on the sixth month, as a result of only medicinal treatment. Their drainage was not required due to the absence of symptoms. On the last follow-up examination, 9 months after the operation, patient felt well, with no data of persistence of disease.