A 47-year-old woman of Indo-Asian decent was admitted to the hospital with a two week history of peripheral oedema, shortness of breath and lethargy, as well as an itchy pigmented rash on her arms, legs and groin of two months’ duration. She reported a large swelling of the right side of her neck, which had been biopsied eighteen months earlier and diagnosed as a T cell lymphoma, for which she had refused conventional chemotherapy. She denied taking any regular prescribed medications, but began using alternative remedies since the appearance of the neck mass.
On examination the rash was raised and hyperpigmented with evidence of excoriation, and the patient had a grey tint to her skin. She had a blood pressure of 164/96 mmHg. The neck mass was firm and non-tender, measured 10cm x 4cm, and had two overlying scars from previous biopsies.
Laboratory results demonstrated a serum creatinine of 600 μmol/l, urea 21.2 mmol/l, haemoglobin 6.3 g/dl, neutrophils 21.9 x 109/l, CRP 118 mg/l, LDH 675 iU/l, and serum bicarbonate 10 mmol/l. Urinalysis confirmed proteinuria and haematuria and urinary protein creatinine ration (UPCR) revealed nephrotic range proteinuria of 515 mg/mmol. Virological tests for HIV, HCV and Hepatitis B sAg were negative. Serological tests for anti-dsDNA, ANA, ANCA and anti-GBM antibodies were all negative, complement levels C3 and C4 were normal.
The patient was commenced on haemodialysis. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis confirmed that the neck mass was an enlarged lymph node, with additional axillary and mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Biopsies of the kidneys, neck mass and skin lesions were performed. The kidney biopsy revealed pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis, and glomerular tufts with fine, dark, granular material scattered within the mesangium and along the basement membrane . Electron microscopy confirmed the presence of scattered electron-dense granules along and within the glomerular basement membrane as well as in the mesangium . This was strikingly similar to the skin biopsy showing scattered fine black granules within the basement membranes of the sweat gland epithelial cells consistent with argyria.
Electron probe microanalysis demonstrated that these granules contained predominantly silver and some selenium atoms . The biopsy of the neck mass confirmed a peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
On further questioning the patient admitted using colloidal silver as another treatment for the neck swelling, made by electrolytic solubilisation of a pair of silver electrodes and consumption of the resulting solution . The patients’ serum silver concentration was strikingly elevated at 127.1 nmol/l (reference value <2.8 nmol/l).
The patient was treated with 3 pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone and intravenous cyclophosphamide, adjusted for age and renal function, every 2-3 weeks, followed by a tapering dose of oral prednisolone. After three weeks, partial recovery of renal function permitted withdrawal of haemodialysis. The patient declined conventional chemotherapy for her lymphoma, but continued pulsed cyclophosphamide to treat her renal impairment. She achieved a nadir creatinine of 288 μmol/l.