Mr. SH, A 35-year-old male patient presented to us with a history of fall from a height of 15 feet after which he was unable to bear weight on right lower limb. He was treated by a local quack in his village. He continued to experience pain for the next 6 months after which he presented to our emergency department with an antalgic gait. On clinical examination, he had a right lower limb abduction and external rotation deformity with painful restricted movements. Radiological imaging confirmed the clinical suspicion of anterior hip dislocation of obturator variety ( and ).
No associated fractures and intact distal neurovascular status were observed. An open reduction and internal fixation of the joint through an anterolateral approach was planned. After opening the hip joint, the head was visualized in the obturator foramen with findings of a dent and irregularity on the surface at the posterosuperior margin, absence of cartilage was noted, but intact vascularity confirmed by drill hole blood oozing .
At this point reduction was successful with Murphy’s skid technique alone, post-reduction radiographs showed concentric and congruent reduction and stabilization achieved with two Steinman pins across the hip joint .
Steinman pins and sutures removed after 15 days, but the hip joint continued to be kept immobilized in Thomas Splint for 3 weeks postoperative after which gradual mobilization started .
Patient went discharge thereafter and returned back to his village but failed to follow-up at 6 weeks due to financial issues in addition to the restrictive travel conditions in the lockdown, now at 3 months postoperative the patient has painfree ambulation with stick support with early signs avascular necrosis (AVN) of the femoral head as seen on the X-ray and computed tomography scan (-).
Patient has been planned for a total hip replacement (THR) at a later date as currently patient can ambulate to his satisfaction and there is no hindrance in his daily routine activities.