A 6-hour-old female neonate born from a 22-year-old Para 1 mother after term pregnancy. The newborn had protrusion of mass per vagina since birth; she also has a defect at the lower back with no discharge since the time of birth. Additionally the mother has noticed deformity on both legs and feet which barely move. The baby was active since the time of delivery and is sucking well and she passed meconium. The mother had two ANC visits and was vaccinated according to the national schedule and she reported the whole course of the pregnancy as uneventful. She did not have any known medical illness and has never taken any medication during the entire course of the index pregnancy except iron folate which was prescribed during the ANC visit.
She had spontaneous onset of labor and the membrane was ruptured spontaneously intrapartum. She gave birth to a 2330-gram female neonate after 5 hours of labor at a local health center. Baby had good APGAR score. Health care providers at the health center noticed defect at the back of the baby and referred her to Hawassa University Comprehensive Specialized Hospital (HUCSH) with the diagnosis of spinal bifida.
During the initial evaluation at HUCSH the baby was active, vital signs were in the normal limits, and all neonatal reflexes were intact. There was 4x4 cm pink mass protruding through the introitus, cervical os is noted at the tip of the mass, the external genitalia appears normal, no discharge or bleeding from the mass, and the mass was reducible digitally and increases in size when the baby cries (see ). There was also 4x4 cm defect at the lumbosacral region the major portion of which is covered with skin while the lower edge is open, no discharge from the mass (see ). Additionally the newborn had bilateral club foot deformity (see ).
On investigation, the complete blood count was normal, creatinine level was 0.4mg/dl, and transfontanelle ultrasound scan shows mild dilatation of the lateral and third ventricles with an index of “mild hydrocephalus” and abdominal ultrasound was normal.
After obtaining consent from the parents, under aseptic technique, the baby was catheterized, the vaginal mass was reduced digitally, and bandage was applied from the lower abdomen, both buttocks and legs were strapped in the bandage to the level of the mid-thigh leaving an opening at the anal orifice for passage of stool (see ). The bandage was removed after 72 hours at which time the mass was completely reduced and there was no recurrence of the prolapse afterwards (see ). Unfortunately one day after the removal of the bandage the baby started to shoot fever and had difficulty of sucking, on examination she had tachycardia and tachypnea and was febrile, she had depressed reflexes, the lower border of the meningocele got ruptured, her fontanels were bulged, and she was diagnosed with ruptured myelomeningocele and meningitis. The plan was to start her on antimeningitis drugs and repair the spinal cord defect after improvement but the parents insisted and went home against medical advice frustrated by her multiple anomalies. We communicated with the parents after her discharge and were informed that the baby died 7 days after she went home, but there was no recurrence of the prolapse throughout her stay.