A 37-year-old male presented with productive cough and low-grade fever. The patient had a history of thoracic surgery for recurrent pneumothorax with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease as the underlying condition. Chest computed tomography (CT) presented a fungus ball in the upper left lobe, and the patient was positive for Aspergillus-precipitating antibody. Although the patient was negative for fungal culture on bronchoscopy, other diseases such as mycobacterial infection and lung cancer were excluded. The patient was diagnosed with CPA based on the chronic course, presence of a fungus ball on chest CT, and an immunological response . The patient was treated with itraconazole (ITC; 400 mg/day) from August 2009 to July 2010 and subsequently, with voriconazole (VRC; 400 mg/day) until December 2011; however, he had repeated haemoptysis during treatment. The patient then underwent left upper lobe and left S6 segment resection surgery in December 2011 and was treated postoperatively with VRC (400 mg/day) for 6 months. Since then, the patient was followed up without antifungal treatment. In June 2016, he had worsening respiratory symptoms and chest CT showed thickening of the cavity wall in the upper left lobe. The sensitive isolate MF-2046 was obtained from the sputum, and VRC treatment was reinitiated due to CPA relapse. Although the resistant isolate MF-2108 was obtained from the sputum in September 2016, the VRC treatment was continued until November 2018 as respiratory symptoms and radiological findings improved. Since then, the patient has not been treated, but no disease progression has been observed .
The MF-2046 and MF-2108 isolates were obtained from the patient’s sputum in June and September of 2016, respectively . Based on the macroscopic colony morphology, micromorphological characteristics, the ability to grow at 48 °C, and the sequences of the β-tubulin gene, these were identified as A. fumigatus sensu strico isolates [, ].
In vitro susceptibility testing of the isolates was performed as previously described . Briefly, minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of ITC, VCZ, and amphotericin B and minimum effective concentrations (MECs) of micafungin were determined using the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute reference method for broth microdilution, document M38-A2, with partial modifications using a yeast-like fungus DP plate (Eiken Chemical, Tokyo, Japan) . The results were evaluated according to the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility (EUCAST) clinical breakpoints.
STR analysis was performed as previously descibed . Briefly, nine microsatellite regions were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the designed primer pairs and sequenced. The number of repeats in each region was counted from the sequences.
The cyp51A gene was amplified by PCR using the designed primer pairs and was sequenced. The results of the STR analysis and primers used in this study are shown in Table S.
All isolates were incubated on a potato dextrose agar (PDA) (0.4% potato starch, 2% dextrose, and 1.5% agar) (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI) slanted at 30 °C for 1 week. The conidia were harvested with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 1% Tween 20 solution, and the conidial suspensions obtained were passed through a sterile 40-μm strainer to remove hyphal fragments. The number of conidia was counted using a haemocytometer.
A total of 1 × 104 conidia /A. fumigatus isolate were spotted on the PDA plates and incubated for 5 days at 30 °C. Colony diameters were measured after 72, 96, and 120 h and the average diameters were calculated from three independent experiments .
A total of 5.0 × 105 conidia / A. fumigatus isolate were incubated in 5 mL of yeast glucose medium at 37 °C for 24 h with shaking at 250 rpm. The precipitate obtained was then recovered by filtration, frozen at − 80 °C, lyophilized overnight, and weighed. The average biomass was calculated from three independent experiments.
Biofilm assay was performed as previously described [, ]. Briefly, a round-bottomed 96-well plate was inoculated with 100 μL of the conidial suspension at a density of 1 × 105 conidia/mL in a Brian medium and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. The spent culture medium was removed from each well and the adherent cells were washed three times with distilled water (dH2O). Next, 100 μL of 0.1% (w/v) crystal violet solution was added to each well and incubated for 10 min. This solution was carefully removed and washed twice with dH2O. The biofilms were destained for 10 min by adding 125 μL of 100% ethanol to each well. The absorbance of the destaining solution was measured at 595 nm.
Healthy G. mellonella larvae (Oita General Service Co., Ltd., Japan) of the same size were selected for the assay. Groups of 10 larvae were inoculated with 1.0 × 106 conidia into the haemocoel using a Hamilton syringe through the last left pro-leg . The inoculated larvae were incubated in the dark at 37 °C and survival was monitored daily for 7 days. Ten larvae were inoculated with PBS and used as controls, and no larvae died during this time. Virulence assays were repeated three times independently.
A total of 5.0 × 105 conidia / A. fumigatus isolate were incubated in 5 mL of yeast extract-peptone-dextrose (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, and 2% dextrose) (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA) broth at 37 °C for 24 h with shaking at 250 rpm. Mycelium was recovered using a sterile 40-μm strainer, rapidly frozen using absolute ethanol and dry ice, and lyophilized overnight. The lyophilized mycelium was homogenized and used for DNA extraction. DNA was extracted using a MasterPure™ DNA Purification Kit (Epicentre, Madison, WI, USA) and purified using a QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Whole-genome sequencing was performed by a commercial vendor (Novogene Bioinformatics Technology Co. Ltd., Beijing, China) using NovaSeq 6000 (350-bp insert library with 150-bp paired-end sequencing; Illumina, San Diego, CA).
Adaptor sequences and low-quality reads were eliminated from paired-end sequence reads using the Cutadapt v1.16 software . The sequence reads were mapped to the Af293 reference genome using Bowtie2 v2.3.4.1 [, ], and BAM files were processed with the MarkDuplicates program from Picard-tools v2.18.1 to generate analysis-ready BAM files . Variants were then called to obtain multi-sample Variant Call Format file using the HaplotypeCaller program from GATK v4.1.0.0 . Subsequently, the effects of the variants were predicted using the SnpEff software . Single nucleotide mutations were reconfirmed using Sanger sequencing.
Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesised from 2.5 μg of the total RNA using a QuantiTect Reverse Transcription kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and cDNA was used as the template for PCR using a QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed in triplicate using a 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The mRNA abundance of the target genes was normalised to 18SrRNA. The primers used for qRT-PCR are listed in Table S.
Unpaired t-test was used to assess the differences in the colony diameter, and the biomass and biofilm amounts. Survival was plotted on a Kaplan–Meier curve for each strain, and log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test was used for pairwise comparison of percent survival using the GraphPad Prism 5 software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.