The patient reported is a 23-year-old adopted woman with a limited history of early childhood. She has a complex medical history including bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and non-anatomic gastroparesis requiring feeds by jejunal tube. She also carries the heterozygous, pathogenic Factor V “Leiden” variant discovered after suffering multiple deep vein thromboses and pulmonary emboli, now on lifelong anticoagulation. The patient experienced numerous infections throughout adolescence and young adulthood including repeated facial impetigo, recurrent tonsillitis requiring tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, skin abscesses, recurrent central line-associated blood stream infections (Enterobacter cloacae), and infections of the central line site (Staphylococcus aureus). Because of a concern for a primary immunodeficiency, she had been treated empirically with immune globulin, without evidence of hypogammaglobulinemia or specific antibody deficiency. At age 22, she presented with a breast abscess and cellulitis requiring incision and drainage (I&D). Over the next several months, she suffered recurrent abscesses despite serial debridement and intravenous antibiotics. During a prolonged inpatient stay for treatment of recurrent breast abscess at her local hospital, she was transferred to our institution for further evaluation and treatment. Her initial diagnostic work-up included laboratory studies that demonstrated a normal leukocyte count, mild anemia, overall normal lymphocyte counts, and a mild thrombocytosis, likely reactive to an acute infection . An ultrasound of the right breast found complex fluid collections, of which the largest region measured 16 x 5 x 14 mm. A biopsy of the tissue supported a picture of acute on chronic inflammation without atypical hyperplasia or malignancy. Cultures obtained at different time points during her clinical course grew numerous organisms including Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, Enterobacter cloacae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Serratia marcescens, Veillonella parvula, and Candida spp. (glabrata, albicans, and lusitaniae). Despite completing an extended course of appropriate antimicrobial coverage along with multiple I&D procedures, the infections did not resolve.