A 10-year-old spayed female domestic mediumhair cat was referred for investigation of a 2-month history of right pelvic limb lameness with no inciting trauma. The cat had previously been diagnosed with IHC at the age of 1 year based on a history of sustained hypercalcemia and an absence of salient findings after an appropriate diagnostic work-up. Prednisolone and alendronate were prescribed for management, levels of which were titrated over time based on ionized calcium levels; the last documented period of hypercalcemia was 3 years after the diagnosis of IHC. Current medications consisted of alendronate (10 mg/week), prednisolone (2.5 mg q24h) and gabapentin (100 mg q8h).
On physical examination, the cat had a moderate weightbearing right pelvic limb lameness with moderate tarsal hyperflexion. The right hock had a normal range of motion with mild palpable crepitus. Orthogonal radiographs of both tibiae and tarsi were performed, revealing a complete transverse right calcaneal body fracture with mild displacement and moderate sclerosis of the fracture ends; there was minimal activity at the fracture site . Although surgical stabilization was recommended, due to perceived improvement over time, the owner elected to trial non-surgical management.
Six weeks later, the cat re-presented for an acute onset non-weightbearing lameness of the left pelvic limb, again with no inciting trauma. Gait analysis confirmed non-weightbearing lameness on the left and mild weightbearing lameness of the right pelvic limb with persistent tarsal hyperflexion. Orthopedic examination revealed swelling and instability at the level of the proximal left tibia. Orthogonal radiographs of both tibiae revealed a complete transverse fracture of the left proximal tibial metaphysis and fibula . The fracture of the right calcaneus remained static with a persistent fracture line, sclerosis and minimal activity . Surgical stabilization of the tibial fracture was elected. Complete bloodwork showed no significant findings with the exception of a mild total hypocalcemia (8.2 mg/dl, reference interval [RI] 9.1–10.7), ionized calcium (5.5 mg/dl, RI 5.1–6.0) and phosphorous (5.3 mg/dl, RI 2.7–5.7) were within normal limits.
Open reduction and internal fixation via a medial approach was undertaken. A 1.5 mm six-hole locking compression plate (LCP) (DePuy Synthes) was placed cranially and was used to reduce the fracture. A 1.5/2.0 mm split-T seven-hole LCP (DePuy Synthes) was then placed medially. Postoperative radiographs showed anatomic alignment, near-anatomic reduction and appropriate implant placement ( and ). While bone biopsy was considered, as this was not considered likely to impact on therapeutic recommendations, it was not performed due to the brittle nature of the bone and the paucity of bone stock available for repair. Postoperatively, analgesia was managed with methadone (0.2 mg/kg IV q6h) while hospitalized. The cat was discharged the next day with instructions for cage rest, amantadine for additional analgesia (2.9 mg/kg PO q24h) and continuation of current medications (prednisolone 2.5 mg q24h, gabapentin 100 mg q8h), with the exception of alendronate, which was discontinued.
Findings at follow-up visits from 4 weeks to 17 months postoperatively are detailed in . At final follow-up, screening radiographs were performed of the pelvis, both stifles, the right tibia and both tarsi, which revealed no evidence of impending fracture.