A 10-year-old Japanese boy with transfusion-dependent Fanconi anaemia underwent HCT. On day 8 after HCT, the patient complained of abdominal pain with vomiting and bloody stool . His body temperature was 38 °C. The laboratory findings revealed a white blood cell count of 40 cells µl−1 and an elevated C-reactive protein concentration of 2.81 mg µl−1. For the control of post-transplant febrile neutropenia, cefepime 50 mg kg−1, twice daily, was administered after the first blood culture from the central venous catheter (CVC). Because of persistent fever for 4 days, the antibacterial agent was switched to meropenem, 100 mg kg−1 per day for 24 days, after the second blood culture. His left cheek became swollen on day 14 after HCT. Enhanced computer tomography findings led to a diagnosis of facial cellulitis .
On microbiological analysis, Peds Plus (PED) and Plus Anaerobic culture vials (Becton Dickinson; BD) were used in a BD BACTEC FX system. Gram-positive, rod-shaped bacteria were isolated from the first two blood cultures in PED vials after a 5 day incubation period. Both blood culture-positive samples were collected from the CVC. Small colonies were observed after incubation for 48 h at 35 °C on 5 % sheep blood agar plates (Shimazu) in a 5 % CO2 environment. These colonies appeared as round, pale orange, Gram-positive bacilli that expanded to a diameter of 2–3 mm after 5 days of additional incubation . The isolated bacteria were catalase-positive, but negative for Kinyoun’s acid-fast staining. However, it was difficult to identifying the Gram-positive bacilli biochemically because of disparate results between VITEK 2 ANC and API Coryne tests. The VITEK2 ANC system identified the bacilli as (% ID: 96 %), while the API Coryne test after 24 h of incubation indicated that the bacilli were spp. (% ID: 94.7 %). VITEK MS, an automated mass spectrometry using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) technology, didn’t identify the strain either. Because of the failure to determine the strain using these devices and systems, we performed 16S rRNA sequencing with an ABI 3500xL automated DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems) under the guidelines of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) (MM18-A) . The sequence obtained had a continuous stretch of 1 414 bp that exhibited 100 % similarity to in a previous report . The antimicrobial-drug susceptibility of the isolated colony was determined using the agar plate dilution method. The isolate was incubated on microplates at 35 °C in an aerobic atmosphere for 72 h. The minimum inhibitory concentration of was estimated as described by CLSI document M24-A2 , and susceptibility to several antibiotics, including meropenem and teicoplanin, was observed .
Three days after an additional administration of teicoplanin (initially 10 mg kg−1 every 12 hours for 3 doses, then 10 mg kg−1 once daily for 14 days), fever, C-reactive protein levels and cheek swelling peaked out on day 16 after HCT, coinciding with engraftment (i.e. white blood cells, 1010 cells µl−1, and neutrophils, 900 cells µl−1). A prompt improvement of fever and cellulitis was observed by day 18 after HCT .
The post-transplant management required the persistent insertion of a CVC after HCT. Based on the result that the blood culture from the CVC on day 14 was sterile, antibiotic therapy was completed (23 days for meropenem and 15 days for teicoplanin). However, fever recurred on day 48 after HCT. The blood culture from the CVC was positive again for , although the peripheral venous blood cultures were negative on day 48 and day 55 post-transplant. Under the diagnosis of catheter-related bloodstream infection, the CVC was removed. was isolated again from the culture of the CVC tip. Meropenem, 100 mg kg−1 per day for 7 days, therapy was terminated 1 week after CVC removal, and no fever recurred thereafter.