A 78-year-old female presented with the left-sided weakness, paresthesia, and hyperreflexia. The preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-circumscribed, homogenous, and subtly enhancing dorsolateral intradural lesion with diminished T1 signal and increased T2 signal. It arose from the region of the transverse ligament of the atlas and measuring 1.9 cm × 1.6 cm × 1.9 cm, where it contributed to dorsolateral cord compression. In addition, there was a subtle abnormal T2 increased signal within the cord reflecting edematous change at this level .
Utilizing intraoperative monitoring, the patient underwent a three-quarter laminectomy of C2, with complete removal of the left hemilamina, half of the right hemilamina, and the posterior arch of C1. Following the decompression, it was noted that the lateral aspect of the thecal sac and the exiting C2 nerve root was slightly thinned, but there was no extradural cyst.
When the dura was opened in a C-shaped fashion deep to several rootlets of the spinal accessory nerve, a sizable intradural extramedullary lesion pushing the spinal cord toward the right was evident. There was a plane between the spinal cord and the cystic lesion facilitating operative dissection. The wall of the cyst was opened and there was efflux of clear fluid with a small amount of calcified material . Nevertheless, as part of the cyst wall was calcified and densely adherent to neural structures, it was left in situ.
The analysis included periodic acid–Schiff and Gomori trichrome special stains as well as immunohistochemical markers including AE1/AE3, MIB-1, cluster of differentiation 68, and epithelial membrane antigen. The cyst was partially lined with meningothelial cells; these findings were consistent with a synovial cyst.
At the time of discharge 4 days later, the patient’s left-sided strength was significantly improved compared to preoperatively. At a 1-month, she was ambulating independently. Postoperative imaging 8 months later (MR) showed no significant residual cyst nor spinal cord compression .