A 25-year-old right-handed man presented to the emergency department with a headache, right-sided weakness, confusion, and aphasia which began the previous night (day 0). On day 0, the patient awoke late in the afternoon with a headache and some confusion according to his family. The patient then went back to sleep until the following morning. Upon awakening, the patient exhibited right-sided weakness and difficulty speaking in addition to the headache and confusion. His mother also reported the patient was nauseous and had episodes of vomiting throughout the night. The patient had a questionable history of migraine with prolonged aura. Prior to the onset of the headache, the patient was in his usual state of health. Unique to this experience, which prompted his parents to bring him to the emergency room, was the persistence of headaches, hemiplegia, and difficulty speaking. A level II stroke alert prompted a CT of his head and Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) of his head and neck; both were negative for any signs of a stroke, stenosis, or occlusion. The consulting neurologist diagnosed the patient with atypical migraine since the symptoms were similar to those previously experienced by the patient in prior attacks. The patient was instructed to return for possible MRI of the brain if symptoms persisted and was referred to an outpatient neurology visit for follow-up. The patient was discharged with a diagnosis of atypical migraine and with instructions for follow-up or to return to the emergency department if symptoms worsened. The patient returned the following day (day 2) due to the persistence of symptoms. Thus, the patient was admitted for observation with right-sided weakness, aphasia, and fever. At 5:00 PM on day two, the patient recorded a temperature of 100.9℉. During the next several days, the patient’s temperature ranged from 98.3℉ − 102.6℉. The patient was febrile to a temperature max of 102.6℉ recorded on day 4 at 4:00 AM. The patient’s fever subsequently broke by at 6:00 AM of day 4. Of interest, the patient reported two female cousins with similar symptoms.
The neurological findings and fever prompted empiric treatment for meningitis. A lumbar puncture (LP) was ordered to assess for infectious etiologies. The patient was unable to be interviewed due to aphasia. History obtained from the patient’s parents revealed the patient had been working outside at a car shop and taking several stimulant weight loss supplements in the days immediately prior to admission. The clinical exam showed an alert, dysarthric patient with global aphasia and weakness in the right upper and lower extremities. The first MRI was obtained approximately two days after symptom onset. T2-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) showed no signs of acute intracranial abnormality but did show scattered hyperintensities in the white matter of frontal lobes bilaterally .
On the day following his admission (day 3), the results of the patient’s LP showed clear, colorless fluid which was negative for xanthochromia. Glucose and protein were within normal limits while white blood cells and red blood cells showed 2 cells/mm3 and 1 cells/mm3 respectively. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) was negative for enterovirus, herpes-simplex virus (HSV) 1 and 2, and cryptococcal antigens. The culture of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was ultimately negative for bacterial species, but his fever persisted. He underwent seizure-like activity which prompted treatment with 1 mg Intravenous (IV) Lorazepam and subsequent resolution of the episode. A loading dose of 1000 mg of IV Levetiracetam followed by 500 mg twice a day as well as further workup was ordered. Another MRI was obtained the day following his seizure-like activity (day 4), which showed diffuse diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and T2/FLAIR hyperintensities throughout the left cerebral hemisphere cortices. Electroencephalogram (EEG) was ordered and returned abnormal results indicative of global central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction and focal dysfunction of the left hemisphere. Encephalitis was suspected, but the exact etiology was still unknown.
Empiric treatment for bacterial meningitis was discontinued on day 5 following negative LP and advice from infectious disease consultations. With a tick-borne molecular panel still pending, empiric treatment with doxycycline was advised. HIV, fungal, bacterial, and viral agents all returned negative. On day 7, the patient experiences a generalized tonic-clonic (GTC) seizure which resulted in the decision to start long-term EEG and repeat MRI. The repeat MRI showed similar findings to the previous MRI - T2/FLAIR hyperintensity of the left cerebral cortex without enhancement and associated sulcal effacement. At this time, the differential was still broad including encephalitis of viral, neoplastic, autoimmune, or idiopathic origins. A steroid regimen was employed.
Figure highlights the MRI findings throughout the course of the patient’s hospital stay as well as the resolution and follow-up visits. Day 11 was notable for more prominent hypointensity on Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) in the left cerebral hemisphere cortices and temporal lobe. MRI on day 15 revealed even more prominent hypointensity on ADC. Continuous EEG recording was started on day 12 and continued for 9 days. The findings from EEG were largely non-specific but included left-hemispheric slowing with mild diffuse slowing. By the end of the EEG recordings, the left hemispheric attenuation had largely resolved.
To rule out germ cell tumor, CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was obtained on day 16 and showed no evidence of neoplasm. Despite the lack of success identifying a causal agent, the patient showed signs of clinical improvement with the persistence of the aphasia. Due to the negative LPs, the negative pan CT, and non-specific EEG findings, the differential now included limbic encephalitis, autoimmune, prion disease, Transient Headache and Neurologic Deficits With Cerebrospinal Fluid Lymphocytosis (HaNDL syndrome) and last, but not least, the Rasmussen syndrome. LP, anti-Hu/Ma, anti-Ta, anti-NR1, anti-AQP4, anti-CASPR2, anti-LGI1, anti-Yo, oligoclonal bands, ANA, anti-double stranded DNA, complement C3 and C4, SSA-SSB antibody, RNP-SM antibody, encephalitis antibody evaluation (ANNA-1/anti-Hu, ANNA-2/anti-Ri, ANNA-3, PCA-1/anti-Yo, PCA-2, PCA-TR/anti-Tr, AGNA/anti-SOX1, Amphiphysin Ab, anti-CRMP5/anti-CV2, anti-GAD65, anti-MA2/Ta anti-myelin, AQP4/Ab/NMO-IgG), an epilepsy autoimmune evaluation (AChR Ganglionic Neuronal Ab, AMPA-R Ab, Amphiphysin Ab, AGNA-1, ANNA-1/anti-Hu, ANNA-2/anti-Ri, ANNA-3, CASPR2-IgG, CRMP-5-IgG, DPPX Ab, GABA-B-R Ab, anti-GAD65, anti-GFAP, LGI1-IgG CBA, mGluR1 Ab, NMDA-R Ab, N-Type Calcium Channel Ab, P/Q-Type Calcium Channel Ab, PCA-2, PCA-Tr), a neurology antibody order (ANNA-1/anti-Hu, ANNA-2/anti-Ri, PCA-1/anti-Yo, PCA-TR/anti-Tr, AGNA/anti-SOX1, anti-Ma2/Ta, anti-Zic4, anti-CRMP5/anti-CV2, amphiphysin Ab, anti-GAD65) and protein 14-3-3 were ordered as part of the follow-up. The decision was made to start the patient on a course of IVIG while additional investigations were still pending. The patient showed improvement after starting the IVIG and was discharged on multiple medications including lamotrigine, levetiracetam, magnesium chloride, riboflavin, valproate sodium and instructions with close follow-ups. At the outpatient follow-up with neurology, the patient showed significant improvements in language, showed no stroke-like symptoms, and denied any seizure-like activity. The rest of the laboratory investigations were unremarkable except genetic testing. The analysis of four genes (ATP1A2, CACNA1A, SCN1A, PRRT2), was positive for a heterozygous, AD mutation in ATP1A2 (c.2936 C > T p. P979L). The patient had a recurrence of seizure which resulted in another short hospital stay.