A 60-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our department in 2017 for a second opinion due to failed response to traditional SIH treatment. About 1 year earlier, he was admitted to the neurological department due to orthostatic headache and subtle cognitive changes recognized by his family members. Craniospinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed signs of SIH; however, no CSF leak was evident. Lumbar puncture showed a low opening pressure (near zero cmH2O). Repeated attempts with lumbar epidural blood patch during the next few months had only partial and short-lived effects. Meanwhile, his condition gradually progressed. His past medical history was uneventful, except for a head injury at age ten when a ski pole struck his left temporal head region. He was discharged from hospital after 2 days with no great concern and no signs of skull fracture at X-ray. As an adolescent, he developed tension headaches (worst in supine position) that worsened during early adult life. In his 30 s, he was once hospitalized, diagnosed with migraine, and medicated for this until 2016. He then suffered a “new type of headache” that was worse in standing position . Thereafter, his condition progressed rapidly, manifesting a fulminant BSD , with severe cognitive decline confirmed by neuropsychological assessment. He failed to perform at his job as a company director, and was on full sick leave.
During his stay in our department, imaging showed severe brain sagging with subsequent CSF flow obstruction through the cerebral aqueduct . A comprehensive search for CSF leakage was performed; dynamic computed tomography (CT) myelogram and repeated craniospinal MRI after administration of intrathecal gadobutrol (Gadovist, Bayer, GE), according to our department's protocol . However, no CSF leak was identified. Continuous intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring revealed severe intracranial hypotension with ICP scores < − 10 mmHg . The mean wave amplitude (MWA) was within the normal range, suggesting no impaired intracranial compliance . The patient deteriorated further and developed severe antegrade amnesia, stereotyped and bizarre behavior, becoming socially and sexually inappropriate. At one point, he assaulted the nurse in his room, thus acquiring surveillance by a security guard. He lost insight, and his decision-making became seriously hampered. For instance, he insisted to divorce his wife. Mini-Mental exam score worsened in a matter of weeks from 26/30 to eventually a point where he could not cooperate for the test.
Due to his rapid clinical decline, a two-step cranial surgical approach was suggested, and his family consented. A cranial defect corresponding to his childhood head trauma was evident during the surgical exploration . The CSF leakage site was repaired, and an external ventricular drain was placed to overcome the supratentorial hydrocephalus induced by the brain sagging and subsequent CSF outflow obstruction. The splitting of the tentorium on the left side was also performed. The right tentorium was split in the second surgical step, and herniated brain tissue was resected. Despite a transient post-operative clinical improvement, his condition deteriorated. He became drowsy and showed clinical signs of herniation upon attempting to withdraw the drain. Therefore, he received a ventriculoperitoneal shunt with Codman-Hakim vale on a low setting (5 cmH2O).
His condition improved remarkably after shunt surgery, and he was discharged shortly thereafter. At 3-months follow-up, he was in good shape, with no neurological deficits and no more headaches. He scored 30/30 on MMSE and showed a good quality of life on the Short Form Health Survey (SF-36). He was back in his position as company director. He had no recollection of the time around his stay and was deeply sorry for his bizarre behavior. There was no sign of relapse on the 5-years follow-up.