An 84-year-old woman with chest pain was referred to our hospital’s emergency department. Her past medical history included hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and diabetes mellitus. She developed new and worsening chest pain over 2 weeks. On presentation, her vital signs were stable, and her chest pain had resolved. Electrocardiography showed no significant ST changes. Troponin T was elevated at 0.016 ng/L (reference, < 0.014 ng/L). Transthoracic echocardiography showed evidence of preserved left ventricular ejection fraction without local asynergy. Due to symptoms and cardiac biomarker elevation, the patient was suspected of having non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. She underwent emergency coronary angiography, which showed a severely calcified nodule distal to a tortuous and calcified lesion in the proximal LAD . We decided to perform percutaneous coronary intervention for the calcified LAD lesion.
The treatment was performed via the left radial artery with a 7-Fr guiding catheter (SPB3.5SH; Asahi Intecc). A guidewire (SION blue; ASAHI Intecc) was passed through the stenosis with the aid of a microcatheter (Zizai; Terumo). After guidewire crossing, we failed to pass the lesions with an IVUS catheter (Altaview; Terumo). A rotational atherectomy system was prepared because device delivery was difficult. We used a Zizai microcatheter to change to another guidewire (Rotawire floppy; Boston Scientific). Rotational atherectomy with a 1.5-mm burr was performed several times at 180,000 rpm for the proximal LAD lesion . The burr was constricted because it was not directly coaxial to the calcified nodule as a result of the proximal tortuous and calcified lesion. Angiography revealed that the calcified proximal portion was ablated eccentrically due to wire bias. The burr seemed to protrude from the contrast media . IVUS imaging revealed extremely eccentric ablation of the proximal calcified lesion; more than half of the media at the 9 o’clock position was cut away . The eccentric ablation almost reached the adventitia.
IVUS imaging helped us decide to perform the “mother-and-child” technique for these lesions. We advanced a GEC (7-Fr Guidezilla II; Boston Scientific) with an inner lumen diameter of 1.60 mm beyond the tortuous part using the balloon surfing technique. This mother-and-child technique successfully enabled coaxial ablation of the calcified nodule without injury at the site of the proximal lesion. During ablation, flow to the left circumflex artery was maintained, and the patient’s vital signs were stable. After ablation, IVUS showed that the calcified nodule at the 7 o’clock position was scored. It was expected to be well dilated . After exchanging the guidewire for the SION blue wire, the ablated LAD lesion with a calcified nodule was dilated with a 2.5 mm × 15 mm non-compliant scoring balloon (Scoreflex NC; OrbusNeich) to expand the lesion with lower pressure than the conventional non-compliant balloon and prepare the lumen before stenting . A 2.5 mm × 16 mm drug-eluting stent (Synergy XD; Boston Scientific) was deployed. Final angiography showed excellent results . The patient had restored her symptom after the procedure and no symptom recurred during 12-month follow-up.