A previously healthy 77-year-old Sri Lankan Tamil male from Galaha, a laborer at a vegetable farm, presented to the Teaching Hospital Peradeniya with a history of fever of 1-week duration. He was apparently well 1 week previously, and presented with high-grade fever along with arthralgia and myalgia. Apart from that, he had generalized headache with the onset of the illness. There were no associated respiratory symptoms, abdominal pain, vomiting, change in bowel habits, or urinary symptoms. He did not have significant past medical, surgical, or family history. He was unmarried and was an occasional alcohol consumer and a nonsmoker.
On examination, he was averagely built, conscious, ill looking, and severely dehydrated. He had cold peripheries. He was icteric, but there was no pallor or conjunctival suffusion. His pulse rate was 112 beats per minute, and his blood pressure was 77/48 mmHg. The abdominal, respiratory, and nervous system examination was unremarkable on admission.
The patients’ complete blood count showed white blood cells (WBCs) of 4.46 × 109/L (neutrophils 82%, lymphocytes 16%), platelet count 42 × 109/L, hemoglobin (Hb) 13 g/dL, and hematocrit (HCT) of 37%. His C-reactive protein was 345 mg/L, and creatinine was 359 µmol/L. Serum bilirubin was 62.9 mmol/L with direct fraction of 42 mmol/L and indirect fraction of 21 mmol/L. Arterial blood gases showed pH 7.37, lactate 1.1 mmol/L, HCO3 13 mEq/L, pCO2 23 mmHg, pO2 95 mmHg .
A clinical diagnosis of leptospirosis was made, and the patient was started on intravenous C penicillin, intravenous ceftriaxone, and oral doxycycline. After adequate fluid resuscitation, the patient was started on intravenous noradrenaline infusion 0.6 mcg/kg/minute. On the following day, patient became anuric for 10 hours with rising creatinine of 414 µmol/L. Ultrasound scan of the kidneys showed acute renal parenchymal disease. The patient was started on peritoneal dialysis. On the third day of admission, the patient became dyspneic, and auscultation of the lungs revealed coarse and fine crepitations in the bilateral lung fields. The oxygen saturation dropped even with a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) mask, and was 81%. The chest X-ray showed bilateral patchy radio-opaque shadows. The patient was electively intubated, and intensive care was given. The patient was started on intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 3 days. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed widespread T inversions, and the 2D echocardiogram showed ejection fraction (EF) of 30% with left ventricular global hypokinesia. His procalcitonin level was 37.94 ng/mL, and the platelet count was 54 × 109/L. The patient was started on plasma exchange on the fourth day of admission, and 1840 mL plasma was removed along with transfusion of 1100 mL fresh frozen plasma and 1000 mL normal saline. Six units of platelets, intravenous tranexamic acid, and intravenous vitamin K were also started. The second plasma exchange was done on the fifth day, with removal of 1810 mL total plasma volume along with transfusion of 1500 mL fresh frozen plasma and 250 mL normal saline. His urine output markedly improved, and the peritoneal dialysis was withheld on the following day. Repeat 2D echocardiography showed improved left ventricular function, with ejection fraction of 50%. By the sixth day of admission, the patient’s inotrope requirement came down and we planned to wean off from the ventilator. Repeat chest x-ray showed clearing of opacifications in the lungs. The patient was extubated on the seventh day of admission. His serum creatinine came down to 243 µmol/L, and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 19 mg/L. Meanwhile, the diagnosis was confirmed as his serology showed positive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) immunoglobulin M (IgM) for leptospirosis. By the tenth day of admission, the patient was discharged with complete recovery. In follow-up, the patient was reviewed after 2 weeks and found to be in good health.