A 67-year-old female complained of a 1-week history of one right lung mass and was admitted to Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University in July, 2020. She presented with shortness of breath, dry cough, and chest tightness, without hemoptysis or chest pain. The patient suffered from stage IA (cT1aN0M0) HCC, which was diagnosed in February, 2017 in Qi Lu Hospital. The prior liver magnetic resonance imaging result revealed an abnormal signal (arterial phase hyperenhancement and delayed phase hypointensity) in the anterosuperior segment of the right liver lobe. Then, she underwent the transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) treatment on HCC. The patient had a 7-year history of hepatitis B virus (HBV) with antiviral drug therapy; no family history was described.
After admission to the hospital, the laboratory examination revealed that the liver function test was within normal range. The viral markers showed positive serum hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B e antigen, and hepatitis B core antibody. The oncological marker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was 5.1 ng/ml, and carcinoembryonic antigen was 2.0 ng/ml. The workup was pursued by a computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed a right lung mass (3.6 cm × 3.7 cm), a hepatic lump (2.2 cm × 1.5 cm) next to the inferior vena cava, and enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes . The primary clinical stage of the lung tumor was identified as IB (cT2N0M0). Furthermore, she was diagnosed with sarcomatoid carcinoma as the histopathologic results from the pulmonary mass biopsy showed the following: CK (AE1/AE3) (weakly +), TTFI (–), Glypican-3 (NS), CK8/18 (+), P40 (–), Syn (–), CD20 (–), LCA (–), CD3 (–), CD30 (–), Ki-67+ (20%), SMA (–), and vimentin (+).
Considering her good clinical conditions, the patient was treated by chemotherapy with paclitaxel (150 mg/m2) plus cisplatin (75 mg/m2) every 21 days for two cycles. Unfortunately, on September 15, 2020, a whole-body CT scan showed a progressive disease with an increase in the diameter of the right lung lesion (4.6 cm × 4.2 cm) .
Thus, the patient received comprehensive genomic profiling by next-generation sequencing in lung puncture tissue from the previous biopsy. The immunohistochemical results showed the expression of PD-L1 as 45% and the tumor proportional score as >1%. All things considered, on September 24, 2020, the anti-PD-1 mAb camrelizumab (200 mg, every 21 days) was added to the foregoing chemotherapy with cycles of every 21 days. After 3 cycles of camrelizumab, the patient was evaluated as with partial response for both PSC (3.1 cm × 3.1 cm) and HCC (1.4 cm × 1.2 cm) on the basis of CT imaging on December 15, 2020 . Then, the combination therapy with camrelizumab and paclitaxel was adopted as maintenance treatment. A CT scan was conducted approximately every 3 months, while a laboratory test was performed prior to every treatment. Both PSC and HCC were assessed as stable disease (SD) . Unfortunately, on June 16, 2021, the patient was assessed as PD with an increase of live tumor (the longer diameter is 1.5 cm) associated with the rise of AFP and the significant enlargement of abdominal lymph nodes in a whole-body CT scan . The patient underwent the TACE treatment while remaining off from paclitaxel on the account of third-degree myelosuppression. Camrelizumab was still carried on, and the PSC lesion continued to shrink. On September 2, 2021, to figure out the metastasis of the abdominal lymph nodes, local radiotherapy (2 Gy each time for 25 times; in total, 50 Gy) was added to the camrelizumab treatment. After 23 cycles of camrelizumab treatment, the efficacy was assessed as SD for PSC and HCC according to the CT scan image in the last follow-up .
In the course of the camrelizumab combination therapy, no treatment-related toxicities were observed. Throughout the process, camrelizumab showed a manageable safety profile and acceptable tolerability, with no treatment-related serious adverse events.