A 70-year-old man with left maxillary carcinoma (cT4aN0M0, poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma) was treated from the maxillary artery with 6 cycles of selective intra-arterial cisplatin infusion with concomitant radiation therapy. However, follow-up CT showed tumor regrowth. The patient subsequently had epistaxis and underwent arterial embolization for hemostasis. A feeding artery was suspected to involve the ophthalmic artery as well as the maxillary artery on contrast-enhanced CT . He had become almost sightless earlier.
A 6Fr sheath was placed in the right femoral artery and a 6Fr guiding catheter (Medtronic plc, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was guided to the left common carotid artery. Common carotid arteriography showed the tumor to be supplied from the ophthalmic artery as well as the maxillary artery, as expected from the CT findings. Angiography revealed no extravasation. 2.8Fr/2.6Fr Masters HF (Asahi Intecc, Tokyo, Japan) was guided to the internal carotid artery , 1.8Fr/1.6Fr Carnelian Marvel S (Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was advanced to the ophthalmic artery. Ophthalmic angiography showed that the tumor was supplied from the 3rd portion, supratrochlear artery and dorsal nasal artery. Subsequently, each artery was selected and embolized with Barricade complex SR finishing coils (Balt, Irvine, CA, USA). Post-embolization angiography revealed disappearance of the tumor staining and residual choroidoretinal blush. Regarding the maxillary artery, we decided to perform coil embolization after microsphere embolization . Masters HF was guided to the trunk of the maxillary artery, Carnelian Marvel S was advanced to the 3rd portion of the maxillary artery. Trisacryl gelatin microspheres (Embosphere®, Nihonkayaku, Tokyo, Japan) 300–500 μm in size mixed with 300 mgI/mL iopamidol (Iopamiron; Bayer, Osaka, Japan) were slowly infused. In total, 1 mL of trisacryl gelatin microspheres mixed with iopamidol were injected step by step. Then, seven microcoils (Target™; Stryker, Fremont, CA, USA) were added to the maxillary artery. No bleeding needed to be treated in the 2 months after embolization.