A 13 years old boy with Behçet's disease was referred to our hospital with chills, fever, cough, and chest pain of one month duration in June 2001. The diagnosis of Behçet's disease was established 4 years prior to this admission, that had presented with oral aphtae, orchitis, right eye uveitis leading to blindness, recurrent pseudofolliculitis, knee arthritis, and lower extremity deep vein thrombosis, all attributable to this autoimmune disorder. He had been treated by Prednisolone (15 mg/day) and Methotrexate (7.5 mg/week) for last 7 month.
Physical examination revealed III/VI to-and-fro murmur along the left sternal border and an S3 gallop. The posterior-anterior chest X-ray , computed tomography scan with intravenous contrast media at the level of T5–T8 , magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , coronary angiography and echocardiography all revealed a 10.1 × 14.8 cm left ventricular pseudoaneurysm in the anterior wall of left ventricle. There was no narrowing suggesting coronary artery disease in his coronary angiography. In two-dimensional echocardiography, the typical features of pseudoaneurysm was noted including a relatively narrow neck in comparison with the diameter of the aneurysm, sharp discontinuity of the endocardium at the site at which the aneurysm communicates with the left ventricle, no noticeable valvular dysfunction, and left ventricular wall motion abnormalities. The orifice to radius ratio was not measurable due to the large size of pseudoaneurysm.
At surgery, the ostium (arrowhead in Fig. ) was measured 2.5 × 3.0 cm. The above mentioned results warranted a surgery with median sternotomy approach. After pericardotomy, a pulsatile mass appeared at the tip of left ventricle with a fistula to the heart. The pseudoaneurysm and large amounts of thrombus within it were resected, and the defect in the left ventricular wall was repaired by Teflon Plegeted Prolen 4/0. The patient made an uneventful recovery. The pathologic examination revealed a fibrous pseudoaneurysm including areas of old hemorrhage and thrombosis and chronic inflammation. There was no complication for next 24 months follow up period after the operation.