A 13-year-old Caucasian male patient presented to our surgical emergency department with complaints of severe diffuse abdominal pain and distension. The patient was brought to the hospital by helicopter about 2 h after sustaining a direct blow to the upper right quadrant of his abdomen from a bicycle handlebar. At the scene of the accident, all resuscitation measures were given in line with the recommendations of ATLS.
The patient was conscious and well-oriented. During the helicopter transportation, he was noted to be pale with blood pressure around 90/60 mmHg, a heart rate of 110–120 beats/min and haemoglobin 85 g/L. Despite a slightly higher blood pressure (115/80 mmHg) following fluid resuscitation upon admission, he remained pale and tachycardic (120 beats/min). Abdominal examination was remarkable for significant distension and diffuse tenderness, but no visible external injuries on the abdominal wall.
Chest x-ray showed no signs for rib injury, pneumothorax or any other expected pathology. FAST scan was performed, showing diffuse echogenic free fluid intraperitoneally with the most probable cause being hemoperitoneum. There were some radiologic signs of contusion of the upper part of left liver lobe, but no signs of splenic injury. Due to the extensive intraperitoneal free fluid seen on FAST and the persisting features of haemodynamic instability (tachycardia, pallor), a decision for immediate exploratory laparotomy and omitting abdominal CT was made. Performing CT imaging would have postponed the operation and might have influenced the outcome.
An emergency upper median laparotomy was performed under general anaesthesia to determine the exact nature of the abdominal injury. Due to the hematoperitoneum, our operative procedure was in conformity with damage control surgery and tamponade of all four abdominal quadrants was performed.
During the exploration, a deep laceration almost separating left and right liver lobes was found with evident bleeding from the laceration (grade II-III according to AAST liver injury scale). Firstly, with the intention to stop the bleeding, the Pringle manoeuvre was performed, and venous bleeding was stopped with several sutures. Thereafter, a meticulous examination of the laceration was done, and an injury of the left hepatic duct was observed. The left hepatic duct was interrupted almost completely, with less than 10% of the circumference preserved. However, the portal and arterial vessels for the left lobe were mainly preserved. A duct-to-duct anastomosis of the injured left hepatic duct was performed with 6.0 PDS intermittent sutures. Subsequently, cholecystectomy, insertion of biliary T-tube and intraoperative cholangiography were performed . Intraoperative cholangiography showed no extraluminal spillage of contrast. At the end of the operation, hemostatic absorbable wraps Surgicel® were inserted into the liver laceration. Intraoperatively, the patient received 3 units each of fresh frozen plasma and concentrated erythrocytes, as well as crystalloid fluids and tranexamic acid.
After operation he was admitted to the paediatric ICU under analgosedation and endotracheal intubation. Immediate post-op laboratory data were as follows: AST 7.02 μkat/L, ALT 7.81 μkat/L, total bilirubin 22 μmol/L, direct bilirubin 10 μmol/L, haemoglobin 107 g/L, erythrocytes 3.76 × 1012, leukocytes 10.4 × 109 and CRP below 5 mg/L. Sedation and vasoactive support were discontinued within the first postoperative day.
On the second postoperative day, an US scan was performed, showing minimal free fluid in the peritoneal cavity under the liver. The bile ducts diameters were within normal range.
On the fifth postoperative day, an US scan was repeated, revealing biliary ducts of normal diameter; however, there was an intrahepatic fluid collection described at the point of liver laceration measuring approximately 6 × 2 × 3 cm in size. Exact determination of whether the fluid was hematoma, biliary fluid or other was impossible on US, so we decided to perform cholangiography imaging through the T-tube to exclude biliary leakage. The cholangiography revealed evident leakage from the left hepatic duct, with the size and location of the extravasated contrast corresponding to the previously described fluid collection on US. Furthermore, a small leakage of contrast was seen in the right biliary tree with small collection of contrast with diameter around 5 mm. The common hepatic duct and common bile duct were otherwise intact and draining of contrast media to the duodenum was observed . A decision was made to manage the leakage of bile from left and right biliary tree conservatively. The T-tube was consequently left open.
On the eighteenth postoperative day and 13 days after the first cholangiography, a follow-up cholangiography was performed, which showed no signs of leakage from both the left and right biliary trees .
In response to the cessation of leakage, we decided to commence intermittent closure of the T-tube. A series of follow-up abdominal US scans were performed, and the size of the intrahepatic collection was initially noted to be increasing, with the largest diameter being 8.6 × 7.1 × 7.6 cm (approximately 300 mL) on the twenty-first postoperative day - 3 days after initiation of the intermittent T-tube closing. Afterwards, the intrahepatic fluid collection began to decrease in size and finally stabilized.
The last US follow-up during hospital stay was performed on the 38th postoperative day and showed a collection measuring 10.6 × 7.4 × 5.9 cm (220–250 ml), indicating that the size of the collection did not change and there were no signs of biliary obstruction. The patient was asymptomatic and feeling well, and we noted a decline of the previously elevated liver enzymes (ALT and ALT) . Consequently, he was discharged from the hospital with a closed T-tube in place.