A 44-year-old male patient who is not known to be diabetic or hypertensive was presented to the emergency room with sudden diffuse abdominal pain for 8 h with no history of trauma. He experienced intermittent attacks of vague lower abdominal pain lasting for few hours with spontaneous relief over the last 2 days. The patient underwent open appendectomy 2 years ago; the patient is married with 3 offspring’s, the youngest of which is 12 years old.
General examination revealed relevant tachycardia (pulse116/min), normal blood pressure was 118/76 mmHg and the respiratory rate was 14 breaths / min. Oxygen saturation on room air was 99 %, and he was afebrile.
Upon abdominal examination there was tenderness and rebound tenderness all over the abdomen, more evident in the lower abdomen. Interestingly, routine examination of the inguino-scrotal region revealed empty right hemi-scrotum despite the patient not being aware about this. Routine blood tests showed high white blood cells count = 20,000 10*3 /mm and marked anemia Hb: 7.4 g/dl.
Urgent pelvi-abdominal U/S showed moderate free intra-abdominal collection in addition to a pelvic mass. Computed tomography of the abdomen showed a well-defined heterogenous hypodense mass measuring about 8.5 × 5.5 cm in the pelvis.
A decision was made to proceed for urgent exploratory laparotomy owing to the drop of hemoglobin level. Initial resuscitation was performed and through a midline incision we found a rounded gangrenous perforated mass in the pelvis, attached to the lateral pelvic wall on the right side by a narrow band containing blood vessels and cord-like structure, as shown in ( & ).
This mass was found to be torted around its band about 180 degrees counterclockwise. The gangrenous mass was excised through ligation of its vascularized pedicle flush with the lateral pelvic wall, formal abdominal exploration was done, and no evidence of suspicious lymph nodes or other masses was found. The specimen was sent for histopathological examination.
Pathological and Histological examination confirmed that the mass was a necrotic hemorrhagic testicular tissue with wide areas of infarctions. Unfortunately, the pathology revealed testicular mixed germ cell tumor .
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on the fifth hospital day to complete his course of treatment with the oncology department in our institute.