A 14-year-old girl presented to the local hospital with vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhoea and was initially diagnosed with viral myocarditis, acute heart failure, and pneumonia. She was transferred to our department because her clinical symptoms had progressed to shortness of breath, chest tightness, fatigue, decreased activity, and white, foamy sputum. On physical examination, the girl was 49 kg in weight and 151 cm in height, her blood pressure was 127/71 mm·Hg, her heart rate was 125 bpm, her respiratory rate was 30 breaths per minute, and her transcutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 96%. Cardiac examination showed a normal S1 and S2 pulse, but a holosystolic murmur (grade 3/6) at the second left intercostal space.
Electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia and changes in the T wave. Chest X-ray displayed an enlarged cardiac silhouette . A transthoracic echocardiogram (mid-aortic valve short-axis view demonstrated enlargement of the aortic sinus and a turbulent colour flow from the noncoronary sinus rupturing into the RA above the tricuspid valve . In addition, transthoracic echocardiography also revealed enlargement of the cardiac chamber, aortic valve regurgitation (AR, mild, 2.5 mm), tricuspid regurgitation (TR, moderate, 3.6 mm), pulmonary hypertension (PH, moderate; flow rate of pulmonary valve regurgitation, 2.12 m/s; PASP≈53 mm·Hg), hydropericardium, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 71% and left ventricular fractional shortening (LVFS) of 41%. Furthermore, transthoracic echocardiography was also used to measure the aortic dimensions, which are shown in Table .
Cardiac catheterization and aortic artery angiography (CAG) confirmed aortic valve prolapse (right coronary valve and noncoronary valve), a noncoronary SVA that had ruptured into the RA, and an obvious shunt . Next, the patient underwent percutaneous closure intervention. The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia with CAG guidance. The pressure of the ascending aorta (AO) was 97 mm·Hg, and the pressure of the main pulmonary artery (MPA) was 34 mm·Hg, which was measured by CAG. The ruptured noncoronary SVA was measured at both the aortic end and the rupture site on angiography. The diameter at the rupture site was 7.8 mm, and a 12 mm Amplatzer duct occluder (Shanghai Shape Memory Alloy Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) was selected for closure. The closure device could be seen clearly, and there was no shunt from the aortic valve to the RA . Postoperative echocardiography showed that there was a highlighted echo representing the closure device, and there was no shunt from the aorta to the cardiac chamber, with an LVEF of 58% and an LVFS of 31% . The reason for the postprocedural reduction in LV function may have been hyperdynamics before the percutaneous closure intervention. At the same time, the aortic dimensions were also measured, as shown in Table . Echocardiography with a 3D imaging view of the aortic root showed the closure device . The patient was discharged on postoperative Day 12 with an uneventful recovery.