A 23-year-old female presented to the rheumatology clinic with a 2-month complaint of symmetric polyarthritis involving the elbows, wrists, knees, and ankles, accompanied by a daily fever and significant weight loss. She reported that her symptoms were first associated with a sore throat, which had improved about 2 weeks before the presentation. She had no past morbidities or prior surgeries and did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol. Her family history revealed that her younger brother was diagnosed with neuroblastoma at the age of four. She had received paracetamol for the past 2 months before the presentation and reported a resolution of her fever upon taking the medicine but no improvement in her pain. On examination, her heart rate was 117 beats per minute, her respiratory rate was 17 breaths per minute, and her blood pressure was 100/70 mm Hg. The patient was pale, irritable, and looked in pain. Her cardiac and pulmonary examinations were within normal limits. Her joint examination was positive for swelling and tenderness in her wrists, knees, and ankles. There was no lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, or splenomegaly. She was admitted to the rheumatology department for observation and further investigation. Her temperature chart showed a daily fever spike twice a day, with peaks reaching 40°C. On the second day of the admission, she developed a nonpruritic maculopapular salmon-colored rash during the febrile episodes . The rash appeared mainly on the patient’s legs and upper extremities and was disappearing as the fever resolved.
Laboratory data at the time of presentation are summarized in Table . It showed marked pancytopenia with high inflammatory markers, high ferritin, and low albumin. Antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, anti-Cyclic Citrullinated Peptide, hepatitis B surface antigen, antihepatitis C virus, parvovirus antibodies, and blood cultures were all negative. The glycosylated ferritin level could not be tasted since it was not available. Computed tomography scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was done and did not show any findings suggesting a potential malignancy. The diagnosis of AOSD was considered appropriate because the patient fulfilled the Yamaguchi criteria. However, the presence of pancytopenia made it crucial to perform a bone marrow examination to exclude other disorders, including macrophage activation syndrome. It revealed a hypercellular marrow with an excess of immature blasts but no hemophagocytosis. The diagnosis of acute myelomonocytic leukemia (FAB classification M4) was made according to the immunophenotyping. A cytogenetic study was performed, and a translocation between chromosomes 6 and 9 with breakpoints at p22 and q34, respectively, was found. The patient started receiving chemotherapy with considerable improvement in the AOSD-related symptoms.