A 32-year-old male patient was hospitalized at the Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, Guizhou Province, China on August 29, 2021, due to pain in the right upper abdomen for 30 d.
The patient’s symptoms started 30 d ago, with repetitive right upper abdominal pain.
The patient presented hepatitis B 5 years ago and did not receive regular treatment.
The patient had a smoking and drinking history of > 10 years: 15 cigarettes/d and about 100 mL wine/d. His parents were healthy and had no family history of cancer.
The abdomen was soft with tenderness in the right upper abdomen but no rebound pain and muscle tension. A mass of about 80 m × 80 m could be felt under the right costal margin of the liver; it was tough and tender, with a clear boundary, and did not move when touched.
Laboratory examinations revealed the following: Alanine aminotransferase, 243 (normal range 9-50) U/L and aspartate aminotransferase, 167 (normal range 15-50) U/L; abnormal alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), 4519 (normal range < 9) μg/L; normal carbohydrate antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) levels; hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA, 2.327 × 102 (normal range < 1000) IU/mL, hepatitis B surface antigen, 250 (normal range < 0.05) IU/mL, and hepatitis B core antibody 8.35 (normal range < 1) cutoff index.
Abdomen computed tomography (CT) displayed a mass of 81 mm × 83 mm in the 7th and 8th hepatic segments as a mild external protrusion. It showed inhomogeneous enhancement compared to the surrounding liver parenchyma in the arterial phase and low density with a clear portal border. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadoxetate disodium (Eovist®) revealed significant enhancement. Intriguingly, massive mixed signals were detected from the mass: A low signal on T1-weighted image (T1WI), a high signal on T2WI, multiple equal and low signals, and segmentation. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed an uneven high signal, apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) images showed an uneven low signal, and no signal reduction area was observed in the out-phase. In the enhanced arterial phase, the edge was slightly uneven, and the enhancement was weaker than that of the normal liver. In the delayed phase, the lesion center and edge were significantly uneven, and the enhancement degree was higher than that of the normal liver, indicating gradually delayed enhancement . Chest CT, gastrofibroscopy, and colonoscopy did not find any evidence of another origin site.
Pathological and immunohistochemical examination results on the excised liver tissues after surgery were as follows: CK (++), AFP (++), hepatocyte (++), CK19 (+), synaptophysin (Syn) (+), CD56 (+), catenin (+), vimentin (+), chromogranin A (CgA) (-), Glypican-3 (+), Ki-67 (60%+), vascular invasion (+), nerve invasion (-), no tumor involvement at the cutting edge of the liver, and the broken end of the gallbladder neck. According to the histopathological results and immunohistochemical features, this tumor included HCC, intrahepatic CCA (iCCA), and NEC.