A 59-year-old Japanese male employed as a decontamination worker following the FDNPP accident was referred to our emergency department. He had a past history of right retinal detachment and, in consequence, had lost sight in his right eye. He was employed by a subcontractor of a general contractor, which operated a joint venture in decontamination work within an area designated as an Exclusion Zone due to the release of radioactivity from the stricken FDNPP. His duties included cutting bush and plants, scraping up surface soil, and packing everything into container bags for proper disposal. He worked an 8-hour day for 5-6 days a week. He had received occupational safety training and radiation-specific special education, which is generally required for workers engaged in such decontamination work. He also received a semiannual ionization radiation check-up and an annual general medical examination, as required by law.
He was working in the Exclusion Zone surrounding the FDNPP and was outfitted with appropriate clothing, including a long-sleeve shirt, pants, and safety helmet. On the day before he was injured, he had worked as usual and had not felt ill. On the day of his accident, the weather was cloudy and visibility was not good. While cutting plants he fell from a height of 1 m due to stumbling in a gutter obscured by the vegetation. He suffered a severe blow to his chest. Although he experienced shortness of breath, he took an analgesic medication to relieve his pain and went home to recover for the rest of the day. By the next day, his chest and back pain had worsened considerably and he attended his local clinic where, following an X-ray, he was referred to our hospital with a provisional diagnosis of rib fractures and pneumothorax.
Our emergency department found his shortness of breath had improved, his blood pressure was 148/84 mm Hg, pulse was 83 beats per minute with oxygen saturation of 95% in room air. Physical examination showed cutaneous abrasions on the right back, subcutaneous emphysema and decreased breath sound on the right side of his chest. Laboratory tests revealed only leukocytosis. Chest X-ray and computed tomography revealed eighth-to-tenth right rib fractures plus right hemopneumothorax. He was subsequently admitted with a final diagnosis of traumatic multiple rib fractures and right hemopneumothorax, in order to drain the contents of the right thoracic cavity. A tube thoracostomy was placed in his right thoracic cavity and his chest was fixed by a bust band on admission day. After 5 days, the chest tube was removed, as his symptoms improved and expansion of the right lung was confirmed by chest X-ray. He was discharged from the hospital on the seventh day after admission. He reported no recurrence of symptoms.
At first, the medical cost for this patient was conventionally registered as an “occupational” accident. However, he later requested for the case to be treated as a “general” accident. If identified as an occupational accident, he would have faced the possibility of being fired from work after his treatment. As a result, this case was handled as a general accident and he was able to continue his employment in the decontamination work.