The proband was a 3-year-10-month-old boy at the time of admission . He was born to a nonconsanguineous couple by normal delivery at 42+ 2 weeks. His birth weight was 3200 g (− 0.2SD), and his Apgar score was 10. He did not meet the developmental milestones and was therefore brought to visit a doctor. He raised his head at 3 months, turned over at 6+ months, and sat up at 9 months. He was able to grab a toy with his hands by himself at 1 year old. He could crawl on his hands and legs and walk independently at 2 years old. He could pinch things with thumb and index finger at 3 years of age but had difficulty putting down objects or releasing them from his fingers. He recognized people at 2.5 years, and could say a single word at 3-year-10-month-old. In the last follow up, he could say a simple sentence at 4-year-2-month-old but could not read or write. However, the acquired skills were not retrogressed. He liked to push people and seemed aggressive. He did not present with seizures but rubbed his legs with his hands while clenching his teeth and demonstrating esotropia for approximately 1 min. This behavior could be interrupted. A 24-h sleep electroencephalogram (EEG) showed little abnormality at 4 years old. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed lateral ventricle enlarged, white matter around the lateral ventricle decreased, and with corpus callosum dysplasia . His head circumference was 48.6 cm (− 1.2SD) at 4-year-2-month-old. The boy had mild dysmorphic facial feature (hypertelorism, slight epicanthus, esotropia, mild nasal bridge depression, oral hypotonia, open mouth, high palatal arch, large ears). He had a rash in infancy, and at the last follow-up he had psoriasis on the head, back, and shins and depigmentation spots on the forehead. His auditory and visual responses were normal.
The younger brother was a 2-year-1-month-old boy who was delivered at 42 weeks. His birth weight was 3800 g (+ 0.4SD). He raised his head at 3 months, turned over at 5 months, and sat up at 14 months. He could hold something with his hands by himself at 1 year old and could pinch something with the thumb and index finger until 1.5 years old. In addition, he understood commands at 1.5 years old. He could crawl on his stomach at 23 months, but he still could not crawl with his hands and legs or walk independently. He cannot build blocks, read or write but did not otherwise retrogress. He did not show any abnormal behaviors. The EEG was normal. The head MRI showed lateral ventricle enlarged, white matter around lateral ventricle decreased, and with corpus callosum dysplasia . His head circumference was 46.1 cm at 1-year old (− 1.6SD) which was relative small. He also had mild dysmorphic facial features, including hypertelorism, slight epicanthus, esotropia, nasal bridge depression, oral hypotonia, open mouth, high palatal arch, and large ears. He had rash when in infancy and had depigmentation spots on the forehead. Psoriasis appeared in his torso. His auditory and visual sense was normal.
The father and grandparents were healthy. The mother graduated from junior high school with slight difficulty; she had mild facial features, including open mouth and esotropia. The physician and her husband opined that she had a relatively rigid character, which indicating the mother have a mild phenotype.
Genomic DNA of the children and their parents was extracted from whole blood using a QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Catalog no. 51106). Nucleic acid preparation and high-throughput sequencing were performed according to standard protocols in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) compliant sequencing laboratory in Wuxi NEXTCODE (288 Fute Zhong Road, Waigaoqiao Free Trade Zone Shanghai 200,131, China CLIA ID 99D2064856). Whole-exome capture was performed using an Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon 50 Mb Kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, California, USA) followed by sequencing as 150-bp paired-end runs on an Illumina XTen (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) platform. Segregation of the PAK3 variant within the family was confirmed by Sanger sequencing on the ABI 3730 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
Sequence data were mapped to the human reference genome (GRCh37/hg19). Variants calling was using the Genome Analysis Toolkit Best Practices Pipeline (Version 3.2.2) . Data filtering, variant prediction, and interpretation followed ACMG guidelines and those from our previous work [, ]. Variant analysis was based on the ExAC database , the 1000 Genomes database and an internal database (more than 30 k samples). The variants were predicted by the online software platforms PolyPhen2.2 , SIFT , and MutationTaster . The structures of PAK3 and its mutant were analyzed using SWISSMODEL base on the protein data bank (PDB ID: 6FD3). And the stability results of the wildtype and variant form of protein are reported by MOE.
The mean depth of the trio-whole exome sequencing data was approximately 120×. We identified a novel variant (NM_ 002578: c.1112G > A, p.Cys371Tyr) of PAK3 in the proband, which inherited from mother. Sanger sequencing confirmed his younger brother also had this hemizygous variant . The residue is conserved among species, including human, rat, mouse, dog, elephant, chicken, and zebrafish . The substituted tyrosine has one more benzene ring than cysteine, the senior structure of the variant protein was not obvious changed . The stability of the variant and wildtype protein was analysis using the Residue Scan module in MOE, showed a reduction of variant protein by 3.45 kcal/mol (Additional file : Table S1). The variant is located in the kinase domain of the protein . The variant was not reported in the 1KG, the ExAC, the HGMD, or PubMed and is not recorded in our in-house database (approximately 30,000 samples). The potential pathogenicity of this variant was scored 0, 0.997 and 1 by SIFT, PolyPhen2, and MutationTaster, respectively, which means that the variant was classified as “damaged/disease-causing”. We concluded the variant as a likely pathogenic variant according to the ACMG guidelines, based on two affected patients in this family, the PP1 criteria can be upgraded to PM . The other variants consisten with the inheritance model in this family were listed in Additional file : Table S2.