A 45-year-old female with no significant past medical or surgical history presented in 2020 for clinical evaluation three weeks after torsional trauma of both knees during a single ski injury. She came to clinic with moderate bilateral knee pain and recurrent instability of both knees while walking. No medication, family, psychosocial history were notable. Physical examination of the left knee in the clinic showed 130° degrees of flexion with a grade two Lachman, grade two pivot shift test but was otherwise ligamentously stable exam and was neurovascularly intact distally. Although physical examination of the right knee showed similar findings, she had a grade one rather than a grade two pivot shift on examination.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both knees was obtained and revealed a type 2 proximal ACL tear of the left knee, and a type 1 proximal avulsion ACL tear of the right knee . There were no significant concurrent meniscal or chondral injuries. After discussing treatment options which included non-operative management, primary repair and reconstruction with either allograft or autograft, the patient was indicated for a single-staged bilateral knee procedure, in which an intraoperative decision, based on tear type and tissue quality, would determine the ultimate treatment for both injuries as previously described .
No pre-operative optimization was required. The patient underwent surgery five weeks after injury. Examination under anesthesia revealed both knees with full ROM, grade two Lachman, grade two pivot shift, and no varus or valgus laxity.
Starting with the right knee, arthroscopic examination revealed a proximally torn ACL with excellent tissue quality (A). The length and quality of tissue were deemed eligible for ACL repair. Using a scorpion suture passer (Arthrex, Naples, FL), a locking stitch of #2 FiberWire (Arthrex, Naples, FL) was passed through the anteromedial (AM) bundle first. The posterolateral (PL) bundle was then sutured in the same manner using a #2 TigerWire (Arthrex, Naples, FL). With the knee in 115° of flexion, a hole was tapped at the femoral PL bundle insertion site. After passing the repair stitches from the PL bundle through the eyelet of a 4.75-mm vented BioComposite SwiveLock suture anchor (Arthrex, Naples, FL), this anchor was then deployed at the anatomical PL bundle origin. The same procedure was subsequently repeated for the AM bundle. However, for optimal footprint visualization, this anchor was deployed with the knee in 90° of flexion. In addition, the suture anchor was preloaded with a FiberTape (Arthrex, Naples, FL), acting as an additional suture tape augmentation to protect the repaired ligament during early rehabilitation. The next step was to fixate the FiberTape distally. Therefore, an ACL guide was used to drill a 2.4-mm tunnel through the anteromedial tibial cortex into the anterior third of the ACL tibial insertion. Using a Ninotol wire, the FiberTape was subsequently retrieved through the tibia and then fixated into the anteromedial cortex in near full extension another suture anchor, after which ACL repair with suture augmentation was completed (A).
The left knee was then approached in similar fashion. Arthroscopic inspection, however, demonstrated the majority of the ligament with a type II proximal tear and with some AM bundle fibers scarred to the femoral wall (B). Nevertheless, it was felt that the tissue quality was sufficient and the tear was proximal enough to have sufficient length to be reapproximated to the femoral wall, and thus that this tear was eligible for repair as well. However, a more complex suture pattern with several locking, looping, and transverse components was performed in addition to the suture augmentation used on the contralateral limb (B). After primary repair of this knee was completed, physical examination of both knees revealed full ROM with a negative Lachman test.
Both knees were placed into a knee orthosis locked in extension in the operating room. The patient was allowed to weight bear as tolerated with crutches and started rehabilitation. All follow-up was performed in the clinic. One week post-operatively the patient returned to clinic and demonstrated 80° and 90° of flexion in her left and right knee, respectively, with negative Lachman tests bilaterally. She regained full bilateral ROM within six weeks. After five months, the patient started running without any symptoms of instability, weakness, or pain. At one-year follow-up, she was cleared for all activities. At two-year follow-up she continued to have bilateral negative Lachman tests and had returned to skiing with no difficulties. Objective anterior knee laxity measurements were obtained using the Lachmeter and demonstrated 5.02 mm and 3.78 mm on the left and right knees respectively, while both knees had a normal knee function (grade A) according to the International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) Objective Score. Functional outcomes scores showed a Lysholm score of 95, Cincinnati score of 96, IKDC Subjective score of 87.35, Forgotten Joint Score-12 (FJS-12) of 88, and Anterior Cruciate Ligament-Return to Sport after Injury Scale (ACL-RSI) score of 53.33. When inquired about the patient's perspective on the rehabilitation and current status of her knees in clinic at most recent follow-up the patient stated that she feels secure in the stability of her knees and is confident when skiing.