A 49-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital for the further examination of an anterior mediastinal tumor. She was suffering from weakness of the extremity muscles and dysphagia after catching a cold in the past month. She had been diagnosed with DM Type 1 (DM1) at 25 years by molecular genetic testing (CTG repeat expansion of DMPK gene proved by Southern blotting), and her older sister and niece had also been diagnosed as DM1, although she had not undergone a medical checkup. Before the instigating event, her symptoms of DM had been mild muscle weakness of the lower extremities and neck and face, myotonia of the hand, strabismus, and frontal balding.
A neurological examination demonstrated ptosis and distal muscle weakness, gait disturbance, symptoms of bulbar paralysis, such as dysphasia, and dysarthria. Computed tomography (CT) revealed an anterior mediastinal 32-mm solid mass that was suspected of being thymoma . The acetylcholine receptor (AchR) antibody titer was 80 nmol/L (normal < 0.01 nmol/L). A tension test (edrophonium test) was positive , and repetitive nerve stimulation tests with the median, accessary, and facial nerve showed a max value of 35% decremental response to 3–5-Hz repetitive stimulation. These findings indicated that she had MG (class IVb according to the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America [MGFA]). The clinical features and these examination findings confirmed the diagnosis of thymoma-associated MG coexisting with DM1.
The blood counts and coagulation function test findings were within normal limits. An arterial blood gas analysis on room air revealed a pO2 of 55.4 mmHg and pCO2 of 60.1 mmHg. A respiratory function test showed a marked restrictive disorder pattern: %vital capacity (%VC) of 29.6% and forced expiratory volume 1.0 (s)% (FEV1%) of 84.5%. Weakness of the extremity muscles improved after pyridostigmine and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). Nineteen days after admission, bilateral thoracoscopic extended thymothymectomy was performed. A pathological examination showed type B1 thymoma without invasion to capsule, and the tumor was diagnosed as pathological T1N0M0, stage I . Tracheotomy was performed the day after the operation because of postoperative crisis. Following this operation, two courses of intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) and two courses of immunoadsorption plasmapheresis (IAPP) were provided. Although the weakness of the extremity muscles improved gradually, the respiratory depression continued for a long time. After being weaned from the ventilator, oral intake was started 108 days after the operation, and she was transferred to a special facility for rehabilitation at 121 days after the operation. At 141 days after surgery, she was able to completely leave the ventilator. The AchR antibody level also decreased from a maximum of 80.8 to 10.6 following treatment for MG . Respiratory failure and muscle weakness recovered to about the same degree as before the onset of MG, and she was discharged on day 270 after surgery.