A 55-year-old male patient had suffered from acute onset of abdominal pain and abdominal distension for one day prior to his admission. He had previously been healthy without any specific underlying disease. Unfortunately, nausea and vomiting were noted twelve hours after his onset of abdominal pain. There was no fever, chills, or diarrhea. The characteristics of his abdominal pain included steady dull pain over the periumbilical and lower abdomen. On general physical examination, we found the patient presenting abdominal distension, hypoactive bowel sound, and diffuse tenderness over the whole abdomen, and localized muscle guarding over the right lower abdomen. Laboratory data showed predominant neutrophil (94%) without leukocytosis (white blood cell count 9160/μl). A large amount of ascites was identified by abdominal sonography and paracentesis was done. It showed the appearance of sticky mucinous ascites with the result of monocyte predominant in the ascites study. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed mucin septations , thickening of the omentum and scalloping of hepatic and splenic margins , which were compatible with the characteristics of the image of pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP). He underwent laparotomy and much yellowish-greenish jelly-like material in the peritoneal cavity was noted . Besides, one appendiceal tumor and multiple peritoneal implants disseminated from subphrenic space to the recto-vesicle pouch. Intra-operative frozen section of appendiceal tumor and one of the peritoneal implants confirmed mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix . The diagnosis of PMP was confirmed by the final histopathology. Instead of the aggressive peritonectomy procedures, we performed excision of the appendiceal tumor; local debridement and copious irrigation. After the operation, he received 10 cycles of systemic chemotherapy with FOLFOX4 regimen (oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 as a two-hour infusion on day 1, leucovorin 200 mg/m2 as a two-hour infusion concurrently with oxaliplatin on day 1, followed by a bolus of 5-FU 400 mg/m2 and continuous infusion of 5-FU 600 mg/m2 over 22 hours), without specific morbidity . Abdominal CT and colonoscopy at post-operative 17 months showed complete response without evidence of local recurrence or distal metastasis . Follow-up serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level also showed no progressive activity of his disease. He remains well currently, and receives follow-up regularly in our outpatient clinic.