A severely obese, 55-year-old male (BMI = 65.74 kg/m2) with a recent medical history of respiratory failure and atrial fibrillation (AF) was admitted to our institution for performing an ICA in order to assess the presence of coronary artery atherosclerosis underlying AF. Before the procedure, an echocardiogram was performed, showing no structural abnormalities; systemic arterial pressure was 140/78 mmHg, and heart rate was 88 with AF.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient. Institutional Review Board was not needed in this case.
The interventional cardiologist was not able to evaluate the left coronary artery ostium, since no vessel was clearly opacified when contrast medium was injected in the left coronary sinus of Valsalva (Supplemental Material ). The right coronary artery was evaluated properly and showed no significant atherosclerotic disease (Supplemental Material ).
Thus, an ECG-gated CCT exam was performed with a 256-slice scanner (Revolution CT, General Electric, USA) to evaluate the left coronary ostium and, eventually, left coronary artery anatomy.
CT scan was performed after the intravenous administration of 50 ml of iodinated contrast material (Omnipaque 350 mg/dl, GE HEALTHCARE, USA) followed by a saline flush with AF. Images were acquired in 1 gantry rotation time (0.6 s) and post-processed with a noise reduction algorithm (Snap and Shot Freeze, General Electric, USA). Finally, images were analyzed on a dedicated workstation (Advantage Workstation 4.7, GE Healthcare, USA) using volume rendering (VR) and multiplanar reconstruction (MPR).
CCT showed the left coronary artery originating from the right coronary cusp , with an intramyocardial course of about 2.4 cm within the interventricular septum with the left anterior descending artery (LAD) emerging at the middle segment of the anterior interventricular sulcus. The left circumflex artery (LCx) originated from the left main coronary artery distal segment , coursing towards the atrioventricular sulcus, below the left atrial appendage.
Computed tomography confirmed an anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the opposite sinus (L-ACAOS) with a trans-septal course.
The patient was treated with medical therapy and followed up after the ICA.