A 59-year-old man was referred to the authors in July 2016 because of visual disturbance and pain in his right eye. He had been diagnosed with a nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and had undergone chemotherapy and radiotherapy over a course of 60 months. He presented with diplopia that had developed over 28 months. His best-corrected visual acuity was 20/200 OD and 20/20 OS. Intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination and fluorescein staining revealed a corneal epithelial defect and corneal stromal edema surrounding the epithelial defected area in his right eye . On the other hand, no pathological changes were observed in his left cornea. Corneal sensitivity was measured using a Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer. Central corneal sensitivity was very low in his right eye (<5 mm) and normal in his left eye (50 mm). Tear secretion was normal in both eyes. Examination with a confocal microscope (Heidelberg Retina Tomograph II Rostock Cornea Module; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) revealed that the subbasal nerves were visible in the left cornea but not visible in the right cornea . On external examination, there was no evidence of ptosis. Upon further examination, no pathological changes were detected in the lens, vitreous humor, fundus, and optic nerve. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass in his cavernous sinus, which was identified as an NPC . The soft tissue tumor occupied the right Meckel's cave . The trigeminal ganglion is located within the Meckel's cave. Persistent corneal epithelial defect did not improve over 2 weeks.
Based on the corneal manifestations, loss of corneal sensitivity, and MRI findings, we diagnosed neurotrophic keratopathy associated with NPC. Subsequently, the patient was prescribed a 60-month course of chemotherapy and radiotherapy, and we initiated treatment with preservative-free artificial tears and antibiotic eye drops. The persistent corneal epithelial defect was unresponsive to artificial tears, fibronectin, and a therapeutic contact lens. The corneal epithelial defect did not completely heal in 4 months. Finally, because amniotic membrane transplantation is an effective treatment for refractory neurotrophic corneal ulcers, we covered the ulcer with an amniotic membrane 4 months after the first observation of neurotrophic keratopathy. The operation was successful, but the patient died 10 days after amniotic membrane transplantation because of complications arising from the NPC; complete healing of the neurotrophic ulcer was not achieved.