A 57-year-old non-smoking man with a BMI of 30 was admitted to our hospital with severe pain (VAS: 7) and swelling in his left knee and the popliteal area. He was diagnosed with KOA 5 years prior. He had tried the regular conservative treatments by taking glucosamine hydrochloride and diacerein for 3 months, and loxoprofen sodium tablets for 1 week. Before coming to our department, he had tried various integrated traditional Chinese and Western medicine treatments, including acupuncture, moxibustion, and a small needle knife. He also had the aspiration of the popliteal cyst with the injection of the compound betamethasone once and Sodium Hyaluronate in the knee joint for 3 cycles (1 cycle: 1 injection once a week for 5 weeks). During this period, he also insisted on doing quadriceps functional exercises. However, pain relief in the knee and the popliteal area was minimal, and the remission time was gradually shortened. He had no other medical morbidities. Physical examination revealed five old healed skin burns caused by moxibustion around the knee, varus malalignment of the left knee with reduced flexion (30° compared with the contralateral), swelling in the suprapatellar and popliteal area, and positive of the Ballotman's and McMurray's tests, no instability was found. The pain was focused along the medial joint line and posterior medial knee exacerbated with deep knee flexion without evidence of patellofemoral or lateral joint line pain.
Preoperative ultrasonography showed suprapatellar bursa effusion and a large fluid bursa (Length: 5.08 cm, depth: 1.76 cm, width: 2.60 cm) between the semimembranosus and gastrocnemius tendons, and with no evidence of deep vein thrombosis. The anteroposterior weight-bearing plain radiographs revealed a significant varus malalignment with the deviation of the mechanical axis (MAD) 35 mm more than normal in the left lower extremity, and there were no abnormal angles in the anatomical lateral distal femur and anatomical medial proximal tibia (, ). Kellgren-Lawrence (K/L) medial compartment grade IV and lateral compartment K/L grade II were based on radiographs of the left knee (,) . Preoperative T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed subluxation of the medial meniscus. Server cartilage wearing on both sides of the medial femur and tibia of the knee joint was found. There was a high-signal-intensity cyst (Length: 5.27 cm, depth: 1.79 cm, width: 3.10 cm) between the semimembranosus and the medial head of the gastrocnemius tendons . The intact anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) was shown normally on MRI. The collateral ligaments were intact. The laboratory data were all in normal ranges.
The senior surgeon (Jin Huang) performed a diagnostic arthroscopy with a 30-degree arthroscope via the anteromedial and anterolateral portals, with a tourniquet in the supine position. Obvious synovial hyperplasia was visualized under arthroscopy and numerous osteochondral defects were found both in the medial femoral and tibial condyles, with server medial meniscal damage . However, the cartilage on the lateral femoral and tibial condyle and the lateral meniscus remained intact . The posteromedial corner of the joint was then exposed via the posteromedial portal entrance to identify the capsular fold . The uni-valvular connection between the semimembranosus and medial head of the gastrocnemius tendons to the cyst was exposed after enlarging the capsular fold. The intact cyst wall was visualized by switching the arthroscope to the posteromedial portal and filled with orange juice-like fluid . The fluid aspired for smear and bacterial culture examination through the operating portal, and the results were negative. The following completely dissected cyst wall was performed via an additional portal inferior and posterior to the posteromedial portal, and a drainage tube was used .
Then, the UKA was performed in the previous supine position with additional disinfection with iodophor in the surgery region. The knee joint was exposed through a medial parapatellar approach. Extensive osteochondral defects in the medial femur and tibia condyle were confirmed, with medial meniscal damage. In contrast, the lateral cartilaginous bone, meniscus, and ACL were intact. The rest of the procedures were performed according to the medial UKA operation manual. 2 g of cefazolin was used 30 min before and initially after the surgery. Antithrombotic drugs were used in this period until weight-bearing was admitted 1 week postoperatively. The 60 mg loxoprofen sodium tablet was used three times daily until the VAS decreased to 3 on the 4th day postoperatively. The drainage tube was removed 48 h postoperatively and the compression bandage was used for 2 weeks postoperatively. The patient was discharged 2 weeks post-operation when the sutures had been removed.
The patient underwent clinical evaluation with imaging and ultrasonography at 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year postoperatively. At 2 weeks and 1 month postoperatively, he was able to go up and down stairs without crutches. The pain (VAS: 0) had significantly relieved since the 1-month follow-up. Physical examination showed the correction of the varus deformity and the range of mobilization at the 1-month follow-up, and without changing at the last follow-up. A minor swelling in the suprapatellar and popliteal area and positive for the Ballotman's test was found at the 1-month follow-up and had disappeared since the 3 months post-operation. The X-ray showed the prosthesis's appropriate position and optimal size . There was no loosening and subsidence of the prosthesis, no fracture around the prosthesis, and no further deterioration of the KOA. The ultrasonographic examination showed that the fluid volume decreased at the 1-month follow-up (Length: 5.6 cm, width: 1.1 cm), disappeared at the 3-month follow-up, and there was no recurrence during the following follow-up.