A 53-year-old morbidly obese woman with a body mass index (BMI) of 70 of Cook Islands origin had a background of obesity-induced hypoventilation and metabolic syndrome, chronic kidney disease, and gout. She also had ischemic cardiomyopathy and received oral anticoagulation with warfarin for AF. She had a stable international normalized ratio (INR) for 8 years prior to her presentation. She complained of constitutional symptoms, weight loss, fatigue, and mild abdominal discomfort and distension in the 4 months prior to her presentation. She was admitted due to ongoing exertional dyspnea, bilateral painful lower limb edema, and rapid AF.
On her second day in hospital, she developed worsening ischemia of her first, second and third toes of her right foot and second and third toes of her left foot. Her toes became dusky and turned black in color and more extensive discoloration was noted on the right side . Pulsations remained intact and arterial Doppler ultrasound of her lower limbs failed to demonstrate significant arterial disease. Distal vascular disease was thought to be responsible for her toe gangrene. Her warfarin was still continued at this point.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and pelvis revealed an 18-cm cystic ovarian mass and free abdominal ascites. An ultrasound-guided ascitic tap was negative for malignant cells and her serum to ascites albumin gradient was 12 g/L. Subsequently, her plasma levels of cancer antigen-125 (CA-125) were 3410 u/ml (normal <35), human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) was 30,300 pmol/L (normal <70) and Risk of Ovarian Malignancy Algorithm (ROMA) was 100 %. Values of ROMA >25.3 % in postmenopausal women indicate high risk of malignancy with >95 % sensitivity and >76 % specificity .
On the third day, her INR progressively increased to 4.5 and simultaneously her platelet count decreased from 154 to 108×109/L. At the same time, serial activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) measurements remained normal at 26 to 36 seconds and the derived fibrinogen levels also remained normal on serial measurements 3.8 g/L (1.7 to 4.5 g/L). No red cell fragments were seen on repeat blood film. The result of a qualitative D-dimer test was weakly positive.
With the aforementioned results, coagulopathy related to both warfarin and an underlying ovarian cancer was suspected. Her anticoagulation with warfarin was reversed with vitamin K as evidenced by the drop in her INR and switched to an unfractionated heparin administered intravenous infusion. A subsequent venous Doppler confirmed extensive bilateral lower limb DVT involving all deep veins on her left and an acute thrombosis of the popliteal vein on her right side.
We noted that her platelet count increased immediately after administration of vitamin K and intravenously administered heparin and peaked to 246×109/L on the following day . Because of her severe renal impairment, the use of either low molecular weight heparin or direct oral anticoagulants was precluded. She was continued on an intravenous infusion of heparin for the subsequent 2 weeks.
Serology revealed positive hepatitis B surface antigen, positive qualitative hepatitis B virus (HBV)-DNA, positive core-HBV (total antibodies, negative immunoglobulin M antibodies) and envelope-HBV antibodies suggestive of chronic hepatitis B infection. Her serum and plasma cryoglobulins, anti-beta 2 glycoprotein, and anti-cardiolipin (immunoglobulin G) antibodies were negative. Her protein C (PC) and factor VII levels were not measured since she was on chronic warfarin therapy. Her thrombin-antithrombin complexes (TAT) were not measured.
An associated oliguric acute kidney injury was managed conservatively and an ultrasound Doppler of her renal vein and renal artery ruled out thrombosis. Her estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was stable at around 20 mL/minute/1.73 m2.
Our patient was deemed to be at an extremely high perioperative risk for a debulking laparotomy and was deemed not suitable for surgery, thus a histological specimen was not pursued. In addition, her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) functional state score of 4 and comorbidities excluded her from chemotherapy.
Eventually, due to her sepsis associated with venous gangrene of both feet, coagulopathy, gynecological malignancy, cardiomyopathy, and end-stage renal failure, palliative treatment was offered and she died 19 days after admission.