A 38-year-old multiparous woman wit previous cesarean delivery at 7th week of gestation was admitted at clinic, due to her medical record, vaginal bleeding. Obstetric history was significant for a one cesarean delivery three years ago. Transvaginal ultrasound was performed and showed two gestational sacks, one was positioned low in uterus (supracervical location) and alive embryo with CRL 11mm. The other one gestational sack was positioned in fundal region of uterus, but with absence of the embryo. According to sonographic finding, the patient underwent dilatation, vacuum aspiration and curettage as a management option. Patient leaved hospital at the same day.
One month after curettage, same women admitted at hospital again due to her medical record, haemorrhage and suspicious residual placental tissue. At the time of admittance performed transvaginal ultrasound showed mixed echogenicity formation in isthmico-cervical region, with marked thinning of the anterior and side myometrium. There was high velocity with low resistant index- RI 0,36 suspicious to placenta increta. The value of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin serum concentration was 8,418 mU/ml. MRI images was notable to residual trophoblastic tissue suspicious to myomatral invasion located in previous cesarean delivery scar.
Because of bleeding, low positioned sonographicaly formation, high value of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin serum concentration and MRI images patient was taken to laparotomy. During the surgery decision was made for hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy and bilateral ovarian conservation in view of local findings of uterus - placenta implanting and penetrating the lower uterine segment, and intraoperative haemorrhage. At the second day after surgery value of beta human chorionic gonadotropin serum concentration dropped to 76,4 mU/ml, patient was well. Fifth day of surgery patient was discharged in good condition.
Histopathological examination of the uterus showed placenta percreta positioned in isthmico-cervical region and region of previous hysterotomy proper cesarean delivery.