The patient is a 73-year-old, 79kg African American man with a past medical history of diabetes, hypertension, and microscopic hematuria. He was diagnosed with HCV genotype 1a infection in 2004. At that time, he was not interested in being treated with interferon and ribavirin given poor response rates and profound adverse effects. In June 2006, he was diagnosed with deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, for which he was started on warfarin and referred to the anticoagulation clinic for drug monitoring. The duration of warfarin therapy was determined to be indefinite by his primary care team. His target international normalized ratio (INR) is 2 to 3, which had been stable on a warfarin dose of 13.75mg to 20mg/week, over a period of 6 years.
He underwent a transjugular liver biopsy in April 2012 due to possible cirrhosis and for guidance of possible HCV treatment. The biopsy showed mild fatty infiltration of his liver and received a grade of stage F4 with marked bridging fibrosis. At this time, he was interested in HCV treatment. It was decided that he would begin treatment with peginterferon alfa-2a weekly and ribavirin twice daily for the first 4 weeks. Boceprevir would be added at week five to be given every 8 hours for 44 weeks. He was informed that treatment could be discontinued if he did not demonstrate a positive and safe response to therapy. Counseling on medication adverse effects and required laboratory monitoring were reviewed with him.
HCV therapy with peginterferon alfa-2a and ribavirin began on 1 August 2012. At this time, his INR was stable on a weekly warfarin dose of 15mg for the previous 4 months. Boceprevir was scheduled to start on 29 August, although he started it on 31 August. On the day prior to starting boceprevir, his INR was 2.5. Five days after starting boceprevir, his INR remained therapeutic at 2.5. On 19 September, almost 3 weeks later, his INR decreased to 1.2. He denied any missed doses of warfarin or changes in consumption of vitamin K foods. His warfarin dose was increased by 16% and 6 days later, on 25 September, his INR remained subtherapeutic at 1.2. However, the day before this visit, he had eaten a large portion of collard greens, a high vitamin K food. The anticoagulation provider believed this may have contributed to the low INR. Therefore, the provider instructed the patient to take a booster dose and remain on the same weekly dose of 17.5mg/week. At his following week’s appointment, his INR was still subtherapeutic at 1.3 without any vitamin K intake or missed doses of warfarin reported. He continued to come to the anticoagulation clinic every 7 to 10 days for INR monitoring and subsequent dose increases; see Table for more details. The majority of his INRs were checked on a point-of-care (POC) device. Periodically, his INRs were also checked in the laboratory through a venipuncture blood draw. On two occasions, both a POC and a laboratory INR were taken on the same day and results correlated very well with one another.
He finally reached a therapeutic INR on 24 October 2012, almost 2 months after starting boceprevir. His original warfarin dose was increased by 75% from 15mg/week to 26.25mg/week. In the subsequent weeks, his INR trended downward due to an increased consumption of vitamin K foods, for which his dose was further increased to 30mg/week. At this point, his original dose had doubled in order to maintain a therapeutic INR. For approximately 2 months thereafter, he remained stable on 30mg/week of warfarin. On 24 April 2013, his INR increased to 3.6 while on 30mg/week of warfarin probably due to a decrease in vitamin K food intake. At this point, his warfarin dose was reduced and his INR returned to his therapeutic target by his next anticoagulation clinic visit on 8 May 2013.
His HCV treatment was discontinued prematurely at week 39 of the intended 48 weeks, due to severe thrombocytopenia. He had close follow-up in the Hepatitis C clinic including complete blood count (CBC) monitoring every 2 weeks. During his last week of therapy, his platelet count decreased from 129,000 to 12,000. Of note, his therapy had been complicated by multiple significant adverse events including severe anemia with a hemoglobin nadir of 7.8, and the development of two abscesses, a suprapubic and a facial abscess. The suprapubic abscess was treated with a course of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and the facial abscess was treated with clindamycin. Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid may increase the risk of bleeding when given with warfarin but neither antibiotic should significantly affect the INR
. His anemia had been difficult to manage as he was unable to tolerate normal dosing ranges of ribavirin. Approximately 7 weeks after starting ribavirin, his dose was reduced to 1000mg/day. Two weeks later, it was reduced again to 600mg/day and eventually down to 200mg/day. He continued to have CBC monitoring by the Hepatitis C clinic with continual ribavirin adjustments. His maintenance dose fluctuated from 200 to 800mg/day, significantly less than his starting dose. Due to his anemia, he required epoetin alfa supplementation throughout his treatment course and was placed on ferrous sulfate and cyanocobalamin. Fortunately, his HCV viral load had been undetectable since week 10 of therapy. He did not experience any bleeding throughout his entire course. Given the severity of his adverse events along with his improved viral load, it was decided to discontinue HCV therapy as overall risks outweighed benefits.
Upon discontinuing boceprevir, his warfarin dose was prophylactically decreased by 17% anticipating that his INR may start increasing. However, at his 1 week follow-up visit, this caused his INR to decrease to 1.48. The warfarin dose was subsequently increased by 10% which resulted, 2 weeks later, in a therapeutic INR of 2.8. Over the following several weeks, his warfarin dose was continuously adjusted. Upon stabilization of his INR, his warfarin dosing needs decreased to 23.75mg/week. This is a 21% reduction from his dose requirement of 26.25mg/week while on boceprevir, and a 37% increase from his original maintenance dose of 15mg/week prior to starting boceprevir.