A 50-year-old male high school teacher with no significant past medical history presented to our hospital in October 2005 because of an abnormal shadow on chest X-ray. He had no cough, sputum or weight loss and no history of inhalation of dust. He had a history of smoking one pack of cigarettes a day for 30 years. Physically, he was afebrile, with normal breath sounds and no palpable surface lymph nodes. His white blood cell count was 5100/μl with a normal differential count. His one-hour ESR value was 24 mm, and C-reactive protein was 0.13 mg/dl. Liver and kidney function was normal. Carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) was within the normal range. Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) was 12.5 IU/l, and cryptococcal antigen was negative. Stool samples were negative for occult blood. Sputum smear examination was negative for acid-fast bacterium (AFB) and 8-week cultures for mycobacterium were negative (Table ). The Mantoux purified protein derivative (PPD) test was not performed because he refused frequent visits to the hospital. Chest X-rays and CT scan revealed multifocal nodules scattered over both lung fields. Hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy was not found (Figure ). Bronchoscopic lavage samples were negative for AFB on smear testing, 8-week culture and PCR-TB/MAC, and also negative on cytology and transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB). Neoplasms, including non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and lung cancer, were considered as the most probable differential diagnosis. However, these could not be excluded at first, because the patient refused further workup, such as CT-guided or video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy. Hence, he was followed up by X-rays and CT scans, without treatment. During the course of follow-up, the nodules in both the upper lung fields and the right middle field were all seen to reduce in size. Septic emboli and malignancy were ruled out due to the lack of evidence of inflammation and the spontaneous regression in size. Paragonimus westermani was also ruled out due to the absence of a history of eating Japanese mitten crab or crayfish and a low eosinophil count. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis was not a possible diagnosis because he did not have any symptoms of sinusitis, glomerulonephritis and mononeuritis multiplex. A benign granulomatous disease, such as nodular sarcoidosis, was thus the most probable diagnosis.
In June 2006 (7 months later) a new nodule appeared in the left lung field, which gradually enlarged in size (Figure ). In December 2006 (13 months later), a chest CT revealed cavitation within the nodule (Figure ). Bronchoscopy was performed once again, but with no positive findings. In February 2007, the cavitary lesion in the left lung seemed stable or slightly reduced in size. In May, the cavitary lesion showed further growth, even though the other nodules did not enlarge in size (Figure ). The patient was asymptomatic until June 2007, when a small amount of sputum and a fever of 38°C appeared, and chest X-rays revealed a left pleural effusion (Figure ). Pleural fluid findings showed a predominance of lymphocytes and elevated adenosine deaminase (ADA) levels (57.4 IU/L). Further, PCR-TB of a sputum sample turned out to be positive. Sputum culture in Ogawa’s culture medium for 8 weeks grew four colonies of Myobacterium tuberculosis. After treatment with isoniazid (INH), rifampicin (RFP), pyrazinamide (PZA) and ethambutol (EB), all the lesions decreased in size (Figure ).