A 73-year-old male with histories of hypertension and diabetes mellitus and no other significant medical history presented in good health to our emergency department with a 3-day history of confusion and fever (37.8°C). Upon examination, the patient was alert but exhibited signs of mild ideomotor slowing, disorientation in time and space, recent memory impairment, and mild right-sided hemiparesis, accompanied by a slight headache (Glasgow coma score [GCS] 14). Though the fever had resolved by the time of examination, no signs of meningeal irritation were observed. Initial cranial computed tomography (CT) imaging identified a hypodense nodular lesion in the left thalamus suggestive of a neoplastic process or an abscess . He was admitted and started on dexamethasone 4 mg twice daily. The patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly over the next two days; he became becoming stuporous with responsive eye-opening to verbal stimuli (E3), poor collaboration, slowed responses, disorientation, inappropriate speech (V3), and moderate right-sided hemiparesis (M6), leading to a GCS of 12. In light of his worsening state and a suspected infectious etiology, we initiated empirical antibiotic therapy with Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole and linezolid and performed a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast. Laboratory tests revealed elevated inflammatory markers, including procalcitonin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein.
The MRI confirmed a left thalamic abscess with a direct rupture into the ventricular system, causing ventriculitis characterized by diffuse ependymal enhancement and dense intraventricular material [ and ]. An expanded ventricular system indicated developing hydrocephalus with transependymal resorption. We consulted with infectious disease specialists, escalated the corticosteroid therapy to dexamethasone 16 mg/day, and broadened the antibiotic coverage to include piperacillin/tazobactam and fluconazole.
A decision for surgical intervention was made given the triad of abscess, ventriculitis, and hydrocephalus. Preoperative planning involved a 3D virtual model to strategize the stereotactic approach to the abscess and possible EVD placement[-] .
Using the BrainLab VarioGuide system, we performed frameless stereotactic surgery, aspirating the abscess and obtaining samples for histological examination. The confirmation of CSF flow through the stereotactic needle indicated a patent communication with the ventricular system. A dual-lumen catheter (IRRAFlow®, IRRAS, Stockholm, Sweden) was subsequently inserted via the same stereotactic route. Postoperative CT confirmed the reduction of the abscess and optimal placement of the catheter .
Postoperatively, the irrigation and drainage exchange system was initiated; treatment began with a single intraventricular gentamicin bolus of 9 mg, followed by an infusion of NaCl 0.9% at 180 mL/h with gentamicin three mg/L diluted in the saline solution. The intracranial pressure (ICP) alarm was set at 15 mmHg to prevent over-irrigation. The patient was rotated every six hours to facilitate antibiotic penetration throughout the ventricular system and to aid in the drainage of pus. Systemic antibiotic and corticosteroid therapy continued.
The patient’s clinical conditions gradually improved, and laboratory tests were monitored, showing a progressive normalization of inflammation markers. Follow-up cranial CT scans revealed progressive clearance of the ventricular system. After eight days, the catheter ceased functioning. A subsequent CT indicated a slight dislocation; an MRI of the brain confirmed the well-drained abscess and reduction in ventricular size with a marked decrease in ventriculitis, diminished intraventricular purulent material, and disappearance of transependymal resorption . Therefore, the catheter was removed. Clinical conditions continued to improve post-catheter removal, and the patient commenced neuromotor rehabilitation. The histological exam was consistent with abscess walls but without identifiable pathogens. Cultures from abscess material, CSF, and blood were negative. Antibiotic therapy was de-escalated based on specific antibiotics’ central nervous system penetration, with meropenem and linezolid maintained for three weeks post-surgery.
The patient’s recovery was remarkable; 4 weeks after surgery, the patient appeared alert and, responsive, cooperative, with mild memory deficits and slight confusion, complete regression of hemiparesis (GCS 14), and in good general condition, and was then transferred to a rehabilitation facility to begin the recovery process.