A 38-year-old male presented to out patient department with 10-day history of intermittent fever. The patient had an uneventful inguinal hernia surgery two weeks prior to the onset of fever. Physical examination revealed the presence of a Grade III/VI decrescendo, high-pitched diastolic murmur along the left sternal border. Transthoracic (TTE) and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed the presence of a congenitally bicuspid aortic valve with two 4 mm size vegetations . The left ventricle was mildly dilated with moderate to severe aortic regurgitation. Blood cultures were positive for growth of non-hemolytic Streptococci (NHS). The patient was hospitalized and started on intravenous antibiotics (Vancomycin and Ciprofloxacin) based on the antibiotic sensitivity report. These were continued for four weeks. The patient became afebrile and was discharged. Ten days after discharge, the patient had sudden onset of severe lower back pain while bending to lift a weight. The patient came to the emergency where tenderness at the level of L5/S1 was detected. No neurological deficits were present. MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) of the spine showed Modic Type II end plate changes with hyperintense signals in the L5 and S1 vertebrae and in the intervening disc on STIR sequences. Associated marrow edema seen as hypointense signal on T1 weighted images. There were no paravertebral collections. These changes were suggestive of acute infective spondylo-discitis . A TEE at that time showed the formation of an aortic valve abscess. Blood cultures performed were again positive for NHS. Appropriate antibiotic therapy was instituted based on sensitivity report for 10 days following which aortic valve replacement surgery was performed. The native valve was excised and a bioprosthetic valve (21 mm Perimount Edwards) was placed. The abscess cavity was scooped out and debrided. Postoperatively, the patient became afebrile and symptomatically better. On follow-up, the patient reported a subjective improvement in his back pain. A repeat MRI 10 weeks after the previous episode of back pain showed resolution of the hyperintense signal previously present at the L5/S1 level in the STIR images.