A 34-year-old Caucasian man, with known beta thalassemia intermedia, presented with the complaints of chronic headache during the last four months, with recent onset nausea, vomiting, disequilibrium and rapid progressive visual loss.
He had pallor of the skin with a cachectic appearance and a prominent skull deformity with hepatomegaly. Neurological examination showed bilateral severe optic disc atrophy and his visual acuity revealed no light perception (NLP) in both eyes. His extraocular movements and examination of his other cranial nerves were normal. His speech and sensorium were intact but there was gait disturbance due to disequilibrium. His Glasgow Coma Score was 15 and there were no paresis in his extremities. His deep tendon reflexes and cerebellar functions showed no abnormality and Babinski's sign was absent. Our patient had irregular blood transfusions, a splenectomy and cholecystectomy in his past medical history. He did not consume any kind of medicine. A family history revealed that his parents were both carriers (minor thalassemia).
On admission, a sample of his blood sent for laboratory investigations. The results showed hemoglobin 8 g/dL, white blood cell count 13.2 × 109/L, platelet count 265 × 109/L and mean corpuscular volume 68.9fl. A peripheral smear showed anisopoikilocytosis, tear drop cells, polychromasia, nucleated red blood cells and target cells. A hemoglobin electrophoresis showed 96.7% fetal hemoglobin and 3.3% hemoglobin alpha 2. Adult hemoglobin was absent.
In a skull X-ray, expansion of the diploic space with a so-called hair-on-end appearance inline with EMH was seen. Computed tomography (CT) study of his brain disclosed a large hyperdense lobulated lesion in the vicinity of the left occipital horn with significant surrounding edema which enhanced after intravenous contrast injection. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain revealed a hyperintense lesion in T1-weighted images which was signal void in T2-weighted imaging, with significant peripheral edema . There was a left-to-right shift of the midline and thickening of the calvarium in the sagittal plane.
After correcting the hemoglobin level before the operation, with the impression of a meningioma of a lateral ventricle or high grade glioma, a craniotomy was performed, using a left posterior parietal transcortical approach.
Intraoperatively, the lesion was found to be lobulated, very well differentiated from the peripheral white matter without adhesion to it and well capsulated with prominent vessels over the capsule of the tumor. The lesion was excised entirely up to its final attachment to the choroid plexus, which came in to view, and the occipital horn was seen.
A pathologic examination of the surgical specimen was compatible with hematopoietic tissue. Macroscopically, the specimen measured 2.5 cm×1.5 cm×1 cm and was soft and grayish white. Microscopically, the specimen was composed of brain tissue, hematopoietic cells and megakaryocytes . On immunohistochemistry, the megakaryocytes and endothelial cells were positive for factor VIII related antigens . Postoperatively, our patient was followed for four months. He showed rapid recovery from the signs and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure but his recovery was incomplete with regards to his visual loss, that is, his visual acuity was improved sufficiently to detect hand motion. During this period, our patient was referred to a hematologist and radiotherapist for continuation of the standard treatment.