A 14-year-old girl was referred to our department whose chief complaint was progressive scoliosis deformity for 3 years, low back pain for 2 year and numbness in the left leg for 6 months. Her parents had initially noticed that her body leaned slightly to left while ambulating 3 years ago. No further attention was given until progression with low back pain. The local hospital diagnosed idiopathic scoliosis with a recommendation for brace treatment, but the torso imbalance developed along with left leg numbness.
Physical examination of the patient showed right-side spinal scoliosis with a razor back of 2.5 cm high when bending down. The patient could walk with no intermittent claudication. The right-side shoulder is 1 cm higher than the left-side. The left-side ilium is higher than the right-side, and the absolute length of the bilateral lower extremity is equal. A slight percussion pain was found on the left side of the waist. Hypoesthesia was found in the anterolateral thigh and extensor muscle strength of the knee that decreased to Grade 4. No hypoesthesia region or weaken myodynamia of other part was detected. The straight-leg raising test negative. No Babinski’s sign was noted bilaterally.
The laboratory studies showed no increase in tumor markers and only a slight increase in B-ALP. Posterior-anterior radiograph showed a 71 ° coronal plane deformity with an apex in the intervertebral space of L1 and L2. No significant reduction was found in side-bending image. The thoracic curve can be compensated with a Cobb’s angle of 43°. There is a 10.3 cm distant from the mid-point of superior border of sacrum to the C7 plumb line. This prompted severe coronal imbalance. Lateral radiograph showed sagittal imbalance (6.3 cm) and a 44° thoracolumbar kyphosis (T10-L2) . A three-dimensional Computed Tomography (CT) image of lumbar spine showed a 4*4*5 cm osteoblastic mass located on the left side of L3-L4, presented as a large expansile lesion involving the left pedicle with zygapophyseal joints and partial lamina. The mass had no obvious border to the normal bone tissue. Axial CT showed that the mass occupied the spinal canal and narrowed the nerve root canal of L3/4 . Contrast-enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine demonstrated a heterogenic characteristic signal consisting of high and low signal intensities on both T1- and T2-weighted images. Axial MRI showed a narrowed spinal canal .
The patient underwent posterior tumor total excision, spinal decompression, scoliosis correction, spinal fusion with auto-graft and instrumentation from T8-S1 using pedicle screw. Intraoperative exam showed that the tumor was located on the concave side of lumbar spine and narrowed the foramen of left L3-L4 with no obvious border with the normal bone tissue. Pathological findings suggested that the mass consisted of vascular soft-tissue component with significant areas of calcification and bone formation. This resulted in conventional osteoblastoma .
Numbness of the left thigh was aggravated immediately after operation and relieved gradually within 1 week postoperatively. The patient could ambulate with brace support on the fifth postoperative day. Postoperative anterioposterior radiographic image showed Cobb’s angle decreased to 29 ° and distant from the mid-point of superior border of sacrum to the C7 plumb line reduced to 3.7 cm indicating reconstruction of coronal balance. Later radiographic image revealed the correction of thoracolumbar kyphosis and sagittal balance (1.9 cm). A 6-month follow-up radiographic image showed no aggravate of scoliosis or spinal imbalance .