A 76-year-old woman (height, 149 cm; weight, 55 kg; body mass index, 24.8 kg/m2) suddenly experienced severe left femoral pain when walking with a T-cane. After this event, the patient was brought in a wheelchair to our hospital.
When the patient was 7 years old, she underwent several surgeries for septic arthritis and osteomyelitis of the left hip . After that, she could live a normal life without any hip pain. However, the left hip pain gradually increased in her late 20s, and she was diagnosed with severe left hip joint destruction. Subsequently, she underwent femoral head replacement surgery with an acrylic prosthesis when she was 31 years old (45 years previously). Her hip pain was relieved for over 30 years. When she was 70 years old, she had difficulty walking without a T-cane because the left hip pain recurred, and she noted a leg length discrepancy, which gradually increased. She had not gone to the hospital before this sudden onset of left hip pain. She had a medical history of hypertension and dyslipidemia, which are controlled by oral administration.
Physical examination of the left hip showed no active motion and remarkably limited passive motion due to severe hip pain. An anteroposterior radiograph showed severe bone stock loss with upper migration of the prosthesis in the acetabulum. Obvious prosthesis loosening was recognized in combination with the thinning of the femoral cortex . A lateral radiograph showed a periprosthetic fracture of the femur , and computed tomography demonstrated marked bone loss with a flimsy and fragmented acetabular roof .
We took into account several factors, including the imaging findings, patient’s age, activities of daily living before the injury, and the patient’s choice before selecting a procedure. We decided to perform a Girdlestone resection arthroplasty by removing the acrylic prosthesis and conducting internal fixation of the periprosthetic fracture.
During the surgery, we recognized the severely loosened prosthesis and removed it easily by hand. There was granulation tissue formation around the implant. The femoral cortex was extremely thin, in which we could confirm the fracture site. For internal fixation, we combined an intramedullary nail (T2 femoral nail, Stryker Corporation, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA) with plate fixation (NCB distal femur plate, Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Warsaw, Indiana, USA). In particular, a locking screw of the plate was placed through the intramedullary nail to reinforce the fixation . We placed allografts around the fracture site and the proximal part of the nail to fill the defect. The top of the nail was covered with a cement block so that it would not irritate the acetabular bone or other soft tissues. Finally, several cerclage wires were placed around the plate and femur. The removed implant showed remarkable wear-out, especially in the acrylic head .
Physiotherapy was started the day after the surgery. Range of motion exercise for the hip was started as soon as possible. For the first 8 weeks after the surgery, toe-touch weight-bearing was permitted. After increments in partial weight-bearing, full weight-bearing was permitted 12 weeks after the surgery.
After 2 years and 9 months of follow-up, bone union was observed on radiography . The patient could live with negligible pain in her left hip, walking with the T-cane indoors and crutches outdoors. The Harris hip score of her left hip at the last visit was 74. No unanticipated events occurred during the follow-up.