This is a 59 year old male who presented with recurrent bilateral inguinal hernias. He had a medical history significant for morbid obesity (BMI > 45). He had no contributory family history. He was a non smoker and denied routine ethanol use. He underwent bilateral inguinal hernia repair, robotically with mesh, six months prior.
Several months after his initial repair, he began complaining of bilateral scrotal swelling, discomfort, and a hard bulge in his proximal left scrotum. CT imaging revealed fat containing bilateral inguinal hernia , left greater than right , with associated left hydroureteronephrosis .
He was taken to the operating room for robotic bilateral inguinal hernia repairs. The repair was performed by the director of the Hernia Center for Excellence who was assisted by an experienced consultant general surgeon. His prior meshes were noted to have migrated superiorly and he had visible recurrent bilateral inguinal hernias. A dissection was performed, including explantation of prior meshes, however the hard “bulge” in the left hemiscrotum was not able to be reduced. Due to concern for a pathologic mass in that area the robotic procedure was terminated and an open inguinal hernia repair was pursued. During the open dissection a large lipomatous mass was reduced out of the left inguinal canal.
On tactile analysis, the large mass had a softer more normal fatty texture as well as a harder mass with a capsule associated with it . The mass was intimately associated with the spermatic cord near the left testicle making dissection of the spermatic cord structures very difficult therefore an en bloc orchiectomy was performed.
Final specifications by the pathology department at our institution characterized the mass as encapsulated yellow fibrofatty tissue measuring 18 × 14 × 10 cm with histologic characteristics of non malignant adipose tissue with evidence of fat necrosis (, ). Attached to the mass was a convoluted spermatic cord measuring 21 cm and a left teste, histologically normal, measuring 3.7 × 3.3 × 2.7 cm. The patient recovered well post operatively and was discharged the next day requiring minimal pain control.