We are presenting the case of a 75-year-old man, who had undergone laparoscopic TAPP for bilateral inguinal hernia repair and presented to our center 8 weeks later with gradually-enlarging left hemiscrotum, along with erythema, pain and low grade fever, of few days duration. His initial surgery revealed a small indirect hernia on the right side and a large sliding hernia on the left, with a loop of sigmoid colon that could easily be reduced with no concern over it is integrity, by the end of the operation. A polypropylene mesh was applied bilaterally and the peritoneum was closed over the mesh, as per standard procedure.
Upon presentation, the patient denied any gastrointestinal symptoms. The patient had multiple comorbidities, including valvular disease, with dual metallic aortic and mitral valve replacement, maintained on warfarin.
On physical exam, the patient was febrile, tachycardic, and hypotensive with systolic blood pressure reaching 90 mmHg. The left hemiscrotum was swollen, indurated, tender and erythematous, with erythema extending to the left inguinal area. The perineum and the remaining physical exam were normal. The patient was in shock and required fluid resuscitation and adjusted dosages of inotropic support, to maintain adequate blood perfusion. Blood tests showed leucocytosis with 14,500/mm3 white cell count, and 87 % left shift. INR level was 3.2, and chemistry profile was within normal. A non-enhanced CT scan revealed a 10.3*7.3*5.7 cm thick walled collection extending from the left paracolic gutter through the inguinal canal, reaching the left scrotal sac. The scrotal sac contains faecal material and a small foreign body . The collection was in continuation with a sigmoid loop, suggestive of either a previous diverticulitis episode or fistula formation. Further imaging with rectal contrast revealed the presence of a mid-sigmoid fistulous tract in communication with the left internal ring .
As the patient was in septic shock, we opted only to drain the scrotum and inguinal area, followed by a second phase, after stabilization in the intensive care unit. We explored the left inguinal canal and hemiscrotum, with debridement and drainage of purulent necrotic tissue from the scrotum. Exploration of the scrotum revealed a watermelon seed (the foreign body noted on CT scan), confirming, even further, the diagnosis of fistulisation between the sigmoid colon and inguinal canal . The inguinal canal was then explored, and the mesh was identified, through the internal ring. No feculent material was noticed in that region. At that point in time, we decided to defer the definitive treatment to a later stage, and transfer the patient back to ICU, for stabilization.
The second stage operation was performed few days later, and involved exploratory infraumbilical laparotomy, adhesiolysis, followed by division of sigmoid fistula , refreshment of the antimesenteric edges of the sigmoid colon at the site of the fistulous opening, and primary repair. The mesh was reperitonealized with a bladder peritoneal flap. The mesh was not removed at this point in time, because it was severely adhered to the floor of the inguinal canal. Any attempt at removing the mesh would have left a large raw surface area which would increase the risk of bleeding tremendously, once anticoagulation for his prosthetic mitral and aortic valves had been resumed. The patient was discharged home one week later on full anticoagulation, after having a smooth postoperative course.
Four months later, the patient presented back with a persistently draining sinus from the inguinal wound. A CT sinogram revealed the sinus tract communicating with a small collection, measuring 3.5*3.0*8.8 cm, adjacent to the inguinal mesh. There was no communication of the contrast material with any bowel. The mesh was explanted through an inguinal incision, after incising the transversalis fascia. The inguinal floor was extensively fibrotic, and as a result, no attempt was made to buttress the floor. His postoperative course was complicated by an expanding left pelvic extraperitoneal hematoma , that developed soon after resumption of anticoagulation. The inguinal area was explored for the third time, and the hematoma was evacuated. The wound was packed for 36 h after which the inguinal wound was closed in layers. He was then discharged home after resuming his oral anticoagulation, with no postoperative complications. His follow up, at one year, revealed complete healing of the wound with no evidence of hernia recurrence.