This study was conducted in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional review board of our hospital and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments ethical standards.
A 10-month-old male infant was referred to the accident and emergency department of our hospital by his pediatrician. The parents of the youngster reported inability of the child to move his left lower limb and inconsolable crying following any attempt to move or touch the affected limb. All symptoms had started 2 days before the referral and apart from an epileptic seizure, no other injury or any recent pathology was reported. The patient had a known medical history of epileptic encephalopathy, suffering from continuous epileptic seizures, as a result of a mutation in the chloride voltage-gated channel 2gene.
Physical examination revealed an otherwise healthy infant, with normal weight, height, and cranial perimeter for his age. The patient’s lower left limb appeared to be in pseudoparalysis;it remained in external rotation and every attempt to passively move it was painful. Routine blood test results (including inflammatory markers) were all within normal range. However, a radiograph revealed the existence of SCFE in the left hip . A skin traction was put in place for analgesia and as a means to initiate– if possible– reduction of the fracture and the patient next underwent amagnetic resonance imaging (MRI)scan , which confirmed the SCFE and excluded any other pathology.
Approximately 6 h following his admittance to the hospital, the patient was transferred to the operating theater. Under general anesthesia, a gentle closed reduction was attempted, applying traction along the longitudinal axis of the limb and then internal rotation . Successful reduction was confirmed with the use of a c-arm image intensifier and a hip spicacast with an anti-rotation bar was applied next . On the next day, and because the patient continued to manifest epileptic seizures, despite the fact that he was receiving his usual treatment, he was transferred to the pediatric department, from where he was uneventfully discharged 4 days later.
The patient was followed up at our outpatients’ clinic every week for the 1stmonth and then every 15 days for another month. The spicacast was removed at 8 weeks . Physical examination at this stage revealed a painless hip with a full range of motion. The patient’s physiotherapy and passive kinesiotherapy routine resumed at 6-month post-reduction. Despite the fact that he was not able to walk (and remained non-ambulatory on his latest follow-up visit) suffering from severe psychomotor dysfunction in the context of epileptic encephalopathy, painless hip range of motion was retained during all follow-up visits throughout the next 22 months. Consecutive follow-up radiographs obtained during the follow-up period, revealed good remodeling of the proximal femur and a femoral head with spherical contour and with no signs of avascular necrosis or chondrolysis . An MRI scan at 2 years post-reduction showed normal shape and size of the affected femoral head, with no signs of physeal arrest and/or avascular necrosis . Nevertheless, the child is under a tight follow-up schedule and it will remain under close observation until he has reached skeletal maturity.