A twenty nine year old white British female, who was a keen runner and currently in training for a half-marathon, presented to a General Practice (GP)/family physician clinic in primary care reporting a two to three year history of left medial thigh and knee pain. There was no obvious precipitating injury or trauma. The patient had initially presented to the minor injury unit within a local hospital and was then referred back to primary care with no specific diagnosis made. The left medial distal thigh pain would intermittently flare over the previous three years and the pain had flared over the preceding three days after simply bending her knees up in bed. There was no obvious specific precipitant to the pain and it had been occurring intermittently over this three year period. When it occurred, the pain was described as sharp and located over her left medial distal thigh, around the distal vastus medialis muscle region. The pain would last a few minutes and then settle with rest. There was no swelling, locking or giving way of the knee.
There was no past medical or family history of note and she was taking no regular medication. She was a non-smoker and drank less than ten units of alcohol per week. She had increased her running mileage over the previous three weeks from approximately ten miles to fifteen miles per week in preparation for the half-marathon but this had no influence on the pain she was experiencing. The pain was not stopping her from training approximately six hours per week.
On initial inspection with the patient wearing shorts, there was obvious bilateral flat feet and evidence of overpronation on walking. Walking was pain-free with no obvious limp. Walking on heels and tip-toes was normal. Lunging, squats and one-legged squats were normal and pain-free. With the patient standing and then lying down, there was no other obvious limb malalignment, joint swelling or loss of muscle bulk in the different leg compartments. All hip and ankle range of movements, both active and passive, were pain-free and full. During palpation, there was tenderness and crepitus palpated within the head of the vastus medialis muscle. No other abnormality was palpated and no bony tenderness was palpated. Patella tap of both knees was negative.
Both active and passive movements of both knees were full and pain-free. All resisted movements of the lower limb were of full strength and pain-free. All ligament tests within the knees, including collateral and cruciate ligaments, were pain-free and within normal limits. There was no meniscal pathology identified on McMurray’s or Apley’s tests. Patellar apprehension testing was normal as was Ober’s test for iliotibial band friction syndrome.
Following the history and examination, the working diagnosis was a muscular strain of the left vastus medialis muscle although the history and examination did not entirely fit with this diagnosis. Other diagnoses to consider with medial knee pain include medial collateral ligament sprain, medial meniscus pathology, pes anserine bursitis, medial facet patella pathology and medial plica syndrome.
After discussion with the patient, it was therefore agreed to undertake an MRI of the left thigh and knee region to allow further investigation of this presentation. A plain x-ray was not performed at this stage as no bony tenderness or trauma was elicited. A MRI of the left knee and thigh region was performed.
The MRI was reported as a small benign exostosis protruding into the left vastus medialis muscle causing a small pseudo-bursa and oedema within the muscle as a result.
The management of the condition was discussed with the patient, including with an orthopaedic surgeon, and she opted for conservative management, with surgical options to be considered if her symptoms were not resolving.