A 56-year-old female patient presented with an intermittent throbbing headache located in the left temporal region. She was admitted to our hospital for neurosurgery.
Two months before hospitalization, the patient did not complain about headache. One month before hospitalization, the headache worsened and became more pronounced at night, and she experienced vision loss with bilateral temporal visual field defects.
The patient had a history of hypertension for more than 20 years. There was no family history of autoimmune disease.
There was no personal or family history.
The patient presented with a height of 160 cm, a weight of 65 kg, a temperature of 36.5 °C, and a blood pressure of 140/108 mmHg. The clinical neurological examination showed no abnormalities. Our initial clinical diagnosis was cellar area occupancy.
The laboratory data showed a potassium level of 3.2 mmol/L, uroprotein+-, and a urinary specific gravity of 1.025. The patient was negative for antinuclear antibodies, immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgM, IgA, and IgG4, which did not support IgG4-related hypophysitis, and no antithyroid antibodies were detected. The remaining biochemical and coagulation test results were unremarkable. The cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free triiodothyronine 3 (FT3), and free triiodothyronine (FT4) levels were measured . A water deprivation test was not performed because the patient did not have polyhydramnios or polyuria.
The chest computerized tomography was normal. The electrocardiography was characterized by a flat t wave. The MRI of the pituitary gland showed symmetrical enlargement with suprasellar extension in a dumbbell shape with significant homogeneous enhancement after gadolinium enhancement , high signal in the posterior pituitary lobe in the T1 sequence, low signal in the anterior pituitary gland in the T1 sequence and high signal in the T2 sequence. The pituitary stalk was thickened, but not deviated, approximately 3.1 mm at the optic cross and approximately 3.1 mm at the pituitary insertion with an elevation of the optimal crossing . The lesion grew bilaterally toward the cavernous sinuses and encircled the bilateral internal carotid arteries, and the parasternal dural caudal sign was visible , all of which are specific MRI manifestations consistent with LYH. According to the scoring system by Gutenberg et al, our patient was -8, strongly suggesting the diagnosis of LH.