About one year ago, a 24-year-old male was referred to the clinic by an oncologist. He had a two-year history of slow progressive right hemifacial swelling accompanied by right nasal obstruction. He also complained of epiphora of the right eye, right side rhinorrhea, and hemifacial pain. There was no history of hearing loss, aural fullness, visual impairment or diplopia, and the patient reported no constitutional symptoms.
The physical examination revealed generalized swelling of the right cheek region, which was firm and mildly tender upon palpation. There was adhesion of the lateral cheek skin to underlying tissues. The right nasolabial fold was obliterated. Ophthalmologic exam showed mild proptosis of the right eye and the right palpebral fissure was narrowed. However visual acuity was normal and funduscopic evaluation was unremarkable. Pupils were normal size and reactive to light. Extraocular movements were full in both eyes.
Intraoral examination showed bulging of the right hard palate and a bucal alveolar sulcus; but the mucosa remained intact and there were no loose teeth (,).
Rhinoscopy showed the medialized lateral nasal wall with deviation of the nasal septum to the left side and decreased size of left nasal cavity.
Neck examination revealed no regional lymphadenopathy and the remainder of the ENT examination was unremarkable.
PNS CT scan showed a large well-defined expansile soft tissue mass in the right maxillary sinus with heterogeneous enhancement. It also showed destruction in the medial and lateral walls with remodeling and some erosions of the anterior and inferior walls in addition to thinning of the orbital floor and posterior wall .
The patient had undergone endonasal biopsy of the mass 1.5 years ago and histological examination had shown a small round blue cell tumor, positive for CD138, and compatible with plasmacytoma.
Full blood count, urea, creatinine, liver function tests, calcium, phosphorus, and electrolytes were within normal limits. Serum protein electrophoresis was normal and Bence Jones proteins were not present in the urinanalysis.
Bone marrow examination showed normal cellularity with 3% plasma cells. The serum B2 microglobuline level was normal.
Thoracolumbar spine MRI did not show any lesions in the bone or soft tissue.
The patient had received 28 sessions of radiotherapy but no improvement had been seen and the mass had continued to grow despite radiotherapy.He underwent surgical resection of the tumor. After the onset of general anesthesia, local infiltration with 1% xylocaine and 1 in 100000 adrenaline was performed. A Weber-Ferguson incision was made and the skin flap was elevated. There were erosions and extreme thinning of the anterior wall along with some subcutaneous tumoral extensions. The medial and lateral walls were destroyed by the tumor. Partial maxillectomy was performed while preserving the palate, infraorbital rim, and orbital floor.
Extension of the tumor into adjacent lateral orbital soft tissue was resected; and at the end of the procedure, this region, as well as the ethmoid cavity, was assessed endoscopically (using straight and angled endoscopes) to look for any possible remnants of the tumor. The maxillary antrum was packed with antibiotic soaked ribbon gauze. The tumor was a well-defined, soft, friable, dark-red, 8*10 cm mass, which was sent for pathological examination. The diagnosis of extramedullary plasmacytoma was confirmed after pathological and immunohistochemical evaluation.
Postoperative MRI was done to ensure complete removal of the tumor and it showed no evidence of remnant tumor .
The patient received postoperative radiotherapy and, after 1 year of follow up, no recurrence or dissemination was observed.