A 64-year-old woman diagnosed with early gastric cancer was referred to our hospital for treatment. Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an elevated lesion with ulcer (types 0–IIc) on the posterior midbody of the stomach, and histopathology revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography showed levocardia and inverted abdominal organs without enlarged lymph nodes or distant metastases. Polysplenia syndrome, intestinal malrotation, and left-sided gallbladder were detected. Well-known comorbidities associated with Kartagener syndrome, e.g., chronic sinusitis and bronchiectasis, were not seen, and a definitive diagnosis of SIP was made. The common hepatic and right gastroepiploic arteries both derived from the first jejunal artery . Tumor marker levels were within normal ranges, her preoperative body mass index was 24.6 kg/m2, and preoperative diagnosis of gastric cancer was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of posterior midbody (0–IIc, cT1b N0 M0), categorized as stage IA according to both Japanese and tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classifications [, ].
According to Japanese guideline for gastric cancer treatment , optimal lymph node dissection was proposed as D1+ in this case. RADG with D1+ lymph node dissection and Billroth I reconstruction (delta-shaped anastomosis ) were performed using robotics (da Vinci Si Surgical System; Intuitive Surgical, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Details of the RADG procedure are shown in Additional file 1: Video S1. Briefly, a three-dimensional camera was inserted into the abdominal cavity below the umbilicus. Four additional trocars were placed, then each robotic arm was docked . The third robotic arm was usually docked to the patient’s left lateral trocar; however, SIP forced us to dock the third robotic arm to the right lateral trocar to address difficulties resulting from mirroring of the organs . The patient-side surgeon improved the surgical field using the left lateral trocar, as needed. The round ligament of the liver was retracted ventrally using a suture carrier device (Endo Close; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA), and the left lobe was elevated with a Nathanson liver retractor (Cook Japan, Tokyo, Japan). D1+ lymph node dissection was performed based on the Japanese classification , and a total of 33 lymph nodes were examined. Surgical duration was 451 min, and blood loss was 150 ml.
Liver function tests indicated hepatopathy on postoperative day 1, and peak serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, lactase dehydrogenase, total bilirubin, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase were 1112 IU/L, 798 IU/L, 1406 IU/L, 15.4 μmol/L, and 14 IU/L, respectively. Hepatopathy resolved on postoperative day 5. A pancreatic fistula was also identified during the postoperative course and was classified as grade II based on Clavien-Dindo classification . The patients’ postoperative hospital stay was 18 days. Histopathology identified moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (0–IIc, 15 × 15 mm, pT1b (SM), int, INF-β, ly0, v0, pPM0, pDM0, pN0), categorized as stage IA, according to both Japanese and TNM classifications [, ]. As of this report, the patient is in good health with no recurrences.