An 86-year-old woman was admitted from an outside institution to our neurological intensive care unit with fluctuating consciousness after hitting her head during a fall. Four weeks before admission, she was in normal health for her age with a history of arterial hypertension. Because of atrial fibrillation, she was treated with rivaroxaban 20 mg once daily. Two weeks before hospitalization, she experienced pain in her lower abdomen accompanied by a feeling of illness and fatigue which she self-medicated with aspirin. She experienced nose bleeding but continued to take aspirin. She was then admitted to an external clinic after falling. During the first in-hospital night, she fell out of bed and struck her head. Thereafter, consciousness decreased and she was transferred to the neurocritical care unit of our institution. She presented with dysarthria and mild motor aphasia, but language comprehension was fully preserved. In addition, mild right-sided hemiparesis was noted. Most of the time, she was awake but intermittently somnolent. Body temperature was 37.6 °C. Routine laboratory tests revealed prolonged prothrombin time, increased international normalized ratio (INR), increased CRP, leukocytosis and corresponding signs of a urinary tract infection. She was treated with prothrombin complex concentrate and antibiotics.
The initial computed tomography (CT) on day 0 showed contusions in the left frontal and temporal lobes and tSAH. Figure a shows this first CT scan with subarachnoid blood in two sulci of the left frontal cortex. A contre-coup injury was found in the right posterior cranial fossa with an epidural hematoma and corresponding tSAH. In addition, a small intra-parenchymal hemorrhage was observed in the right basal ganglia. Arterial aneurysms or arteriovenous malformation were ruled out using CT angiography (CTA). Blood was also detected in the fourth ventricle, but signs of disturbed cerebrospinal fluid circulation were not seen. Accordingly, the patient did not receive external ventricular drainage. Further CT scans on days 1, 3 and 5 showed neither increase of the epidural hematoma nor development of an occlusive hydrocephalus. They revealed only the progressive decrease of Hounsfield units within the blood-related hyperdensities. Nimodipine was not given because there is currently no recommendation for its use after tSAH .
The patient was alert and in an improved general condition when she was transferred to the normal ward on day 7. On day 8, however, the patient experienced a secondary deterioration of her neurological status, as characterized by reduced consciousness and global aphasia, with loss of ability to speak or understand. Whereas the CT scan on day 9 was still unremarkable, the MRI scan on day 10 revealed new cortical laminar infarcts adjacent to the sulcal clots . The infarcts included both Broca and Wernicke areas. Transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD) on day 10 showed normal mean velocities of the posterior cerebral arteries (right PCA 29 cm/s, left PCA 23 cm/s) and normal pulsatility indices. The bone window was not sufficient to assess velocities of the middle cerebral arteries (MCA). Neither MR angiography (MRA) on day 10 nor CTA on day 14 showed any signs of proximal vasospasm . However, the CT scan on day 14 revealed the same infarcts as the MRI scan on day 10 . Over the following week, the patient improved again. She was able to respond to simple commands when she was transferred to clinical rehabilitation.