The proband (DGDP084) is an 11-year-old girl born after normal pregnancy and delivery. At birth, she weighed 2.83 kg. She passed her neonatal hearing screen test and did not require admission to the special care unit. At around 8 weeks, the infant started manifesting nystagmus. An MRI turned out to be normal. At 8 months, her parents started to have concerns about her motor skills. She was not yet sitting or weight bearing. She continued to display jerky eye movement and showed some reluctance to elevate her eyes. Upon examination at 9 months, development of her gross motor skills was found to be delayed. At 15 months, her gross motor skills were determined to be at the 9-month-level. Her parents also noted that she was slow to develop movement patterns, particularly involving rotation. At that time, the infant was described as a happy, smiling little girl.
When examined at 20 months, she was still showing developmental delay. She was not yet crawling, and used a lot of jargon with no clear words. She was able to roll and enjoyed clapping and waving goodbye. At 2 years and 1 month she had a brief generalized tonic clonic seizure associated with fever. As a 2 year and 3-month old girl, she was able to recognize her name and understand the names of familiar adults. She was crawling efficiently and enjoyed turning pages of her books. She was able to bring a spoon to her mouth, but required her parents’ assistance for loading. A thyroid function test performed at 2 years and 8 months did not detect any abnormalities. Her development at that time was quite significantly delayed in many areas and she was functioning at around the 12-month level. She walked with a wide spaced ataxic gait and displayed some stereotypical hand movements. The girl also had episodes where she would stare and look blankly for approximately 10 s. She displayed some of the physical and behavioral features of Angelman syndrome. She has had extensive testing of genetic changes normally seen in children with Angelman syndrome. This has excluded a maternally inherited deletion, uniparental disomy, CNV analysis, abnormal methylation at 15q11-q13, or a mutation in UBE3A gene as causative. As some children with MECP2 deletions have an Angelman-like phenotype, gene testing of MECP2 (MIM 300005) was also done, which was also negative. Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MIM 235730), clinically similar to Angelman syndrome, is caused by mutations of SIP1 (aka ZEB2, MIM 605802). Mutation screening of this gene was negative. Although Angelman syndrome patients show specific EEG patterns, an EEG showed no specific or paroxysmal abnormality in DGDP084. This suggests that she was not suffering from Angelman syndrome.
At 3 years and 4 months, the patient had a head circumference at 49.5 cm (50th centile). She had deep blue, lightly pigmented irides and displayed frontal bossing as well as a flat occiput. The patient also had a prominent chin and displayed fifth finger clinodactyly . When she was examined at 4 years-1-month, her parents revealed that their daughter’s sleep patterns were disturbed. She would wake up in the middle of the night and start banging on her window. At 4 years-7-months, she displayed global developmental delay, hypermetropic astigmatism, and minor jerky eye movement. Her height was at the 25th centile and weight on the 75th centile. At that time, she was also enrolled in special schooling. She had several episodes of significant abdominal pain associated with constipation and was being treated with Movicol.
As a 5-year-old girl, the patient displayed significant learning difficulties. She was also experiencing intermittent episodes of distress during which she was making straining noises. These episodes occurred approximately every month or two, lasting up to one week. During those episodes, she often sat in an unusual position with her legs folded underneath, her head held back and in a dream-like state. She was also diagnosed with glycosuria. At that time, the patient had a head circumference of 55.5 cm (between the 9th and 25th centile), weighed 19.4 kg (50th centile), and her height was at 107.4 cm (25th centile). Her sleep patterns were still variable despite being treated with Melatonin. She continued to have an ataxic wide-based gait and displayed stereotypic arm movements with hand flapping. She also had a tendency to walk in a side-to-side stepping instead of forward stepping. Microarray analysis revealed a deletion at Xq22.2.
When examined as a 6-year-old girl, she weighed 18.7 kg (9th-25th centile), and her height was 110.1 cm (9th-25th centile). She displayed poor coordination, and her speech had not yet developed. The girl was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes, and a heart murmur was also detected. She continued to have problems with constipation and was taking Chloral hydrate. Her parents mentioned that her problematic sleep patterns were becoming a concern as the banging noises were disturbing neighbors. The repeated banging also left marks on her wrist, and she was also eating non-food items. She was dependent on her parents for all her personal care and was also enrolled in occupational therapy. While still a 6-year old girl, she had chicken pox, which was mild in nature. She continued to have unsettled nights as a 7-year-old girl and at that time the abdominal discomfort was thought to be presumably responsible. A summary of DGDP084 clinical features is provided in Table .
Family history is unremarkable except for the father, paternal grandmother and a maternal cousin. The patient’s father has Type I diabetes, while the maternal cousin displays cerebral palsy. The paternal grandmother had a number of stillborn babies.