A 48-year-old Caucasian woman presented to a neurology clinic for progressive right upper limb weakness that had started 3 months earlier. Her major complaints were frequently dropping things from her hands, worsening handwriting, difficulty holding a spoon, and inability to do her job as a desk clerk. She also noticed some twitching in the muscles of her right upper and lower extremities. She denied numbness or tingling in the extremities and weakness of the bulbar muscles (dysphagia, dysarthria, and shortness of breath). She denied any neck pain; trauma; and constitutional symptoms such as fever, night sweats, and weight loss. Her past medical history included rosacea and dry eyes. She had undergone a cesarean section and plantar fasciotomy in the past. Her father had died as a result of heart failure. She reported no neurodegenerative diseases, neuromuscular diseases, or sudden deaths in other family members. She had no history of smoking or alcohol or illicit drug abuse and no known drug allergies.
On examination, she did not have any cognitive dysfunction, and the result of her cranial nerve examination was normal. Her motor examination revealed decreased strength in both proximal and distal muscle groups, predominantly in the intrinsic hand muscles with wasting and in the shoulder abductors. Fasciculations were noted in the right upper and lower extremities in various muscle groups. Her deep tendon reflexes were brisk with positive jaw jerk, Hoffman’s sign on the left, and bilateral ankle clonus. Her plantar reflexes were mute bilaterally. Her sensory system, coordination, and gait were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and the cervical and thoracic spine was unremarkable. The result of her autoimmune and paraneoplastic workup was negative, although the result of her malignancy workup was positive for papillary thyroid cancer, which was subsequently resected. An electromyogram with nerve conduction studies showed denervation in three body regions, consistent with the diagnosis of ALS. During the next 3 months, her pulmonary function tests showed a decrement by more than 20% in measurements of predicted forced vital capacity and forced expiratory volume in 1 second. One month later, she had an acute episode of shortness of breath and was diagnosed with pulmonary embolism, for which she was started on anticoagulation.
Nine months into her diagnosis of ALS, she presented to the emergency department of our hospital with acute on chronic shortness of breath and was hypoxic and hypercapnic with a negative inspiratory pressure of −10 mmHg, requiring bilevel positive airway pressure ventilation (BiPAP). In further evaluation for cardiopulmonary causes, her chest x-ray was unremarkable; a computed tomographic angiogram of the chest ruled out pulmonary embolism; and an electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with J-point elevation, saddle-shaped ST segment elevation predominantly in V1 and V2 with no significant QTc prolongation and negative troponinemia . Eventually, she became lethargic with a worsening Glasgow Coma Scale score and increased work of breathing, and she was unable to protect her airway, requiring intubation. She was continued on BiPAP until induction for intubation. Etomidate and succinylcholine were administered, and within 1 minute into induction, she developed pulseless ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation. Advanced cardiac life support was initiated with defibrillation, three rounds of epinephrine, and a loading dose of amiodarone prior to return of spontaneous circulation. After some time, she became responsive and started following simple commands, and a decision was made not to use a hypothermia protocol. She was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit for close monitoring. Her echocardiogram showed that her left ventricular ejection fraction was 70%, and asymmetric hypertrophy of basal segments of the left ventricle was noted. She was diagnosed with type 2 Brugada syndrome by cardiology services as the cause of her ventricular tachyarrhythmia, and she was started on quinidine. The results of her genetic panel for Brugada syndrome was negative. There were no recurrences of ventricular arrhythmias during the rest of her hospitalization. She declined automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator placement and was later discharged to home hospice care with a tracheostomy.