A 59-year-old female presented with whole abdominal pain and body weight loss of 4 kg and visited our hospital in September 2020. Computed tomography (CT) revealed wall thickening of the whole length of the ascending colon and aggressive metastasis to locoregional lymph nodes and those located around the pancreas head and body, paraaortic region, celiac artery, right prerenal space, and peri-left adrenal gland . Colonoscopy was carried out, and the anal side margin of a circumferential tumor on the hepatic flexure was found; the endoscope was not able to pass through the tumor lesion due to significant narrowing . A biopsy was taken. Tumor cells showed PDA-like histology with scant intracytoplasmic mucin, resembling the appearance of malignant lymphoma . Then, immunohistochemical staining was performed, revealing positive staining for CK AE1/AE3 and CDX2 and negative staining for CD45 . Thus, a diagnosis of PDA of the ascending colon was made. Genetic mutations in KRAS, NRAS, and BRAF were absent. Serum levels of tumor markers such as CEA and CA19-9 showed normal levels of 2.1 ng/mL and 20.5 U/dL, respectively. Considering the aggressive nature of the colon cancer accompanied by metastasized lymph nodes but no bowel obstruction, chemotherapy, namely, mFOLFOX6, was initially administered followed by 5 courses of mFOLFOX6 plus cetuximab. CT after chemotherapy showed an obviously decreased size of metastasized lymph nodes . To achieve primary tumor excision to prevent recurrence and subsequent stenosis or ileal stoma construction, right hemicolectomy with palliative lymph node dissection was carried out in February 2021. During the operation, peritoneal or liver metastases were not found. However, around the pancreas, white scarring was significant, and thickening and stiffening were obvious from the root of the mesocolon to the peripancreatic area; furthermore, the mesocolon of the hepatic flexure was unable to be detached from the pancreas. The tumor obviously remained in the peripancreatic area, paraaortic region and other retroperitoneal areas. The patient showed uneventful recovery and was discharged on postoperative day 14.
Chemotherapy consisting of mFOLFOX6 plus cetuximab was started in March 2021. CT conducted 8 months after the operation revealed no metastases to lymph nodes or other organs, and the patient was judged to have a complete response . Chemotherapy was continued until one year after the operation. CT conducted at that time showed no evidence of recurrence; thus, a complete response had been maintained. Chemotherapy was discontinued at the patient’s request. One month later, in March 2022, she was admitted due to obstructive jaundice, with a serum total bilirubin value of 25.04 mg/dL. Serum values of CEA and CA19-9 were 6.2 ng/mL and 30.2 U/mL, respectively. CT revealed choledochal obstruction due to a mass in the pancreas head accompanied by mild dilatation of the main pancreatic duct and dilatation of the intrahepatic bile duct . Bulky lymph nodes located in the peri-left adrenal region and swollen lymph nodes in the para-aortic region were observed. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was attempted; however, we failed to confirm the papilla of Vater due to duodenal constriction caused by tumor infiltration and exposure of tumors . A biopsy was taken from the recurrent tumor of the constricted segment of the duodenum, and PDA with signet-ring cells was diagnosed. Jaundice was improved by percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD); however, cholangitis persisted. Before readministration of chemotherapy, we planned gastrojejunal anastomosis and conversion to internal drainage of the biliary tract in order to resume oral intake and improve cholangitis, and the operation was performed 3 weeks after PTBD, 1 year and 2 months after the prior operation. Exacerbation of the patient’s condition progressed, and 18 days after the second operation, the patient died of the recurrent tumor in April 2022.
With consent from the patient’s family, autopsy was conducted.