A 49-year-old man was referred to our hospital for endoscopic therapy of a lateral spread tumor (LST) in the rectum in December 2019. At the previous hospital, biopsy histology showed high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia (HGIN). He had a three-week history of intermittent hematochezia. Family history for colorectal malignancy was negative. Physical examinations and routine laboratory tests revealed no abnormalities. Before resection, the patient underwent a magnifying chromoendoscopy examination. White-light endoscopy showed a superficially elevated lesion with slight depression in the central part, together with a reddish scar due to previous biopsy . The proximal part of the lesion presented with dense irregular microvessels in NBI mode . In magnifying endoscopy combined with 0.05% crystal violet staining, the proximal part showed irregular microvessels and turned out to be poorly stained with predominantly non-structural pit pattern, while the background mucosa showed regular Type-I pit patterns according to the Kudo’s classification . The distal part showed poorly stained with predominantly non-structural pit pattern, as well as a few small roundish pits scattered over the surface . The demarcation line between the lesion and normal mucosa was clearly visible. The whole lesion was lifted after submucosal injection and then resected completely through endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). Histology of the resected sample showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma invading into deep submucosal layer, with negative lymphovascular invasion and negative resection margin . P53 Immunohistochemistry staining showed complete absence in the cancerous area, which was predictive of TP53 truncated mutation. The MMR and APC genes showed intact expression, and β-catenin was expressed in the cellular membrane and cytoplasm . KRAS gene mutation was conducted through Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and also showed negative results. The patient then underwent additional surgery with lymph node dissection and final histology showed no residual tumor and no lymph node involvement. Follow-up surveillance colonoscopy and contrast enhanced computed tomography were performed for the patient in both the first year and second year after surgery. Neither local recurrence nor distant metastasis was detected over a two-year follow-up period.