A previously healthy 8-month-old infant with uneventful personal history and regular psychomotor development was admitted to the Emergency Department because of non biliary vomiting, irritability and lethargy; 4 days before, he had fallen from the bed without any apparent acute complications; no visit was done in that occasion.
On the physical examination at the arrival, he was fussy, with inconsolable crying, but no neurological sign was observed. Anterior fontanel was normal. Laboratory tests included blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, liver and renal function tests, and urine analysis, all proving negative. Intussusception was excluded on abdominal ultrasound. Head ultrasound showed mild frontal subarachnoidal enlargement, up to 5 mm.
Soon after the admission, he got worse, with bulging anterior fontanel and anorexia. Head computed tomography (CT) scan proved negative for intracranial lesions, and the electroencephalogram was normal. Then the infant underwent lumbar puncture (LP) on sedation. LP was performed in the lateral recumbent position, with legs flexed. After the infant’s back was cleaned with antiseptic solution, 22-gauge spinal needle was inserted at the 4th lumbar space. In this case we had not the possibility to measure CSF opening pressure, anyway we used an empiric method already described in literature [, ], and we observed that in 10 s the number of CSF drops flowing through the needle was higher compared to the number observed during routine procedure. After the needle was removed, the area was cleaned and a compressive medication on the needle site was performed. The infant was put on i.v. ceftriaxone and acyclovir after the CSF sample collection, then CSF analysis revealed slightly increased protein level (74,6 mg/dl, normal value 20–45 mg/dl) and leucocyte level (6 cells/mmc), with normal glucose level and negative Gram stains and cultures, as well as negative HSV, EBV, CMV, Enteroviruses, and SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction. Immediately after LP, the infant’s condition improved significantly, and he could be fed properly.
The ophthalmology evaluation revealed pale and elevated optic disc with retinal venous congestion.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium showed mild narrowing of the pituitary gland peduncle and flattening of the sella turcica. The CSF flow study was normal and venography study did not show any venous thrombosis. Under suspicion of IIH, complete blood metabolic, endocrinological, and infective workout proved negative.
Five days after the LP, the patient presented again irritability and anorexia; head circumference increased from 46.5 cm to 47.7 cm. The patient was then transferred to the regional Pediatric Hospital for neurosurgery evaluation and further investigation and therapy. His neurologic status and physical examination were normal except for full, tense and pulsing anterior fontanel measuring 3 × 3 cm. A new ophthalmology evaluation confirmed papilloedema, and another LP was done using the same method: again, opening lumbar pressure was increased, and CSF analysis was normal. West Nile Virus polymerase chain reaction was also negative. Neurosurgery evaluation did not suggest any other intervention.
IIH was then diagnosed on Friedman criteria and the infant was put on acetazolamide (10 mg/kg/day) and i.v. dexamethasone (0.2 mg/kg/day). After the second LP and the beginning of medical therapy, he rapidly got better, anterior fontanel flattened, and vital signs remained normal during all the admission.
Further investigations revealed normal calcium metabolism, decrease level of vitamin D 25-OH (21 ng/ml, normal value > 30 ng/ml), and increased Vitamin A level (1.03 μg/ml, normal value 0.14–0.52 μg/ml).
Dexamethasone was stopped after 10 days, and acetazolamide was gradually decreased in 2 months without any adverse effects, and full recovery.