A 57-year-old previously healthy male was transferred to our hospital in November 2019 after a sudden loss of consciousness. Four days prior, the patient developed fever (maximum temperature 39°C) of unknown origin. He was admitted to a local hospital and was diagnosed with Dengue fever after the Dengue virus IgM was tested weakly positive. During the hospitalization, he suddenly lost consciousness and started vomiting. He had no significant medical history (particularly no anti-platelet or anticoagulant history), no recent travel history, and no history of cerebral trauma. Physical examination showed blood pressure of 161/82 mmHg, heart rate of 97 beats/minutes, respiratory rate of 25/minutes, and temperature of 37.8℃. He was in a coma and did not response to voice. The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 6 points. The diameter of his left and right pupil was 3.0mm and 4.0mm, respectively. The direct and indirect light reflex was slow. Limb movement was observed, and his chest, cardiac, and abdominal examination was normal. There were no rashes, petechia, ecchymoses, or other skin lesions. Blood tests performed 1 day before admission at the local hospital showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 8.32 × 10E9/L, hemoglobin (Hb) level of 171 g/L, hematocrit of 52.5%, platelet count of 31 × 10E9/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 272 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 225 IU/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 6.47 mmol/L, and serum creatinine of 83.4 µmol/L. Computed tomography scan of head indicated left subdural hemorrhage, subfalcine hernia, and brain infarction , there was no abnormality in the CT angiography (CTA). CT scan of whole abdomen suggested perirenal inflammation and chest CT showed slight bilateral inflammation of lower lungs . Surgical removal of subdural hematoma and decompressive craniectomy were performed immediately despite the low platelet count (20 × 10E9/L). He was then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). The patient received an immediate transfusion of one unit of platelet. He also received fluid resuscitation for hypotension and high lactic acid (8 mmol/L). Meanwhile, norepinephrine (0.3 µg/kg/min) was used to maintain his blood pressure. He had no oliguria. Peripheral blood tests upon ICU admission showed highly elevated WBC of 23.55 × 10E9/L, Hb level of 85 g/L, hematocrit of 24.5%, and platelet count of 42 × 10E9/L. Urinalysis was normal. Biochemical tests showed elevated liver enzymes with peak AST of 3320 IU/L, ALT of 1780 IU/L. The prothrombin time (PT) was 13.7 seconds, the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 49 (normal range 28-40 at our hospital) seconds and the fibrinogen concentration (Fib) was 2.89 G/L. hypersensitive C-reactive protein was 8.14 mg/L, and procalcitonin was 1.49 ng/mL. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 215.54 pg/ml. Hepatitis A, B, C, and E viruses, HIV, Syphilis, Cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus were all tested negative by serology. Dengue virus antigen, IgM and IgG, and RNA were also tested negative. Triglyceride was normal (1.75 mmol/L). Ferritin was 3021.7 ng/mL. Upon further communication with his family members, his son recalled that the patient had been bitten by a rat one month ago. Peripheral blood sample on ICU day 1 was sent for mNGS test and also sent to Guangzhou CDC for serological testing of leptospirosis and Hantavirus. On ICU day 3, the initial bone marrow biopsy showed scattered hemophagocytic cells. On ICU day 4, the mNGS performed by IngeniGen Biotechnology Inc using Illumina MiniSeq detected SEOV with 28 high-confidence sequence reads and mapped to an SEOV reference genome (S segment: NC_005236.1, M segment: NC_005237.1, L segment: NC_005238.1) . The important laboratory results prior to admission and after ICU admission were summarized in Table . Serology of Hantavirus by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was also positive for Hantavirus IgG, thus confirming the SEOV infection. Antibody titration test was not performed; therefore, the exact titer of the Hantavirus IgG was unknown. Blood, sputum, and urine cultures were all negative on ICU day 1. The sputum culture performed on ICU day 2 grew multi-drug resistance (MDR) Acinetobacter baumannii. Cerebrospinal fluid culture and blood culture performed on ICU day 11 also grew MDR A. baumannii. He was treated with meropenemand and colistin for the bacterial infections. On ICU day 10, head CT indicated new intracranial hemorrhage . On ICU day 15, the patient suddenly developed shortness of breath, hypotension, tachycardia, and respiratory arrest, suggesting foramen magnum hernia. He received the mechanical ventilation. His CSF workup showed markedly increased red blood cells, suggesting an increased intracerebral hemorrhage. The patient died on ICU day 19.