A 68-year-old woman presented with severe corneal edema of the right eye one day after trabeculectomy for primary open angle glaucoma. Her past medical history was unremarkable, and past surgical history was significant for uneventful trabeculectomy in the left eye one year earlier.
Preoperative data included a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/200 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 18 mmHg in the right eye with antiglaucoma medications and 10 mmHg in the left eye without medication. Central corneal thickness (CCT) was 553 µm and 560 µm in the right and left eyes, respectively. Both eyes had moderate nuclear sclerosis. Fundus examination was significant for glaucomatous optic disc cupping with cup/disc ratio of 0.75 in the right and 0.9 in the left eye.
At presentation, visual acuity had decreased to counting fingers at 0.5 meter in the right eye. Slit lamp examination revealed elevated bleb, severe corneal stromal edema, and IOP of 6 mmHg . The patient was first managed conservatively with intensive steroids and hyperosmotics with probable diagnosis of DMD. The diagnosis of DMD was confirmed using anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) (anterior module, Topcon 3D OCT-1000, Topcon Inc., Tokyo, Japan), and the patient underwent air descemetopexy on postoperative day (POD) 3. This was unsuccessful, and the patient also developed choroidal effusion which made the situation worse due to shallow AC. AS-OCT revealed scrolled DMD touching the lens and a CCT of 1204 µm . The patient underwent the 2nd reparative surgery including choroidal tap and intracameral air injection on POD 6.
The patient responded dramatically to this intervention, and the cornea was completely clear on day 7. The patient was on antibiotics, frequent steroids, and cycloplegics. However, she returned to the clinic 5 days later with decreased vision and the same scenario including shallow AC, DMD, and choroidal effusion and an elevated bleb.
As there seemed to be a vicious cycle of hypotony and choroidal effusion, the patient underwent the 3rd surgery aimed at breaking the cycle and preventing recurrent choroidal detachment. This surgery consisted of transconjunctival suturing of the scleral flap using three 10-0 nylon sutures, choroidal tap, and AC reforming using 0.3 ml of 20% sulfur hexafluoride (SF6). During injection, the tip of the injection cannula was placed on the iris in order to prevent further damage to the scrolled DM.
The eye responded dramatically to this procedure and cornea became clear the next day after the intervention. DM remained attached post operatively and gas bubble resorbed from AC within 6 days. Sutures were removed after 2 weeks, and needling bleb revision was done 1 week later. After 3 months, IOP was 13 mmHg without medication; and endothelial cell counts were 1170 and 1720 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Lens opacity gradually increased, and the patient underwent uneventful cataract surgery 4 months after trabeculectomy.