A 19-year-old woman presented in March 2010 with vague, recurrent upper abdominal pain. The pain had been occurring for approximately one year and had increased in frequency and severity. A physical examination revealed the presence of a large, palpable firm mass, which was slightly mobile, with an irregular outline, in the right upper abdomen. There were no other remarkable findings. An initial laboratory investigation returned results that were within normal ranges, while the tumor markers CEA, AFP, and CA19-9 were not elevated. An abdomino-pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan (Figure ) showed a well-defined kidney-shaped retroperitoneal para-aortic mass. The mass measured 9 cm × 5 cm × 9.5 cm and showed peripheral enhancement after injection of an intravenous contrast agent with a relatively central hypodense pattern and abundant vascularity. The lesion originated from the posterior aspect of the head and neck of the pancreas. Figures A and B show the mass in the pancreatic head and ancinate process with marked enhancement in the arterial phase, and wash out in the venous phase. The mass was anterior to the aorta and inferior vena cava (IVC) and was anteromedial to the right kidney, abutting the fundus of the gall bladder, and reaching the level of porta hepatis (Figure C-F). There was evidence of parenchymal infiltration into the liver, but enlarged lymph nodes were not detected by CT. Based on these findings, a differential diagnosis of sarcoma was made.
Intraoperatively, a large, firm tumor, originating from the head of pancreas, was found pushing against the caudate hepatic lobe and IVC. Multiple reactive lymph nodes were also identified in frozen sections. An open biopsy showed that the mass was a neuroendocrine tumor. The tumor was resected using a pancreaticodudenectomy (Whipple procedure) and it included segment VI of the liver and a small segment of the IVC. During the operation, the patient’s blood pressure spiked (>220 mm Hg) when the tumor was manipulated. The increase in blood pressure was not transient and it could only be controlled through a continuous infusion of a combination of alpha and beta blockers, in addition to nitroglycerine, until the tumor was resected.
The final pathology report described a 9-cm tumor, composed of well-defined nests of cuboidal cells separated by vascular fibrous septa, having a classic zellballen appearance, with lymphovascular invasion; immunohistochemistry was positive for synaptophysin and chromogranin. All the resection margins were negative, and only one of the 15 lymph nodes showing evidence of metastasis (Figure A-D). Histological staining showed that the tumor completely infiltrates the pancreas; however, it is only pushing into the boundaries of the liver tissue (Figure E-F).
Although the patient’s post-operative recovery was unremarkable, she was re-admitted with recurrent abdominal pain one month after being discharged. Further examination revealed an abdominal collection at the site of the resection. The site was drained under CT guidance and the patient received a therapeutic dose of I131-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG). A subsequent total body scan revealed the absence of other associated neuroendocrine tumors and no evidence of multicentricity. Repeated follow-up MIBG scans were done, without evidence of recurrence. The patient has been disease free for >36 months.