A 58-year-old Caucasian woman consulted her doctor with symptoms of asthenia, anorexia and weight loss 15 days after they first appeared. In her physical examination, pallid skin and mucous membranes were observed. Her abdomen was soft and yielding and tender to deep palpation of the left hypochondrium, where a mass could be felt.
In the medical tests carried out, the only altered parameters were hematocrit 24%, hemoglobin 8 g/dL, red blood cell count 2,500,000/mm3 and blood glucose 152 mg/dL. An abdominal ultrasound revealed a mass with a diameter of approximately 10 cm at the area between the tail of the pancreas, the left adrenal gland and the upper pole of the left kidney. An abdominal CT scan confirmed the presence of a large retroperitoneal tumor measuring 10 cm × 15 cm that seemed to have its origin in the left adrenal gland, which was surrounded by the tumor, although the possibility of another type of primary retroperitoneal tumor could not be excluded . On the basis of these findings, an intravenous pyelogram with contrast dye was obtained, which revealed only a slight displacement of the left kidney in relation to the described tumor. A chest X-ray did not reveal any significant alterations.
We decided to perform surgery with the patient under general anesthesia. We made a bilateral subcostal incision and found a large retroperitoneal tumor in the left hypochrondrium with a grooved surface and a diameter of approximately 15 cm. The tumor was removed, including the kidney and left adrenal gland, together with the spleen and greater omentum. The patient recovered without any post-operative complications.
The anatomopathological study corresponded to a tumor weighing 625 g and measuring 16 cm × 11 cm with a nodular, fleshy appearance and areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. The microscopic study showed a tumor with fusiform and ephithelioid cells, with frequent multi-nucleation, monstrous nuclei, intra-nuclear inclusions, prominent nucleoli and a high number of mitoses, as well as a notable lymphocytic infiltrate. On the periphery of the tumor, remnants of the adrenal gland were recognizable, with tumor cells that had infiltrated the wall of the large venous vessels.
Immunohistochemical staining revealed strong, diffuse positive staining for S-100 protein and positive staining for the melanoma markers HMB45 and Melan-A. Staining for vimentin was also positive. Staining for the epithelial markers cytokeratin (CAM 5.2) and epithelial membrane antigen and the neuroendocrine markers chromogranin A and synaptophysin were negative. A diagnosis of non-pigmented melanoma was established .
After the patient's release from our hospital, an exhaustive examination was conducted by dermatologists, ophthalmologists and oncologists, who found no evidence of lesions suggestive of melanoma in any part of her body. The patient was treated and her records were reviewed by the oncology department. Her treatment consisted of interferon-α-2b (IFNα2b) administered intravenously. Analytical and radiological reviews (abdominal CT scan and chest X-ray) were carried out. Thirty-two abdominal CT scans were obtained throughout this period, making it possible to diagnose and treat relapses in a relatively timely manner.
Two years after the patient's diagnosis and surgery, during a routine review involving an abdominal CT scan, a solid retroperitoneal mass with areas of necrosis measuring 7 cm × 2 cm × 4.5 cm was found in the left renal fossa, invading the abdominal wall and in direct contact with the intestinal loops. Also, a para-aortic adenopathy with a diameter of 1.8 cm was observed .
The patient once again underwent surgery while under general anesthesia. We performed a mid-line suprainfraumbilical incision and located a tumor in the previous surgical area. Its diameter was approximately 10 cm, it seemed to infiltrate the abdominal wall and it was adhered to the splenic angle of the colon, although without infiltration. After the adhesions were removed, we completely removed the tumor, together with a para-aortic adenopathy with a diameter of approximately 3 cm. The post-operative period progressed without any incidents. The pathology of the retroperitoneal lesion and the lymph node showed a tumor entirely similar to the one previously excised.
Four years after the initial diagnosis, during a radiological review (chest X-ray and CT scan), pulmonary nodules were detected that were suggestive of pulmonary metastasis. Chemotherapy with dacarbazine and IFNα2b was begun by the oncology service, and one year later the CT scan revealed that the nodules had disappeared.
In the CT scan obtained eight years after the initial diagnosis, we observed a nodule measuring 4.5 cm × 2.3 cm in the left renal fossa and a nodule measuring 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm in the mesenteric fat of the descending colon . On the basis of these findings, we decided to perform surgery with the patient under general anesthesia to remove the nodules through a left subcostal incision, including the tail of the pancreas and the splenic angle of the colon, re-establishing intestinal continuity by colocolic anastomosis. The tumor remained unchanged in its microscopic appearance. During the subsequent clinical and radiological follow-up, no relapse was observed.