A 59-year-old Caucasian male presented with complaints of chest pain for 2 h and racing heart. The pain started at rest, substernal, crushing in nature, constant, 7/10 in severity, non-exertional, not relieved by rest or nitroglycerin. With the pain not getting any better, he decided to come to the emergency room. There he was found to be in atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response. He has an established diagnosis of idiopathic cryoglobulinemia for the last 14 years for which he has been treated with plasmapheresis and rituximab in the past, and is currently on oral prednisone. He has history of multiple leukocytoclastic vasculitic skin lesions involving his trunk and extremities, gangrene of right first and second toe, and left index finger requiring amputations. His last flare was 6 months ago , and he has not had any further skin lesions. He also has history of acute renal failure with nephrotic syndrome 12 months back that was treated with plasmapheresis and steroids. Other past history includes hypertension, coronary artery disease status post two stents – the last one placed 7 years ago – gout, degenerative joint disease, and left eye surgery for retinal detachment. He has no history of smoking, drinking, or illicit drug use. His home medications included allopurinol, prednisone, sotalol, and lisinopril. Vital signs at presentation to the emergency room were blood pressure 141/91, pulse 150/min irregularly irregular, and respiratory rate 22/min, and pulse oximetry showed 97% saturation on room air. Skin examination revealed areas of palpable purpura with no discharge or bleeding bilaterally on the knees and abdomen. The abdominal lesions appeared more chronic as compared to the more recent lesions on the knee. His complete blood count showed white count of 11.1×103/mm3, hemoglobin 15.9 g/dL, hematocrit 48%, and platelet count 123×103/mm3. INR was 0.89, while chemistry showed sodium 136 mEq/L, potassium 4.1 mEq/L, chloride 103 mEq/L, bicarbonate of 21.1 mEq/L, creatinine 1.03 mg/dL, BUN of 15 mg/dL, and albumin of 2.9 g/dL. His 6-h serial of cardiac enzymes was 0.04, 1.27, and 1.56 (normal ranges <0.4 ng/mL). He was found to have a significant three-vessel disease by cardiac catheterization and was planned to have coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
Given the high risk for end organ damage during hypothermia for CABG, close association was established between nephrology, cardiac surgery, and hematology/oncology services. It was very clear that the patient needed an intervention to prevent peri- and postoperative complications. At admission, his qualitative cryoglobulin was positive. We performed two sessions of plasmapheresis with 4-Lplasma volume with 5% albumin exchange. On the third day, the cryoglobulins by qualitative analysis were negative.
After median sternotomy and heparinization, the patient was put on CPB using aortic venous antegrade cannulas. Once adequate flow had been achieved, cross-clamp was applied and the heart was arrested using blood cardioplegia at 31°C, which was given every 20 min throughout the case. No topical cooling was used. The distal anastomoses of a left internal mammary artery graft and three saphenous vein-aortocoronary grafts were placed on the arrested heart. Three proximal aortic anastomoses were completed with systemic hypothermia, a spontaneously beating heart, and partial CPB. Total aortic cross-clamp time was 1 h and 42 min. CPB was discontinued after 2 h and the patient made an uneventful recovery. There was no electrocardiographic or enzyme evidence of perioperative myocardial infarction. The minimal nasopharyngeal and bladder temperature during the procedure was 32.4°C.
Postoperatively, patient did not have any complications associated with cryoglobulinemia such as renal failure or skin rash. At discharge, the patient was again restarted on his home dose of prednisone. His total postoperative stay in the hospital was 6 days.