A 54-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with a 10-month history of bilateral finger extension weakness and clumsiness. The chief complaint at her first visit was bilateral ulnar side numbness of her forearm and middle finger, ring finger, and little finger. There was atrophy of intrinsic muscles. She had no decline in her balance or ambulatory abilities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed displacement of her cerebellar tonsils below the foramen magnum level, with syringomyelia presenting from the C4 to T8 level . A surgical procedure was planned due to the progressiveness of her neurological conditions.
Suboccipital craniectomy and C1 laminectomy with duraplasty were performed under general anesthesia. The craniotomy was 3 cm in size and rectangular. After opening the dura in a Y-shaped fashion, a pinhole unexpectedly opened in the arachnoid membrane. The dural graft used an absorbable artificial dural substitute (Seamdura, Gunze Limited Medical Division, Tokyo, Japan), which was carefully sewn into place using a running 5-0 nylon suture. After placement of an absorbable suture reinforcement felt sheet made of polyglycolic acid (Neoveil, Gunze Limited) for use as an absorbable artificial dural substitute interface, the surface was covered by fibrin glue. The total operative time was 3 hours 27 minutes, and there was little estimated blood loss.
Postoperative bleeding was 80 ml while under a zero vacuum pressure drain, which was removed at 2 days after surgery. Although our patient exhibited no new neurological deficits, she had a prolonged headache. At the time of her release at 1 month after the operation, she still had a slight headache. At 1 month after discharge, she again presented to our hospital due to severe headache and nausea. On examination, her wound was well healed and there was no evidence of CSF leakage or infection. There were also no cranial neurological symptoms observed. MRI of her cervical spine showed pseudomeningocele compressing her cerebellum and spinal cord. MRI of her brain also showed ventriculomegaly . Pseudomeningocele aspiration with a 22-gauge hypodermic needle was performed, with 25 ml of fluid removed under X-ray control . Immediately after aspiration, her headache and nausea decreased, and she was subsequently discharged at 3 weeks after aspiration. At 4 months after the operation, cervical spine MRI showed shrinkage of spinal syringomyelia and resolution of the stenosis at the level of the cerebellar tonsils , although the pseudomeningocele remained. At her 1-year follow-up, she reported improvement in her symptoms with increasing bilateral finger extension strength and decreasing bilateral upper extremity numbness.
Institutional Review Board approval was obtained for this case report, and our patient gave written informed consent to publish this case and any accompanying images.