A 31-year-old woman called our hospital (Soma Central Hospital, Soma, Fukushima, Japan), and complained about a tingling sensation with itching on her right axilla (Day 0). On day −6, her son was infected with COVID-19, but she was asymptomatic. She underwent the real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test of SARS-CoV-2 with throat swab fluid at a medical institution on day −4 as per Japanese regulations, which mandate testing for individuals in close contact with COVID-19 patients. Her test result was positive, and she continued to stay at home.
A telephone encounter with a physician was made since the video communication for telemedicine was not able to be immediately prepared. She was interviewed about her present and past medical histories by phone. She had a past history of chickenpox and no varicella-zoster vaccination. She had no concomitant disease. She completed 3 doses of BNT162b2 mRNA SARS-CoV-2 vaccination. The last vaccination was received 2-months before the symptom onset. She was aware of discomfort in her right axilla on day −2, and reported the appearance of a rash with partial blistering that spread to her right chest on day 0. The attending physician asked her the visual analog scale of the pain of the skin lesion, and she responded with a score of 1 out of 10.
After the medical interview, the clinical diagnosis of the Herpes zoster was made based on her report on the tingling sensation on the skin surface, localized lesion on her right chest, itching with blisters, a past history of chicken pox, and no history of the varicella-zoster vaccination. The unilateral nature of her skin rash was particularly decisive for the diagnosis since the skin lesion in Herpes zoster is distributed along with a specific dermatome associated with the sensory root ganglia. The attending physician decided to initiate anti-viral therapy promptly to avoid the severe consequences of Herpes zoster, such as intractable and chronic pain that often result from delayed treatment. An anti-viral treatment with amenamevir (400 mg/day for 7 days) was given. Loxoprofen was also prescribed for her pain control. The attending physician asked her to mail photos of the skin lesion and visit our hospital 7 days after.
The photos of the skin lesions were sent to the hospital on Day 3 . The skin lesions were localized and partially blistered in the photos, which is consistent with typical skin findings of Herpes zoster. She visited the outpatient clinic on day 7 as scheduled. The skin lesion was partially crusted, formulating a band to the anterior right chest from the axilla . Her herpes zoster was serologically confirmed as positive for both anti-varicella-zoster virus IgM and IgG antibodies. There was no data suggestive of the immunosuppressive status. She showed no itching, but had mild pain. An additional dose of acetaminophen (3000 mg/day) was prescribed for 7 days. On day14, her pain disappeared, and she showed crusting of the rash on her right chest to the axilla .