The patient is a 58-year-old male who presents with a feeling of fullness in the upper abdomen after meal. The patient began to have black stools with no apparent cause in June 2021, several times a day. Gastroenteroscopy showed cardia cancer and diagnostic CT images showed localized thickening and enhancement of the gastric wall on the lesser curvature after treatment for gastric cancer. Pathology results were: adenocarcinoma on cardia biopsy, adenocarcinoma on biopsy of the lesser curvature of the gastric body, immunohistochemistry: Her-2 (3+), pMMR, PD-L1 expression CPS=0, EBER (–). Patient was diagnosed with gastric cancer (adenocarcinoma, cTxN+M1, stage IV, HER-2 positive).
The patient received concurrent chemoradiotherapy with oral tegafur-gimeracil-oteracil potassium (S-1) and 25 sessions of online adaptive MR-guided radiotherapy for gastric tumors. The patient was treated with the Unity MR-LINAC. The patient underwent a 4D CT scan with an empty stomach. Before CT simulation, anisodamine (dose 10 mg) was given to reduce gastric motility. The cardia and gastric body lesions (clinical target area volume, CTV) was outlined on the 4DCT scan and the images were combined into an internal CTV (ICTV). The combined ICTV included enlarged metastatic lymph nodes and a planned target area volume (PTV) extending 5 mm outwards from the ICTV. The patient was treated with involved site radiation therapy (ISRT)at 50 Gy in 25 fractions. Patient continued to be treated with Tislelizumab and Herceptin during this period. The patient fasted and received anisodamine (10 mg dose) prior to each radiation therapy session . As of September 2022, the patient’s follow-up CT results showed stable efficacy and no adverse symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, as well as abdominal pain.
Tumors were outlined based on artificial intelligence technology (AccuContour®) and the resulting images were then reviewed and modified by the attending radiation oncologist. The MR images of stomach tumors were clearer in patients taking scopolamine compared to those not taking it . After the online adaptive plan was approved by physicist and physician, the radiation treatment started with real-time MR imaging in all three planes to monitor the tumor and organs motion during the beam delivery. We found a significant difference between the patient’s first MRI-based guided radiotherapy and CT-based simulated localization of the target area outlined . Using dose accumulation, there was a large cumulative dose difference between online MRI-guided radiotherapy and CT-simulated localization . The cumulative DVH of the patient’s radiotherapy plan based on CT simulated localization showed a GTV50 of only D16%. The treatment would be ineffective if no online positioning was taken.
The patient underwent 25 subsequent MRI-guided radiotherapy sessions. We calculated dice similarity coefficient (DSC) after outlining the gastric tumor lesions on real-time MR imaging and simulated CT imaging. With CBCT guidance, even after enlarging the PTV by 5 mm as usual, the tumor area was not completely covered at any fraction . The DSC measures the volumetric overlap of two sets of data and was obtained with Equation (1), which calculates the quotient of similarity between two volumetric sets with a value between 0 and 1. In this formula, A and B are the volumes of the target area outlined after CT-based localization and daily MRI-based localization, respectively. A DSC value of 1 means perfect overlap, whereas a DSC value of 0 means no overlap.
Patient with a DSC of 0 at the second treatment, indicating the complete separation from the target area . The two target areas are unrelated, resulting in a significant separation of the target areas. Intra-segmental changes during the patient’s radiation treatment remained stable on both MRI imaging devices before and after treatment .