In July 2020, a 73-year-old male patient presented at our institution with mild abdominal pain and an attack of intense cold. Due to previously known urolithiasis, ultrasound, and MSCT scan were performed. These examinations revealed thrombosis of the portal, splenic, and superior mesenteric vein with a probable tumor thrombus which was inseparable from an irregular caudate lobe . Furthermore, an MRI of abdominal organs substantiated the diagnosis of HCC by showing an expansive process of caudate lobe 5.4x3.7 cm in diameter next to portal vein thrombosis (PVT) and fatty infiltration of the rest of the liver parenchyma . Besides non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), the patient had no other known risk factors (HBV and HCV serology were negative and the patient didn’t consume alcohol). Liver function was well retained without clinical signs of liver impairment (Child-Pugh score A6), and the patient was in good clinical condition (ECOG PS 0, BCLC C). AFP level was mildly elevated at 17.3 μg/L (nv <7) with other laboratory parameters within normal limits.
The patient underwent atypical caudate lobe resection, and pathology confirmed the diagnosis of poorly differentiated grade III HCC. R0 resection was performed, histologic stage pT4N0Mx, and the immunohistochemistry staining was positive for Hepatocyte and Glypican-3, whereas CK19 and CK7 were negative. The specimen was subjected to comprehensive genomic analysis via the FoundationOne CDx method utilizing next-generation sequencing. Findings revealed that the tumor exhibited microsatellite stability accompanied by a low tumor mutational burden of 4 mutations per megabase. Furthermore, genetic alterations in CTNNB1 and TERT genes were identified, suggesting their potential as activating mutation, however, presently there are no targeted therapeutic interventions available for these specific mutations.
The patient underwent atypical caudate lobe resection, and pathology confirmed the diagnosis of grade 3 HCC. The postoperative level of AFP declined to normal values of 4.7 μg/L. MRI showed a postoperative collection in the place of resected caudate lobe, a new metastasis in the 6th liver segment 1.3 cm in diameter, and a PVT progression which now affected the whole right lobe. From October 15, 2020, the patient started with an oral administration regimen of sorafenib, commencing at an initial dosage of 800 milligrams daily, divided into two equal doses of 400 milligrams each, administered twice daily which was recommended as the first-line treatment at the time by both the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN).Due to portal thrombosis, which could not be surgically removed, the patient received daily dalteparin sodium, 12 000 IU, IM treatment, from surgery until the thrombus turned into cavernous formations. After two months, the patient was reevaluated with a new CT scan which showed partial regression of postoperative collection and PVT and complete regression of metastasis in the 6th liver segment. The patient was evaluated every two months with no signs of a viable tumor on CT scans. AFP remained lower than 5 μg/L and other laboratory parameters were normal. After the first cycle of sorafenib, the patient reported the emergence of a new maculopapular rash on both of his lower extremities accompanied by pruritus. Atypical dermatological changes were localized on both lower legs and alleviated by daily application of preparation with 10% urea. The accompanying itching was treated with loratadine PO. The observed rash was classified as CTCAE (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events) grade 1. After completion of the sixth cycle, the patient presented with complaints of diarrhea which escalated in frequency and severity leading to a weight loss of 18 kilograms. Diarrhea was characterized as CTCAE grade 2 but after the introduction of loperamide and adjusting the dose of sorafenib to 400 milligrams daily, administered as 200 milligrams twice per day, the adverse event was well-managed. On a CT scan performed in May 2022, a new nodule in lungs 6 millimeters in size suspecting a new metastasis was seen, but sorafenib therapy was continued. On a CT scan performed in July 2022; the aforementioned suspect metastasis was described as a ground-glass nodule. The last MRI scan was performed in April 2023, the patient still had no signs of active disease and continued with 400 mg of sorafenib.