An 82 year old male patient was referred to our cardiological department for treatment of aortic valve stenosis. The patient was in substantially reduced general condition with dyspnoe on insignificant loads (NYHA III) and edemas of hands and feet. Physical examination revealed a grade 3/6 systolic ejection murmur with radiation to the carotid arteries. There had been multiple hospitalizations in the past 6 month because of recurrent cardiac decompensations. Previously known comorbidities were chronic heart failure for unknown reason, atrial fibrillation, pulmonary hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cardiovascular risk factors were arterial hypertension, diabetes, and former nicotine abuse. Biochemical tests revealed a moderately decreased glomerular filtration rate (54 ml/min/1.73qm), slightly increased creatinine (1.35 mg/dl) and increased high sensitivity troponin (98.5 pg/ml). NT-proBNP was 5473 pg/ml.
The patient underwent transthoracic echocardiography for staging severity of the aortic valve stenosis, which revealed borderline results (peak aortic jet velocity 2.8 m/s, mean aortic jet velocity 2.1 m/s, peak aortic pressure gradient 31 mmHG, mean aortic pressure gradient 19 mmHG, calculated aortic valve area 0.9 cm2). Global left ventricular systolic function was highly reduced (LVEF Simpson 4CH = 29%), stroke volume index was 24 ml/qm. Global longitudinal strain was -7.3%. Apical sparing, which could be a sign for cardiac amyloidosis was not present. Transthoracic echocardiography also revealed diastolic dysfunction (e = 1.01 m/s; e’ septal = 0.03 m/s; e’lateral = 0.04 m/s; s’septal 0.02 m/s; s’lateral = 0.03 m/s, e/e’ = 28.9). The left atrium was moderately, and the right atrium profoundly enlarged (35 cm2 each, left atrial volume index 67.8 ml/qm). Chest X-ray showed a global enlarged heart, chronic pulmonary congestion, and right-sided pleural effusion . Coronary angiography showed no significant coronary artery stenosis. Laevocardiography confirmed a highly reduced LVEF and a massively increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (33 mmHg), Right heart catheterization showed a normal cardiac output at rest (cardiac index 3.1 l/min*m2) and post-capillary pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery mean pressure 44 mmHG, max 66 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 35 mmHG). Invasively measured aortic valve gradients were 25/16 (max/mean) mmHG and the aortic valve opening area was calculated as 1.9 cm2. In transesophageal echocardiography, the opening area of the aortic valve was planimetrically determined as 0.8 cm2, again indicating severe AS .
Due to discrepant findings in echocardiography and cardiac catheterization regarding the severity of aortic valve stenosis, low-dose dobutamine stress echocardiography was performed . At rest conditions, there was global hypokinesia with an ejection fraction of 33%. Aortic valve (AV) mean pressure was 16 mmHg referring to a calculated aortic valve opening area of 0,7 cm2. Under peak dobutamine stress (20 mcg/kg/min), LVEF increased to 47% mean and mean AV pressure gradient to 23 mmHg. Left ventricular outflow tract velocity increased more than aortic valve velocity (LVOT/AV 0.2 at rest vs. 0.25 under stress) referring to an enlarged opening area of the aortic valve under stress conditions from 0.7 cm2 to 1.1 cm2. Stroke volume increased by 61.3% to 50 ml. On the basis of these diagnostic findings, AS was classified as pseudo-severe due to systolic dysfunction of the left ventricle with preserved contractile reserve, indicating a non-valvular reason for heart-failure and no indication for valve replacement.
Since the origin of the highly reduced LVEF was still unclear, cardiac MRI was performed, confirming global hypokinesia with a LVEF of 35% and revealing reduced myocardium-to-blood contrast, raising suspicion for presence of a cardiomyopathy . An endomyocardial biopsy from the intraventricular septum in the right ventricular outflow tract was done, revealing multifocal interstitial transthyretin- related cardiac amyloidosis (ATTR). Because of a newly developed complete left bundle branch block in the ECG and the severely reduced LVEF, implantation of a cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D), was performed on top of optimum heart failure medication. Regrettably, at short- and medium-term follow-up echocardiography, LVEF did not show relevant improvement, although no signs of cardiac dyssynchrony could be found. However, NYHA improved to NYHA II and in the following 2-year period after device implantation, no more hospitalizations were required. Status of AS in follow-up transthoracic echocardiography 1 year later did not differ from baseline.