A 52-year-old man, who has no medical history and no family history of prostate cancer, was diagnosed with prostate cancer (initial serum PSA level, 7.73 ng/mL; Gleason score, 4 + 4; cT2aN0M0). He underwent radical prostatectomy and his PSA level decreased to 0.00 ng/mL. However, his PSA level gradually increased to 0.28 ng/mL at 25 months after surgery. CT and bone scintigraphy showed no metastasis. He underwent salvage radiation therapy (70 Gy, 35 fraction) to the pelvic floor and his PSA level decreased to 0.04 ng/mL. However, his PSA level gradually increased to 0.30 ng/mL at 5 years after surgery. CT revealed right internal iliac lymph node metastasis. He started ADT with bicalutamide. After starting ADT, his PSA level was well controlled below 0.10 ng/mL for 23 months. However, his PSA level increased to 0.50 ng/mL at a castrated serum testosterone level of <0.3 ng/dL. Despite sequential treatment with abiraterone acetate (12 months), enzalutamide (4 months), docetaxel (three cycles), and cabazitaxel (four cycles), his PSA level increased to 16.6 ng/mL. Serum level of ProGRP level was within normal range (56.1 pg/mL, normal range 0–71.9 pg/mL) and reevaluation of primary prostate biopsy disclosed that there is no subset of neuroendocrine differentiation. CT demonstrated enlarged cervical, retroperitoneal, and pelvic lymph node metastases. The enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes invaded the duodenum and caused gastrointestinal bleeding . Additionally, he showed gait disturbance because of the enlarged retroperitoneal lymph node and his QOL and PS had worsened (PS, 2–3). A schematic of his clinical course is shown in Figure b. The enlarged cervical, retroperitoneal, and pelvic lymph node metastases are shown in Figure c–e, respectively.
During this treatment period, in December 2018 in Japan, pembrolizumab was approved for the patients with MSI-high tumors. The patient's prostate surgical specimen showed MSI-high prostate cancer. In June 2019, he started on pembrolizumab infusion intravenously once every 3 weeks per cycle as a standard protocol. Following five cycles of pembrolizumab therapy, his PSA level decreased 63% (16.6–6.1 ng/mL) and CT demonstrated shrinkage of the metastatic cervical, abdominal, and pelvic lymph nodes (>30%, Fig. f–h). Additionally, his walking difficulty decreased and his PS improved (PS: 1). The patient is continuing treatment with pembrolizumab.