A 50-year-old female who had a history of positive hepatitis B surface antigen for more than 10 years presented to The Infectious Department of our hospital complaining of aggravating anorexia and fatigue. During her presentation in The Infectious Department, she had nausea and vomit symptoms.
The patient’s symptoms started a week ago with gradually increasing gastrointestinal symptoms including anorexia and nausea. Her liver function tests showed elevated transaminases.
She had a past medical history of being a carrier of HBV for more than 10 years without antiviral treatment. She had no cardiac function abnormalities, arterial hypertension or diabetes mellitus. She had no negative drug history, and no alcohol intake.
The patient reported that her four siblings were infected with HBV, her mother died from hepatocellular carcinoma, and her father was in good physical condition.
After admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.6 °C, heart rate was 91 bpm, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 145/104 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 99%. The patient was 160 cm tall and weighed 53 kg. The clinical examination revealed light scleral icterus without any other pathological signs.
Laboratory values on admission and during hospitalization are shown in Table . A series of tests were performed after admission to The Infectious Disease Department. Blood analysis revealed the following: Alanine aminotransferase, 575 U/L; Aspartate aminotransferase, 593 U/L; Total bilirubin, 108.3 μmol/L; Alkaline phosphatase 116 IU/L; Positive hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-LKM-1 > 1:80; Positive anti-soluble liver antigen/liver-pancreas; Positive anti-mitochondrial antibody; and Positive anti-SSA antibody and anti-SSB antibody.
The hematoxylin and eosin staining of liver tissue: The structure of hepatic lobules is unclear. The hematoxylin and eosin staining showed varying degrees of hepatocyte edema with moderate to severe piecemeal necrosis and scattered eosinophilic bodies . Small bile duct in the portal area was accompanied by lymphocyte-predominant inflammation with a small amount of eosinophil infiltration .
Immunohistochemistry analysis of liver tissue: The proliferation of small bile ducts in the portal area were obvious , with more infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells and positive marker detection including hepatitis B surface antigen (+), HBcAg (+-), bile duct epithelium (CK19+), IgG (+), and IgG4 (-) combined hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma. Findings were consistent with mild chronic hepatitis compatible with HBV infection, without histological stigmata of autoimmunity .
Mesh fiber staining of liver tissue: The reticular fiber staining showed that the hepatic lobular stent was significantly damaged . The characteristic floral ring structure of AIH was not seen .
Masson staining of liver tissue: The portal area was enlarged with fibrosis, the formation of bridging fiber band was visible in the focal area, and collagen fiber proliferated in the portal area by Masson staining .