A 61 year old man presented with increasing dyspnea on exertion, ascites, and lower extremity edema. His medical history was remarkable for FAP which initially manifested ten years earlier as nausea and vomiting due to gastroparesis. In addition, he developed a painful peripheral neuropathy approximately two years later. Due to his progressive symptoms, he underwent OLT at another institution in August, 2006. Prior to his transplant, he had no cardiovascular complaints. His preoperative evaluation included a 2-dimensional echocardiogram. He did not have a cardiac catheterization. Approximately 2 months after his transplant, he began feeling dyspneic with mild to moderate activity. Shortly thereafter, he began to develop increasing abdominal girth and lower extremity edema. He presented to our institution in February, 2007 with further progression of these symptoms. His current medications included prednisone, tacrolimus, gabapentin, clotrimazole, valcyclovir, and pentamadine. His family history was significant for a father dying in his 50s due to gastrointestinal complications from FAP. On physical examination his heart rate was 100 with a blood pressure of 110/60 mmHg. He had an oxygen saturation of 97% while receiving oxygen at 4 L/min by nasal canula. He had no evidence of jaundice. He had crackles at the bases of his lungs bilaterally. His cardiovascular exam was remarkable for 10 cm of jugular venous distension, a regular rhythm with no murmurs, and an S4 gallop at the apex. His abdomen was mildly distended with shifting dullness to percussion and a liver edge 4 cm below the right costal margin. He had 2 + bilateral lower extremity edema. The ECG demonstrated sinus tachycardia with normal voltage, right axis deviation, and a left posterior divisional block. The Chest XRAY demonstrated mild cardiomegaly, patchy infiltration with associated atelectasis at the lung bases and a small right sided pleural effusion. The echocardiogram demonstrated an increase in left atrial volume, but was otherwise unchanged from his preoperative echocardiogram. This prompted an inferiorvenocavogram to evaluate for possible stenosis at the level of the anastomosis. The pressure gradient across the inferior vena cava anastomosis was unremarkable at 1–2 mmHg. There was no evidence of portal hypertension. However, the overall central venous pressure was elevated at 18–19 mmHg. It was decided at this time to perform a right and left heart catheterization. The coronary arteries were angiographically normal. The right and left heart pressures were elevated. His pressure tracings demonstrated no evidence of intrathoracic-intracardiac pressure dissociation or ventricular interdependence. Overall, this pattern was most consistent with restrictive physiology. An endomyocardial biopsy was performed which was consistent with cardiac amyloidosis. Subsequently, it was learned that the patient's mutation was on the transthyretin (TTR) gene, Threonine60Alanine. He was started on an aggressive diuretic regimen and began to feel moderate relief. He is currently being closely followed as an out-patient and will be considered for cardiac transplantation if his symptoms cannot be controlled with medical management.