A 44-year-old Caucasian female with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), diabetes, and hypothyroidism was admitted to a nonteaching hospital with severe biventricular cardiac failure de novo. The weeks before presentation, she experienced progressive exertional dyspnea and ankle edema. Echocardiography showed a severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (± 10%) with an apical thrombus. Her chest X-ray revealed severe pulmonary edema. For her dilating cardiomyopathy, no apparent cause was found and heart failure medical therapy [including diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and low dosages of beta blockade] were initiated. Two days after admission, she developed a cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation. Despite rapid return of spontaneous circulation following immediate advanced life support, cardiogenic shock persisted with high dosages of inotropes (dobutamine > 10 μg/kg/minute) and high levels of ventilator support [positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) > 14 cm H2O) because of fulminant pulmonary edema.
In the absence of cardiosurgical facilities, she was transferred by a mobile intensive care unit and under inotropic support to our hospital. VA ECMO was initiated soon after arrival. Surgical cannulation (directly into the right atrium and central aorta after sternotomy) was chosen over a peripheral approach because of both local preferences and the presence of severe pulmonary dysfunction, anticipating for a significant risk for developing Harlequin syndrome. Additional unloading of the left ventricle (LV) was effectuated by left ventricular venting via the right pulmonary vein and the pericardial sac was left open. Additional coronary angiography and myocardial biopsy did not reveal any treatable substrate. Within the following days, serial echocardiographic evaluation showed gradual biventricular improvement. Repeated weaning attempts were however unsuccessful because systemic hemodynamics deteriorated immediately after reduction of ECMO flow below 2 L/minute.
After 12 days of ECMO support, our patient still required norepinephrine 225 ng/kg/minute and milrinone 0.14 µg/kg/minute. She was in sinus rhythm (120/minute) with a mean arterial pressure of 68 mmHg, a central venous pressure (CVP) of 10 mmHg, and her SvO2 was 0.55. No pulsus paradoxus was present. As inflammatory parameters [C-reactive protein (CRP) 59 → 200 mg/L] vasopressor need increased, a suspicion of infectious complications of the central approach was feared. Therefore, it was decided to perform a resternotomy and convert from central to peripheral VA ECMO. In the presence of gradual improvement of myocardial contractility, extension of ECMO support was intended as a bridge to recovery since poor right ventricular (RV) function prohibited candidacy for long-term LV assist device therapy (LVAD). During surgery, a significant amount (300 mL) of pericardial fluid and thrombus mass was found and removed after which hemodynamics immediately improved, enabling subsequent VA ECMO weaning and decannulation during the same surgical procedure. Although the pericardium was left open, a large thrombus compressed the RV and caval veins. Remarkably, echocardiography just prior to sternotomy revealed some pericardial effusion but no clear thrombus or functional signs of tamponade (Additional files and ).
Four weeks after intensive care unit (ICU) admission, the patient could be transferred to the regular cardiology ward and at follow-up at 1 year after discharge, our patient was alive and asymptomatic with low dosages of ACE inhibitor and beta blockade therapy.