A 55-year-old Iranian woman (height: 168 cm weight: 78 Kg), a known case of ADPKD, was admitted to our hospital with 3-week history of malaise, severe bilateral flank pain, dysuria, frequency, chills, and fever. She had also pertinent past medical history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension for 8 years and was receiving atenolol 50 mg and glibenclamide 25 mg daily. She had neither history of cigarette smoking nor alcohol consumption. Her family history was unremarkable. She had three normal full term pregnancy without any complications. On physical examination, she was febrile and ill. Mild pretibial edema and tenderness over the costovertebral angles were also noted. Laboratory studies showed anemia, elevated level of blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum creatinine, and serum glucose. Urinalysis showed pyuria, and urine culture yielded growth of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeroginosa (more than 105 colonies per high power field). Hence, antibiotic therapy was begun with the administration of ciprofloxacin intravenously. Abdominal Ultrasonography (US) demonstrated both enlarged kidneys measuring 18 cm on the right side and 23.6 cm on the left contained multiple cysts. The largest cysts in the right and left kidney were 8 cm and 10 cm respectively, with most of the remaining cysts measuring 4 to 5 cm. A renal calculus was also seen in the left pelvicalyceal system. No hepatic cyst was noted. Due to the lack of clinical improvement, intravenous piperacillin/tazobactam was added to ciprofloxacin on the 5th day of her admission. Further US investigation on the 12th day, showed numerous cystic space-occupying lesions with low level internal echoes, septations, and increased wall thickness of the cysts that representing infected cysts . So, intravenous trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) was added to the former antibiotic therapy. This 2-week intensive antibiotic therapy had no beneficial effect. After informing the patient and her family about her condition and obtaining a signed consent, the antibiotics were discontinued and then we decided to perform puncture and irrigation of the cysts for confirming the diagnosis of pyocyst, determining the causative organisms, and treating the refractory infected cysts. After sterile preparation, US-guided percutaneous puncture was carried out by using a 20-gauge Chiba needle (TSK, Japan) in the supine position and 40 ml of purulent fluid was evacuated and sent for microbiological and serological studies. The culture was positive to E. coli and Pseudomonas aeroginosa. On the second stage, the largest cysts in the left side were punctured by an identical method. Cystic fluid was aspirated as completely as possible. To achieve this, the needle tip was monitored with US so that it remained in the center of the cyst during aspiration. Immediately after that, an 8 Fr. Catheter was inserted into the cystic cavity with US guidance and irrigation and drainage with 20 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride solution, and 20 ml of 10% povidone iodine was carried out. Forty-eight hours later, the same procedure was repeated for the largest cyst (8 cm in diameter) of the right kidney ; however, the patient showed no improvement. Despite the repeated irrigation and drainage via the inserted catheters, no response to the procedures was seen. Therefore we decided to schedule her for bilateral nephrectomy on the 23rd day, but she didn't consent to the operation. We continued irrigation of catheters with 10 ml of 0.9% saline solution every 8 hours for removing the infected debris and draining the purulent discharge. Ultimately, a catheter was inserted into another large cyst of the left kidney for irrigation and drainage. After 3 days, fever disappeared and clinical state and laboratory tests showed improvement. Repeated US showed decreasing amount of internal echoes and thick septa of the drained cysts . Two catheter in the left and one in the right side were removed once the amount of drainage became less than 10 ml and sterile. Then, antibiotic therapy was appropriately changed to oral TMP-SMX. After 2 months of hospitalization, she completely recovered and was discharged to home. One year after discharge, she remained asymptomatic.