A 79-year-old man was hospitalized for severe bilateral COVID-19 pneumonia after 10 days of fever and dyspnoea. He had a history of hypertension and of long-standing AF for which he was on rivaroxaban therapy (20 mg per day). During hospitalization, DOAC was switched to LMWH at a therapeutic regimen (enoxaparin 100 IU/kg bid) and administered with hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir/ritonavir, empiric antimicrobial treatment and supplemental oxygen to maintain SpO2 in the 93–96% range. Coagulation parameters were in the normal range. The patient’s clinical condition improved and the hospital course was uneventful. He was discharged after 19 days with the indication to resume rivaroxaban treatment together with the anti-hypertensive drug losartan (100 mg per day).
Two weeks later he suddenly complained of severe respiratory distress with cough and chest pain. In the emergency department, the electrocardiogram confirmed the presence of AF with a ventricular rate of 110 bpm. Laboratory tests revealed a normal complete blood count with increased values of hs-troponin I (230.2 ng/l, normal value <34.2), D-dimer (3.99 μg/ml, normal value <5.00), C-reactive protein (47 mg/l, normal value <5.00), fibrinogen (376 mg/dl, normal value <200), lactate dehydrogenase (325 U/l, normal value <248) and ferritin (353 ng/ml, normal value 21–246). Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal size and function of the right ventricle with a mild increase in pulmonary pressures (40 mmHg). Computed tomography pulmonary angiography showed APE involving the lateral and posterior basal segmental branches of the right pulmonary artery and the posterior basal segmental branch of the left pulmonary artery . The ground-glass opacities documented on computed tomography scanning during the first hospitalization had evolved into areas of consolidation and of interlobular and intralobular septal thickening . The patient stated that he was taking the drugs regularly. The rivaroxaban plasma level was promptly measured (20 hours after last administration the day before hospitalization) and was 68 ng/ml (normal value in the absence of the drug is <25 ng/ml) with an elevated PT INR of 2.16 and aPTT of 1.45 (normal value <1.2). Based on these findings, the patient was switched to LMWH at a full dose regimen (100 IU/kg bid). Lower limb compression ultrasonography was negative for venous thromboembolism (DVT). The clinical course was uneventful and the patient was discharged home 9 days later on therapeutic doses of LMWH.