A 17-year-old male presented to the pediatric trauma hospital emergency department after an altercation with multiple gunshot wounds. As per advanced trauma life support protocol, life-threatening injuries were ruled out systematically. Orthopedic service was consulted to assess his injuries, which included three gunshot wounds of particular orthopedic interest. He sustained a gunshot wound to the medial aspect of the left thigh with profuse popliteal bleeding, gunshot to the right flank with missile air tracks down to the level of the posterior elements of the lumbar spine with resultant right L2 pedicle and laminar fractures, and finally, a left shoulder gunshot wound just inferior to the acromial margin in a lateral to the medial trajectory. Imaging revealed retained bullet fragments lodged in the posterosuperior quadrant of the glenoid (, ).
At initial presentation, while he was hypotensive and tachycardic, physical examination was notable for no sensation or motor control below the level of the umbilicus. Emergently, he was taken to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy as well as the vascular exploration of the left popliteal injury. Exploratory laparotomy revealed superior pole renal and caudate lobe hepatic lacerations which were hemostatic. The popliteal fossa was explored once proximal control was gained at the level of the groin and revealed considerable popliteal vein injury without arterial injury. Once hemostasis was obtained, fasciotomies were performed for the lower leg due to the significant time under tourniquet control before surgery. Osseous injuries to the spinal column were deemed stable, suitable for upright positioning, and the plan was to treat them conservatively.
Due to the multiple injuries and critical status, his early care was dominated by intensive resuscitation, and once he was deemed adequately resuscitated for additional surgery, it was planned to address the retained bullet and shoulder joint arthroscopically. Of particular interest in addressing the left shoulder was the diagnosis of acute paraplegia with possible incomplete spinal cord injury, which would necessitate as much preserved upper extremity function as possible. The decision was made in concert with the surgical and intensive teams to continue intravenous antibiotic coverage until it was deemed safe to address the shoulder surgically. The pre-operative computed tomography (CT) of the shoulder was carefully studied, and the bullet was located in the posterosuperior quadrant of the glenoid. The bullet measured 1.6 cm in diameter which is large and the normal arthroscopic graspers would not be adequate. Hence, various other instrument options were explored, including laparoscopic graspers.