An 11-years-old girl presented to the emergency department with worsening dyspnea and mild dysuria after a 3-weeks history of progressive proximal weakness to both upper and lower extremities, occasional bilateral leg myalgia, dysphagia and dysphonia. She had approximately lost the 13% of her body weight. Her past history was remarkable for incidentally diagnosed type I Arnold-Chiari malformation 5 years before, associated to a 3 cm-long cervical hydrosyringomyelia and an anterior sacral meningocele.
Physical examination was remarkable for severe diffused muscle hypotony and hypotrophy, with diminished deep tendon reflexes and abolished patellar reflexes. Pulse oximetry and capillary blood gas test showed type II respiratory failure (SpO2 88%, pH 7.33, pCO2 68 mmHg, HCO3− 30 mmol/L). Blood tests were remarkable for neutrophilic leukocytosis (WBC 14.400/mm3, N 9.710/mm3) and elevated muscle enzyme levels (CPK 8479 U/L, AST 715 U/L, ALT 383 U/L, LDH 1795 U/L) with normal inflammatory markers. The neurological evaluation and a MRI scan of the brain and spine ruled out a worsening in Arnold-Chiari malformation. Capillaroscopy evaluation showed dilation and giant capillaries with avascular areas.
Findings were consistent with a severe onset of JIIM and treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone (30 mg/Kg/day for 3 days, followed by 2 mg/Kg/day) and IVIG (1 g/kg, two infusions) was started. The girl was then admitted to PICU, given her need of invasive mechanical ventilation.
Metabolic myopathies were excluded through urinary organic acids and serum acylcarnitine profile evaluation. Autoantibodies screening showed ANA positivity (1:1280). Repetitive nerve stimulation test ruled out a simultaneous neuromuscular junction disorder. Muscle biopsy showed endomysial and perimysial necrosis and infiltration of mononuclear cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and NK cells) ruling out a mitochondrial myopathy. Evaluation of MAA revealed anti-TIF1-γ and anti-PM/Scl100 antibodies positivity. A Whole-body MRI showed a 19 mm-wide mass underneath the previously documented meningocele . After surgical removal of both the meningocele and the mass, the latter was histologically characterized as a mature teratoma.
Due to extreme hypotonia, muscular wasting, severe malnutrition and intolerance to enteral feeding the patient needed a transient tracheostomy and parenteral nutrition, followed by physiotherapy, speech therapy and nocturnal non-invasive ventilation.
Given the clinical severity of the disease additional immunosuppressive therapy with mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg twice a day for 2 weeks, then increased to 750 mg twice a day as a result of therapeutic drug monitoring) and rituximab (360 mg/m2 of body surface, 4 weekly infusions) was added, together with antimicrobial prophylaxis with TMP/SMX and folic acid supplementation. Slow steroid tapering was started (5 mg decrease every week until 25 mg/day, then 2.5 mg every 10 days).
Disease activity was adequately controlled, so that muscle enzyme levels normalized from day 20 after admission (CK 139 U/L, aldolase 6.9 U/L) and a slow but progressive clinical improvement was observed. Patient was discharged from PICU at day 31.
Parenteral nutrition granted a stable weight growth until patient recovered from swallowing difficulties and incomplete glottic closure (as revealed by fiber-optic endoscopy) at day 48, when oral nutrition was restored followed by tracheostomy tube removal 5 days after.
The Childhood Myositis Assessment Scale (CMAS) showed a slowly but persistent improvement in the 5 weekly measurements increasing from day 31 (CMAS: 10/52) to hospital discharge (CMAS: 35/52). Speech therapy and respiratory physiotherapy were integrated in the rehabilitation program.
Respiratory muscle function was the last to fully recover. Non-invasive ventilation was suspended at day 31, but hypoventilation persisted especially at night, as shown by overnight transcutaneous capnography performed at day 46 (average pCO2 51.9 mmHg, time over 50 mmHg: 73%; average SpO2 93%, time underneath 88%: 5%). Nocturnal non-invasive ventilation was therefore maintained for another month, when overnight capnography in spontaneous breathing confirmed recovery (average pCO2 45.1 mmHg, time over 50 mmHg: 4%).
Two months after discharge the patient was in complete clinical remission, her CMAS being 52/52. Her laboratory tests were completely normal while being treated with mycophenolate and low dosage of steroids (5 mg/day).