A 3-year-old girl showed up to the Emergency Department (ED) because of fever and neck stiffness started 2 days before. Her medical history was remarkable for the presence of a recurrent mild right hip pain and limping started three weeks before, apparently after an upper airway infection with no significant improvement after the administration of anti-inflammatory therapy.
On admission, she was alert, with normal respiratory rate, febrile, pale and showed an evident neck stiffness. At physical examination, she complained of severe pain on neck movements in every direction. Movements of extra rotation of the right hip were also moderately limited. The abdominal examination was unremarkable.
Blood tests showed a mild anemia and a rise in inflammatory markers: WBC 11,460/mmc, HGB 9 g/dl, PLTs 333,000/mmc, CRP 98 mg/L (normal values: < 5.0 mg/L), ESR 120 mm/h.
A peripheral blood smear and an immunophenotype resulted unremarkable.
The hip ultrasound showed the presence of a mild joint effusion and synovial thickening. To rule out the presence of an abdominal mass, an abdominal ultrasound was performed, showing nothing remarkable.
The cervical spine X-ray was negative, whereas the pelvic X-ray showed an osteolytic lesion surrounded by a sclerotic rim near the right acetabulum and a cortical rarefaction of the left femoral neck. No lesions of the spine were detected.
Due to the presence of bone pain in multiple sites associated with osteolytic radiological findings, solid tumor metastasis and a chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO) were suspected. Thus, a total body magnetic resonance (MRI) was scheduled. Empirical intravenous antibiotics (oxacillin plus ceftriaxone) were started on the weak suspicion of an osteomyelitis.
Follow-up blood tests, however, revealed raised serum levels of Neuron-Specific Enolase (NSE) (66,5mcg/L, normal range 0-18mcg/L) and a slight increasement of LDH (353U/L, normal range 200-333U/L).
Therefore, a neck and abdominal CT-scan was performed instead of the scheduled MRI.
The CT-scan showed a solid, heterogeneous, predominantly hypodense surrenal mass with eccentric calcification of dimensions of 2.5 cm x 2.7 cm x 4.5 cm . Imagines of the spine were suggestive of infiltration of the bone, showing extensive inhomogeneity of the vertebral metamers . These features were considered indicators of neuroblastoma.
At the 24-hours urine collection, vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) and homovanillic acid (HVA) were increased (VMA 207.3 mg/24 h, HVA 137.1 mg/24 h). To have a whole-body disease assessment, MIBG scintigraphy was performed and showed high left adrenal uptake and widespread skeletal involvement. To confirm the diagnosis, bone marrow aspiration and biopsies were also carried out. The bone marrow aspiration revealed the presence of neoplastic infiltration > 50%, also confirmed by histological examination of the bone marrow biopsies. Amplification of the oncogene N-MYC emerged. The diagnosis of stage 4 neuroblastoma was then formalized.
The patient started the Rapid COJEC induction chemotherapy for high-risk neuroblastoma. In 24-hours the bone pain disappeared, the child was afebrile and the inflammatory markers eventually dropped significantly. In the last 9 months the girl completed the Rapid COJEC protocol. A CT-scan and a MIBG scintigraphy were carried out after the end of the chemotherapy, showing a complete remission of the skeletal disease. Furthermore, she underwent primary tumor resection and 2 autologous stem cell transplants. At the current state, her clinical conditions are stable.