A 17-year-old male was referred to the emergency department of our institute due to multiple traumas following a car accident. At the time of admission, with Glasgow Coma Score of 9, the patient was sleepy and had mismatched pupil sizes. Physical examination revealed that intense pain, gross swelling, and considerable deformity in the 4th finger (ring finger) of the right hand in addition to multiple scalp lacerations. Then, a comprehensive emergency imaging was rendered to the patient, including cranial, thorax, and abdomen. Furthermore, extensive radiographs of the right hand were obtained ( and ). A temporary casting was immediately employed to immobilize the fracture-dislocation. Our first decision tomanage patient’s orthopedic issue was that closed reduction and percutaneous pinning for either lesion after the neurosurgery. After a complete emergency evaluation, subdural hematoma was displayed on the cranial computed tomography (CT) in addition to massive alveolar hemorrhage on the thorax CT. With the exception of above findings, no additional pathologies were recognized. With the diagnosis of subdural hematoma, the patient was promptly taken to operating theater by neurosurgeons, to provide decompression. After the operation, due to the lung and hand pathologies, no neurosurgeons and traumatologists allowed surgical intervention for the hand fracture-dislocation. Therefore, our decision converted from surgery to non-surgicaltreatment. At the intensive care unit, closed reduction and short arm splint in the intrinsic plus position was applied with a single attempt. The reduction was confirmed through the control plain radiography. The patient was followed up with 2 daily clinic visits for 3 weeks at the intensive care unit. At the 4th week of the follow-up, the X-ray displayed a complete union in CMC fracture dislocation ( and ). For that reason, the splint was removed. A satisfactory range of motion (ROM) was observed at the time of the last follow-up. There was no limitation of movement, and full ROM was accomplished1 year postoperatively, DASH score was evaluated as 13.5 (, , ).