A 50-year-old male was brought to the emergency department after he jumped from a 5-meter bridge in an attempted suicide and fell on the hard concrete below. Upon admission, the patient was agitated, disoriented, and in intense respiratory distress. Examination revealted that the patient’s airway was clear, but there was a bilateral absence of breath sounds and hyperresonance on percussion. The patient was hemodynamically stable. He was intubated due to respiratory failure. Bilateral chest tubes were inserted based on a high clinical suspicion of pneumothorax. Thereafter, the patient developed a large subcutaneous emphysema, despite the fact that the chest tubes were functioning with his severe air leakage. Past medical history was unremarkable with no previous formal depression diagnosis. A social history check showed daily marijuana and tobacco use.
The patient was sent for a head, neck, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis CT scan. The scan revealed giant bullous emphysema on the superior lobes bilaterally, right pneumothorax with a collapsed lung, along with multiple rib fractures, and lung emphysema (, ). A hip dislocation was detected, and closed reduction was performed.
The patient was sent to the ICU, where he improved clinically after conservative treatment with continuous negative pressure suction using a 20 cm water column. He was extubated after 48 h, with persistence of the air leakage on both chest tubes.
On the day following extubation, he developed hypoxia associated with disorientation and agitation and had to be intubated again. Hypoxia was postulated from pulmonary contusion and ventilator-associated pneumonia worsening his already baseline compromised lung. He developed sepsis, and subsequently acute kidney injury with the need for dialysis.
During the course of 5 days, the patient presented hypoxia and a severe mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis, despite the use vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam. The treatment with bilateral chest tubes associated with continuous negative pressure aspiration did not correct the air leakage, which caused an important lost of tidal volumes on the ventilator. Changes in ventilator parameters (increases in PEEP, tidal volumes, etc.) did not improve his oxygenation or decrease his pCO2. In an effort to expand his lungs and improve his ventilatory function, we decided to perform a bilateral bullectomy.
As the patient had poor surgical status, only a right bullectomy was performed 8 days after the trauma. The right side was chosen over the left, because it showed more compression and a larger residual, healthier parenchyma. After surgery, the right side fistula was resolved . Four days after surgery, the patient developed a right-sided empyema, right lung incarceration, and blood clots in the chest tube . In order to resolve these issues, videothoracoscopy and decortication of the right lung were performed, which resulted in the resolution of these problems and improvement in ventilatory parameters with conservative treatment for the left lung. Notwithstanding antibiotic treatment and successful surgical interventions, the patient died on the 25th day of hospitalization due to infectious complications.