A 47-year-old female, with no relevant medical history and no prior pregnancies, was referred to the gynaecologist for abdominal pain and dyspareunia. On gynaecological examination, we found a large gummy mass of likely uterine origin, closely attached to the vaginal wall, occupying the pelvis. The transvaginal ultrasound showed a large solid-cystic mass, with regular borders and some Doppler signal occupying the entire Douglas pouch . A contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was performed confirming a rounded 10 cm low attenuation pelvic mass predominately cystic with multiple thin septa, with an uncertain origin (uterine cervix or vagina). Despite the size of the mass, it was apparently non-infiltrative, protruding into the bladder, the rectum and the lower vagina with only a slight delay on the right renal enhancement . A 4-cm solid uterine mass compatible with subserous leiomyoma was revealed on the posterior surface of the uterus.
Based on these findings, the gynaecology oncology board agreed on resection of the pelvic mass, suspecting malignant disease. On June 5, 2019, we performed laparotomy. We found the tumour was a 10 × 15 × 12 cm cystic cervicovaginal-retrovesical mass with a whitish and smooth surface. The uterus was small with small intramuscular and subserous fibroids. The macroscopic appearance of both adnexa was normal. The tumour was intactly excised in the surgical procedure that consisted of hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy and paravaginal resection of the mass .
The histological report confirmed large cells of poorly defined cytoplasm with anisokaryosis with focal fusiform morphology, surrounded by abundant inflammatory cells. The immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed no expression for CK-AE1/AE3, EMA, ALK, CD-34, CD-45, CD-68, actin, desmin, myogenin, CD10, myoD1 and S-100 on the large cell’s component , whereas expression was detected for CD-45, CD-3, CD-68 and focally for CD-20 and CD-138 on the inflammatory component. In addition, the Ki-67 labelling index was low, with less than 1% positive cells in the large cell’s component. Finally, the IHC analysis was in line with inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour . No anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement nor deletion was detected on fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis despite several attempts. The most plausible reason of ALK negative in the sample was that the tumour blocks accounted with a very few number of tumour cells. There were not enough tumour cells for FISH technique. In June 2020, a comprehensive genomic profiling FoundationOne® test (Roche) was used to analyse genomic changes in the primary tumour; unfortunately, the molecular analysis could not be applied due to lack of the minimum number of cells required in the paraffin sample.
Following surgery, a whole-body positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan performed showed no evidence of malignant disease. The patient has not received any adjuvant treatment to date. Continuous patient follow-up showed no evidence of relapse to date. The last follow-up was in May 2021, with no evidence of disease for 19 months postoperatively.