A 20-year-old Caucasian female presented to the emergency department of a rural community hospital with shortness of breath and a syncopal episode. The patient stated she is a cross-country runner and for the past 4 days has had significant shortness of breath with even mild exertion. The patient had a witnessed syncopal episode at home lasting about one minute. The patient remembered being in the kitchen, but not falling. At that point, her mother brought her to the emergency department for further evaluation.
Upon arrival, the initial set of vital signs were blood pressure 132/78 mmHg; heart rate 109 bpm; regular, respiratory rate of 20; and SpO2 of 89% on room air. The patient appeared well nourished, but mildly anxious. Further assessment revealed no past medical history, no pertinent surgical history, and the only medication she takes daily is birth control. The patient endorsed recent flights from Georgia to Florida to Puerto Rico in the past 4 months. The patient denied ever feeling severe shortness of breath and denies a history of syncope. Patient’s mother denied any congenital defects or pertinent genetic information including family history of clotting disorders or history of blood clot in any first-degree relatives. While talking, the patient’s work of breathing increased as evidenced by accessory muscle use and SpO2 decreases to 89%. When resting, her SpO2 is 95–96% and showed no signs of accessory muscle use or tachypnea.
Physical exam revealed clear and equal lung sounds anteriorly, heart sounds were normal anteriorly, skin was pink, warm, and mildly diaphoretic. Posteriorly lung fields were auscultated as clear, but a low-pitched systolic murmur was heard in the 5th intercostal space in the right scapula region. Lower extremities were normal upon exam. Diagnostic investigation revealed significantly elevated troponin T high sensitivity at 82 ng/L (normal < 14 ng/L). Other lab work was normal. ECG can be seen in Fig. below. Pulmonary embolism was suspected and a diagnostic CT angiogram (CTA) of the chest was obtained. A d-dimer was not included in diagnostic workup because of the high index of suspicion for pulmonary embolism given the other test results.
The CTA of the chest was read as extensive bilateral pulmonary emboli with evidence of right heart strain, as demonstrated by refluxing of contrast into the right ventricle, see Figs. , , and . The patient was placed on a heparin drip and transferred to a higher acuity facility for catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy and further evaluation.
At the higher acuity facility, echocardiogram showed a mildly dilated right ventricular cavity with moderately reduced function and diffuse hypokinesis. Venous doppler studies of the right and left lower extremities were negative for thrombosis. The patient underwent radiological insertion of a catheter into the pulmonary artery for catheter-directed tPA therapy. After the catheter was removed, an IVC filter was inserted. Patient was anticoagulated and sent home after 4 days in the intensive care unit.