A 51-year-old man with an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy examination revealed a 0-IIc lesion in the posterior wall of the upper and middle gastric body 4 cm from the EGJ . The patient was diagnosed with gastric cancer clinical T1bN0M0 (clinical stage IA) and decided on surgical treatment.
The patient had early-stage gastric cancer, and LDG and D1 + lymphadenectomy performance was planned to preserve the remaining stomach. It would be difficult to determine the intraoperative dissection margin by laparoscopic operation. ICG fluorescence marking was performed before surgery because of this. A 100-fold diluted, 0.5 ml ICG was injected at the just oral side of the tumor 1 day preoperatively. B-I reconstruction with the delta-shaped anastomosis was planned first as the reconstruction method.
An additional movie file shows this surgical procedure in more detail (see Additional file ).
Lymph node dissection was performed similarly to that of conventional LDG and D1 + lymphadenectomy. The posterior duodenal wall was fully mobilized while exposing and confirming the gastroduodenal artery when performing lymph node No. 6 dissection . The posterior wall of the fundus was also mobilized since it was a case with a high possibility of becoming a tiny remnant stomach.
An IR laparoscope camera (VISERA ELITE II, OLYMPUS, Japan) was used to confirm the tumor position. The tumor was located on the posterior wall of the upper and middle body of the stomach . The tumor in the posterior wall was fixed in the lesser curvature by rotating the stomach clockwise preserving the residual stomach as much as possible . It was decided to staple the right side from the lesser curvature to the greater curvature. A 60-mm stapler (Powered Echelon Flex GST system Blue 60 mm; ETHICON Endosurgery, Cincinnati, OH) was used from the lesser curvature side to ensure a 2-cm margin on the tumor’s proximal side . The same 60-mm stapler, as the second shot, was stapled to preserve the greater curvature side as much as possible . The resected specimen was removed through the umbilical incision. Figure shows this surgical procedure as a shema.
A delta check was passed as the duodenum’s posterior wall, and the remnant stomach’s posterior wall was sufficiently mobilized. B-I reconstruction using the delta-shaped anastomosis was performed .
The operation time was 234 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 5 ml. The patient was allowed to be discharged on postoperative day 6 without complications. Histology reported a gastric carcinoma with lymphoid stroma, T1b2, INFb, Ly0, V1c, Pn0, PM0, RM0, and N0 (0/36) . Six months after surgery, there are no reflux esophagitis and weight loss due to poor appetite.