A 36-year-old female presented with weakness of her right upper extremity of 10 years duration, accompanied by progressive muscle atrophy of the right hand. Recently, she had started experiencing increasing neck pain and numbness in both her upper and lower extremities. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the cervical spine demonstrated an anterolateral enhanced lesion opposite the C6 vertebral body accompanied by a multilevel proximal/distal syrinx extending from the medulla to the T4 level [Figures –].
MR angiography with gadolinium-diethylenet riaminepenta-acetic acid of the upper body demonstrated the C6 intramedullary anterolateral spinal cord tumor, but no other lesions . Angiography showed that the main feeding vessel was the left anterior C8 radicular artery, which originated from the thyrocervical artery, and then penetrated the dura mater and branched both rostrally and caudally into the ASA .
3D computed tomography (CT) angiography confirmed the same findings as the MR imaging with gadolinium . 3D computer graphic images were constructed based on these neuroradiological images, demonstrating the anatomical relationships of the spinal tumor with the surrounding structures simulating surgical visualization .
The intramedullary tumor was removed via an anterior approach utilizing monitoring of motor evoked potentials (MEPs) and somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs). A left-side skin incision exposed C4 to C7, allowing for completion of a total corpectomy of C6 and partial corpectomies of C5 and C7 . Intravenous injection of ICG showed staining corresponding to the tumor, ASA, and surrounding venous drainage through the intact dura mater . The dura mater and the arachnoid membrane were then opened , and ICG injection showed the ASA, tumor, feeder, and draining veins . After sharp dissection of the vessels from the arachnoid, a temporary clip with low closing force (Sugita AVM Microclip, Mizuho Medical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was applied to the feeding artery of the tumor . ICG injection showed reduced blood flow in the feeding artery but intact flow in the ASA . Temporary artery occlusion was maintained for 30 minutes, but MEP and SSEP monitoring showed no changes. The feeding arteries were coagulated and the tumor was totally removed . The last ICG injection confirmed complete tumor excision and preservation of the ASA . The dura mater was closed with 7-0 nylon and fibrin glue. Anterior fusion from C5 to C7 was performed with an iliac bone graft fixed with a titanium plate. One day after the surgery, cervical radiography showed that the bone graft was dislodged, and hence it was replaced with a fibular graft, and accompanied by external fixation with a halo vest.
Postoperatively, the patient remained neurologically unchanged with similar motor function, however, had slight improvement in upper extremity numbness. Her dysphagia was only temporary, resolving over the 1st postoperative month. Postoperative MR imaging confirmed total removal of the tumor and shrinkage of the associated syrinx. The pathological diagnosis was hemangioblastoma. The halo vest external fixation was removed 2 months after the surgery and replaced with a neck collar until confirmation of adequate bone fusion. Follow-up MR imaging at 1.5 years confirmed total removal of the tumor and shrinkage of the associated syrinx with accompanying atrophy of the spinal cord [Figures –] and cervical radiographs showed the grafted fibula bone fused to both the caudal and rostral vertebral bones [Figure and ].