The patient, a 47-year-old female, was admitted to our hospital with the complaint of upper abdominal pain and melena for 1 month. After once eating oysters 1 month ago, the patient developed a cold feeling with pain in the upper abdomen. One week later, she gradually developed acid reflux, melena and reduced stool volume, whose frequency of melena was 2–3 times a day. In terms of physical examination, the whole abdomen was soft, no gastrointestinal type and peristaltic wave were seen, the upper abdomen was lightly tender, no mass was touched, and the bowel sounded normal. Admission test showed severe anemia (HGB 47 g/L), with liver and kidney function and tumor markers normal. Intermittent blood transfusion treatment, enteral and parenteral nutrition were adopted along with the appearance of nearly complete intestinal obstruction.
The upper digestive tract radiography showed a mass-like filling defect in the D3 and D4 part of duodenum, and no obvious damage of mucosa was observed, considering the possibility of a submucosal lesion . Abdominal enhanced CT showed a cuff-like change of intestinal segments in the left upper abdomen, and a spindle-shaped fat-density opacity (3.6 × 3.7 × 6.7 cm) was seen in the lumen , whose boundary was clear and no enhancement was observed in the enhanced scan. The D2 part and its proximal side were pulled, which correlated the performance of the fibrolipoma combined with intussusception. The patient underwent duodenal endoscopy further, which showed stenosis of the access into the D2 part, where “a large mass”, soft and with smooth surface mucosa, was seen in the lumen . Nevertheless, there was no active bleeding seen in view. Ultrasound endoscopy showed echo of the mass was medium to high, with the internal echo uniform . Moreover, the lesion seemed to continue with the submucosal layer of the intestinal wall, and did not involve the junction of the pancreaticobiliary duct. In order to further confirm bleeding site, 99mTc-RBC gastrointestinal bleeding site determination was performed, which showed the 6th group of intestine would be the bleeding site and no abnormal radioactive elevation was observed in duodenum and proximal jejunum.
An Elective laparoscopic exploration was performed. Intraoperatively, a mass, about 5 × 4 cm in diameter, was found in the jejunum near Treitz ligament, and after opening the duodenal collateral ligament, the D2 part of duodenum was found incarcerated into the D3 part, D4 part and jejunum, which presented the “vortex sign” . Cutting the jejunum open, the pedicle of this mass was wide, the surface was brittle, and it was easy to bleed when touching . For prudential reasons, intestine till ileocecal junction was explored, segmental bloody content was nearly equally distributed, which hint the bleeding site was the mass. And therefore, a median small incision was made into the abdomen to completely remove the mass together with the basement intestinal wall via the jejunum incision . The frozen pathological diagnosis was adipose-derived tumor without obvious cell atypia. The intussuscepted D2 part with abundant blood supply was then restored, and the two incisions in the intestine were closed appropriately, with the lumen unobstructed and without blood supply disorder. The paraffin pathological diagnosis of this lesion was fibrolipoma, and the result of immunohistochemical staining was AE1/AE3 (partially +), Ki-67 (index 10%), SMA (+), S-100 (+) and CD34 (vascular +). The patient was removed from the duodenal drainage on POD 2 and oral feeding was started on POD 7. After successful transition to a semi-liquid diet on POD 10, the patient was discharged from the hospital on POD 14. The HGB was gradually increased and stabilized before discharge at around 100 g/L, and there were no significant complications occurring such as infection, hemorrhage and intestinal fistula perioperatively.