A 26-year-old male was admitted with a chief complaint of painful swelling on the right side of his neck for 4 months and episodic low-grade fever for more than three months. His recorded maximum temperature was 103 degrees F which last for 3 days. He reported sweating, malaise, anorexia, and a significant weight loss of about 10 kg in the last 4 months. There was no history of tuberculosis, and he does not recall tuberculosis in close contact. The skin overlying the mass was smooth and nonerythematous. There was no history of swelling elsewhere in his body. There was no travel history.
The total leukocyte count was increased with predominant neutrophils. His C-reactive protein was positive. The eosinophil count was within the normal range. The serology was negative for HIV, HCV, and HBV. The Mantoux test was negative. GeneXpert of the biopsy sample was also negative for tubercular bacilli. C-ANCA and P-ANCA were negative. His renal function test and liver function test show no abnormalities. Blood and urine culture grows no organism after 48 h of inoculation.
Chest imaging showed necrotic cervical lymphadenopathy on the right side, a heterogeneously enhancing necrotic lesion in the anterior mediastinum, multiple mediastinal and right hilar lymphadenopathy, nodular opacity, and thickened interlobular septa with fibrotic changes in the right upper lobe with mild pericardial effusion. The left second rib’s adjacent muscle, cartilage, and anterior aspect were invaded. Two similar lesions were noted in the right anterior chest wall superior to the lesion mentioned above and the in left lateral aspect of the lesion as discussed above.
Fine-needle aspiration cytology of the right cervical lymph node showed reactive lymphadenitis. In the meantime, the patient was started on intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics for suspected infective lymphadenitis. Even though his pain and temperature reduced after a few days, the mass was still present with no improvement, even during follow-up. Although acid-fast bacilli were not seen in the microscopy of the fine-needle aspiration cytology sample, with the history and reactive lymphadenitis finding in the microscopy, a clinical diagnosis of lymph node tuberculosis was made during follow-up, and the patient was started on antitubercular therapy. The patient’s condition was not improving even after starting antitubercular medicine, and thus the patient was admitted for further investigations and management.
Histopathology of the right cervical lymph node and right axillary tissue and a biopsy of the anterior chest wall was done. The specimens showed fibrous stromal tissue densely infiltrated by neutrophils, lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils, as shown in Figure . Histopathology of the sternal mass showed similar findings. There was the absence of Reed-Sternberg cells, granulomas, or any atypical cells.
Our patient showed clinical and symptomatic improvement with high-dose steroid therapy, so he was followed up in the clinic with drastic improvement during regular follow-ups.