A 90-year-old woman visited a nearby physician complaining mainly of abdominal pain, constipation, vomiting, and decreased appetite. Four days later, she returned to the hospital, because her symptoms did not improve. A CT scan showed a small bowel dilatation following which she was referred to our hospital upon being diagnosed with ileus. The CT scan conducted at the referring hospital showed strangulation of the small intestine in the obturator foramen , and a non-invasive reduction was performed under echo guidance. The reduction was performed with the hip joint flexed and abducted (open/exposed) . Upon examination of the groin area by echo guidance, a tumor image (strangulated intestinal tract) was confirmed near the inner side of the femoral artery . The affected leg was slightly abducted and the inner side of the femoral artery was manually compressed. The index and middle fingers (or ring finger) were inserted vertically into the surface of the body. The tip of the hernia sac was identified using echo and reduced by applying pressure in the abdominal cavity while monitoring it in real-time using a probe. When the gastrointestinal tract that was incarcerated in the obturator can be reduced into the abdominal cavity under echo-guide, the disappearance of the tumor image on the echo is observed. Another CT scan was performed to confirm the reduction and the disappearance of the obturator mass . Patient follow-up was done to monitor any change in intestinal necrosis, such as peritoneal irritation, observed at the time of hospitalization. We examined 12 cases of strangulated obturator hernia from April 2013 to February 2020 with male:female patient ratio of 0:12. The average age was 85.3 years (74–97) and average BMI was 17.4 (15.0–20.1). In 9 out of 12 cases, subjective symptoms such as abdominal pain and other objective findings such as abdominal distension were apparent, and image diagnosis led to a definitive diagnosis. All patients underwent non-invasive reduction under echo guidance at the time of diagnosis of obturator hernia based on physical findings and CT examination. The average period until echo guide reduction was 3.4 days (0–8). Although there were 3 cases in which the onset mechanism was unclear, echo-guided reduction was possible in these cases as well, and no complications were observed after the reduction. Reduction under ultrasound guidance was possible amongst 10 out of 12 cases (83%). Reduction under ultrasound guidance was impossible amongst 2 out of 12 cases (17%), and required emergency surgery. The reason for the two cases of emergency surgery was not, because the perforation of the gastrointestinal tract was caused by this reduction procedure, but because there was no improvement in the findings of incarcerated obturator hernia images by reduction under the echo guide. In addition, physical findings such as abdominal distension and abdominal pain and persistent gastrointestinal dilatation findings on X-rays made it extremely dangerous to transition to strangulation ileus. Patients who could be reduced had improved abdominal symptoms without intestinal ischemia and perforation. Of the 10 cases that could be reduced, 3 cases were not surgically repaired. Two patients were 97 years and 90 years and did not undergo surgery, because the patient and family did not wish for surgical treatment. One patient was admitted to a hospital with severe cardiovascular disease. It was judged that he could not tolerate surgical invasion, and he was followed up after non-invasive retraction. Upon request, elective radical surgery was performed in 7 of these patients after their condition improved and monitored other organs for any signs. 4 patients underwent laparoscopic hernia repair under general anesthesia and three underwent anterior repair approach under lumbar spine anesthesia . The average time between reduction and radical surgery was 8.5 days (2–21). Remaining 2 patients (17%) who could not undergo non-invasive reduction, underwent emergency surgery, had irreversible intestinal ischemia and required small bowel resection. Of these two patients, one underwent UHS and one underwent only a single occlusion, an obturator suture under the laparotomy with the surrounding thickened peritoneal tissue.