A 50-year-old African American male with a history of hyperthyroidism, hypertension, and congestive heart failure presented to an outside hospital with fever and an altered mental status. He was diagnosed with hyperthyroidism about three months prior to hospitalization. He was started on methimazole (MMI), but compliance taking the medication was low. His primary care provider had recommended thyroidectomy; however, he was unable to have the procedure due to lack of health insurance. On presentation to the outside hospital, imaging revealed right lower lobe pneumonia with an effusion and he was started on antibiotics. His clinical status deteriorated, and he developed shock complicated by atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular rate with documented rates in the 140–190 beats per minute. His arrhythmia was refractory to digoxin, diltiazem, and two attempts at cardioversion with 200 Joules. He was initiated on an amiodarone infusion which stabilized his arrhythmia. His TSH documented at the outside hospital was 0.01 mIU/L and free T4 was 8 ng/dL.
He was transferred to our hospital for further management. Prior to transfer, he was started on hydrocortisone 50 mg every 6 hours and MMI 10 mg three times daily. MMI was used instead of propylthiouracil (PTU) due to elevated liver function tests. On the day of arrival to our hospital, the inpatient endocrinology team was consulted for assistance with thyroid management. He was intubated for respiratory distress at the time of the endocrinology team's initial assessment. His blood pressure, supported by two pressors, was 90/63 mmHg. His temperature was 36.9˚C and his pulse ranged from 88 to 134 beats per minute on the amiodarone infusion. Physical examination was significant for scleral icterus and left neck fullness. No thyroid bruit or discrete nodules were identified; however, the neck exam was limited due to multiple central lines. His heart beat was irregular consistent with atrial fibrillation and a cardiac murmur was also detected. Lower extremities were notable for edema and hyperreflexia. The endocrinology team was unable to assess his mental status due to the patient being sedated. Thyroid labs on admission to our hospital included TSH <0.01 mIU/L (0.47–4.68 mIU/L), total T3 358 ng/dL (97–169 ng/dL), free T4 > 7 ng/dL (0.6–2.5 ng/dL) and thyroid stimulating antibodies >500% (normal ≤122%). Additional laboratory studies showed acute kidney injury and elevated liver function tests, troponin, and white blood cell count. Thyroid ultrasound with doppler showed an enlarged, heterogeneous thyroid gland, more pronounced on the right than the left without any nodules, although the view of the left side was limited due to the endotracheal tube and central line.
His Burch–Wartofsky score for hyperthyroid storm was 100 which was highly concerning for thyroid storm. As the Burch–Wartofsky score can sometimes be misleading with elevated scores in critically ill patients without thyroidal illness, the Japan Thyroid Association thyroid storm criteria, a diagnostic criterion less likely to incorrectly diagnose thyroid storm in critically ill patients, was also utilized to assess for thyroid storm in our patient . Employing this second diagnostic criterion, our patient again met criteria for thyroid storm based on the family report of altered mental status, tachycardia with documented rates of 140–190 per minute, heart failure with an estimated ejection fraction of 30%, and thyrotoxicosis with suppressed TSH and elevated free T4 and total T3 levels.
The endocrine consult team recommended increasing MMI to 20 mg three times daily and starting cholestyramine 4 g three times daily. Over the ensuing days, his renal function worsened such that he required continuous renal replacement therapy. On day 2, saturated potassium iodide solution (SSKI) 250 mg three times daily was initiated and cholestyramine was increased to 4 g four times daily. Liver function tests improved by day 3; therefore, he was switched from MMI to PTU 200 mg three times daily to take advantage of the decreased conversion of T4 to T3 seen with PTU. On day 4, TSH remained undetectable and free T4 was unchanged at >7 ng/dL. Total T3 began to decrease, but remained >200 ng/dL. Despite maximal medical therapy for thyroid storm, his clinical status continued to worsen with evidence of multiorgan failure. The endocrinology team consulted the hematology physicians for initiation of TPE.
He was started on daily TPE on hospital day 4. Replacement fluid contained half fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and half 5% albumin and was equal in volume to his total plasma volume (about 4L). His TPE treatment lasted about two hours each day and he received plasmapheresis daily for four days. After the first day of TPE, his free T4 and total T3 decreased to 5.3 ng/dL and 139 ng/dL, respectively. After 4 sessions of daily TPE, his free T4 was 1.9 ng/dL and total T3 was 77 ng/dL . With TPE, his clinical course significantly improved to the point where he was weaned off of pressors and extubated. Over the following 2 weeks, he was safely titrated off of SSKI and hydrocortisone, and switched from PTU to MMI. For definitive treatment of hyperthyroidism, the endocrine surgery team was consulted to evaluate the patient for total thyroidectomy. At the time of their evaluation, the patient was clinically euthyroid. Given his recent critical illness, the surgeons considered him to be a high-risk surgical candidate. Therefore, they recommended performing an elective thyroidectomy once the patient was further out from his critical illness and had undergone outpatient cardiac optimization. He was discharged home three weeks later on MMI 30 mg twice daily and cholestyramine 4 g twice daily. At time of discharge, he did not require any supplemental oxygen and his left ventricular ejection fraction improved to 48% as measured on positron emission tomography myocardial perfusion scan. He was no longer in atrial fibrillation as he had converted back to sinus rhythm and amiodarone had been discontinued. With the exception of total bilirubin, his liver function tests had normalized before discharge. By 2 months post discharge, his total bilirubin had also normalized. He was discharged with intermittent dialysis needs, though two weeks after leaving the hospital, dialysis was discontinued because his kidney function recovered.