A 56-year-old male patient was diagnosed as "hyperthyroidism" more than 6 years ago, and treated with methimazole for 2 years. Nearly 4 years ago, the patient had a recurrence of hyperthyroidism and was re-treated with methimazole. Half a month ago, without obvious inducement, the patient relapsed with heat intolerance, excessive sweating, palpitation and shortness of breath. He added the dose of methimazole to 10 mg twice daily by himself, and then presented to our hospital. On physical examination, his body temperature and heart rate were normal. A nodule was palpable in the left lobe of the thyroid without tenderness. Laboratory tests revealed a suppressed TSH at 0.010uIU/ml (normal range 0.35–4.94 uIU/ml), and a normal fT3 at 5.39 pmol/L (normal range 2.43–6.01 pmol/L), and a normal fT4 at 14.45 pmol/L(normal range 9.00–19.00 pmol/L). The TPOAb, TgAb and TRAb were all positive at > 1000 IU/ml (normal range 0.00–5.61 IU/ml), 6.60 IU/ml (normal range 0.00–4.11 IU/ml), and 6.94 IU/L (normal range 0.00–1.75 IU/L). ESR was mildly elevated at 36 mm/h (0–20 mm/h). Thyroid ultrasonography revealed an inhomogeneous weak echogenic nodule in the left lobe of gland, about 21*16*29 mm in size, ill-defined margins, irregular shape, and close relationship with shallow bread membrane . The nodule was classified into category 4B according to the Chinese-Thyroid Imaging-Reporting and Data System (C-TIRADS) model by the sonographer . Moreover, enlarged left cervical lymph nodes were observed. (The patient provided a report of thyroid ultrasonography from another hospital one year before admission, and there was no such nodule). Radionuclide imaging of the gland demonstrated increased uptake of 99 m Tc pertechnetate and a hot nodule in the left lobe of the gland corresponding to the weak echogenic nodule detected on ultrasound . Based on the findings of ultrasound, and considering that the possibility of malignancy for hot nodules could not be completely excluded, we performed a FNA. Cytology revealed eosinophilic follicular lesions with papillary features, and papillary thyroid carcinoma cannot be excluded . Given all the evidence above, the patient was then transferred to the surgical department. Intraoperative frozen-section examination observed no definite neoplastic lesions. The type of surgical procedure was determined as left lobe and isthmus thyroidectomy plus central cervical lymph node dissection. Postoperative histopathology revealed autoimmune thyroiditis with granulomatous inflammation, interstitial fiber hyperplasia, and eosinophilic degeneration of some follicular epithelium with atypia, without definite evidence of malignancy . Immunophenotypes revealed TG( +), CK19(-), Galectin-3(-), HBME-1(-), and CD56( +). Coexisting with the decreased TSH, the functional nodule was considered TSH-independent. Thus, the patient was finally diagnosed as atypical Marine Lenhart syndrome with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. During follow up, thyroid function tests revealed euthyroidism at the first and the forth month after surgery, but a mildly suppressed TSH at 0.1020uIU/ml with an elevated TRAb at 2.20 IU/L, at the tenth month after surgery.