A 59-year-old male patient presented to our hospital with epigastric pain. His medical history included multiple myeloma and cardiac amyloidosis; he was undergoing chemotherapy. On physical examinations, the patient had a body temperature of 37.1 ℃ and his abdomen was soft and flat, with right-upper-quadrant tenderness and a mild Murphy’s sign.
Laboratory test results indicated an elevated white blood cell count of 13,400/μL and a C-reactive protein level of 0.33 mg/dL. There were no apparent abnormalities observed in blood testing for the liver or biliary functions. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed an enlarged gallbladder with biliary sludge without evidence of wall thickening or calculi . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy did not reveal any abnormal findings. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed with planned endoscopic naso-gallbladder drainage (ENGBD). Since ENGBD was difficult to place, endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD) and endoscopic sphincterotomy were performed for suspected biliary mud in the common bile duct. After ENBD, he underwent percutaneous transhepatic gallbladder aspiration (PTGBA) due to persistent bile mud accumulation and right upper quadrant pain.
After PTGBA, the patient continued to experience a reservoir of bile sludge and recurrent right upper quadrant pain. However, oral flopropione administration at the time of pain was remarkably effective in reducing these symptoms. Based on the efficacy of flopropione in managing colic attacks and presence of gallbladder dysfunction with a history of amyloidosis, we suspected that the patient had gallbladder dyskinesia due to gallbladder amyloidosis. The patient responded to induction chemotherapy for multiple myeloma without adverse events. However, his cardiac function was impaired, with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 36%, an overall decrease in wall motion, and an elevated NT-proBNP up to 3652 pg/mL. Surgery was suggested. However, the patient preferred to be followed up because his symptoms were stable, being concerned about worsening heart failure due to surgical invasion. The symptoms settled down after that. One year later, he experienced right upper abdominal pain and came to see the physician. His general condition was stable. Therefore, we decided to perform laparoscopic cholecystectomy for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes. During the surgical procedure, the gallbladder was mildly enlarged. However, no thickening was observed, and there was little evidence of neovascularization or tissue fragility . The surgery was completed without any complications, with blood loss of 28 mL and surgical time of 106 min. Examination of the resected specimen revealed an absence of calculi in the gallbladder. Macroscopic analysis of the resected gallbladder demonstrated longitudinal sectioning, revealing diffuse deposition of eosinophilic material from the mucosal lamina propria to the subserosal layer, as evidenced by hematoxylin and eosin staining. Direct fast scarlet staining revealed a salmon pinkish coloration, indicating amyloid deposition in the mucosal lamina propria, muscularis propria, and peripheral nerves. Amyloid deposition was observed in the peripheral nerves of the subserosal layer of the gallbladder neck . The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, leading to discharge on postoperative day 5. To date, no recurrence of the abdominal pain has been observed. In this case, preoperative suspicion of gallbladder amyloidosis allowed for surgically treating the patient while being in good general condition before developing cholecystitis.