A 30-year-old Ethiopian male patient presented with left lower limb swelling of two days, which was getting painful while he was walking. He had previous history of deep vein thrombosis of the left lower limb three years before his current presentation and he took anticoagulant (warfarin) for three months. He had also superficial thrombophlebitis on his right leg seven months prior to his current presentation; for which he received anticoagulant (rivaroxaban) for three months. He is a bank accountant and claims an average mobility with occasional prolonged sitting. He had no constitutional symptoms like fever, night sweating, loss of appetite or weight loss. He did not have cough, hemoptysis or bowel habit changes. He had no history of cigarette smoking or alcohol consumption. He did not give a family history of venous thromboembolism and malignancy. He had no history of chronic medical illness and no prior history of surgery.
On physical examination, he had blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, pulse rate of 80 beats per min, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per min, oxygen saturation of 97% with room air, grossly swollen left lower limb with significant discrepancy from the right lower limb. There was no remarkable finding on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems.
He was investigated with Doppler venous ultrasound of the left lower limb, which revealed distension of the left common femoral, superficial femoral and iliac veins with extensive thrombosis along with incompressibility and absence of blood flow. On laboratory tests, complete blood count, liver enzymes, renal function tests, glycated hemoglobin, and coagulation profile were within normal ranges. He tested negative for HIV. Laboratory tests for antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and inherited thrombophilia were non-remarkable except the detection of heterozygous MTHFR gene (C677T) mutation on real time PCR mutation analysis . Determination of serum homocysteine level was planned after the detection of heterozygous MTHFR gene (C677T) mutation, but it was not done due to unavailability of the test and financial constraints. Further investigations including fecal occult blood test and abdominopelvic ultrasound were not revealing any positive finding and age specific cancer screening tests including tumor markers were not done because the patient was young with no clinical features or family history suggestive of malignancy.
He was treated with rivaroxaban 15 mg PO two times daily BID for the first 21 days and then he was continued with the same medication at a dose of 20 mg PO daily for the first 03 months followed by secondary prevention strategy at a dose of 10 mg PO daily. He had significant improvement of the leg swelling. He did not have short term or long term complications of deep vein thrombosis and there were no bleeding events due to the anticoagulant use.