A 15-year-old boy who initially visited the outpatient orthopedic clinic because of a 2-week history of left femoral pain was admitted to the Division of Orthopedics. On admission, he was afebrile and complained of no other symptoms. An initial examination failed to determine the cause of femoral pain. Magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis and bilateral femurs on admission revealed T1-weighted, gadolinium-enhanced, low-intensity, diffuse, and irregular lesions on his pelvis and bilateral femurs . This imaging indicated a hematological malignancy with diffuse bone involvement, suggestive of acute leukemia. Positron emission tomography (PET) exhibited extensive accumulation of 18F–fludeoxyglucose (FDG) with a maximum standardized uptake value of 7.09 . The patient’s blood count was normal, although the platelet count was slightly decreased to 10.3 × 104/μL. Some immature myeloid cells (2.0% metamyelocytes, 4.5%, myelocytes, and 0.5% blastocysts) were circulating in the peripheral blood. Laboratory findings showed elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 1299 U/L, creatine kinase (CK) of 437 U/L, and C-reactive protein of 1.25 mg/dL. The tumor markers sIL-2R and WT1 mRNAs were elevated to 566 U/mL (standard range: 135–483 U/mL) and 110-copies/μg RNA (standard range: <50 copies), respectively. These laboratory and imaging findings suggested hematological malignancy. Therefore, the primary orthopedic surgeon consulted a hematologist and a pediatrician, who suggested an immediate bone marrow examination.
Bone marrow aspiration (nucleated cell count, 1.84 × 104/μL) demonstrated hypercellular marrow with proliferation of blast-like bullous atypical cells, accounting for 89.0% of all nucleated cells . The use of special stains for aspirated bone marrow cells showed that the proliferating cells were negative for myeloperoxidase and esterase, but strongly positive for periodic acid–Schiff . Flow cytometry analysis indicated that the cells were phenotypically positive for CD56 only . A bone marrow biopsy was simultaneously performed, but the results were delayed because of decalcification. Meanwhile, CK levels were elevated and disseminated intravascular coagulation developed; thus, intravenous hydration therapy was initiated to protect renal function. However, no specific therapy was started while waiting for the confirmation of pathological diagnosis.
After a delay of a couple of weeks, supportive hydration therapy was initiated and the pathological examination of the bone marrow biopsy based on the curious morphology and positivity for CD56 , desmin, vimentin, myoglobin, and myogenin confirmed a tentative diagnosis of alveolar RMS. The tumor cells were negative for synaptophysin, S-100, and MyoD1 . Medical oncologists and radiologists reviewed the 18F–FDG-PET images and recognized a primary mass in the penile region, which was initially overlooked. Basal penile biopsy was performed by an urologist and the results of a histological examination of the biopsied tissue were in agreement with the pathological findings of the bone marrow . The immunohistochemical staining pattern was similar to that of the bone marrow sample: i.e., positive for desmin, vimentin, and myoglobin, and negative for synaptophysin, S-100. However, of note, myogenin and MyoD1 staining were both positive . The histopathology of basal penile muscle indicated characteristic alveolar growth of small round cells with round regular nuclei and scant cytoplasm, which led to a diagnosis of alveolar RMS. Afterwards, karyotype analysis of bone marrow cells revealed t(2;13)(q35;q14) , which is a characteristic translocation of RMS, producing the PAX3-FOXO4 (FKHR) fusion protein. The final diagnosis of this patient was alveolar RMS with massive involvement of the bone marrow and the primary site in the perineal muscles . The patient was transferred to a hospital that specializes in pediatric oncology. The Japanese sarcoma study group protocol was started with an initial treatment regimen for high risk patients, consisting of vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (VDC) followed by ifosfamide and etoposide (IE), which was designating to coordinate with future stem cell transplantation. He responded well to this induction treatment and received radiation therapy for the residual disease.