An 11-month-old, previously healthy boy with a 1-day history of fever was presented to his family physician. Blood tests revealed leukocytosis (10,000 /μL) and an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (5.0 mg/dL). His family physician suspected that he was suffering from mild pneumonia, and he was administered a single intravenous dose of ceftriaxone sodium and discharged on daily suppository antibiotics (ceftizoxime sodium) and then sent home. However, his fever persisted, so he was taken to consult the family physician every day. His family physician advised that he continue using antibiotics; however, progressive neutropenia and an increased CRP level were shown. He was therefore referred to our hospital.
His parents were not consanguineous, and there were no cases of immunodeficiency or HLH in the patient’s family. He had no remarkable medical history and his physical growth and development had been normal. He had been fully immunized with three doses of PCV-13. A physical examination on admission revealed that his temperature was 41.1 °C, blood pressure was 88/58 mmHg, heart rate was 202 beats/min, respiratory rate was 60/min, and SpO2 was 100%. He showed a normal growth and development. He had conjunctival pallor, dried lips, reddened pharyngeal mucosa, bilateral inflamed eardrums, hepatosplenomegaly, and petechiae on his extremities. The blood tests revealed leukopenia (1570 /μL), neutropenia (63 /μL), increased CRP (37.8 mg/dL), increased procalcitonin (PCT) (97 mg/dL), increased aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (287 IU/L), increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (3474 IU/L), increased fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (FDP) (1257 μg/mL), hyperferritinemia (26,500 ng/mL), hypertriglyceridemia (389 mg/dL), and increased soluble IL-2 receptor (sIL-2R) (4400 U/mL) . A blood test on the second day of admission showed anemia (7.8 g/dL). Serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, blood sugar, and serum creatinine levels were within normal range. The results of the urinalysis was normal. Leukocytosis was absent in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and the concentrations of protein and glucose in the CSF were within the reference range (31 mg/dL and 53 mg/dL, respectively). There was no evidence EBV on serology or DNA in whole blood. The immunoglobulin M titers for cytomegalovirus, human herpesvirus-6, and measles were also negative. The results of immunochromatographic antigen tests for influenza virus in nasal discharge, adenovirus in throat swab, rotavirus in stool, human metapneumovirus in nasal discharge, and group A Streptococcus in throat swab were negative. The β-D-glucan level was also negative.
Computed tomography revealed hepatosplenomegaly without pleural effusion, ascites, or abscess. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging revealed fluid retention in the bilateral mastoid processes. Echocardiography revealed no pericardial effusion, valve vegetations, or coronary artery dilation. To differentiate other causes of neutropenia and anemia, bone marrow puncture was performed, revealing that the number of nucleated cells was decreased (2.0 × 104/μL), and the ratio of myeloid to erythroid precursor cells was increased to 9.29. Phagocytosis of erythroblasts by macrophages was observed. After submitting blood cultures, meropenem hydrate was started on admission. We diagnosed him with severe IPD with a rapid progressive deterioration in his general condition and a severe systemic inflammatory response; therefore, intravenous immunoglobulin was also administered as an add-on antimicrobial therapy. In addition, he was diagnosed with HLH based on prolonged fever; neutropenia; anemia; hepatosplenomegaly; hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow; and elevated serum levels of triglycerides, ferritin, and sIL-2R.
On the second day of hospitalization, S. pneumoniae was isolated from blood cultures drawn on admission. Cultures from urine and CSF samples were negative. We explained to the patient’s parents that the prompt treatment for HLH with immunomodulatory therapy using steroid and immunosuppressants was needed, and that these treatments might have an adverse effect on the severity of the IPD; thereafter, we obtained a consent for treatment from the patient’s parents. On the same day, high-dose methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg/day, 3 days) was started. Prednisolone (1.5 mg/kg/day) and cyclosporin A (6 mg/kg/day) were started after the methylprednisolone pulse; thereafter, white blood cell count, neutrophil count, and platelet counts gradually increased while the levels of AST, LDH, FDP, ferritin, and CRP returned to their normal ranges. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of penicillin G for the detected S. pneumoniae was 0.5 μg/mL; therefore, it was identified as penicillin-intermediate S. pneumoniae (PISP). On the fourth day of hospitalization, his fever resolved. He was then switched to cefotaxime sodium (150 mg/kg/day) as de-escalation, although the MIC of cefotaxime was not relatively good (0.5 μg/mL). Blood culture tests on the 4th, 8th, and 11th days of hospitalization were negative. Cefotaxime sodium was discontinued on the 14th day of hospitalization, whereas prednisolone and cyclosporin A were discontinued on the 55th day of treatment. He was discharged without any complications on the 22nd day of hospitalization. There was no recurrence of HLH and no developmental delay up to when he was 3 years old.
The pneumococcal capsular serotype of S. pneumoniae isolated from the patient’s blood was identified as 23A, which was not included in PCV-13. Considering the possibility of primary immunodeficiency, immunological function tests for the number and function of T cells, B cells, serum complement titers, serum immunoglobulin titers, granulocyte phagocytic function, and natural killer cell activity were performed and found to be within the normal range (19.4% assay at effector-to-target ratio of 20:1; standard value 14.1–48.7%). We did not test the immunoglobulin G (IgG) titer for S. pneumoniae in this patient; however, the IgG titer for pertussis was positive, confirming the reaction of the vaccine that he had previously received. In addition to inflammatory parameters such as CRP, PCT, ferritin, and urinary β2-microglobulin (β2-MG), we measured serum cytokines such as sIL-2R, interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-18, interferon-γ (IFN-γ), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and soluble CD163 (sCD163) serially using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The levels of CRP, PCT, ferritin, sIL-2R, IL-6, IL-10, IL-18, IFN-γ, and sCD163 in the serum were highly peaked at admission and then gradually decreased. However, the levels of urinary β2-MG remained elevated on 3rd day of hospitalization even after high-dose steroid pulse therapy and then decreased rapidly after the induction of cyclosporin A on the 5th day of hospitalization. The levels of IL-2, IL-4, and TNF-α were below the detection limit.