A 23-year-old man was referred from another hospital with a history of a dry cough, fever (> 39 °C), and malaise, mostly at noon and at night. The symptoms started after he developed a self-limited skin and soft tissue infection on his left hand two weeks ago. Initially, he was hospitalized for 3 days under suspicion of COVID-19 infection. Empiric antibiotic therapy with piperacillin-tazobactam was started after his admission. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed floating vegetation (35–40 mm) on the tricuspid valve. Prior to transfer to our clinic, he also complained of blood-stained sputum and two episodes of diarrhoea and vomiting. The patient originally came from Romania, is a construction worker, and denied intravenous drug abuse. However, he admitted to having contact with a patient with active pulmonary tuberculosis in the past.
On physical examination at admission, his vital signs showed a blood pressure of 128/60 mmHg, a heart rate of 112 bpm, oxygen saturation of 97% on room air and a subfebrile temperature (37.5 °C). Cardiac auscultation revealed a grade III/VI holosystolic murmur over the tricuspid valve. There were also bilateral rales and crackles audible at the base of the lungs and right basal dullness on percussion. Examination of his extremities and skin revealed bilateral ankle pitting oedema and an isolated left-hand oedema with concomitant swelling of the third metacarpal-phalangeal joint. Neurological examination was unremarkable.
Initial investigations included laboratory tests and blood culture sets. An electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm without signs of underlying ischaemia or atrioventricular block. An initial full blood count revealed mild leucocytosis, neutrophilia, left deviation, and microcytic anaemia . High levels of C-reactive protein and procalcitonin suggested a bacterial infection. In addition, the patient presented with a concomitant acute kidney injury (creatinine 1.5 mg/dl, BUN 112 mg/dl). Liver function tests showed elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase and gamma-GT and low levels of cholinesterase . Empirical antibiotic therapy with ampicillin, flucloxacillin and gentamicin, according to the current European Guidelines for the empirical treatment of native valve endocarditis, was administered . A throat swab for the SARS-CoV-2-RNA PCR test was reported to be negative.
After admission, we performed transoesophageal echocardiography , which demonstrated 25 × 15 mm vegetation on the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve without evidence of severe tricuspid regurgitation. The other valves presented no vegetation or severe regurgitation. The left ventricular ejection fraction was normal, and intracardiac thrombi were not observed. Further relevant echocardiographic findings revealed a normal right ventricular function and pulmonary arterial systolic pressure of 30 mmHg. A small ventricular left-to-right shunt due to a ventricular septal defect was observed on colour Doppler .
In addition, a CT scan of the thorax and abdomen demonstrated bilateral disseminated multiple septic pulmonary emboli and concomitant pneumonic infiltrates as well as mild bilateral pleural effusions . On the CT abdomen scan, no additional organ emboli or abscess formations were found. A coronary CT angiography showed no evidence of calcium plaques suggestive of coronary artery disease or malformations. Although this patient did not present neurological symptoms, a brain CT was obtained, which showed normal findings. A CT scan of the left hand revealed a soft-tissue infection or phlegmon without bone involvement.
After admission, at least two blood culture sets were reported to be positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). The final diagnosis of S. aureus bacteraemia and isolated right-sided endocarditis was based on two major criteria according to the modified Duke criteria for endocarditis . We continued administering flucloxacillin, following the current guidelines . Clarithromycin was started because of atypical pneumonic infiltrates on CT, and a course of 10 days of ceftazidime was also added to the antibiotic regimen due to concern about a Pseudomonas sp. infection. Previously, the initial antibiotic therapy with gentamicin was stopped in consideration of his acute kidney injury. A therapeutic intravenous anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin was begun after the diagnosis of septic pulmonary emboli.
Furthermore, a second transoesophageal echocardiography was performed 10 days after starting antibiotic therapy . Fortunately, it showed diminished vegetation (16 × 7 mm) on the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve, without any evidence of further valve lesions. The left-to-right shunt due to the ventricular septal defect was stable without haemodynamic significance. In consensus with our endocarditis team, including a cardiac surgery evaluation, we decided on conservative management of the isolated right-sided endocarditis.
During hospitalization, the patient gained weight and there was an increase in peripheral oedema and anasarca, and increased levels of creatinine, BUN, and hypoalbuminemia were noted on laboratory tests . In addition, urine diagnostic tests revealed macrohematuria, albuminuria, high levels of A1-microglobulin, and a high protein-creatinine ratio, suggesting acute tubular injury . Autoantibodies and C3 complement tests were conducted, which revealed a low C3 level and a negative ANCA titre . In consideration of these findings, we suspected glomerulonephritis associated with S. aureus infection and decided to not perform a renal biopsy. Instead, we administered diuretic therapy with amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide to treat the anasarca symptoms. In addition, relevant proteinuria was observed on his 24-h urine protein test . Consequently, we started a regimen of corticosteroids with prednisolone therapy (1 mg/kg BW) for 4 weeks, and then it was tapered weekly, showing a gradual improvement in the patient’s proteinuria and oedema .
After an acute episode of massive haemoptysis, we stopped the intravenous anticoagulation and performed an urgent bronchoscopy . It showed tracheobronchitis with diffuse bleeding in segment 8 of the lower right lobe requiring an endobronchial tamponade for 24 h to stop the bleeding. Subsequently, the patient underwent a revision bronchoscopy for extraction of the endobronchial tamponade. It showed abundant purulent bronchial secretions without signs of de novo active bleeding. Acid-fast stain tests, Pneumocystis jirovecii, and respiratory viruses (RSV-RNA, Influenza A, B) were negative in the bronchoalveolar lavage. Although the gamma-interferon test was positive for a latent tuberculosis infection, we considered it an isolated finding not relevant to diagnose active pulmonary tuberculosis. Haemoptysis episodes are more likely due to multiple septic pulmonary emboli and concomitant S. aureus pneumonia, as previously found on the patient’s CT-thorax scans.
Further investigations related to explaining the microcytic anaemia revealed an iron deficiency (iron 33 µg/dL, ferritin 116 mcg/dL, transferrin 78 mg/dL). However, this finding might be explained as a combination of nutrition deficiency, recurrent haemoptysis, and inflammatory systemic disease due to acute infective endocarditis. His other parameters were at normal levels without suspicion of haemolysis or vitamin B12 deficiency.
Prior to discharge, a thorax CT scan revealed remission of the pneumonic infiltrates and septic emboli after two weeks of antibiotic therapy . After 4 weeks of hospitalization, considerable improvement of renal function, proteinuria, and inflammatory markers was observed. The patient was discharged with combined antibiotic therapy of flucloxacillin and clarithromycin at 4 weeks.
At follow-up, one month after discharge, the patient presented with a good recovery of renal function and proteinuria . Laboratory tests were unremarkable. Additionally, transoesophageal echocardiography showed no more relevant vegetation of the tricuspid valve only some mild regurgitation . However, an aneurysmal transformation of the ventricular septal defect (5 mm) located infravalvular to the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve was found . The left-to-right shunt was not haemodynamically significant (systolic velocity of 5.5 m/s) without involvement of the aortic valve or aorta . After surgical evaluation, conservative management, including endocarditis prophylaxis, was continued. The patient was scheduled for further echocardiographic follow-up and cardiac catheterization to determine the invasive haemodynamic parameters.