A 39-year-old female was referred to the Department of Urology of Emam Reza Hospital, Mashhad, Iran due to persistent pain in the right flank. During the history, she had hypothyroidism which was controlled by levothyroxine. The pain had started three months ago and its intensity did not change during the day. A slight tenderness and palpable mass in the right lumbar region were detected on the physical examination without any other unremarkable findings. Routine tests were performed for the patient showing a mild microcytic hypochromic anemia, normal kidney function tests and elevated level of serum lactate dehydrogenase (753 U/L). Urine tests revealed significant red blood cell count per HPF. In an ultrasound examination, a solid mass with the size of 124×145 mm was observed in the cortex of the right upper kidney pole.
Other abdominal and pelvic organs were reported normal. In abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan with and without contrast, solid and hypodense mass involving the upper half right kidney was detected with approximately 128×100 mm in diameter . Also, paraaortic lymphadenopathy on the right side of the abdominal aorta was seen adjacent to the tumor, the largest was 22×11 mm in diameter. The kidney mass did not invade to surrounding structures and instead displaced liver and abdominal organs by pushing them. Other abdominal and pelvic organs were reported normal. Pulmonary and mediastinal spiral CT without contrast were performed for the patient, there was no evidence of any pulmonary or pleural metastasis. With a primary diagnosis of RCC, right radical nephrectomy was performed along with the removal of palpable pathologic lymph-nodes. Macroscopic examination shows kidney with surrounding fat weighing 1625 grams, measuring 18*13*8 cm. It has a mass with lobular outer surface and size of 16.5 * 11.5 * 7.5cm. The cut surface is creamy to white with areas of necrosis and hemorrhage surrounded by kidney with the size of 4 *3 *2 cm. The surgical margin was involved with the tumor but ureteral pelvis and sinus fat were not. In the light microscopic examination, the tumor was composed of tubular and rosette-like structures covered by simple to pseudo-stratified columnar epithelium with elongated, vesicular nuclei with acidophilic cytoplasm, occasionally with intraluminal papillary projection, enclosed in fascicular mesenchymal stroma, fibrous and hyalinized areas . Foci of necrosis was seen. Surgical margin focally involved by tumor. Blastemal element was not clearly observed in any tumor region. All resected lymph nodes were reactive without any tumoral involvement.
Immunohistochemistry for EMA, CK, CD56, WT1, CD10, CD99, synaptophysin, chromogranin was done. WT1 (with twice repeat) was non-specific , EMA was positive and other markers were negative . The final diagnosis according to histologic and immunohistochemical findings was biphasic Wilms' tumor (stage III due to surgical margin involvement).
After definitive diagnosis, patients received 6 cycles of vincristine, dactinomycin, and doxorubicin. After a two-year follow-up, the patient was disease-free.