A 53-year-old woman visited our out-patient psychiatric clinic in March 2013. Her daughter reported that she had become excessively talkative, impulsive, and verbally aggressive. The changes in her personality had begun to appear in 2008 and her symptoms of hostility had become more severe recently. Her premorbid personality was described as reserved, diligent, frugal, and calm and she had worked in a market for more than 20 years. However, during the previous 5 years, she had begun to speak garrulously and often lost the thread of a conversation and included many irrelevant details when providing an explanation. She had become much more easily irritable and angry, which took the form of yelling and throwing objects. She had also begun to argue over seemingly unimportant matters with her neighbors. She had also begun to impulse buy multiple items also make many unnecessary purchases for her family. She had also become very hyperactive in her work life and social life. She did not display any sleep or eating disorders at the time of her visit.
The patient’s husband had an explosive temperament and alcohol problems which were a source of great stress and concern for her. Since 2000, she had begun to irregularly attend a local psychiatric clinic to receive medications for a depressed mood and insomnia. At the time of these visits, she was taking both antidepressants and sleeping pills. However, she and her family denied that she had experienced any depressive episodes or had ever been diagnosed with a mood disorder. She had no history of head trauma but had hypertension and diabetes, both of which are cardiovascular risk factors. There was also no history of migraine, a prior TIA, or stroke reported by the patient.
Her family history further revealed that her father had died at 76 years of age after having suffered a stroke and that he had hypertension, diabetes and a history of depression including a suicide attempt. However, her mother is 76 years old and in good health. She has three younger brothers, the oldest of whom is 51 years old and has been diagnosed with cerebellar atrophy. He also has dysarthira and cerebellar ataxia. Those symptoms had gradually developed within the previous 2 years. Her second brother had suffered from depression and had committed suicide 20 years previously. Her youngest brother had no health issues, but his 17-year-old son had been diagnosed with epilepsy. She also has a son and a daughter. Her son suffers from migraine attacks but her daughter is healthy.
When her mental condition was assessed she showed no evidence of delusions or hallucinations, but she did have pressured speech, circumstantiality, labile moods, poor impulse control, and made grandiose plans. She demonstrated no insights into the changes in her personality and behavior. Bedside neuropsychological testing revealed total scores that were within the normal range (K-MMSE 29/30). However, a Montreal Cognitive Assessment test (MOCA-K 25/30) revealed a failure to perform the trail making test (TMT) and copy cube. In the attention subtest, she tapped on the wrong letters and failed to correct this. In the language subtest, she could speak more than 11 words in 60 seconds but the all of the words began with the same sound with a different suffix, for example, like, liked, likely, look, looked, looking. In a delayed recall subtest, she recalled only two words correctly out of five. She was successful with Clock drawing, the Luria’s fist-edge-palm test and the loop test.
Due to a suspected late-onset bipolar disorder with chronic manic features in this case, neuropsychological testing was performed by a clinical psychologist. To evaluate this patient’s comprehensive cognitive function, we performed the following tests: BGT, Clock Drawing Test, Color Trail Test (CTT) 1/2, Korean Auditory Verbal Learning Test (K-AVLT), Stroop Test, Word/Figural Fluency Test, Executive Complex Figure Test, Grooved Pegboard Test, Finger Tapping Test, Hand Dynamometer, MMPI-II, Sentence Completion Test (SCT), Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) and Rorschach Test.
The K-AVLT findings showed that the patient had a normal ability to encode and retrieve verbal information. However her abilities in terms of tracking sequential stimulations, dividing her attention and inhibitory control function were found to be severely impaired, with a poor score in terms of attention and executive function in the CTT tests (<1% percentile). Cognitive productivity was also poor as reflected in impaired word/figure fluency. In the WCST, the patient showed 18 perseverative responses (50% percentile) and 47 non-perseverative responses (<1% percentile). Her potential for perseveration was therefore low, and she showed an impaired efficient sorting tendency. The results of the Rorschach test indicated a strong cognitive rigidity in this patient as she only responded to the same content repetitively. Finally, the results of the MMPI-II showed that scales 1 and 9 were all higher than 65 T, indicating that this patient was complaining of physical pain or discomfort and making efforts to cope with difficulties in her cognitive function.
In conclusion, neuropsychological testing of our current case revealed an intact memory, but impairment in both attention and executive function. Although the patient’s perseveration tendency was not clear, she revealed a high level of cognitive rigidity in the Rorschach test. The results of the neurological examination of this case were unremarkable and other systemic examinations showed no abnormalities. The results of routine laboratory tests including VDRL, HIV antibodies and thyroid function were also unremarkable apart from hyperlipidemia. MRI analysis of the brain was performed and revealed severe leukoencephalopathy. There was a high signal intensity found by T2 weighted images (T2W1) and low signal intensity in the left pons. In fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery (FLAIR) images, a high signal intensity was prominent on the periventricular white matter, both basal ganglia, thalamus, and the external capsule. These magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings are very consistent with a diagnosis of CADASIL. Since the clinical and MRI findings for this patient were highly suggestive of CADASIL, genetic testing for NOTCH3 mutations was performed. As expected, a heterogeneous mutation was detected in this patient that causes an arginine to proline substitution in exon 3 of chromosome 19 p13.2-13.1 (c.224G > C).
During her hospital treatment, her manic symptoms, including a labile mood, talkativeness and impulsivity, partially responded to atypical antipsychotics (quetiapine, 800 mg) and benzodiazepine (bromazepam, 6 mg) treatment. She was also prescribed with amlodipine (novasc), metformin (diabex), and atorvastatin (lipitor) for the management of the vascular risk factors, hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia, respectively. She was able to be discharged after two weeks in hospital. At the time of discharge, she was no longer hostile or aggressive but still showed slight impulsivity and mood instability symptoms. Her initial Montgomery-Asberg Depression Scale (MADRS) and Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) scores were 24 and 37, respectively. Two weeks after treatment, these values were lowered to 17 and 25, respectively. Her Clinical Global Impression-Severity Scale (CGI-S) score was 6 (severely ill) at initial presentation and 4 (moderately ill) at hospital discharge. Her Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) score also slightly improved from 50 to 60 after treatment.