A 56 years old man, with histories of lacunar stroke and gastric ulcer, came to our hospital because of 6 days of melena and 3 days of somnolence, agitation and mood changes. The patient was a farmer and did not take any antiplatelet and antacids drugs. He came to local community hospital for dizzy and melena on June 24th, 2017. Blood examination showed anemia with 73 g/L of hemoglobin. He was treated with proton pump inhibitors. Two days later, he recovered from melena but presented with somnolence. Blood test was reexamined and showed aggravation of anemia with 58 g/L of hemoglobin. He was treated with red cell transfusions and then transferred to our hospital. On admission, vital signs were: blood pressure 96/48 mmHg, pulse 48 beats/min, respirations 12 breaths/min, body temperature 36.8 °C. The neurologic examination revealed somnolence, aphasia, bilateral decreased muscle power in grade 4 and bilateral babinski sign. He presented with agitation when he was awaken. The score of National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 11 points. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed symmetrical calcifications in bilateral basal ganglia, caudate nucleus, thalami, subcortical white matter and cerebellum . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed acute ischemic stroke in bilateral basal ganglia and periventricular regions with hyperintense signal in diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and hypointense signal in apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) . The patient was admitted to neurological department with the diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke.
At hospitalization, possible causes of intracranial calcification were investigated. The level of serum calcium was 2.08 mmol/L (normal range: 2.10–2.55 mmol/L). The level of serum phosphorus, copper, ceruloplasmin, thyroid hormone, parathyroid hormone and enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were normal. Family history revealed that one of his three daughters (34 years old) had also suffered from brain calcification, but without neurological problems . His parents and two brothers also have no neurological problems. His father died of cardiac disease 10 years ago and his mother died of cancer 13 years ago. Mutational analysis was performed with a sample of whole blood from the patient and showed a SLC20A2 gene mutation c.344C > T (p.Thr115Met) in exon 3. Therefore, a diagnosis of PFBC was made.
In order to identify the possible mechanism of ischemic stroke, CT angiography of cervical and cerebral arteries were performed and showed arteriosclerosis . Cerebral microbleeds were not observed in susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) and cerebral veins were normal on magnetic resonance venography (MRV). Sinus rhythm was showed on electrocardiogram. Mural thrombus was not detected in ultrasound cardiogram. We hypothesized that ischemic stroke may be related with hypoperfusion. The level of low density lipoprotein was 2.78 mmol/L at admission. Risuvastatins were given according to the guideline of acute ischemic stroke. Antacids and volume expansion therapy were regularly administrated. Five days after admission, the patient presented with a normal state of consciousness and could speak simple words. However, his memory was not completely recovered. MR perfusion imaging was taken and revealed that there was hypoperfusion in bilateral basal ganglia, prefrontal and temporal lobe . After treatment for 20 days, he discharged with a favorable functional outcome and could carry out daily activities independently. The score of NIHSS was one point (correctly answered one question when he was asked his age and the name of the current month) and modified Rankin Scale score was two points (unable to carry out all pre-stroke activities, such as working as a farmer). However, he still had cognitive impairment with the score of 18 by mini-mental state examination (MMSE). The level of hemoglobin was 90 g/L at discharge.