A 38-year-old man was admitted to the Division of Surgery in February 2006 because of persistent cough and haemoptysis. Bronchoscopic examination, bronchoalveolar lavage, sputum and bronchial aspirate were negative for malignancies. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan disclosed a single expansive cystic mass, 7 cm in diameter, with air fluid level, occupying the lateral segment of the right middle lobe of the lung with compression of the medial segment and of the adjacent segments of the lower lobe. The cystic wall showed intraluminal projections and a sessile nodule 1 cm in diameter .
The patient underwent a middle right lobectomy without complications. The macroscopic examination of the surgical specimen revealed a 7 × 6.5 × 6 cm single cyst, surrounded by haemorragic pulmonary tissue. The cavity contained 10 cc of clear fluid. The outer surface of the cyst was smooth and the inner surface was characterized by small papillary protrusions. Histologically, the cystic wall consisted of vascularized fibrous tissue lined by cuboidal or columnar respiratory epithelium with focal gland-like appearance . Rare smooth muscle bundles and elastic fibers were present. Islets of cartilage were not found. Intraluminal projections of connective tissue were observed . The adjacent pulmonary parenchyma revealed areas of atelectasia and intra-alveolar essudate.
The diagnosis was CCAM, type I, according to the modified Stocker's classification .
The patient was discharged from the hospital one week later with a completely uneventful post operative course. Nine months after surgery the patient was free from symptoms.
CCAM is a relatively rare malformation of the terminal respiratory structures, first reported by Ch'in and Tang in 1949 . The lesion consists of cysts and solid airless tissue, with no cartilage in the wall. It may affect partially or entirely the pulmonary lobes . Many lesions described in the past as congenital cystic disease, bronchiolectasis, and a variety of related entities probably were adenomatoid malformations [,].
CCAMs have been classified, depending on the size and number of the cysts, into three types:
1. Type I (macrocystic type) accounts for 50% to 70% of cases, is characterized by multiple large cysts, (up to 10 cm) or a single dominate often multiloculated cyst, with a pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium, resembling the distal bronchial tree and proximal acinus, with normal alveoli between the cysts. Radiographic analysis may preoperatively suggest the diagnosis, especially when a multicystic pattern is evident. When the cystic lesion is single, the differential diagnosis with the congenital parenchymal cysts and bronchogenic cysts is not possible only on the base of the radiological features;
2. Type II (microcystic type) represents 20% to 40% of cases and shows multiple tiny cystic structures usually much less than 2 cm in diameter. This type can associate with high frequency to other congenital anomalies, and the prognosis is poor;
3. Type III (solid type) represents more than 10% of cases and consists of a bulky firm, solid mass with cysts less than 0.5 cm in diameter, mimicking the terminal bronchioles and the alveolar ducts of the pseudoglandular period[,,]; it is now considered a form of pulmonary hyperplasia. The prognosis is usually poor.
CCAM is most commonly found in the neonatal period and up to 90% of diagnoses are made within the first two years of life [,].
The adult form of CCAM shows a wide radiological expression with extreme difficulty of preoperative diagnosis . Some authors reported very unusual findings like the involvement of an entire lung lobe or the presentation as a single large well defined cyst of more than 5 cm in diameter . The disease may be asymptomatic, diagnosed by means of a routine chest radiograph , may be a surgical chance finding in the study of an extrapulmonary disease or may be revealed by a lung inflammatory process [,]. The histological description lacks in almost all the reported cases in the literature, and the lesion is referred only to Stocker's classification. These previously post-natal and adult CCAM reported cases are enlisted in Table .