A 44-year-old male presented to us with an 8-month history of chronic backache and lower limb paraesthesias. Initially, only symptomatic treatment was given which did not help him and he developed bladder complaints in the form of urgency and poor flow. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of spine was done and multiple disc bulges were identified in the lumbar region, the maximum being at L4-5 level. He was diagnosed to have a cauda equina syndrome and hence, L4-5 micro-discectomy was done. Clean intermittent self catheterization (CISC) was advised for bladder care and active physiotherapy was started. He continued to deteriorate and developed difficulty in walking with increasing stiffness and weakness in legs. He was admitted at our institute and a thorough examination was performed. He had an overall grade 3 spastic paraparesis with poor left foot dorsiflexion (grade 1). The reflexes were depressed and plantars were upgoing bilaterally. The anal tone and the peri-anal sensations were reduced. We reviewed the previous MRI and detected T2 hyperintense signal in the dorsolumbar cord which was missed at the first surgery . The MRI was repeated and it showed progression of the cord signal to higher level and appearance of flow voids on T2-weighted images which enhanced post-gadolinium . Suspecting a vascular pathology, a spinal angiogram was ordered which led to the diagnosis of spinal intradural AVF at L4-5 level which was supplied by the artery of Adamkiewicz (originating from right D9 segmental artery) . The AVF was draining into an ′early filling′ peri-medullary vein leading to appearance of the dilated veins and flow voids on MRI. As the feeder was the artery of Adamkiewicz (D9 level) and the fistula was at was L4-5 level, open surgery was preferred over the endovascular therapy and the patient underwent re-exploration and L4-5 laminectomy. The tortuous and dilated veins were seen on the filum and the fistula was identified and disconnected . Intraoperative angiography confirmed the obliteration of the AVF with non-visualization of the peri-medullary vein . The post-operative course was uneventful and he started making gradual recovery. The CISC was continued and he was discharged with active physiotherapy. The patient continued to improve and started walking independently resuming his active lifestyle (Karnofsky performance scale >90). After 3 months, the post-operative MRI showed complete disappearance of the flow voids and cord signals .