A 25-year-old man consulted a local hospital for disturbed consciousness. His medical and family histories were unremarkable, except for glaucoma during childhood. He had been healthy until an episode of flu-like symptoms that occurred 5 days before admission. He lived alone, and had not been in touch with anybody for days. At the time of admission, he had hypothermia (27.8°C), elevated blood glucose (1049 mg/dl), and ketonuria. Blood gas analysis revealed an acidic pH (6.972), likely due to long-lasting metabolic abnormalities. He was diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis, and intravenous infusions of insulin and fluids were initiated.
The next day, the patient complained of chest pain. Since an ST-segment elevation was detected on the electrocardiograph, acute myocardial infarction was suspected. Therefore, he was transferred to our hospital. Physical findings included blood pressure, 122/64 mmHg; pulse, 95 beats/min; and temperature, 36.6°C. Pancreatic and liver enzymes were elevated. Conversely, the phosphorus level was low (1.0 mmol/L), whereas HbA1c was 6.4%, and C-peptide was undetectable in plasma (Table ). Abdominal computed tomography revealed no abnormalities. Together, the symptoms of elevated blood glucose, near normal HbA1c, ketoacidosis, and low C-peptide level at disease onset were consistent with fulminant type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Electrocardiogram analysis showed ST-segment elevation in II, III, aVf, and V4–6. The cardiac enzymes were elevated. Echocardiography revealed diffuse hypokinesis of the left ventricle wall, and the ejection fraction was 45.3%. Coronary angiography did not detect any stenotic or obstructive lesions in the coronary arteries (Figure ). The chest pain disappeared on the same day. On Day 3 of hospitalization, CMR revealed diffuse gadolinium myocardial enhancement in the subepicardium of the left ventricle, consistent with myocardial edema (Figure ). Dual SPECT imaging using Tl-201 BMIPP and I-123 BMIPP showed that the defects were not restricted to a specific area in the heart (Figure ). These findings supported the diagnosis of acute myocarditis.
The possibility of an infection was investigated using viral antibodies against influenza A and B; echovirus 3, 7, and 9; adenovirus; coxsackie A2, 9, 16, and B1-6; cytomegalovirus; and mumps. The serum antibody titer for coxsackie B4 was 64 at the time of admission, and had decreased to 32 one month later, suggesting a viral involvement in the disease.
The patient was treated by carperitide and phosphorus infusions for mild heart failure and hypophosphatemia, respectively. Echocardiography performed on Day 10 showed no wall motion asynergy, and the ejection fraction recovered to 62.1%. On Day 5, intravenous insulin infusion was stopped (Figure ), and insulin was administered subcutaneously at a scheduled time. The patient learned how to monitor blood glucose and inject insulin. After adjusting the dose of insulin, the patient received a two-week inpatient education program on diabetes mellitus. Then, he was discharged 29 days after admission.