The patient was a 67-year-old man. He was referred to our department with a chief complaint of lower abdominal distention. On arrival at the hospital, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was 0, and physical examination revealed only a palpable elastic hard mass in the left lower abdomen. Vital signs, neurological findings, and blood tests were normal. Contrast-enhanced CT abdominal imaging showed a 16 × 11 × 28 cm long mass occupying the left retroperitoneal and pelvic cavities, extending through the left inguinal canal to the left thigh . CT imaging revealed that the interior of the mass was low-density with a possible fatty component, and no metastasis to other organs or lymph nodes was observed. Based on the imaging findings, a well-differentiated liposarcoma was suspected, and surgical resection was planned.
The operation was started through a midline abdominal incision , and adhesions between the tumor and surrounding tissue were mild. The left psoas major muscle, left external iliac artery, and left femoral nerve were visible through the tumor and could be preserved. The rectus abdominis muscle and inguinal ligament were incised by extending the skin incision to the thigh for ensuring good surgical vision . The tumor was up to the level of the lesser trochanter, but all tumors were resectable. Since it was difficult to remove the tumor in one lump, it was divided into three pieces to preserve the psoas major muscle and femoral nerves . Surgery time was 6 h and 26 min, and blood loss was 2140 mL. The main causes of bleeding were slow hemorrhage from the tumor and ascites/lymphatic fluid. The split surface of the excised specimen was yellowish-white with some grayish-white areas of fullness . The total tumor weight was 1660 g, and the maximal size of the resected tumor was 28 cm. On histopathology, hematoxylin and eosin staining showed mature adipocytes with fibrovascular stroma and scattered atypical cells with pleomorphic swollen nuclei . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for MDM2 and Cdk4 ; a well-differentiated liposarcoma was diagnosed. Pathological grade using the FNCLCC (Fédération Nationale des Centers de Lutte Contre le Cancer) grading system was grade 1, and no obvious positive pathologic margins were observed. There were no postoperative motor or sensory deficits in the lower extremities. Currently, 3 years after surgery, no recurrence has been observed.