A 46-years-old woman presented with history of flank pain, abdominal lump and intermittent hematuria of 6 months duration. She was diagnosed as renal cell carcinoma (RCC) elsewhere and referred. The investigations at our hospital revealed normal hematological and biochemical parameters. The urine microscopy showed deformed RBC. The computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a large irregular well defined heterogeneous lesion occupying the left hypochondrium, lumbar and supra umbilical regions, measuring approximately 16 × 13.6 × 12.1 cm, and showed presence of predominant cystic portions with no obvious calcifications . The mass was contiguously involving the upper half of the kidney. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the mass was suggestive of sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma. The metastatic work-up including bone scan, and CT scan of the thorax were essentially normal. With a provisional diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma surgery was planned. Intra operatively a huge mass was observed in the retroperitoneal region arising from the left kidney and attempts to separate the mass from the kidney were unsuccessful. Hence, left nephrectomy with adrenalectomy was performed with complete excision of the tumor mass. Histopathology showed large encapsulated mass 16 × 17 × 12 cm attached to kidney on its posterior aspect. The tumor showed a predominantly spindle cell pattern consisting of cellular fascicles showing mild atypia, with a diffuse sprinkling of lymphocytes and plasma cells and a few lymphoid aggregates. Only an occasional mitosis was identified in these areas. Hypocellular areas with sparse cells and a collagenous stroma were also present. One area of the tumor showed features of malignant transformation, with sheets of bi and multinucleated and multilobed cells in a background of atypical spindle cells with interspersed inflammatory cells . Mitoses in this area were 3–4/high power field and focal necrosis was present. Immunohistochemisty for desmin, smooth muscle actin (SMA), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cytokeratin (CK), CD68, HMB45 and ALK were performed. Desmin showed diffuse positivity, while SMA, EMA and CD68 showed focal positivity. CK, HMB45 and ALK were negative. A diagnosis of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor with malignant transformation was made.