A 29-year-old G4P3003 at 34 weeks and 4 days of gestation was transferred from an outside hospital to our tertiary care center with left upper quadrant pain and newly diagnosed splenic artery aneurisms. Initial evaluation was with an abdominal ultrasound followed by CT and CT angiogram which showed two SAA of 2.3 cm and 1.9 cm in the hilum .
The nature of the pain has been intermittent and present since her last pregnancy four years ago. However, the pain worsened acutely and persisted requiring her to seek emergent care a day prior to her admission. Her past medical history was significant for abnormal pap smears, history of herpes, recent urinary tract infection that was treated, bilateral renal stones, and iron deficiency anemia. The total timeframe between worsening of the pain prompting the diagnosis of the aneurysm and thereafter labor onset followed by delivery was less than 24 hours.
Family history was significant for maternal autoimmune hepatitis and primary biliary cirrhosis.
On examination, vital signs and physical exam were normal except for tenderness in the left upper quadrant on abdominal exam, but without rebound or guarding. Fetal monitoring showed reactive and reassuring tracings, and tocometry revealed irritability without regular contractions. On admission, preterm labor workup was negative (cervical length 3.5 cm by transvaginal ultrasound, cervix 1 cm dilated, 60% effaced, fetal station -3, and negative fetal fibronectin). Also, laboratory studies were performed including liver enzymes, amylase, and lipase that were within normal.
Regarding management, the care of this patient was approached in a multidisciplinary fashion involving the general obstetrics team, maternal-fetal medicine, vascular surgery, general surgery, trauma surgery, interventional radiology, and the neonatal intensive care team. A contingency plan for exploratory laparotomy, neonatal delivery, and control of the maternal hemorrhage was made with the team in case of a SAA rupture. This entitled that the patient was close to a fully staffed OR suite that has the available surgical instruments required, on-call teams being notified, availability of blood products and cell saver for massive transfusion protocol if needed, and space for neonatal resuscitation. The patient was kept nothing by mouth, was typed and crossed, and had 2 IV access sites. Since the patient was stable upon transfer, different management options were discussed in detail. This included delivery with open splenectomy; however, prematurity risks had to be taken into consideration. Therefore, plan was made to attempt to embolize the SAA and allow the pregnancy to progress, taking into account the risk of splenic necrosis and need for future splenectomy. Antenatal corticosteroids were administered. However, due t4o unforeseen circumstances on day 2 of her admission, the interventional radiology suite was not available for the use of elective procedures. During that night, the tracing became category 2, and contractions were noted on the monitor. The patient's cervix was checked, and she was found to be 3 cm dilated. Preterm labor was diagnosed. Vaginal delivery should be ideally avoided in SAA due to the risk of rupture with Valsalva and increased intra-abdominal pressure.
After a brief discussion with the multidisciplinary teams on-call and obtaining patient consent, a decision was made to proceed with a primary low transverse c-section via Pfannenstiel skin incision followed by laparoscopic splenectomy under general anesthesia. Splenic artery aneurism was considered an indication necessitating the avoidance of the second stage of labor (pushing) due to risk of rupture when repetitive Valsalva maneuvers are necessary. Additionally, a persistent category II tracing at the onset of labor was concerning for the fetus being intolerant of labor per se.
Upon entry into the abdomen, no bleeding was noted. The patient delivered a liveborn male fetus at 33 weeks and 5 days with Apgar scores of 8 and 5 at 1 and 5 min, respectively, and birth weight of 2855 grams. The estimated blood loss for the delivery was 400 cc. A decision was made to close the peritoneum upon abdominal closure to help prevent CO2 escape during the laparoscopy. Once the caesarean incision was closed, the laparoscopic splenectomy was performed with resection of the splenic artery proximal to the aneurysm after mobilizing it. Multiple splenic aneurysms were noted in the distal third of the splenic artery; one of them was approximately 2 cm proximal to the hilum . Estimated blood loss during the laparoscopic procedure was 10 ml. The patient recovered well postoperatively. She was counseled about the risks of infection with asplenia and was given postsplenectomy vaccines (Meningococci, HiB, and Pneumovax). She was also given intravenous iron injection for her iron deficiency anemia. She was discharged home on postoperative day 3.