A 35-year-old man with a diagnosis of primary sigmoid colorectal cancer was admitted to the Second Affiliated Hospital of Army Military Medical University in August 2019. Computed tomography (CT) and high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor mass in the sigmoid colorectal region accompanied by perforation and multiple liver metastases. The patient was in bad condition (karnofsky performance status (KPS) = 70) and complained of moderate abdominal pain with weight loss. He has concomitant anemia (grade 1) and a history of tobacco use for 10 years; no history of alcohol or drug abuse; no family history of colorectal cancer, polyps, inflammatory bowel disease, or other malignancies. Later, the radical resection of rectal cancer (Dixon) was performed in laparoscopy with a simultaneous resection of liver metastasis. Pathological examination confirmed a poor differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma classified as stage IV based on the TNM staging of T4N0M1 (the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging manual, version 8). Immunohistochemistry testing performed on a tumor biopsy sample revealed a pMMR, a negative programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) result, combined positive score (CPS)<1, and a Ki67 proliferative index of 80-90%. Additionally, next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis was used to demonstrate that the tumor was KRAS/BRAF/NRAS wild type. After surgery, he was treated with six cycles of the adjuvant chemotherapy drug, XELOX (oxaliplatin+capecitabine). In March 2020, metastasis in multiple pelvic lymph nodes were diagnosed, including the mesenteric (18×18 mm) and anastomotic (19×13 mm) ones. Afterwards, a treatment with the chemotherapeutic drug, FOLFIRI (5-fluorouracil+irinotecan+leucovorin), in combination with cetuximab was performed for six cycles. In August of the same year, the patient showed lower abdomen pain and the CT exam revealed a further progression of the disease up to the enlargement of two other big lymph nodes (36×42 mm; 34×21 mm). Consequently, the patient was treated with XELOX (oxaliplatin+capecitabine) combined with bevacizumab for 4 cycles. However, the patient’s lower abdominal pain persisted and the efficacy assessment test suggested a further progression in October 2020 . An intensity modulated radiation therapy was used from October 16, 2020, to November 19, 2020. To this regard, the gross target volume (GTV) was used to determine only para-anastomotic lymph nodes, while the planning gross target volume (PGTV) was a 5-mm extension of the GTV visualized in three dimensions. A total radiation dose of 50Gy/25F was delivered to the PGTV . Surprisingly, ten days after the treatment, CT scan analysis revealed not only an enlargement of the radiotherapy lesion (40×50mm), but also of the mesenteric lymph node lesions which were not treated with RT (40×41 mm) . On December 3, 2020, the patient received sintilimab, a PD-1 antibody (Ab) (200 mg on D1, every 3 weeks). After three months, the patient’s lower abdominal pain disappeared and serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels returned within normal ranges with a regression of two target lesions, including the one located in the mesenteric lymph node not treated with radiation . In November 2022 positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showing the remission of all lesions following the treatment . Until November 2022, the patient was continuously treated with sindilizumab and reached a progression free survive (PFS) of more than 23 months since the beginning of the immune monotherapy. The timeline of the treatment plan following the surgery and CEA levels during treatment are showed in , . After 2 years of sindilizumab maintenance therapy, the patient was regularly seen for follow up every 6 months without further antineoplastic treatment and generally in good clinical condition (KPS 100) without the onset of new relevant symptoms. The last CT scans were performed in February 2023, and there was still no sign of tumor progression.