A 68-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with complaints of left upper quadrant pain lasting two months. The patient had comorbidities of hypertension and dyslipidemia. The patient denied any history of weight loss, bruising, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, hematochezia, melena, or recent travel.
Physical examination revealed tenderness in the left upper quadrant, consistent with spleen-tenderness without distention, rebound, guarding, or rigidity. Lymph nodes were non-palpable, presenting no evidence of regional lymphadenopathy. Complete blood count demonstrated leukocytosis, with lymphocyte-predominance, 16.0 %, and elevated monocyte count, 0.9 k/μL and 9.4 %. The patient also presented with an elevated LDH of 215 units/L. All remaining laboratory markers were within normal limits, including CRP at 1.41. The patient tested negative for viral markers of HIV, EBV, HTLV-1, Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C.
Ultrasound abdomen visualized a heterogeneous hypoechoic spleen, measuring 9.8 × 3.8 × 4.8 cm, demonstrating splenomegaly. Three well-circumscribed masses were identified on ultrasound. The first, a 3.6 × 3 × 3 cm in the mid-medical portion. The second, a 3.2 × 2.6 × 2.8 cm in the inferior portion of the spleen. The third, a 1.9 × 1.4 × 1.8 cm in the superior aspect of the spleen. PET-CT Abdomen-Pelvis revealed two hyper-attenuating lesions in the spleen, measuring 4.1 × 2.5 cm and 1.5 × 3.0 cm, consistent with hypermetabolic masses within the spleen (A & B). This constellation of radiological findings provided sufficient clinical indication for definitive Splenectomy with subsequent pathological analysis.
The patient underwent robotically-assisted laparoscopic splenectomy, overall resection of an 18 × 9 cm spleen and accessory spleen with hilum (A & B). Gross examination of the specimen revealed significant splenomegaly, weighing 350 g (A & C). The splenic capsule was significantly distended with multiple subcapsular masses (A & C). Two large masses were excised and sent for pathological immunohistochemical analysis.
Microscopic examination revealed well-delineated multinodular dense infiltrations of atypical lymphoid cells, with angulated rounded vesicular nuclei. Atypical lymphoid tissue was admixed with typical small lymphocytes, inconspicuous germinal centers, and lymphoid-infiltrating red pulp. Pathological findings were consistent with Lymphoma originating from the splenic-parenchyma. Immunohistochemical analysis of atypical lymphoid tissue was positive for surface markers CD20, CD21, and CD79a; negative for CD5, CD10, and CD23. Immunohistochemical gene analysis was positive for BCL6 dim, BCL2, HGAL, and LMO2; negative for MUM1, Cyclin D1, and SOX11. Ki-67 staining analysis identified a high mitotic proliferative index of atypical lymphoid tissue. Pathological and immunohistochemical analysis concluded a final diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), germinal center subtype, with surrounding typical splenic tissue and no evidence of capsular invasion and consequent metastasis.
The patient was discharged on post-operative day two, following vaccinations for Haemophilus, Meningococcal Group B, and Neisseria meningitidis for prophylaxis of capsular organisms, per recommendations for infectious diseases.
Outpatient post-operative visits were unremarkable with surgical scars healing well and no concerns for infection. The patient received an insertion of a central tunneled venous catheter for adjunct chemotherapy three months post-splenectomy. The patient underwent four cycles of R-CHOP adjuvant chemoradiation therapy: localized radiotherapy with Cyclophosphamide, Hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin (Vincristine), Prednisone, and Rituximab. At six months post-splenectomy, the patient demonstrated no signs of cancer recurrence confirmed by the PET scan and is recovering well.