A 64-year-old woman who had never smoked presented with cough 2 years earlier. She had past medical history of asthma, and surgical history of appendectomy. She had no history of drug consumption. There was no family history associated with this disease. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a 10 × 8 mm nodule in the S6 segment of the right lower lobe. In addition, interstitial shadows were found predominantly in the bilateral lung bases (A). A systematic examination for interstitial shadows revealed positive anti-SS-A antibodies and hyposecretion of saliva, leading to the diagnosis of Sjögren's syndrome. Two years later, chest radiography revealed no nodule (B), whereas chest CT showed that the nodule in the right lower lobe had slowly enlarged to 12 × 10 mm (C). Transbronchial lung biopsy was not performed because of the difficult location of the nodule. Tumor markers (CEA, CYFRA, pro-GRP) were not elevated. Cryptococcal antigen was negative. Accumulation of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) was observed in the nodular shadows (D), but no significant accumulation of 18F-FDG in hilar or mediastinal lymph nodes was seen on positron emission tomography (PET)/CT. We suspected primary lung cancer and performed video-assisted thoracoscopic right S6 segmentectomy. A macroimage of the resected specimen showed a solitary nodule (8 × 8 mm) . The nodule was soft to the touch. The lung tissue around the specimen showed fibrosis of the subpleural stroma, focal infiltration of lymphocytes, honeycombing of the glandular epithelium, small cyst formation, and bronchiectasis.
The tumor area showed infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells, and a solitary increase in the number of histiocytes (CD68+) with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and unevenly distributed small nuclei, and fibrotic foci with central vitrification . Immunostaining showed CD68 (+), S-100 (−), κ (+), λ (+), immunoglobulin (Ig) G (+), IgM (weak+), and IgA (−) . Histopathological evaluation of the resected specimen revealed crystal-storing histiocytosis. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7. As of 6 months postoperatively, no recurrence has been identified.