A 70-year-old man with a history of hypertension, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and a carotid endarterectomy was admitted to our emergency department with persisting and progressive angina for two hours. Moreover, he complained about general malaise and decreased exercise tolerance in the week prior to hospital admission. On physical examination, cardiac sounds were normal on auscultation. His blood pressure was 110/60 mm Hg and heart rate was 90 bpm. On admission, serum troponin T was 956 ng/L (normal range [NR] < 14 ng/L), creatine kinase myocardial band (CK-MB) 18 U/L (NR < 25 ng/L), creatine kinase (CK) 132 U/L (NR < 132 ng/L), low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol 3.4 mmol/L, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol 0.8 mmol/L, triglyceride 0.75 mmol/L, and C reactive protein 150 mg/L (NR < 5 mg/L). His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinustachycardia (118/min) with ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, aVF and V5–6 and ST-segment depression in leads V1-V2. Coronary angiography was performed within one hour of hospital admission and revealed single-vessel coronary artery disease and the patient underwent a percutaneous coronary intervention of the circumflex coronary with placement of a drug-eluting stent. After the procedure, a Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) grade 2 flow was achieved in the AMI culprit coronary artery. Peri-procedural hypotension was treated with infusion of 2 l of 0.9% sodium chloride and dobutamine infusion. Postprocedural transthoracic echocardiography showed a moderate left ventricular function with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40–45% and trivial mitral and tricuspid regurgitation.
Fifty days after PCI the patient experienced progressive fatigue and chest pain with haemodynamic instability. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a covered left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) of the lateral wall and extensive pericardial fluid and inflow obstruction. The free wall rupture was in close proximity to the anterolateral papillary muscle (ALPM), but did not lead to significant mitral regurgitation. The transthoracic echocardiographic images are shown in Fig. .
The patient was brought to the operation room for emergent repair of the rupture. The surgical technique is described and shown in Fig. . The patient was weaned of cardiopulmonary bypass through the use of mild doses of inotropes. Transesophageal echocardiography showed a good result without significant mitral regurgitation. By carefully avoiding damage to the ALPM during the procedure we were able to avoid additional mitral valve repair or replacement.
Postoperative recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged 12 days after the operation. More than a year later, the patient did not experience any subsequent cardiac events and his functional status was similar to the level before the episode of myocardial infarction and rupture.