A 62-year-old woman presented to medical care (The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China) due to repeated purulence and decreased hearing of right ear for 30 years, and aggravated for 1 year. The accidentally insect flew into the right ear, and then purulence and decreased hearing developed and sustained for 30 years. The patient had not been treated with antibiotics for ear infection before. Besides, she had a history of hyperlipidemia and treated with traditional Chinese Medicine.
Upon medical checkup, she had a tympanic temperature of 36.5 °C, blood pressure of 129/87 mmHg, pulse rate of 72/min and respiratory rate of 19/min. Computed tomography of mastoid process revealed chronic mastoiditis and tympanic membrane perforation of right side. Aural endoscopy showed that the left external auditory canal unobstructed and the tympanic membrane intact with local calcified plaques; white aerial hyphae can be seen in the right external auditory canal, with large perforation in pars tensa of tympanic membrane, and drum room clean . Laboratory evaluation revealed leukocyte count of 6810/mm3 with 68.9% neutrophils and 23.7% band forms, total cholesterol 7.2 mmol/L (normal range, 3.1–5.7 mmol/L), high-density lipoprotein 2.02 mmol/L (normal range, 1.09–1.63 mmol/L), lipoprotein(a) 860 mg/L (normal range, 60-300 mg/L).
On day 4, the patient underwent microscope supporting right ear tympanoplasty, ossicular chain release and aticoantrotomy under general anesthesia. Empiric antibiotic treatment with Cefuroxime sodium (1.5 g every day) were started and lasted 1 day for prevention of postoperative infection. Ear exudate intraoperative was collected and the Gram stain of the colonies demonstrated Gram-positive branched filamentous bacilli, with weak acid fast staining negative . The organism appeared grayish white, dry, wrinkled small colonies biting agar after 24 h incubation on blood agar, beta hemolysis obvious after 48 h incubation. The isolate exhibited distinctive powder or velvet colonies that developed characteristic white aerial hyphae after 72 h of aerobic growth . To confirm the identity of the isolate, we performed molecular identification using primer sets 16S-forward (5′AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG3′) and 16S-reverse (5′GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT3′) by polymerase chain reaction amplification of the 16S rRNA gene. The sequence analysis of 1,450 bp nucleotide were queried against the GenBank 16S rRNA gene database and the best match returned was the Streptomyces cacaoi (GenBank accession number AB184115), with 99.2% similarity.
Due to the limitations of experimental conditions, the antibiotic susceptibility of the Streptomyces cacaoi strain was mostly determined by the Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method on Mueller-Hinton agar plates. Although there are no categorical interpretative criteria for antimicrobial susceptibility testing data for Streptomyces cacaoi, the isolate inhibition zone (millimeter) for antimicrobials demonstrated: minocycline 20 mm, gentamicin 37 mm, clindamycin 6 mm, erythromycin 6 mm, sulphamethoxazole/trimethoprim 6 mm, amikacin 32 mm, levofloxacin 6 mm, moxifloxacin 20 mm, ciprofloxacin 12 mm, linezolid 50 mm, cefotaxime 6 mm, ceftriaxone 6 mm, cefepime 6 mm. Moreover MIC testing indicated resistance to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (> 256 μg/ml), meropenem(> 32 μg/ml), and intermediate resistance observed to imipenem (6 μg/ml) with the employ of Etest (Biomerieux SA, Marcy, France).
With external application of ofloxacin ear drops sustained for 2 weeks after surgery, the patient returned for pure tone audiometry and ear endoscopy and recovered in good condition. One month later she accepted cleaning of the right external auditory canal which was packed with ear dressing under the aural endoscope and was delighted to see the intact tympanic membrane after operation .