A 27-year-old male with recently diagnosed severe CoA was referred to us with history of refractory hypertension and shortness of breath (NYHA II) of three years duration. There was no history of trauma or surgery. Also, there was no claudication. On physical examination, the blood pressure in the right upper limb was 200/120 mm Hg. A radio-femoral delay was apparent and a pressure gradient of 90 mm Hg was noted between the upper and lower extremities. The pulsations in the lower limbs were faint. Routine blood chemistry and urine analysis was un-remarkable. A chest x-ray delineated rib notching. A 2-D echocardiogram revealed a bicuspid aortic valve with mild stenosis and left ventricular hypertrophy with mild impairment. A contrast CT angiogram showed a severe CoA of the descending aorta at the isthmus involving a 4 cm long segment with merely 1–2 mm lumen and a gradient of 90 mm Hg with a diastolic runoff.
A decision was made to proceed with a transcatheter stent implantation at the Coarctation/atretic aortic segment under general anaesthesia. A 14 F sheath was placed in the right femoral artery via a surgical cut down. An initial angiogram revealed a blind end at the level of the coarctation .
The initial management plan was to approach via right axillary artery with a “kissing technique” to perforate the atretic segment. However, while manipulating a straight Terumo™ wire through the distal part of the aorta, incidentally the wire went through the membranous atretic lumen of the aorta. The diameter of atretic aortic lumen was 1.2 mm .The subsequent angiogram however confirmed the absence of any resultant vascular complication. Therefore, we proceeded further.
A 45 mm PTFE covered Cheatham-Platinum stent was positioned successfully at the coarctation through a 14 F Mullins sheath. A 16 mm X 4 cm Z-Med™ balloon was used to successfully inflate the stent distal to the left subclavian origin . Post implantation gradient was noted to be about 3 mm Hg. The patient went on to make an uneventful recovery and was discharged home. At 1-year follow up, an aortogram revealed good flow in the involved segment without any significant gradient. At 2-year follow up, an echocardiographic evidence of high gradient across the aortic valve (60 mm Hg) and progressive dyspnea on exertion prompted us to perform a cardiac catheterization. A narrowing of the stent was found at the middle segment with a measured pull back gradient of 10 mm Hg across it. We proceeded to re-dilate the stent successfully . The aortic valve gradient was 30 mm Hg. Currently, the patient is asymptomatic and receiving anti-hypertensive medications in addition to aspirin and ACE-inhibitor.