In January 2014, a Caucasian 19-year-old man was admitted to the Department of Cardio-Thoracic and Respiratory Sciences at the Second University of Naples with severe respiratory failure secondary to a bilateral pneumonia.
Our patient reported 15 days of fever (with a maximum of temperature 40 °C) associated with productive cough; no improvement of symptoms with oral antibiotic therapy was achieved at home. On admission, our patient presented with a high fever of 40 °C, malaise, and dyspnea (Borg scale 2). Despite mild dyspnea, arterial blood gases (ABGs) on admission showed severe hypoxic respiratory failure with a partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) of 49 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) of 45 mmHg, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 90% on fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 21%.
His family history revealed no respiratory disorders while his clinical history revealed frequent episodes of bronchitis and wheezing treated by a general practitioner with inhalers and antibiotics and never investigated by a pulmonologist.
A clinical examination exhibited diffuse rhonchi and crackles throughout both lung fields, digital clubbing, hypotonia with generalized muscular hypotrophy, and small body size for his age; his body mass index (BMI) on admission was 16.
Spirometry indicated the presence of a severe obstructive ventilatory defect.
A chest X-ray (CXR) exhibited extensive, undefined micronodular opacities and also mild reticular lines in the middle and lower thoracic fields .
Blood examinations showed normochromic normocytic anemia (Hgb (haemoglobin) 10,6 g/dL), marked leukocytosis (31.18*103u/L), and hypergammaglobulinemia (IgG (immunoglobulin G) 2136 mg/dL).
AH1N1 virus infection was laboratory confirmed on pharyngeal swab by using a real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay (rapid diagnostic test for H1N1 influenza virus (FAST SET) H1N1v Arrow Diagnostic srl Genova, Italy).
Concurrent Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumanii complex infection was detected on sputum microbial examination; antibiotic therapy was administered as follows: piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5gr intravenously three times a day and ciprofloxacin 400 mg intravenously twice a day in addition to oseltamivir orally . Our patient was placed in isolation in a negative pressure room until pharyngeal swabs for AH1N1 were clear.
Despite pharmacological therapy and oxygen support, his clinical state remained poor. His PO2 value was 60 mmHg and PCO2 44 mmHg on oxygen via a 40% venturi mask.
A high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan identified multiple cylindrical bronchiectasis and bronchiolectasis in both lungs as well as mucous plugging and centrilobular nodules. Also evident in some areas were “tree-in-bud opacities”, an expression of acute small airways disease. An incidental finding was adipose infiltration of the pancreas .
At this stage clinical and radiological findings raised suspicion of CF; therefore, our patient underwent a sweat test, which exhibited clear positive values (a Na+ of 103 mEq/L and Cl- 94 mEq/L) and a molecular test with deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extraction and analysis of CFTR gene mutations confirming disease (genotype DeltaF508/DeltaF508).
Our patient was then transferred to the Adult Cystic Fibrosis Department of Federico II Hospital, University of Naples; a clinical examination showed the presence of dyspnea (Borg scale 3), fever (a temperature of 39 °C), asthenia, cachectic appearance, immobilization syndrome, presence of diffuse rhonchi, and crackles throughout both lung fields as well as a sacral pressure sore (stage 1).
ABGs on oxygen therapy with a nasal cannula (4 L/min) showed values of PCO2 of 34.4 mmHg and PO2 of 58.1 mmHg.
Blood examinations confirmed anemia (hemoglobin 8.8 g/dL), marked leukocytosis 20,000/L, hypergammaglobulinemia and C- reactive protein (PCR) of 5.14 mg/dL; persistence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumanni complex was showed on sputum. Parenteral antibiotic therapy was continued as follows: meropenem 2 g intravenously three times a day, ceftazidime 3 g intravenously three times a day, colistin 2,000,000 intravenously three times a day. Further therapy included acetylcysteine intravenously, twice a day, electrolytic 0.9% solution, intravenously, betamethasone 1.5 mg, intravenously, twice a day.
A program of drainage physiotherapy was started using ELTGOL (slow expiration with glottis opened in lateral posture, French: Expiration Lente Totale Glotte Ouverte en décubitus Latéral), positive expiratory pressure (PEP) mask, Acapella and autogenous drainage twice a day. To improve his bronchial hygiene and physiotherapy, nebulized hypertonic saline 3% solution was administered.
An air mattress was used to aid healing of a sacral pressure sore and low molecular weight heparin was administered while our patient was immobile. Parenteral ferrous sulfate was prescribed to treat anemia. Dietary assessments were carried out during admission to optimize nutritional intake.
His pancreatic insufficiency was treated with pancreolipase and the diabetes was well controlled with rapid-acting insulin three times daily and long-acting insulin therapy overnight.
During the 3 months’ admission, our patient demonstrated significant improvement in his respiratory symptoms; normalization of arterial blood gas values, good glycemic control, satisfactory weight gain (BMI 18), resolution of his sacral pressure sore, and improvement in his energy levels leading to remobilization .
Our patient was discharged to attend rehabilitative therapy as an outpatient .