A 35-year-old male presented to ophthalmology emergency suffering with pain, loss of
vision, and bleeding from his left eye for 48 hr after experiencing a road traffic
accident whilst under the influence of alcohol. On presentation, the patient was
calm, conscious, co-operative, and oriented to time, place, and person. His
neurological examination was within normal limits. On ophthalmic examination, the
right eye appeared normal with a visual acuity of 6/6. The left upper and lower
eyelids were edematous with subcutaneous hematoma and complete blepharoptosis.
Crepitus was felt on the palpating eyelids. On retracting the eyelids with a
Desmarres retractor, the left eyeball was not visible, and the patient was not able
to perceive light. The left temporal region appeared filled with a soft, palpable
globular structure situated beneath the temporalis muscle.
A non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) of the head and orbits was requested. The
NCCT axial images revealed a comminuted and displaced fracture of the medial and
lateral orbital walls [Figure 1a]. The coronal section also revealed a displaced
tripod fracture of the left zygomatic bone and orbital floor [Figure 1b]. The intact
left eyeball was seen below the temporalis muscle without any optic nerve or
extraocular muscle attachment [Figure 1c]. The virtual reality reconstruction
highlighted a contributory supero-temporal defect in the bony orbit, which appeared
large enough to accommodate the intact eyeball [Figure 1d].
After receiving informed consent, the removal of the eyeball from the sub-temporalis
space was performed. Intraoperatively, the eyeball was found to be hypotonus with a
surrounding purulent foul-smelling discharge. The outer scleral surface was necrosed
and the cornea was opaque. No optic nerve or muscle stump was identified. The
specimen was sent for histopathological and microbiological examination. An open
reduction internal fixation surgery using mini-plates was performed for the tripod
fracture repair and reconstruction of the bony orbital rim. In order to achieve the
best possible cosmetic rehabilitation, a second-stage orbital volume restoration
using a dense porous polyethylene spherical implant was planned, to be followed by a
customized ocular prosthesis.