A 70-year-old Japanese female complaining of dyspnea on exertion was admitted to our hospital after chest X-ray showed left pleural effusion. Her medical history included hypertension, dyslipidemia, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, cerebral infarction, and left breast cancer. Her hypertension, dyslipidemia, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation were well managed by medication, and she underwent total left mastectomy and remnant gauze removal surgery 33 and 13 years ago, respectively. She was a nonsmoker with no history of autoimmune diseases, multiple myeloma, tuberculosis, or exposure to asbestos. Her family history revealed that her father had liver cirrhosis, and her mother had been diagnosed with lung cancer. There was no family history of autoimmune disease or tuberculosis.
On admission, she was lucid, with heart rate of 74 beats/minute, blood pressure of 138/68 mmHg, peripheral oxygen saturation of 96%, and body temperature of 35.8 °C. Heart sounds were normal but with decreased breath sounds in the left lung field. No spontaneous pain or tenderness was present in the chest. Her abdomen was flat and soft, with no abdominal tenderness or bowel sounds. No pitting edema was observed in either her forearms or legs; however, bilateral submandibular gland enlargement was observed. She had no motor or sensory deficits in her extremities and no arthralgia or morning stiffness associated with rheumatoid arthritis.
Inflammatory findings such as C reactive protein (CRP) and tumour makers were within the normal range (normal CRP, < 0.3 mg/dL). Autoantibodies were serologically negative. Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) was 2001 mg/dL including 637 mg/dL for IgG4 (normal IgG 870–1700 mg/dL, normal IgG4 4–108 mg/dL). Chest X-ray and CT showed left pleural effusion without abnormal lung shadow and no pleural thickening . We performed pleural puncture and drained 1200 mL of pleural fluid. Pleural puncture revealed lymphocytes were dominant and adenosine deaminase (ADA) was high, but Mycobacterium tuberculosis was not detected (normal ADA 8.6–20.5 U/L). Elevated IgG and IgG4 levels were observed in the pleural effusion (IgG 1756 mg/dL; IgG4 684 mg/dL). Class III cells were identified from the pleural effusion, suggesting the possibility of breast cancer dissemination. Mycobacterium cultures for sputum, pleural fluid, and pleural biopsy samples were negative.
The results of pleural puncture suggested tuberculous pleuritis, pleuritis due to autoimmune disease, or carcinomatous pleuritis, but a definitive diagnosis could not be made. Thus, we performed thoracoscopic pleural biopsy. Under thoracoscopy, no obvious lesions, pleural thickening, nodules, or pleural-pulmonary adhesions were found for the left pleura. Although the pleura appeared normal, we randomly collected seven specimens at three locations .
Pathological examination revealed membranous tissue with superficial proliferation in the reactive mesothelium. We confirmed plasmacytoid, lymphocyte-dominated inflammatory cell infiltration. The formation of reactive lymphatic follicles was also present. Polymerase chain reaction for mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB-PCR) was negative, and no granulomas were found in the pleural specimens. There were no malignant epithelial lesions and immunostaining showed no deviation in IgG-k or IgG-λ chains. Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small Rino Nucleic Acid (RNA) and Congo red stain were also negative. IgG4-positive cells were 102/high power field (HPF), and the percentage of IgG4 positive/IgG positive cells was 41.4%, suggesting pleuritis associated IgG4-related disease .
We then performed 2-deoxy-2-(18F]-fluoro-d-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT for systemic retrieval analysis. FDG PET-CT showed FDG accumulation within the bilateral submandibular glands of the left pleura. Subsequently, under ultrasound guidance, we collected biopsy samples from the right side of the submandibular gland. An infiltration of plasmacytes and lymphocytes around the adeno-atrial tissue was present; however, no malignant cells or granulomas were noted. Immunostaining confirmed IgG4-positive cells were 96/HPF and the percentage of IgG4 positive/IgG positive cells was 55.2%, confirming pleuritis-associated IgG4-related disease.
We have started treatment with prednisolone 30 mg/day because of increased pleural effusion after discharge from the hospital. The patient was followed for 10 months. The dose was reduced every month from 30 to 20 mg/day to 15 mg/day to 12.5 mg/day to 10 mg/day. Eventually, the dose was reduced to 7.5 mg/day 6 months after the start of treatment, and now the dose was continued at 7.5 mg/day. Since the prednisolone dose was reduced, the patient has progressed without relapse of pleuritis and submandibular gland swelling. Although some side effects of prednisolone such as lipid abnormalities and worsening of diabetes were observed, the treatment was successful without major side effects.