A 34-year-old male presented as a trauma after he was assaulted with an ice pick. On presentation, he was an American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) score C; the motor exam of the lower extremities demonstrated full strength in the right leg and weakness in the left leg; based on the MRC scale, the patient was 2/5 in the proximal and 3/5 in the distal muscle groups. His bowel and bladder function and sensation to light touch and pinprick remained intact. There was a small skin puncture site slightly asymmetric to the right in the lower thoracic spine that was identified as the entry point. A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated an 8 cm hyperdense foreign body, consistent with an ice pick fragment, entering the right T10 lamina with an upward and medial trajectory . The foreign body then traversed the spinal canal and thoracic spinal cord, penetrated the T9 thoracic vertebral, entered the left chest cavity, and perforated the descending thoracic aorta .
Given the patient’s neurologic status and concern for worsening vascular injury, a decision was made to take the patient to the operating room to repair the breach in the aorta and remove the retained ice pick. A multidisciplinary team consisting of neurosurgery, vascular surgery, and cardiothoracic surgery was formed, and the treatment plan consisted of endovascular repair of the aortic injury and removal of the ice pick from the aorta. The patient was positioned in a “lazy” left lateral decubitus position to allow access to the groins and the back. Although the foreign body was eccentric to the right, placing the position on the left would allow the cardiothoracic surgeons access to the aorta, in the event an endovascular solution was unsuccessful. Vascular surgery first gained bilateral access to the common femoral arteries under ultrasound guidance. A thoracic pigtail catheter was placed from the right side to image the descending thoracic aorta. A 12-French sheath was placed in the left common femoral artery in preparation for occlusion of the thoracic aorta with a Coda balloon if the patient became hemodynamically unstable. The aorta was measured and sized using the previous CT of the chest and a Cook TX2 28 × 80 mm graft was deemed appropriate for the repair of the aorta. First, an aortogram was performed via the pigtail catheter that showed no active extravasation of contrast from the entry site. The endograft was then advanced from the left side and positioned at T9. Once the endograft was in place, neurosurgery began exposing the foreign body. A paramedian incision that incorporated the entry site was made and the tract of the foreign body was followed to the spinous process of T10. A subperiosteal dissection was done and the foreign body was localized at its entry point in to the lamina medial to the spinous process. A circumferential exposure required drilling of the surrounding bone structures to optimize access to the foreign body. The distal end of the ice pick was then removed with a large thoracic sternal needle driver . As the foreign body was removed, the vascular surgery team deployed the thoracic stent graft. A completion angiogram of the descending thoracic aorta was performed which showed no evidence of extravasation or endoleak.
After securing the aortic injury, we examined the entry point of the ice pick. CSF was leaking posteriorly through the lamina with Valsalva maneuvers. A fat graft and fibrin sealant were placed over the defect. Special care was taken to minimize the dead space during the closure of the muscle and fascial layers. A lumbar drain was placed at the L4/L5 interspace with caution not to engage the level of the spinal cord injury with the catheter. A chest tube was placed by CT surgery to address the hemothorax; however, the chest tube was purposefully left closed for a few hours before the drainage was started to avoid creating an anterior CSF fistula. The patient was extubated on postoperative day 1, with improvement of his neurological examination (4/5 in all muscle groups of the left lower extremity). The lumbar drain was clamped 48 hours postoperatively and was removed after verifying that there was no leak from the incision site posteriorly. The patient had an uncomplicated hospital stay and was discharged on postoperative day 6 with a normal motor exam except for the left extensor hallucis longus and dorsiflexion at 5-/5.