A 64-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with complaints of progressive difficulty in swallowing.
The patient’s symptoms started 2 mo prior, with recurrent episodes of difficulty in swallowing. He could ingest fluids with ease, but semi-liquid foods only with difficulty. He also reported feeling fatigued.
There was no remarkable medical history. He had a history of smoking for 20 years, but no history of alcohol or drug consumption.
The patient had a disease-free personal and family history.
The patient was emaciated and had a body mass index of 19.88 kg/m2. There were no mental status changes, cerebellar symptoms, or abnormal eye movements. No clinical ophthalmoplegia or encephalopathy was detected. The other items of the physical examination were normal.
Blood biochemistry revealed mild hypoproteinemia (36 g/L). The results of routine blood and urine tests and arterial blood gas analysis were normal.
An esophagogastroscopy revealed a significant esophageal tumor located 26-33 cm from the upper incisors, and biopsy results indicated squamous cell carcinoma. Chest contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed thickening of the middle and lower esophageal wall with luminal stenosis. The abdominal CT findings were unremarkable. As per the eighth edition of the Union for International Cancer Control staging, the final diagnosis was locally advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, clinical stage cT3N2M0 (stage IIIB).
The patient refused surgery or chemotherapy. In order to alleviate dysphagia due to malignant esophageal stenosis, he received 60 Gy of local radiotherapy in 30 fractions without concurrent chemotherapy. Repeated vomiting and dorsalgia occurred during radiotherapy, without diarrhea. A parenteral nutritional supplement including high glucose but no thiamine was administered. On day 8 of radiotherapy, the dysphagia status was markedly improved. From day 10 of radiotherapy, the patient gradually displayed apathy, disorientation, and passivity; was disinterested in his surroundings; and slept abundantly. On neurological examination, he was minimally responsive to verbal and painful stimuli, uncooperative for the finger-to-nose examination, had a slow pupillary response to light, and a Glasgow coma scale score of 10. This was followed by the onset of lethargy on day 12 of radiotherapy. An emergency brain CT scan performed immediately was normal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral symmetrical hyperintensities in the dorsal thalamus, the periventricular region of the third ventricle, and around the cerebral aqueduct as seen on T2-weighted imaging, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) .