The patient, a 26-year-old Caucasian woman, presented to our hematology department after a routine laboratory investigation revealed normocytic anemia with increased myeloid precursor cells, including 5 % blasts. At that time, the patient had no other clinical symptoms aside from a persisting open wound on her lower leg, which was the reason for conducting the first laboratory tests. A bone marrow examination was performed to identify the cause of her anemia. Aspiration of bone marrow was invariably impossible throughout the treatment because of severe myelofibrosis. Therefore, only bone marrow core biopsies were available, which showed a highly hypercellular marrow with an excess of myeloid precursor cells (5 % CD34+ and 17 % CD117+). There were signs of dysplasia in all cell lines. Furthermore, increased reticulin was seen corresponding to myelofibrosis grade 3. Molecular testing revealed a 47,XX+8 karyogram with a weakly detectable JAK2 V617F mutation. A diagnosis of myeloproliferative neoplasia (MPN) with aspects of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) was made. On the basis of a high Cervantes score , an up-front hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) was planned, but then postponed because of liver enzyme abnormalities. Analysis revealed only hepatosplenomegaly that was considered secondary to extramedullary hematopoiesis at that time.
Six months later, a follow-up bone marrow examination showed an unexpected finding: Approximately 25 % of the marrow was occupied with clusters of spindle-shaped mast cells . Immunophenotyping was not feasible, because bone marrow aspiration was unsuccessful; however, the c-KIT D816V mutation was detectable, and the patient’s serum tryptase level was elevated (194 μg/L). Thus, the diagnosis was shifted to SM-AHNMD. Simultaneously, the patient developed dyspnea, coughing, fatigue, and diffuse abdominal pain. Like most patients with aggressive SM, she had no mast cell mediator-related symptoms such as pruritus, flushing, or diarrhea. The symptoms had an insidious onset and were gradually progressive with additional fever and weight loss, eventually necessitating admission to the hematology ward. She initially had no hypoxemia. Subsequently, computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a diffuse reticular aspect with areas of ground-glass appearance and widening of interlobular septa . The patient had mild restriction with a total lung capacity (TLC) of 3.76 L (77 % of predicted), a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 2.97 L (81 % of predicted), and an impaired diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 62 % of predicted with a corrected diffusion capacity for alveolar volume (TL/VA) of 86 %. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) of the right upper and middle lobes was performed to rule out infectious diseases, mainly Pneumocystis jirovecii. Again unexpectedly, mast cells were identified by morphological examination of BAL fluid. Furthermore, neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes, small lymphocytes, and alveolar macrophages were seen. Subsequent immunophenotyping revealed that 8 % of the cells had a phenotype matching neoplastic mast cells (CD117+/CD34−/HLA-DR−/CD2−/CD25+). No other monoclonal cell population was found. Immunophenotyping of peripheral blood showed that merely 0.3 % had a mast cell phenotype, ruling out contamination of the BAL by blood. A lung biopsy was denied by the patient, but the BAL was considered enough evidence for the interstitial pulmonary disease being directly related to mastocytosis.
The patient had SM-AHNMD with pulmonary involvement, hepatosplenomegaly, skeletal lesions, and lymphadenopathy, with associated MPN/MDS. Concurrent with the aforementioned clinical admission because of worsening pulmonary symptoms, it was noted that the peripheral myeloblasts had increased to 19 %, warranting myeloablative chemotherapy. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group status of the patient was 2 at that time. She was treated with high-dose cytarabine and idarubicin in cycle 1, and high-dose cytarabine combined with amsacrine in cycle 2. Complete remission of the MDS was achieved after cycle 2, with no blasts identifiable in a follow-up bone marrow examination. On the basis of knowing that conventional myeloablative chemotherapy is not effective for SM, prednisolone 1 mg/kg was added from the start of the first remission induction cycle. This resulted in short improvement of the pulmonary symptoms and a decrease of the serum tryptase level to 46.8 μg/L. However, repeated CT scans showed progressive disease, which was reflected by pulmonary function testing, with a FVC of 2.36 L (65 %), a forced expiratory volume in 1 second of 1.92 L (61 %), and a DLCO of 58 % of predicted. Moreover, tapering of corticosteroids from 60 to 40 mg/day resulted in quick recurrence of pulmonary symptoms. Therefore, dasatinib was started, but this caused unacceptable side effects (headache and anorexia). Moreover, a rise in blast count was seen 2 months after achievement of complete remission, with a blast count of 20 % in bone marrow. Intensive myeloablative chemotherapy was not considered feasible at that time, owing to the patient’s pulmonary disease with a TLC of 2.86 L (58 %), an FVC of 1.78 L (49 %), a DLCO of 26 %, and a TL/VA of 52 %. In a last effort, cladribine was given to palliatively treat the patient’s mastocytosis. Unfortunately, shortly after the first cycle of cladribine, the patient died as a result of severe neutropenic sepsis with mucositis. Her death occurred 5 months after the discovery of both the presence of SM and the pulmonary interstitial disease.