A 16-year-old neutered female Korat cat presented with vomiting, mild hypercalcaemia and mild azotaemia. Physical examination revealed two easily movable masses on the ventral cervical neck, with one on each side of the trachea in the region of the thyroid glands . The right mass measured approximately 2 × 1 cm and the left one 1 × 1 cm.
Complete blood count results were within the reference intervals (RIs). Serum biochemical analysis revealed mild hypercalcaemia (total calcium 3.17 mmol/l [RI 2.2–3.0 mmol/l] and ionised calcium [iCa] 1.57 mmol/l [RI 1.15–1.40 mmol/l]), moderate hypophosphataemia (0.69 mmol/l; RI 1.3–2.1 mmol/l), mild azotaemia (creatinine 183 µmol/l; RI <170 µmol/l) and mild hyperglycaemia (7.9 mmol/l; RI 3.5–5.7 mmol/l). Serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentration was markedly increased (42.0 pg/ml; RI 7–26 pg/ml). PTH-related peptide (PTHrP) (<0.50 pmol/l; <0.8 pmol/l) and serum total thyroxine (T4; 20 nmol/l [RI 10–60 nmol/l]) concentrations were within the RI. Urinalysis revealed a mildly decreased urine specific gravity (USG) of 1.033 (RI >1.035).
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed slightly decreased size and mildly increased cortical echogenicity of both kidneys. Cervical ultrasonography revealed a well-defined, mildly heterogeneous soft tissue mass, measuring 18 mm × 9 mm, within the right thyroid gland, which measured 23 mm × 10 mm. The mass contained multiple cysts with anechoic content, measuring up to 4 mm × 6 mm . Normal thyroid tissue was identified at the caudal pole of the mass. The left thyroid gland, measuring 18 mm × 7 mm, contained a single large cyst with anechoic content, measuring 9 mm × 6 mm. Normal thyroid tissue was identified at the cranial and caudal poles of the cyst .
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology of the right-sided mass revealed clusters of follicular epithelial cells with round, centrally placed nuclei and pale basophilic cytoplasm. The cells formed acinar-like structures surrounding eosinophilic colloid. Very mild anisokaryosis and anisocytosis were observed. These findings were consistent with neuroendocrine – most likely thyroid – hyperplasia or adenoma.
Cystic fluid was aspirated bilaterally under ultrasonographic guidance for the analysis of PTH concentration and was found to be clear and watery. A sample volume of 0.1–0.2 ml was yielded from both sides and diluted to the required minimum sample volume of 0.4 ml with sterile saline. Results showed the PTH concentration in the cystic fluid to exceed that in the serum (42.0 pg/ml; RI 7–26 pg/ml) manyfold (right cervical mass 12,081 pg/ml, left cervical mass 5199 pg/ml), confirming both masses to be functional and of parathyroid origin. CT of the cervical region and the thorax revealed no signs of metastatic disease or invasion of vital anatomical structures by the masses. While waiting for the test results, the patient was treated symptomatically with a renal diet, maropitant (1.7 mg/kg PO q24h) to reduce vomiting and half a teaspoon of psyllium mixed with wet food (q12h) in an attempt to reduce the hypercalcaemia. After the final diagnosis had been reached, surgery was pursued.
The patient was premedicated with levomethadone (0.2 mg/kg IV) and midazolam (0.2 mg/kg IV). Anaesthesia was induced with propofol (4 mg/kg IV). Following endotracheal intubation, anaesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane and a constant rate infusion of fentanyl (3–10 μg/kg/h). At surgery, performed using a ventral midline approach to the thyroid area, no normal thyroid or parathyroid tissue was identified on the right side. Instead, a cystic mass was discovered and resected . The tissue at the site of the left thyroid gland was partially cystic and no normal parathyroid tissue was identified. The cystic tissue was resected and normal-looking thyroid tissue measuring 3–5 mm at the cranial and 2 mm at the caudal poles of the resection site was identified and preserved. Postoperative treatment during the 28 h hospitalisation period consisted of intravenous fluid therapy with Ringer’s acetate solution, pain management with levomethadone (0.1–0.2 mg/kg IV q4h), a fentanyl patch (12 μg/h) and maropitant (1 mg/kg IV q24h).
The cat recovered well. iCa concentration was re-evaluated every 4 h for the first 28 h, then once daily for 6 days and then once a week for the first month postoperatively. It reached its lowest point 19 days after the surgery (0.90 mmol/l; RI 1.15–1.40 mmol/l) and returned to the RI (1.17 mmol/l; RI 1.15–1.40 mmol/l) 25 days after surgery. No clinical signs of hypocalcaemia occurred at any point. Preoperative serum T4 concentration was 20 nmol/l (RI 10–60 nmol/l) and remained within the RI throughout the postoperative period. It reached its lowest point (12 nmol/l; RI 10–60 nmol/l) 5 days postoperatively. At this point, serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) concentration was also measured using the canine TSH assay (cTSH) and found to be increased (1.78 ng/ml; RI <0.03–0.15 ng/ml). Five days later, the serum T4 concentration had increased to 13 nmol/l (RI 10–60 nmol/l) and it finally stabilised at 15 nmol/l. No clinical signs of hypothyroidism occurred at any point. Serum creatinine and phosphate concentration were also monitored postoperatively. Serum creatinine concentration (183 µmol/l; RI <170 µmol/l) was found to remain at the preoperative level, whereas serum phosphate concentration returned to within the RI (1.49 mmol/l; RI 1.3–2.1 mmol/l). USG remained mildly decreased (1.031; RI >1.035).
Histopathology revealed similar findings in both masses, which consisted of polygonal chief cells with ovoid or round nuclei and lightly eosinophilic cytoplasms, water clear cells with clear and vacuolar cytoplasms, and oxyphil cells with intensively eosinophilic cytoplasms. The chief cells were arranged in solid sheets separated by fibrous stroma and formed follicle-like structures. They exhibited a neuroendocrine growth pattern, moderate anisokaryosis and anisocytosis, mild pleomorphism, increased mitotic activity (six mitoses per 10 high-power fields [HPFs] on the right side and one mitosis per 10 HPFs on the left side) and some pathological mitoses. The neoplastic cells invaded the adjacent thyroid tissue and capsule and formed a cystic tumour, combined with areas of acute haemorrhage and necrosis ( and ). Immunohistochemical staining was negative for calcitonin, positive for chromogranin, positive for voltage-dependent anion channel 1 in oxyphilic cells and negative for thyroglobulin ( and ), confirming the masses to be of neuroendocrine origin and not of thyroid origin. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of a bilateral parathyroid carcinoma. Both tumours had been resected by marginal excision.