Our patient is a 14 year 8-month-old male with dysmorphic features and a history of developmental delay, learning difficulties and disruptive behaviors. He was born at 35 weeks gestation to a 21-year-old gravida 1, para 0 mother. The mother denied any use of medications. Fetal ultrasounds were normal. His birth weight was 2637 g. He had mild jaundice at birth and remained in the hospital for 5 days due to breathing difficulties. He sat at 1 year of age, walked between 13 or 14 months of age, and did not speak any words until 3 and a half years of age. He had some regression of learning according to the family. At the age of 8 years he was evaluated by the Child Development Unit and diagnosed with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Genetic evaluation was performed on this patient at the age of 14 years and 8 months. At the time of the genetic evaluation, his weight was 47.2 kg (20th %ile), height was 162 cm (22nd %ile), and head circumference was 53.2 cm (30th %ile). He had dolichocephaly with prominent occiput and a long and narrow face. His eyebrows were quite heavy with medial flare. His scalp hair was somewhat sparse and fine textured. He had telecanthus, with outer canthal distance (OCD) 9.6 cm (95th %ile) and inner canthal distance (ICD) 3.9 cm (>97th %ile). The cartilage of his ears was very soft and with Darwinian tubercle bilaterally. He had esotropia, narrow and short philtrum, bifid uvula, high palate, very broad nose in the middle as well as on the tip, and receding anterior hairline with widow’s peak. His genitalia was barely at the beginning of Tanner II. He also had hyperconvexed nails, collapse of arches of his feet, slight scoliosis, and quite large-looking elbows with prominent carrying angles. His skin was dry with eczema on the dorsum and numerous moles, especially under his left eye. At the time of evaluation, he was in the eighth grade but was in special education classes working at a second grade level. The representative photos of this patient are shown in Fig. .
The mother of the patient is 36 years old with learning disabilities. As a child, she had developmental delay and had speech therapy, occupational therapy and physical therapy. She finished high school and is attending school to become “a nurse”. The maternal grandmother also had developmental delays, special education, mental health concerns, and required speech therapy. The patient’s father is in his 40’s. He had delays and had learning disabilities. The patient’s 7-year-old and 5-year-old maternal half-sisters had no concerns reported.