A 59-year-old man was admitted to a community hospital for worsening abdominal pain in the upper quadrants with jaundice (total bilirubin 13.4 mg/dL) and evidence of highly elevated serum amylase (5400 U/L). An abdominal ultrasound showed cholelithiasis with common bile duct dilatation due to biliary sludge. Due to the presence of biliary obstruction, an ERCP was attempted but failed due to impossible cannulation of the papilla; therefore, the procedure was immediately interrupted. Moreover, 2 days after patient hospitalization in the primary hospital, his clinical conditions worsened by the development of MOF, since acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and acute renal failure with anuria occurred. Therefore, the patient underwent endotracheal intubation and was referred to the intensive care unit of our referral tertiary center. The patient had no relevant past history or medications. On admission at our hospital, the patient presented with elevated serum creatinine (4.26 mg/dL, normal range 0.7–1.2 mg/dL) and blood urea nitrogen (111 mg/dL, normal range 18–48 mg/dL). The serum amylase was equal to 233 U/L (normal range 28–100 U/L), and the total bilirubin was 8.33 mg/dL (normal range 0.25–1 mg/dL). A marked anemia was evident (hemoglobin 7.8 g/dL, hematocrit 23.6%) without leukocytosis. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed hypoxia without acidosis (pH 7.41, base excess −0.2, lactate 1 mmol/L). The APACHE II score at admission was 30. Enteral feeding was started immediately upon naso-duodenal tube placement, and continuous veno-venous hemofiltration (CVVH) was introduced for acute renal failure also considering the occurrence of hyperkalemia up to 6 mmol/L. Continuous vasopressor support was not necessary, as hemodynamic stability was maintained by fluid infusion.
However, several episodes of shock associated with hyperpyrexia up to 38.5 °C occurred and required short-course treatment with vasopressor. These episodes were hemodynamically consistent with septic shock, but blood cultures were initially negative, as well as skin and mucosal swabs. Only urine cultures were found positive for Escherichia coli; therefore, piperacillin/tazobactam therapy was started based on antibiograms. Due to persistent ARDS with PaO2/FiO2 ratio <100 mmHg, the patient needed prolonged artificial ventilation, and a percutaneous tracheostomy was performed. Several attempts of weaning from mechanical ventilation failed. Intra-abdominal pressure was monitored, being constantly equal to 12 mmHg. Abdominal ultrasound confirmed the presence of distended gallbladder with multiple gallstones and biliary sludge without signs of acute cholecystitis, but common bile duct diameter was normal, apparently with no more evidence of obstructing sludge into the biliary tree.
The patient underwent CT scan which showed acute necrosis of the cephalic portion of the pancreas, with reduced enhancement in pancreatic tail and a 11 × 5.5 cm fluid collection in the right retroperitoneal space . Severe edema of peri-pancreatic adipose tissue was documented, with abdominal and pelvic effusion. Urine iodine excretion was negligible, and bilateral pleural effusion was documented. Weekly follow-up CT scans demonstrated the appearance of a 13 × 9 cm highly dense retroperitoneal collection cranial to the pancreatic head communicating with another 6 × 5 cm collection near the left hepatic lobe. Head and neck of the pancreas were no more recognizable, and a significant compression was evident on portal vein. Moreover, a progressive increase in bilateral retroperitoneal fluid collections was detected, as well as a further 12 × 4 cm necrotic collection under the uncinate process.
Four weeks after the admission, these collections were in communication with a unique large 24 × 10 cm retroperitoneal collection characterized by a partially fluid content. Also, the necrotic collection cranial to the pancreatic head connected with the left hepatic lobe collection augmented, with a diameter of 15 × cm, and acquired features of walled-off pancreatic necrosis (WOPN) . Due to the worsening of retro-gastric WOPN with gastroduodenal extrinsic compression and the clinical evidence of ongoing sepsis, the patient was subjected to ETN of the WOPN. A 1.6 × 2 cm metallic stent (Niti-S yo-yo stent, Taewoong, South Korea) was positioned, draining abundant necrotic and purulent material, and a 6-Fr naso-cystic tube was then positioned to guarantee continuous irrigation of the drained WOPN with 2 L saline/die . Cultures on purulent material revealed the presence of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and blood cultures were positive for E. coli; therefore, antibiotics cefotaxime and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim were started targeted on antibiograms.
Endoscopic transgastric pancreatic necrosectomy was repeated two times over the following 2 weeks, and during the last endoscopy, a biliary leakage was encountered from an unspecified site on the right margin of the WOPN. Subsequently, the patient repeated abdominal CT scan which confirmed a significant reduction of the WOPN, being 5.6 × 4.3 cm, while the large right and left retroperitoneal collections increased in size . Then, an ultrasound-guided PD was performed of the left retroperitoneal collection, positioning a 10-Fr drainage tube . Due to size reduction of the WOPN and consequent less extrinsic compression on the duodenum, an ERCP became feasible. ERCP confirmed a biliary fistula from the distal third of the common bile duct to the WOPN cavity; therefore, sphincterotomy of papilla was performed and a 6 mm × 4 cm fully covered metallic biliary stent (Wallflex, Boston Scientific, Boston, MA, USA) was positioned . Endoscopic second-look documented almost complete debridement of the WOPN.
The following CT scans showed a progressive reduction of both the WOPN and the left retroperitoneal collection but only a modest decrease of the large right retroperitoneal necrotic collection which appeared only partially liquefied. Moreover, the patient remained febrile despite meropenem, colistin, and fluconazole were started after Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase-producing bacteria and Candida albicans were isolated on pus collected from abdominal drainage and on blood cultures. Therefore, VARD was decided 2 weeks after the last ETN. The patient was positioned on the left flank; the right lower costal margin and the iliac crest were marked on the skin. Ultrasound was used to localize the necrotic retroperitoneal tissue underlying the skin between markings and a 5-cm incision was performed on this site, about 2 cm above the iliac crest. Once the access to the retroperitoneal space is completed, necrotic material was evacuated by aspiration. Then, a 10-mm laparoscope was inserted through the incision without gas insufflation, and the right retroperitoneal space was explored. Debridement of necrotic material was performed by forceps and with a laparoscopic jet irrigation/suction device, and a plentiful quantity of infected debris was evacuated. When the descending part of the duodenum was visualized frontally, with the inferior vena cava being visible inferiorly and the right mesocolon superiorly, the VARD was considered completed . The retroperitoneal space was then flushed with 4 L saline solution, and two 32-Fr drainages were positioned superiorly and inferiorly; the fascia and skin were closed . The procedure was uneventful, and no bleeding occurred intraoperatively or in the post-operative course. A continuous irrigation with 5 L saline solution was infused in 24 h via the superior drainage, and fluids were collected by the inferior drainage.
Subsequently, a gradual decrease of inflammatory markers was recorded together with an improvement of clinical conditions, and the patient became afebrile after 6 days from the VARD. The following CT scan demonstrated a significant reduction of all abdominal collections, being the right retroperitoneal collection sized 7.5 × 4 cm . No biliary material was detected in drainages. Two weeks after VARD, all antibiotics were stopped, creatinine and serum electrolytes were in normal ranges, and CVVH was terminated. The patient was completely weaned from lung ventilation and fluid challenge, and tracheostomy was closed. Enteral feeding from naso-duodenal tube was continued; the patient was discharged from the intensive care unit and transferred to the surgical ward. Subsequent CT scan showed further reduction of all intra-abdominal collections and the left drainage was removed, while only one right drainage positioned after VARD was left and continued to drain purulent material. The patient gradually started per os feeding and enteral feeding stopped. After 3 weeks, CT scan was repeated and documented reduction of the right retroperitoneal collection and the large right drainage was therefore replaced with a 10-Fr drainage which was removed after 2 weeks. The patient was discharged in good clinical conditions, and 1 month after discharge, a CT scan demonstrated resolution of the intra-abdominal collections. A subsequent ERCP was performed to remove the biliary stent but a common bile duct post-inflammatory stenosis was detected; therefore, a new 8 mm × 6 cm fully covered metallic biliary stent (Wallflex, Boston Scientific, Boston, MA, USA) was positioned . After 2 months, the transgastric metallic stent used for ETN and biliary stent were both removed, with no residual structure of the bile duct.