This study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki principles, as well as CARE guidelines and methodology .The patient was a 73 years old woman who referred to the emergency department with dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, myalgia weakness and lethargy. Her symptoms started 4 days ago. Swelling and redness of the face were observed on physical examination and she denied any chest pain or palpitation. One month before this presentation, the patient had been diagnosed and admitted by covid-19 for five days.
Her past medical history was chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and dyslipidemia. The patient's regular medications included aspirin (80 mg once daily), prednisolone (5 mg once daily), metoprolol (50 mg twice daily), amlodipine, (4 mg twice daily), pantoprazole (40 mg once daily), furosemide (40 mg once daily), losartan (25 mg twice daily), Insulin (60 unites twice daily), calcitriol (0.25 mg daily), nitrocontine (6.4 mg twice daily), clonazepam (1 mg before sleep), salbutamol spray (2 puff, three times a day).
At emergency department, blood pressure was 100/60 mm Hg, heart rate was 70 beats/min, and axillary temperature was 36.5_C and oxygen saturations were 89%. demonstrated the initial laboratory data in emergency department. In the lung computed tomography (CT) -scan, suspected lesions was observed. However, it was not possible to distinguish whether these lesions were new or related to previous Covid-19 infection. Because of the clinical symptoms and pandemic Covid-19 conditions, the patient was admitted with a possible diagnosis of super infection sinusitis and covid-19 reinfection. The samples were sent for Covid-19 -PCR testing. Due to the delay in the PCR test report (about 24–48 hours), and the severe spread of the disease in Iran, the initial management was based on Covid-19 treatment. Therefore, the patient was treated with intravenous fluid therapy, oxygen therapy, dexamethasone (8 mg daily), Remdesevir, enoxaparin (40 mg daily, SC injection), and Insulin.
On the third day of admission, the PCR test reported negative result, so Covid-19 was rule out and medications that prescribed for Covid-19 (Remdesevir, dexamethasone, etc) were discontinued. The patient presented headache and pain in her upper jaw. Physical examination showed fever, erythema, and tenderness in the right cheek.
Emergency biopsy and culture from sinus by subsection to fungal infection conducted . On CT-scan of the brain, orbits, and paranasal sinuses reveal soft tissue swelling and development of fungal invasion to the right side of the face . The diagnosis of fungal infection confirmed by the positive result of biopsy direct KOH examination of sinus tissue and positive culture. Consult with ophthalmologist and otolaryngologist conducted result demonstrated intact optic nerve. Direct potassium hydroxide (KOH) examination showed aseptate branched hyphae. Furthermore, the lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB) wet mount preparation of culture has shown broad aseptate hyphae. Finaly mucormycosis confirmed by histopathologic examination using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Although the Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining was also confirming mucor hyphae . Treatment with Amphotericin B as the main medication for fungal infection and ceftriaxone, clindamycin, and vancomycin as bacterial prophylaxis was started. After five days' fever was disappeared, brain MRI preformed for evaluation orbit involvement but the involvement was limited to ethmoid sinus, sometimes debridement was conducted for the patient. However, after some days’ treatment with Amphotericin B, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine raised and the patient developed diarrhea and became hemodynamically unstable. In the stool analysis, Strongyloides stercoralis was reported. Unfortunately, despite all the treatment, the patient died on day thirty-two of this admission.
Direct potassium hydroxide (KOH) examination showing aseptated branched hyphae(A), the lactophenol cotton blue (LPCB) wet mount preparation of culture showing branched aseptate hyphae (B), histopathologic examination using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining (C), the Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining (D).