A 37-year-old male with a previous history of alcohol abuse and chronic polyneuropathy presented with right knee pain and limitation of weight-bearing after a fall when walking. The examination showed mild tenderness and swelling over the medial proximal tibia. There was diminished sensation over both legs and feet. The past medical history included rheumatoid arthritis treated with long-term oral corticosteroids and a midfoot Charcot arthropathy that had been managed conservatively. The plain radiographs revealed a non-displaced fracture of the proximal medial tibial metaphysis . Conservative management was chosen in the form of a knee immobiliser and instructions to remain non-weight-bearing, with a follow-up every 2 weeks.
The patient returned after 1 month, bearing weight over his limb without a brace, complaining of increased pain over the proximal right tibia. Plain radiographs showed sclerosis of the fracture site with a mild varus collapse of the proximal right tibia . The patient was reminded to follow the touchdown and bracing instructions precisely. Two months later, he presented with marked knee pain and an inability to bear weight. The examination now revealed varus collapse and non-union of the proximal tibial fracture with loss of axial limb alignment . Various treatment options were discussed with the patient and the decision then made to proceed with an open wedge high tibial osteotomy and bone grafting. Surgery in the form of an open wedge medial proximal tibial osteotomy was carried out with fresh-frozen structural cancellous allograft (femoral head), iliac crest bone marrow aspiration and stem cell concentration, and calcium phosphate bone cement used to fill the subchondral bone defect . The patient's limb was placed in a hinged knee brace and was instructed to touchdown weight-bear with crutches.
The patient presented at 6 weeks post-op fully weight-bearing without an assistive device but with maintenance of limb axial alignment . Restriction instructions were again presented clearly to the patient, but at the 4th month visit, the patient then presented with wound swelling and pain. Plain radiographs revealed resorption of the osteotomy site and loosening of one of the proximal screws along with shearing of one of the screw heads. A CT scan revealed resorption of the bone graft along with the presence of sequestrated bone fragments .
Serum investigations denoted elevated inflammatory markers. The decision made was to proceed promptly with hardware removal, an extensive debridement with tissue (bone and soft tissue) biopsies and the insertion of gentamicin and vancomycin-loaded bone cement (PALACOS® fast R+G) along with the application of a uniplanar external fixator . The results from the tissue cultures and implant sonication revealed a non-methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection which was sensitive to vancomycin, clindamycin, tetracycline, and cotrimoxazole. Clindamycin was prescribed orally and the patient was discharged with a 2-week follow-up.
Three weeks later, the patient presented with wound inflammation and purulence and was admitted for re-debridement and replacement of cement spacer (PALACOS® fast R+G with additional 3 grams of vancomycin and 2 grams of tobramycin). The wound was loosely approximated with the additional placement of a negative pressure system over the incision. The patient was discharged on a 6-week regimen of oral clindamycin and cotrimoxazole, and for weekly follow-up with inflammatory marker monitoring which were decreasing. After 1 month, with normalisation of serum CRP to 0.5 mg/dL and formation of healthy wound granulation tissue, the patient was readmitted for secondary wound closure along with an exchange of the antibiotic delivery system. At this stage, neither purulence nor bone necrosis was observed, and the bone defect was clean with obvious punctate bleeding. A well-formed healthy membrane was noticed along the medial, posterior, and anterior portions of the defect. Multiple swabs were taken for culture and sensitivity which later revealed no growth. The subsequent surgery was planned for at 8 weeks after ensuring full wound healing and maintenance of normal serum inflammatory markers.
The definitive reconstructive surgery was performed through the removal of external fixator, an anterolateral incision, removal of antibiotic cement, an oblique osteotomy with bone excision to create oblique bony surfaces that coapted well, impaction of autologous iliac bone graft along the osteotomy to the medial side, acute shortening with compression and fixation with an anterolateral locking tibial plate . A formal fibular resection was performed to allow acute shortening of the tibia of 1.5 cm.
Post-operatively, a knee immobiliser was applied to the limb and weight-bearing was slowly advanced over 6 weeks until the patient was fully weight-bearing at 12–14 weeks. Regular follow-up visits showed progressive consolidation of the osteotomy site and ossification along the well-formed pseudomembrane along the medial aspect of the osteotomy . At 12 months, the clinical and radiographic follow-up showed the osteotomy site to be consolidated with bridging callus and the patient ambulating independently with a 1 cm shoe lift. The patient has approximately 2 cm of shortening in this limb with knee range of motion of 0–100°.