A 26-year-old female with bilateral pain in the jawbone and several areas of her head was referred to our hospital. The pain was dull, worse at night, and unaffected by activity. The patient denied any previous history of trauma, infection, or malignancy in her past medical history and in family history. The complaint dated back to when the patient was 5 years old, as the pain was first experienced and accompanied by a noticeable lump on her mandible which slowly grew in size but unfortunately was not sought for medical treatment.
As the primary complaint was manifested within the cranium, the referral was directed for the Oncology Surgery Department at our hospital. From physical examination, it was noted that several masses in the skull were present but the clearly noticeable mass was on the left mandible. The patient complained of pain but with a normal range of motion of the temporomandibular joint. Multi-slice Computed Tomography (MSCT) of the head was ordered which revealed bilateral parietal, temporal and frontal bone osteoma with ivory osteoma on both sides of mandible and right ethmoidal bone . Specifically, the osteoma mass on her left mandible was massive, measuring at 5,6 × 6.0 × 4,5 cm.
The oncology surgeon performed left hemi-mandibulectomy and sent the sample to pathology for further examination. As for the right mandible, ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration was performed 2 months post-operative. Both pathology samples showed bone tissue consisting of compact and lamellar bone with various Haversian canals, and a distribution of inflammatory cells consisting of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages were found . The final conclusion of osteoma was confirmed with no cellular characteristic for malignancy.
Fourteen months following the hemi-mandibulectomy, the patient complained of persisting pain on her right angle of mandibula, which a head MSCT was repeated. The latest MSCT showed no meaningful growth of lesions compared to the prior imaging . The patient was then referred to the Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department for a more thorough imaging of possible skeletal lesion dissemination.
A whole-body bone survey was performed and two extracranial lesions were visualized. Both were lytic lesions with regular margin and narrow transitional zone, each found on, left ulna, distal third of right fibula and medial third of left fibula .
As multiple osteomas were found in various areas, we ordered for colon-in-loop examination and found no visible polyps or intraluminal masses in the colon were visualized . This excludes the suspicion of Gardner's Syndrome. Combined with the patient's history and result of supporting examination we conclude the final diagnosis of the patients as osteoma with cranial and extracranial manifestation. We opted for monthly observation, which up to six months did not show progression of symptoms of the lower limbs.