A 4-day-old boy was admitted to the Hospital del Niño in Panama. He was the first child of a healthy young woman from a normal vaginal birth at term. He had an Apgar score of 9 at 1 minute and 9 at 5 minutes, a birth weight of 3.5 kg, body length of 53 cm and a 35 cm cephalic circumference. The newborn was hospitalized when clinical examination revealed 4+ jaundice, hypoactivity, hyporexia and generalized tonic-clonic seizures, requiring management with anticonvulsives, phototherapy and exchange transfusion. A history of use of naphthalene-impregnated clothes was recorded. Analysis of clinical symptoms and laboratory tests diagnosed the proband with kernicterus by G6PD deficiency. Despite clinical management, after 5 years the patient presented with reduced psychomotor development, neurosensory hypoacousia, absence of speech and poor reflex of the pupil to light.
Upon admission the patient presented total bilirubin values of 42.6 mg/dl (41.8 mg/dl from indirect bilirubin), 11.8 g/dl hemoglobin, 8% reticulocytes, O (Rh+) and B (Rh+) blood types for child and mother, respectively, and negative direct Coombs. G6PD testing was reported as deficient, and the quantification of the serum levels of this enzyme was 0.278 U/gHb (normal value range 4.6 to 13.5 U/gHb). Cranial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated hyperintense basal ganglia lesions on T2-weighted images .
Determination of the G6PD polymorphic variant was achieved by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) as described elsewhere . Genomic DNA from the patient and one heterozygote G6PD Mediterranean variant control were obtained from heparinized peripheral blood with the salting out method described by Miller et al. . We used 100 ng of DNA to amplify the region flanking nucleotide 563 containing the polymorphism. Amplified products were then digested with the restriction enzyme Mbo II and the digestion mix was electrophoresed in 10% polyacrylamide gel. Analysis showed the G6PD Mediterranean polymorphic variant genotype , which explained the G6PD deficiency phenotype.