A 42 year-old Afro-Caribbean female presented with severe pain in the lower limbs associated with distal weakness, with progressive worsening during the previous week.
Her past medical history was remarkable for longstanding pigmented skin nodules in limbs and torso, bilateral breast implants ten years prior and giving birth to her first child at 26 weeks three months before.
Neurological examination revealed tetraparesis (distal upper limbs: grade 4+/5; proximal lower limbs: right = grade 4/5, left = 3/5; distal lower limbs: right = grade 3/5, left = 2/5), absent ankle reflexes, indifferent plantar reflexes, reduced positional sense in left ankle and up to right knee and reduced vibration and superficial pain sense up to both knees. Physical examination identified multiple hyperpigmented small nodules over the limbs and trunk.
Blood workup revealed normocytic anemia, thrombocytosis and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (110 mm/h), C-reactive protein (CRP) (33 mg/L) and angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) (74 units/L). Biochemistry including ionogram, calcium, renal and liver function was unremarkable. Syphilis, hepatitis A, B and C and Human Immunodeficiency Virus serologies were negative. Autoimmune studies showed positive antinuclear antibodies (titre > 1/640, speckled pattern) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) with an atypical cytoplasmic-ANCA (c-ANCA) pattern, however without myeloperoxidaseA (MPO) or proteinase 3 (PR3) specificity. Antinuclear antibodies, antibodies against double stranded DNA, antibodies against extractable nuclear antigens, anti-cardiolipin antibodies and lupus anticoagulant test were negative.
Cerebrospinal fluid showed hyperproteinorraquia (500 mg/L), 5 leukocytes, normal glucose, increased ACE (1.47 units/ml). Direct microscopy, acid-fast bacilli smear, cultures, including mycobacterial culture, and Herpesvirus family and Adenovirus DNA were negative.
Brain and spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging revealed slight pachymeningeal thickening and enhancement over the vertex. Chest, abdomen and pelvis computerized tomography recognized left breast implant intracapsular rupture and mildly enlarged bilateral axillary lymph nodes only.
Nerve conduction studies identified patchy asymmetrical involvement of sensory nerves in upper and lower limbs with axonal involvement (both sural and superficial peroneal nerves and left ulnar nerve) and minor denervation in the muscles supplied by the affected nerves, consistent with MM.
Dermatology team diagnosed the skin lesions as nodular prurigo.
As pain and weakness significantly worsened during the following two weeks and a provisional muscle and nerve biopsy description suggested an inflammatory process, a course of intravenous (iv) cyclophosphamide (15 mg/kg) and oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/d) were started with marked strength improvement in the following days. Oral cyclophosphamide (150 mg/day) was started two weeks later.
Final biopsy findings described a granulomatous vasculitic process associated with axonal neuropathy. Muscle biopsy showed perivascular inflammation without fibrinoid necrosis and a cluster of cells resembling a loose non-necrotic granuloma. Nerve biopsy revealed florid axonal neuropathy with large and small myelinated fibers active degeneration, dense inflammatory infiltrates including several scattered eosinophils and aggregates of epithelioid macrophages forming loose granulomata in perineurium and endoneurium, without vessel fibrinoid necrosis. Skin biopsy was unremarkable.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) was presumed as histology identified eosinophils and poorly formed granulomata. She was discharged on cyclophosphamide, analgesia and prednisolone taper until 20 mg/day. Clinically she was almost pain free, but suffered severe fatigue.
Within three months, she stopped medication against medical recommendation and worsened in the following eight weeks, with severe neuropathic pain and inability to walk autonomously. Neurological examination revealed grade 3/5 tetraparesis, lower limbs arreflexia and sensory gait ataxia. Inflammatory markers were increased (ESR = 86 mm/h; CRP = 54 mg/L). Cyclophosphamide (150 mg/day) and prednisolone (40 mg/day) were restarted with clinical and laboratorial improvement within one month. Nevertheless, recurrence of severe symptoms occurred two months later and alemtuzumab (20 mg/day, iv, 5 days) was used with only mild improvement within three weeks.
By this time, 150 mg/day azatioprine (AZA) was associated with prednisolone taper, but worsening occurred on every taper attempt. Whole body PET performed during an exacerbation with severe systemic symptoms excluded other areas of inflammatory activity and neoplasms.
After four months of AZA, slow clinical recovery was reported. Stability was achieved for further six months on prednisolone (17,5 mg/20 mg on alternate days) and AZA (175 mg/day). However, severe pain and weakness worsening followed and AZA was switched to mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (750 mg bd). At that point, breast implants were removed as bilateral breast tumefaction and a large left axillary adenopathy were noticed. Biopsy showed granulomatous lymphadenitis and patchy stromal fibrosis of breast tissue with periaqueductal and perilobular inflammation including occasional poorly formed non-necrotizing granulomas, without signs of malignancy and with negative acid-fast bacilli and fungi stains.
After four months of stability, neurological symptoms recurrence associated with bilateral uveitis were treated with iv methylprednisolone (1 g, 3 days). Oral prednisolone (40/60 mg on alternate days) and MMF (1 g, bd) were increased. Four rituximab infusions (375 mg/m2/week) were performed. Despite improvement of systemic symptoms and inflammatory markers, marked disability persisted due to pain and weakness.
Skin biopsy obtained three months later, during a period of skin lesions exacerbation, showed numerous granulomata in the dermis with perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates, without vasculitic features. This time the clinical and histopathological features suggested sarcoidosis, so our treatment strategy changed.
Infliximab (3 mg/kg, iv, at 0/2/6 weeks and every 6 weeks thereafter) was started in combination with MMF and prednisolone with excellent prompt clinical and laboratorial response. Coinciding with clinical symptoms recurrence, five months later, NAbs againts infliximab were detected. Switch to adalimumab (40 mg, sc, every second week) maintained improvement, however, despite strength improvement, sensory ataxia and neuropathic pain still hindered autonomous walking. Eight months later, another period of treatment efficacy loss followed, associated with NAbs against adalimumab, reducing the choice of TNF-α inhibitors described as beneficial in sarcoidosis. We eventually chose etanercept (50 mg, sc, once a week) still in combination with MMF (1.5 g/day) and prednisolone (40 mg/60 mg on alternate days) which controlled most clinical symptoms with complete motor and cognitive functional recovery. She remains clinically stable after eighteen months on etanercept, presenting full power with fatigability, fluctuant facial asymmetry, marked sensory gait ataxia, areas of sensory deficits with numbness and dysesthesia, absent reflexes in the lower limbs and decreased reflexes in the upper limbs. Despite clinical stability, inflammatory markers remain increased (ESR = 83 mm/h; CRP = 14 mg/L) and skin lesions persist.
Figure represents clinical symptoms and inflammatory markers evolution during the disease course and the treatments performed during this period.