A 26-year-old male with a history of the right temporal chondrosarcoma resected in 2010 with subsequent self-limiting CSF rhinorrhea presented 8 years later with new-onset left temporal headaches. MRI of his brain at this time showed a right temporal contrast enhancing lesion suspicious for recurrent intracranial chondrosarcoma measuring 2.1 cm × 1.9 cm. He was monitored at 3 month intervals with repeat MRIs which showed stability of the mass. Approximately 1 year later, he presented with new-onset seizures and MRI findings that demonstrated an increase in size to 2.4 cm × 2.4 cm with evidence of encephalomalacia of the right temporal lobe. He subsequently underwent a repeat right craniotomy for resection. Pathology confirmed the lesion was World Health Organization Grade 1 chondrosarcoma. Several weeks later, he presented with a pseudomeningocele and a history of fevers. Seventy milliliters of subgaleal fluid were drained followed by a reexploration of his cranial incision and a wound washout. At this time, a small defect was noted in the frontal bone near the frontal sinus. The mucosa of the defect was obliterated with electrocautery, packed with muscle graft, then covered with Duragen® (Integra LifeSciences) and sealed with DuraSeal® (Integra LifeSciences). A subgaleal drain was placed and discontinued 2 days postoperatively. Cultures from CSF and pseudomeningocele specimens grew MSSA and he was started on appropriate antibiotics. Two months later, he presented with positional headaches and intermittent fluid leaking from his nose that started 2–3 weeks after his wound washout. A fluid sample was collected and was positive for β2-transferrin. He was admitted from the clinic and a lumbar drain was placed for CSF diversion. Shortly after, he complained of severe nuchal rigidity and headaches. CT head without contrast was performed , which showed diffuse pneumocephalus.
The lumbar drain was clamped and the patient subsequently underwent right craniotomy which exposed a small dural opening in the temporal region, as well as a small opening in the previously repaired frontal sinus. The frontal sinus defect was repaired by removing the remaining mucosa and muscle in the sinus, and cauterizing the walls. Temporalis muscle was packed into the sinus and Mimix® bone cement was used to close off the frontal sinus. Duragen was subsequently laid over the hardened cement as well as the temporal dural defect and sealed with DuraSeal. A larger piece of Duragen was used to cover the remainder of the surgical exposure. The bone flap was secured to the skull with titanium plates and screws. The temporalis muscle was approximated and the galea and skin were closed. CT imaging preoperatively demonstrated large frontal pneumocephalus in the right cerebral hemisphere with significant decrease in size postcraniotomy and frontal sinus packing .
On postoperative day (POD) 2, the patient developed a large and minimally reactive right pupil consistent with an oculomotor nerve III palsy. Repeat imaging showed persistent right pneumocephalus , which was treated with high-flow oxygen.
On POD 3, the patient was found to have a right CN III and VI palsy. The patient then underwent placement of a right-sided epidural drain and external ventricular drain (EVD) with subsequent improvement in pupil size and reactivity over the next couple of days .
Subsequent imaging demonstrated improved pneumocephalus, and the epidural and ventricular drains were removed on days 6 and 9, respectively. The patient was discharged POD 10 with no recurrence of cranial nerve palsy. A follow-up CT scan was done on POD 15 revealing decreased amounts of pneumocephalus . The patient continues to remain neurologically stable with reactive pupils bilaterally.