A 77-year-old woman was referred to our division for a mixed ground-glass opacity lesion in the right upper lung. The patient was symptom-free and in good performance status. There were no remarkable findings on physical examination. Chest computed tomography revealed a 34 mm × 20 mm partial solid nodule with spicule formation and pleural indentation at the right S3 . The consolidation tumor ratio was 30%. Preoperative positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed that the standard uptake value (SUV) of the lesion was 1.9, and there was no suspicious metastasis. Kommerell diverticulum at the origin of the left subclavian artery and a right-sided aortic arch were detected through preoperative three-dimensional computed tomography (3D CT) reconstruction . Echocardiography revealed no cardiac abnormalities.
A right upper lobectomy was performed because the lesion was considered to be malignant. A three-port VATS approach with no rib spreading (no soft tissue retractor or direct visualization) was used. A 3-cm incision in the fourth intercostal space (ICS) at the anterior axillary line was made as the main manipulation port, and a 1-cm incision in the seventh ICS at the scapular line was made as an assisted manipulation port. A 1-cm thoracoscopic port was made in the seventh ICS at the middle axillary line. After dividing the interlobar fissure with a linear stapler, we detached and divided the ascending A2, right superior pulmonary vein (RSPV), A1 + A3, and right upper lobe bronchus sequentially. There were no anatomic variations of pulmonary vessels or bronchi . After histologically confirming the invasive carcinoma, radical mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed. After the routine dissection of the pulmonary ligament lymph node (#9) and the paraesophageal lymph node (#8), we dissected the subcarinal lymph node (#7). It was difficult to expose the left main bronchus, as the esophagus could not be suspended easily due to the obstruction of the right descending aorta . When dissecting the paratracheal lymph node, we identified the right vagus nerve above the azygos vein by blunt separation, and we then proceeded with the dissection in the cranial direction . The right recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) was observed to branch from the right vagus nerve and hook around the right-sided aortic arch . No upper paratracheal lymph node was dissected because of the obstruction of the right-sided aortic arch. The total operative time was 170 min with an estimated blood loss of 100 cc.
The postoperative histological diagnosis was moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (80% lepidic and 20% acinar). There were five lower paratracheal lymph nodes, five subcarinal lymph nodes, two paraesophageal lymph nodes, two pulmonary ligament lymph nodes, one #10 lymph node, and two #11 lymph nodes retrieved. No lymph node metastasis was detected. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7 without any complications such as hoarseness.