A 17-month-old male boy of northern African origin presented to our hospital. At that time, he was in established renal failure, having been commenced on peritoneal dialysis (PD) at the age of 9 months in his home country. Diagnosis of PH1 has been confirmed within the first year of life by genetic analysis revealing a homozygous mutation in the AGXT gene (Ile244Thr). We measured free plasma oxalate (POx) concentrations following a protocol previously established in our laboratory. Using this protocol, POx concentrations between 20 and 40 μmol/L are commonly obtained in general ESRD patients . In our patient, POx concentration was 128.9 μmol/L at presentation. In the further course, samples for control of POx concentration were taken after nocturnal peritoneal dialysis and pre-hemodialysis. The patient demonstrated slight pancytopenia, but no signs of retinopathy, echocardiography, and Speckle tracking echocardiography were unremarkable. He was initially anuric, and during the course of his hospitalization, urine output slightly improved (less than 0.1 ml/kg BW/h). The patient had already received pyridoxine (9 mg/kg BW per day) for several months prior to admission as responsiveness to this medication has been described in patients with the Ile244Thr genotype . As his PD program has been insufficient to effectively lower POx concentration, we first introduced a daily program (10 dwells of 80 min with 300 mL each, Glc 1.5%; Ca2+ 1.25%) according to GPN standard. In addition to PD, we placed a tunneled catheter via the right vena jugularis interna and started our patient on continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF, 5 sessions of 2–3 h per week; dialysate flow 5-7 L/h; blood flow 50–60 mL/min). Following initiation of this regimen, POx concentration dropped to 80.8 μmol/L . For the compassionate use of Stiripentol, the parents gave written informed consent. Subsequently, Stiripentol was introduced with a starting dosage of 4.7 mg/kg/d and increased stepwise up to 61 mg/kg/d for the duration of 2 months. At the end of the trial, we administered a dosage slightly above the recommended dosage; however, Stiripentol plasma measurements by high-performance liquid chromatography showed values within a non-toxic range. The manufacturer’s recommendations were followed specifically concerning dietary precautions. Most frequent side effects (≥ 1/100) of Stiripentol are loss of appetite and weight, dizziness, insomnia, irritability, hyperkinesia, nausea and vomiting, elevated GGT, and neutropenia. Adverse reactions were not observed in our patient. During the whole 3.5-month period of Stiripentol administration, we did not observe a decrease in POx concentration and, therefore, stopped administration. Four weeks after discontinuation, POx concentrations were found to remain within the same range, suggesting that the withdrawal did not increase oxalate load further.