A 78-year-old man with chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 5 presented with acute dyspnea and productive cough for 1 week. He had HIV infection for 10 years and currently on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). He was diagnosed Klebsiella pneumonia with respiratory failure. After admission, he developed massive upper GI bleeding and profound shock, led to cardiac arrest. After resuscitation, he gained a return of spontaneous circulation but still had oliguria. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was initiated via right femoral non-cuff catheter for metabolic and volume control. After that, his hemodynamic was improved, and CRRT was withdrawn. Since he had had CKD stage 5, PD catheter placement was made for long term renal replacement therapy. He did not have any previous abdominal surgery or other contraindication for PD.
Laboratory tests on the day of operation were consisted with ESRD as following: serum urea nitrogen 81 mg/dL; serum creatinine 6.2 mg/dL, corresponding to an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 5 ml/min/1.73m2 (as calculated by CKD-EPI [Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration] equation); serum sodium 143 mEq/L; serum potassium 3.8 mEq/L; serum chloride 103 mEq/L; serum bicarbonate 17 mEq/L; hemoglobin 10.5 g/dL, white blood cell count, 10980/μL; platelet count, 168,000/μL; serum albumin 2.3 g/dL.
The patient was given lactulose 30 mL for bowel preparation for pre-operative preparation. On the operation day, the patient was sedated with fentanyl 50 μg intravenously.
He underwent PD catheter insertion by interventional nephrologist under local anesthesia at the bedside, despite unable transferring to the operating theater. The midline sub-umbilical incision and subcutaneous fat dissection were performed to reach the rectus sheath. The introducing sharp 16 gauge needle was applied one attempted, and normal saline 500 ml was instilled. A 150 cm. guide wire was introduced using the Seldinger technique. The PD catheter was carefully advanced into the peritoneal cavity as deep as usual with a deep cuff within the rectus sheath. One liter of normal saline was instilled through the peritoneal cavity then minimal inactive bloody color fluid was observed. Both inflow and outflow rates were satisfied. An abdominal X-ray showed an optimal position of the PD catheter . In the immediate postoperative period, his clinical was stable. A rapid 1-liter exchange was continued every 1 hour, and the effluent showed adequate drainage during the first six hours. However, the effluent became lightly yellowish color and contained small fibrin after the first 4 hours dwell, as depicted in . The patients developed a high-grade fever at 12 hours after the operation. He was normotensive and denied any abdominal pain. Complete blood cell count showed a hemoglobin level of 10.6 g/dL, white blood cell count of 12,000/μL, and platelet count of 207,000/μL. PD fluid was sent for cell count, which showed white blood cell 1750 cell/μL with 92% of neutrophil. The PD fluid gram stain revealed gram-negative rods, so the intestinal perforation was suspected. The emergency abdominal computerized tomography scan (CT scan) was performed in this case for rule out any iatrogenic hollow viscus organ injury because of equivocal peritoneal sign on abdominal exam. Abdominal CT scan demonstrated small pneumo-peritoneum with air bubbles trapped in pelvic fluid and thickening of the segmental small-bowel wall in the left-sided abdomen . The patient was transferred to the operating theater for an emergency exploratory laparotomy. There was no inadvertent movement of the catheter and it was secured properly. Operative finding revealed 100 ml of bile content and pus in the abdominal cavity. Moreover, a through-and-through jejunal wall perforation was identified (about 50 cm from the ligament of Treitz), as depicted in . The perforated sites were closed by 3-0 Vicryl interrupted sutures. After that, the abdominal toilet was done properly, and the abdominal wall was closed as usual fashion. Finally, the patient was transferred to the ICU in stable condition. Postoperatively, intravenous meropenem was given for the empirical treatment and was discontinued on postoperative day 7 in regards to the negative result of blood culture. After surgery, the hemodynamic was stable, and normal bowel movement was observed in 48 hours. Intermittent hemodialysis was re-started without any complication during dialysis treatment. Hemodialysis was considered for long term renal replacement therapy for this patient.