A 31-year-old woman (gravida 0, para 0) visited the hospital due to abdominal distension. She had been in good health. Physical examination showed a markedly distended abdomen. Abdominal ultrasound (US) showed a pelvic mass and gross ascites. She was referred to our hospital for further examination and subsequent treatment.
Transvaginal US showed the presence of marked ascites and a large solid and cystic mass with a diameter of 20 cm around the uterus in the pelvic cavity. CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed gross ascites that extended under the diaphragm, a strongly enhanced, heterogeneous, huge mass in the pelvic cavity, and multiple peritoneal nodule lesions. There was no lymphadenopathy. On pelvic MRI, the pelvic mass showed homogeneous low intensity on T1-weighted MRI and heterogeneous low and high intensities on T2-weighted MRI, suggesting the presence of cystic and solid lesions. There were no fatty components. The patient’s serum CA 125 level was 165.7 U/ml (normal value < 35 U/ml). Serum CEA and CA 19–9 levels were within normal ranges. The pelvic cyst with solid components, the high CA 125 level, massive ascites, and multiple peritoneal nodule lesions strongly indicated the presence of an advanced ovarian cancer.
The patient underwent whole-body FDG PET/MRI to confirm malignancy and the presence of lymph node or distant metastases. The huge mass in the pelvic cavity and multiple peritoneal nodule lesions showed strong FDG uptake . She underwent abdominal paracentesis several times to confirm malignant cells in the ascitic fluid and reduce the abdominal discomfort caused by the massive ascites. However, cytological examinations showed only mesothelial cells without any malignant cells despite the imaging appearance of suspected malignancy on CT, MRI, and FDG-PET.
Therefore, exploratory laparoscopy was performed for diagnostic purposes, and 6900 ml of bloody serous ascites were evacuated and obtained for cytology. A huge mass with a diameter of more than 20 cm occupied the pelvic cavity and adhered strongly to adjacent organs including the uterus, adnexa, and rectum . It was decided that the optimal surgery could not be performed because there were countless disseminated lesions of various sizes in the intraperitoneal organs, including the omentum, mesentery, and peritoneum . Therefore, one nodule of the omentum was resected by a harmonic device for frozen section examination, and it was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma. Additional resection of the omental nodule was performed for permanent fixation and further pathological examination. The pathological examination showed that the tumor consisted of small cells and large cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and a high mitotic rate, showing nested, trabecular, and pseudoglandular growth patterns . There was no other histologic subtype. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that these cells were positive for neuroendocrine markers such as synaptophysin and CD56, and the Ki-67 index was greater than 20% . Cytological examination of the obtained ascitic fluid showed no malignant cells. There were no other suspicious malignant lesions in the lung or digestive system on CT or FDG-PET. Therefore, the final pathological diagnosis was large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the ovaries with FIGO stage IIIC.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. On the 11th day after surgery, she received the first course of chemotherapy with etoposide and cisplatin. After 2 courses of the chemotherapy, the symptoms of abdominal distension had improved, although there was residual tumor in the abdominal cavity. However, the residual tumor then increased rapidly, and the patient died 2 months after surgery.