A 55-year-old Chinese man visited our hospital complaining of abdominal distension. He was positive for hepatitis C antibodies and showed elevated hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA (3.26E+004 IU/mL). The results of liver function tests were as follows: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 38.2 U/L (reference range: 15–40), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 47.1 U/L (reference range: 9–50), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 92.2 U/L (reference range: 45–125), and total bilirubin 12.2 mmol/L (reference range: 0–26). Notably, both gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) (108.5 U/L, reference range: 10–60) and alpha-fetoprotein were elevated (22.22 ng/mL, reference range: 0–20), and CA19-9 was normal (13.14 ng/mL, reference range: 0–37). EBV nucleic acid quantitative detection was 4.50E+003 copies/mL. Abdominal ultrasound showed the presence of a hypoechoic lesion in the right posterior lobe of the liver that was 41×51 mm in size. The results of a complete blood count, blood chemistry tests, and urinalysis were normal.
Gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images ( and ). The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map showed that the tumor features restricted diffusion . After administration of contrast material, the lesion showed hypoenhancing against the background and a heterogenic perfusion defect in the hepatobiliary phase. Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS) showed hyperenhancement in the arterial phase, and after the contrast agent was rapidly cleared (<40s), the portal and delay phases showed hypoenhancement ( and ). These findings led us to suspect a malignancy such as hepatocellular carcinoma, due to the patient’s hepatitis C background. An abscess was also considered, although the patient did not have other symptoms, such as fever. After performing ultrasound-guided percutaneous tumor biopsy, examination of biopsy specimens revealed the presence of nodular cirrhosis. Histologically, the tumor consisted of poorly differentiated tumor cells along with intense lymphocytic infiltrates and interstitial fibrous proliferation . Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells exhibited expression of cytokeratin 19 and 7 and no expression of HepPar-1 . Epstein-Barr encoding region in situ hybridization produced negative results.
The patient was diagnosed with LELCC and hepatitis C-related liver cirrhosis. He underwent MWA without adjuvant therapy and was given anti-HCV medication (400 mg sofosbuvir and 100 mg velpatasvir tablets once per day). Under ultrasound guidance, two microwave antenna (ECO-100C18 MWA antenna (Yigao, Nanjing, China)) were used for ablation together. First, feeding artery was ablated 4 min at 55 W. Second, tumor was ablated with 0.5cm safety margin. After ablation, ablation efficacy was evaluated by CEUS immediately.
AST and ALT were elevated at 47 U/L and 71.9 U/L, respectively, on postoperative day 1. GGT was also slightly elevated at 110.4 U/L. Pleural effusion occurred, and pleural drainage was performed on day 3 after MWA. The patient recovered and was discharged on postoperative day 7. Four months after MWA, laboratory tests showed HCV RNA < 100 IU/mL, alpha-fetoprotein 6.77 ng/mL, normal liver function, and EBV nucleic acid was not detected. MRI showed hyperintense on T1-weighted images and slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted images, foci measuring 6.0 cm in the right posterior segment of the liver ( and ). The ADC map did not show that the lesion features restricted diffusion . The lesion exhibited mild peripheral enhancement in the arterial phase and low enhancement in venous and delay phases . The patient has been followed-up with regular outpatient visits and no new lesions have occurred within 9 months after MWA .