A 42-year-old man visited our outpatient dermatology clinic with papulonodular, pruriginous eruption on the limbs. Clinical examination revealed grouped and scattered pruritic papules and nodules on his legs, arms and trunk .
Four years earlier, the patient had been in a car accident and the first papules had appeared around the trauma and burn scars. Gradually, they disseminated to the legs, the arms and the chest. He also had irritant contact dermatitis on the hands, possibly from using detergents. The patient also reported allergic rhinitis, conjunctivitis and repeated episodes of tonsillitis over the last 5 years.
Results of haematological and biochemical examinations were within normal limits, as were the rapid plasma reagin, anti-HIV, C-reactive protein and serum IgE results. There was a raised antistreptolysin O titre (ASTO) of 800 IU/ml. His chest X-ray and his urine test were also normal. A skin biopsy from the trunk revealed a pseudo-epitheliomatous acanthosis, hyperkeratosis and vascular hyperplasia of the upper dermis with a mild inflammatory perivascular infiltration, a scenario compatible with PN. Characteristics of a specific inflammation were not observed.
The patient was treated with oral methylprednisolone 16 mg gradually tapered, oral antibiotics, hydroxyzine 25 mg, local clobetasol propionate 0.05% cream and emollients. This treatment led to a regression for some time, but later the same clinical symptoms recurred.
One month after regression of the nodules, the patient underwent patch testing with European standard battery and metals (TROLAB®), following the International Contact Dermatitis Research Group guidelines . The reactions were negative at 48 and 96 hours and at 7 days. The same tests were repeated 2 months later and were again negative. The patient had also been subjected to skin prick testing and radioallergosorbent tests for the detection of aeroallergens implicated for allergic rhinitis, 2 months before consultation. Since these tests were negative and as there were no current clinical or endoscopic signs of rhinitis, we decided to not repeat allergic testing for rhinitis.
The patient's history with chronic tonsillitis in relation to the high ASTO levels led us to believe that tonsillitis could be a possible cause for PN, and the patient underwent a tonsillectomy . The nodules started to regress gradually with the application of local steroids. Six months later, they had totally disappeared; only the scars from the car accident and some hyper-pigmentation were apparent. In 6 years of follow-up, the patient is doing well with no skin lesions and with normal ASTO levels.