A 28-year-old otherwise healthy Indian man presented with mild nonspecific discomfort in the left eye. He had been diagnosed with idiopathic FBA in the right eye 6 months earlier , at that time a complete blood count, differential count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, chest X-ray, Mantoux test, and angiotensin-converting enzyme level were normal. Serology for human immunodeficiency virus and syphilis was non-reactive. On presentation, the right eye had achieved visual acuity of 6/12 (20/40, logMAR 0.30) after resolution of the previous episode of FBA. The left eye had 6/6 (20/20, logMAR 0) vision. Intraocular pressure on applanation tonometry was 14 and 12 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. There were occasional anterior chamber cells in both eyes with no keratic precipitates. The left eye showed marked optic disc hyperemia, mild blurring of the disc margins, and dilated tortuous veins with flame-shaped hemorrhages around the disc . Fundus fluorescein angiography showed normal arterial, arteriovenous, and venous phases in both eyes. There was mild early disc leak in the left eye, which increased with time . There was no abnormal perivascular leakage to suggest vasculitis in either eye. A diagnosis of impending CRVO in the left eye was made and the patient was further evaluated to rule out disorders associated with CRVO in younger individuals. The cardiovascular evaluation was unremarkable. A complete hemogram, with bleeding time, clotting time, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and serum homocysteine level, were within normal limits. Serum antinuclear antibody and lupus anticoagulant were negative. Three days later, the patient presented with decreased visual acuity of 6/18 (20/60, logMAR 0.48) in the left eye. The left eye showed increased disc edema with hyperemia, macular edema, and thick perivascular exudation along the major vessels (predominantly venous) in the lower half of the fundus, typical of FBA . Differential leucocyte count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, chest X-ray, Mantoux test, peripheral blood smear, and angiotensin-converting enzyme level were normal. Serology for human immunodeficiency virus was negative. The anterior segment of the left eye showed cells with no keratic precipitates. The patient was started on oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day. Four weeks later, macular edema had resolved completely, with a few precipitated hard exudates nasal to the fovea. Small segments of patchy vascular sheathing were evident along the vessel wall of inferior arcade arterioles . There was complete visual recovery to 6/6 (20/20, logMAR 0) in the left eye. Oral steroids were tapered off in the following 4 weeks. No recurrence of the disease was noted in either eye during 6 months of follow-up.