A 40-year-old man was admitted to medical intensive care unit with acute hypercapnic respiratory failure due to status asthmaticus. His past medical history was poor-controlled asthma that intermittently used only a short-acting bronchodilator for 10 years. He was 12-pack-year smoker which quit over 10 years. He denied alcohol consumption nor recreational drug use. He presented with coryza, myalgia and low grade of fever for 6 days. On the day of admission, he developed difficulty of breathing, respiratory rate of 44 /minute. His blood pressure was 184/122 mm Hg and tachycardia of 120 /minute. An initial oxygen saturation was 85% at room air. On examination, he had poor air-entry with biphasic wheezing throughout the lung’s field. After intubation, he was deeply sedated and paralyzed in order to being controlled with a proper setting of mechanical ventilation. Arterial blood gas revealed acute respiratory acidosis with PH of 6.98, PaO2 of 90 mm Hg (under fraction of inspired oxygen-FiO2; 0.6) and PaCO2 of 119.5 mm Hg. The chest radiograph and initial serum investigations were unremarkable. Nasal swab for respiratory viral test was positive for Enterovirus/Rhinovirus. The essential investigations and dose of sedative drugs are shown in Table . During the admission, patient’s mean arterial pressure was over 65 mmHg without inotrope’s support. The salbutamol inhaler (100 mcg/puff) was administrated via ventilator’s inspiratory circuit, 4–8 puffs every 15–30 min. Furthermore, salmeterol/fluticasone propionate MDI (25 mcg/250 mcg) 4 inhalations every 12 h and four inhalations of tiotropium bromide soft mist inhaler (2.5 mcg) were used as inhaled controllers. Not only intravenous steroid was used for exacerbation regimen, but two grams of magnesium sulphate infusion was also given. Ceftriazone, azithromycin and oseltamivir were empirically started and discontinued when nasal swab, sputum culture and blood cultures revealed none of other co-infections. We did not use an aminophylline nor inhaled anesthetic agent due to unavailability. The ventilator setting was volume-controlled mode, 5 ml/kg of ideal body weight, 5 cm H2O of positive end expired pressure (PEEP), 0.6 of FiO2 and 60–100 L/min of decelerating flow. After 6 h of treatment, patient’s ventilation and oxygenation showed significant improvement contributing to lactate normalization (from 4.4 to 0.7 mmol/L). However, at 24 h of admission, his lactate level had re-elevated to a peak of 4.6 mmol/L contrary to the improvement of PaO2, PaCO2, patient’s symptoms and mechanical ventilator’s setting. There was a minimal rising of creatinine, potassium and creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) which was less likely to make a diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis. Furthermore, none of liver function test, urine analysis, lipid profiles and electrocardiogram’s finding had illustrated abnormality. Four and a half Litres of lactated Ringer’s solution were infusing for fluid resuscitation and maintenance during the first 48 h. The urine output throughout 48 h of admission was 45–180 ml/h with positive accumulative balance of 3.2 L. The salbutamol inhaler was discontinued while patient’s clinical status improved, a total dose of salbutamol was 31,500 mcg (315 puffs). The lactate level had rapidly decreased into normal range within 12 h of discontinuation and the patient was extubated safely at day 5 of the admission.