A 35 year-old man was transferred from a peripheral hospital to the Montreal Neurological Hospital (MNH) in March 2015 for the diagnostic work-up of a viral encephalitis. Past medical history was significant for cocaine abuse and high-risk sexual behavior with male partners. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing two years earlier was negative. The patient had initially presented to a community hospital with a 5-week history of headaches and 3-week history of horizontal diplopia. Upon this first presentation, a non-contrast cerebral CT scan was unremarkable and he was treated as having migraines. While at home, he developed right upper extremity weakness, bilateral lower extremity weakness in addition to fecal and urinary incontinence. The patient also endorsed a 20-pound weight loss over 5 weeks. Prior to transfer to the MNH, he underwent lumbar puncture (LP) and his cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) had demonstrated a lymphocytic pleocytosis at 280 cells (0–10 cells), increased protein at 1.5 g/L (1.55 g/L) and low glucose of 1.7 mmol/L (2.5–4.4 mmol/L) and negative gram stain. Intravenous (iv) acyclovir was started due to suspicion of a viral encephalitis.
Upon arrival at the MNH, the patient was drowsy and confused. He was afebrile and vital signs were stable. Cranial nerve exam demonstrated a right 6th cranial nerve palsy. He also had right upper extremity weakness (4/5) and bilateral lower extremity weakness (3/5 bilaterally). Deep tendon reflexes (DTR) were present at the upper extremities bilaterally but absent in the bilateral lower extremities with upgoing plantar responses. Anal tone was absent. Repeat LP demonstrated a high opening pressure at 42 cm H20), lymphocytic pleocytosis at 130 cells (0–10 cells), high protein (1.55 g/L) and low glucose (2.7 mmol/L). While awaiting results of diagnostic testing, he was empirically treated for Listeria monocytogenes, Cytomegalovirus and Herpes Simplex Virus with ampicillin 2 g iv q 4 h and valganciclovir 250 mg iv q12 hours. Gram stain, Auramine stain and India Ink stain were negative.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain and whole spine demonstrated multiple enhancing lesions involving the cerebellum, left midbrain, left pons. A right medullary lesion was also visualized in addition to multiple foci of enhancement involving the cerebral hemispheres. There were multiple enhancing lesions in the thoracic spine with associated swelling . Nerve conduction studies were within normal limits. However, needle studies of the bilateral lower extremities and lumbar paraspinal muscles demonstrated acute denervation suggestive of radicular and or lower motor neuron dysfunction. Computed Tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen scans revealed left axillary adenopathy, numerable small hypodensitities in the spleen and multiple lesions in the kidneys . A PET scan was not performed as it would have been unlikely to yield additional insight into the patient’s condition beyond that provided by the MRI.
At admission, peripheral white blood cells count, platelets, haemoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase, liver enzymes and creatinine were normal. C3 and C4 complement were also normal, as was antinuclear antibody screen. Furthermore, tumor markers including alpha fetoprotein, cancer antigen 125 and carcinoembryonic antigen were also normal. Approximately 2–5 days into admission, bacterial CSF and blood cultures were reported as negative. CSF Cryptococcal antigen testing returned negative as did CSF HSV 1 and 2 and serum CMV quantitative PCR. One week into admission, Epstein Bar Virus (EBV) serum viral load came back at 12,434 copies/mL, Histoplasma capsulatum serum antigen enzyme immunoassay (EIA) was negative, Lyme disease EIA was negative. JC virus PCR was ordered but due to insufficient quantity of CSF, this test was not performed. Toxoplasmosis immunoglobulin (Ig) G was indeterminate at 2.7 IU/mL and IgM was negative. Serum syphilis EIA was negative. HIV testing then returned positive with a plasma viral load (VL) of 11,096 copies/mL and CD4 count of 324 cells/μL (27%), at which point he was treated with emtricitabine 200 mg, tenofovir 300 mg, darunavir 800 mg and ritonavir 100 mg p.o. daily.
Over the course of the first two weeks, the patient displayed signs of improvement with return of DTR and improvements in strength although he was still incontinent of stool. Furthermore, a trial of spontaneous voiding failed and he required reinsertion of the Foley catheter.
During the third week of his admission, the patient underwent brain biopsy of the right frontal lobe. The pathology revealed prominent angiocentric inflammatory patterns, composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells and occasional epithelioid histiocytes. Many of the cortical vessels showed an obliterative endothelialithis. The cortical inflammation overlied and was adjacent to areas of sub-acute organizing infarction. Immunohistochemistry for CD45, CD3 and CD20 confirmed that the majority of the cells were CD3+ and only rare B cells were seen. Most of the lymphocytes were T cells and this finding was suggestive of a reactive process. Immunohistochemistry was performed in both blocks of tissue due to the patchy nature of the pathology. Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was lost in areas of infarction. There was concomitant loss of neurofilament, indicating true infarction (as opposed to demyelination). The perivascular lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory infiltrates were composed of primarily CD3 positive T cells with fewer CD20 positive B cells. CD68 showed diffuse microglial activation throughout the cortex and was expressed in the lipidladed macrophages in the regions of infarction. The Ki67 expression was surprisingly low, staining only occasional cells in a perivascular distribution. Stains for both Polyoma virus and toxoplasmosis were negative. There were no viral inclusions and EBV-in situ preparations were also negative. These findings were consistent with grade 1 angiocentric lymph proliferative disorder with a positive EBV PCR in serum . As the pathology exam yielded the diagnosis, PCR for Toxoplasmosis gondii or JC virus DNA were not performed on the brain biopsy. A CT scan was performed following his brain biopsy to ensure no evidence of post-surgical complication. Here it was noted that several of the lesions seen on MRI had partial calcification.
The patient was treated with rituximab 10 mg/kg over 3 weeks for a total of 4 treatments, along with adjunctive steroids. Due to drug interactions, darunavir and ritonavir were replaced by raltegravir 400 mg twice daily. The patient received his first treatment in mid-April 2015 and was discharged 2 weeks later. At the time of discharge, he had a normal mental status. Cranial nerve exam continued to show a right 6th cranial nerve palsy. He also had widespread weakness with upper motor neuron signs, worse in the lower extremities but which had significantly improved. He was also able to ambulate with a walker. Viral load on discharge was 2339 copies/mL and CD4 was 683 cells/μL (CD4 (27%). Fungal cultures of CSF and brain tissue were negative at four weeks and as were Mycobacterial cultures at 12 weeks.
The patient was followed as an outpatient and made progressive improvements. MRI of the head performed in September 2015 showed interval improvement since March 2015 with disappearance of some lesions and reduction of the size of other lesions. No new lesions were identified. At 34 months, his neurological exam and ability to ambulate was normal. However, due to ongoing fatigue he remained off work. His most recent CD4 count in January 2018 was 643 cells/μL (39%) and his HIV viral load has remained undetectable since May 2015.