We report the case of an Arab male patient, 77 years old, known to have arterial hypertension for which he was not taking any medications. He had no personal or familial history of anemia.
In November 2020, he was admitted for acute onset of dyspnea and episodes of productive cough, fever, and fatigue, with no chest pain or gastrointestinal symptoms. On examination, the patient appeared in respiratory distress. He was weak and fatigued. His temperature was 38.9 °C, heart rate was 97 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 86% on ambient air and 94% when receiving oxygen through a nonrebreather mask at a rate of 6 liters per minute.
Chest radiography showed peripheral parenchymal opacities in both lungs. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated bilateral peripheral ground-glass opacities, as well as some areas of consolidation and thickened interlobular and intralobular lines known as “crazy paving,” as shown in Fig. .
The patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA and was admitted to a dedicated coronavirus intensive care unit.
Laboratory evaluation revealed high inflammatory markers: C-reactive protein 229 mg/l and serum ferritin level 1650.98 ng/ml. Hemoglobin level was 86 g/l, mean corpuscular volume 96 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration 34.2%, and reticulocyte level 30,300/μl. White blood cell count was 5400/ml, and platelet count was 180,000/μl. D-dimer level was slightly elevated at 0.6 μg/ml, and prothrombin time was not prolonged.
Regarding treatment, during his hospitalization, the patient received oxygen, azithromycin, hydroxychloroquine, vitamin C, zinc, low-molecular-weight heparin, and corticosteroids.
Ten days after his hospitalization, there was a clinical amelioration of his symptoms including respiratory distress and fever, as well as a decrease in inflammatory markers. The patient was therefore discharged.
Two months later, he presented to the hospital for increasing dyspnea with limited physical activity, asthenia, palpitations, and tinnitus. We suspected a second infection of SARS-CoV-2; however, the result of reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was negative. The patient did not report any history of bleeding, as well as no fever or bone pain.
On examination, heart rate was 110 beats per minute, temperature was 36.2 °C, respiratory rate was 17 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 95% on ambient air. The skin and the mucous membranes were pale with no associated jaundice. There was no hemorrhagic syndrome, no palpable peripheral lymphadenopathy, and no splenomegaly. Cardiac, pulmonary, and abdominal examinations were normal.
Chest radiography showed no opacity. Laboratory evaluation revealed normocytic normochromic anemia with reticulocytopenia. Hemoglobin level was 50 g/l, mean corpuscular volume 84.8 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration 34.2%, and reticulocyte level 9300/μl. White blood cell count was 3400/ml, and platelet count was 202,000/μl. The peripheral blood smear showed no anomaly.
The serum ferritin level was high at 836.04 ng/ml. Regarding other inflammatory markers, the C-reactive protein level was not elevated at 10.65 mg/l.
Blood levels of total, direct bilirubin, and lactate dehydrogenase were all normal, as were the results of renal function tests. Blood levels of vitamin B12 and folate were normal, and erythropoietin level was also in the normal range.
Bone marrow aspirate showed mild hypocellularity. Megakaryocytes were present and morphologically normal. The erythrocytic lineage was aplastic, accounting for less than 1%, and there were no giant pro-erythroblasts with vacuolated cytoplasm. The granulocytic lineage showed hyperplasia accounting for 82%, and all stages of maturation were present. Besides, no signs of cytological dysplasia or extramedullary cell infiltration were noted A bone marrow biopsy was performed. Trephine biopsy sections showed normocellular bone marrow with absence of erythroid precursors, increased granulopoiesis, and normal megakaryopoiesis. There was no evidence of lymphoid or blast infiltration, no secondary deposit, and no granuloma.
The diagnosis of acquired pure red cell aplasia was retained. An etiological investigation was initiated.
The patient was not taking any drugs or chemicals such as isoniazid or azathioprine known to cause pure red cell aplasia. PCR testing for parvovirus infection was negative. Serologic tests for hepatitis A, B, and C viruses and human immunodeficiency virus were negative. Testing for antinuclear antibodies and anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies was negative. He had no history of solid cancer and no symptoms potentially related to malignant disease, and tumor markers were normal. As for radiologic findings, computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was normal, ruling out thymoma and deep-seated enlarged lymph nodes, which might be linked to lymphoproliferative disorders.
In conclusion, no disease associated with secondary pure red cell aplasia was detected. Oral prednisone 1 mg/kg was initiated as standard treatment. The evolution of the disease was marked by the amelioration of symptoms and a gradual increase in hemoglobin level.