Patient was a 30-year-old male born in Ghana. He had been living in Spain for 10 years. Last trip to his country of origin was 2 years before. In February 2021, was diagnosed with SCD (hemoglobin SC genotype) with a hemoglobin level of 117 g/L. He had never had any complications and he was not taking any medication.
He was admitted with acute diarrhea and fever, oral intolerance, and mild dehydration. Blood tests at admission showed elevated acute phase reactants without anemia. Screening for SARS-CoV-2 resulted positive. Empiric antibiotic and standard COVID-19 treatment were initiated. During the first 5 days of hospitalization, digestive symptoms evolved favorably but patient developed an acute severe VOC. Despite treatment with abundant hydration and rigorous pain control, patient did not improve.
On day +6, he was febrile, tachypneic, and mildly tachycardic, blood pressure was 154/90 mm Hg, oxygen saturation was 89% on room air (improving to 97% with O2 3 L/min). On physical exam, he appeared uneasy. Cardiopulmonary auscultation was normal and abdomen exploration was soft and non-tender, without hepatosplenomegaly. He seemed somnolent but oriented and without focal neurological deficits. Arterial blood gas analysis at room air confirmed hypoxemia (pO2 67 mm Hg). Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia and a chest X-ray did not show alterations.
Complete blood count showed marked hemolysis (hemoglobin had dropped to 72 g/L with a reticulocyte count of 177 × 109/L) with an extremely high LDH (39,000 IU/L), and thrombocytopenia (41 × 109/L). Peripheral blood smear reported 3 schistocytes per field, immature granulocytes, and nucleated RBC. No Plasmodium spp. was reported on peripheral smear review. Bilirubin level was 2.9 mg/dL, ferritin was 27,469 ng/mL, D-dimer was >35,000 ng/mL (DDU) with normal basic coagulation tests. Patient associated acute kidney injury (GFR 56 mL/min) and the remainder of the tests showed analytic signs of ischemic damage of different organs (pancreas, liver, muscle, and myocardium). Blood, stool, and urine cultures were negative. ADAMTS-13 activity was 57%. A CTA scan excluded acute thromboembolic embolism, COVID-19 signs of lung injury or organizing pneumonia, showing normal pattern of pulmonary parenchyma.
In the light of rapidly progressive anemia and thrombocytopenia, the most likely scenario was a severe VOC drepanocytic crisis triggered by the viral infection, with subsequent bone and multi-organ microinfarctions. Although the respiratory failure did not accomplish diagnostic criteria for acute chest syndrome (ACS), a RBC exchange was performed on day +8. Patient hematocrit at that time was 21% and his total blood volume based on Nadler method was 5,933 mL, corresponding to 1,245 mL of RBC volume. A total of 2.5 RBC volumes of the patient were exchanged in 66 min with the goal of achieving a hematocrit of 30%. RBC exchange was performed with Spectra Optia v12.0 (TerumoBCT, Lakewood, CO) and 10 RBC units (accounting for 2,772 mL of RBC fluid), with an estimated 30% fraction of patient cells remaining after the procedure. Overall, after the procedure, hemoglobin was 115 g/L and levels of S/C hemoglobin dropped from 41%/45% to 9%/8%.
Following RBC exchange, pain improved rapidly and the hypoxemia ceased. Levels of hemoglobin stabilized around 80–100 g/L and a progressive improvement of ischemic alterations was observed. Despite this apparent improvement, from day +9, the patient continued with daily high fever (up to 39°C), progressive thrombocytopenia with a nadir of 29 × 109/L, persistent elevation of acute phase reactants (C-reactive protein 17 mg/dL, ferritin 24,667 ng/mL), and a leucoerythroblastic reaction in peripheral blood. On the first hand, the combination of signs and symptoms could be consistent with a hemophagocytic syndrome considering the fever, pancytopenia, and ferritin elevation. Nevertheless, it would not be expected to find a leucoerythroblastic reaction in peripheral blood. On the other hand, a possible concealed infection was considered and multiple serologies (including human immunodeficiency virus, Epstein-Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus, Parvovirus-B19, atypical bacteria, Toxoplasma, and Leishmania) were performed, obtaining either passed infections or negative results.
Meanwhile, bone marrow aspiration was performed showing scarce material, with complete absence of viable hematopoietic cells and abundance of necrotic material. Consequently, a bone marrow biopsy was performed on day +15: revealing predominant necrotic occupation of medullary spaces , without histologic signs of osteonecrosis, congruent with a case of BMN following the severe VOC. In view of this event, supportive treatment with transfusions was maintained until spontaneous recovering occurred, with normalization of complete blood count and analytic alterations by day +26. Patient was discharged after a month of hospitalization.
Retrospectively, complement membrane attack complex (C5b-9) deposition after incubation of laboratory endothelial cells with activated plasma from the patient was assessed . This novel technique provides a semiquantitative estimation of plasmatic in vitro ability to induce complement activation , and in our patient, the endothelial reactivity to C5b-9 was reported as intensely positive.