An 80-year-old female presented to the Emergency Department (ED) via ambulance with altered mental status. Her family reported the patient developed rapid onset of and worsening lethargy that started shortly after she awoke in the morning. Emergency medical services (EMS) noted the patient to be tachycardic and hypotensive en route. Upon arrival to the ED, she was somnolent but arousable to voice and unable to provide any details. Her past medical history included diabetes and hypertension. Vital signs upon presentation included a temperature of 38.4 °C, heart rate 128 beats per minute, blood pressure 100/64 mm Hg, respiratory rate 32, and pulse oximetry of 97% on room air. On exam she was noted to have a mottled left lower extremity with intact distal dorsal pedal and posterior tibial pulses. No crepitus or bullae were noted. Palpation of her entire left lower extremity appeared to be painful, especially in her groin and proximal calf area.
Laboratory analysis included white blood cell count of 12.2 and a significantly elevated venous lactic acid at 9.8. Acute renal failure was noted with a serum creatinine of 3.05 (baseline 1.00). Sodium was 140 and glucose 167. A venous blood gas showed pH 7.21, pCO2 32, and HCO3 13. Blood cultures were sent. Left lower leg X-rays showed mild soft tissue edema, but no gas in tissue planes. A point-of-care ultrasound (US) was performed (SonoSite, Bothell, WA) and showed thickened subcutaneous tissue with fluid accumulating superficial to the deep fascial layer > 4 mm in the superficial posterior compartment of the left lower leg. Distal to the popliteal fossa on the posterior aspect of the left leg deep to the fascial layer there was an anechoic fluid pocket with swirling of fluid noted with transducer compression (Additional file : Video 1). Abnormal sonographic architecture of the gastrocnemius muscle was noted as well . Additional file : Video 2 displays a normal lower extremity ultrasound for comparison purposes.
Patient was diagnosed with necrotizing fasciitis and ordered broad-spectrum antibiotics: vancomycin, clindamycin, and piperacillin–tazobactam. She was resuscitated with intravenous fluids. Surgical consultation was obtained. Recommendations included computerized tomography (CT) of the left lower extremity of which was obtained . This was performed without intravenous contrast and showed soft tissue swelling, subcutaneous fatty standing and mildly enlarged lymph nodes in the left inguinal region with possible small hematoma. The radiologist’s differential diagnosis included cellulitis or anasarca. Diffuse subcutaneous fatty stranding was noted in the left calf, ankle and foot region, with edema being most likely.
She was taken to the operating room by the surgical service where two incisions were made. The first surgical incision was made on the left lateral leg just anterior to the greater trochanter and was taken down to the level of the fascia. Fascial planes appeared intact and there was no evidence of necrotizing process. A second incision was made just inferior to the head of the fibula in the lateral compartment and again taken down to the level of the fascia, which was not entered. Intra-operative compartment pressures were measured and noted to be normal. The left lower leg incision was closed with staples and a vacuum dressing was placed on the left thigh incision.
Post-operatively, her clinical condition worsened. Both blood and intra-operative cultures grew Group A Streptococcus. She returned to the operating room on hospital day #2. Her lateral calf incision was extended proximally and distally; the fascia was opened up in all four lower extremity compartments and necrotic tissue was noted diffusely. Because of extent of necrosis in the left lower extremity, a below the knee guillotine amputation was performed. She returned to the operating room on hospital day #3 for further extensive debridement. On hospital day #4 her condition continued to worsen and she expired.