A 68-year-old Asian man without a particular medical history visited our hospital with a complaint of a mass with focal tenderness that had developed 8 years earlier in his left distal forearm. He did not complain of cold hypersensitivity (worsening of pain when exposed to coldness), but he had positive findings for Tinel’s sign accompanied by serious numbness upon percussion. The mass had a round, soft surface of about 0.8cm in macroscopic appearance, and it was movable within a narrow range . The patient did not have motor weakness, radiating pain, or a sensory change in the distal mass. He had no particular family medical history, and he had no pain or discomfort unless the tumor was pressed. Hematologic testing and plain radiography performed in the hospital produced no special findings. High-resolution ultrasonography was done to identify the size, accurate location, and patterns of the tumor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was not performed, owing to financial reasons expressed by the patient. A 0.9cm nodule was observed on an ultrasound. It was located in the subcutaneous fat layer of the forearm. It was a well-defined hypoechoic tumor with slight acoustic enhancement. The blood vessel was observed to be included inside the lesion. Hypervascularity was observed in the tumor on a Doppler ultrasound, which made us suspect a hemangioma or glomus tumor on the basis of the location, clinical symptoms, and ultrasound findings together .
Surgery was performed with the patient under local anesthesia. A 1cm longitudinal incision was made in the location of the tumor to identify the dark red solid tumor surrounded by a fibrous capsule distinguishable from surrounding tissues. During the resection, a small vessel that supplied the inside of the tumor was identified and ligated. After the tumor was removed, the patient was discharged from the hospital on the same day . The biopsy findings were that the size of the excised tumor was 0.8cm×0.6cm×0.4cm, the vascular tissues expanded to the tumor surrounded by the fibrous capsule were scattered, and tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm containing equal nuclei were visualized by hematoxylin and eosin staining under an optical microscope . Round, epithelioid cells proliferated around capillaries consisting of normal endothelial cells and sheets. Therefore, immunochemistry was additionally conducted because of pathologic findings suggestive of a glomus tumor rather than a hemangioma, which had been expected prior to the operation. The tumor cells were found to be smooth muscle actin–positive and CD34-positive, which definitively indicated a glomus tumor. The patient’s severe pain due to tenderness of tumor disappeared completely, and the he recovered well without other complications or signs of recurrence.