A 31-year-old man presented to our hospital with dull and nocturnal pain. A protruding mass overlying the left side chest wall with progressive growing was noted.
According to the patient’s statement, the mass gradually increased in size over these 3 mo. The pain interfered with the patient’s performance of daily activities. There were no symptoms related to airway compression or respiratory disturbance.
The patient had a past history of left lower lobe lung adenocarcinoma in situ and underwent wedge resection 3 mo ago.
The patient had no family history.
Physical examination revealed tenderness on palpation and the presence of a firm, non-movable, well-defined 5 cm mass. The motion of the left shoulder and overhead arm elevation was interfered by this mass. There was no other palpable mass over the head, neck, or axillary lymph nodes.
The results of the laboratory tests, including those for complete blood count, biochemical proﬁling, and coagulation function, were all within the normal range.
Computed tomography (CT) with contrast showed a focal osteoblastic mass in sternum manubrium region with bony exostosis and adjacent soft tissue calcification . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed the presence of hypermetabolic activity with a mass located over the upper sternum . Bone scintigraphy also revealed increased focal uptake in the area, indicating a strong suspicion of a primary sternal tumor . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a focal ill-defined bony mass of the sternum with cortical destruction and periosteal reaction. The tumor size was approximately 5.0 cm × 4.2 cm × 5.2 cm, with an edge abutting the aortic arch . The presence of malignancies including chondrosarcoma was suspected in the differential diagnosis.
Section through the tumor at the sternum showed hypercellularity and contained groups of neoplastic chondrocytes with extensive chondroid matrix component. The tumor cells had enlarged, hyperchromatic nuclei and occasional binucleation. Some bony fragments were also present. The immunostaining of the tumor cell revealed positivity for S100 and focal positivity for IDH-1. It was consistent with grade II chondrosarcoma.
The gross specimen showed a 6.5 cm × 6.0 cm × 5.0 cm gelatinous and elastic to firm tumor mass composed of hyaline cartilage . Pathology suggested grade II moderately differentiated chondrosarcoma with clear and uninvolved margins. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining indicated less cellularity without atypia and a lobulated architecture with abundant cartilaginous matrix separated by the fibrovascular bands. The spread trabecular bone filled the lacunar space, which was surrounded by the hyaline cartilaginous matrix .