A 26-year-old man was admitted to our hospital on September 1, 2017. He had a history of repeated fatigue, poor appetite, yellowing skin, and yellowish urine for more than three years, which aggravated one month ago.
At the age of 26 (one month ago admitted to our hospital), after drinking beer, he developed significant aggravation of yellowing skin and yellowish urine, with fatigue, poor appetite, aversion to oil, diarrhea, progressive emaciation, and weight loss of about 20 kg. Extremely abnormal liver function was confirmed [alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 126.8 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 109.2 IU/L, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) 340.7 IU/L, total bilirubin (TBIL) 322.5 μmol/L, and direct bilirubin (DBIL) 173.1 μmol/L].
He started suffering from repeated skin lesions at the age of 3 years. The previous skin biopsy suggested photosensitive dermatitis. He was advised to avoid light at ordinary times, which relieved his skin condition. At the age of 18, he was infected with hepatitis A, which was subsequently cured. In the past three years, he often came in contact with pesticides and more frequently suffered from dermatitis. At the age of 23, he suffered from mild jaundice, with exposed skin thickening and chapping, while he was diagnosed with abnormal liver function for the first time.
His father had suffered from “jaundice hepatitis” at the age of 12, and his mother, partner, and children were all healthy.
Physical examination upon admission showed severe yellowing of the skin and sclera, rough and irregular skin on the arm, face and perioral area, and lichenification in some areas . Abdominal palpation revealed swelling of the liver and spleen, and suspicious shifting dullness.
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested splenomegaly, and a small volume of ascites, and the characteristic description was fullness and enlargement of the liver with diffuse fatty infiltration of liver parenchyma .
The monitoring showed abnormal liver function, high proteinuria, and abnormal blood lipid metabolism. Initial diagnosis at admission was abnormal liver function of unknown etiology. We systematically checked for common diseases that caused liver damage. According to the history, alcohol consumption was the predisposing factor, but the alcohol consumption did not meet the diagnostic criteria for alcoholic liver disease. Due to frequent exposure to pesticides in recent years, “drug/chemical liver injury” could not be completely ruled out, but could not explain the existence of skin lesions. After admission, hepatitis B virus markers, anti-hepatitis A virus (HAV)-immunoglobulin M (IgM), anti-hepatitis E virus (HEV)-IgM, Torch check IgM (rubella, toxoplasma), cytomegalovirus IgM, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and pre-transfusion ICT [human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), and TP] were tested to exclude virus-related hepatitis. The autoimmune antibody spectrum (ANA, AMA-M2, LKM, and ANCA) was tested to exclude autoimmune liver disease; while autoantibody profiles (ds-DNA, ANA, etc.) were checked to exclude liver injury caused by systemic diseases [such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)] and connective tissue diseases. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), T3, T4, FT3, and FT4 were checked to exclude liver injury associated with hyperthyroidism, while schistosomiasis antibodies were tested to exclude schistosomiasis-related cirrhosis. The normal blood amylase and imaging findings of the abdomen excluded chemical liver injury caused by pancreatitis, and myocardial enzymes and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) were normal. Electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and myocardial enzymogram were used to exclude liver injury caused by cardiogenic liver congestion, and abdominal vascular ultrasound was performed to exclude vascular liver diseases, such as Bucca syndrome. Given the juvenile onset of the disease, further screening for inherited metabolic liver disease was performed. No nervous system signs were found, and electromyography (EMG)/neutral endopeptidase (NEP) and amplitude integrated electroencephalography (AEEG) were normal. Ceruloplasmin, serum copper, and 24-h urine copper were also normal. No corneal K-F ring was observed, thereby excluding hepatolenticular degeneration. Given the normal saturation of ferritin and transferrin and the absence of homogeneous and diffuse iron deposition in liver imaging, hemochromatosis was not considered. No developmental disorder, “baby face”, repeated or severe hypoglycemic attacks, muscle strength and muscle tone decline, evidence of glycogen accumulation, or history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) was found, and normal levels of α1 antitrypsin ruled out α1 antitrypsin deficiency. Based on the history of photosensitive dermatitis in childhood and liver damage in adolescence, the initial clinical diagnosis was porphyria. Further examination of uroporphyrin was negative; red fluorescence was seen around red blood cells in his peripheral blood smear under a fluorescence microscope . Fluorescence intensity (Ex 400 nm, Em 595 nm) was measured with a Thermo VARIOSKAN LUX fluorescence spectrophotometer. The fluorescence intensities of urine, whole blood, and plasma were 2.14, 17.49, and 17.17, respectively, which were significantly higher than the normal fluorescence intensities of urine (1.231), whole blood (0.059), and plasma (0.912). Bone mineral density test suggested bone loss and increased fracture risk. Skin and liver biopsy results were consistent with porphyria, and liver histopathology (G3S3) suggested superposed drug-induced/chemical liver injury.