A 58-year-old male arrived at policlinic. He complained on dysuria, ischuria for several months and macrohaematuria. He did not have physical symptoms of acute blood loss. Serum Creatinine level was normal (68 mg/dL). Ultrasound examination of kidneys and urinary tract revealed solid bladder mass of about 55 mm in diameter without signs of metastatic spread. Patient had no significant anemia (HGB 117 g/l), but HGB level decreased from 143 g/l in two days.
Before hospitalization additional imaging was performed:MRI: bladder tumor 63 mm with invasion of the right ureter with right ureterohydronephrosis. On nephroscintigraphy: nonfunctioning right kidney. Irrigation through the three-way catheter was ineffective. Conservative treatment of haematuria (Транексам® (Tranexam), Obninsk, Russian Federation, tablets 500 mg 3 times per day) was ineffective. Cystoscopy was non-informative due to profuse haematuria, with multiple blood clots in the bladder.
After following discussion with referring physician it was decided to perform selective embolization of bladder tumor due to potential life-threatening blood loss. Pre-operative CT-Angiography showed significant neovasculaturization of the tumor without obvious source of active bleeding.
Patient underwent an embolization procedure: Right Common Femoral artery access (Vascular sheath Prelude 5F, Merit Medical, USA., catheter Cobra C2 5F, Merit Medical, U.S.A.), bilateral superselective embolization of anterior division branches of Internal Iliac Arteries using microcatheter 2,4F (Progreat-α micro catheter, Terumo Corporation, Japan) and Avigo hydrophilic guidewire, Medtronic, USA). Superior and inferiorvesical arteries on both sides , left prostatic artery and left obturator arteries were embolized using 500 μm Embozene particles (Boston Scientific Corporation, USA) 1 vial per procedure (diluted with contrast media and saline in amount to stable suspension) to achieve subtotal stasis (near absence of contrast enhancement of distal parts of above-mentioned arteries), subtotal embolization of both anterior portions of Internal Iliac Arteries (notable ceasing of contrast flow from arising point) upon exit using gelfoam (Pfizer, USA) and Embozene suspension (self-made combination of Gelfoam particles about 20% of 10 ml syringe volume, mixed with Embozene spheres about 10% of syringe volume with contrast media and saline) . Such comprehensive embolization was performed as our dedicated medical facility with determined equipment is exclusive in terms of treating oncology patients and this particular patient can’t be brought here in time if bleeding reoccure at home.
The procedures were performed under local anesthesia using Lidocain 1%. Intravenous Fentanyl 0,2 mg (Fentanyl, Moscow endocrine factory, Moscow, Russia) was injected before embolization for analgesia during the procedure and programmed IV morphine pump connected following the procedure. Patient suffered from severe pelvic pain for 4 h after the procedure and mild pain in pelvic area for 2 days. Haematuria ceased on day 3 after the procedure. For planning further treatment transurethral biopsy of the mass was performed, necrotic villous papillary tumor in lower semicircle of the bladder was visualized. Two days later urologist diagnosed peritonitis. On Ultrasound examination massive amount of free hyperechoic liquid, without gas was reported. Urgent exploratory laparotomy shown 3 to 4 l of free muddy smelly fluid in the abdominal cavity and total necrosis of the bladder wall. Sanation of abdominal cavity, necrectomy, cystostomy, and bilateral nephrostomy were performed. Patient deceased from multiple organ failure on day eight despite symptomatic therapy in intensive care unit. An autopsy report described total necrosis of tumor with necrosis of underlying bladder wall and multiple organ failure due to sepsis .