A 51-year-old female with a history of rheumatoid arthritis and a 10.5-pack-year smoking history presented with an aspergilloma in her right lung. After failing medical management, she was treated with a right pneumonectomy at an outside institution. This was complicated by BPF and empyema of the pneumonectomy cavity. She underwent two additional thoracotomies requiring rib resection, and placement of serratus anterior and later latissimus dorsi flap to close the fistula. Seven months following her last operation, she presented to us with stridor, persistent cough, and dysphagia, concerning for postpneumonectomy syndrome. Review of last computed tomography (CT) imaging from three months after the pneumonectomy revealed a multiloculated pleural space, with air fluid levels in the pneumonectomy cavity. An updated CT scan showed interval progressive rightward mediastinal shift with nearly complete obliteration of the pneumonectomy cavity by the heart . A bronchoscopy was performed, which demonstrated narrowing of the left mainstem bronchus and stenosis of the lower lobe bronchial orifice due to external compression of the airways. Results of a previous complex right-sided BPF with two areas of disrupted bronchial staple line were noted .
The patient elected to proceed with operative correction of her postpneumonectomy syndrome. A thoracotomy in the fifth intercostal space was performed and dense adhesions in the chest with rotation of mediastinal structures were faced. Upon entering the pleural space, a small loculated serous fluid collection was encountered. To rule out an infected field, the pleural rind and fluid samples were sent for intraoperative gram stains, which returned negative. Cultures were also submitted. The mediastinum was mobilized from the chest wall, taking care to avoid damage to the muscle flaps, which had previously sealed the BPF. As a result, only the mid and inferior portion of the mediastinum was mobilized. A saline immersion test was performed to ensure the integrity of the muscle flap seal over the right mainstem bronchus. The implants were sized based on measuring the amount of saline instilled in the chest, and close hemodynamic monitoring of arterial and central venous pressures. Before placing the implants, the thoracotomy was closed temporarily after placement of implant sizers, monitoring hemodynamics to ensure there was no right heart compression. Two implants (250 mL and 100 mL) were placed into the pleural cavity, and the thoracotomy was closed. The postoperative recovery was uneventful. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 5. She noted complete resolution of her stridor, cough, as well as dysphagia four weeks post-operatively. Her post-operative chest radiograph showed partial medialization of the inferior mediastinum with persistent rightward deviation of the proximal trachea . At time preparation of this manuscript, the patient continues to have full resolution of symptoms at fourteen months following surgery.