The patient is a 49-year-old male with a body mass index of 22.15 and no significant past medical history who underwent a THA on the right side. He has no history of diabetes; however, he does smoke multiple cigarettes a day. He was positioned in the lateral decubitus position with an axillary roll for a posterior approach to the hip. The operation lasted approximately 2 h and 45 min and was without complication. The patient was recovering appropriately until post-operative day 1. At that time, examination revealed absent wrist and finger extension with pain and numbness on the dorsum of the hand. Anesthesia was consulted and helped to formulate the diagnosis of radial nerve palsy. The patient was placed in a wrist brace and began working with occupational therapy while in the hospital. At discharge, he continued to work with occupational therapy for the radial nerve palsy and was followed closely in the orthopedic clinic. At 2-week postoperation, he was progressing appropriately with his THA; however, he still lacked grip strength and could not extend his wrist or fingers appropriately. Therefore, an electromyography (EMG) was undertaken to evaluate the radial nerve further. EMG revealed normal sensory nerve action potentials in the median, ulnar, and radial nerves. However, compound muscle action potential showed slowing with conduction block in the spiral groove and decreased recruitment of the brachioradialis, extensor carpi radialis, and extensor indicis pollicis. The triceps were intact and unaffected. The results were consistent with radial nerve palsy in the spiral groove, or “Saturday night palsy” . The patient has now been following in the orthopedic clinic for 2-month time, and the radial nerve palsy has been improving. The sensory deficits have decreased and now there is only pain and paraesthesia on the dorsum of the thumb. Weakness and inability to extend the wrist are still present; however, subjectively the patient feels that he is improving. At this time, the patient is following with neurology as well as the hand surgeons for further evaluation and treatment options. The hip arthroplasty is progressing appropriately as well and the patient has had no issues. At 6-month follow-up in the orthopedic clinic, the radial nerve palsy has fully resolved. Physical examination findings of the patient showed full wrist extension, wrist flexion, finger abduction, and finger flexion. Thumb extension and general strength continued to improve from the previous follow-up but was not fully resolved, rated at a 4/5. The thumb extension and general strength would continue to be monitored at the next follow-up visit. As symptoms were improving, no additional therapy or treatment was necessary. The hip arthroplasty progressed appropriately as well and the patient has had no issues since surgery. He is back to work without limitation and able to complete all activities of daily living. Finally, at 1-year follow-up, the radial nerve palsy continues to remain fully resolved with no additional complications. Physical examination findings of the left wrist showed full wrist extension and full finger extension with intact sensation to light touch throughout all radial nerve distributions. The patient no longer has any physical or sensory deficits due to the radial nerve palsy. Strength is now full, rated 5/5 in thumb extension. Evaluation of the patient was completed by the same physician throughout the course of treatment, and the patient will now continue to follow a normal post-operative total hip protocol for clinical visits.