A 31-year-old nulliparous 26 weeks’ pregnant woman was referred to our hospital. She had no notable previous illness or medical condition. Ultrasound and fetal echocardiography revealed fetal SVT with a suspected short ventriculoatrial (VA) interval, fetal heart rate (FHR) of 216 bpm, and 1:1 conduction. We also found ascites and subcutaneous edema as signs of fetal heart failure . Maternal biochemistry for thyroid function and infection was normal.
Direct fetal antiarrhythmic therapy with amiodarone was planned after the patient’s consent was received. We administered 1200 mg of oral amiodarone 24 h before the procedure to prevent redistribution to the maternal compartment after performing maternal electrocardiogram (ECG) and consulting the cardiologist.
At the beginning of the procedure, we planned to use the fetal intravenous route (dose 2.5 mg/kg) and to continue with the intraperitoneal (IP) route (dose 2.5 mg/kg). With ultrasound guidance, we identified the injection site and administered 1% lidocaine as local anesthesia. With the freehand technique, the amniocentesis needle was inserted and slowly advanced to the umbilical cord. We performed a small aspiration to ensure the needle was in the umbilical vein and continued with a slow injection of 2.5 mg of amiodarone . Before we administered the IP dose, the patient suddenly complained of shortness of breath. We stopped the procedure and gave her oxygen (3 L/min) via a nasal cannula, and subsequent maternal vital signs were within normal limits. Ultrasound showed an FHR of 107 bpm. We decided not to continue with the IP dose.
One day after the procedure, the FHR returned to 220 bpm. The patient agreed to undergo another direct fetal antiarrhythmic therapy via the fetal IP route in the operation room with continuous maternal vital sign and ECG monitoring. With ultrasound guidance and the freehand technique, we administered 5 mg (dose 5 mg/kg) amiodarone to the fetal peritoneal cavity . This time, the procedure was uneventful, but the FHR was still 220 bpm immediately after the procedure.
The morning after the procedure, the FHR had decreased to 120 bpm with sinus rhythm . During 4 days of observation, the FHR was continuously normal (∼120–130 bpm), and we decided to reduce the maternal amiodarone to 400 mg/day and discharged the patient. We performed a weekly follow-up, and the fetal hydrops (ascites and subcutaneous edema) had resolved 2 weeks after the procedure . Further follow-up was uneventful, and we gradually decreased the maternal amiodarone dose to 100 mg/day. At 39+5 weeks of gestation, we performed a cesarean section, and a baby girl weighing 3400 g with an APGAR score of 9/10 was delivered. Neonatal ECG and thyroid screening were within normal limits. Echocardiography revealed a small patent oval foramen with a left-to-right shunt. The baby was discharged 3 days after delivery and exhibited normal growth until 3 months of follow-up (latest follow-up).