A 41-year-old nonsmoker female was admitted to our hospital for chest pain that had persisted for over 1 week. Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed a soft tissue mass shadow in the right posterior mediastinum approximately 3.7 × 2.8 × 6.7 cm in size, and the boundary with the adjacent esophagus was unclear . Endoscopic ultrasound examination showed a 3.5 cm × 3.3 cm submucosal eminence of the esophagus. The boundary remained clear with uniform hypoechoic changes . Colour Doppler ultrasound of blood flow displayed little blood flow signals inside the mass. Ultrasonic elastography showed that the texture of the lesion was soft, and the strain ratio (SR) value was 4.91. The disease was initially diagnosed as a mediastinal mass. After the preoperative examination, the patient underwent mediastinal mass enucleation by video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). The tumor was completely resected macroscopically, and postoperative pathology supported the diagnosis of esophageal GIST. The mass (6.0× 4.0× 3.0 cm) showed a complete capsule and weave-like dimensional structure upon gross examination. The histological examination revealed that the tumor consisted of short spindle cells with red homogeneous stroma and mucoid degeneration with a mitotic index of < 5/5 square mm2. Thus, according to the modified National Institute of Health (NIH) criteria, the tumor was considered a high-risk GIST.
On immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells were unequally positive for CD117 , weakly positive for DOG1 , negative for SMA , strongly positive for CD34 , and positive for SDHB . The Ki-67 labelling index was 1% . Sanger sequencing revealed no mutations in the exons corresponding to the c-KIT and PDGFRA genes, including exons 9, 11, 13 and 17 of KIT and exons 12, 14 and 18 of PDGFRA . Next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed the presence of an FGFR2-KIAA1217 gene fusion (3.88% abundance in tissue, ). A break-apart fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) assay confirmed the FGFR2 translocation . Follow-up was suggested for this patient. The patient did not experience relapse during the 8-month follow-up after surgery, and no further treatment was administered.