A 14-year-old Thai boy presented to the community hospital with a complaint of intermittent cough of two weeks duration. Four years previously, he had undergone a tracheostomy for laryngeal stenosis following prolonged intubation after a burr-hole craniotomy for subdural hematoma evacuation. A No. 5 stainless steel tracheostomy tube was put in place. The current tracheostomy tube had been used for one year.
Two months previously, the patient started coughing and during the daily cleaning session his parents found that the inner tube was missing. He was brought to the family physician immediately. The patient was diagnosed with acute bronchitis and a new tracheostomy tube of the same size was inserted. After discharge, the parents reported that their child still coughed off and on every week. He slept well during the night without any breathing difficulties and had no abnormal breath sounds.
One day prior to admission, the boy had more severe and persistent cough. He was sent to the community hospital again. The chest X-ray revealed a metallic density foreign body in his right main bronchus. Subsequently, he was referred to our university hospital for definite treatment.
On arrival, the patient had occasional cough with hyperpnea. His vital signs were: a body temperature of 38.0° Celsius; a pulse rate of 140 beats per minute; respiratory rate of 44 times per minute; and blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg. The chest auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds on the right side but no chest wall retraction. An X-ray of the chest was performed. Patchy infiltration of the right lower lung and a metallic foreign body in the right main bronchus were found. He was transferred to the operating room for bronchoscopic removal under general anesthesia. The foreign body (inner tube of the previous tracheostomy tube) was retrieved from the right main bronchus and removed through the tracheostomy stoma . A fracture at the junction between the inner tube and connector was found . His pneumonia was treated with intravenous amoxicillin with clavulanic acid for three days before switching to oral form for 11 days. A follow-up chest X-ray showed decreased infiltration compared with the prior film. He was discharged with improvement of his symptoms. He had fully recovered at the one month follow-up and there were no signs of any late complications.