A 9-year-old white boy from the United Kingdom presented to our emergency department generally unwell, and unable to weight-bear due to a painful swelling of his left foot, with no preceding history of trauma. Ten days prior to this admission he woke from bed unable to walk on his left foot. Two days later he attended the emergency department, feeling otherwise well in himself. He received a clinical diagnosis of Sever’s disease and was discharged to have physiotherapy in the community.
Four days after the first discharge from accident and emergency, his foot became increasingly painful so he returned to the hospital. This time clinical findings included a painful, erythematous, hot swollen heel and ankle. Plain radiographs were obtained with increased density noted within the calcaneal apophysis . He was again discharged with a diagnosis of Sever’s disease. The features of Sever’s disease, however, are typically bilateral without the erythema and heel swelling.
When the patient presented for a third time (a further 4 days later, and a total of 10 days after the initial onset of symptoms) it was noted that he was constitutionally unwell, pyrexial, and dehydrated with severe pain in his foot. Lymphangitis was extending up his lower leg, and the soft tissue swelling around his ankle joint was marked. Blood results revealed a white cell count (WCC) of 11.1×109/L, neutrophils 8.0×109/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 68mm/hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) 198mg/L. An orthopedic opinion was requested, and he was promptly admitted for suspected osteomyelitis. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of his left foot was obtained and it revealed osteomyelitis of the calcaneus bone and infection in the surrounding soft tissue .
After the MRI scan confirmed osteomyelitis of calcaneus, the patient was urgently taken to theatre for drainage of a left foot abscess and drilling of os calcis for osteomyelitis. A transverse incision was made and copious amounts of pus drained (sent for microscopy, culture, sensitivity, Gram stain and acid-fast culture; Fig. ). The wound underwent a complete washout with 6 liters of saline, and the os calcis was drilled with a 4.5mm drill then washed-out further . Aqueous iodine and ribbon gauze were used to gently pack the cavity and hold open the incision.
Antibiotics were withheld until after a sample was sent in theatre to ensure optimum chances of a successful culture. Penicillin-based antibiotics (flucloxacillin and co-amoxiclav) administered intravenously coupled with fusidic acid taken orally were commenced immediately after a sample was sent in theatre, as per microbiology advice. His foot was placed in a below-knee backslab to reduce movement and decrease chances of infection spread across tissue planes.
There was regular monitoring of inflammatory markers to monitor his response to antibiotics, and two further wound washouts were performed. On the second wash (third look) the wound was healing well with granulation tissue so the wound was partially closed .
Staphylococcus aureus was found to be responsible for the infection and, although community-acquired, it was confirmed to be a Panton-Valentine leucocidin (PVL)-negative strain. The patient continued his intravenously administered antibiotic regimen for a total of 2 weeks from the time of surgery, after which he was discharged home to continue with a 4-week course of flucloxacillin and fusidic acid administered orally. The blood results on discharge (3 weeks after admission) revealed a WCC of 5.4×109/L, neutrophils 1.7×109/L, ESR 18mm/hour and CRP <5mg/L.
At 6 weeks he was reviewed in clinic; his symptoms had resolved and he was able to fully weight bear without pain. We are happy to report that no complications were identified after 12 months of follow up, and he is playing football in his regional league.