An incidental left fusiform vertebral artery (VA) aneurysm was coiled in a 60-year-old man . An early recanalization (after 4 months) was found and the attitude was conservative. After 7 years, the aneurysm enlarged and the patient underwent a second coil embolization. After 6 months, a new recanalization developed and a contralateral fusiform VA aneurysm appeared. Although the patient was asymptomatic, follow-up with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and digital subtraction angiography after 3 and 10 months, showed enlargement of both aneurysms [Figures and ]. The patient was referred to our hospital and underwent cerebrovascular reconstruction and aneurysm resection in June 2014. Antiplatelet treatment was initiated prior to surgery.
The surgery was performed under neurophysiological monitoring. The patient was placed in a right park bench position. A handheld Doppler was used to find the subcutaneous occipital artery (OA). An L-shape postauricular skin incision was made . Skin flap was elevated and the OA was harvested. Simultaneously, the radial artery (RA) was harvested from the left arm. The suboccipital muscles were dissected layer by layer while the OA was safely exposed. Retrosigmoid and transcondylar approach was performed through a suboccipital craniotomy. The posterior half of the sigmoid sinus wall was skeletonized to maximize the lateral operative field. The V3 segment of VA was exposed in the suboccipital triangle. Hypoglossal canal was skeletonized by the drilling of condylar fossa. Posterior half of jugular tubercle could be removed extradurally under hip of sigmoid sinus securing wide operative field for intracranial proximal VA. The dura was opened. The giant coiled aneurysm was ventral to the caudal cranial nerves (CNs) [Figures , and ]. A small arterial branch arising from the proximal portion of the aneurysm was reconstructed by OA with end-to-side anastomosis [Figures and ].
A fish mouth shape trimming was performed on the donor vessel to ensure endothelial layers of donor and recipient attached together.
After temporary trapping, the aneurysm coil mass was incised by monopolar coagulator . Microscissors and ultrasonic aspirator were used to cut and remove the tight packed coils. Careful and meticulous coil removal was performed to avoid damage of CNs and brainstem. At that point, aneurysm removal was made possible. The RA graft (RAG) was prepared in an albumin-containing heparinized saline solution after taking it from the forearm. Subsequently both ends of RAG were anastomosed with VA in a fish mouth trimming: RAG to intracranial V4 end-to-end and RAG to V3 end-to-side fashion [Figures and ].
Intraoperative indocyanine green video angiography, Doppler sonography, and a transit-time blood flow meter were done to confirm bypass patency and perforator arteries integrity. Proximal aneurysm clipped reinforced was applied . Operation time was 6 h.
The patient could walk without assistance after 7 days, although left thermal hypoalgesia, due to Wallenberg's syndrome appeared because of small infarction of medulla oblongata . Respiratory support with ventilator during sleep at night was transient for 2 months and a half. After 6 months, the patient had a modified Rankin scale of 2, with no changes 18 months after surgery.
Radiological images confirmed no changes on the right fusiform VA aneurysm size [Figures and ].