A 55-year-old woman consulted her general practitioner for a persistent abdominal pain lasting several months. An injected abdominal CT scan performed 10 months before was normal.
For a chronic effort dyspnea associated with left bundle branche, she had a previewed myocardic scintigraphy and a pulmonary function that were both normal.
Since the abdominal pain persisted, another ambulatory abdominal thoracic CT scan was performed. Non-ionic low-osmolar RCM (Iomeron 400® Bracco s.p.a., Sion, Switzerland) was injected intravenously (iv). Several seconds after the injection, the patient presented with an acute dyspnea associated with wheezing and mild hemoptysis. Pulmonary status showed prolonged expiratory phase and bilateral wheezing.
Suspecting an anaphylactoid reaction, she received immediately 100 mg of hydrocortisone, 30 mg of clemastine (iv), and 0.3 mg of adrenaline (intramuscular), with no clinical response to this treatment. Immediately, while the patient was still lying on the CT table, a chest CT scan was performed.
She was immediately transferred to the emergency unit. At the time of admission, arterial blood gas showed pH 7.41, arterial partial pressure of oxygen was 8.1 kPa, arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide was 4.7 kPa, PaO2/Fio2 ratio was 18.1 kPa. Blood sample showed a mild inflammatory biologic syndrome with leukocytosis (14.0 g/L), thrombocytosis (401 g/L), and slightly elevated levels of C-reactive protein (28.9 mg/L). Initially, the NT-proBNP level was around 179 ng/L, and then slightly increased to 383 ng/L within 3 days. The Troponine and creatin kinase levels were in normal range. The rest of the blood test results were within normal limits, revealing no other organ failure.
The electrocardiogram revealed a block in the left bundle branch, which was already known and remain unchanged.
The thoracic CT scan revealed diffuse bilateral alveolar infiltrates and vascular redistribution, with a normal cardiac silhouette, consistent with the diagnosis of NCPE .
Thus, diuretic treatment was conducted in association with a high-dose corticotherapy (1 mg/kg/d). She stayed in the intensive care unit for 24 hours, and no criteria for invasive ventilation was documented. After a short non-invasive ventilation therapy, oxygen has been rapidly weaned. The patient was discharged from the intensive care unit after 24 hours. No other blood arterial gas tests were conducted. The patient stayed for 48 hours in internal medicine department and then was discharged in a healthy condition.