A 66-year-old man with a 27-year history of diabetes was hospitalized because of severe morning hypoglycemia and postprandial hyperglycemia.
At age 39, he had shown symptoms of polyuria and was diagnosed as having type 2 diabetes. At the initial treatment, an allergic skin reaction to porcine insulin occurred, requiring a switch from insulin to oral hypoglycemic agents. He often missed clinic visits, which contributed to very poor glycemic control. He was then hospitalized for glycemic control (HbA1c: 11.7% (104 mmol/mol)) when he was 54 years old. During this hospitalization, his fasting serum C-peptide level was 1.41 ng/mL and blood glucose levels were promptly improved by dietary treatment with oral hypoglycemic agents (sulfonylurea and α-glucosidase). He underwent photocoagulation therapy for proliferative-diabetic retinopathy and his creatinine level was 1.0 mg/dL at this time.
At age 56, premixed human insulin 30/70 was administered after an episode of diabetic ketoacidosis with subcutaneous abscesses, but, again, due mainly to his poor adherence, his glycemic control had remained very poor with HbA1c of approximately 10.0% (86 mmol/mol). Then, a complete cessation of treatment for three years resulted in a marked HbA1c increase to 18.9% (183 mmol/mol). At this point (61 years old), multiple daily insulin therapy using insulin analogs, i.e. aspart before each meal and detemir before bedtime, was introduced and his HbA1c levels gradually decreased. However, after one year of treatment with insulin analogs, hypoglycemic attacks in the morning manifested. In addition, postprandial hyperglycemia developed and his severe glycemic fluctuations were not reduced by switching basal insulin from detemir to degludec and glargine. The plasma creatinine level was maintained at approximately 1.0 mg/dL with proteinuria for three years after the beginning of the hypoglycemic episodes, but had recently risen to nearly 2.0 mg/dL. He had hypertension and developed peripheral artery disease with mild claudication. To prevent exacerbation of vascular complications, the patient has been treated with an angiotensin II receptor blocker, since age 64 years. He was diagnosed as having hypothyroidism with negative thyroid antibodies and had been treated with levothyroxine since age 65 years. To examine the mechanism underlying his glycemic fluctuations and to devise an effective treatment strategy, he was admitted to our hospital.
On admission, his fasting blood glucose level and HbA1c were 62 mg/dL (3.4 mmol/L) and 9.3% (82 mmol/mol), respectively. Total insulin level was extremely elevated at 4500 μU/mL. The total insulin values represented both endogenous and exogenous insulin because not only human insulin but also recombinant insulin analogs cross-react with the ARCHITECT® insulin assay (Abbott Laboratories) . He was positive for insulin antibodies with the binding rate being 80.4% and Scatchard plot analysis (on the 2nd day of hospitalization) revealed 0.0194 × 108 M− 1 (K1) and 184 × 10− 8 M (R1) , indicating high binding capacity and low affinity. The characteristics were similar to those of the autoantibodies reported in IAS patients. His HLA (human leukocyte antigen) haplotypes were HLA-DRB1* 040101/ HLA-DRB1*0406 and HLA-DQB1*030201/ HLA-DQB1*050101 and, among them, HLA-DRB1*0406 is associated with the highest risk for susceptibility to IAS . Insulin-specific IgE antibody and islet-related autoantibodies, such as those against glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) and insulinoma-associated antigen-2 (IA-2) were undetectable. Counter regulatory hormones against insulin action were not lowered . Estimated glomerular filtration rates were between 13 and 25 mL/min/1.73m2, showing chronic renal failure. Serum hepatic enzyme levels were within normal ranges. Neither computed tomography nor magnetic resonance imaging revealed any tumors in the pancreas, excluding the existence of insulinoma. Taking these findings together, the IAS-like insulin antibodies were considered to be the cause of glycemic instability in this patient.
First, to prevent the frequent hypoglycemic attacks, we repeatedly adjusted the treatment regimen . We stopped insulin glargine before bedtime, followed by cessation of insulin aspart before each meal. At 36 h after the cessation of all insulin administrations, insulin levels fell to 2500 μU/mL and glucose levels were elevated and remained over 360 mg/dL (20 mmol/L) throughout the day, indicating supplemental insulin, either exogenous or endogenous, to be necessary for prevention of hyperglycemia. Next, bolus insulin, restarted with altered formulations comprised of regular human insulin or insulin lispro, inhibited neither postprandial hyperglycemia nor morning hypoglycemia. Therefore, instead of increasing exogenous insulin, we administered other agents to selectively suppress postprandial hyperglycemia.
First, liraglutide, and then voglibose were added to insulin treatment, but continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) using iPro2® (Medtronic Japan, Tokyo, Japan) revealed that treatment with insulin lispro 3 U before each meal, liraglutide 0.9 mg before breakfast and voglibose 0.2 mg before lunch was not able to suppress either marked diurnal hyperglycemia or the early-morning hypoglycemia . Voglibose could not be used more than once a day due to exacerbation of diarrhea. The replacement of insulin lispro with mitiglinide before each meal effectively inhibited glycemic fluctuations. Typical CGM data are shown in Fig. b. The mean amplitude of glycemic excursion values for 72 h (analyzed on 51st-53rd and 61st-63rd days of hospitalization) was decreased from 216 mg/dL (12 mmol/L) to 157 mg/dL (8.7 mmol/L) by the replacement of insulin lispro with mitiglinide. To precisely evaluate endogenous insulin secretion, we used the Chemilumi C-peptide kit (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics), which shows negligible cross-reactivity with proinsulin. Although serum C-peptide remained high due to renal failure, mitiglinide significantly raised serum C-peptide levels 2 h after, as compared with those before meals , indicating increased postprandial insulin secretion. Furthermore, the replacement of insulin lispro with mitiglinide decreased insulin levels from 3500 μU/mL to 2640 μU/mL, despite the persistently high binding rate (84.2%), low affinity (K1 = 0.0236 × 108 M− 1) and high capacity (R1 = 84.4 × 10− 8 M) of insulin antibodies (analyzed on the 61st day of hospitalization).