A 2 years 4 months old boy was brought to a TB clinic in Dushanbe, Tajikistan by his mother with prolonged fever, weight loss and decreased general activity. Examination revealed a healthy weight of 13 kg and no clinical features of cardiac failure. His mother was receiving treatment for MDR-TB with additional resistance to second line injectable drugs. There were no other known contacts with TB. Investigations revealed a left-sided pleural effusion with cardiomegaly with no parenchymal abnormalities or lymphadenopathy on chest x-ray and negative human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test. Three sputum samples were obtained from the child by sputum induction; Ziehl-Nielson microscopy, Xpert® MTB/RIF (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), and mycobacterial cultures were all negative. Echocardiography was unavailable but pericarditis was considered by the clinician. Insufficient volume and the lack of respiratory distress meant the pleural effusion was not aspirated. Following local expert review, in the absence of DST results, he was initiated rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol for treatment of suspected drug-susceptible TB. Drugs were prescribed according to weight for 8 weeks (three tablets a day of the fixed dose combination comprising rifampicin 75 mg + isoniazid 50 mg + pyrazinamide 150 mg) alongside prednisolone, 2 mg/kg/day, for 4 weeks due to the clinical diagnosis of pericarditis.
Initial resolution of fever and improvement in appetite and activity levels were followed by recurrence of fever and development of respiratory distress, dry cough and generalised oedema suggestive of cardiac failure 6 weeks after starting treatment despite good reported adherence. Echocardiography revealed thickened pericardium (7 mm; a value greater than 4 mm considered to imply constrictive pericarditis ) but no effusions or calcifications. Pleural fluid analysis by Genotype MTBDRplus (Hain Lifescience, Nehren, Germany) revealed isoniazid-resistant, rifampicin-sensitive Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The same sample was not processed for Mycobacterial culture. In light of this clinical deterioration, his treatment was modified based on the DST of his likely contact and according to local policy. His mother’s phenotypic DST confirmed sensitivity to ethambutol and ofloxacin, and resistance to rifampicin, isoniazid, amikacin, kanamycin and capreomycin.
The decision to start MDR-TB treatment despite a result of rifampicin sensitivity from pleural aspirate was taken due to the clinical deterioration, the mother’s DST, concern about a possible false negative rifampicin resistance test and the potential for amplification of resistance with standard drug sensitive TB treatment given sensitivity to ethambutol and pyrazinamide were not known in the child’s isolate. The boy’s treatment regimen with the corresponding doses are as given in the table below :
Following a 4 weeks course, steroids had already been stopped by the time the boy’s regimen was modified for DR-TB. Since the inflammation in the pericardium seemed well established and not active on echocardiography, steroid was not restarted. Two weeks after completing his steroids, the boy experienced deterioration in cardiac function with increasing oedema and progressive breathlessness. Subtotal pericardiectomy resulted in significant clinical improvement. Biopsies from the excised pericardium were not sent for analysis. Left ventricular ejection fraction improved from 50 to 64% 6 months after surgery alongside improvements in left ventricular end diastolic dimensions. Following discharge after cardiac surgery, his treatment was managed in the community. Since the boy was too young to be cooperative, pure tone audiometry could not be performed. Otoacoustic emission testing was unavailable. In order to provide tailored doses and child-friendly formulations, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) supported the Ministry of Health in compounding syrups from quality controlled second line medication (moxifloxacin, prothionamide and pyrazinamide for this child) using a commercially available liquid vehicle.
Clinical response was good and following 2 years of treatment and 1 year of follow-up he was discharged from the program. At discharge, the boy was asymptomatic, achieving appropriate growth mile-stones and had no features of cardiac failure although repeat echocardiography could not be performed.