A previously healthy 19-year-old male was referred to a tertiary hospital with acute onset of involuntary eye movements, generalized myoclonus, and mildly confused mental status. He complained of fever, chills, myalgia, sore throat, and then dizziness that had developed 9 days previously. His initial vital signs were stable and he did not have a fever. Spontaneous eye movements were first observed 4 days previously by an otolaryngologist, and generalized myoclonus developed 2 days thereafter. There was no history of any medication or exposure to toxins. Neurological examinations revealed chaotic multidirectional saccadic eye movements with large amplitudes. While resting or moving he exhibited moderate-to-severe myoclonic jerks affecting the head, trunk, and all four limbs . He was disorientated with respect to both space and time. He was not able to stand or sit due to severe truncal ataxia. The results of initial brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed on the day of the admission, and follow-up images obtained on the 5th hospital day were normal . Electroencephalography did not reveal any spikes or spike-and-wave components. The results of routine laboratory tests were normal except for elevated muscle enzymes [creatine kinase (CK) 1029 U/L, normal range 26-174 U/L]. Analysis of his cerebrospinal fluids (CSF) revealed normal cell counts and protein levels, and negative results for cytology and viral markers. Serological tests revealed no acute infections of rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, syphilis, herpes simplex virus-1 and -2, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), streptococcal infection, varicella-zoster infection, mycoplasma, or hepatitis A, B, or C. Tests for antinuclear antibodies were negative. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that the patient's serum and CSF were negative for anti-Hu, anti-Ri, anti-Yo, and neuromyelitis optica antibodies. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a mediastinal mass detected, but biopsy proved this to be a benign lesion that had extensive necrosis and chronic inflammation without granuloma. Malignancy was not detected on positron-emission tomography-CT. On admission the patient had no symptoms or signs of parotitis, orchitis, or pancreatitis; however, his serum IgM antibody titer index for the mumps virus was elevated at 1.20 (negative <0.9), but he was negative for the IgG antibody. Enzyme immunoassays produced negative results for CSF IgM and IgG antibodies to the mumps virus. On the 26th hospital day his serum IgG antibody titer index to mumps virus was 1.40 (negative <0.9), and he was negative for the IgM antibody. There was no evidence of an alternative bacterial infection. He was thus diagnosed with OMS associated with mumps infection.
He was initially treated with clonazepam; however, his symptoms, and especially the myoclonus, became aggravated, and his muscle enzymes increased rapidly (CK=12835 U/L). Acute renal failure developed on the second hospital day due to rhabdomyolysis, requiring continuous infusion of midazolam and atracurium, and application of a mechanical ventilator. In addition, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg; 2 g/kg divided into 5 days) and valproate (initial loading dose, 1800 mg; maintenance dose, 1200 mg/day) was started. The patient subsequently gradually improved and so the midazolam and atracurium were tapered off, being discontinued on the 11th hospital day when the mechanical ventilator was removed. At that time small-amplitude opsoclonus was still observed intermittently, and myoclonus could be elicited only by stimuli such as being touched. The patient had fully recovered from his confused mental status, and had fully recovered from opsoclonus or myoclonus by 2 months.