A 10-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat was presented with a 3-month
history of weight loss, dysorexia and lethargy. Haematology and biochemistry were
normal. The cat was first treated with meloxicam (0.05 mg/kg PO q24h [Meloxidyl;
CEVA]) for 7 days without success and started to develop neurological signs.
The cat was then referred to our hospital. Physical examination revealed a lethargic
animal without other significant signs. Neurological examination revealed decreased
mentation and moderate proprioceptive deficits affecting all four limbs with normal
spinal reflexes. Its gait was difficult to assess because the cat was unwilling to
move, but it seemed normal. Menace response was decreased bilaterally, with normal
pupillary light reflexes.
These findings were consistent with a forebrain lesion. Preanaesthetic abdominal
ultrasonography and thoracic radiographs were unremarkable. A pre- and post-contrast
(iohexol 350 mgI/ml 2 ml/kg IV [Omnipaque, GE Healthcare]) CT (Brilliance; Philips)
study of the brain was performed and reviewed by a board-certified radiologist.
After induction with propofol (4 mg/kg IV) and diazepam (0.5 mg/kg IV), anaesthesia
was maintained with isoflurane and oxygen. An extensive asymmetric permeative
osteolysis affecting two-thirds of the circumference of the calvarium was observed,
involving the right frontal, parietal, temporal (zygomatic arch, retroarticular
process and mandibular fossa) and occipital bones, as well as the left parietal bone
. An
irregular periosteal reaction was observed along these bones; it was more pronounced
on the occipital bone. Bone lysis of the presphenoid and basisphenoid bones was also
present with irregular spiculated periosteal reaction on the ventral aspect of the
basisphenoid bone. This extensive bone lesion was associated with a large
‘plaque-like’ contrast-enhancing extra-axial subdural/pachymeningeal lesion,
extending within the tissues surrounding the calvarium (,). A severe mass effect was observed,
resulting in a subtentorial herniation and a cerebellar herniation through the
foramen magnum. The left frontal sinus was enlarged and the right sinus was missing,
most likely due to congenital anomaly. The nasal cavity was partially filled with
contrast-enhancing soft tissue-attenuating material associated with nasal turbinates
rarefaction. The nasal septum was slightly deviated to the left side . Soft tissue
material was observed within the nasopharyngeal meatus, rostral nasopharynx and
right presphenoid sinus. A contrast-enhancing nodule affecting the left thyroid
gland was also noted .
Based on these findings (especially the calvarial osteolysis), an osseous or
intracranial tumour was primarily suspected. CT was extended to the thoracic and
abdominal cavities, searching for potential metastasis, but it did not reveal any
further lesions. Given the extensive nature of the brain lesion and the poor
prognosis, the cat was euthanased at the owner’s request following the CT
examination.
A post-mortem MRI of the brain was performed using a 1.5 T magnet (Vantage Elan;
Canon-Toshiba) and was reviewed by a board-certified neurologist and a
board-certified radiologist. T2-weighted (T2W) images were acquired in transverse,
sagittal and dorsal planes. Three-dimensional T1-weighted and fluid attenuation
inversion recovery (FLAIR) images were acquired in the transverse plane. The
previously described right-sided extra-axial subdural lesion appeared homogeneously
hypointense on T2W and FLAIR images. A severe mass effect was observed again,
resulting in a marked compression and displacement of the adjacent brain parenchyma
toward the left, and a deviation of the falx cerebri to the left side . On the sagittal
images, a diffuse, ill-defined, intramedullary T2W hyperintensity affecting the
first cervical spinal cord segments was also noted, presumably resulting from the
previously described cerebellar herniation through the foramen magnum. The
extracranial lesion surrounding the calvarium appeared heterogeneously hyperintense
on T2W and FLAIR images .
The owners declined a full necropsy but gave their consent for a focal sampling of
the lesion. After a right dorsolateral approach of the calvarium, a right temporal
bone incision was easily performed with a simple scalpel, given the pronounced bone
lysis. A 2 × 2 cm sample (calvarium with adjacent soft tissues) was collected and
examined by a board-certified pathologist. Macroscopically, a thinned crumbling and
almost transparent calvarial bone was observed. In addition, the inner part of the
sampled portion of the calvarium was lined with a thick greyish material with a firm
consistency.
Histopathological examination revealed a moderately cellular neoplasm composed of
spindle-shaped cells with elongated nuclei. The neoplastic cells were organised in
bundles, streams and a few whorls, supported by a variably dense fibrovascular
stroma . These
findings were consistent with a fibroblastic subtype of meningioma. The mitotic
count on a contiguous 2.37 mm2 area was 08. The cytological atypia were
limited. A few epithelial neoplastic cells were observed, forming tubules, with a
cuboidal-to-polygonal shape, compatible with metastatic adeno- carcinoma. These
cells were scattered through the meningioma, and also the calvarium and surrounding
muscular tissues . Cell atypia were mild, and no mitotic figure was recorded.
The final diagnosis was a cerebral meningioma associated with extensive lysis of the
calvarium and presumed intratumoral adenocarcinomatous metastatic inclusions.