A 40 year old female, suffering from hypothyroidism for 6 years, presented to our outpatient department with a gradually progressing large abdominal lump for 1year associated with bilateral pedal edema and difficulty in breathing for 1 month. She had had a similar large lump in 2013 and 2017, and had twice undergone excision of the tumour elsewhere. Biopsy revealed a well differentiated liposarcoma. She received 6 cycles of chemotherapy after the second surgery and her last cycle was in March 2018. She had not had radiotherapy. She was well till November 2018 when she again noticed a lump in the lower abdomen which gradually increased in size occupying her entire abdomen. There were no symptoms suggestive of bowel or urinary bladder involvement and no history of jaundice, back pain or headache.
On examination, she was moderately built and nourished with weight of 83 kg, height of 161 cm and body mass index (BMI) of 32. She had a distended abdomen with a midline scar from a previous laparotomy. Firm non-tender mass felt all over abdomen with edema noted all over abdominal wall and bilateral lower limbs. Her bowel sounds were heard in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. On digital rectal examination, a mass was felt anteriorly compressing the rectum. Her all lab parameters were within normal limits except for raised thyroid-stimulating hormone that was managed by increasing the dose of thyroxin from 25mcg to 50mcg once daily. She was evaluated with a PET CT which showed a mildly FDG avid, large heterogeneously enhancing lesion with a predominantly fat component occupying almost the entire abdominopelvic cavity with displacement of the other intra-abdominal organs. No other significant FDG avid lesion was seen elsewhere in the body.
As it was a second recurrence of the tumour and the patient refused neo-adjuvant therapy, it was decided to relieve her symptoms by surgical excision. On exploration by a senior consultant in surgical gastroenterology and liver transplantation department in this tertiary care center, a huge 50 × 40 × 40cm yellowish encapsulated multilobular retroperitoneal tumour mass was found extending from the diaphragm to the pelvis . The entire small bowel and right-sided colon were pushed to the left hypochondrium with minimal interloop adhesions. The liver and right kidney were pushed cranially and medially. The tumour was completely excised without removing any other abdominal organ. The total weight of the excised tumor specimen was 18.55kg.
Her post-operative course was uneventful. At the time of discharge, 1 week after surgery, her weight was reduced to 61 kg with BMI of 23.5. The final histopathology report was suggestive of large grade 2, dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDL) with undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) features , with less than 50% necrosis and a mitotic rate of 5–6/10hpf. pT4N0Mx (stage 3B according to AJCC staging system 8th edition). She is now under close follow up with no recurrence detected on a CT scan at 12months.