A 76-year-old woman presented with bloody stool. Colonoscopy revealed a tumor with an ulcer in the rectum, located 7 cm to the oral side of the dentate line . Endoscopic biopsy of the main rectal tumor showed pathologically well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. During upper gastrointestinal endoscopy for preoperative screening, a 0-IIc gastric lesion was revealed on the lower gastric body . Endoscopic biopsy of the gastric lesion also showed adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) showed three lymph node metastases in the lesser curvature area of the stomach and T4a rectal cancer . Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography CT revealed FDG accumulation in the lesser curvature lymph nodes of the stomach and the main lesion of the rectum , but no initial distant metastasis was observed. Barium contrast enema revealed the tumor site (arrow) in the rectum (Ra) . Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with advanced GC (TNM stage T1b N2 M0: IIA) and advanced RC (Ra, TNM stage T4a N0 M0: IIB). We planned to perform simultaneous total robotic radical distal gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection and robotic radical low anterior resection with D3 lymph node dissection.
Robotic surgery was performed by da Vinci Si (Intuitive Surgical Inc., USA), with the patient under general anesthesia and in the supine position with legs apart, for low anterior resection. The gastric and rectal cancer surgeons were different, and each of them had certifications of the console surgeons and sufficient (more than 10 cases) experiences in robotic surgery for gastric and rectal cancers. An umbilical port was inserted for the robot-scope (0°), and intra-abdominal pressure was maintained at 10 mmHg with the AirSeal® system (CONMED, Corporation, Largo, FL, USA). Robotic distal gastrectomy (RDG) with D2 lymph node dissection was initially performed using five ports and (b)) and a Nathanson liver retractor ). Preparation before robotic distal gastrectomy took 34 min (including docking of the robot [Fig. a]). First, the omentum was dissected in the oral direction, and the left gastroepiploic artery and vein were clipped and cut. Next, the retroperitoneum was incised at the level of the upper pancreas. The right gastroepiploic artery, vein, and gastroepiploic artery lymph nodes were dissected. Perigastric lymph nodes on the small curvature, splenic hilar lymph nodes, and pancreatic marginal lymph nodes were dissected en bloc by incising the omentum at the level of the upper pancreas and dissecting from the outer layer of the proper hepatic artery to the common hepatic artery and splenic artery. The duodenum was dissected at 1 cm on the anal side of the pylorus ring, and the stomach was dissected at the level of the marking line that was sufficiently on the oral side of the tumor using linear stapling devices (Medtronic Signia Stapling System, USA). The resected stomach was extracted through the mini-laparotomy wound (4 cm) and the extended umbilical port wound . Intracorporeal gastroduodenostomy (delta-shaped anastomosis) was performed using the same linear stapling devices . This part of the surgery was accomplished within 281 min (console time, 247 min), and the estimated blood loss was 0 mL.
Next, robotic low anterior resection was performed using the same two ports and three new ports and (d)). Preparation before low anterior resection took 40 min (including undocking and docking of the robot [Fig. b]). Because the rectal tumor was located above the peritoneal reflection, lateral dissection was not performed during the surgical procedure . Mobilization of the rectum was performed robotically. Total mesorectal excision was performed with monopolar curved scissors (da Vinci Si). Lymph nodes along the inferior mesenteric artery were dissected with high ligation. The rectum was dissected using a linear stapler (Signia™ Stapling System, Tri-staple 60 mm Purple, Medtronic, USA), and reconstruction was performed intracorporeally with a circular stapler (EEA 25 mm, Medtronic, USA). This part of the surgery was accomplished within 327 min (console time, 273 min), and the estimated blood loss was 0 mL. The transected rectum was extracted through the same umbilical incision that was used for the excision of the GC. Two drainage tubes were placed at the gastroduodenal and colorectal anastomotic sites through the port site ).
No complications were observed after the operation, and the patient started oral intake on the 2nd postoperative day and was discharged on the 10th postoperative day. Pathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the submucosal layer with lymph node metastasis (3/35) for the GC and a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with serosal invasion of the mucosal layer without lymph node metastasis (0/20) for the RC. A pathologically negative margin of > 3 cm was confirmed in all specimens. We assessed it as having been oncologically appropriate to perform simultaneous robotic combined resection for these cancers. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and the accompanying images.