A 70-year-old Caucasian man was transferred to our department from the Department of Neurology where he was an inpatient due to Lambert Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS).
LEMS is an autoimmune disease of the neuromuscular junction, characterized by proximal muscle weakness, areflexia and autonomic dysfunction. Antibodies are found, directed against P/Q-type voltage gated calcium channels in the pre-synaptic nerve terminal . LEMS is rare with a prevalence of about 1 per 100,000, equally common in men and women. The onset is generally over the age of 50, although it can affect children .
Lambert, Eaton, and Rooke in 1956 described a myasthenic syndrome in association with lung cancer . Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is found in over half of patients . There are also reports of an association with sarcoidosis and other autoimmune disorders including vitiligo. There is an association with HLA-B8 and DR3 . Due to the paraneoplastic etiology of LEMS, CT is recommended at diagnosis.
In our case muscle weakness, an atactic gait, diplopic images, dysphagia and ptosis were present. In retrospective view of our patient, the first symptoms of LEMS were already present two and a half years earlier. At that time our patient did not undergo medical examination and no further diagnostic workup was initiated.
After presenting at the Department of Neurology other possible causes of LEMS were ruled out; internal investigation was performed with findings of a hypercholesterolemia. The medical history of our patient contained a transurethral resection of the prostate gland three years prior to treatment in our institution with unsuspicious histological findings showing a chronic prostatitis and benign hyperplasia. Additionally, our patient was a smoker of 60 pack-years. There was no evidence of autoimmune disease in the medical history. Currently, no lower urinary tract symptoms and no loss of weight or loss of appetite were described. The clinical and ultrasound examinations were normal.
Subsequent radiologic evaluation by CT scan of the cranium, thorax and abdomen did not show any sign of malignant disease.
One year previously our patient was first sent to our department for urogenital tumor search. No suspicious findings were detected on digital rectal examination, like the whole clinical and ultrasound examination of the urogenital tract. PSA level was 0.8 ng/mL. To complete the diagnosis a 10 core biopsy of the prostate gland was performed that showed chronic prostatitis and benign hyperplasia.
Whole body positron emission tomography (PET)/low-dose CT scan revealed a 2.3 × 1.9 cm tumor of the right seminal vesicle presenting as an irregular circumscribed mass. Furthermore, one lymph node lateral to the tumor and numerous para-aortal and right para-iliacal lymph nodes suspicious for metastases were found. Additionally, a circumscribed mass of 2.5 × 2.3 cm was detected in close contact to the psoas major muscle. Cranium and thorax were clear of neoplasms on CT and PET-CT.
Following the imaging results another transrectal ultrasound-guided 10 core biopsy of the suspicious right seminal vesicle and the right prostate gland was performed.The histological findings of the biopsy of the right seminal vesicle showed a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma with immunohistochemistry similar to SCLC. The immunohistochemistry was negative for PSA, positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin and CD99. Transcription termination factor TTF-1 was positive in about 60% of the tumor cells. A biopsy of the right prostate gland showed chronic prostatitis and a benign hyperplasia.
Having discussed all treatment options, our patient underwent six cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin (520 mg) and etoposide (210 mg) at the Department of Hemato-oncology. Additionally pyridostigmine bromide 60 mg twice daily and 90 mg during the night for the myasthenic symptoms were initiated. With this medication the pronounced weakness that he initially presented with declined.
Following six cycles of chemotherapy, our patient presented again to our department for re-evaluation. Staging was completed by a PET-CT scan , a CT scan of the cranium, thorax and abdomen, and a transrectal ultrasound.
The suspicious, enlarged para-aortal and para-iliacal lymph nodes were stable. There was no evidence of new metastases. A PET-CT scan showed a declining accumulation in projection to the described para-aortal and para-iliacal lymph nodes on both sides. Also a declining accumulation in projection to the seminal vesicle was described. The transrectal ultrasound of the prostate and the seminal vesicles detected a hypoechoic 2.0 × 1.7 cm tumor in the right seminal vesicle. The biological marker neuron-specific enolase declined from 72 μg/L to 22 μg/L.
In cooperation with the Department of Hemato-oncology, we decided a strategy of observation. Our patient will re-present for re-evaluation for a two month follow-up. In case of impairment of the clinical symptoms, monotherapy with etoposide would be initiated.