A 73-year-old woman presented with a several months history of a mass in the right parotid gland region. She had a past medical history of right superficial parotidectomy due to the presence of a neurilemoma [cellular schwannoma] which had been treated 17 years previously in another medical center. She had hypertension and hypertriglyceridemia, but no toxic habits.
She presented with a 2 cm palpable, firm, mobile, painless and slowly growing mass in her right parotid gland. There was no facial paralysis or constitutional symptoms and no palpable nodes on neck examination. FNAB was unspecific. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a well-defined tumor measuring 2 cm in its greatest dimension, in the supposed location of the superficial lobe of the right parotid gland. It showed high signal intensity with homogeneous enhancement in T2-weighted images . The principal suspicion was a recurrence of parotid schwannoma.
The patient underwent a tumor resection. The specimen was well-defined and not encapsulated, measuring 2 x 2 cm with a white surface. Microscopic findings were that of tumor cells arranged in a storiform pattern with numerous ramifying vessels and hyalinized walls . The tumor cells were round to spindled, with tapering cytoplasm. These cells exhibited a characteristic inmunophenotype. They showed reactivity to CD34, bcl-2 and CD99, but not to AE/1, AE/2, EMA, or S-100. The tumor exhibited a Ki67 index of 5%. Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as SFT.
Two years later, the patient suffered a recurrence. She developed a mass measuring 6 cm localized under the masseter muscle. During the excision of the tumor, destruction of the adjacent mandibular cortical bone was observed. The margin of the tumoral resection in this location was microscopically positive.
A new magnetic resonance imaging and a computed tomography were carried out . An heterogeneous image within the masseter muscle was observed which was compatible with possible tumoral remains. There was an osteolytic lesion in the ramus of the mandible suggestive of invasion of the mandibular nerve foramen .
In this context, a marginal mandibulectomy with an alveolar inferior nerve lateralization was performed . We confirmed negative margins of the resection in the bone, the nerve and the residual masseter muscle. We used bone grafts from the mandibular angle and a reconstruction plate to provide better stability .
The clinical aggressiveness of bone destruction correlated histologically with an increased in Ki67 index [15%] and mitotic rate. Microscopically, bone remodelling without infiltration was observed. The patient has remained free of disease for 9 months postoperatively.