The patient was a 64-year-old woman with seven children brought to the hospital with severe vomiting and a history of solid dysphagia; she had the symptoms for three months and was referred to different physicians, left without definite diagnosis before admission to our center.. Patient’s past medical history was unremarkable. Post-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the neck showed two lesions (kissing tumors) in the upper esophagus, causing the tracheal shift to the right side with no lymph node enlargement . Physical examination revealed no abnormalities, and the results of laboratory examinations were within the normal range. CT-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy evaluation of the mass showed a few pleomorphic spindle malignant cells among inflammatory cells in a bloody background. Additional endoscopy of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum was performed for the patient, which showed a large tumor in the cricopharyngeus causing stricture, while the stomach and duodenum were normal. .
The patient was scheduled for exploratory laparotomy with the exploration of cervical organs, resection of the pharynx, thyroid (partial), and esophagus and gastric pull up along with the insertion of a tracheostomy and bilateral chest tube, and cervical penrose.
The patient was laid in a supine position. After preparation and sterilization, the abdomen was opened by a high midline incision. The surgeon inserted his finger into the mediastinum to assess the presence of any tumors. Stomach was mobilized by harmonic ligasure, lesser sac was opened, short gastric and left gastric arteries were ligated, and gastric pedicle was made on the right gastroepiploic arteries and epigastric area. Then, the esophagus was dissected bluntly by the finger in the mediastinum through the hiatus's opening and continued upward. Adhesion to the carina was found and released meticulously. Next, the collar incision was made on the neck. Then, subtotal thyroidectomy was done, and the specimen was sent for pathologic evaluation. Trocar was introduced in the sheath over the spine, and the esophagus was gently dissected and pulled up. The esophagus' blunt dissection was also carried out from the above until two hands could reach each other via the upper and lower incisions. After the esophagus' full release, resection of pharynx, larynx, and esophagus was done, and specimens of the proximal esophagus were sent for further pathological evaluation. Then, anastomosis of the mouth floor to the stomach was performed with polydioxanone suture 3/0, and the neck wound was irrigated and closed after insertion of a Penrose drain. The posterior part of the trachea was then fixed to the skin with Vicryl 3/0, and tracheostomy tube size 7.5 was inserted. The abdomen was irrigated, and the fascia was closed with a nylon loop one and irrigated. The skin was closed by nylon 3/0. Bilateral chest tubes No. 24 were inserted into the 5th intercostal space with a depth of 10 cm and fixed with silk 0 dressing. The surgery lasted for five hours and thirty minutes, and the patient received two packed cells and 6500 cc normal saline and had 4000 cc urination and 450 cc bleeding.
The gross pathological evaluation showed two separate grey cream masses with a smooth glistening surface at the cricopharyngeal level that made a stricture, as shown in Fig. . Microscopic evaluation showed malignant pleomorphic spindle cell neoplasm with high mitotic rate and many atypical mitoses in the larger mass (measuring 52 × 45 × 30) and invasive squamous cell nests proliferation in the smaller mass (measuring 15 × 6 × 6 mm). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) evaluation of the larger mass sections revealed negative results for P63, desmin, CD34, c-kit, DOG1, and cytokeratin (CK). It was diffusely positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), S100, and also the high expression of proliferation index Ki67 to up to 15% was suggestive of malignant smooth muscle tumor. IHC evaluation of the smaller mass shows diffuse CK, P63 positivity , and negative immunostaining for S100 and SMA was observed, which indicates the diagnosis of SCC. Tumors had no lymphovascular invasion, and the resection was curative with negative horizontal and vertical margins. Histopathological evaluation of the thyroid specimen shows nodular hyperplasia. Seven regional lymph nodes were free of metastasis.
The patient was discharged after ten days of hospital admission and was referred to the radio-oncologist. The patient underwent radiotherapy and was stable at six months' follow-up with no recurrence.