A 47-year-old Thai woman, living at Maesot, Tak, North Thailand, with ß thalassemia/hemoglobin E, was referred from a provincial hospital for further investigations regarding acute arterial insufficiency of both legs. Two months prior to admission (PTA), she noted a self-limited blackish painful nodule at left labia minor. Few weeks later, she developed a low-grade fever with bilateral groin pain. One month PTA, she had severe pain at left foot, and a diagnosis of acute arterial insufficiency was made a doctor at provincial hospital. Emergent embolectomy with clot removal at left common iliac artery was performed. Few days after hospitalization, there was a recurrent limb ischemia, and embolectomy was performed again. One week after hospitalization, the pathology of the clot exhibited noncaseous granulomatous inflammation with many fungal hyphal elements , and hence the patient was referred to King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital (KCMH), Bangkok, Thailand, for further investigations. She did not smoke. Unfortunately, the operation could not be performed due to the computed tomogram angiogram showing circumferential soft plaques along distal aorta, bilateral common iliac arteries, and external iliac arteries as well as near total occlusion of bilateral internal iliac arteries . Serum IgG titers against P. insidiosum was1:800 (in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, KCMH), and serum ß-d-glucan was 523 pg/mL. Unfortunately, the organism could not be isolated from the clinical specimens. The definite identification of the organism from the clot, by amplifying the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of ribosomal DNA using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique with sequencing of the amplicon and GenBankBLAST searching as previously described , was P. aphanidermatum (100% identity). Unfortunately, the patient eventually expired due to uncontrolled sepsis 2 weeks after treatment with itraconazole, terbinafine, azithromycin, and doxycycline as well as an iron chelator, deferoxamine.