A 64-year-old man was seen with a 6-month history of multiple bilateral auricular nodules. He also had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis and had been receiving antituberculosis therapy since December 2009. The protocol consisted of 4 drugs (isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol hydrochloride) administered for 2 months, followed by 4 months of treatment with isoniazid and rifampin. He denied any history of trauma or sun exposure.
Physical examination revealed multiple 2.5-mm painless nodules over the helix . These were superficial, circumscribed, and without surrounding erythema or ulceration. An excisional biopsy was performed. The lesion was separated easily from the surrounding tissues and did not invade the perichondrium. Hematoxylin-eosin staining of biopsy specimens revealed amorphous fibrillary crystalline tissue deposits in formalin-fixed tissue, representing a proteinaceous matrix that surrounded dissolved crystals, consistent with gout tophi .
The differential diagnosis of auricular nodules is broad and includes sebaceous cysts, chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis, sarcoid nodules, leprosy, hemangioma, keratoacanthoma, chondroma, lipoma, squamous cell carcinomas, Kaposi’s sarcoma, melanoma, epidermal and dermoid cysts, elastotic nodules, tophaceous gout, rheumatoid nodules, and schwannoma . Biopsy should be performed to rule out malignancy.
Gout is a common systemic metabolic disease, but manifestations of it are infrequently encountered in the field of otolaryngology. It is caused by disordered purine metabolism, resulting in hyperuricemia. When the uric acid level in serum is above 7.0 mg/dL (to convert uric acid level to micromoles per liter, multiply by 59.485), urate crystals form a deposition in subcutaneous tissue, called tophi. Symptoms such as pain, erythema, and swelling are related to the precipitation of uric acid crystals in joint spaces and soft tissues . Primary gout is related to uric acid overproduction, while secondary gout is caused by a decrease in uric acid excretion or by an overproduction of purine. Predisposing factors include aging, male sex, obesity, heavy alcohol consumption, a purine-rich diet, medication use, and genetics. In the patient described herein, the uric acid level was 12.4 mg/dL at 1 week after initiating antituberculosis therapy, and it was 10.1 mg/dL 2 years later. An antituberculosis regimen with pyrazinamide inhibits renal tubular excretion of urate, resulting in some hyperuricemia . Gout tophi occurred at special location like auricular area following a clear history of anti-tuberculosis treatment is unusual. On gross pathological examination, tophaceous gout deposits appear as yellow-white chalky material. The histopathological diagnosis of gouty tophi is made by identifying needle-shaped crystals that are negatively birefringent under polarized light . The deposition of crystals is difficult to visualize with routine fixation, tissue processing, and staining because they are dissolved by formalin-based preservatives. A characteristic feature is a basophilic granular matrix surrounding dissolved crystals on light microscopy.
The external ear, especially the helix, is one of the most common sites of tophus formation in the head and neck region. Documented sites of involvement in the head and neck include the arytenoid, true vocal cord, hyoid bone, thyroid cartilage, nasal septum, temporomandibular joint, soft palate, cervical spine, and glossoepiglottic ligament Tophi of the auricle are usually asymptomatic. Dietary modification and medication use (e.g., a xanthine oxidase inhibitor such as allopurinol or a uricosuric agent such as probenecid) are recommended. Surgical intervention is reserved for tissue diagnosis or for when tophi inflame and ulcerate through overlying skin.