The work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .
We present a case of a 26-year-old male patient diagnosed with Schimmelpenning syndrome, a rare malformative syndrome characterized by a significant deformity of the left hemiface and thorax . The patient exhibited a complete lack of mouth opening (0 mm).
The patient was initially managed in the Maxillofacial Surgery Department, where a specialized left custom-made temporomandibular joint prosthesis was placed. General anesthesia was administered with fibro-vigil naso-tracheal intubation without any complications. Risdon and preauricular incisions were used for prosthesis placement, with two drains inserted after the surgery. The immediate postoperative period was uneventful, and due to the patient's syndrome, postoperative monitoring was performed in a continuous care unit. The drains were removed on the third postoperative day. The skin was edematous but not fluctuant on palpation. The patient was shifted from the continuous care unit on the fourth postoperative day. However, on the fifth postoperative day, the patient reported pain at the surgical site. A control computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, revealing a cervical collection measuring 5 cm in width and 6.5 cm in height, with a right airway laterodeviation . Initially, the sutures at the surgical site were removed to facilitate drainage, but this had no effect on the collection. Subsequently, the patient was fasted, and a drainage procedure was performed in the operating room under general anesthesia, necessitating a new fibro-vigil nasotracheal intubation, initiated at 09:48 AM. At the time of initiation of the procedure, the patient showed no signs of airway distress, resulting in a decision to proceed with nasotracheal intubation instead of a tracheostomy. In a semi-reclined position, light sedation was achieved through regular injections of remifentanil. During this intubation attempt, difficulties arose in exposing the glottic region because of progressive edema affecting the entire glottal system and rightward laryngeal deviation. The vocal cords were nearly invisible, making intubation impossible. After 32 min, the patient experienced a sudden drop in oxygen saturation from 100 % to 35 % between 10:22 AM and 10:24 AM . Immediately, the cervical scar was opened with a blade, resulting in the evacuation of a large super-infected hematoma. Subsequently, cricothyroidotomy was performed in three steps . Initially, the cricoid was identified and a vertical 10-cm skin incision was made, centered on the cricoid but without taking any other anatomical landmarks into consideration, using a No. 15 blade. The soft tissues were separated around the cricoid using the index and middle fingers of the left hand, while the right hand continued to incise the tissues in a vertical direction until resistance from cricoid was felt under the blade. At this point, the left index finger was used to identify the cricoid cartilage and was positioned on the cricothyroid membrane. This provided guidance to the right hand, holding the blade, to make a horizontal incision on the cricothyroid membrane. A size 7 tracheostomy tube was placed directly into the trachea for ventilation. The entire procedure was performed by the Maxillo-facial surgeon of the Maxillofacial surgery department.
Due to the patient's unique anatomy and airway deviation, resulting from the postoperative hematoma , cricothyroidotomy was performed on the right cervical side . The patient rapidly regained satisfactory oxygen saturation. Following confirmation of ventilation, the tube was secured on each side with a single a suture. Subsequently, the planned surgical intervention was performed without any further episodes of reduced oxygen flow.
Following the second surgery, the tube was left in place for 48 h. The patient spent 5 days in the continuous care unit. A fresh CT scan confirmed the proper positioning of the tracheostomy cannula and effective drainage of the left-sided collection. The cuff of the tube was deflated on the third day, and the tube was removed on the fifth day without any complications. During subsequent postoperative consultations, the patient presented no chronic complications, along with the absence of laryngeal stenosis.