A 19-month-old Syrian boy was referred to our clinic for steatorrhea, vomiting, and abdominal distension. He was born a full-term, normal pregnancy without any complications after birth. The birth weight was 4 kg. The newborn screening test was normal. Since early infancy, he suffered from feeding intolerance and diarrhea described 5 times per day; oily, bulky, and foul-smelling without vomiting or bilious emesis. He was on breast and bottle feeding. By the age of 6 months, there was an obvious failure to weight gain and the family started seeking medical advice. Investigations were performed which excluded primary cystic fibrosis, alpha 1 antitrypsin, Metabolic disease (lipid metabolism disease), thyroid diseases, adrenal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, and celiac disease. There were fatty drops in the stool examination. A diagnosis of non-specific malabsorption was made and the patient was treated with multivitamins without any improvement in general condition. The family started feeding him PediaSure® formula milk - only by chance- from around 10 months of age with partial improvement in his symptoms and observed weight gain. His development was normal for his age. The child underwent all the compulsory immunizations for his age. There was no relationship between the parents and the family history was noncontributory.
On physical examination, his body weight was 9 kg (− 3 SD), the length was 75 cm (− 3 SD), he was vitally stable and generally well. The abdomen was distended but soft, with no masses or organomegaly. The neurological assessment was normal. The patient underwent multiple investigations. Complete blood count (CBC), C- reactive protein (CRP), blood film, blood gases, renal and liver function, electrolytes, glucose, bilirubin, ammonia, amylase, lipase, and urine were normal . Stool microscopy revealed fat globules. Abdominal ultrasound showed revealed intestinal wall thickening with normal findings (Liver steatosis was not observed). An ophthalmologic (funduscopic examination), cardiac assessment (echocardiogram) was normal. We performed an Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) that showed a milky white “snow-storm” appearance of the duodenal mucosa and the histological biopsies from the duodenum showed fat-laden vacuolization of enterocytes without villous atrophy . That suggested lipid trafficking disorder. The Differential Diagnosis included abetalipoproteinemia (ABL), hypobetalipoproteinemia (HBL), or CRD. Therefore, more specialized additional investigations were performed including total cholesterol (TC), Low-Density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), and total lipid which were markedly reduced; high-Density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) was borderline low with normal very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and Triglycerides (TG). Total Creatine kinase (CK) was elevated. Vitamin A, D levels were borderline low with low vitamin E levels . Lipoprotein electrophoresis of postprandial plasma did not show the presence of chylomicrons. Immunoblot testing showed a decrease in apolipoprotein A1 and apolipoprotein B.
The clinical and laboratory findings were more consistent with CRD. A blood sample for genetic analysis in directional direct DNA sequencing (AB 3730 DNA analyses equipped with seascape software) of SARB coding exons and exonic-intronic junctions from genomic DNA was obtained. Genotyping identified a homozygous SAR1B gene variant as the deletion of one of the two repeated Glutamine in position 113 or 114. It was the first description of this variant in the fourth helix of SAR1B protein (NM_0161032.: c.[del340-342]; [del340-342], p. [Glu114del]; [Glu114del]). His parents were heterozygous for the same variant (NM_0161032.: c.[del340-342]; [=], p. [Glu114del]; [=]).
The patient was started on the restriction of dietary fats, hydrolyzed formula with a higher medium-chain triglyceride content, some vegetable oils (sun-seed, olive oil, almond oil) in his daily diet in addition to fat-soluble vitamin supplementation (hydrosoluble vitamin E 50 UI/kg/d; vitamin A 15,000 IU/d; vitamin K 15 mg/wk.; vitamin D 1000 UI/kg/d).
During follow-up, the child showed catch-up growth in weight–height and a clinical examination were unremarkable with normal laboratory findings .