The patient developed a fever 3 h prior to admission with a peak temperature of 39 °C.
Fever in this patient was accompanied by chills, but no cough, expectoration, pharyngeal pain, abdominal pain, diarrhea, increased urination frequency, increased urination urgency, perianal pain and other symptoms.
The patient was a 71-year-old female who had experienced hypertension for 3 years. She took oral valsartan capsules 80 mg daily which controlled her blood pressure.
There was no other special medical history or family history.
The patient was anemic, with wet rales in the right lung, regular heart rhythm, no obvious tenderness or rebound pain in the abdomen, no obvious masses in the abdomen, and no edema in the limbs.
Routine blood examination showed the following: White blood cell (WBC) count 13.2 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage 88.5%, hemoglobin (Hb) 66 g/L, platelet (PLT) count 11 × 109/L, and blood glucose 33 mmol/L.
Chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) examination revealed inflammation in both lungs and bilateral pleural thickening .
The suspected diagnoses on admission were as follows: Fever of undetermined origin (potentially indicating severe sepsis); pneumonia; hypertension.
After admission, the patient received anti-inflammatory therapy with 0.5 g meropenem administered intravenously every 6 h, 5 g intravenous human immunoglobulin daily to improve immunity, 4 units of erythrocyte suspension to correct anemia, and 10 units of platelets to increase her PLT count. In addition, insulin micropumps were continuously used to control the patient’s blood glucose levels. The next day, the patient felt cold and experienced chills, her temperature reached 40 °C, and her blood pressure dropped to 85/53 mmHg. The telephone report from the microbiology unit indicated that Escherichia coli (E. coli), Aeromonas hydrophila (A. hydrophila) and Aeromonas caviae (A. caviae) were present in the blood culture. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and treated with a 0.5 g meropenem micropump every 6 h and a 50 mg intravenous injection of tetracycline every 12 h to fight infection. Fluid resuscitation was conducted, and vasoactive drugs were administered to maintain blood pressure stability. Following admission to the intensive care unit, the decrease in platelets and Hb was accompanied by a decrease in WBC count . Recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor was used to elevate the WBC count, and recombinant human PLT growth factor was used to promote PLT production. In addition, erythrocyte suspensions, platelets, and other supportive treatments were administered. One week after antibiotic treatment, the patient’s infection was controlled; her blood pressure and body temperature returned to normal, and the blood culture was negative. Although the WBC count and Hb levels returned to normal, the patient's platelets remained low and could not be corrected with repeated PLT transfusions . A bone marrow biopsy was performed. The bone marrow smear showed many malignant cells . Cancer metastasis to the bone marrow was suspected; thus, a whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) examination was performed, and the results revealed high metabolic signals in the ascending colon .