The patient, a 54-year-old woman, presented with shortness of breath on exertion over the previous three months. Physical examination revealed slight jugular vein distention (JVD); a grade III to VI systolic murmur, which was heard at the tricuspid area; and mild edema of both legs. Laboratory reports were within normal ranges. Echocardiography showed that the right PA (RPA) was almost completely obstructed by a low echogenic mass, and the left PA (LPA) was also partially obstructed, and the superior vena cava (SVC) was dilated with a diameter of about 23 mm. Right ventricle enlargement and tricuspid insufficiency were also revealed. A helical computed tomography (CT) scan showed that the RPA trunk was blocked by a soft tissue mass which grew circumferentially, with only line-like contrast passing through it . The LPA was thickened interiorly, with favorable contrast perfusion to its branches. On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed with PA thromboembolism.
During surgery, a local soft mass measuring approximately 1.5 × 1.8 × 4.0 cm3 was completely resected from the RPA. The diagnosis of intimal sarcoma was made by pathological examination . Atypical spindle cells were observed. Immunohistochemical analysis was positive for vimentin and weakly positive for CD34, while CD117, S-100, smooth muscle actin, desmin, and CD68 were negative. Following surgery the symptoms were relieved, and echocardiography showed normal blood flow in the PA trunk, RPA and LPA as well as in their proximal branches. The patient was then discharged.
Ten months later, the patient was referred to our department with complaints of shortness of breath on exertion, facial swelling and pain in the right upper quadrant. On physical examination no abnormalities were found except for facial swelling and JVD. Helical CT scan revealed a solid mass in the right pulmonary hilum, with no clear boundary to the mediastinum. The mass could be enhanced asymmetrically, with a central low-density necrosis invading the SVC and RPA trunk . In addition, a low-density cycloid mass with a clear boundary was detected on the quadrate lobe of the liver. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of a local recurrence of intimal sarcoma of the PA was made, with suspected metastasis to the liver. Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT) to the mediastinum was performed with a total dose of 60 Gy using 15 MV X-ray in 30 fractions. Dyspnea and facial swelling were relieved.
Thirteen days after radiotherapy, the patient complained of pain in the right upper quadrant, loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting. An enlarged metastatic mass in the liver was detected by CT. Transcatheter Arterial Chemoembolization (TACE) was performed on the mass in the liver. After treatment, the symptoms were relieved. Two months later, a further CT scan showed extensive metastases to lung, liver and both adrenal glands. The patient died 2 weeks later.