A 43-year-old Hungarian man with poor socioeconomic living conditions was found lying on the floor unresponsively by a family member. He was taken to a regional hospital “Szent György” University Teaching Hospital, Székesfehérvár, Hungary. On admission he had low level of consciousness accompanied by stiff neck, constricted pupils and fever (38.6 °C). Alcohol abuse, smoking and epileptic seizures were found in his past medical records. Urgent skull CT scan was performed revealing left side mastoiditis but neither brain abscess nor vascular disorders were described. Blood was drawn for clinical chemistry and for bacterial culture. Relevant parameters of the blood test showed elevated white blood cell (WBC) count 24.1 109/L (87.5% Neutrophils), increased C-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels (211.4 mg/L and 0.46 ng/ml, respectively). Laboratory parameters of blood and liquor are shown in Table . The results of the urine tests were normal.
Lumbar puncture was carried out and the CSF sample was taken to the laboratory immediately. The slightly xanthochromic CSF was cloudy showing increased WBC count (7400 cells/μl), elevated protein level (12.4 g/L), and low glucose level (< 0.6 mmol/L) compared to the elevated serum glucose level (8.1 mmol/L).
After taking blood and CSF specimens for culture Ceftriaxone (2 × 2 g), Vancomycin (2 × 1 g) and Ampicillin (6 × 2 g) were started and completed with supportive treatment.
The patient’s CSF sample was processed routinely in our Microbiology laboratory (SYNLAB Székesfehérvár, Hungary) on arrival. The Pastorex Meningitis agglutination kit (Bio-Rad) testing the CSF sample for the presence of soluble antigens of Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae type b, Neisseria meningitidis group A, group B/E.coli K1, group C, group Y/W135, and Streptococcus group B was negative. Microscopic examination showed several neutrophil granulocytes and a very few number of hardly dyed short rods or elongated cocci that seemed to be Gram-negatively stained at first examination. To exclude tuberculous meningitis Ziehl-Neelsen staining was performed, but no acid-fast bacilli were detected. At the 18–24-h and 48 h readings bacterial growth was negative both on the blood and on the chocolate culture media. Only the enrichment broth was slightly cloudy, indicating bacterial growth. On the next day, after 72 h of incubation tiny grey pinhead colonies were found on both blood and chocolate agar plates that were catalase and oxidase negative. Similar colonies were seen on the anaerobic plates. Irregular small Gram-positive bacilli and coccobacilli were observed in the microscope. The bacterium was identified as A. turicensis by VITEK 2 ANC ID Card (Biomerieux) and API Coryne (Biomerieux). The identification was verified by molecular method. PCR was performed with primers that amplified 1343 bp fragment of bacterial 16 s rRNA coding sequence . PCR thermal profile was as follows: 5 min at 94 °C, 40 cycles of 94 °C for 1 min, 55 °C for 1 min and 72 °C for 1 min and a final extension at 72 °C for 2 min . PCR amplicons have been purified by Qiagen PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, GmbH, Hilden, Germany) and have been sequenced (BIOMI Kft., Gödöllő, Hungary). Analysis of nucleic acid sequence was done based on online tools of NCBI GenBank thus, the strain was identified as A. turicensis.
Antibiotic susceptibility of tested strain was performed by E-test after the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) recommendations. The isolated strain was susceptible to penicillin, ampicillin, imipenem, meropenem and vancomycin at concentrations ranging from 0.125 to 0. 5 mg/L.
As the patient’s condition did not improve a left side mastoid surgery was performed. During the mastoidectomy intraoperatively removed purulent discharge was sent to our Microbiology laboratory. After two days of incubation colonies grew on the agar plates that were similar to those isolated from the CSF sample. Identification both by biochemical reactions of automated systems and by 16S rRNA PCR and sequencing resulted A. turicensis. Moreover, the strain presented the same antibiotic MIC values as isolate of the CSF sample.
Postoperative bleeding occurred leading to the necessity of reoperation. On the third day of postoperative period severe polyuria was presented with dilated pupils insensible to light. The skull CT scan revealed cerebral herniation, intensifying oedema and sinus thrombosis. . Unfortunately, there was no chance of reoperation because the patient passed away.
After 5 days of aerobic and anaerobic incubation of the blood cultures no bacterial growth was detected. Autopsy was performed that confirmed the clinical diagnosis of cerebral herniation due to the purulent meningitis and the consequent oedema in the CNS. Moreover, a greenish-yellow discharge accumulated at the brain stem and in the lateral ventricules. During histopathology an infiltration of granulocytes at the meninges was seen and suspected signs of actinomycosis was also observed.