A 39-year-old woman, who is a farmer presented with multiple painful ulcers, erosion, exudation, and crusting on the right leg for 1 month. One month prior to the current admission, the lesion was erythem, blistered, showing a cricoid or coin shape, with sporadic worm-eaten ulcerations . She was seen in the orthopedic department, the ulceration was progressively enlarging despite antibiotic treatment, surgical debridement, and negative blood cultures. The severely swollen right shank and feet restricted movement. Bone doctors suggested limb amputation to prevent the skin damage from spreading. However, the patient could not accept the psychological trauma of amputation.
The patient came to our in-patient department. Cutaneous examination showed diffusely distributed, multiple, well-defined, deep purulent ulcers on the right medial shank measuring 6 to 20 cm and sporadic worm-eaten ulceration on the right ectocnemial, with severe oozing and erosions. Ulcerations exhibited deep undermined borders and granulated tissue, and a black eschar at the base. The arteria dorsalis pedis had good pulse. The patient had normal sensation on the skin of the right shank and both feet. Oral mucosa, vaginal mucosa, and cutaneous appendages were normal. The systemic examination was unremarkable. Her medical history was significant for intermittent bloody diarrhea for 3 years. Laboratory examinations showed an elevated white cell count of 11.8 × 109/L, 91 g/L hemoglobin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 82 mm/h, unelevated procalcitonin, serum C-reactive protein was 131.29 mg/L, and the tuberculin skin test was negative. Enteroscopy demonstrated endoscopic evidence of UC , hepatic function tests and renal function tests were normal. A skin lesion biopsy showed superficial erosion and scarring. Partial epidermal hyperplasia, partial epidermal atrophy and thinning, mild edema of dermal papill . Most of the middle and lower part of the dermis, showed dense lymphocytes, histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells, and neutrophil infiltration . Based on the clinical manifestation, laboratory examinations and results of the enteroscopy, the diagnosis was giant PG with UC.
She was treated with topical applications of povidone iodine and kangfuxin solution twice a day, methylprednisolone sodium succinate 40 mg and compound glycyrrhizin 60 mg intravenous drip once a day, along with thalidomide 50 mg twice a day. The UC was controlled with mesalazine. Five days later, the patient showed significant improvement. This patient required multiple therapies to heal the PG after 3 months .