A 67 year old male with a history of heavy smoking was witnessed by his wife to have suddenly collapsed at home. The patient had been complaining of chest pain for a few days but did not seek medical care due to fear of contracting COVID-19 from within the medical setting. When emergency medical services (EMS) arrived to his house, the patient was complaining of severe crushing chest pain and a 12 lead electrocardiogram (ECG) performed revealed ST-segment elevations and pathological q-waves in leads II, III, and aVF with reciprocal ST-segment depressions in leads I and aVL, consistent with inferior ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) . En route to the hospital the patient subsequently lost pulses and underwent cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for 3 min prior to arrival to the emergency department (ED). On arrival to the ED, the patient underwent 10 more minutes of CPR until return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was achieved. After appropriate donning of personal protective equipment (PPE) by ED personnel, the patient was intubated and point of care (POC) ultrasound revealed a depressed ejection fraction (EF) and a large pericardial effusion with tamponade physiology. A pericardiocentesis was attempted twice, however aspiration of the pericardial effusion was unsuccessful which raised concern for a hematoma formation from a possible contained old rupture. A chest x-ray revealed a widened mediastinum . The patient was taken emergently for computed tomography angiography (CTA) scan of his aorta. The CT scan revealed active extravasation through a small channel in the inferior wall of the left ventricle into the pericardial cavity consistent with left ventricular myocardial perforation. There was also evidence of reflux of contrast into the inferior vena cava, distal hepatic veins, and right renal vein suggestive of low cardiac output in the setting of acute cardiac tamponade, left ventricular perforation and hemopericardium . The right coronary artery was noted to be opacified in the proximal segment with significant acute thrombosis . The patient lost pulses multiple times in the ER and was too hemodynamically unstable to be taken to the catheterization lab for PCI at the time. In an effort to prevent further cardiac arrests, he was immediately taken to the operation room (OR) for further exploration and possible evacuation of the large pericardial effusion.
In the OR, the hemopericardium was evacuated through an emergent subxiphoid incision and the chest alongside the pericardium was opened. One liter of blood was evacuated. Given ongoing blood loss, a large catheter was directly placed into the right atrium for transfusion and another catheter was directly placed into the aorta to transduce blood pressure. The patient underwent aggressive resuscitation with a max systolic blood pressure of 50 mmHg, and his left ventricle was noted to be empty throughout this time. On closer examination of the left ventricle, there was a large free wall rupture and surrounding fat pad hematoma on the diaphragmatic surface of the left ventricle, likely from the inferior STEMI he suffered. They also noted similar discoloration and a hematoma lateral to the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. The open free wall of the left ventricle was attempted to be sutured to control the bleeding, however, the myocardium was noted to be extremely fragile and could not hold the suture . Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) following evacuation of blood revealed inferior and septal wall hypokinesis, no evidence of a flap suggestive of aortic dissection, and multiple cardiac arrests requiring CPR via intraoperative open thoracotomy cardiac massage (Video 1 A-B). After about another hour of attempted resuscitation to control the bleeding, his systolic pressure was no longer able to be generated and the patient eventually expired on the table.