A 36-year-old pregnant Chinese patient who was previously healthy complained of dyspnea for three weeks and deterioration for five hours in the second trimester of pregnancy (22 weeks of gestation) and was admitted to local hospital. White blood cell counts and neutrophil percentage increased. Chest computed tomography confirmed lung infection and pleural effusion formation. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed hypoxemia (PO2, 62mmHg, SpO2, 93%). D-dimer, 26,210 ng/mL↑. Limb vein ultrasound confirmed right cephalic vein thrombosis. Echocardiography showed that thrombus formation from right ventricle to right ventricular outflow tract, from pulmonary artery bifurcation to left pulmonary artery and proximal right pulmonary artery. Mild tricuspid regurgitation. Mild pulmonary hypertension (46mmHg). Enlargement of the right heart. Pulmonary artery computed tomography angiography (CTPA) confirmed right ventricular and bilateral pulmonary artery thrombosis. The patient was diagnosed with PE, pulmonary hypertension and pneumonia. She was administrated with heparin (25,000 IU per day), 50 mg alteplase thrombolysis, antibiotic (ceftriaxone) and transferred to the Intensive Care Department of our hospital. BMI was 22.3 kg/m2. The patient doesn’t smoke, or take hormone drugs. The families had no VTE phenotypes and no family history of venous thrombosis. Self-tested SARS-CoV-2 antigen was positive three weeks ago when the dyspnea appeared.
Laboratory tests were as follow: the activity of AT, 53% (Reference range:83–128%) ; D-dimer, 4132 ng/ml↑; Biomarkers of myocardial injury: high sensitivity troponin T, 71.69 ng/L↑ (0–14 ng/L), myoglobin and creatine kinase isoenzymes were not significantly abnormal. Thrombophilia screening: Protein C, Protein S activity, and anti-cardiolipin antibody combinations were not significantly abnormal. Anti-nuclear antibody and antinuclear antibody profiles, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were negative; Lipids: Total cholesterol 5.46mmol/L↑, triglycerides 1.82mmol/L↑,HDL cholesterol 0.61 mmol/L↓, LDL cholesterol 4.2 mmol/L↑, ApoA1 0.85 g/L↓, ApoB 1.15 g/L, lipoprotein (a) 36 mg/L; Infective index: Blood, phlegm culture, SARS-CoV-2 RNA was negative; Interleukin-6 12.362 pg/ml↑(0-5.4pg/ml);General item: liver and kidney function, electrolytes, thyroid function, stool and urine routine, HbA1c did not show any significant abnormalities. Genetic analysis: a novel heterozygous mutation (NM_000488: exon5: c. T938C: p.M313T) in SERPINC1. FII, V and other thrombogenic gene were normal, to sequencing of F5, F7 and other genes involved in thrombosis (indicate the genes sequenced) revealed no pathogenic variants.
After the patient was transferred to our hospital, electrocardiogram results were that right electrical axis deviation, incomplete right bundle branch block. Chest radiography revealed an enlarged cardiac shadow, a cardiothoracic ratio of approximately 0.56, and a distended pulmonary artery segment . CTPA revealed multiple embolisms of bilateral main pulmonary artery, and branches, mainly in the left lower pulmonary artery segments , and the right ventricular filling defect was considered for embolization . Echocardiography suggested thrombosis in the pulmonary artery and right ventricle . Venous ultrasonography of both the upper and lower extremities was normal, iliac vein couldn’t be seen because of fetal occlusion. Echocardiography revealed a massive thrombus in the right ventricle (32 × 26 mm). Considering the rapid ventricular blood flow rate, the thrombus would be in high risk of shedding. When the huge thrombus shed, it may obstruct the main pulmonary artery, with high risk of a sudden death. After a multidisciplinary evaluation, the patient met the surgical indications and underwent thoracoscopic intracardiac and pulmonary thrombus removal via extracorporeal circulation . Postoperative CTPA showed the thrombus in the main pulmonary artery and multiple embolisms in the branches of the two pulmonary arteries have disappeared . The embolism in the right ventricle reduced after surgery . During hospitalization, based on the weight of the patient (60 kg), she was administrated with 6000IU low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) per 12 h for anticoagulation. The patient was discharged when her condition was stable.
One month after surgery, the patient was readmitted to terminate pregnancy for diseases of the fetal nervous system. The patient continued to be administrated with LMWH (5000 IU per 12 h, 54 kg) after discharge. The patient had no discomfort and her vital signs were stable when admission. While, D-dimer, 1608 ng/ml↑and a review of the CTPA at that time showed that the embolism in the left pulmonary artery was larger than before, new embolism was found in superior and inferior vena cava . Considering the poor effectiveness of LMWH, we changed it into oral warfarin for anticoagulation two days after delivery (2023/03/10). After discarding an acquired deficiency, we performed a genetic analysis of thrombophilia for suspected CAD. A month after discharge, the dose of warfarin was increased from 1.25 mg to 3.75 mg once a day based on international normalized ratio (INR) monitoring results in local hospital. On follow-up, the INR of the coagulation test haven’t reached the target (1.04–1.41).
A month after the second discharge from our hospital, the patient made third admission with complaining about colic of left lower abdomen and left lower back. Physical examination revealed deep tenderness near the umbilical area of the left abdomen and pain perception in the left renal region. Laboratory examination showed AT activity, 88%. D-dimer, 5363 ng/ml↑. Genetic analysis revealed a novel heterozygous mutation (NM_000488: exon5: c. T9 38 C: p. M313T) in SERPINC1, with an allele frequency of 0.0003 in East Asian populations in the ExAC database. According to analysis, the p.M313T mutation is rare and has a low incidence in the population. While the predicted result of PolyPhen2 mutation is “Probably Damaging,” the predicted result of SIFT mutation is “Damaging,” both indicating that the mutation of SERPINC1 gene is harmful. The patient’s son completed genetic testing which showed no mutation, while other family members refuse to complete it for financial or distant reasons. CTPA showed that the right pulmonary artery thrombosis wasn’t worsen. Main abdominal vein computed tomography angiography revealed multiple thrombosis in inferior vena cava, superior mesenteric vein, half azygos vein, left renal vein, proximal right renal vein, and bilateral internal iliac vein were found . We change into rivaroxaban (15 mg twice a day) for anticoagulation. Three days after rivaroxaban administrated, and before discharge, the thrombus remained stable . The D-dimer level decreased to 1002 ng/ml, and AT activity was 108%. After discharge, the patient regularly took rivaroxaban and was reexamined on time in local hospital with echocardiography to monitor changes of thrombus. It indicated thrombus in right ventricle is shrinking. CTPA indicated that the main pulmonary artery and right pulmonary artery thrombus had disappeared, the inferior vena cava, right atrium, and right ventricle were partially reduced. Abnormalities on venous ultrasound of either lower limb were not present. Laboratory tests indicated D-dimer was 1160 ng/ml. Based on these results, the patient’s condition improved, indicating that rivaroxaban was effective.