A 78-year-old lady with no prior known chronic medical illness, presented with sudden onset of hemoptysis on the day of admission. She denied fever, cough or any chest pain prior. She was tachypneic upon arrival with 90% oxygen saturation on room air. Preliminary investigation revealed haemoglobin level of 13.5 g/dl, normal coagulation profile, and type 1 respiratory failure on arterial blood gas, with bibasal alveolar infiltrates on chest X-ray (CXR). She developed another bout of hemoptysis in the emergency unit and went into cardiac arrest. She was resuscitated and intubated; and fresh blood was noted upon suction from the size 7 mm endotracheal tube.
Urgent thoracic computed tomography (CT) angiogram revealed a focal wedge-shaped consolidation at the posterior-basal segment of the left lower lobe and lingular lobe with surrounding bronchiectatic changes; with dilatation of the inferior pulmonary vein—suggesting hyperemia—but with no active contrast extravasation. Endotracheal aspirate sent urgently for Acid-fast bacilli and Xpert MTB/RIF was negative. She was started empirically on broad-spectrum antibiotic and her endotracheal tube was changed to 8 mm by the anesthesiologist to allow greater leeway for bronchoscopic intervention. Emergency bronchoscopy was performed using a flexible therapeutic bronchoscope (Fujinon EB530-XT), and revealed airway flooding with blood clots. All blood clots were evacuated, with no central intraluminal lesion noted. However, the bleeding source was localized to lingula and posterior-basal segment of left lower lobe, consistent with the CT finding. A decision was thus made to embolize the segmental bronchi using 7 mm Endobronchial Watanabe Spigot (EWS
, Novatech, La Ciotat, France) as an interim measure to prevent airway flooding while awaiting definitive treatment. A nylon thread was sutured beforehand to the distal end of the EWS for ease of forcep retrieval in the event of inadvertent grip-loss during insertion . The forcep was introduced in advance into the therapeuptic bronchoscope, and the EWS grasped with the forcep. The bronchoscope with the grasped EWS was inserted through the endotracheal tube as a single unit, and inserted firmly into the target bronchi under direct vision . Two 7 mm EWS were successfully embolized, one each into the lingula and postero-basal segment of left lower lobe. Total procedure time was 50 min. Post procedure CXR showed two EWS in optimal positions . Subsequent bronchial artery embolization (BAE) attempt was abandoned after failure to identify the culprit vessels. In view of high surgical risk, patient was managed conservatively in the medical high dependency unit.
Patient was mechanically ventilated in ward with no recurrence of hemoptysis. She was transfused with one pint of packed cell, and haemoglobin level thereafter remained stable at 10.4 g/dl. A decision for EWS removal was made at day 4 of ventilation, as there was no evidence of re-bleeding; whereas there were concerns regarding her higher risk of infection due to underlying bronchiectasis, as well as possible deleterious effect on ventilation due to the lingular lobe EWS blockade in this elderly patient. Upon removal of EWS via flexible bronchoscope, the mucosa of the target bronchi was noted to be healthy with no purulent discharges or bleeding from the culprit bronchi. Despite the brief episode of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, she attained good neurological recovery and was extubated after EWS removal. She was discharged 2 days later with good functional status. Patient walked into our outpatient clinic 1 month later with no recurrence of hemoptysis and further investigation and management has since moved to focus on her underlying bronchiectasis. A summary and timeline of the clinical progress is as below .