A 26-year-old G1P0 was referred to Maternal Foetal Medicine (MFM) clinic at 20 weeks, secondary to spontaneous singleton pregnancy. Her medical history was significant for congenital right lung agenesis with dextrocardia and left lung hyperinflation. Other medical history included pre-gravid obesity and mild intermittent asthma. She was asymptomatic and able to tolerate normal daily physical activity.
Preconceptionally, she underwent cardiopulmonary testing, which revealed normal baseline functioning. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) prior to conception showed dextrocardia and shift of the heart to the right upper area of the chest with a right-sided inferior vena cava (IVC) with mildly reduced left ventricular systolic function and an ejection fraction of 45%–50%. Preconceptional chest X-ray demonstrated the heart’s position in the right side of the chest, opacification of the right hemithorax and relative hypoplasia of the right ribcage. There was no focal parenchymal consolidation identified in the left lung, which partially extended into the right hemithorax . Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed thoracic findings consistent with the X-ray findings . She was also recommended to undergo cardiopulmonary exercise stress testing and pulmonary function testing (PFT), which she did not complete before pregnancy.
All the prenatal labs were completed and noted to be normal. A detailed obstetric ultrasound for foetal anatomy assessment and foetal echocardiogram were completed and noted to be normal. Given her normal baseline lung function, an uncomplicated pregnancy course was anticipated. Recommendations included PFT to assess her forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and follow-up with cardiology and pulmonology every trimester. Foetal growth assessment every 4 weeks after 24 weeks and third trimester antenatal foetal surveillance were recommended.
The patient remained compliant with her care with all the specialists. Foetal status remained reassuring with appropriate growth for gestational age with normal amniotic fluid volume. The patient’s cardiac and pulmonary status remained stable throughout the gestation. A multidisciplinary conference (MDC) was coordinated in early third trimester for delivery planning among the MFM, anaesthesia, paediatric cardiology, pulmonology, obstetrics and critical care specialist teams.
Labour induction was electively scheduled at 39 weeks of gestation for a planned delivery. Maternal status was monitored closely with telemetry during the course of labour. Early epidural was administered to avoid the detrimental effects of intrapartum pain. She had an uncomplicated vaginal delivery. Careful monitoring of the patient’s volume status was performed during the intra- and postpartum periods, secondary to concern of volume overload from continuous intravenous fluid infusions and autotransfusion following delivery. Her immediate postpartum course was uncomplicated, and she was discharged home in a stable condition on the second postpartum day. The patient was doing well with no issues at her 6-week postpartum visit. She recovered well from her pregnancy and delivery and was then followed for routine gynaecological care.