Patient aged 30 years, third gesture third pare, mother of two children alive by vaginal route was admitted in the labor room of the Ibn Rochd university hospital center of Casablanca for a premature delivery on badly followed pregnancy presumed at 8 months. On questioning the parturient, there was no notion of consanguinity with her spouse. The parents did not mention the history of congenital anomalies or close family marriage in their relative. There was no notion of taking medication or plants during the pregnancy. There was no history of dermatological disorders or other genetic diseases. The fasting blood sugar level was within normal limits during the pregnancy. No obstetrical ultrasound was performed during her pregnancy.
On admission, the patient was conscious, the blood pressure was 11/6cmHg, the urine dipstick did not show any proteinuria. Her cervix was dilated to 6 cm with intact membranes.
On obstetrical ultrasound, we found a progressive monofetal pregnancy, with positive cardiac activity, ultrasound biometrics corresponded to the term. There was an associated hydramnios with a large cistern that was 11 cm, the placenta was fundial.
After labor management, she gave birth 2 h after admission to the maternity ward of a living newborn female weighing 2400 g. The newborn's Apgar score apgar score was 8.
The initial physical examination revealed large, thick scales all over the body. Examination of the head and neck revealed an abnormal parchment-like membrane covering the head and sparse hairs.
Excessive scaling around the mouth gives a typical fish-like appearance. No other obvious abnormalities were observed. A thorough systemic examination was carried out and revealed no abnormalities (, ).
A cord sample was taken, the parents refused to do a karyotype.
The newborn was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit and managed with adequate humidification in an incubator. He expired within 10 h after birth. Unfortunately, her parents did not give consent for an autopsy.