A 54-year-old man was referred to our hospital for assessment of two posterior mediastinal masses that was detected on chest radiography during a routine health check. He denied the following symptoms including the presence of chest pain, hoarseness, hemoptysis, cough and dyspnea. He was a non-smoker and had no exposure to any environmental fumes or dust. Physical examination revealed normal breath sounds in both of the lung fields. Laboratory findings were within normal limits. In these examinations, hematology tests and biochemistry tests were within regular levels. His Pulmonary function tests and cardiovascular examination revealed normal performance. Plain chest computed tomography (CT) scans two paravertebral masses with well-defined margins, well demarcated from the descending aorta in the posterior mediastinum measuring 7.0 × 5.5 cm of the left one and 3.8 × 2.8 cm of the right one in size. There was no destruction of adjacent bone structures, no pleural effusion or infiltration of surrounding tissues and no evidence of intraforaminal or intraspinal tumor manifestation. Contrast-enhanced CT scans showed obvious enhancement in soft tissue masses . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) included axial scan, and multiplanar reconstructions (MPRs) on the coronal and sagittal planes revealed that both of the masses extending from levels T9-10 in the coronal planes. Mixed-signal lesions, mainly equal to a T1/T2 signal, were observed. In the marginal regions, a cystic lesion exhibited longer T1 and T2. There was no involvement of the vertebral canal and the bony structure was normal.As diagnosis was not established through imaging, surgery was scheduled. We approached the left tumor which was removed by en bloc resection via video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) rather than the thoracotomy. There was no invasion into the adjacent structures. After careful attention to hemostasis, a chest tube was placed to drain the pleural cavity, and the left lung was reinflated under direct vision. Three months later the right-sided lesion of 3.8 cm in diameter was also excised. Grossly, both tumors disclosed a thin capsule of soft consistency and reddish-brown color. Microscopically, both tumors consisted of mature fat tissue and hematopoietic tissue, including myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocytic elements surrounded . Based on these findings, extra-adrenal myelolipoma was diagnosed. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was followed up for 5 months without evidence of recurrence to date.