A 51-year-old woman with unremarkable medical history was admitted to the hospital via the emergency room for lower back pain.
She complained of worsening back pain after lifting a heavy object two months ago. The numeric rating scale (NRS) score for back pain was seven points.
The patient had an unremarkable medical history.
The patient had an unremarkable personal and family history.
Physical examination revealed paralumbar muscle tenderness, a 5 cm × 8 cm skin ulcer on her right breast, and several mass-like lesions on both breasts. We planned to evaluate the multiple breast masses under the impression of breast cancer while treating her lumbar pain.
Her blood pressure on admission was 150/90 mmHg despite no history of hypertension. When the patient complained of severe pain, the blood pressure elevated to 170-180 mmHg, and when the pain was relieved, it decreased to 150 mmHg. Therefore, we concluded that the increased blood pressure was likely due to the uncontrolled pain, since the patient did not have a history of hypertension. Attempts to alleviate the pain included physical therapy, trigger point injection, and medication (intravenous nefopam and methocarbamol, as well as oral acetaminophen and tramadol). However, the pain and elevated blood pressure persisted (systolic BP, 160–180 mmHg). On the 4th day of admission, the patient continued to complain of severe pain (NRS score 8-9), and the patient's blood pressure was measured up to 186/106 mmHg. Therefore, we added oral and intravenous antihypertensive drugs to control her BP, but no improvement was observed.
On the 7th day of hospitalization, the patient had an altered mental status with generalized tonic-clonic seizures lasting for 1 min.
Her serum calcium level was 15.8 mg/dL.
Electroencephalography showed repetitive seizures localized in the bilateral posterior region that were more prominent on the left side. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed bilateral cortical and subcortical edema of the occipital lobes suggesting PRES lesions .