A 27 year old pregnant woman, the index patient, was referred to the obstetric department of our University Medical Centre with hypertension and pre-eclampsia at 26 weeks. Ultrasonography showed intra-uterine growth retardation. History showed that the patient's father had undergone a resection of the right adrenal gland at the age of 48 because of a pheochromocytoma. Clinical evaluation of the index patient with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilateral adrenal pheochromocytomas, the right tumour being 4 centimetres and the left 1 centimetre in diameter. Twenty-four hours urine analysis showed a creatinin of 8.8 mmol/24 hours (reference 9–18 mmol/24 hours), metanephrines 21.6 μmol/24 hours (ref:<1–8 μmol/24 hours), VMA 64 μmol/24 hours (8–36 μmol/24 hours), free adrenaline 146 nmol/24 hours, free noradrenaline 4850 nmol/24 hours (90–470 nmol/24 hours) and free dopamine 4450 nmol/24 hours (420–2600 nmol/24 hours). She had no café-au-lait spots. She received alpha-adrenergic receptor blockade (doxazosine 160 mg), calcium channel blockers (nifedipine 30 mg) and beta-receptor blockade (metoprolol 100 mg) one week later. At 28 weeks a Caesarean section was performed due to pre-eclampsia and a daughter was born weighing 745 grams with a length of 33 cm. Her head circumference measured 23 cm. During this procedure the right adrenal gland was removed through a subcostal incision without any intra-operative complications.
The obstetrician referred the mother to the endocrinologist. Additional family history demonstrated that the patient's paternal grandmother had died at the age of 42 as a result of a stroke. It remains unclear whether she suffered from a pheochromocytoma. The index patient's grandmother's brother also died from of a stroke at the age of 57. Both patients may have had a pheochromocytoma since cerebrovascular accidents are known complications. Another theory is they both suffered from cerebellar haemangioblastomas. However, these cerebellar neoplasms more often present with cerebellar signs and symptoms as headache, nausea and vomiting, dizziness, blurred vision, nystagmus, ataxia, intention tremors, coordination deficits and at a later stage herniation of the cerebellum, oedema and death. This suggests that pheochromocytomas would be the more plausible explanation.
Three months later the patient underwent an uncomplicated laparoscopic adrenalectomy for the left pheochromocytoma. Subsequently, she was treated adequately with hydrocortisone, mineralocorticoids and dehydroepiandrosterone.
The differential diagnosis for the index patient focussed on VHL disease and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. DNA analysis, did not demonstrate a RET proto-oncogene mutation. Later, a missense mutation (Gly93Ser) in exon 1 of the VHL gene on chromosome 3 (p25 – p26) was shown in the patient, her father and her daughter. The diagnosis of VHL disease was now proven based on the positive family history for pheochromocytoma and the mutation in the VHL gene. Further diagnostic work-up revealed two small lesions suspicious for inactive angiomas on the right retina in the index patient and the left without any abnormalities.
The family had many questions concerning the risks of the daughter having VHL disease and was referred to the Department of Clinical Genetics for counselling.
Additional ultrasonography in the father showed epididymal cysts on the left side and bilateral renal cysts. An MRI of the brain and spinal cord showed no signs of haemangioblastomas and examination of the eyes no retinal haemangioblastomas.
The family tree of the family is depicted in Figure . The sister of our index patient did not inherit the family's mutation. The patient, her father, and daughter remain in a periodical screening program for VHL disease for early detection of other VHL associated tumours, but especially pheochromocytomas.