A 65-year-old man was scheduled for a major laparotomy for bowel reconstruction. The procedure involved adhesiolysis, small bowel resection, side to side ileo-ileal anastomosis and abdominal wall reconstruction.
His comorbidities included mild asthma, ankylosing spondylitis, duodenal ulcer. He also had a superior mesenteric artery thrombosis in the past which led to bowel ischemia and intestinal failure for which he had a laparotomy and small bowel resection. The postoperative period following the laparotomy was complicated by a pulmonary embolus and he was commenced on treatment dose tinzaparin and aspirin for prophylaxis of arterial thrombosis. His other regular medications included omeprazole, codeine and loperamide. His allergy to oxycodone was rash and pruritus.
He was a high risk for post-operative complications with an anaerobic threshold of 8.4 and VO2 max of 15.3mls/kg/min. His ECG had old ischemic changes. However, dobutamine stress test was negative. His airway was mallampatti grade 2 with limitation of neck movements. He was a Cormack and Lehane Grade 4 from previous laryngoscopy and intubation was with the help of a video laryngoscope. His preoperative investigations were within normal range with INR 1.0 and normal range platelets. Aspirin was stopped seven days before and tinzaparin was stopped 24 hours prior to surgery.
There was a detailed discussion about the options for anaesthesia and pain relief during preoperative visit. Patient controlled analgesia was offered but was declined by the patient.
An awake epidural was inserted at T8/9 level using loss of resistance to saline. The insertion was uncomplicated with the space identified in first attempt and no bloody tap. A test dose of 3 mls of 2% Lidocaine was given and then a continuous infusion of 0.125% Bupivacaine with 2 microg/mL Fentanyl was used intra-operatively at a rate of 10mls per hour. The total operative time was approximately 8 hours. He was extubated towards the end and transferred to recovery. The epidural rate was decreased to 5 mls per hour in recovery and was subsequently turned off due to a dense block. It was restarted within few hours when he started to move his toes. There wasn’t any sensory deficit at this point. The dense block persisted on subsequent review and the epidural was turned off. An urgent MR scan was done which showed epidural haematoma with cord compression between T5 - T11. He underwent an urgent T5 - T11 decompressive laminectomy and posterior thoracic instrumentation. Neurological recovery was minimal with persistent paraplegia.