A 51-year-old Japanese woman noticed redness and swelling in her left breast 16 years after breast augmentation. In 2004, the patient had undergone bilateral breast augmentation in Korea. Although there was no information about the exact type of injected material or the quantity, the material was speculated as liquid silicone. The patient had a history of hepatitis C, but no family history of cancer including breast cancer. She had no traumatic breast injury history and no regular medications or allergies.
Despite oral antibiotic therapy for suspected subcutaneous fluid retention, there was no improvement for 6 months. Palpation revealed redness, swelling, heat, and pain in the upper region of her left breast. The skin of the left breast was partially destructed and there was leakage of pus and serous fluid. Breast ultrasonography showed fluid retention in the left breast and enlarged reactive lymph nodes in the left axilla. The bilateral breasts were difficult to observe on ultrasonography due to foreign bodies .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans showed a large ulcerative lesion with thick enhancement on the ulcerative surface in the left breast. In addition, there were many nodules in the subcutaneous fat of both breasts, and some were encapsulated by calcification.
Breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) shows a large ulcerative lesion in the left breast. There is an irregular-shaped enhancing mass on the base of the ulcer, and it is continuous with the mammary gland tissue. Many subcutaneous nodules are also seen in both breasts. The T1-weighted image and fat-suppressed T2-weighted image show no signal in those nodules. These are consistent with the liquid silicone materials injected before .
Streptococcus pyogenes was detected in the culture of the subcutaneous fluid retention. Continuous drainage and following debridement were not effective. Thus, a partial left mastectomy was performed 101 days after the initial visit.
Pathology revealed a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma.
We performed a total left mastectomy and additional sentinel node biopsy.
An intraoperative sentinel lymph node evaluation was performed by one-step nucleic acid amplification (OSNA) assay. Due to the positive result of the OSNA assay, we performed an additional axillary lymph node dissection. Pathological examination revealed no metastasis in the dissected axillary nodes, and the resection margins were negative. After the surgery, the patient received four cycles of epirubicin, cyclophosphamide therapy, and four cycles of docetaxel therapy.
The gross appearance of the breast tumor was not distinctive and with cystic degeneration and skin ulcer. The cut surface showed white-to-greyish. Microscopically, the cyst wall was lined by atypical squamous epithelial cells with varying degrees of nuclear atypia and prominent keratinization, and in the deep layer, these atypical cells infiltrated into the surrounding tissues and occasionally showed a spindle shape. In the surrounding mammary tissue, numerous vacuolated structures of different sizes were observed accompanied with inflammatory cell infiltration, and fibrosis. Immunohistochemically, these atypical cells were positive for p40 and p63 . Estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) were negative in tumor cells. The histopathological diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma, pT3 pN0 pM0 Stage IIB.
Multiple cysts diameters from 0.2 to 1.5 cm were observed in the removed mammary tissue. Thin hard shells remained after surrounding fatty tissues were digested from the cysts with protein/lipid-digesting solution for 2 weeks. The liquid contents in the cysts were isolated and analyzed by Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer at the Chemicals Evaluation and Research Institute, Japan. The strong absorption bands in the mid-infrared spectrum range, at 1261.4, 1094.7–1022.5, and 800.9 cm-1 indicated that the liquid contents were polydimethylsiloxane (e.g., silicone oil) .