An 82-year-old female patient was referred to our department complaining of chest tightness and abdominal fullness for 8 months, with massive pericardial effusion for 2 months.
Eight months prior, the patient developed chest tightness and abdominal distension, which worsened over time. She was admitted to the gastroenterology ward of our hospital. Chest CT showed a large amount of pericardial effusion and a small amount of bilateral pleural effusion. Then, the patient was transferred to the cardiology department for further treatment. Relevant laboratory tests and inspections were performed, but no cause was found. After diuretic treatment, the patient’s symptoms were gradually relieved, and echocardiography showed that pericardial effusion slightly decreased, and she was discharged. The patient underwent an FDG-PETCT examination at Shibo High Tech Hospital, which showed that pericardial effusion might be related to IgG4-RD. The patient was given an over-the-counter diuretic that contained furosemide and spironolactone. Later, the above symptoms reappeared and gradually worsened, and the patient attended our department for further treatment.
She had binocular cataract surgery one year ago.
The patient had a temperature of 36.5°C, a blood pressure of 128/84 mmHg, a pulse of 95 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and a finger oxygen saturation of 95%. Cardiac percussion (cardiac dullness) revealed an enlarged area, and a low and dull sound was heard on auscultation. The patient also showed mild pretibial pitting edema. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
In the department of gastroenterology of our hospital, the results of the patient’s laboratory tests showed that the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 67.0 mm/h, D-dimer was 6.42mg/L FEU, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 649ng/ml, total protein was 72.6 g/L, globulin was 35.3g/L, albumin was 35.3 g/L, and immunoglobulin (IgG) was 19.0 g/L. Blood cultures, PPD, T-spot, antinuclear antibody, and extractable nuclear antigen antibody spectrum were all negative. Routine blood tests, routine biochemical tests, thyroid function, tumor markers, coagulation series, pre-transfusion tests, myocardial markers, and routine and urinary tests revealed no significant abnormality.
Some investigations were repeated while the patient was admitted to the rheumatology and immunology department of our hospital. ESR was 29.0 mm/h, D-dimer was 1.86mg/L FEU, BNP was 486ng/ml, total protein was 74.6 g/L, globulin was 35.9g/L, albumin was 38.7 g/L, IgG was 17.2g/L, immunoglobulin subtype 4(IgG4) was 14.0g/L, complement C3, complement C4, C-reactive protein (CRP), and rheumatoid factors were normal. Antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-cyclic citrate peptide antibody, and anti-phospholipid antibody were all negative.
In the department of gastroenterology of our hospital, chest computed tomography (CT) showed a large amount of pericardial effusion and a small amount of bilateral pleural effusion, with multiple small nodules in both lungs . Echocardiography revealed a large amount of fluid in the pericardial cavity. The depth of the posterior wall of the left ventricle was 16mm, the depth of the anterior wall of the right ventricle was 14mm, the depth of the left ventricle wall was 17mm, and the depth of the right atrial roof was 16mm. Thyroid ultrasound showed multiple thyroid nodules TI-RADS-3, swollen lymph nodes on the right side of the neck. Submandibular gland ultrasound showed that large low echo nodules can be detected in the submandibular gland, with clear boundaries, less uniform internal echoes, and blood flow signals. . Abdominal ultrasound displayed no obvious abnormalities. Echocardiography showed moderate fluid accumulation in the pericardial cavity. The depth of the posterior wall of the left ventricle was 11.9mm, and the depth of the left ventricle wall was 14mm. Furthermore, PETCT showed moderate pericardial effusion, which was in accordance with the increased area of FDG uptake, with a maximum SUV of 5.04mm. Bilateral pharyngeal tonsils and submandibular glands manifested symmetrically increased FDG uptake. Moreover, small lymph nodes were observed at the right side of the sternal bone, and the mediastinum and the wall of the ascending aorta all showed increased metabolism .
In the rheumatology department, chest CT showed a large amount of pericardial effusion and a small amount of left pleural effusion, multiple small nodules in both lungs, and disseminated inflammation of the middle lobe of the right lung and the lower lobes of both lungs . The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm, low T-wave, and increased left atrial load. Echocardiography showed a large amount of fluid in the pericardial cavity. The depth of the posterior wall of the left ventricle was 13mm, the depth of the anterior wall of the right ventricle was 10mm, the depth of the left ventricle wall was 10mm, the depth of the apex was 13mm, and the depth of the right atrial roof was 11mm. Three days after admission, a biopsy of the right submandibular gland was performed .