A 60-year-old male presented with malaise and 10 kg weight loss over a period of 1 year. He also had a fever of over 38° and tachycardia. He had a history of hypertension, but no transient elevation of blood pressure, headache or profuse sweating. Blood tests revealed inflammatory findings (C reactive protein 15.8 mg/dL), anemia (hemoglobin 8.3 g/dL) and deterioration of glucose tolerance (HbA1c 7.5%) . Computed tomography showed a heterogeneous mass 15 cm in size in the left suprarenal space . Magnetic resonance imaging scan showed an internal heterogeneous mass with mixed high and low signal on T2-weighted images and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography showed hyperintensity in the mass. For further assessment, detailed blood and urine tests were performed, the results of which are shown in Table . Briefly, serum cortisol levels were elevated at midnight and were not suppressed by 1 mg dexamethasone. Plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone level was markedly suppressed. In addition, 24-h urinary noradrenaline and normetanephrine levels were greater than three times the normal upper limit. These results indicated that the suprarenal tumor was an adrenal tumor, secreting both cortisol and catecholamine, although MIBG-scintigraphy showed no uptake in the tumor. For more definitive diagnosis and treatment, we performed open left adrenalectomy with radical nephrectomy, with blood transfusions and 12 mg of oral doxazosin mesylate as preoperative preparation. No intraoperative hypertension was observed.
The tumor was a tan-colored, multilobulated solid mass 30 × 25 × 13 cm in size, situated in the retroperitoneum around the superior pole of kidney, and it extended to the hilum of the left kidney . Histology revealed atypical spindle cells with a fascicular architecture intermingled with lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates . On immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells were positive for CD34 and negative for AE1/3, EMA, desmin, SMA, S100, c-KIT, SF-1, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, MDM2, and CDK4. The Ki67 labelling index was 12%. Fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed no amplification of MDM2. A definitive diagnosis of UPS was made. The left adrenal gland was slightly invaded, and hyperplasia was observed in the adrenal cortex but not in the adrenal medulla on hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections .
The patient was discharged 10 uneventful days following surgery, after recovering from fever and tachycardia. Catecholamine and cortisol levels had been normalized prior to discharge. Unfortunately, the patient developed local recurrence 6 months after the operation. Intriguingly, neither catecholamine nor cortisol levels were elevated at recurrence. The patient received radiotherapy to the local recurrent site with a total dose of 60 Gy in 25 fractions, and has since remained in stable condition without distant metastasis for a period of 5 months since the end of the radiotherapy.