A 49-year-old male presented to the Accident and Emergency Department with bilateral elbow pain following a fall while running on ice. The patient is fit and well, takes no regular medication, and is a right-handed dominant pilot. On clinical examination, there was no swelling or deformity present. He had full extension of the left arm and lacked 20° of extension of the right arm. He had significant weakness in the extension of both elbows, and his active function was limited by pain on both sides. Plain radiographs revealed bilateral olecranon avulsion fractures, confirming triceps tendon avulsion injuries . The patient also had a non-displaced fracture of the right radial head. Although the specific cause of the triceps tendon avulsion was not explicitly recorded in the patient’s medical history, it is worth considering potential underlying factors such as anabolic steroid use, which has been associated with tendon injuries in some cases. Further investigation into the patient’s history and potential risk factors could provide valuable insights into the etiology of this injury.
The patient underwent bilateral open fixation using the suture technique 10 days post-injury. Ruptured bilateral triceps were noted, the left more severe than the right. Tourniquet time was 43 min (each side) at 250 mmHg. A midline incision curved radially was used to expose the triceps, protecting the ulnar nerve throughout. A suture-only repair with sutures and non-metallic suture anchors on each side was undertaken . Once the repair was complete, both elbows were moved to the full range of motion (ROM) to check the adequacy of the repair and ROM. Wound closure was done in layers with 3/0 Monocryl and Steri-Strips™ applied to the skin. Bilateral back slabs to 45° were applied, leaving the wrist free. The patient was discharged home the day after surgery with appropriate analgesia. The patient was changed into a lightweight back slab at 45° 1 week postoperatively.
Three weeks postoperatively, the wounds had healed well, and radiographs revealed a good position of the repair . The ROM on the left side was 5–85°, and on the right side, it was 0–90°. We advised the patient to start moving his elbows at 3 weeks, but he was advised to avoid heavy lifting, pushing, and pulling for a further 3 weeks. The patient required splints to be worn outdoors and overnight for 3 weeks. After this period, the splints were discarded and formal physiotherapy commenced, with ROM increasing for 5–145° on the right side and 30–130° on the left side. At 3 months postoperatively, he gained full ROM in the right arm (0–150°) and nearly full ROM in the left arm (5–150°) and returned to work at full capacity.