Our patient is a 50 y.o. female who presented for neurosurgical evaluation for a 35-year history of intractable OCD. Her symptoms began following a childhood trauma, and her obsessions centered on safety. She described intrusive thoughts of harming others, checking rituals, and feelings of incompleteness. She no longer could drive or leave her house alone due to these symptoms. She worked in a complex healthcare occupation previously but left her job due to excessive time spent in documentation due to OCD symptoms. Previous treatment trials included psychotherapy, various psychopharmacological trials (including SSRIs, atypical antidepressants, atypical antipsychotics, and benzodiazepines), and electroconvulsive therapy.
This patient was evaluated at the University of Florida Center for Movement Disorders and Neurorestoration as a collaboration of the departments of Psychiatry, Neurology, and Neurosurgery. Prior to recommending surgery, a risk versus benefit analysis was performed by a multidisciplinary team (psychiatrist, psychologist, neurologist, and functional neurosurgeon), which reviewed all past treatments, procedures, and evaluations to ensure the appropriateness of the candidate. Psychiatric diagnoses were based on a review of medical records and clinical interviews.The patient met DSM-V criteria for OCD with an Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS), with a history of treatment-refractory OCD symptoms since age 15 causing suffering and functional impairment. Her symptomatology was supported by a Y-BOCS of 36 at the time of the initial DBS consultation, indicating extreme severity (scores 32–40). Previous psychotherapy, pharmacological, and electroconvulsive therapy trials were deemed adequate, and she was deemed a potential candidate for deep brain stimulation therapy to treat her debilitating, medication-refractory OCD symptoms.
While she was deemed a surgical candidate at this time, the next 7 years were spent on medication optimization because her insurance would not cover the procedure. Upon changing insurance, the patient was again deemed a surgical candidate after repeat evaluation by a multidisciplinary team. She underwent successful bilateral VC/VS Medtronic device implantation and initial device programming occurred over a 3-month period. Her medication regimen was fluvoxamine 100 mg 3 times per day, olanzapine 10 mg at night, and clonazepam 1 mg 3 times per day, and remained unchanged over the following year throughout DBS implantation and optimization.
The anatomical target was the same for both the left and right sides. The DBS targeting utilized a stereotactic CT scan fused with MRI and morphed to a deformable atlas and was deemed successful. Although coordinates are less meaningful in such individual cases due to high patient-to-patient variability, we have included a patient-specific figure showing the lead position (–). Additionally, it should be noted that variability in DBS settings across leads may be explained by the variability of lead implantation within the targeted brain area. After implantation, there was no difference in the positions of the left and right leads.
At 2 months post-implantation, we attempted an initial systematic, exploratory, trial-and-error approach, assessing the effects of various stimulation parameters predominately through variation in amperage amplitude across various contacts. Frequency was held constant throughout at 135 Hz. Although monopolar stimulation lacks precision, it allows for a larger electrical field spread across the targeting region. For our purposes this broader, less precise, field would be of benefit for exploring regions that might elicit an acute positive emotional or affective response such as feelings of euphoria, mirth, or smile.
Monopolar interrogation consisted of testing all eight contacts (4 each, bilaterally) individually and systematically at 135 us, 190 us, 210 us, and 260 us. For each given pulse width, amperage was titrated upwards in 0.5 mA increments every 60 s. At longer pulse widths of 210us and 260us, she reported side effects– feeling “clammy and sweaty” and nauseated at the most ventral, right contact at 4.0 mA. We noticed no affective stimulus response elicited by the DBS stimulation.
Double monopolar settings were interrogated, and we used a similar titration pattern, pairing the two most ventral contacts, then pairing the middle contacts, holding the frequency at 135 Hz again. No stimulus effects, i.e., no mirth or smile were noted with any settings. Consistent with monopolar interrogation, the most ventral pair on the right induced side effects of “clamminess” and feeling “hot” at 3.3 mA. And for the left ventral most contact, “hot flashes” and “nausea” occurred at 3.5 mA. No euphoria, smile nor mirth was noted.
Her symptoms remained unchanged at her follow-up approximately 1 month later. Dose optimization continued, now with triple monopolar interrogation using the three most ventral contacts, holding both pulse width (260 μs) and frequency (135 Hz) constant (See ). Again, no mirth or smile resulted from any setting changes. On the left, mild nausea was noted at 3.2 mA and resolved at 2.5 mA. On the right, mild nausea at 2.3 mA resolved at 2.0 mA. Again, there was no stimulation-induced euphoria, smile, or mirth for any parameter settings. Given that she was now 5 months post-implantation, that a broad electrical field theoretically covered at least the ventral portion of the ALIC, minimal side effects were noted, and the presumption that further interrogation would be unlikely to uncover any mirth response, these settings were held and considered optimized.
At a return visit 5 months later, the patient reported a robust improvement in her quality of life, a “25% reduction in OCD” symptoms, and even more so for her checking behaviors. Some days she experienced “no symptoms” and felt “like myself, minus the OCD.” She also reported experiencing a 4–5 h per day reduction in compulsive behaviors. She also reported the symptoms of depression were absent, and that her mood was “good.” A repeat Y-BOCS had not been performed for this visit. During this visit it was noted that for the left lead, the pulse width had been inadvertently set at 250 μs rather than 260 μs, a finding deemed inconsequential given her marked improvement such that pulse width was continued with this slight asymmetry, still using long pulse width bilaterally. Her device battery life was at 28%, and an elective repair indication notification was present. She was eager to schedule battery replacement surgery given her response. She opted for a rechargeable battery and had the IPG replacement performed at an outside hospital closer to her home where the IPG was changed to a Boston Scientific, device type– Vercise Genus. Final settings were as follows: Left C+, 0−, 1-, 2- @ 2.7 mA, 250 μs, 135 Hz, Right C+, 0-, 1-, 2- @ 2.3 mA, 260 μs, 135 Hz.
After her IPG replacement, she also transferred her programming care to an outside team closer to her home. Immediately after the replacement, her new provider changed her device settings from our initial optimization, reducing the longer pulse width. The patient reported they had concerns about the battery consumption due to her prior settings. New settings were: bilateral triple monopoles at the three most ventral contacts, 7.5 mA, 136 Hz, and 150 μs. However, one month after her settings had been changed the patient reported a return of depression and a significant worsening of OCD symptoms. This persisted for several months, and she contacted us requesting a DBS programming consultation. She reported her symptoms were now “debilitating,” with OCD compulsions lasting several hours daily, and that she was in bed for hours at a time with thoughts of suicide beginning to return.
We resumed her DBS programming and began transitioning her settings to her previous parameters in an attempt to replicate the previous response. At the time of this writing, we have continued with the use of triple monopoles bilaterally, and over the next 3 months will transition her settings to a longer pulse width, monitoring for side effects. Vecise Neural Navigator 4 software indicates her most recent settings (9.0 mA, 200 us, 136 Hz) will increase her daily charging time from only 20 to 30 min.
Our goal was to gradually transition her back to her previous optimized settings. During the transfer of care to our clinic, we reintroduced the longer pulse-width settings. However, it had previously taken several weeks to adjust some of those settings. While increasing the pulse width, she experienced hot flashes and nausea that persisted beyond 200 us. As a result, we kept her at 200 us. Her overall dosing was lower than what was currently being used, so we adjusted her amperage as it had minimal effect on the nausea at 200 us pulse width. Two weeks later suicidal thoughts had diminished. After her follow-up 2 months later, her depression and OCD symptoms remained unchanged. So, we targeted a longer pulse width again.
During one of her early optimization trials, we noted that nausea would dissipate by lowering the frequency to around 99-105 Hz. We leveraged this and lowered her frequency at the 2nd follow-up visit after returning to our care; this allowed us to achieve a longer pulse width (260us) without side effects or nausea. Communication with the patient over the next 2 months revealed that her depressive symptoms were subsiding with the longer pulse width. She reported that her suicidal ideation had completely disappeared, and she was now out of bed. She described her residual depression as dysphoria arising specifically from her OCD symptoms. However, her OCD symptoms remained unchanged.