A 9-year-old boy (height 118 cm; weight 18 kg) with asplenia, dextrocardia, single atrium, single ventricle, common atrioventricular valve, and total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) had undergone a TAPVC repair and a Fontan surgery with fenestration by 3-year-old, in addition, multiple coil embolizations for major aortopulmonary collateral arteries. He had developed protein losing enteropathy and plastic bronchitis after Fontan surgery. Furthermore, he experienced endoscopic esophageal variceal ligation (EVL) for EV twice at 7-year-old without any adverse events.
This time, he was rushed to the emergency room at another hospital for massive hematemesis. His condition was stabilized by conservative treatment such as a blood transfusion, and he was transferred to our hospital. An emergency gastroscopy revealed moniliform moderate varices with redness extending from the gastric cardia to the upper esophagus; however, there was no active bleeding. Subsequent cardiac angiography revealed the central venous pressure of 14 mmHg, and there was no indication for a catheterization procedure. Thus, EIS under general anesthesia was scheduled for the treatment of EV.
His preoperative blood pressure (BP) was 84/46 mmHg, heart rate (HR) was 91 beat per minute, and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 96% at 1 L/min of oxygen through a nasal cannula. Preoperative electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, and chest X-ray indicated a cardiothoracic ratio of 44.5%. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed ejection fraction of 56% with mild common atrioventricular valve regurgitation, and blood tests showed mildly decreased hemoglobin (12.5 g/dL) and elevated hepatobiliary enzymes (total bilirubin 2.8 mg/dL, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 160 IU/L).
After the induction of general anesthesia with midazolam 3 mg, fentanyl 50 μg, remifentanil 0.3 μg /kg/min, and rocuronium 20 mg, he was intubated, and we maintained general anesthesia with sevoflurane 1.5–2% and remifentanil 0.05–0.15 μg/kg/min. The ventilator mode was set to pressure-controlled ventilation, with driving pressure of 10–13 cmH2O, positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cmH2O, respiratory rate of 20/min, and fraction of inspiratory oxygen (FIO2) 0.47. He was monitored via electrocardiogram, SpO2, continuous arterial BP, and capnometry.
We used an OLYMPUS GIF TYPE Q260J endoscope with a diameter of 9.9 mm and 5% ethanolamine oleate with iopamidol as the sclerosing agent (SA) for EIS. We attached an EV balloon (MD-690, Create medic, Kanagawa, Japan) near the tip of the endoscope and dilated the balloon with 20 ml of air just before injecting the SA to prevent it from leaking out. The SA was injected into the varicose vein with a 25G puncture needle under X-ray fluoroscopy.
After the procedure started, his vital signs were stable. However, at the time of the SA injection into the varicose vein in the gastric cardia a short time after the balloon was dilated, his systolic BP decreased from 70 to 50 mmHg . At first, we suspected anaphylaxis due to the SA partly because we did not know about the balloon dilation; however, there was no change in HR or tidal volume (VT) and also no allergic findings such as skin reddening. After that, BP gradually recovered when the balloon was deflated about 3 min later. Next, the SA was injected into the esophageal varices about 5 cm cephalad from the first injection point in the same way. Then, immediately after the balloon dilation, the VT decreased from 200 to 60 ml, SpO2 decreased from 93 to 79%, end-tidal CO2 (EtCO2) increased from 36 to 51 mmHg, and HR increased from 88 to 98/min . We started manual ventilation with 100% oxygen right away. That restored SpO2; however, ventilation was inadequate until VT and EtCO2 were recovered by the balloon deflation a few minutes later. Thereafter, his respiratory and circulatory dynamics were stable, and he was extubated in the operating room.
Although he had the good postoperative course, EVL was performed for rebleeding from compensatory enlarged gastric varices on the 11th postoperative day (POD), followed by a percutaneous fenestration re-creation on the 26th POD, and he was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on the 55th POD.