The patient was a 78-year-old man who presented to our hospital with a chief complaint of intermittent right lower abdominal quadrant pain for over 2 months. His medical history included nontuberculous mycobacterial lung disease and asthma, and he had no history of abdominal surgery. He had neither nausea nor vomiting, and his vital signs were normal. His height was 162.2 cm, weight was 72 kg, and body mass index (BMI) was 27.4 kg/m2. His abdomen was soft and flat, no parietal mass was palpated, and slight tenderness was present in the right lower quadrant. Blood test results were within normal limits. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed protrusion of a small bowel loop between the rectus muscle and the PRS ; ALH was suspected. Laparoscopic surgery was planned, and SILS was chosen to minimize the invasiveness.
With the patient in the supine position under general anesthesia, a 2-cm-long muscle-splitting incision was made at contralateral McBurney’s point. A Lap Protector™ (Hakko, Nagano, Japan) was attached to the wound, and an EZaccess™ (Hakko) with three inserted 5-mm trocars was added . Laparoscopically, the ALH was easily detected, and there were no hernia contents . We used the IPOM technique for its simplicity and repair reliability. A 9-cm-diameter Symbotex™ (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) composite mesh was positioned so that the AL was pressed against the rectus abdominis muscle, and the mesh was fixed using AbsorbaTack™ (Medtronic) tacks while percutaneously compressing from the opposite side. The first few tacks were fixed using a Diamond-Flex® circular retractor (BD, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, USA) to stabilize the mesh position, and the final 30 tacks were fixed using the double-crown technique . We fixed the mesh carefully to avoid damaging the inferior epigastric vessels. Seprafilm® (Sanofi, Paris, France) was placed under the incision to prevent adhesions, and the wound was sutured in layers. The operation time was 30 min. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on the third post-operative day. His symptoms resolved after surgery, and no recurrence has been noted 1 year since the surgery.