A 15-year-old girl presented with back pain. A chest roentgenogram and computed tomography (CT) showed a well-circumscribed 8.0 cm tumor adjacent to the 8–11th thoracic vertebrae and the descending aorta in the left posterior mediastinum . Contrast-enhanced CT revealed that the AKA arose from the left 9th intercostal artery that ran between the tumor and the vertebrae . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed that tumor-feeding arteries also arose from the left 9th intercostal artery , which indicated that preservation of the 9th intercostal artery might be essential to avoid severe neurogenic complications, such as paraplegia.
The patient was placed in the right lateral decubitus position. RATS was performed with the left intercostal approach using the da Vinci Xi system (Intuitive Surgical, Mountain View, CA) with four arms. During the procedure, carbon dioxide gas was insufflated into the thoracic cavity through a trocar at the pressure of 8 mmHg. The camera trocar was first inserted at the 8th inter costal space (ICS) through middle axillary line. Then, a 3-cm utility thoracotomy was performed in the 6th ICS along the anterior axillary line. Two additional trocars were inserted as follows: one in the 9th ICS along the posterior axillary line and another in the 9th ICS along the subscapular line.
After the da Vinci system was docked, careful dissection was accomplished utilizing the Fenestrated bipolar forceps, the Tip-up fenestrated grasper and the Permanent cautery spatula (Intuitive Surgical) (Additional file : Video S1). The parietal pleura all the way around the tumor was first opened to mobilize the tumor, which revealed that the tumor originated from the sympathetic trunk. The nerve of origin was divided from the tumor with preserving the sympathetic trunk. The 9th intercostal vein as well as the 10th intercostal artery and vein were also preserved with dividing vessel branches involved by the tumor. The 9th intercostal artery was carefully dissected to avoid the injury of the AKA; tumor-feeding arteries arising from the 9th intercostal artery was clipped and divided, which achieved complete tumor resection with preservation of the AKA and the entire 9th intercostal artery .
Postoperative course was uneventful, and back pain that she had complained of before surgery has been relived. The final pathological diagnosis of the tumor was ganglioneuroma. The patient is well without any complication at 18 months after surgery.