An 11-year-old girl was injured when she collided with her right great toe while using a jump box during gymnastics. She then started to feel pain in the right great toe and had difficulty wearing shoes. Five months later, the pain progressively worsened, and she experienced hyperextension of the IP joint. No specific diagnoses were made at an initial clinic. She was referred to our outpatient clinic because of diagnostic difficulty and increased symptoms, such as pain and swelling of the plantar side of her right great toe, despite conservative treatment. Physical examination at the i n i t i a l v i s i t r e v e a l e d t h e impossibility of active flexion, swelling, and tenderness in the plantar aspect of the IP joint of the right great toe. The passive range of motion was 35° during extension . The score on the Japanese society for surgery of the foot ( JSSF) hallu x metatarsophalangeal-IP scale was 58 points. Plain radiographs showed no obvious abnormal findings such as dislocation or fracture . Ultrasonography revealed a lowechoic area on the plantar plate on the phalangeal side . Moreover, there was no evidence of flexor hallucis longus (FHL) tendon rupture. Therefore, we diagnosed the patient with a chronic plantar plate tear of the IP joint of the right great toe and performed surgical treatment under general anesthesia 8 months after its onset.
Intraoperatively, a plantar incision was made on the IP joint, and the FHL tendon was retracted. The plantar plate ruptured at the insertion of the proximal phalanx; however, the insertion of the distal phalanx remained intact . The distal phalanx is easily dislocated manually in the dorsal and plantar directions. The IP joint was temporarily fixed in a slightly flexed position using a 1.2 mm-Kirschner wire . Two guide pins were inserted from the plantar aspect of the distal part of the proximal phalanx to the dorsal aspect of the base of the proximal phalanx under an image intensifier , and two suture anchors were inserted (FiberTak DX Suture Anchor, Arthrex, Naples, FL, JuggerKnot Mini, Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN). The plantar plate was repaired by suturing using horizontal mattress stitches .
Postoperative treatment consisted of 1 week of non-weightbearing, and the Kirschner wire was removed 4 weeks postoperatively, after which range-of-motion exercises were started. The patient was allowed to return to sports 3 months postoperatively. At 1 year follow-up, there was no hyperextension or instability of the IP joint of the great toe, no degenerative changes on plain radiographic images , and excellent clinical outcomes with a score of 100 on the JSSF hallux scale. The Self-Administered Foot Evaluation Questionnaire demonstrated the all subscales of 100 for pain and pain-related symptoms, physical function and daily living, social function, shoe related issues, and general health and well-being.