A 36-year-old woman presented with abdominal pain and fever (38.5–39°C) of 3 weeks duration. She was previously healthy, and was on oral oestroprogestative since one year. Two years ago, CMV IgG tested negative. Leukocyte count was 9700 cells/mm3, platelets were 80000/mm3, and C-reactive protein level was 110 mg/L (N: < 10). ALT level was 49 U/L (N: < 37), AST was 45 U/L (N: < 36), γ-glutamyltranspeptidase level was 49 (N: < 36), with normal LDH, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin and INR values. Haptoglobin value was 2.06 g/l (N: 0.28–1.78). Prothrombin time and fibrinogen level were normal. An abdominal CT scan showed an enlarged spleen and a thrombus in the splenic vein extending into the portal trunk. A fresh thrombus was also evident in the right hepatic vein (see figure). A thorough evaluation for a hypercoagulable state was performed: homocystein level: 6.7 μmol/l (N: < 15); antithrombin III: 86% (N: 75–125); protein C: 74% (N: 70–140); protein S: 88% (N: 50–120); factor V Leiden and prothrombin 20210 genes: not mutated; anticardiolipin antibodies: negative; antinuclear antibodies: < 1/60; paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria: absence of deficience of GPI-linked proteins by flow cytometry. Although a bone marrow analysis was not performed, an overt myeloproliferative disorder was deemed unlikely in the absence of grossly elevated white blood cells and platelet count, no eosinophilia, basophilia, or atypical platelet morphology on the peripheral smear examination. We felt that the probability of an early hepatocellular carcinoma in the absence of a pre-existing liver disease was extremely low. The value of AFP was 4 ng/ml (N < 15 ng/ml)
Blood cultures remained sterile, and serological tests for hepatitis A, B, C and HIV were negative. Serum immunoglobulins were as follows: IgG: 19 g/l (N: 6.7–13); IgA: 4.3 g/l (N: 0.7–2.9); IgM: 2.6 (N: 0.4–2.6). Typisation of circulating lymphocytes (T, B, NK) showed normal values.
Serological testing for CMV showed elevated titers of IgG and IgM. CMV DNA using real-time PCR was detectable at a level of 5 copies per 106, with a partial inhibition of amplification. EBV DNA was negative. Mild duodenal inflammation was observed at endoscopy, with viral-type inclusions visible in endothelial cells seen in intestinal biopsy.
Intravenous heparin at a therapeutic level was administered, and oral contraception was stopped. The patient remained febrile (temperature 39°C), and the abdominal pain increased in intensity despite full-dose anticoagulation. The AST and ALT levels increased (76 U/L and 111 U/L, respectively). A repeat abdominal CT scan showed moderate ascites. Using a transjugular approach, direct venography was performed after a difficult cannulation of the right hepatic vein, demonstrating a "spider-web" network pattern typically seen in Budd-Chiari syndrome (see figure). The hepatic venous pressure gradient showed moderate portal hypertension, with a value of 9 mmHg (N: < 4). Liver histology (see figure) showed acute hepatitis with a mononuclear and neutrophilic infiltrate, scattered areas of hepatocyte necrosis, and a microgranulomatous cell reaction. An immunohistochemistry study was performed on the liver biopsy specimen to detect CMV, but remained negative. There were no features of a pre-existing liver disease, and no lesions (plasma cells infiltration, interface hepatitis) that may suggest the presence of auto-immune hepatitis. In addition, a marked sinusoidal dilatation and congestion in the centrilobular regions were consistent with a hepatic vein outflow obstruction.
Five days after liver biopsy, transaminases returned to normal values. The patient remained febrile with mild abdominal pain persisting another 3 weeks. At 5 months, control ultrasonography showed persistently obstructed right hepatic, splenic and portal vein with a cavernoma, but no ascites.