A 73-year-old man was consulted to nephrology for persistent oliguric azotemia during admission to hepatology of our hospital.
He already started hemodialysis via right internal jugular vein long-term dialysis catheter at one month ago due to septic acute kidney injury with uremic symptoms and oliguria. His azotemia and oliguria were not improved after sepsis resolving and he was still receiving hemodialysis for one month.
He had received intravenous antibiotic therapy and endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage state for sepsis due to acute cholangitis and common biliary duct cancer for one month.
He denied taking any medications and past medical history except antibiotic therapy.
His blood pressure was 148/80 mmHg and he had both sides of pretibial pitting edema.
His initial blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine (sCr) were 46.8 mg/dL and 5.33 mg/dL. But his sCr was 0.8 mg/dL at one month ago. His total protein, serum albumin and total cholesterol were 5.6 g/dL, 2.2 g/dL and 136 mg/dL, respectively. Urinalysis revealed proteinuria (+1) with a protein/creatinine ratio of 3.6 mg/mg and microscopic hematuria. Serologic tests for viral hepatitis were all negative, and serum immunologic tests were within normal range for C3 and C4 and negative for anti-nuclear antibody (Ab), anti-ds DNA Ab, immunoglobulin G, A, and M levels, cryoglobulin and anti-phospholipid Ab. However, the patient was positive for perinuclear-ANCA.
Kidney needle biopsy and bronchoscopy were performed due to clinically suspected RPGN.
Renal pathologic findings were compatible with crescentic glomerulonephritis. Bronchoscopic finding showed diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. The patient’s final diagnosis was ANCA-associated vasculitis with pulmonary-renal syndrome.
We chose plasma exchange with oral cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids therapy for newly diagnosed ANCA-associated vasculitis with severe renal failure. But we delayed cyclophosphamide after plasma exchange finished because he was still receiving antibiotic therapy for acute cholangitis. He was initially treated with intravenous methylprednisolone 30 mg/d and therapeutic plasma exchanges at the same time. After three times of plasma exchange for one week was done, oral cyclophosphamide 100 mg/d was started. The third day after the second dose of oral cyclophosphamide therapy, the patient suddenly developed generalized tonic-clonic seizures with deviation of both eyeballs for 30 s, five times consecutively, and when the seizure attack occurred, blood pressure was 175/76 mmHg. After the seizure, the patient exhibited stuporous mental status.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was immediately performed and revealed multifocal high signal intensity in both frontoparietal lobes, temporal lobes, occipital lobes, cerebellum and pons on T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) but no abnormal change on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) . Electroencephalography showed frequent short bursts of bilateral polymorphic delta to theta slow waves of medium to high amplitude, mixed with short-attenuated periods.