A 9-year-old Japanese girl with a known history of non-hereditary GDD presented with pain and deformity in the left thigh after a minor fall. The GDD was diagnosed by the facial bone developmental dysplasia and genetic examination when she was 3 years old. She had a history of multiple fractures of various sites, such as bilateral tibia, fibula, thoracic vertebrae, cervical vertebrae, and coccyx. All previous fractures had been successfully treated conservatively without complications. Her bone mineral density (BMD) measured using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry at the previous hospital 2 years ago was lower than the age-adjusted average; her spine BMD was 0.493 g/cm2 and T-score was − 5.9.
At the initial radiologic examination, a displaced transverse fracture (32-D/4.1 in AO Pediatric Comprehensive Classification of Long Bone Fractures (AO-PCCF) ) in the mid-shaft of left femur was observed . Repositioning of the fracture fragments was not successful using skin traction with external hanging weights. Thus, the patient underwent a closed reduction and external fixation by using a unilateral fixator system (Hoffmann II®, Stryker Corporation, Kalamazoo, MI) with 5-mm non-hydroxylapatite-coated half pins under general anesthesia 6 days after the injury . The radiograph obtained at the 12-week follow-up showed a solid bony union at the fracture site, and the fixators were removed . The patient was allowed to initiate and gradually advance weight bearing.
At 25 weeks after the initial surgery, she suddenly felt severe pain in her left thigh while she was walking and was unable to walk further. Radiological examinations revealed another fracture in the left femur (32-D/4.1 in AO-PCCF) at one of the half-pin insertion sites . She underwent an external fixation again. After this operation, the patient sustained a refracture (32-D/4.1 in AO-PCCF) at the same fracture site, followed by a supracondylar fracture (33-M/3.1 in AO-PCCF) at a distant site of the femur and two consecutive fractures at the half-pin insertion sites . The supracondylar fracture occurred without any triggering activity before beginning weight-bearing exercise. The supracondylar fracture was successfully treated conservatively, but she sustained two more consecutive diaphyseal fractures (32-D/4.1 and 32-D/4.1 in AO-PCCF) at the half-pin insertion sites . She eventually underwent a revision surgery for the diaphyseal fractures with an Ender nail (Ender nail®, MIZUHO Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Open reduction was not easily achieved owing to the fracture deformity and growing callus. Only one nail could be passed through it because the medullary canal was significantly narrowed due to diaphyseal sclerosis associated with GDD . After this operation, the patient started early functional rehabilitation and was allowed to progress gradually to partial weight bearing following pain relief. The radiographs at 5-month follow-up showed a solid bony union at all the fracture sites, and the Ender nail was removed . Three months after the implant removal, the patient maintained her ambulatory status without further refractures.