A 34-year-old man with no history of systemic disease presented with fever; he had lost 8 kg during the week before presentation. Physical examination revealed no significant findings. Laboratory investigation showed several abnormal findings, including leukocytosis (14500 cells/μL; reference range [RR], 4500-11000 cells/μL) and elevated aspartate aminotransferase (61 U/L; RR, 10-42 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (75 U/L; RR, 10-40 U/L) levels. Ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed marked thickening of the gallbladder wall. However, serum bilirubin (0.4 mg/dL; RR, < 1.5 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase (140 U/L; RR, 40-140 U/L), and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (59 U/L; RR, 8-61 U/L) levels were normal. Initially, acute atypical cholecystitis with fever as the only symptom was diagnosed, and empirical antibiotic therapy was indicated (intravenous infusion of ceftazidime [2000 mg] 3 times per day). The fever persisted even after 1 week of antibiotic therapy, and blood culture was negative. A subsequent gallium-67 scan revealed a rim-like, gallium-avid lesion in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to clarify the nature of the gallbladder lesion and showed evident thickening of the epithelial and muscular elements and multiple intramural cysts of various sizes in the gallbladder wall . GAM with intramural Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses was suspected; however, the possibility of a malignant gallbladder tumor could not be ruled out entirely.
Exploratory laparotomy with cholecystectomy revealed an enlarged gallbladder (approximately 11 cm in diameter) with abscess formation in the gallbladder wall . Pathological tests revealed extensive inflammatory cell infiltration and caseous-like necrosis consisting of chronic granulomatous inflammation with acute necrotizing inflammation. Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture of the specimen revealed negative results. The fever subsided after the cholecystectomy, and the patient was discharged uneventfully 10 days after the operation. He was followed up at our outpatient department more than 3 years later; he was well and did not have a fever.