An 85-year-old woman presented to the Emergency
Department (ED) with spontaneous evisceration of
the small intestine through her vagina. About 12 hours
prior to presentation to the ED, she noticed progressive protrusion of bowel through her vagina while squatting
to urinate. There was associated lower abdominal pain.
She had spontaneous vaginal deliveries of five children
and her last confinement was 40 years ago. The woman
has been menopausal for nearly 30 years. She had a
history of reducible vaginal prolapse following her
last childbirth, but she never sought medical attention.
At the ED, she was in significant discomfort and her
vital signs were: pulse rate of 110/min, blood pressure
of 90/60mmHg, respiratory rate of 30 cycles/min
and temperature of 36.2ÚC. Examination revealed a
scaphoid non-tender abdomen. On examination of
the perineum, there was evisceration of about 200cm
of small intestine with mesentery through the vaginal
opening. The small bowel appeared edematous with
demonstrable visible peristaltic movements .
Anal and rectal examinations were normal. Blood count
and chemistry revealed leucocytosis of 28.19 × 109
cells/L with a preponderance of neutrophils (91.4%),
and acidosis (HCOƒ of 18mmol/L).
She was commenced on intravenous fluid resuscitation
with ringers lactate alternating with dextrose saline
infusion while on Nil per Oris. Blood samples were
withdrawn for baseline investigations, and empirical
broad-spectrum antibiotics (ceftriaxone and
metronidazole) were commenced. Sterile gauze soaked
in warm normal saline was used to wrap the loops of
small bowel. An informed consent was obtained after
counselling her on the mode of treatment. She was
taken to the operating room by the General Surgery
team, in conjunction with the Gynaecology team. The
patient was placed in supine position, and before skin
preparation the eviscerated loops of bowel were
washed with warm saline and wrapped in another saline
soaked gauze. Subsequently, general anaesthesia was
administered, the abdominal skin was prepped and
isolated by surgical drapes, and low midline laparotomy was performed. The herniating loops of small bowel
were reduced trans-abdominally by gentle traction. The
entire length of small bowel was inspected and
appeared viable. There was a 6cm linear defect on the
posterior vagina fornix with necrotic edges .
The Gynaecology team performed total abdominal
hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-ophorectomy and
repaired the vagina vault using continuous stitches with
No 2 vicryl suture.
She recovered well from surgery, and was discharged
on the 5th day of admission and to follow-up in the
outpatient surgical and gynaecological clinics.