A 9 years old, previously healthy boy presented with sudden onset of colicky abdominal pain of 4 h duration. The pain was mainly infra-umbilical. Associated with this he had gross abdominal distension and 2 episodes of non-bilious vomiting. Parents reported that the child had bowel movements daily before he joined school since when bowel movement became every 2–3 days. The parents do not remember when the child passed the first meconium. The child had had similar attack a month before presentation to our hospital and rectal tube deflation was done at a nearby hospital. Otherwise there was no other complaints. His growth and development is similar compared to his peers. He was not on any medications. There was no family history of similar illnesses.
On physical examination except for tachycardia other vital signs were all in normal range. All anthropometric measurements were in normal range. He was in pain while holding his abdomen. He had gross abdominal distension. There was no direct or rebound tenderness. Abdomen was hyper tympanic to percussion. Bowel sounds were increased. There was no organomegally or palpable masses on deep palpation. Per-rectum examination showed empty rectum. No stool or blood on examining finger. A Plain abdominal radiographs showed single hugely dilated bowel loops in the left lower quadrant with single air fluid level . Abdominal ultrasound was unremarkable except for gas filled abdomen. Complete blood count and organ function test was done and all were in normal range.
We put the patient in knee-chest position and gently introduced fully lubricated rectal tube into the rectum and slowed advanced upward. Gush of air and scanty stool came out. The abdomen became soft and the cramp subsided. We left the tube in the rectum for 24 h. We took full thickness rectal biopsy the next day. It showed aganglionated rectum with absent ganglion cell in both submucosal and muscles layers. We also obtained diagnostic barium enema and it showed redundant sigmoid with no radiologic evidence of Hirschsprung’s disease . After Hirschsprung’s disease confirmed by rectal biopsy, he underwent primary trans-anal Soave’s endorectal pull through . We resected the rectum and dilated part of sigmoid colon until normal appearing bowel caliber is reached. We did colo-rectal end-to-end anastomosis 2 cm above dentate line. He was kept nothing per-os for the 48 h post-op and was put on prophylactic antibiotics.
He was then started on feeding and tolerated it and discharged on 6th post-op day. He experienced passage of loose frequent stool for the first 10 days post-operatively which improved later by itself.
Currently, on his third post-operative months, he is having regular bowel movement. Result of the excision biopsy showed aganglionated distal colon and ganglionated proximal bowel.