A 75-year-old man presented with a 2-day history of nonbilious vomiting without abdominal pain. He received a deceased donor kidney transplant in 2010 for end-stage kidney disease secondary to autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. His postoperative course had been uncomplicated, and his kidney function had been stable on standard immunosuppressive therapy with prednisone, cyclosporine, and mycophenolate mofetil with a serum creatinine of 150 µmol/L. His history was significant for a myocardial infarction requiring coronary artery bypass and sciatica. Two years prior to kidney transplantation, he had a left nephrectomy for a kidney mass, which was benign, complicated by a ventral hernia requiring repair. Six weeks prior to presentation, his creatinine rose to 200 µmol/L. One week prior to admission, his creatinine rose to 280 µmol/L and an ultrasound of his transplant kidney revealed mild hydronephrosis and the entire length of the ureter was not visualized ( and ).
His physical examination revealed a nonobese man without any abdominal tenderness to palpation and no evidence of hernia, as assessed by the nephrology and urology teams. Investigations revealed a serum creatinine of 370 µmol/L. Urinalysis was negative for blood and protein. Electrocardiography (EKG) did not reveal any changes compared with 1 year prior, and 2 serial troponin I values were unremarkable at was 26 and 27 ηg/L, respectively. Abdominal ultrasound revealed mild hydroureteronephrosis of the transplant kidney in the right iliac fossa, with tapered dilation of the ureter. The distal ureter was obscured by overlying bowel gas and not seen . Abdominal computed tomography revealed moderate hydronephrosis of the transplant kidney due to obstructed herniation of the transplant ureter in a right inguinal hernia ( and ). An antegrade double-J stent was percutaneously inserted into the transplant ureter at the level of the obstruction to identify and preserve the transplant ureter at the time of inguinal hernia repair. He subsequently underwent a successful open right inguinal hernia repair with polypropylene mesh reinforcement. The transplant ureter with indwelling stent was palpable within the hernia sac and not felt to be excessive in length, so it was not reimplanted. His creatinine returned to baseline at the time of hospital discharge. Three weeks later, repeat Doppler ultrasound of the transplant kidney showed resolution of the hydronephrosis and his ureteral stent was removed.