An 83-year-old woman with a history of arterial hypertension and chronic kidney disease presented to the Emergency Room with an acute (<2 h) onset of left leg pain and numbness, and partial loss of motor function. The leg also showed pallor, pulselessness, and poikilothermia. The patient did not complain of chest pain.
A diagnosis of acute limb ischaemia was made, class IIb of the Rutherford classification. At the same time, a routine ECG showed ST-segment elevation in the inferior leads, leading to a diagnosis of inferior ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) . Blood pressure and SpO2 were normal (130/75 mmHg, SpO2 98%). Fast echocardiography showed akinesia of the inferior and infero-lateral walls with a mild reduction of the ejection fraction (40%). A dose loading of aspirin (250 mg i.v.) was administered. The patient reported a cough over the last 2 days, but she had no fever on admission. A nasopharyngeal swab was performed to assess the presence of SARS-CoV-2, as per hospital protocol during the COVID-19 pandemic. A total-body CT angiography was performed to investigate the cause of acute limb ischaemia and rule out aortic dissection. A lung CT scan was also performed to assess potential COVID-19 pneumonia.
A total occlusion of the left common iliac artery was diagnosed together with subsegmental thrombosis of a right lobe pulmonary artery branch . The lung CT scan showed a typical COVID pneumonia, with multiple bilateral, mainly subpleural, ground-glass opacities . At 2 h after admission, the patient was transferred to the Cath Lab for emergency coronary angiography. A total occlusion of the proximal right coronary artery was diagnosed (Video 1), as also shown by CT angiography, together with a critical stenosis of the mid left anterior descending artery and of the first obtuse marginal branch .
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was performed with i.v. cangrelor administration, manual thrombectomy, and subsequent deployment of two drug-eluting stents. The final angiography showed no reflow in the distal segment of the right coronary artery (Video3). No reflow was treated with intracoronary adenosine, without success. At the end of the procedure, the patient had good haemodynamic parameters (blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg). The patient was then transferred from the Cath Lab to the operating room to undergo Fogarty thrombectomy of the left common iliac artery. At the end of cangrelor infusion, clopidogrel 600 mg was administered and the patient was admitted to the COVID area of our hospital.
Seven hours later, the results of the nasopharyngeal swab revealed the presence of SARS-CoV-2. Low molecular weight heparin was administered according to body weight, in combination with dual antiplatelet therapy, in order to treat multiple thromboses. In the following 48 h, the clinical condition of the patient worsened, with onset of right common iliac thrombosis and impairment of cardiac function. Blood sample results of the patient during hospitalization are reported in Table . The patient died for multiorgan failure during the third day after admission.