A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with ccRCC with metastasis to the lungs, liver, bone, and multiple lymph nodes. The IMDC risk category was favorable. The patient received a combination of axitinib and pembrolizumab as a first-line therapy, with the greatest effect of partial response and without severe irAEs. The treatment was discontinued after 34 cycles, owing to disease progression. Subsequently, everolimus and then cabozantinib were administered to the patient. Subsequently, nivolumab was started as a rechallenge for ICI therapy. On the eleventh day after the first administration, the patient had difficulty closing the left eyelid and mouth fully. He visited our hospital 4 days after onset, and a physical examination revealed paralysis of the upper and lower left facial muscles, suggesting peripheral facial nerve paralysis. Facial paresthesia, hearing loss, dizziness, tinnitus, painful rash on the auricle, dysphagia, and dysarthria were not observed. There were no abnormalities in other cranial nervous systems. Contrast-enhanced cranial MRI detected abnormal enhancement in the left facial nerve , but no brain metastasis or cerebral infarction was noted. The serological antigen test was negative for herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster virus. The patient had no history of diabetes mellitus or neurological disorders. Since other causes could be excluded based on the clinical course, physical examination, blood tests, and imaging tests, the patient was diagnosed with Bell's palsy, most suspiciously induced by nivolumab. Treatment with oral prednisone equivalent to 0.5 mg/kg/day was started. Facial weakness improved promptly in 4 days, and prednisone was completed in 14 days. After 2 months, re-examination with cranial MRI revealed the residual contrast enhancement in the left facial nerve despite complete resolution of paralytic symptoms. We permanently discontinued nivolumab and started subsequent anticancer therapy because rapid disease progression of hilar lymph node metastasis was confirmed.