A 46-year-old Caucasian man referred to our outpatient rehabilitation service in January 2019 for spontaneous pain at the left thigh. He was 1.80 m tall and weighed 72 kg (BMI 22.2 kg/m2). He reports a lifestyle characterized by occasional alcohol intake (less than one alcohol unit per day) and sedentary work (office worker). Medical history is significant for a trimalleolar fracture of the right ankle treated with open reduction and internal fixation in October 2011. Moreover, in July 2018 he practiced stool culture, faecal occult blood test, celiac disease screening, urinalysis, and abdominal ultrasound, because of the occurrence of several episodes of acute diarrhoea, that were responsive to a short course of antidiarrheal and antispasmodic agents and probiotics.
Clinical complaints started in January 2019 with gradually increasing groin pain without any previous trauma requiring the use of a crutch. The primary care physician prescribed oral diclofenac 150 mg and omeprazole 20 mg per day for 1 week, but the symptoms did not regress. Therefore, his doctor advised him to consult a physiatrist at our service.
On physical examination, patient reported severe groin pain (Numeric Rating Scale, NRS, 8/10) radiating to the antero-medial thigh and at the knee, worse during the night and weight-bearing activity. Moreover, passive and active range of motion (ROM) of the left hip (internal and external rotation 15°, flexion 95°) were limited and patients was forced to use walking sticks. We planned a diagnostic workup including laboratory exams, including complete blood count (CBC), serum erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-Reactive Protein (CRP), alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), creatinine, uric acid, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH), 25(OH) vitamin D, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), total testosterone, protein electrophoresis, urinary free kappa and lambda light chains, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the hips. Laboratory tests were normal, except for increased serum TSH (3.28 μIU/ml, normal range 0.2–2.5 μΙU/ml), while remarkable and diffuse bone edema in epiphyseal and metaphyseal region of the left proximal femur was reported, supporting the diagnosis of TOH .
Therefore, we prescribed clodronate (200 mg i.m. for 10 days and then 200 mg i.m. every other day for 20 days) , oral calcium citrate (1 stick of 500 mg per day for 1 month), and cholecalciferol (1 oral solution of 25,000 IU weekly for 1 month). Pharmacological approach was associated with instrumental physical therapy, including Pulsed Electromagnetic Fields (PEMFs) stimulation [8 h per day (night use) for 6 weeks; the device generated single-voltage pulses of 1.3 milliseconds in duration, with a frequency of 75 Hz, and was positioned on the lateral thigh] [–], and Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation (NMES) of the left quadriceps (1 session per day for 3 weeks; electrodes were placed around the thigh for 30 min each session, generating a frequency of 50 Hz, pulse duration of 250 ms, and 10 s on and 30 s off). Moreover, protected weight bearing for 3 weeks was advised. Finally, we recommended a consultation with an endocrinologist to address putative thyroid disorders.
The endocrinologist performed thyroid ultrasound revealing hypoechoic nodule of 5 mm and new laboratory assessment confirming increased TSH levels (3.67 μΙU/ml) and normal level of free thyroxine, (FT4, 15.18 pg/ml, normal range 6–18 pg/ml) and free triiodothyronine, (T3, 3.67 pg/ml, normal range 2.57–4.43 pg/ml). The specialist made the diagnosis of subclinical hypothyroidism and prescribed a nutraceutical containing both myo-inositol (600 mg) and selenium (83 mcg) (1 tablet per day for 2 months).
Clinical and instrumental follow-up performed after 2 months from the beginning of therapies, showed significant pain relief (NRS 2/10), improved ROM of the hip, and a significant reduction of bone edema at MRI examination of the left hip . Moreover, the patient was able to walk without aids. However, due to persistent high level of TSH (3,56 μΙU/ml, normal range 0,2–2,5 μΙU/ml), endocrinologist prescribed levothyroxine 25 μg per day resulting in serum TSH reduction (2,64 μΙU/ml) after 2 months. Finally, the patient did not report any adverse events.