A 75-year-old Asian woman with severe aortic stenosis was admitted for surgical aortic valve replacement, she had been experiencing exertional chest pain and dyspnea for more than 6 months. The patient’s medical history includes mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, type II diabetes and hypothyroidism; also she has not had any prior cardiothoracic surgery. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography showed severe aortic valve stenosis (classical type with normal flow, high gradient), mean transaortic gradient of 55 mmHg, calcified aortic cusps with tri-leaflet morphology, diastolic dysfunction grade 1, normal left ventricular systolic function, and moderate left ventricular hypertrophy. Coronary angiogram showed normal coronaries.
After discussing the proposed procedure, along with alternative options, the decision was made to replace the aortic valve with a mechanical prosthesis, in agreement with the patient. The patient underwent mechanical aortic valve replacement without any complications. Anticoagulant therapy was initiated 12 h postoperatively, after ensuring no active bleeding. Anticoagulant therapy consisted of Enoxaparin 40 mg twice a day along with Acenocoumarol 4 mg (half tablet/day). During the first 48 h postoperatively, the patient was asymptomatic, with stable hemodynamic condition. On day three postoperatively, the international normalized ratio (INR) was 2.2, and the patient started to manifest hemodynamic dysfunction with hypotension (average blood pressure 70/40 mmHg, taken via intra-arterial probe) and oliguria. Physical examination showed tachycardia (average 120–130 bpm) with normal heart sounds intensity, jugular venous distension, and tachypnea with normal breathing sounds. The patient started deteriorating rapidly, developed hemodynamic instability and respiratory failure requiring immediate intubation and mechanical ventilation along with volume expansion, vasopressors and inotropic support.
Urgent transthoracic echocardiogram (CX50 xMATRIX ultrasound system, Philips Medical Systems, Andover, MA, USA) adopting mainly a qualitative approach and implemented as POCUS exam with semi-portable echo machine showed normal pericardium, no pericardial echo free space, normal function of aortic prosthesis, preserved left ventricular systolic function (as per visual estimate) with right atrial compression by a localized mass identified as probable hematoma of 32 × 37 mm; the right atrial dimensions were reduced to 20 × 23 mm . The right ventricle was mildly undersized compared to the preoperative dimensions, no septal bounce was documented. The patient was on respiratory machine and assessment of the inferior vena cava dimensions and compliance was difficult; similarly, evaluation of respiratory variations of the Doppler flow velocities were judged unreliable.
The patient was taken rapidly to the operative room, there was a loculated pericardial hematoma compressing the latero-anterior wall of the right atrium and prompt evacuation of the hematoma was performed, there was no active bleeding site identified. The volume of the hematoma (a mixture of coagulum and clots) was roughly estimated to be around 50 to 60 cc. Thereafter, the patient became asymptomatic, restored normal hemodynamics with normal sinus rhythm and was discharged few days later.