An 81-year-old diabetic man suffered from congestive heart failure. On admission, the electrocardiogram showed a Q wave in the III lead. Echocardiography demonstrated no apparent asynergy, and cardiac enzyme levels were not elevated. He also had epigastric pain, and coronary angiography was performed. There was significant stenosis of the right coronary artery (RCA) #2; the patient therefore underwent percutaneous coronary intervention on the RCA. His symptoms were alleviated with diuretics. However, heart failure symptoms continued according to the New York Heart Association Functional Classification III. Ten months after presentation, pulmonary edema on chest X-ray scan was exacerbated and follow-up echocardiography revealed a shunt flow of ventricular septal rupture , moderate tricuspid regurgitation, and an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 35%. Cardiac computed tomography revealed an inferior left ventricular (LV) aneurysm . The dimensions of the LVA were 3.4 × 4.8 cm. Cardiac catheterization detected pulmonary high flow with an estimated Qp/Qs ratio of 3.5. Surgical treatment was indicated and the patient was referred to our hospital. The patient underwent repair of the ventricular septal rupture and liner repair of the inferior LVA. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established by ascending aorta cannulation and bicaval drainage. Intraoperatively, the VSR site was found near the apex when the inferior LVA was opened longitudinally. The VSR consisted of multiple holes , and the infarcted myocardium had already turned to scar tissue made of firm, fibrotic tissue. The VSR was closed with a 2.5 × 2.5 cm bovine pericardial patch that was fixed by 10 pairs of mattress sutures on the scar tissue around the VSR . The ventriculotomy was closed with two layers of 3–0 polypropylene mattress and running sutures with felt strips without any excision of the aneurysmal tissue. Tricuspid ring annuloplasty was also performed. A residual shunt was not found on intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography. Blood transfusions were performed intraoperatively. After surgery, the patient was extubated on the first postoperative day. He needed inotropic support for 4 days and stayed in the intensive care unit for 6 days. Medical management for heart failure included only diuretics. Postoperative transthoracic echocardiography on postoperative day 10 demonstrated an LVEF of 33% and no tricuspid regurgitation. The patient’s postoperative recovery was uneventful, and he was discharged from the rehabilitation facility on the 34th postoperative day .