The patient is a 44-year-old woman who presented with a sub-acute neurocognitive decline over a several months period, such that she was no longer able to perform routine tasks required for daily activities. Past medical history is notable for Graves disease (diagnosed 2005, treated with methimazole) and endometrial adenocarcinoma s/p total abdominal hysterectomy-bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and chemotherapy (carboplatin and paclitaxel) in 2009, in remission since. Neurological examination was notable for difficulties recalling the events prior to the presentation and disorganized speech. However, the patient re-oriented easily. Physical examination revealed bilateral and symmetric proptosis. Laboratory values were unremarkable. Computed tomography scan of the brain showed 6.1 cm × 4.8 cm × 4.9 cm mass centered over the anterior falx cerebri with moderate surrounding hypodensity and effacement of adjacent sulci . Patchy hyper-density was seen within the mass, with Hounsfield units >200 suggestive of calcification. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated an irregularly shaped, intra-axial mass with heterogeneous contrast enhancement that abut the anterior communicating artery (ACA) . Fluid attenuation inversion recovery imaging revealed complex patterns of hypointense tubular outlines within the lesion, suggestive of considerable vascularity within the lesion . MR angiogram showed multiple vascular pedicles emerging from both ACA branches penetrating the lesion as well as prominent venous drainages into the anterior and posterior superior sagittal sinus. Diagnostic cerebral angiogram confirmed extensive blood supply from the bilateral ACAs as well as the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) with a 2.4 cm × 1.4 cm × 2.3 cm AVM nidus and prominent venous drainages into the superior sagittal sinus .
Staged embolizations were performed prior to surgical resection. The first stage involved Onyx embolization of four major pedicles arising from the right anterior cerebral artery. 3 days later, Onyx embolization of three major pedicles arising from the left ACA and two pedicles arising from the left MCA were performed. 3 days after the second embolization, the patient underwent resection of the mass through a bi-frontal craniotomy with frontal sinus exenteration. Under microscopic magnification, the plane along the inferior margin of the lesion was developed along the skull base to devascularize the dural pedicles. Branches of the ACA were identified and followed to isolate A1 and A2 branches. Under stereotactic guidance, corticectomy was made in the right middle frontal gyrus to allow a trajectory to the superior margin of the tumor. The tumor was debulked until the distal ACAs were identified. These vessels were carefully followed until continuity to the proximal ACA was established. Tumor fragments were then carefully micro-dissected free from the ACA. Closure was performed using standard methods.
An intraoperative frozen section was consistent with high-grade glioma. Subsequent hematoxylin and eosin-stained permanent sections revealed an intimate admixture of anaplastic oligodendroglioma (WHO Grade III) and AVM. The anaplastic oligodendroglioma exhibited archetypal histopathologic features including uniform cellularity with uniformly round nuclei set in perinuclear halos . Mitotic figures were numerous, with up to eight identified in one high power (×400) field, and there was multifocal microvascular proliferation. As is common in oligodendrogliomas, microcalcifications and multiple nodules of the tumor with heightened cellularity were seen . Immunohistochemistry against the most common IDH1 gene mutation (R132H) stained the tumor mass but not the AVM vessels. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for chromosomes 1p and 19q showed a deletion in 1p19q.
The AVM was set within a background of anaplastic oligodendroglioma and consisted of multiple irregularly contoured vascular lumens of varying diameters including both thick-walled muscular arteries and large thin-walled veins with variable amounts of intervening parenchyma including oligodendroglioma . Black granular embolic material filled some vessels. Irregular vessels showed intimal hyperplasia/cushions, a characteristic feature of AVMs . Due to the patient's history of endometrial adenocarcinoma and new diagnosis of a glioma, consideration was given to the possibility of Lynch syndrome resulting from a mutation in a mismatch repair gene. To test the immunohistochemistry was performed using antibodies against MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. However, all stains were positive in the tumor and hence there was no evidence of mutations in the common mismatch repair genes at the protein level.
Postoperative MRI revealed a gross total resection of the lesion. The patient remained neurologically non-focal postoperatively. Due to cognitive dysfunction, the patient was discharged to rehabilitation. At the 1-month follow-up, the patient was oriented but had little recollection of the hospitalization. She subsequently underwent a 6-week course of radiation and temozolomide followed by a 1 year course of temozolomide. At the 2 years follow-up, she had her driver's license re-instated and resumed independent living. MRI at this time showed no evidence of tumor recurrence.