The patient was a 31-year-old Japanese man with no specific past medical history or family history. He worked as an inspection worker at a metal fabrication plant. He had smoked about ten cigarettes per day for 10 years and was an occasional drinker. Orange smoke rose from a storage tank containing “phosphoric nitric acetic acid” at his metal fabrication plant. Dressed in protective clothing and a protective mask, the patient entered the smoke-filled area to control the smoke being produced. The nitrogen oxide concentration measured around the storage tank was over 2500 ppm, and he witnessed orange–brown smoke at that time. After entering the area and taking a few breaths, he suddenly became unwell, with dyspnea and numbness in his extremities. He was evacuated from the area within a few minutes, at which time he was suffering from whole-body cyanosis and was still aware of the above symptoms. His colleague called for emergency services, and he was transported to an emergency hospital. On arrival at that hospital, his respiration rate was 18 breaths/minute, and his oxygen saturation (SpO2) ranged from 80% to 85% on 15 L/minute of oxygen by mask (2.5 hours postexposure). Arterial blood gas testing at the same time showed a high methemoglobin level of 23.1%. Accordingly, he was diagnosed as having methemoglobinemia. The hospital did not have any methylene blue in stock; thus, 3 hours after the initial emergency call, he was transferred to our center, which had methylene blue on hand.
At 4.5 hours after exposure, when the patient was transported to our center, his whole-body cyanosis had improved and his subjective symptoms had disappeared. His consciousness was clear and his blood pressure was stable. However, his SpO2 remained low at 90% on 15 L/minute of oxygen by mask, and his respiratory rate was still 18 breaths/minute. Arterial blood gas testing showed that his methemoglobin level was still high at 12.5%. We diagnosed him as having toxic methemoglobinemia due to nitrogen oxide inhalation because there were no other factors that would result in methemoglobinemia. The patient had been on high-flow oxygen since the previous hospital, and although his methemoglobin level had decreased, it was still symptomatic. Consequently, we elected to initiate treatment for methemoglobinemia by administering methylene blue according to package inserts. Methylene blue (total of 100 mg) was administered intravenously. Ten minutes after the initial intravenous administration of methylene blue (50 mg), his methemoglobin level had improved to 6.0%, and 10 minutes after an additional intravenous administration of methylene blue (50 mg), his methemoglobin level had almost normalized to 1.8%. The administration of methylene blue caused his SpO2 to improve remarkably; just after its administration, his SpO2 was 100% on 5 L/minute of oxygen. Chest X-ray and chest computed tomography (CT) showed no evidence of pulmonary edema or interstitial pneumonia, and no other abnormal findings were observed. He was admitted to our center for follow-up.
After admission, blood tests were conducted frequently, but no re-elevation of his methemoglobin level was observed, and other parameters remained consistently normal. Furthermore, his subjective symptoms did not reappear, and his respiratory status, including his respiratory rate and SpO2, was consistently stable without the administration of oxygen. A daily chest X-ray showed no new appearance of ground-glass opacities or consolidation. Whole-blood RNA samples were collected on the first (4.5 hours after exposure), third, and fifth days of admission to our hospital. His general condition remained stable, and he was discharged on day 5 after admission. The diagnosis of methemoglobinemia was straightforward, and there were no adverse events associated with the administration of the methylene blue.
We followed him as an outpatient for 3 months after discharge. At each monthly visit, we conducted chest CT scans and a respiratory function test. Chest CT showed no new ground-glass opacities or consolidation, and respiratory function tests showed no obstructive or restrictive ventilatory impairment. At the 3 month outpatient visit, the patient showed no problems resulting from either subjective symptoms or objective findings, so follow-up was terminated. No adverse effects of methemoglobinemia or complications from the treatment were observed. The timeline of this case is presented in Table .
RNA-seq identified 26,255 RNAs, 19,000 of which were protein-coding RNAs. As the patient’s symptoms had improved by day 5, the sample collected on day 5 was used as a control and compared with the sample obtained at the time of admission. Among the 2000 RNAs with the highest mean absolute deviation, 473 had a fold change of ≥ 1.5. In the Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, as shown in Fig. , the highest fold enrichment was observed for the hydrogen peroxide catabolic process, followed by platelet degranulation, neutrophil degranulation, neutrophil-mediated immunity, neutrophil activation involved in immune response, and neutrophil activation. A GO analysis using RNA-seq data showed activation of the hydrogen peroxide catabolic process (details are shown in the Additional file : Methods).