A 55-year-old woman suddenly became aware of speech difficulty and left arm numbness at 11:00 pm while talking on the telephone with her daughter. She was taken to our hospital by ambulance. She was diagnosed with RA 6 months earlier, and she had been treated with methotrexate at a dose of 10 mg daily. She had a history of herpes simplex encephalitis from 30 years earlier. Her blood pressure was 155/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 80/min and regular, and temperature was 36.8 °C. ECG was normal. Her Glasgow coma scale was E4 V4 M6, and neurological examination demonstrated dysarthria, left hemiparesis, left-sided sensory impairment, and left unilateral spatial neglect. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 5. Head computed tomography (CT) showed no obvious lesions except effacement of the cortical sulci in the right parietal lobe, and the Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score (ASPECTS), a 10-point quantitative topographic CT scan score, was 8. No arterial occlusion or stenosis was seen on CT angiography . Blood tests showed a platelet count of 274 × 103/μl, prothrombin time International Normalized Ratio (PT-INR) of 1.07, and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 25.6 s (APTT-control 31.0 s). She was diagnosed with acute embolic stroke in the right parietal lobe, and there was no contraindication to intravenous thrombolytic therapy. At 4 h 6 min after onset, intravenous administration of rt-PA was started in accordance with the Japanese guideline (alteplase, 0.6 mg/kg) [, ], with an intravenous drip infusion of 30 mg of edaravone, a free radical scavenger, over a period of 30 min. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed at 1 h, 30 min after starting the thrombolytic therapy . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) demonstrated a linear high-intensity lesion in the right temporoparietal cortex. The lesion was demonstrated to be a hypodense linear lesion on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map image. This cortical lesion was seen as a high-intensity lesion on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging. These MRI findings were not compatible with acute ischemic stroke. Her neurological deficits improved rapidly (NIHSS score: 5 on admission, 1 at 24 h after thrombolytic therapy).
Contrast-enhanced head MRI performed on hospital day 3 found that the high signals on DWI had disappeared. However, the FLAIR image showed ribbon-like high signals in the cerebral cortex, and no contrast effect was observed . In subsequent additional tests, rheumatoid factor (RF) was 85 IU/L and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibody was elevated at 223.7 U/mL, while myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (MPO-ANCA) and proteinase-3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (PR3-ANCA) were negative. Lumbar puncture showed a cell count of 68/μL (monocytes 14, polynuclear cells 54), protein 40 mg/dL, and glucose 52 mg/dL. Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) performed on day 6 showed decreased accumulation in the right temporoparietal region. Spinal fluid testing performed on day 10 showed an elevated interleukin-6 (IL-6) of 271 pg/mL, but anti-CCP antibody was normal at 3.7 U/mL. Because of the elevated cerebrospinal fluid cell count and the patient’s history of herpes encephalitis, she was temporarily treated with a continuous intravenous infusion of acyclovir 1500 mg/day until the polymerase chain reaction test was confirmed to be negative. The patient was finally diagnosed with RMSA. On day 16, continuous infusion of methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily was started for 3 days, and it was repeated on day 28. Her symptoms then gradually resolved, and the high signal on the FLAIR image also disappeared. The patient was discharged on day 44 with only a slight attention deficit on neurological examination.