A 54-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of dyspnoea. He had a past medical history of diabetes mellitus and Stage 3 chronic kidney disease. He was diagnosed with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) in 2010. The aetiology of HFrEF was suspected to be idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy with comprehensive evaluation, including transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), coronary angiography, and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). He was followed up in a cardiology outpatient clinic with guideline-directed medical therapy for 10 years. In 2012, he was diagnosed with a ureter stone, and abdominal pelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral hydronephrosis and bilateral fat infiltration in the perirenal and periureteric spaces . Diagnostic ureteroscopy and biopsy were performed, and the pathology results showed chronic non-specific inflammation. He was referred to a rheumatologic clinic, and the diagnosis was suspected to be idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis. Oral steroids and azathioprine for immunosuppression were started and followed up in the outpatient clinic.
On admission, his vital signs were: blood pressure 119/63 mmHg, pulse rate of 60 beats/min, respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, and body temperature of 37.0°C. He had a little dehydrated tongue, but his chest and abdomen physical examination showed no abnormalities. Chest radiography revealed cardiomegaly, and TTE revealed a large amount of pericardial effusion and an echogenic mass on the right atrial (RA) side and atrioventricular (AV) groove . Cardiac MRI revealed infiltrative mass-like lesions in the RA wall and AV groove, indicating the likely cardiac involvement of a systemic disease, such as ECD, IgG4-related disease, or lymphoma . Cardiac MRI showed normal systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction: 68%) and increased native T1 (1468 ms) value, and normal T2 (44.4 ms) value on the mass-like lesion. Cardiac positron emission tomography (PET)–CT was performed to evaluate the disease activity, and it revealed fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the RA wall and AV groove .
He underwent subxiphoid pericardial window formation and pericardial biopsy to drain the pericardial effusion and obtain a sample of suspicious tissue. In the operating room, there was a large amount of serous pericardial effusion. In addition, firm and irregular cardiac masses were observed in the pericardial space and on the right ventricle (RV) surface. We could only obtain some pericardial tissue due to the limitations of the surgical field; pathological examination revealed only pericardial fibrosis with no specific findings. Immunohistochemical staining with IgG and IgG4 showed negative results, and BRAF mutation analysis revealed the patient had the wild-type.
However, bone radiography revealed suspicious heterogeneous radiolucency in the distal femur and proximal tibia, and a whole-body bone scan revealed increased uptake in both distal femurs and proximal tibiae . Considering the pericardial effusion, cardiac masses, hydronephrosis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, and multifocal bone lesion, we believed that that the patient likely had ECD despite initial insufficient pathologic results . After a multidisciplinary team approach, we performed a cardiac biopsy with median sternotomy; multiple irregular and firm masses were found on the surface of RA, RV, AV groove, inferior vena cava, superior vena cava, and aorta . We obtained a large amount of suspicious mass, and pathological examination found chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and CD68 positivity on immunohistochemical staining . In addition, the BRAF V600E mutation was detected. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with ECD.
He was referred to the haematology department and started chemotherapy with etoposide and dexamethasone. After the 2 months of initial chemotherapy, he was started with vemurafenib, an inhibitor of BRAF harbouring the V600E mutation. Treatment response will be assessed after 2 or 3 months of vemurafenib treatment.