A 16-year-old right-hand dominant female presented to our orthopedic department with tolerable pain in upper back associated with “clunking” during active movements of right shoulder. The parents also had noticed an abnormal prominence in the right scapular region. She developed gradual symptoms over a 6 month period before her presentation with no antecedent history of trauma and constitutional symptoms. Other siblings and parents were normal.
Physical examination revealed a nontender palpable mass at superior border near medial angle of scapula. A grating sensation, both palpable and audible, was produced during active shoulder range of motion. Vertebral border of right scapula was more prominent than left . The winging of scapula was noticed even at rest which did not increase as the patient did push against the wall. There were no signs of infection or inflammation. A bony mass was felt over the superomedial angle of the right scapula, which was minimally tender and corresponded to the area from where the crepitus arose. The upper extremity and shoulder girdle muscles were neurologically intact. Laboratory investigations were within normal limits.
Radiographs showed a large bony tumor arising from superior border close to angulus superior scapulae and directed toward the thorax . Computed tomography scan images revealed a pedunculated bony mass measuring 5.3×3.0×1.5 cm attached to ventral surface of superior border of scapula by a small stalk (-). Magnetic resonance imaging revealed this mass was extending anteriorly against the ribs and had a characteristic mushroom-shaped appearance with no obvious soft tissue component. A diagnosis of ventral scapular exostosis is made and patient was offered for surgical treatment in view of her complaints and cosmetic concern. Wide, open excision is the treatment of choice; however, there are recent reports of arthroscopic excision [, , , , ].
The patient was treated with excision of osteochondroma in prone position under general anesthesia. The shoulder was held in internal rotation thus facilitating lifting of medial border of scapula. A longitudinal incision along the medial border of scapula was used. Trapezius muscle was incised in line with its fibers . Levator scapulae and rhomboid minor muscles were detached. No bursa was demonstrated and we encountered no technical difficulties during surgery. Extraperiosteal resection of the swelling was done and sent for biopsy . Histopathological examination confirmed the mass to be an osteochondroma . a. No malignant transformation was noticed in the cartilaginous cap. Post-operative clinical examination showed painless full shoulder mobility as well as the absence of scapular winging and crepitus. Radiograph confirmed complete removal of the tumor. The arm was immobilized in a sling for 4 weeks during which period only pendulum exercises were permitted. After 4 weeks, she was sent for a rehabilitation program to improve her shoulder range of movements. Her symptoms resolved dramatically in the immediate post-operative period and she felt no abnormal movements of the shoulder at 6 weeks follow-up. There is no recurrence of symptoms till last follow-up at 6 months.