A 31-year-old pregnant Caucasian female, gravida 3, para 1, at 28 weeks of gestation was admitted to the hospital complaining of a sudden onset of moderate lower abdominal pain. She denied trauma. The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable. There was no history of intrauterine device. The patient reported one uncomplicated miscarriage, followed by uterine curettage, after which she became pregnant and delivered vaginally at term. Uterine perforation was not suspected during uterine curettage, on the other hand no laparoscopy procedure was done after curettage to exclude injury. The second pregnancy and delivery were uneventful. The course of the recent pregnancy had also been uneventful. A physical examination revealed vital signs that were within normal ranges. An abdominal examination revealed that her abdomen was soft and tender. The uterus was soft and not tender, and contractions were not present. The patient was feeling fetal movements well, and a fetal non-stress test showed that the fetus was reactive. The severity of pain increased gradually. Initial laboratory investigations showed no abnormalities. An ultrasound scan showed a live fetus in a longitudinal lie with cephalic presentation. The placenta was on the anterior wall of the uterus. Abnormal placental localization and hematoma were not found. The amniotic fluid index was in the normal range. The pain was increasing gradually, and the next day, the patient was transported to a tertiary referral hospital. Upon admission, the patient’s abdomen was tender, with guarding. Her vital signs were within normal range. The uterus was soft and not tender, with irregular uterine contractions. The patient was feeling fetal movements well, and the result of a fetal non-stress test was reactive. An ultrasound scan was performed again, and it revealed free fluid inside the peritoneal cavity. In the Pouch of Douglas, there was a 75 × 35 mm nonvascularized area, which suggested the presence of a blood clot. The other abdominal structures were without abnormalities. A blood analysis showed a 2 g/dL decrease in hemoglobin level. An exploratory laparotomy was performed, and 1000 mL of blood was evacuated from the abdominal cavity. The adnexa were without macroscopical changes. The left parametrium was enlarged and purplish. The fundal height was appropriate for the number of weeks of pregnancy, without any macroscopic changes in the anterior wall. The enlarged gravid uterus was moved gently forward to reveal the posterior wall. On the posterior wall, there was a defect (approximately 10 cm) in the muscular wall, with active bleeding . The amniotic sac was intact inside the uterus. No pelvic adhesions were found, and no endometriosis foci were found. Bleeding was excluded from the gastrointestinal tract, spleen, liver, kidneys and the mesentery. Due to the extent of the defect and the magnitude of the bleeding, a caesarean section was performed, followed by hysterectomy. A live female infant weighing 1000 g, with Apgar scores of three was delivered. The estimated blood loss during surgery was 2000 mL. Six units of packed red cells and three units of fresh frozen plasma were given to the patient. Histopathological examination of the uterus did not reveal muscle disease or endometriosis. The patient was discharged from the hospital in good general condition after 11 days. The baby was discharged from the hospital after 70 days, also in good general condition.