A previously healthy 12 year old female was hospitalized to community hospital with a history of 5 days of fever, cough and right hip and abdominal pain. Medical history was unremarkable and there was not history of recent trauma. Laboratory examinations revealed a white blood cell count of 11,070/mmc with 10,000/mmc neutrophils (90%) and 500/mmc Lymphocytes (4,5%), haemoglobin level of 10.3 g/dL, and platelet count of 215,000/mmc. The C-reactive protein (CRP) was 42 mg/dL (reference range 0,0–0,15). The patient was transferred to our hospital for evaluation of possible appendicitis. On admission, she appeared ill with low-grade fever (anti-inflammatory drug recently taken), a pulse rate of 120 beats/min, and a respiratory rate of 18–20 breaths/min. Physical examination revealed a strained abdomen with pain on palpation of the right iliac fossa. Musculoskeletal examination revealed restricted movement of the right hip with pain radiating to the lumbosacral region, but no warmth or erythema. The results of the remaining examinations were unremarkable. Laboratory examination results confirmed neutrophilic (9030/mmc) leukocytosis (10,770/mmc) with considerable elevation of inflammatory indices such as CRP 46.17 mg/dl (range 0,0–0,15 mg/dl), Procalcitonin 25.8 ng/ml (range 0,0–0,50 ng/ml); d-dimer, 6199 ng/ml (range, < 500 ng/ml) and fibrinogen level, 874 mg/dl (rang 150–400 mg/dl). The examinations showed renal insufficiency (creatinine 1,24 mg/dl, range 0,35 − 0,86 mg/dl); therefore, intravenous hydration was immediately initiated. Serum electrolyte, amylase, lipase, liver function tests, and urinalysis results were normal. Chest-X-ray did not reveal any pulmonary foci of infection and abdomen ultrasonography was unremarkable. So, we performed a Contrast-enhanced computed Tomography (CT) and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right hip that revealed pyomyositis of the iliopsoas, piriformis, and internal shutter associated with collection of pus (abscess) between the muscular planes .
We started intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone (100 mg/kg/day) and vancomycin (60 mg/kg/day). After 48 h, the blood culture was positive for Streptococcus pneumoniae, sensitive to penicillin, ceftriaxone, and clindamycin; therefore, the antibiotic therapy was switched to intravenous ceftriaxone only.
After four days of hospitalization, the fever declined, and leg pain resolved after 14 days of recovery, without adverse events. Repeated skeletal muscular ultrasound on third, the seventh, the thirteenth and the twentieth hospital days showed progressive reduction of the abscess. During the recovery the pneumococcal urine antigen test resulted negative. Moreover, multiplex reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on nasopharyngeal swab for respiratory viruses and bacteria (including Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Legionella pneumoniae and Bordetella pertussis) was performed, with negative results. The child was discharged after 21 days of treatment with intravenous ceftriaxone and continued oral antibiotic therapy at home with oral amoxicillin to complete a total of 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy. Immunological studies revealed normal IgG, IgA, IgM, and IgG subclass values and normal classical and alternative pathway total complement function. MRI performed 2 months later showed complete resolution of the pyomyositis and abscess .