A 62-year-old man was referred to our hospital for treatment of a rectal SMT detected during a medical checkup at another hospital. Digital examination of the anus and rectum revealed a 20-mm elastic hard tumor palpable on the right and ventral sides of the anal canal and located 2 to 3 cm proximal to the anal verge. Laboratory examination showed no elevation of either carcinoembryonic antigen or cancer antigen 19-9. Colonoscopy showed a 20-mm SMT in the anal canal . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a 20-mm cystic tumor on the right site of the lower rectum with no evidence of lymph node or distant metastases . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed a 20-mm cystic tumor on the right site of the lower rectum . These findings strongly suggested a benign cyst in the anal canal; therefore, the patient underwent trans-sacral resection for precise diagnosis of the tumor. The pathological diagnosis of the resected tumor was a mucinous adenoma with high-grade dysplasia with negative surgical margins. The patient was observed in ambulatory practice. Follow-up CT and MRI 14 months after surgery showed a new cystic lesion near the site of the removed tumor . To evaluate whether the new cystic tumor was a recurrence, the patient underwent trans-sacral resection of the cystic tumor again. Pathological examination of the second resected tumor revealed that the tumor was a mucinous adenocarcinoma of the lower rectum with a possible remnant tumor at the local site. After providing sufficient informed consent, the patient underwent anal sphincter-preserving intersphincteric resection (ISR) with partial resection of the external sphincter along with prophylactic lymph node dissection. Pathological examination showed that the tumor cells were located at the anal gland under the mucosa of the anal canal and that these cells produced mucin and fibrosis . Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and negative for CK20 . The final diagnosis was an early mucinous adenocarcinoma arising from the anal gland without an invasive appearance. The TNM classification was pT1N0M0 stage I, and the surgical margin was negative for tumor tissue. No adjuvant chemotherapy was performed for this patient. At the time of this writing, 79 months after surgery, the patient was alive without recurrence and active in society.