In our case, a 75-year-old man presented with a 1-day history of acute onset progressively ascending weakness of all four limbs. He had decreased deep tendon reflexes on presentation and breathing difficulty with a single breath count of 7; his weakness was the Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 2/5 in all four limbs on presentation. There was no history of fever or other viral prodromes at presentation. He was intubated and put on mechanical ventilation for respiratory support.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis 2 days after presentation showed one lymphocyte with protein 39 mg/dL. Nerve conduction velocity (NCV) ( to ) study revealed reduced compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitudes and conduction velocities of bilateral median and ulnar nerves. Bilateral tibial and peroneal nerves were inexcitable. Bilateral median, ulnar, tibial, and peroneal “F” responses were non-recordable. Acute demyelinating and axonal type of motor polyradiculoneuropathy related to COVID-19 infection was considered. Cerebrospinal fluid picture can be a possible association in COVID-19 and a decision was made to start on immunoglobulin therapy.
On admission, his high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) thorax revealed bilateral ground-glass opacities and consolidations. He was thrombocytopenic and lymphocytopenic on admission with a neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio of 90:8. In the meantime, his nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab test came out to be positive for COVID-19. He was supported with lung-protective ventilation and other supportive treatment.
He was started on IVIg at a dose of 2 g/kg of body weight divided over 5 days. In the meantime, his respiratory status worsened to moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) as per the Berlin definition of ARDS. He was supported with culture-based antibiotics, sedated for lung-protective ventilation. Further blood reports also revealed coagulopathy with D-dimer of 1.5 μg/mL and increased serum ferritin of 971 ng/mL. He was continued on pharmacological thromboprophylaxis. His respiratory status further worsened to severe ARDS in the second week of illness. His repeat HRCT scan on the 8th day of admission showed an increase in ground-glass opacities and consolidations bilaterally. Fortunately, his respiratory support requirement started decreasing from the 10th day of admission. He was shifted out of isolation after two consecutive negative COVID-19 PCR results. Gradually, his respiratory status improved further, his ventilator supports were weaned down, and he was extubated on the 17th day of illness. Subsequently, he was discharged from the hospital 24th day of illness with no residual muscle weakness.