A 45-year-old female was admitted to our surgical department at the Amir-AL-Momenin Hospital, Semnan, Iran, in May 2012. She presented a 17-year history of lower abdominal and back pain, rectal fullness, pain on defecation, constipation, and symptoms associated with genitourinary obstruction due to a pelvic mass. During her first pregnancy, a cystic pelvic mass had been diagnosed as an ovarian cyst, but the cyst was only drained during the caesarian section. Afterwards, she underwent five additional laparotomies, at first to remove a presumed ovarian cyst and then to treat the actual problem, the retrorectal cyst. The surgeries had been carried out in different centers and even by unprofessional hands. The cyst was not resected completely, and it recurred after each of these procedures. After these unsuccessful surgeries, no other major procedure was done, and the patient was followed with transabdominal ultrasonography approximately every six months. When the patient’s symptoms became unbearable, the cyst was drained through a minimal perineal incision between the coccyx and anus. In the last year, her symptoms did not improve after perineal drainages. It seemed that the cyst was not completely evacuated. A CT scan and MRI studies confirmed two large, separated, noncalcified, unilocular cystic mass lesions with well-defined borders in the retrorectal and retroperitoneal spaces. On a T1-weighted MRI, the lesions were low signal, while on a T2-weighted MRI, the lesions were high signal, indicating fluid content. There were no areas of heterogeneity or irregularity that enhanced with contrast. The retrorectal mass was located in the pelvic cavity behind the rectum and the vaginal canal, compressing and anteriorly displacing the uterus .
We decided to resect the cysts completely, because the case was so complicated after 19 surgeries (laparotomies and perineal drainage). A team of two general surgeons experienced in anorectal surgery, a urologist, a neurosurgeon, and two anesthesiologists operated on the patient for eight hours.
For complete excision, we used a combined abdominoperineal approach. At first, JJ stents were inserted through cystoscopy to find and protect the ureters during dissection, on account of the massive adhesions and anatomic distortion caused by previous operations. Then the laparotomy was done through a midline incision, revealing a large cystic lesion, adherent to the small bowel and ureters. The mass was carefully dissected and isolated. It seemed to have originated from the left ovary, and it contained clear fluid. The cyst was resected by salpingo-oophorectomy.
The second mass in the retrorectal space was completely apart from the first cyst. Although exceedingly difficult because of adhesions and fibrosis from the previous surgeries, the cyst was dissected with special attention to avoid injuring the rectum, ureters, or pelvic nervous plexus. For complete dissection of this cyst, the operation was continued with a perineal approach. A longitudinal incision was made between the anus and the coccygeal bone, the subcutaneous planes were divided, and the lumbosacral fascia was exposed. The anococcygeal ligament was transected. The retrorectal space was exposed by transection of the fibers of the levator ani. After complete dissection of the cyst, it was removed with a tract that had been created between cyst and skin in the site of the last perineal drainage. The pelvic floor was then reconstructed by suturing the fibers of the levator ani.
Upon histopathological examination, the first specimen consisted of the ovary containing a creamy brown unilocular 9 × 7.5 cm collapsed cyst with a smooth internal surface. The cyst was reported as “ovarian serous cystadenoma.” The second specimen was a unilocular 12 × 6.5 × 8 cm cyst filled with yellow fluid and sebaceous material; the inner aspect of the cyst had a creamy smooth surface. Microscopically, this cyst was lined by stratified squamous epithelium. Also seen were scattered sweet gland-like structures, areas of erosion, granulation tissue formation, chronic inflammation, and fibrosis. The diagnosis was “dermoid cyst.”
Postoperative recovery was complicated by respiratory failure, but eventually the patient improved and was discharged in generally good condition on the twelfth postoperative day. No complications occurred during the 18-month follow-up.