A 78-year-old female patient was referred to our emergency department with complaints of lower abdominal pain, slowed gastrointestinal transit, nausea, loss of appetite, and fatigue.
Her medical history was significant for hypertension, biological aortic valve, mitral valve regurgitation, atrial fibrillation, heart failure NYHA II/III, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Gold II, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia. There was no relevant family history. Her medication history consisted of Perindopril 10 mg/Indapamide 2.5 mg, Acenocoumarol 2 mg/day, Digoxin 0.25 mg/day, 5/7 days, Budesonide 160 microg/Formoterol 4.5 micron 2× two puffs/day, and Metformin 1,000 mg/day.
The pain was moderate without irradiation. There were no aggravating or relieving factors. The symptoms were worsening in the last 4 days before admission.
On admission, the patient had a body temperature of 37.7°C, a pulse rate of 80 beats/min, a blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg, and a saturation of 96% in ambient air. Physical examination revealed a new periumbilical mass associated with lower abdominal tenderness but no rigidity or rebound tenderness.
Blood tests showed leukocytosis (22 × 109/L), neutrophilia (20.09 × 109/L), C-reactive protein >30 mg/dL, procalcitonin 9.5 ng/mL, creatinine = 3.42 mg/dL, urea = 127 mg/dL, and INR > 9.
An abdominal ultrasound was performed, which revealed intestinal loops with peristalsis present at the level of the descending colon – a slightly dilated intestinal loop with a slightly thickened intestinal wall. We completed with abdominal and pelvic computer tomography scan (CT), which showed an inflammatory block at the level of the hypogastrium – thin intestinal loops, agglutinated, forming a lesional block of 90/69/60 mm, with fecal stasis and air inclusions. Adjacent fat infiltrated, with multiple fluid fuses present. Pulled mesentery and mesenteric vessels – an associated internal hernia is suspected .
An echocardiogram reported neurofunctional biological aortic valve, concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, and mitral valve regurgitation. There were no vegetations of valves observed.
Due to high suspicion of intestinal subocclusion, the patient underwent exploratory laparotomy via a median incision. The abdominal cavity was explored, detecting an epigastric inflammatory block that includes several loops of the small intestine (jejunum and ileum) and omentum, the dissection of which reveals the minimal interileal purulent collection and a tumor at about 50 cm from the duodenojejunal angle, with the appearance of diverticulitis. At 40 cm from the duodenojejunal angle, another uncomplicated intestinal diverticulum of about 2 cm diameter is identified .
We performed segmental resection of the jejunum with terminal–terminal enteroenteric anastomosis.
in a double layer, lavage, and drainage. IV fluids, Ceftriaxone 2 g/day once daily, Metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h, probiotics, and Famotidine 20 mg were administered. The treatment of associated diseases continued.
On Day 4, the patient had normal gastrointestinal transit. During hospitalization, the patient presented one episode of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. The patient underwent an esogastroduodenal endoscopy, which revealed a Forrest III antral gastric ulcer and congestive corporeal gastritis without an active source of bleeding. Under treatment with proton pump inhibitors, erythrocyte mass transfusion evolution was favorable. The patient was discharged home on day 21.
Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of jejunal diverticulitis. Stasis, hemorrhagic areas, and lymphoid follicles were observed at the resection margins. The intestinal wall shows areas of necrosis spread throughout its thickness, hemorrhagic areas, abscesses, and a marked transparietal predominantly neutrophilic inflammatory infiltrate. At the level of the diverticulum, fibrin–hematic exudate is observed at the level of the serosa, vascular stasis, hemorrhagic areas, and mixed inflammatory infiltrate, with the presence of lymphoid follicles and erosions at the level of the mucosa (, ).