A 37-year-old woman with a history of laparotomic intestinal derotation during childhood was referred to our emergency department because of sudden onset pain in the lower and upper left abdomen. There was no relevant drug or family history. The pain was worsening over the past 48 h and now radiating to the right lower quadrant. The patient reported nausea without vomiting and the absence of stool since the start of the pain. The vital signs were slightly abnormal, with a sinus rhythm of 95 bpm, blood pressure of 121/90 mmHg, and a body temperature of 37.4 C. On physical examination, sparse peristalsis was auscultated over the abdomen. The pain was most prominently in the left upper quadrant, with guarding and rebound tenderness.
Laboratory results showed a leukocyte count of 19 × 10E9/l and a C-reactive protein level of 317 mg/l. A computed tomography scan showed signs of air centrally in the mesentery, just cranial from the umbilicus, surrounded by enlarged lymph nodes. The radiology report described a diverticulum in the small bowel, most likely a Meckel’s. The suspicion of a perforated hollow viscus was increased by the presence of free intraperitoneal fluid just behind the anterior abdominal wall. No further abnormalities were detected, especially the absence of colonic diverticula or other (non)inflammatory processes.
The patient underwent a laparotomy (performed by SM and SH) which macroscopically revealed the diagnosis of perforated JD. Multiple JD were revealed, of which at least one was perforated. A segmental (80 cm) resection of the affected jejunum was carried out, followed by a side-to-side hand-sewn primary anastomosis. Postoperatively, a 5-day course of antibiotics was administered. The patient was able to tolerate oral intake after the removal of the nasogastric tube. On day six, the patient was discharged home. At the two-week follow-up visit, she was fully recovered. No adverse or unanticipated events were registered 6 months after.
Histopathological examination (, ) confirmed the diagnosis and showed multiple, small, and medium-sized, flask-like invaginations present through the muscularis propria, filled with mucin or stool but easily emptied, bulged into the serosa. Central perforation of the diverticular part with accompanying inflammation and fibrin plaques along the serosa. There is a suppurative inflammation of the diverticula and peridiverticular abscess formation with foreign-body giant cell reaction to faecal material (green arrows in C) with fat necrosis. This work has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .