A 57-year-old man was transferred to the Emergency Department of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese Medicine University, because of sudden onset severe chest pain for 40 min. The pain was characterized as pressure-like, progressive in nature with radiation to the back region, with profuse perspiration and blurred vision. The patient had been diagnosed with hypertension for 3 years and on losartan 100 mg per day without monitoring blood pressure. Apart from hypertension, his past medical history was clinically unremarkable. He was not on other regular medications before presentation and had no significant family history. He was a current smoker with a 20-year-history of smoking 20 cigarettes per day and drank 100 g per day for 20 years.
On admission, his body temperature was 37.1 °C; pulse 81 beats/min; respiratory rate 20 breaths/min with normal oxygen saturation; and blood pressure 92/61 mmHg.
Point-of-care testing showed: white blood cell count at 7.1 * 109/L (3.5–9.5 * 109/L), lymphocyte% at 35.8% (20–50%), platelet count at 106 * 109/L (125–350 * 109/L), serum potassium at 3.92 mmol/L (reference value 3.5-5.3 mmol/L), blood creatinine at 75 μmol/L (59–104 μmol/L), creatinine kinase—myocardial band at 15.5 U/L (reference value < 25 U/L), brain natriuretic peptide at 65.8 pg/mL (reference value < 100 pg/mL), cardiac troponin I at 0.003ug/L ( reference value < 0.026 μg/L), and D-dimer at 4.52 mg/L (reference value < 0.55 mg/L). The 12-lead ECG obtained at admission showed ST-segment depression (> 1 mm) at the J point, with tall, symmetrical T-waves in the leads V1–V3 along with ST-segment elevation (1 mm) in the lead a VR . These ECG changes suggested de Winter syndrome, a condition associated with acute occlusion of LAD.
On the basis of chest pain and de Winter ECG changes, the patient was initially diagnosed with AMI and treated with aspirin 300 mg (chewable), ticagrelor 600 mg (chewable) and atorvastatin 20 mg according to the current guidelines. Emergency coronary angiography (CAG) was immediately performed.
In the catheterization laboratory, the right radial artery was cannulated with a 6-French sheath. The possibility of an AD was indicated by unsuccessful attempt to selectively engage the coronary ostium. Subsequent intraoperative ultrasound showed intimal tear in the aortic arch , supporting the diagnosis of AD. CAG via femoral artery showed subtotal left main coronary artery (LM) occlusion, total LAD occlusion and a 99% stenosis of the left circumflex artery (LCX) . The blood pressure of the patient was at 85/56 mmHg with continuous norepinephrine administration, which signaled a poor prognosis.
Considering the hemodynamic instability and high risk of a referral for an emergency aortic computed tomography in CT room and repair surgery in senior surgical hospital, cardiologists advised the patient to undergo PCI urgently. In order to promote rapid recovery from the cardiogenic shock, two 3.5 × 32 mm Promus Element Plus stents were implanted respectively into the proximal of LM-LAD and LM-LCX after the agreement of family members. Following treatment by direct stenting, the LM-LAD and LCX blood flow was completely restored . Following PCI, the patient was stabilized and shortly admitted to the Intensive Care Unit.
Aortic computed tomography (CT) angiography confirmed final diagnosis of type A aortic dissection (TAAD) . The patient still suffered from chest congestion after stabilizing blood pressure and heart rate.
Two months after the PCI procedure, transthoracic echocardiograph (TTE) was performed for follow-up, which revealed dilation of the aortic root pseudo cavity, severe aortic regurgitation, severe mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, and pulmonary hypertension. The patient still suffered from post-exercise chest tightness and underwent the Bentall procedure. After the surgery, there was no obvious chest discomfort during follow-up. On the patient’s most recent clinical follow-up visit, a repeat CT scan of the aorta showed replacement of ascending aorta, aortic valve, mitral valve and tricuspid valve, and coronary artery bypass grafting .