A 33-year-old primigravid African woman who had been pregnant for 40 weeks and three days dated from the first day of her last normal menstrual period presented to our unit with a three-day history of continuous pain around the umbilical area. She did not have any other complaints.
A review of her antenatal records revealed that she had sought medical attention at her local clinic for lower abdominal pain at eight weeks and four days and once again at 14 weeks and two days of gestation. Both episodes of lower abdominal pain were managed conservatively.
Throughout the pregnancy the patient continued to experience on and off abdominal pain which became better as the pregnancy progressed.
She denied any per vaginal bleeding during her pregnancy.
Of note, the patient said that her mother had developed hypertension when she was pregnant.
The results of her serologic tests for human immunodeficiency virus as well as rapid plasma reagin were negative at the antenatal clinic. Her hemoglobin concentration at 22 weeks of pregnancy was 10.7g/dL. Methyldopa and nifedipine were commenced for pregnancy-induced hypertension from 22 weeks of gestation. During antenatal care visits at 26 weeks and three days, 30 weeks and three days, 34 weeks and four days, and 37 weeks and three days she was normotensive. At 38 weeks and four days her blood pressure was 150/100mmHg.
The patient had an ultrasound scan done at 33 weeks and three days at a local clinic which showed a single viable breech intrauterine pregnancy with a left lateral upper segment placenta, slightly reduced liquor volume and some small free fluid in the hepatorenal area. The estimated gestational age by scan was 34 weeks and two days. From the time of this ultrasound scan, the presentation by clinical examination which had previously been documented as cephalic was then documented as breech.
Besides the on and off abdominal pain, her pregnancy had been uneventful until she developed periumbilical pain prompting her to present to our unit.
On examination her blood pressure was 140/90mmHg and other vital signs were within normal limits. Her body mass index (her weight in kilograms divided by the square of her height in meters) was 27. A breech presentation was the remarkable finding on obstetric examination. Admission and urgent delivery by cesarean section was advised because of the breech presentation and suspected pre-eclampsia; the patient agreed and she gave her informed consent.
She continued taking antihypertensives. During her admission, several of her blood pressure readings were in the severe range (≥160/110mmHg). At 40 weeks and five days of pregnancy our patient had a cesarean section performed via a Pfannenstiel incision by a junior member of the obstetric team. On entering the ‘parietal peritoneum’ a sudden gush of meconium-stained liquor issued forth. The fetal back was visualized. Delivery of the baby was done, the umbilical cord was clamped and cut and part of the placenta was removed. On recognition of the unusual circumstances, artery forceps were used to arrest bleeding from the remaining placenta and then senior help was sought. The cesarean section which was being done under spinal anesthesia was continued under general anesthesia (the patient was intubated) because severe hemorrhage was anticipated and also to minimize patient anxiety.
AAP was diagnosed by the next most senior doctor who in turn sought assistance from the consultant.
When the consultant arrived, the patient’s placenta was noted to be predominantly attached to her small bowel , large bowel and the superior surface of her urinary bladder. After assessment of the placental attachment site, a decision was made to remove the remaining placenta. There were large bleeders on the placental bed which was thick enough to allow figure of eight sutures to be used without compromising nearby organs.
The meconium-stained bowel was cleaned with normal saline; no obvious bowel defects were noted. Part of the membranes attached to the small and large bowel and bladder were left in situ. The uterus was palpable and about the size of a uterus at 10 weeks of pregnancy beneath the sac. Estimated blood loss was 1.5liters. Our patient received three units of packed red blood cells.
The baby girl delivered weighed 2850g and had Apgar scores of eight and 10 at one minute and five minutes respectively. Besides slight cranial asymmetry the examination of the newborn baby was unremarkable. The baby’s head circumference was 32cm (5th centile). By day 5 post-laparotomy the mother could mobilize fully, eat, drink and had normal bowel motions and micturition. The baby was breast feeding and eliminating well. Of note, the mother’s blood pressure normalized post-delivery; however, the results of a urine dipstick test showed that she had proteinuria (3+ = 3g/L).
On day 5 post-delivery, an ultrasound scan showed a slightly bulky uterus measuring nine cm in length not consistent with a post-delivery uterus. Notably, the scan showed ascites with fibrinous strands and internal echoes.
The patient requested discharge and she was discharged on day 5 after delivery on iron and folate tablets. During her stay, she was counseled on AAP and future care.
On day 9 after her laparotomy our patient was re-admitted with a three-day history of vomiting after meals, abdominal pain and distension; she was passing stool and flatus normally.
A physical examination revealed a grossly distended abdomen. A repeat ultrasound scan showed gross ascites. Functional intestinal obstruction secondary to increased intra-abdominal pressure from the gross ascites was diagnosed. Serial abdominal ascitic tapping for symptomatic relief, intravenous crystalloid and antibiotics as well as low molecular weight heparin were commenced.
On day 15 post-surgery, 5700mL of a dark brown fluid was drained at one go from the urinary catheter and her abdominal distension subsided. Over the following days, her condition was monitored.
The patient and her baby were discharged from hospital on hematinics with no complaints 26 days after the birth of her baby.
Five weeks following surgery, the patient and her baby were apparently doing well.
At about six months of age, the infant’s growth and development were seemingly normal. The infant’s head circumference was 40cm (5th centile); the cranial asymmetry was barely noticeable.
At about six months after delivery, the mother had no complaints and her physical examination was unremarkable. Her blood pressure was 160/93mmHg; she had hypokalemia (3.3mmol/L, reference range (RR) 3.6 to 5.0mmol/L) and hyponatremia (124mmol/L, RR 135 to 145mmol/L). Her chloride was 101mmol/L, RR 101 to 111mmol/L and bicarbonate, 15mmol/L, RR 21 to 31mmol/L.
The mother’s laboratory blood investigations are shown in Table .