A 34-year-old male patient with diagnosis of epilepsy and schizophrenia, with a history of multiple seizure episodes and compulsive hospitalizations, suffered a posterior right shoulder dislocation during a seizure . The joint was reduced and immobilized in 10–20° of external rotation for 4 weeks. During that episode, he also complained of the left shoulder pain, but there was no evidence of dislocation or fracture both on X-rays or computer tomography scan (CT scan) performed in the emergency room. In the outpatient clinic, he presented bilateral shoulder pain and instability complaint. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a reverse Hill-Sachs lesion of small dimensions on the right shoulder, and a Bankart labrum lesion associated with a slight humeral Hill-Sachs lesion on the left shoulder. These findings suggested a possible previous anterior episode(s) of dislocation of the left shoulder as well.
At that time, the patient was lost to follow-up. However, he returned a year later, more symptomatic than before. He complained of bilateral shoulder pain, increasingly worse on the right side, and increasing over the previous months, without any traumatic new event.
Clinically, there was an objective asymmetric shoulder deformity with an acromioclavicular prominence on the left side. The range of motion (ROM) was very limited: the right shoulder had a deficit of external rotation and of forward elevation (90° of forward elevation, T8 internal rotation, and −10° external rotation) and the left shoulder had a lack of forward elevation and no internal rotation (100° of forward elevation, internal rotation only to the trochanter, and 20° external rotation).
X-rays and CT scan revealed a bilateral chronic dislocation: On the right side, a chronic posterior shoulder dislocation, and a severe reverse Hill-Sachs lesion comprising more than 50% of humeral head surface; on the left side, a chronic anterior shoulder dislocation with a humeral Hill-Sachs lesion of moderate dimension.
Since the patient was stable concerning his neurologic and psychiatric disorders, and the symptoms were severe on the right shoulder, the first intervention was on the right side. An anatomic right shoulder hemiarthroplasty with pyrocarbon-coated humeral head (Aequalis AscendTM Flex, Wright-Medical, Tornier) was performed, through a deltopectoral approach . Four weeks after surgery he started rehabilitation. Six months later, he was painless, with functional ROM (>90° abduction, 160° of forward elevation, 20° external rotation, and T8 internal rotation) but maintained left shoulder pain due to the chronic anterior dislocation.
Therefore, a Latarjet procedure was planned. However, a coracoid bone deficiency was found intraoperatively, preventing its use. As a result, a Remplissage Technique (anchoring the posterior soft-tissue structures to the Hill-Sachs defect) and a subscapularis plication with a rotator cuff interval closure were performed to achieve better stability. Nevertheless, when the stability was tested, persistent anterior instability was found. Subsequently, the glenohumeral joint was stabilized with a temporary trans-articular Steinmann pin , removed 4 weeks after surgery. Glenohumeral reduction was maintained, and 4 weeks after the pin removal, physiotherapy was started on his left shoulder. One year after the second surgery, he had residual pain in the left shoulder with some ROM limitations (90° abduction, 120° of forward elevation, 10° external rotation, and L4 of internal rotation), with no limitations on daily activities. There were no new episodes of shoulder dislocation. The follow-up time was 25 months.