A term male newborn was delivered by emergency cesarean section to a 27-year-old primigravida with gestational diabetes. The mother had followed nutritional recommendations and had taken no medication during pregnancy. The newborn was large-for-gestational-age, had an umbilical arterial pH of 6.92 and an APGAR score of 1 at 1 min. After cardiorespiratory resuscitation, his APGAR scores were 8 and 10 at 5 and 10 min respectively. His blood tests revealed acidosis, hypoglycemia, severe multiorgan involvement and impaired coagulation, requiring whole body cooling, mechanical ventilation, empiric antibiotic treatment, analgesia, sedation, PN, glucose infusions and clotting factor replacement in the first week of life. Subsequently, the newborn’s clinical condition and laboratory findings improved, the whole body cooling and mechanical ventilation were stopped on day 4 and 7 respectively and full oral feeding was reached on day 14. Despite laboratory findings of multiorgan involvement returned to normal, ALT elevation and direct hyperbilirubinemia persisted beyond the age of 3 weeks . Biliary atresia, congenital infections, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, thyroid dysfunction, cystic fibrosis and metabolic disorders were excluded. Genetic analysis of the main hepatobiliary transporters discovered a novel heterozygous missense variant in the ABCB11 gene (c.1345G > A, p.Glu449Lys). According to current ACMG guidelines the variant was classified as likely pathogenic . Furthermore, 2 heterozygous variants, both classified as variants of unknown significance were identified in the gene ATP8B1 encoding the biliary aminophospholipid transporter (c.636 T > A, p.Ile212Ile and c.1819 + 49 T > C). Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) was initiated on day 28. Due to persisting cholestasis, occasional increase of gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) and rising levels of liver transaminases (without an obvious reason) a diagnostic liver biopsy was performed at the age of 3.5 months. Liver histology showed giant cell transformation, lobular inflammation, bile retention inside the hepatocytes and bile canaliculi and mild portal fibrosis and ductal proliferation . These findings resembled histological presentation of PFIC2 . Specifically, identification of bile plugs within the hepatocytes and bile canaliculi suggested dysfunction of bile elimination mechanisms. Interestingly, immunohistochemical staining revealed almost completely abolished canalicular BSEP expression . No additional medication was initiated in our patient. His clinical course improved continuously. UDCA therapy was discontinued at the age of 6 months due to normalization of serum bilirubin levels. Serum liver enzymes returned to normal by the age of 14 months. Our patient showed normal physical development and had normal liver ultrasound findings as well as biochemical liver function tests during the follow-up controls performed on the regular basis till the age of 5 years. Since surrogate parameters of hepatocellular injury and cholestasis improved, we believe that BSEP loss was of transient nature and found it unethical to perform a second liver biopsy for the histochemical proof of recovery.