A 50-year-old man presented with a 2-wk history of abdominal distension, reduced food intake and weight loss.
The patient began to have symptoms more than 10 d prior. He had previously visited a local clinic and received anti-inflammatory treatments to alleviate his symptoms. However, the symptoms relapsed after discontinuation of treatment. The patient was admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. He underwent thorough laboratory examinations and was primarily diagnosed with thrombocytopenia, anemia, fatty liver and splenic space-occupying lesions. The patient was transferred from the hematology department into our ward for surgery.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient had no relevant personal and family history.
On admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.5 °C, heart rate was 96 beats/min, respiratory rate was 19 breaths/min, blood pressure was 117/89 mmHg, and he had an anemic appearance. The patient had no rash or KS lesions on the skin. There were no lumps in the abdomen, the liver was not palpable, and the spleen could be touched at three transverse fingers under the ribs. There was no edema in the lower extremities.
A routine blood test showed moderate anemia with a hemoglobin level of 7.9 g/dL, thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 35000/μL, and an albumin level of 30.5 g/L. Bone marrow biopsy showed active myeloproliferation (80%); a decrease in the ratio of granulocytes to erythrocytes was observed and immunohistochemical investigation showed CD 34(+), MPO(+), CD20(+), and CD3(T cell +). Tests for hepatitis B virus (hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B surface antibody, hepatitis B e antigen, hepatitis B e antibody, hepatitis B core antibody) were negative. Tests for HIV antigen and antibody were negative. Detection of nucleic acid for COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) was negative.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed an inflammatory lesion in the right upper lobe of the lung and effusion in the left pleura. Abdominal CT suggested splenomegaly, with multiple low density shadows and mixed density shadows . Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed space-occupying lesions in the spleen, which were considered to be lymphoma .
During hospitalization, the patient had moderate anemia and thrombocytopenia, and was initially treated with thymosin and caffeic acid tablets to stimulate the production of blood in the bone marrow. He also received omeprazole to protect the stomach and glutathione to protect the liver. The day before surgery, the patient was administered a platelet transfusion to increase his platelet count to 50000/μL.