An 11-year-old boy was admitted to the Unit of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, City Hospital, Chorzów, Poland due to a suspicion of acute leukemia. Five days before admission to the hospital, he developed a severe and difficult to stop nosebleed. Since then, the boy was experienced weakness, lethargy, lack of appetite. Additionally he developed abdominal pain, a headache and nausea. Physical examination revealed pale skin with petechiae, inflammation of the gingiva, tooth decay and splenomegaly. Lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly and the presence of a Central Nervous System (CNS) disease/leukemia were not observed. Family Health History has no indication of any genetic, hematologic or cancerous diseases. Patient was not exposed to any physical (i.e. ionic radiation) or chemical factors (organic solvents, pesticides, herbicides, paints, lacquers) during childhood nor fetal period. He was born out of second pregnancy, first childbirth (first pregnancy ended due to spontaneous miscarriage around eighth week). Weight at birth 2400 g. Mother's age at birth: 19, father: 21. Patient has younger step-sister (same mother, different father), showing no symptoms of ALL or any other hematological disorders.
By the time of diagnosis of ALL, the patient had been sick sporadically and had no routine blood tests—including morphology. The patient has not taken any medications on a permanent basis.
The laboratory results showed: white blood cell 206,900/µl, platelet count 142,000/µl and hemoglobin level 10.2 g/dl. The bone marrow was highly cellular, represented by a homogeneous population of small blasts with lymphoid morphology (88.5%). Flow cytometric analysis showed BCP-ALL phenotype: CD45dim + , CD38 + , CD34(+), CD81(+), CD24(+), CD19(+), CD79a(+), TdT(+), CD10(+), CDdim33(+), CD20dim(+), CD22dim(+), CD15(-), CD117(-). The boy was diagnosed with common B-cell precursor ALL and qualified for treatment according to the AIEOP-BFM ALL 2017 protocol.
The cytogenetic and molecular examinations of the patient's bone marrow were performed by the Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Cytogenetics at the University Clinical Hospital in Wroclaw. Karyotype analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on the bone marrow sample according to the AIEOP-BFM ALL 2017 protocol. According to the protocol, tests for genetic diagnostics were performed. By day 6, a FISH test was performed to obtain a result for the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome. Up to day 33, the FISH test was performed for the frequent genetic aberrations: ETV6/RUNX1 translocation and rearrangements in the KMT2A and TCF3 genes. At the same time, molecular tests were carried out using the RT-PCR method for the presence of the BCR/ABL1 and KMT2A/AFF1 fusion gene. G-banded chromosome analysis revealed an abnormal male karyotype 46,XY,t(9;22)(q34;q11) /46,XY . The FISH study showed no rearrangements in ETV6/RUNX1, TCF3 (MetaSystems Probes, Germany) or KMT2A (Vysis, Abbott Molecular, Illinois, USA). The FISH study performed with the BCR/ABL1 dual color, dual fusion translocation probe (Vysis, Abbott Molecular, Illinois, USA) disclosed a typical translocation pattern 2 green/orange BCR/ABL1 fusion signals, 1 green BCR signal, and one orange ABL1 signal in 90% of the interphase cells . Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to detect the presence or absence of the KMT2A /AFF1 and BCR/ABL1 fusion gene using primers as per JJM van Dongen et al. . The test was negative in both cases. Due to the positive result of the FISH test for BCR/ABL1, another RT-PCR was performed in order to search for atypical BCR/ABL1 transcripts. New RT-PCR analysis was performed based on primers BCR-6 and ABL-3 published by T. Burmeister and R. Reinhardt . Electrophoresis showed a band of ~ 489 bp . Sanger sequencing confirmed the direct junction between exon 8 of BCR (NM_004327.4) and exon 2 of ABL1 (NM_005157.6) . The Sanger sequencing was important because this method determined the type of transcript by analyzing the direct junction between exons. Transcript type information is crucial for monitoring the presence of BCR/ABL1 transcript by RT-PCR method.
The patient’s induction therapy started according to the protocol IA-Pred. On the 8th day of treatment, the patient had a poor response to prednisone. Due to the presence of the BCR /ABL1 fusion gene, further treatment was performed according to the EsPhALL 2009 protocol (European intergroup study of post-induction treatment of Philadelphia-chromosome-positive ALL). Imatinib at a dose of 300 mg/m2 daily was started on day 15 of treatment, but on day 28 was withheld due to hepatotoxicity (WHO grade III). Evolution of peripheral blood cell counts during therapy is presented in Table . In accordance to protocol, the patient's bone marrow was collected on days 15 and 33 of treatment. Examination of the bone marrow sample on day 15 revealed 15.4% blast cells in bone marrow morphology. Flow cytometry (FCM) revealed 23.48% of blasts. On day 33 (TP1), the bone marrow was already aplastic. Nevertheless, a PCR-MRD (Minimal Residual Disease) result was obtained. MRD in TP1 was low-positive (< 10−4). Bone marrow smear revealed a total of 2.6% of blasts. Despite the poor quality of the material in TP1, it was also possible to perform a FISH study and RT-PCR test . Both molecular and cytogenetic tests were negative. According to the EsPhALL 2009 protocol the boy should have been classified as poor risk Ph(+) ALL group because of PPR (prednisone poor responder) on the 8th day, but due to complete remission on day 33 (LBL 1.2%, PC-MRD < 10–4) he was classified as good risk Ph(+) ALL group. From about day 32 of treatment, the patient reported abdominal pain, constipation, nausea and vomiting. Physical examinations showed hepatomegaly and lazy intestinal peristalsis. The symptoms were most likely caused by paralytic intestinal obstruction after chemotherapy. Additionally, the patient developed a fungal infection of the bladder.
Due to the general condition of the patient, consolidation treatment was delayed by 25 days. After this time, according to the EsPhALL 2009 protocol the IB protocol was started and Imatinib was resumed. Another PCR-MRD test was performed on day 17 of treatment (TP1b) of the IB protocol. PCR-MRD in TP1b was negative. Therefore the patient continued chemotherapy without qualification for HSCT (Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation). The patient after consolidation therapy was in haematological remission of ALL. The patient remains without a transplant for 8 months after diagnosis.