A 12-year-old boy presented with a mass over left shoulder for 1 year. The mass was insidious in onset, gradually progressive, and patient complained of mass effect, irritation while wearing tight clothing or combing hair and cosmetic reason. It was not associated with pain. There was no history of trauma to left shoulder. On examination, a hard and trans-illumination negative swelling, measuring 6*4*3 cm, was noted on the lateral aspect of left shoulder just below acromion process . The swelling was non-mobile, non-tender, and non-adherent to overlying skin or muscle tissue. Skin over the swelling appeared normal.
X-ray of the left shoulder showed irregularly ossified lesion on the lateral aspect of proximal humerus just below acromion process MRI was done and revealed a large, well defined, fairly well capsulated, and lobulated mass along lateral aspect of proximal humerus measuring 6*4*3.5 cm in size with a thin stalk connecting to postero-lateral corner of acromion process . It showed multiple areas of extensive calcification with a very thin cartilaginous cap.
Above said features defined a benign lesion but few peculiar signs of Exostoses. Hence, patient was posted for J needle biopsy which suggested bony trabeculae along with thin cartilage without dysplasia. As the lesion was benign, excisional biopsy was planned by direct lateral approach to proximal humerus and the mass was carefully separated from surrounding tissue with blunt dissection . Tumor was excised en bloc.
Gross examination of the specimen revealed a thin pedunculated and well encapsulated mass measuring 6*5*4 cm, oval shaped, with a thin cartilaginous cap . Cut section revealed a grey white mass with variegated appearance.
Histopathological examination revealed a benign tumor exhibiting a cap of benign mature cartilage. Sub-cartilagenous areas shows numerus mature bony trabeculae showing enchondral ossification suggestive of osteochondroma .
Postoperatively, we did regular dressing and suture removal. Surgical wound healed without any complication. In recent follow-up, patient had full range of motion at shoulder without local irritation and an acceptable surgical scar without any functional limitation of the extremity (-). We have advised patient regular follow-up every 6 months or so follow-up if sudden appearance or increase in size of the swelling, till skeletal maturity to diagnose early recurrence.