A 29-year old male, formerly a competitive soccer player, presented with pain in the superior-lateral and posterior aspect of the left knee. He had a history significant for gout that was managed without medications. Physical examination revealed a moderate effusion and an extensor lag of 5 degrees. There was no laxity to the ACL or other ligaments. An initial MRI revealed soft tissue nodularity in the lateral and central aspects of the knee, most consistent with PVNS or gout (, ). A second MRI was performed to obtain sagittal gradient echo images on a 3 Tesla MRI unit to confirm the preliminary diagnosis of PVNS. This again revealed the soft-tissue nodularities with a few areas of blooming artifacts, but not to the extent expected for classic PVNS and therefore was thought to be an atypical presentation by our radiology colleagues . Surgery was scheduled for an arthroscopic knee debridement and excisional biopsy of the lesion by the senior author (JA). During the arthroscopy, significant crystalline formation on the articular cartilage in all three compartments was noted, extending to the synovium . A large mass was seen anteriorly in the notch surrounding the ACL and PCL . The mass was resected and sent to pathology for formal analysis. Extrusion of calcified-appearing tissue and crystals from the mass were consistent with a gouty tophus. The mass was debrided in its entirety with care to avoid ACL or PCL injury. The majority of gouty deposits found along the cartilage was debrided carefully with the aid of a shaver to protect the cartilage from further mechanical injury. An extensive synovectomy was also carried out to aid in the reduction of the gout crystal load within the knee. Post-operative histological analysis revealed the excised mass was in fact a gouty tophus. Additionally, since gout was suspected, we performed post-operative uric acid levels which were revealed to be 717 μmol/L. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was ambulating under full weight immediately post-operative. Pain was managed with over-the-counter analgesics. Six- and twelve-month follow-up revealed good range of motion, no effusion and cessation of pain during sporting activities. At two-week follow-up the patient was referred to a rheumatologist for medical management of their gout.