A 61-year-old lady presented to us with a four days history of left-sided neck swelling associated with odynophagia. She has pre-existing atrial fibrillation since ten years back and she is on non-Vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant (NOAC). Before this presentation, she had undergone unsuccessful transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) at a heart centre to investigate her mitral valve prolapse. The TOE was abandoned as they had difficulty inserting the TOE probe. At the heart centre, she was monitored for a day post procedure and was discharged well.
Upon further history, she denies having upper gastrointestinal symptoms prior to this. On clinical examination, she appears well and afebrile. There was a left anterior neck swelling measuring 4 cm x 4 cm which was tender on palpation. There were no skin changes and no cervical lymph nodes palpable. All other systemic examinations were unremarkable. Initial blood investigation showed mild leukocytosis (11.4 × 109/L), but the rest of her blood investigations were normal. We suspected a delayed iatrogenic upper oesophageal perforation secondary to her recent TOE.
We proceeded with an upper endoscopic examination, but unfortunately, we were unable to visualize any mucosal abnormalities over the oesophagus . She did, however, have an associated sliding hiatus hernia. A contrasted computed tomography (CECT) of the neck was performed. It showed a prevertebral soft tissue swelling with a maximal thickness measuring 2.2 cm and the presence of air pockets at the level of C7 . A semilunar hypodense collection with rim-esnhancing wall is seen from the left submandibular space superiorly to the suprasternal region inferiorly . Subsequently, we performed a targeted upper gastrointestinal study with gastrograffin with a complementary plain CT of the neck. Contrast leakage was seen within the previously hypodense collection at the left paravertebral region, and the contrast media is seen tracking into the left submandibular space superiorly and inferiorly, until the level of T1 . A diagnosis of oesophageal perforation is thus confirmed, although the defect is likely small, as no contrast leakage was seen during the dynamic study.
As the patient was clinically well, and the upper endoscopy examination did not show any apparent mucosal defect, we elect to manage her conservatively. She was kept nil-by-mouth for a week, and total parenteral nutrition was initiated. She was also empirically started on broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics. Her clinical condition improved with resolution of the neck swelling as well as the odynophagia. She was started on oral feeding after a week and subsequently discharged well. She was seen in our clinic four weeks after discharge, and she remains well. A repeated upper gastrointestinal study performed six months later showed smooth contrast flow though the oesophagus with no contrast extravasation.