A 71-year-old woman underwent left radical nephrectomy 4 years ago. Pathological findings showed clear cell renal cell carcinoma G2 (pT3aN0M0), but 15 months after surgery multiple lung and pleural metastases occurred. Despite sequential therapy comprising IFNα, sunitinib, axitinib, and pazopanib, no clinical efficacy was observed and all drugs were discontinued due to cancer progression within 6 months.
During pazopanib treatment, the patient participated in a clinical trial to receive a cancer-specific peptide vaccine at her own discretion. The patient's HLA subtype was HLA-A24, and cancer-specific peptides such as SART2, LCK, EGFR, and MRP3 were identified in renal cell carcinoma tissue . These cancer peptides were used to eliminate cancer cells via activation and enhancement of the exhausted immune system to improve its potential to attack cancer cells. Administration of these cancer peptides was also expected to facilitate further elimination of remaining cancer cells by the immune system, resulting in a more favorable therapeutic effect. After two courses (18 times) of vaccine therapy, no significant anti-cancer effect was detected. The patient subsequently decided to discontinue vaccine therapy, wished to receive newly approved nivolumab and was referred to our hospital.
After obtaining informed consent about the possibility of severe irAEs, we started nivolumab at a dose of 3 mg/kg. Soon after the start of nivolumab, the multiple lung and pleural metastatic lesions began to shrink markedly and we finally achieved almost CR without any specific serious adverse events .
Ten months after the start of nivolumab administration, fever and erythema with induration over a 10-cm area of bilateral thigh developed. Skin biopsy of the lesion was performed and pathological findings showed infiltration of a number of inflammatory cells, such as lymphocytes, plasma cells, foam cells, and epithelioid cells, resulting in a diagnosis of immune-related cellulitis . Interestingly, these skin reaction areas corresponded to peptide vaccine inoculation sites.
Because this irAE occurred, we ceased nivolumab treatment and continued close follow-up without any anti-cancer treatment. The patient has maintained CR without any clinical symptoms for more than a year since discontinuation of nivolumab.