A 66-year-old woman with no history of malignant tumors was found to have elevated serum CA19-9 levels during a medical checkup. The patient underwent pancreatic and biliary examinations at a nearby primary hospital, which revealed no abnormal findings. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a tumor at the level of the suprasternal notch, which was diagnosed as PTC by fine-needle aspiration cytology. Subsequently, the patient was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. The serum CA19-9 level was elevated to 78.2 IU/mL (normal range, ≤ 37 IU/mL). Serum Tg level was within the normal range, and TgAb tested negative. Ultrasonography revealed a 34 × 31 mm hypoechoic nodule with an indistinct border extending caudally from the left lobe of the thyroid gland . CT revealed a heterogeneously enhanced mass extending from the lower pole of the left thyroid lobe to the posterior sternal region. The tumor significantly compressed the trachea and an irregular lesion was observed in the tracheal lumen, indicating that the tumor had invaded the entire tracheal wall . CT did not reveal any enlarged or suspicious metastatic lymph nodes from the neck to the mediastinum or any distant metastases. Bronchoscopy revealed an exposed tumor approximately 3 cm in length on the left side of the tracheal lumen .
The patient was diagnosed with PTC with tracheal invasion (cT4a Ex2 N0 M0, cStage III). Subsequently, the patient underwent total thyroidectomy, tracheal sleeve resection with concurrent end-to-end tracheal anastomosis, and left cervical and superior mediastinal node dissection (D3c) with a reversed T-shaped upper sternotomy down to the third intercostal level. Although the tumor adhered to the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, it was preserved without gross residual tumor tissue around it. Tracheal sleeve resection of 3.5 cm length, followed by end-to-end anastomosis of the trachea, was performed, and the anastomosis site was covered with thymic tissue . The absence of tumor exposure in both tracheal stumps using intraoperative rapid histopathological diagnosis was confirmed. In the resected specimen, the thyroid tumor invaded beyond the tracheal mucosa . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 12 days postoperatively.
Histopathological examination of the excised specimen revealed PTC with tracheal invasion in the left thyroid lobe (pT4a and pEx2). While the majority of the tumor was composed of well-differentiated PTC, a portion of the tumor exhibited a solid pattern . In addition, intrathyroidal metastases measuring 7 and 4 mm in the left and right lobes, respectively, were detected. No lymph node metastasis (pN0) was observed. The histopathological stage was designated as pStage III. Immunohistochemical staining of the primary tumor demonstrated the expression of CA19-9 on cancer cells. The expression level of CA19-9 was higher in the solid pattern portion of the tumor than in the well-differentiated areas . Conversely, thyroglobulin levels were diminished in the solid pattern section of the tumor relative to the well-differentiated portion . The serum CA19-9 level decreased to the normal range (7.1 IU/mL) 1 month postoperatively . Three months after the surgery, the patient received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy (100 mCi). On 131-I scintigraphy following RAI therapy, the accumulation of 131-I was observed in the thyroid bed alone. However, 18 months had passed since the surgery, and the patient showed no signs of recurrence.