A 17-year-old boy presented to our clinic for management of poor vision after congenital cataract surgery in the left eye. He had been diagnosed with congenital cataract in the left eye at 3 months of age (his medical history revealed an anterior subcapsular cataract), and he had undergone cataract extraction and IOL implantation in the left eye under general anesthesia at 6 months of age (the surgical method was recorded as cataract extraction combined with IOL implantation). Follow-up was performed once a month after the surgery. At 3 months postoperatively, the left eye exhibited a pinhole pupil, but the treating ophthalmologist chose to observe it without treatment. The patient thereafter received regular monocular occlusion treatment, starting with 6 h of prescribed daily patching and decreasing to 2 h of prescribed daily patching by the age of 6 years. During this period, the child’s guardian monitored the vision of the affected eye at home every week to ensure that the vision was not less than 0.5logMAR(20/40).Because the corrected vision couldn’t be improved, the affected eye had never had refractive corrections such as glasses or contact lenses.Subsequently, he began school and did not engage in any amblyopia training. There was no history of ocular or systemic genetic disease in the patient’s parents or immediate family members.
Upon presentation to our clinic, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the patient’s right eye was 0.0 logMAR(20/20) with a refraction of − 5.75 diopters (D) cylinder/−2.25 D sphere, and the BCVA in his left eye was 0.5 logMAR(20/40) with a refraction of 0.0 D. Visual acuity in the left eye did not improve with correction; the intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination showed that the left cornea was transparent and the anterior chamber was deep. A pinhole pupil (approximately 0.5 mm) was evident in the left eye , and its light reflex sensitivity was high (Video 1). Contractions of the iris sphincter and dilator muscle were clearly observed under light irradiation, but there were no responses to pupil-dilating drugs. The IOL was not visible. The number of endothelial cells was 2889/mm2 in the right eye and 2876/mm2 in the left eye. IOLMaster measurements showed that the axial length of the right eye was 27.02 mm. IOLMaster could not measure the left eye; A-ultrasound showed that the ocular axis was 24.21 mm. B-ultrasound revealed no obvious posterior segment abnormalities in the left eye. There were no obvious abnormalities in the anterior segment or fundus of the right eye.
On June 30, 2023, left pupilloplasty was performed with the patient under corneal surface anesthesia. Considering the unpredictable status of the patient’s IOL, we prepared a 21 D IOL based on the A-ultrasound results in case of intraoperative IOL replacement. The surgical procedure proceeded in a manner that was considerably better than expected. After a clear corneal incision had been made and viscoelastic had been injected into the anterior chamber, the pinhole pupil was cut open with iris scissors; a portion of the iris tissue was removed in a toroidal fashion to create a pupil approximately 3 mm in size. The position of the IOL in the posterior part of the eye was confirmed to be correct, without dislocation or deviation. The anterior chamber was flushed with balanced saline solution to remove the viscoelastic agent, and the corneal incision was closed by a water-tight approach .
At the first follow-up on postoperative day 1, the uncorrected visual acuity in the patient’s left eye was 0.9 logMAR(20/100). The refraction results were − 2.23 D cylinder/−3.00 D sphere in the left eye, which achieved a BCVA of 0.0 logMAR(20/20). The intraocular pressure was 13 mmHg. The pupil was located in a central position with a diameter of approximately 3 mm , and it showed light reflex sensitivity (Video 2). The IOL position was appropriate, and fundoscopy of the left eye was performed. This examination revealed a reddish optic disc, good retinal vascular alignment, and a flat retina . Optical coherence tomography showed that the macular structure in the left eye was normal. Additionally, comparison of the visual field in the patient’s left eye before and after surgery demonstrated considerable improvement .