A 57-year-old Chinese woman was diagnosed with a stage ⅢB moderately-differentiated pancreatic adenocarcinoma and underwent distal pancreatectomy and en-bloc splenectomy in September 2014. Eight months later, a follow-up contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed enlargement of her multiple abdominal lymph nodes. Then the patient was treated with two cycles of chemotherapy with gemcitabine (1200 mg) plus paclitaxel liposome (180 mg) on days 1 and 8, every 3 weeks. However, the re-examination of CT demonstrated progression of disease (PD) according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST, V.1.1). Next, she started receiving docetaxel (110 mg) intravenously on days 1, plus tegafur (50 mg, two times per day) orally on days 1 to 14, every 3 weeks. CT scan showed a partial response (PR) following six cycles of the chemotherapy. In November 2015, docetaxel was discontinued and tegafur regimen was used for maintenance chemotherapy. After two cycles of tegafur monotherapy, a follow-up CT scan showed the PD again. CT imaging revealed the presence of retroperitoneal lymph node metastases with two nodes of 2.4×2.1 cm and 2.9×1.7 cm, respectively, as well as abdominal para-aortic lymph node metastasis with a node of 2.4×2.2 cm. Whereafter, this patient decided to pursue an off-label use of pembrolizumab (100 mg, every 3 weeks) on January 21, 2016. Fortunately, radiological results demonstrated a PR after four cycles of immunotherapy. Moreover, her serum level of CA19-9 rapidly dropped down to normal (below 37 U/mL) . Next, she continued to receive another four cycles of pembrolizumab with the same dosage and administration as before and durable benefit was observed . Notably, after her last cycle of pembrolizumab treatment in July 2016, the adverse effects started to appear, characterized by allergic dermatitis, fever, nausea and vomiting. In September 2016, she was diagnosed with SLE based on her clinical features and autoantibody in serum, positive antinuclear antibody of 1:320 titer (speckled patterns) and antibodies to Sjögren’s-syndrome-related antigen A (SS-A). Subsequently, she was administrated with hydroxychloroquine (200 mg, daily) to control SLE until March 2019. In the meantime, her recurrent tumor lesions of retroperitoneal nodes achieved near complete remission and the para-aortic nodes maintained a reduced size. This patient has neither history of autoimmune disease nor family history of cancer. Her whole disease course and clinical outcomes were summarized in . From initiation of the immunotherapy to date, the patient experienced durable survival benefit of more than 4 years, and she had a good performance status when this case report was revised.