We report the case of a 20-year-old healthy male who was transported by emergency medical services (EMS) to the emergency department (ED) from an outpatient surgery center with a chief complaint of shortness of breath and hemoptysis. The patient reported that upon awakening from anesthesia in the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), he was coughing up blood clots. He was in the PACU after undergoing general endotracheal anesthesia for an outpatient shoulder tendon repair procedure. Of note, the patient received inhaled sevoflurane for anesthesia and an inter-scalene nerve block for postoperative pain control. The patient reported no significant past medical history and no smoking or drug use history. Family history was significant for a postoperative deep venous thrombosis (DVT) after surgery in the patient’s mother and systemic lupus erythematous in his maternal aunt. The patient was of athletic build, participated in track and field, and had no prior history of receiving general anesthesia. Brief discussion with the attending anesthesiologist from the outpatient surgery center revealed no further details. He reported no difficulty with induction, intubation, or extubation.
On arrival to the ED, the patient was found to be tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute. The PACU staff had reported hypoxemia to the EMS personnel, and he was transported on four liters of oxygen via nasal cannula with an ED oxygen saturation of 96%. He was normotensive without tachycardia. The patient had hemoptysis in the ED with bilateral rales on auscultation of his lungs. A portable chest radiograph was obtained, which showed diffuse multifocal patchy alveolar opacities in the bilateral lungs concerning for DAH. Chest computed tomography angiogram further supported the diagnosis of DAH, without any findings of pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax, or other significant chest pathology. Initial laboratory work-up revealed a lactic acid level of 6.8 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), a hemoglobin level of 14.8 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (14.0–18.0 g/dL), a platelet count of 227,000 per microliter (μL) (150,000–450,000/μL), an international normalized ratio of 0.99 (0.85–1.17), a partial thromboplastin time of 23.2 seconds (22.9–35.8 seconds), and a creatinine level of 1.49 milligrams (mg) per dL (0.50–1.40 mg/dL).
During the patient’s ED stay, he was administered one liter of intravenous crystalloid solution for his lactic acidosis and acute kidney injury. His tachypnea and hemoptysis improved, and he was gradually weaned from supplemental oxygen. After pulmonology consult in the ED, the patient was admitted to inpatient medicine for overnight observation and further work-up of his hemoptysis. He underwent bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage the next day with results consistent with DAH. He also received lab work-up for autoimmune processes including antinuclear antibody, complement component 3, complement component 4, rheumatoid factor, anti-double stranded DNA antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, all of which were within normal limits. The patient remained clinically stable and experienced resolution of his lactic acidosis (1.3 mmol/L) and acute kidney injury (creatinine 1.10 mg/dL) and was discharged the day after admission with outpatient follow-up.