A 32-year-old female patient was admitted to our endocrinology outpatient department because of anterior neck pain and swelling for 26 days. She further complained about receiving the second dose of inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine (BBIBP-CorV) on 19 February 2021, 3 days before the symptoms above started. She did not report any history of recent upper respiratory tract infection or COVID-19. However, she had been prescribed methimazole for 10 days, on account of occasional palpitation due to thyrotoxicosis at the local hospital.
Upon physical examination, her heart rate was 110/min and body temperature was 36.7°C. On palpation, the thyroid was enlarged and two symmetrical and painful nodules were found about 30 mm in diameter in the bilateral thyroid lobes. Further ultrasound defined the characteristics of the nodules as hypoechoic areas with blurred margins, irregular shapes, and decreased vascularity, in line with the clinical location on physical examination .
Upon laboratory assessment, the thyroid function showed elevated free triiodothyronine (FT3) and free thyroxine (FT4) and reduced thyrotropin (TSH). Thyroid-related autoantibody detection showed positive thyroglobulin antibodies (TgAb) and thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies (TPOAb) and negative TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb). Inflammatory markers showed normal complete blood count (CBC), significantly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) .
In order to differentiate the etiology of thyrotoxicosis, a radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) was performed and found to be significantly low . The separation phenomenon of reduced RAIU and elevated thyroid hormones implied a destructive cause of thyrotoxicosis in this patient.
According to susceptible HLA genotypes reported in subacute thyroiditis , we performed an HLA genotyping and found that the genotypes are HLA-B*46:01/58:01, HLA-C*01:02/03:02, and HLA-DRB1*03:01/09:01 in the current case.
Based on all findings above, the diagnosis of subacute thyroiditis was confirmed and the medications were switched from methimazole 10 mg daily started in the local hospital to celecoxib 200 mg daily and propranolol 10 mg three times a day in our outpatient department, to control the inflammation and thyrotoxicosis-related symptoms. During the follow-up, neck pain was relieved 20 days later; hypoechoic areas were decreased gradually and disappeared 6 months later . The thyroid function turned out to hypothyroidism with gradually decreasing free T4 level to below the lower limit of normal range 20 days later after withdrawing methimazole, despite the normal free T3 and TSH level, and requiring an ongoing levothyroxine 50 ug daily even 6 months later, to maintain a normal thyroid function. Long-term follow-up would be conducted to determine transient or permanent hypothyroidism in the current case, and whether or not the patient would need levothyroxine treatment constantly.
The whole timeline of clinical progression is shown in . Clinical, laboratory, imaging findings on admission and during follow-up are shown in .