This is a retrospective case study of a slim 37-year-old man exhibiting associated lifestyle risk factors (chronic marijuana and tobacco abuse, but neither alcohol excess, nor other illicit drugs) who suffered an acute thalamomesencephalic stroke, rapidly worsening to a comatose state.
Familial and personal medical history was negative for associated cardiocerebrovascular pathology or other specific risk factors.
In the evening that preceded the cerebral infarction, he submitted a large and elaborate tattoo over the left hypochondrium and abdominal (lumbar) flank and smoked a few cigarettes with cannabis.
The following morning, he experienced acute onset of dizziness, visual, speech, and gait disturbances.
He was admitted to the emergency room with walking difficulties, disturbed balance and coordination of movements, slurred speech, diplopia, confusion, and left palpebral ptosis. Neurological examination revealed right-sided severe ataxic hemiparesis, dysarthria, left palpebral ptosis and mydriasis, divergent strabismus, and fluctuating consciousness (Glasgow coma scale, GCS 10/15).
Blood tests (white blood cells count, hemoglobin, electrolytes, liver, and renal function) revealed normal results. Urine toxicology at admission was positive only for tetrahydrocannabinol; no other illicit drugs were present on tox screen. Electrocardiogram (EKG) and chest X-ray findings were normal. Clotting tests were normal [antithrombin III was 108% (>80%), homocysteine was 7.5 μmol (≤ 12), lupus anticoagulant was negative, antinuclear antibodies were 0.3 UM (<0.7), C protein was 117% (70-130)].
Emergent computed tomography (CT) scan on the day of admission showed no gross abnormality and no evidence of cerebral hemorrhage or encephalitis.
In a few hours he become comatose (GCS 7/15) and was transferred to the intensive therapy unit. Intubation and ventilation support were not necessary. EKG monitoring during admission in the intensive care unit did not revealed pathological aspects.
At about 20 hours after the onset of stroke, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and angiography (MRA) were also performed . These revealed acute paramedian thalamic ischemic lesions extending to the rostral midbrain (asymmetrically, mainly on the left side). The imaging showed no evidence of cerebral venous occlusion, infiltrative neoplasm, severe infectious and inflammatory lesion, or a large embolus at the basilar tip, with stroke in the posterior circulation. MRA showed patency of the basilar and vertebral arteries, a normal appearance of the left P1 arterial segment and left PCA, and a right-sided full FPCA. Our 1.5-Tesla MRI device failed to visualize the TPAs; the left AOP was just presumed.
He recovered from a coma after 4 days and exhibited a slow, progressive evolution. Initially, he presented with severe alternating (superior) oculomotor hemiplegia (Weber syndrome), with left-sided oculomotor nerve palsy, a drooping eyelid and fixed-width pupil pointed down and out, diplopia, and dysarthria associated with contralateral severe ataxic hemiparesis.
Based on clinical and neuroimaging findings, the positive diagnosis was acute ischemic stroke in the territory of the left AOP. The clinical spectrum of the AOP infarct was outlined in the frame of a “thalamopeduncular" syndrome, associated with the typical symptoms of bilateral paramedian thalamic infarcts (confusion and coma), accompanied by with oculomotor disturbances, contralateral hemiplegia, and cerebellar ataxia.
After the acute episode, he was admitted on the neurorehabilitation department. He clinically manifested a paramedian midbrain syndrome, combining the previously described left-sided oculomotor impairment with moderate right-sided ataxic hemiparesis without hemianesthesia, tremor, dysmetria, dysarthria, and depression. Repeated EKG and blood tests and a transthoracic echocardiogram, respectively, did not reveal pathological aspects.
The diagnosis was established retrospectively, after a delay of 20 hours, too late for thrombolytic management. He initially received anticoagulant therapy (heparin for 3 weeks in the acute stroke department), followed by a novel oral anticoagulant for another 5 weeks during rehabilitation. He was discharged with small doses of aspirin, up to six months, as secondary prophylaxis. Statins were not administered, either in the acute or during the subacute stage.
He had a good evolutive trend and was discharged with a modified Rankin score (mRS) 3. Psychological evaluation emphasized a marked improvement of his masked depression and augmentation of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score (from 23 to 29/30).
He completely changed his lifestyle, with abstinence from both tobacco and cannabis, and continued the rehabilitation program as an outpatient. He exhibited favorable outcomes, with no vascular recurrence.
Four months after the acute stroke he achieved a mRS 2 and was slightly disabled and still unable to carry out all previous activities, especially professional ones (driver). Most symptoms abated, except for slight visual blurring, diplopia, and residual left third cranial nerve palsy.
Favorable neurological results were consistent with repeated neuroimaging tests for control. Contrast-enhanced MR angiography remained unchanged. MRI showed no acute recurrences, but only small residual lacunae.