A 52-year-old male, non-smoker, with a history of arterial hypertension, was diagnosed with IPF as he suffered from the progression of dyspnoea to NYHA class III in June 2019. Despite of antifibrotic therapy (nintedanib 150 mg twice a day until July 2020, pirfenidone 801 mg three times a day since then), pulmonary function decreased, home oxygen therapy was recommended, and the patient was listed for lung transplantation in March 2021. The initial spirometry results at our centre indicated severe restrictive lung disease without obstruction—forced vital capacity (FVC) was 2.19 L (45% of predicted value), forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was 1.73 L (45% of predicted value), and the FEV1/FVC ratio was normal (79%, normal value > 75%). Measurement of transfer factor for carbon monoxide (TLCO) showed very severe reduction (1.85 mmol/min × kPa, 17% of predicted value), CO transfer coefficient (KCO) calculated as ratio of TLCO and accessible alveolar volume (VA) was also severely reduced (1.78 mmol/min × kPa × L, 16% of predicted values). These findings were highly suggestive of interstitial lung disease or pulmonary fibrosis .
At baseline cardiology assessment, the patient showed no clinical signs of fluid overload (absence of lower extremity oedema and jugular vein distention). Velcro crackles, often associated with IPF, were audible during inspiration. There was a systolic murmur audible at the left sternal border in third and fourth intercostal space. The murmur did not radiate to the left axilla or carotid arteries. Right heart catheterization and selective coronary angiography were performed as a part of pre-transplant examination. Coronary angiography was normal. On the contrary, RHC confirmed severe pulmonary hypertension (PH) and increased pulmonary vascular resistance of 5.6 Wood units (normal value < 2 WU). Mean pulmonary artery pressure was 75 mmHg (normal value < 20 mmHg), pulmonary wedge pressure was between 28 and 40 mmHg (normal value < 10 mmHg), and transpulmonary gradient was 35–47 mmHg (normal value < 10 mmHg). However, PH was classified as combined pre- and post-capillary that is not typical for IPF. Therefore, the results suggested another (probably left heart) condition as a cause of the post-capillary component. Screening TTE revealed left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy with maximum LV wall thickness in the interventricular septum of 25 mm (normal range 6–11 mm). There was grade III (severe) systolic anterior motion (SAM) of an elongated anterior mitral valve leaflet (33 mm, normal range 22–23 mm), with only mild mitral regurgitation. The maximum pressure gradient (PG) in the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) was 113 mmHg at rest and 215 mmHg (, ) during the Valsalva manoeuvre (normal value < 30 mmHg). Left ventricular ejection fraction was 70% (normal range 55–70%). Signs of severe PH were present—right ventricle was dilated and hypokinetic (34 mm in parasternal long axis view, normal value < 31 mm), tricuspid regurgitation pressure gradient was 63 mmHg (normal value < 30 mmHg), and inferior vena cava was dilated and did not collapse >50% during inspiration (normal diameter < 21 mm). A diagnosis of obstructive HCM was made. At the time of diagnosis, the patient had been started on a low dose of beta-blockers (1.25 mg of bisoprolol), after the diagnosis, the dose was increased to maximum tolerated dose (2.5 mg of bisoprolol). Although there was no family history of HCM, molecular genetic testing revealed a pathogenic mutation in MYBPC3 gene. Later, the patient’s daughter was screened for HCM. Her TTE showed no signs of HCM, and the genetic testing was negative.
Based on severe symptoms and planned major thoracic surgery, septal reduction therapy (SRT)–alcohol septal ablation (ASA) was recommended and performed in April 2021 by selective injection of 1.5 and 1.0 mL of 96% ethanol into the first and second septal branch of left anterior descending artery, followed by immediate decrease of LVOT gradient to 10 mmHg within the invasive measurements. A follow-up TTE examination in one month confirmed a low residual LVOT PG of 20 mmHg, the patient described improvement of exertional dyspnoea, but remained dependent on home oxygen therapy due to his severe pulmonary condition.
In September 2021, the bilateral lung transplantation was performed with the support of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. The patient was extubated on the second post-operative day. The post-operative course was complicated by bacterial pneumonia (Klebsiella pneumoniae). After antibiotic treatment (piperacillin 4 g and tazobactam 0.5 g three times a day for 21 days) and pulmonary rehabilitation, the pulmonary graft functions improved and the patient was discharged from the hospital on standard immunosuppressive therapy (prednisone 30 mg daily, tacrolimus 4 mg twice a day, mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg twice a day).
A follow-up TTE (, ) in July 2022 showed LVOT gradient of 6 mmHg, no SAM, and normal estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure (30 mmHg, normal value < 35 mmHg). The patient reported near complete regression of dyspnoea, to NYHA class II functional status. For further risk stratification, 24 h ECG monitoring was performed. No non-sustained ventricular tachycardia was detected. Due to capacity reasons, cardiac MRI was performed after the invasive procedure . However, no late gadolinium enhancement was found (except for the scar tissue after alcohol septal ablation). The patient’s sudden cardiac death risk was 1.99%. Therefore, ICD (implantable cardioverter-defibrillator) implantation was not recommended.