A 65-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with chest tightness and palpitations which persisted for 2 years. The patient had a free past medical history, and denied any other relevant personal or family history. In physical examination, there were no remarkable signs, and her vital signs were normal. And, there was no hematological and biochemical disorders. The levels of tumor biomarkers were normal.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a 23 mm × 8 mm mass which was polyp-like-shaped, homogeneous, firm, mobile and solitary . Further transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed that the mass had regular margins and was pedunculated, with a stalk originating from the LV wall, and the mass protruded into the left atrium during systole, resulting in mild mitral regurgitation . To further clarify the nature of the mass, LV contrast-enhanced echocardiography was performed. And there was very little contrast agent filling in the LV mass . Her chest non-contrast computed tomography (CT) showed a calcified mass lesion in the left ventricle . The contrast-enhanced coronary CT angiograms demonstrated a 19 mm × 8 mm mass centered on the lateral wall of the left ventricle. The mass was relatively homogeneous low density with punctate calcifications and no significant enhancement . The preoperative diagnosis was the cardiac fibroma.
Excision of the tumor under cardiopulmonary bypass was performed adopting a port-access approach through the right mini-thoracotomy. After incision of the left atrium, no thrombosis was detected. Then the mitral valve was pulled open, and a mass of gray-white, firm, polyp-like, was seen. The tumor was connected to the posterior wall of the LV and did not invade the heart muscle, and was completely excised with an adequate margin of endocardium . After re-exploration for no other mass, the surgeon sutured layer by layer and ended the operation. Postoperative histopathological examination showed that the tumor cells were irregular, surrounded with voids, and scattered with interstitial sparseness, which confirmed the cardiac myxoma .
After tumor removal, the patient was free of chest tightness and palpitations and recovered well. At 9-day after the surgery, TEE showed that the cardiac mass and mitral regurgitation resolved completely. In the 3-year follow-up period, this patient experienced no tumor recurrence.