A 6-month-old Chinese male child was admitted to our department with recurring episodes of hypoglycemia for 6 months. His parents were healthy and not consanguineous, and his family history was not notable. The child was first admitted to the hospital because of repeated cyanosis and poor reaction at the age of 2 days. He was diagnosed with hypoglycemia based on his blood glucose level (which was 0.3 mmol/L) and recovered after receiving glucose and glucocorticoid infusion.
At the age of 22 days, the infant appeared pale and had a poor reaction and reduced muscle strength after fasting for 4 h for Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination. His blood glucose was 2.06 mmol/L and he was recovered from glucose infusion again. Subsequently, the child showed increased muscle tension and movement retardation.
At the age of 4 months, the child experienced repeated vomiting and diarrhea for one day, and hypoglycemia reappeared (blood glucose, 4 mmol/L). In addition, the child had an episode of convulsions that lasted for 2–3 min. After intravenous infusion of glucose, blood glucose returned to normal.
At the age of 6 months, the child was admitted to the hospital for a systematic examination. Physical examination at admission showed that his body weight was 6600 g (3th centile); body length, 76.0 cm (97th centile); head circumference, 41.0 cm (3th centile); chest circumference, 43.0 cm (50th centile). He was conscious and had a good mental reaction, nutrition levels, and skin elasticity. He had strabismus in both eyes, but it was prominent in the left eye. He was unable to use the support of his elbows to get up from a reclining position, and when he stood upright, his head was tilted to one side. He could not turn over or bear his weight. He leaned forward fully in the sitting position and flexed his legs in the standing position. He was not actively conscious of grasping objects. He could keep holding objects, but he could not change objects with his hands. He could pronounce vowels, but he was insensitive to locate the sources of sound or light. He had normal muscular strength in both upper limbs, but greater muscular strength in both lower limbs, mainly in the adductor muscles. The testes were not completely lowered into the scrotum, and the result of the transillumination test was negative.
The results of laboratory tests, including blood routine (platelet count, 435 × 10 9/L; hemoglobin, 107 g/L), thyroid function, biochemical tests, stool and urine routine, and blood lactic acid, were normal. In order to rule out other possible causes of hypoglycemia, we had conducted a fasting test. The test, sustained for 4 h, was considered completed when the blood glucose level of patient indicated the hypoglycemia. The results showed that both insulin and cortisol were within the normal range, which could exclude cortisol deficiency and hyperinsulinemia. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain indicated that the brain parenchyma was scattered with low-density shadows, and the bilateral ventricles appeared plump.
MRI of the brain indicated extensive abnormal signals in both cerebral hemispheres. This was considered to be indicative of atrophic cystic changes caused by encephalomalacia. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed that multiple spikes/sharp-slow waves were synchronously or asynchronously discharged in the left and right occipital regions during both waking and sleep. A 2–3 Hz increase in δ activity was found in the occipital region, and the dominant rhythm of the occipital region was not significant in the waking state. Echocardiography was indicative of patent ductus arteriosus. The Gesell Developmental Schedules showed that the gross motor skills of the patient at 4 weeks and 3 months were equivalent to those of neonates at 0 months, and the fine motor skills were equivalent to those of neonates at 0–1 month. The Gesell Intelligence Scale showed that the ability to respond to people and the environment was equivalent to that of infants at 6 weeks (Developmental Quotient [DQ] = 35 points), while the ability to respond to physical objects was equivalent to that of infants at 3 weeks (DQ = 18 points). In addition, the patient’s gross motor skills were equivalent to that of infants at 0 weeks (DQ = 0 points); his fine motor skills were equivalent to that of infants at 2 weeks (DQ = 12 points), and the ability to communicate was equivalent to that of infants at 6 weeks (DQ = 35 points).
The study was carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki of the World.
Medical Association and was approved by the Committee of Medical Ethics of The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University. Informed consent was obtained from parents. A high-throughput sequencing and genetic analysis, and Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses had been used.
After obtaining the parents’ consent and signatures on the informed consent form, blood samples were taken for a whole exon sequencing analysis. The results revealed the heterozygous intron mutation c.1070 + 3A > G (splicing) in the coding region of the COG1 gene that was inherited from the mother, and the heterozygous mutation c.2492 g > A (p. Arg831Gln) in exon 10 of the COG1 gene that was inherited from the father.
The coding region of c.1070 + 3A > G in the COG1 gene could not be predicted by the Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT), Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (PolyPhen_2), Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL), and Mutation Taster software [, ]. For the coding region of the COG1 gene, c.2492G > A (p.Arg831Gln), the results from the protein function prediction software SIFT, PolyPhen_2, REVEL revealed that it was destructive, unknown, or benign, and has not been reported in Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD). The prediction software Mutation Taster indicated that it was a pathogenic mutation . The results of other prediction software are shown in Table [–]. The secondary and tertiary structures of COG1-encoded proteins were predicted by the Phyre2 software . Based on the identified heterozygous mutation in exon 10 of the COG1 gene and the patient’s clinical manifestations, we speculated that CDG-IIg in the patient may be caused by the compound heterozygous mutation.
To explore the relationship between COG1 and related genes signal pathways, we used the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes database (STRING, 11.0 version) . We constructed the protein and protein interaction (PPI) network of COG1 by using the search tool of the STRING database. An interaction score of 0.9 and a maximum interaction number of 50 were considered as the cut-off criteria (An additional figure file shows this in more detail (see Additional file )). The number of genes interact with will be more if the degree of a gene is larger. In the current study, we rank the genes from high to low. High-degree genes in the top fourteen and INS gene were identified as the core genes. We used core genes to perform enrichment analysis and constructed PPI network again. The PPI network is shown in Fig. a.
GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed using the Cluster profiler package . The biological processes (BP), molecular functions (MF), and cellular components (CC) associated with these genes were identified, and p values <0.05 were considered to indicate statistical significance. In addition, we used the STRING database to perform Reactome pathway enrichment analysis . A false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. The results of the GO analysis are shown in Fig. c. With regard to BP, the COG1-related proteins were involved in Golgi vesicle transport, intracellular transport, protein transport, ER-to-Golgi-vesicle-mediated transport, and intra-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport. With regard to CC, the interacting proteins were predominantly enriched in the Golgi membrane, Golgi subcompartment, Golgi apparatus part, trans−Golgi network membrane and Golgi transport complex. With regard to MF, the interacting proteins were involved in soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion attachment proteins (SNAP) receptor activity, soluble NSF protein attachment protein receptor (SNARE) binding and syntaxin binding. The results of KEGG analysis showed that COG1 was mainly enriched in SNARE interactions in vesicular transport . To further identify the signal pathways related to COG1, we used the Reactome pathway database for screening, with FDR < 0.05 as the search condition. The top six identified items are shown in Fig. b. The identified proteins were involved in intra-Golgi traffic, COPI-mediated anterograde transport, Membrane Trafficking, Retrograde transport at the Trans-Golgi-Network, COPII-mediated vesicle transport, and Cargo concentration in the ER.