A 61-year-old man presented at our hospital with intermittent fever and malaise for 4 mo.
Four months before the visit, he had developed a fever (up to 40 C), mostly in the afternoon and at night, accompanied by chills and malaise. Although his body temperature normalized after 3 d of anti-infection treatment via self-treatment, the fever reappeared after stopping the treatment. The disease progressively worsened, and his blood pressure decreased and was accompanied by an increased heart rate. The patient was diagnosed with infectious shock and was subsequently transferred to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient was previously in good health.
He was previously healthy and had no family history of disease.
Physical examination revealed slightly pale skin and mucous membranes, with no enlargement of the jugular vein, but there was enlargement of the cardiac border to the left. There was also evidence of a grade III-IV diastolic murmur in the aortic valve area and peripheral vascular signs (+).
Laboratory test results revealed normal leukocytes and neutrophils, the patient had C-reactive protein and calcitonin levels of 53.1 mg/L and 2.66 ng/mL, respectively, as well as liver and renal function tests that were within normal limits. The Tuberculin purified protein derivative test results were negative. Paired blood cultures (asymmetric limbs, e.g., left upper limb and right lower limb) on 3 consecutive days showed gram-positive cocci. Macrogen next generation sequencing technology showed Streptococcus gordonii.
Cardiac ultrasonography showed an ejection fraction of 52% and aortic valve leaflet thickening and echogenic enhancement, a moderate regurgitant signal under the aortic valve in diastole, a small amount of regurgitant signal on the left atrial side of the mitral valve in systole, a small amount of regurgitant signal on the right atrial side of the tricuspid valve in systole, an ascending aortic internal diameter of 46 mm, an aortic valve Vmax of 2.2 m/s, an enlarged left atrium, aortic valve calcification with moderate regurgitation, and mild regurgitation of the second and tricuspid valves . The cardiac magnetic resonance imaging results were consistent with dilated cardiomyopathy changes, left heart insufficiency, a significantly reduced systolic function, aortic valve thickening and stenosis, incomplete closure of the mitral valve and tricuspid valve, a small amount of pericardial effusion, pericardial inflammatory changes, and a small amount of bilateral pleural effusion.
Flow cytometry showed an increase in the proportion of granulocytes and nucleated red cells and a mild decrease in the proportion of lymphocytes. The phenotype was not abnormal. Abnormal immunoglobulins and identification of multiple myeloma: Immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE) results showed that there was no “M protein” detected within the serum polyclonal immunoglobulins; there were no kap and lam light chain "M protein" detected in the urine. Serum protein and IFE revealed no significant "M protein", a reduction in albumin levels, and elevated levels of α1 and γ globulins. The serum immunoglobulin (Ig)G, IgA, IgM and kap, as well as lam light chain levels, were normal, but the IgE levels were high. We also found a moderate increase in the level of urine kap light chain and 24-h urine protein levels. Protein electrophoresis revealed no specific band in the urine. No light chain type "M protein" was detected in the urine via IFE, This result excluded abnormal immunoglobulinemia and multiple myeloma .