We present the case of a 63-year-old female, with a past medical history of hypertension, diabetes, diverticulitis, and chronic low back pain. She did not have any significant cardiac history. She has had a hysterectomy, and multiple orthopaedic surgeries in the past. She takes lisinopril, trazodone, amlodipine, metformin, sertraline, cyclobenzaprine, and morphine at home. She is an active half a pack a day cigarette smoker, but no alcohol or illicit drug use.
She was found unresponsive at home and did not have a pulse and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was started. Emergency medical services arrived at the scene and she was found to have ventricular fibrillation (VF) on the monitor. She was defibrillated three times and received multiple rounds of epinephrine and sodium bicarbonate. Her total time from cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) to return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was 37 min. After ROSC was achieved, electrocardiogram (ECG) showed non-specific ST-segment changes and T-wave inversions and soon progressed into high grade and third-degree AV block ( and ). Initial troponin I was negative. A bedside echocardiogram was performed by a cardiologist, showing an ejection fraction of 25% with akinesis of the apex and anteroseptum.
On presentation, the patient had a troponin I level of <0.015 ng/mL, lactic acidaemia of 10 mmol/L, potassium of 2.5 mmol/L, elevated creatinine of 1.4 mg/dL. Computed tomography angiogram of the chest was done to rule out pulmonary embolism or aortic dissection as the cause of the CPA, which was negative for any acute process; however, it did show calcification of left anterior descending and left circumflex arteries. She was taken for a right and left heart catheterization the same day which did not show any significant coronary occlusion (, Videos 1 and 2). Left ventriculogram showed ballooning of the left ventricle .
A formal transthoracic echocardiogram performed hours after presentation showed an ejection fraction of 15–20% and severe hypokinesis of anterior, apical, anteroseptal, and lateral wall of the heart, resembling TCM . An echocardiogram repeated 4 days after the cardiopulmonary arrests showed an ejection fraction of 60–65% with hypokinesis of mid anterior and antero-apical hypokinesis and absence of any other wall motion abnormalities compared to the previous echocardiogram.
The patient had a pulmonary artery catheter and transvenous pacemaker placed for closer monitoring of cardiac haemodynamic state and to pace her heart, respectively. The pulmonary artery catheterization revealed right atrial pressure of 11 mmHg, right ventricular systolic pressure of 39 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure of 46/22 with a mean of 31 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge mean pressure of 20 mmHg, cardiac output of 5.27 L/min, and cardiac index of 2.9 L/min/m2. The patient was pacemaker dependent during her hospitalization, despite of improvement in her TCM per repeat echocardiogram. Hence, she eventually received a dual-chamber pacemaker/implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for her AV block and as primary prevention for her ventricular arrhythmia. The patient was intubated during CPA. She had a thorough neurological examination off sedation, and she was following commands and moving all extremities. She was eventually extubated and had a good neurological recovery. Subsequently, she was discharged home without any significant neurological deficits. In addition to her previous home medications, she was started on carvedilol, aspirin, and atorvastatin upon discharge. The patient followed up in an outpatient setting and continued to have a stable ejection fraction of 60–65%; in addition, she was pacemaker dependent without any ventricular arrhythmia events.