A 67-year-old man was experiencing gallbladder carcinoma with common bile duct (CBD) invasion related jaundice and cholangitis s/p cholecystectomy, hilar lymph node dissection and Roux-en Y hepaticojejunostomy three years ago. However, six months after diagnosis, the carcinoma reoccurred, so he received a partial hepatectomy along with chemotherapy (Cisplatin and 5-FU over six cycles). After chemotherapy, the serum creatinine was 4.7 mg/dl (13 mL/min/1.73 m2 of GFR). Due to obstructive jaundice, a CBD drainage tube was inserted. He also experienced frequent cholangitis and his bile cultures yielded Klebsiella pneumoniae, Citrobacter freundiim, Enterococcus sp., Group D streptococcus not enterococcus, and Escherichia coli. Due to these conditions, he received Cefoperazone for an extensive period of time (6 months). Afterward, he suffered from chronic diarrhea for two years, five times per day. The renal function was stable even the above conditions. This time (three years after RYGB), he was admitted to hospital due to kidney injury (4.7 to 14.7 mg/dl of serum creatinine), which is less likely pre-renal azotemia. A renal biopsy disclosed mild interstitial inflammation, moderate interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy with intratubular crystal deposition . Under polarized light, the deposits appeared strongly birefringent, which formed fan-like, sheaf-like, or irregular shapes consistent with calcium oxalate crystals . Under a low power field with polarized light, almost all tubular lumens were filled with crystals . The patient’s 24-h urinary oxalate level was found to be significantly elevated, at 60 mg/day (normal range is up to 40 mg/day). Serum calcium, thyroid function, and uric acid were all within normal limits. Calcium oxalate crystal related acute kidney injury was confirmed, and the patient was placed on a low oxalate diet. However, soon after the diagnosis, he went into end-stage renal disease and was placed on hemodialysis. Before this admission, he had been on a low potassium diet because of long-term renal dysfunction. The patient himself had approved the course of treatment, and had given signed consent.