A 40-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with recurrent fever and loose stools for more than 3 mo and aggravation for 3 d.
The patient had developed fever with loose stools 3 mo ago. She went to a local hospital, and diagnosed with acute gastroenteritis and was discharged after anti-infection, fluid replacement and other symptomatic supportive treatments. Subsequently, the patient repeatedly developed fever and loose stools, which resembled a dilute water sample. The stools were yellow with no blood, and the patient was monitored for signs of emergency. She visited the local hospital many times for treatment, and showed no obvious improvement in her symptoms.
The patient reported no remarkable history of past illness.
Physical examination showed pale mucosa and tenderness of upper abdomen.
The auxiliary examination after admission showed that the white blood cells were 9.9 × 109/L, neutral ratio was 75.7%, hemoglobin was 87 g/L, C-reactive protein was 106 mg/L, and procalcitonin was 3.92 ng/mL. Calprotectin and ANCA IgG were positive. Tests were negative for autoantibody, immunization, blood culture, stool culture, Widal reaction, CMV DNA, and inflammatory bowel disease-associated antibodies.
B-ultrasound revealed that multiple lymph nodes in the neck were accessible, including lymph nodes near the root of the neck; and multiple mesenteric nodes were accessible. Colonoscopy revealed multiple colonic ulcers on May 26, 2015 . The colonoscopic biopsy pathology showed chronic mucosal inflammation, interstitial lymphocytes, plasma cells, and infiltration of eosinophils and neutrophils. The patient was administered metronidazole for anti-infection and salford enema fluid combined with Pattersian. The colonoscopic biopsy pathology showed interstitial lymphocyte hyperplasia with erosion and granulation tissue formation, and immunohisto-chemistry showed chronic inflammation of the sigmoid mucosa on May 29, 2015. The lymphocyte results mainly indicated T lymphocyte hyperplasia. The patient underwent positron emission tomographic-computed tomographic (PET-CT) on June 10, 2015, which showed that 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism in the colon and rectum was increased, the intestinal wall of some segments of the colon was slightly thickened, prompting inflammatory bowel disease, and there were multiple low-metabolized lymph nodes in the mesenteric root of the abdominal cavity.
The patient had a high fever; the highest body temperature was 40.3 ºC, the white blood cells were 17.5 × 109/L, and the neutrophil ratio was 91.8%, and meropenem anti-infective treatment was administered. The patient subsequently experienced recurrent high fevers. A pathologist of Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital Affiliated with Zhejiang University was consulted. The expression of CD3, Epstein-Barr virus encoded RNA (EBER), and T-cell intracellular antigen (TIA) was positive; CD20, CD5, CD4, and CD8 were negative; CD56 was suspected to be positive; and Ki-67 was approximately 40%. Pathological diagnosis showed intestinal mucosal focal heterotypic lymphocyte infiltration with an abnormal immune phenotype, and T cell lymphoma could not be ruled out on June 28, 2015. Enteroscopy showed hyperemia and edema of the sigmoid colon mucosa, multiple longitudinal ulcers and proliferative changes of the surrounding mucosa on June 12, 2015 . Bone marrow aspiration showed lymphocytes (accounting for 3.5%, mainly mature) on June 17, 2015. Immunohistochemical analysis on the bone marrow was performed and revealed that CD3, CD2, CD5, CD20, CD79α, myeloperoxidase, and CD61 and CD34 megakaryocytes, were positive, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase was negative on June 18, 2015. Blood tumor immunotyping showed that the proportion of granulocytes increased, which showed abnormal differentiation on the CD15-CD11b and CD16-CD13 dot plot on June 18, 2015. The Ig gene rearrangement test did not detect a monoclonal rearrangement of the gene on June 23, 2015. The hematologist consultation did not consider lymphoma.