A Hispanic female in her early 30s initially presented in 2017 with months of abdominal discomfort and distention. CT imaging showed a left ovarian lesion and marked ascites. Patient underwent a paracentesis and diagnostic laparoscopy which revealed peritoneal nodular implants with pathology confirming peritoneal mesothelioma with positivity for CK5/6, CK7, keratin AE3/AE1, and podoplanin (D2-40). Patient was referred to the USA in 2018 for treatment where she underwent a cytoreductive surgery with HIPEC with mitomycin C for well-differentiated epithelioid mesothelioma. Patient’s peritoneal cancer index (PCI) was 24, and completeness of cytoreduction score was 0. Tumor was positive for calretinin, CK5/6, and CAM5.2 and negative for MOC-31 and CEA. She was without symptoms or radiographic evidence of recurrence for 2 years, until she presented to her home hospital with fevers, hypotension, abdominal pain, and distention. On examination, she had a palpable abdominal mass with MRI showing a hypointense lesion with air fluid levels measuring 10.5 × 10.7 cm and multiple mesenteric nodules. She was taken for exploratory laparotomy, partial mesenteric mass excision, and evacuation of intra-abdominal abscess. Complete excision was not performed during initial operation due to involvement of surrounding bowel and mesenteric vessels. Immunohistochemistry was positive for podoplanin, calretinin, and CK5/6 and negative for desmin and anti-CD117. Patient was referred to our facility for further treatment, with restaging laparoscopy performed in December 2020. Due to prior incomplete resection and to potentially facilitate re-resection, five cycles of neoadjuvant cisplatin and pemetrexed were then administered. In June 2021, the patient underwent restaging CT which revealed essentially stability of the mesenteric mass (9.3 × 5.7 × 7.3 cm) with central air and fluid and multiple enhancing mesenteric nodules . Patient was taken to the operating room in July 2021 for mesenteric mass excision with en bloc ileocecectomy and extended terminal ileectomy .
Although additional smaller visceral peritoneal nodules (< 2.5 mm) were encountered when evaluating the bowel, repeat HIPEC was not performed due to substantial sclerosis associated with the deeper mesenteric nodules. Patient’s PCI was 2, and completeness of cytoreduction score was 0. Pathology revealed spindle cell proliferation in a collagenous stroma with nuclear staining positive for beta-catenin, positive calretinin and CK7, and negative DOG-1 staining. This pathology revealed a new diagnosis: desmoid-type fibromatosis.