A 66-year old male of Spanish origin, known for Crohn disease and type I bipolar affective disorder for at least 15 years, was brought to the emergency department for sudden mutism that developed within 2 h. In the emergency room, the patient was described catatonic, presenting with no speech at all, staring, stupor, immobility and rigidity of the four extremities and a trismus. He was not vomiting. Standardized scale for catatonia was not used on admission. Retroactively, according to the psychiatrist in charge of the initial evaluation of the patient, the score on Bush-Francis catatonia scale would have been 8.
The patient was diaphoretic, with obvious dysautonomic signs: blood pressure was 175/126 mmHg, heart rate was 105 bpm and respiratory frequency was 22/min. His temperature was 36.7 °C. Laboratory results showed a mild hyponatremia (Na+ 132 mmol/l, N: 136–144), the glomerular filtration rate was 95 ml/min and liver tests were as follow: ASAT 33 U/l (N: 14–50), ALAT 30 U/l (N: 12–50), alkaline phosphatase 61 U/l (N: 25–102), γGT 62 U/l (N: 9–40). Creatine kinase (CK) blood concentration was 56 U/l (N: 47–222) and arterial gasometry was in the normal ranges. Hematology was unremarkable, namely leucocytes were 4.9 G/L, with 79% neutrophils. A brain CT excluded an ischemic stroke and a cerebral hemorrhage. A 24 h-EEG was unremarkable. Clozapine blood level at admission was not determined. While reviewing the patient history, it appeared that he was hospitalized in a psychiatric ward until 2 months ago for a manic episode, which has required many drug treatment trials because of adverse effects or treatment failure. These were namely, a three-fold CK elevation related to olanzapine, mild leucopenia and agranulocytosis related to aripiprazole, extrapyramidal manifestations on haloperidol and high dose quetiapine lack of efficacy. Facing this resistant episode a try with clozapine was then made. The patient was eventually discharged, stabilized on clozapine 50 mg daily, with 12.5 mg on demand, valproic acid 500 mg twice daily and his usual treatment for Crohn disease (mesalazine 1000 mg, azathioprine 50 mg twice daily).
For an unknown reason, clozapine was then abruptly stopped and replaced by risperidone 5 mg daily associated with quetiapine 200 mg daily three days before the emergency admission. Besides valproid acid was decreased to 300 mg daily.
Therefore, the hypothesis of a cholinergic rebound syndrome was evoked, with a potential contribution of risperidone overdose in the catatonic manifestation. Risperidone and quetiapine were stopped and biperidene 2.5 mg intravenously was administrated leading to a dramatic recovering of the patient’s ability to speak within minutes after application. Other manifestations (nausea, sweating, tachycardia, hypertension) took few days to recover on clozapine 50 mg and daily oral administration of 2.5 mg of biperiden. The patient was eventually discharged twenty days after admission with only mild bradykinesia and gait instability. His mental state was stable during the whole hospital stay.