An 11-year-old castrated male Maine Coon cat was presented with a 3-week history of depressed mental status and anisocoria, with the right pupil larger than the left pupil. The cat also had suspected lumbar and abdominal discomfort, and had been placed on meloxicam (0.1 mg/kg q24h PO) and gabapentin (4 mg/kg q12h PO) ongoing 1 week prior to presentation.
General physical examination was unremarkable, including palpation of both kidneys. On neurological examination the cat was depressed but responsive and interacted normally with its environment. Menace response and dazzle reflex were present and normal bilaterally. Marked anisocoria was present, with mydriasis in the right eye. Direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes were severely reduced in the right eye but normal in the left eye. The right eye also demonstrated ptosis, protrusion of the third eyelid and an absence of both spontaneous physiological nystagmus and vestibulo-ocular reflex. Based on the neurological examination findings, a disease process affecting the right oculomotor nerve (both parasympathetic and motor components) and right sympathetic innervation of the eye was suspected, likely at its pathway through the middle cranial fossa or at the level of the mesencephalon.
Haematology results were unremarkable. Complete serum biochemistry revealed mild hypernatraemia (160 mmol/l; reference interval [RI] 135–155), an increase in urea (11.6 mmol/l; RI 5.4–6.7) and creatinine (267 μmol/L; RI 56–153), and a mild increase in total protein (81 g/l; RI 56–78) and globulin (48 g/l; RI 24–47). Urinalysis revealed a specific gravity of 1.018 but no other abnormalities. Serology for Toxoplasma gondii showed an increase in IgG concentration (positive at 1:400) and normal IgM, compatible with previous exposure to the pathogen. Cisternal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed hyperproteinuria, with a microprotein value of 0.58 g/l and normal cell count and morphology.
MRI of the brain using a 0.27 T magnet (MRI Grande; Esaote) was performed and the following sequences acquired: sagittal, transverse and dorsal T2-weighted (T2W), sagittal, transverse and dorsal T1-weighted (T1W), transverse gradient echo T2, transverse fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and transverse three-dimensional hybrid contrast enhancement (HYCE). Following intravenous administration of a gadolinium-based contrast medium (Gadovist; Bayer) at a dose of 0.1 mmol/kg, all three T1W sequences were repeated.
At the level of the middle cranial fossa and pituitary fossa there was a partially well-defined, extra-axial mass lesion . The lesion involved the optic chiasm. This mass was T2W mildly hyperintense and T1W mildly hypointense to the cerebral grey matter and FLAIR isointense, except on its dorsal aspect, where it did not suppress and was strongly hyperintense. Moderate peri-tumoral oedema was evident. Strong, homogeneous contrast enhancement that included the presence of dural tails in all directions was seen, as well as enhancement of both the right optic and oculomotor nerves.
Given the clinical presentation, MRI findings and CSF results, a presumptive diagnosis of a neoplastic process was made, most likely a basal meningioma, lymphoma, craniopharyngioma or histiocytic sarcoma (HS).
Following the diagnostic tests, the cat was started on prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg q24h ad eternum), as further investigation (or treatment), including abdominal ultrasound, thoracic radiographs and urinary culture and sensitivity, to confirm the altered renal parameters and to find another neoplastic focus, were declined. At the 2-week recheck, the cat’s mentation and behaviour were normal, and the right eye exhibited less pronounced mydriasis, reduced but present pupillary light reflex (both direct and consensual), and protrusion of the third eyelid. The external ophthalmoplegia had resolved. At the 6-week recheck, the cat had deteriorated and was presented as depressed and compulsively circling to the right. The right-sided cranial nerve deficits related to the sympathetic supply and oculomotor nerve were again present but less pronounced than the prior presentation. Euthanasia and post-mortem examination were performed.
The key findings noted at gross post-mortem examination were that the optic nerves, and, to a lesser extent, oculomotor nerves, and the pituitary gland, were obscured by an unencapsulated, moderately poorly demarcated, homogeneous, moderately firm white mass that was multinodular . From a main nodule, the mass indistinctly spread and infiltrated, in a thin layer, >80% of the ventral aspect of the cranial vault . The right and left kidneys exhibited a round 3–8 mm diameter, respectively, white, homogeneous, unencapsulated but well-demarcated, moderately firm mass .
For histological evaluation, the brain and tissue samples from a panel of organs were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin solution. Following fixation, samples were processed, paraffin embedded and sectioned following routine histological protocols. Histological examination revealed that the optic chiasm, and ventral aspects of the hypothalamus and piriform lobes were compressed and infiltrated by a moderately densely cellular and unencapsulated neoplastic mass . The neoplastic cells, loosely arranged in sheets, were round to polygonal, with frequently clearly delineated cell boundaries. The nuclei were round to oval or reniform, and with a variable number of frequently prominent basophilic nucleoli. There were 15 mitoses in 10 high-power fields (per 2.37 mm2), and there was moderate anisocytosis, and marked anisokaryosis, and nuclear pleomorphism. Scattered multifocally were groupings of moderate-to-large numbers of lymphocytes with fewer plasma cells. Multifocally these formed prominent perivascular cuffs. Multifocally, perivascular cuffs included variable proportions of admixed neoplastic cells.
The renal parenchyma was expanded by a neoplastic population with similar histological features to that in the brain .
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for CD3 (dilution 1:150; mouse monoclonal, clone F7.2.38 [Dako Pathology/Agilent Technologies]), MHCII (dilution 1:400; HLA-DR antigen alpha chain, mouse monoclonal, clone TAL.1B5 [Dako Pathology/Agilent Technologies]) and Iba1 (dilution 1:800; mouse monoclonal, clone 20A12.1 [Millipore]), followed a routine protocol using EnVision FLEX high pH target antigen retrieval solution (Dako Pathology/Agilent Technologies).
IHC staining revealed that the majority of the neoplastic cells in both the kidney and the brain exhibited intense cytoplasmic and membranous expression of Iba1. Additional IHC staining performed on the neoplastic population within the brain demonstrated that the majority of the neoplastic cells also exhibited intense cytoplasmic and membranous expression of MHCII, and were infiltrated by moderate-to-large numbers of lymphocytes exhibiting intense membranous staining for CD3 .
Taken together, it was considered that the gross, microscopic and IHC findings were consistent with a primary HS of the brain that had metastasised to the kidneys bilaterally.