A 67-year-old Caucasian female presented to our department in June 2010 due to decreased vision in her left eye (LE) within the preceding months. BCVA was 35 letters (L). The right eye (RE)’s BCVA was 85L. Anterior segment examination and ocular tension were normal. Fundus examination showed drusen in the posterior pole of both eyes, macular edema in the LE at presentation, and developing within two months in the RE as well, some loss of the lutein pigment of both eyes and macular hypo/hyper pigment changes and atrophy in the LE that were attributed to a retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) tear .
At baseline, macular OCT of the LE showed intraretinal cysts, a RPE detachment and loss of continuity of the RPE line and a hyper-reflective subretinal lesion associated with fibrosis, loss of the ellipsoid zone and atrophy. RE’s OCT was unremarkable, apart from macular drusen, at first. However, intra-retinal cysts and subretinal fluid developed within two months . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed slight macular leakage at 2 min (') with increasing fluorescence at 20’ in the RE, and a more intense leakage at 2’ in the LE and intense fluorescence at 20’, together with mask and window defects. Indocyanin green angiography (ICGA) revealed at 20’ a clear, well delimited CNV in the RE unseen in FA, and late hypercyanescence of the LE that imperfectly matched FA hyperfluorescence along with a mask effect that was considered to be related to a RPE tear. A diagnosis of an occult lesion or Type 1 CNV in the RE and a minimally classic/classic lesion or Type 2 CNV in the LE was established . Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) revealed a central area of hypoautofluorescence in the RE that was attributed to the presence of lutein with focal areas of hypo/hyperautofluorescence releated to drusen and RPE mottling. LE’s FAF revealed a central area of hypoautofluorescence surrounded by a ring of hyperautofluorescence that was related to the RPE tear. FAF at the end of the study showed a slight progression of atrophy, in the LE mainly .