A 68-year old female patient with a painless swelling of the left buccal mucosa was referred to our department. An initial incisional biopsy of the lesion was inconclusive and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and neck diagnosed a benign appearing connective tissue tumour, arising without local invasion.
Detailed medical history pointed to a more than three months consisting, rapidly enlarging mass in the patient's left buccal mucosa, which provoked pain while using her dentures. The patient further complained of lack of appetite, sleeping disturbance and weight loss of 11 kilograms (15% of body weight) over the last five months. Tobacco and alcohol abuse was excluded.
Intraoral examination revealed an asymptomatic, solid, firm, exophytic and endophytic growing tumour of the left buccal mucosa . The tumour was fixed to adjacent structures and extended caudal to the mandible. Examination of the patient did not reveal facial paralysis, paraesthesia and palpable regional lymphadenopathy. Haematologic parameters were all within normal range. For further elucidation, a deeper biopsy was performed. During surgery, the tumour could hardly be separated from the surrounding connective soft tissue and adjacent alveolar bone. The retromolar alveolar crest appeared disintegrated and was suspicious of bone invasion, so a specimen of the alveolar bone was taken as well.
Histopathological analysis of the specimen, supported by immunohistochemistry (CK7 and CK20 positive; CK5/6, Aktin and HER 2 negative) allowed the diagnosis of a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (NOS) of the minor salivary glands .
Positron-emission tomography with 'low dose CT' (PET-CT), computerised tomography (CT head and neck, chest, pelvis and abdomen) and bone scan showed the tumour in the left buccal area and an additional circular mass in the hilum of the left lung, a tumour of the left kidney, as well as multiple pulmonary, cervical lymph nodes and osseous (skull, spine, rib, pelvis) masses . Bronchoscopic biopsy of the hilum mass also identified a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (NOS). Since the immunohistochemical analysis was negative for the thyroid transcription factor-1 protein (TTF-1) and was positive for cytokeratin 20, a primary adenocarcinoma of the lung was unlikely and the tumour was finally attributed to the minor salivary glands as site of origin.
Due to the extent of the disease, palliative chemotherapy was initiated.