A 46-year-old woman of unknown ethnic origin presented to her primary doctor with a one-month history of a painless left breast lump without associated nipple discharge that was noticed by the doctor on examination. She was otherwise healthy with no other relevant history. Physical examination revealed a large, non-tender, freely movable mass in the left breast and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left axilla. Our patient reported no systemic B symptoms such as fever or weight loss. A biopsy of her left breast mass revealed a DLBC lymphoma. Our patient was then referred for staging with F-18 FDG PET/CT that was acquired from base of skull to upper thigh with the CT being low-dose and unenhanced. The PET/CT scan revealed a 8 × 10 cm hyperdense and intensely FDG-avid mass occupying almost the entire left breast with maximum standard uptake value (SUV) of 21 . In addition, several left axillary lymph nodes measuring up to 5 cm in size and several left sub-centimeter internal mammary lymph nodes showed intense FDG avidity , with SUV values of 33 and 3.3. However, PET/CT findings were suggestive a breast carcinoma rather than a lymphoma, based on the location and distribution of the lesion. Because of the rarity of breast lymphoma, it would be unusual to consider metastatic breast lymphoma in the differential diagnosis of breast tumors. As a result, it would have been impossible to distinguish breast lymphoma from breast carcinoma through PET/CT. An incidental finding of intense FDG uptake in the uterine cervix, SUV of 8, led to the subsequent pathologic diagnosis of a previously unsuspected squamous cell carcinoma . The lesion appeared to involve the proximal third of the vagina and the corpus uterine, but a tumor extension to the parametrial soft tissue was not noticed.
Our patient underwent chemotherapy for NHL of the breast and cervical cancer as well as afterloading brachytherapy to the uterine cervix. A repeat FDG PET/CT three months after completion of therapy showed resolved FDG avidity of all previously described lesions .