Our patient is a 58-year-old African American man with a history of SHK transplant for a previously failed cardiac allograft and end-stage kidney disease attributed to calcineurin inhibitor toxicity based on clinical grounds. Twenty-four years before his dual-organ transplant, the patient had received an orthotopic heart transplant for non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, which subsequently failed due to graft coronary artery disease. His allograft was a Kidney Disease Profile Index of 45% deceased donor kidney with a cold ischemia time of 22 h and 30 min. The calculated panel reactive antibody was 65% and no donor-specific antibodies were present. The patient received anti-thymocyte globulin induction and mycophenolate/tacrolimus/prednisone maintenance immunosuppression per institutional protocol. This was subsequently changed to a sirolimus/lower dose tacrolimus/prednisone regimen 18 months post-transplant for concerns of calcineurin inhibitor toxicity. The patient’s infectious complications include late-onset CMV viremia 23 years after his first transplant, which was treated successfully; COVID-19 pneumonia, which required a 16 days hospitalization and was managed with supportive measures, convalescent plasma, and tocilizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits interleukin-6 receptor. The patient had a 2 years kidney allograft protocol biopsy that was unremarkable with no evidence of rejection, inflammation, or chronic changes, and his baseline serum creatinine (SCr) had been around 2 mg/dL. He presented 5 years and 11 months after his SHK transplant with a subacute rise in his SCr from his baseline to 2.6 mg/dL. This triggered a for-cause kidney allograft biopsy, which showed polyomavirus nephropathy with abundant SV40 immunostaining, minimal scar tissue inflammation (ti1, i0), and mild interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy (ci1, ct1). BKPyV DNA was undetected in both blood and urine. JCPyV DNA PCR in blood was positive at 6,052 IU/mL. Due to positive SV40 staining in the setting of JCPyV viremia and the absence of BKPyV viremia, JCPyV DNA-specific ISH staining in paraffin-embedded kidney tissue was performed and showed positive staining in the nuclei of multiple tubular epithelial cells, supporting the diagnosis of JCPyV-N .
The patient had been maintained on a tacrolimus (target trough 6–8 ng/mL)/sirolimus (target trough 3–8 ng/mL)/prednisone 5 mg daily regimen at the time of presentation. In response to his JCPyV infection, his target tacrolimus trough was reduced to 4–6 ng/mL while maintaining the sirolimus trough goal at 3–8 ng/mL. The plan was to monitor JCPyV PCR serially and titrate immunosuppression further as needed based on viral load and kidney function. One week later, the patient was admitted for an incidental finding of severe aortic insufficiency in the setting of a type-A complex dissecting aortic aneurysm involving the aortic root from the level of the sinuses of Valsalva to the mid-ascending aorta. The cardiovascular surgery team determined that the patient would require a third sternotomy for aortic root replacement with coronary artery reimplantation or bypass grafting. In anticipation of the cardiac surgery, the patient was taken off sirolimus and initiated on mycophenolate sodium 360 mg p.o. twice daily. Intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg) 2 g/kg was administered in four divided doses for his JCPyV infection. We continued to monitor serial JCPyV PCR every 2 weeks. He underwent cardiac surgery after which he sustained acute on chronic kidney allograft insufficiency with SCr and estimated glomerular filtration rate of 3.3 mg/dL and 20 mL/min/1.73m2, respectively, at the time of finalizing this report. The timeline of events, immunosuppression, kidney function, and JCPyV titer trends are illustrated in .