A 71-year-old woman with a history of hypertension, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and hemiarch replacement for Stanford type A acute aortic dissection came to the hospital for intermittent claudication of her left leg. She had a history of left renal infraction 2 months after the operation.
The left femoral artery was pulseless, there were no signs of paresthesia or paralysis; however, she reported symptoms of pain and coldness in her left foot. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm; echocardiography showed normal cardiac function, with no obvious intra-cardiac thrombus formation or enlargement of the left atrium. Computed tomography (CT) revealed occlusion from the left common femoral artery to the superficial and deep femoral, and popliteal arteries . A diagnosis of acute arterial occlusion of the left lower extremity was made, and emergency thrombectomy was performed on the day of arrival at the hospital. Warfarin was administered postoperatively (target PT-INR 1.8–2.5). However, 1 month later, the pain in the left leg recurred. Because the same findings were observed, emergency thrombectomy was performed the same day. Warfarin and aspirin (100 mg/day) were administered. Finally, the left leg pain recurred 1 month later, and thrombectomy was repeated. CT scan revealed the entry site was the distal anastomosis, the re-entries were in the left common iliac artery, and some micro re-entries. Aortography revealed a new entry site near the distal anastomosis, and contrast imaging of the false lumen indicated the formation of a thrombus . Using non-obstructive angioscopy, a VISIBLE Fiber (Fiber Tech Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and a Fiber Imaging System FT-203F (Fiber Tech Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into the false lumen via the distal re-entry site. Angioscopy revealed the presence of a free-floating thrombus inside the false lumen ; a portion of the thrombus was collected by suctioning with a TEMPO™ catheter (Cordis, Cardinal Health, Ohio, USA). Blood flow from the tear in the distal part of the anastomosis was determined to have caused the thrombus; hence, the treatment plan included occlusion of the entry site. We performed entry site closure from the false lumen side.
Under local anesthesia, a 5-Fr sheath and a 5-Fr Destination™ guiding sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) were inserted via the left common femoral artery. A TEMPO™ catheter and a Renegade™ microcatheter (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) were placed in the false lumen via the 5-Fr sheath; and another TEMPO™ catheter was inserted into the false lumen via the 5-Fr Destination™ guiding sheath; an Interlock-35 (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was placed as an anchor; thus, the embolization was performed using the Interlock-35 via the microcatheter . As a result, the blood flow from the true to the false lumen resolved . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after 8 days. Follow-up CT showed the progression of thrombus formation in the false lumen, and aortic remodeling including shrinkage of the false lumen ; pathological findings of the thrombus from the first thrombectomy resembled those of the thrombus suctioned from the false lumen catheter. Warfarin and aspirin were stopped after coil embolization. There were no signs of embolism and coil migration at the 1-year follow-up since the obliteration of the entry site.