A 49-year-old physically active female with breast cancer in remission presented to clinic with complaints of bilateral knee pain and intermittent swelling for over 20 years. Her symptoms initially worsened steadily over the first 5 years and plateaued off in terms of severity and frequency of swelling. At the time of presentation, she was complaining of her right knee having more pain and effusion than her left. She did not experience any mechanical symptoms of locking, catching, or clicking. Previously, the patient had been treated by a physician with knee aspirations and steroid injections every 18 months with minimal relief. She was having issues walking, working, and having limitations in recreational hiking as well due to pain. Physical exam revealed bilateral knee effusions that were diffusely sore with no spot tenderness to palpation. No ligamentous instability, joint line tenderness, or patellar instability was appreciated in either knee. She had a negative rheumatology workup and bilateral knee MRIs revealed frond-like projections from the knee synovium .
After a discussion of risks and benefits and surgical versus non-surgical treatment options, the patient elected to undergo right knee arthroscopic debridement followed by left knee arthroscopic debridement 4 months later. In the right knee, there were fatty fronds found in the patellofemoral pouch, medial gutter, lateral gutter, and even on the PCL with no signs of articular destruction . Intra-operative samples were obtained and sent for pathology . Extensive debridement was carried out with an arthroscopic shaver and radiofrequency ablation. The lipoma in the patellofemoral pouch was debrided down to the anterior femur. The left knee had similar findings but had a larger lipoma in the patellofemoral pouch and more involvement in the medial and lateral gutters. The lipomas were treated with a more extensive debridement with the arthroscopic shaver and radiofrequency ablator as compared to the right knee.
During post-operative follow-up, the right knee and left knee both had significant effusions at 2 weeks with the left knee having noticeable ecchymosis at the office visit. The right knee had an uneventful recovery where her effusion and pain had drastically improved within 1 month of surgery and she was back to work. At 6-month follow-up, the patient had a minimal effusion and minimal right knee pain. The left knee post-operatively continued to have recurrent effusions with loss of range of motion (10°–125° of knee flexion) within the 1st month. She underwent physical therapy during this time and at 1-month follow-up, she was at full range of motion (0–125° of knee flexion) for her left knee but still had a moderate effusion. However, despite the loss of motion, her pain was improved compared to her pre-operative state. At 2-month follow-up for the left knee, the patient had near full range of motion and her pain and swelling had greatly improved, and she reported that her left knee was much better than before surgery. She was able to return to work and currently is active at work and in recreational activities with no limits from pain.