A 66-year-old man with a history of chronic hepatitis B presented to the emergency department with acute right-upper-quadrant (RUQ)abdominal pain for hours. On examinations, his abdomen was soft but tender to deep palpation at RUQ with a palpable mass. His abdominal Computed Tomography (CT) showed a substantial hypervascular tumor in the right lobe (13 × 17 cm in size) and thrombosis in the right portal vein. The level of Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) at that time was as high as 30,905 ng/ml. He was diagnosed with HCC, BCLC, stage C.
Since then, he has received three courses of transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), 25 times abdominal radiotherapy, and four times intravenous nivolumab 100 mg. After then, he took lenvatinib 10 mg/day. The AFP level was maintained between 1000 and 2000 ng/ml for four months until he discontinued lenvatinib. The AFP level rose quickly to 17,828 ng/ml after lenvatinib discontinuation, and the contrast-enhanced chest CT showed multiple round nodules in his lungs. Due to disease progression, we discussed DC-CIK cell therapy with the patient, and he agreed to try it. Therefore he underwent wedge resection of the left upper and lower lobes for cell therapy preparation using video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). Progressive shortness of breath developed four weeks after the left lung wedge resection. The chest CT showed that enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes led to his mild bronchial stenosis. So we first resumed lenvatinib 10 mg/day, followed by radiotherapy to control his lymphadenopathy. Ten days after radiotherapy, we added intravenous pembrolizumab 100 mg, and the AFP level was 16,576 ng/mL. Thirteen days later, we infused 109 DC-CIK cells into the patient. The AFP level was down to 10,570 ng/mL on the same day. One day after DC-CIK cell infusion, shortness of breath developed, and his chest radiograph (CXR) showed increased infiltration in the left lung . Immune-related adverse events (IRAE) should be considered, and intravenous methylprednisolone 20 mg/day was given two days after the first administration of DC-CIK cells. Before using the steroid, the AFP level decreased to 8704 ng/mL. Unfortunately, 11 days after cell therapy, the left tension pneumothorax occurred. The patient refused to undergo further treatment and expired peacefully.