A 63-year-old Korean man with HZ presented at our hospital’s emergency room and was admitted to the dermatologic ward due to intractable medication-resistant pain. He had periodically received medical treatment for various conditions stemming from a history of atrial fibrillation, asthma, hepatitis B and liver cirrhosis. He had visited an otolaryngologic clinic for auricular pain that had arisen after a cold, although no ear abnormalities were found, 12 days before admission. Then, 2 days later, erythematous maculopapular rashes appeared in the painful area; subsequently, he was diagnosed with HZ and started on medications including antiviral agents. His skin lesions improved (excepting some vesicles) by degrees and crusts formed. Nevertheless, combined itching, stabbing and throbbing pain on the left of his neck and postauricular area did not improve. Just before he came to the emergency room, the throbbing pain had worsened considerably, manifesting itself at intervals of 2 to 3 hours despite medication. Finally, he was hospitalized due to refractory HZ neuralgia. Medication including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, anticonvulsant (gabapentin, 600mg/day), antidepressants (amitriptyline, 10mg/day) and antibiotics was administered for alleviation of his symptoms, and he later consulted our pain clinic for pain control.
On physical examination at our pain clinic, he showed skin lesions with crusts mixed with some vesicles in the left C3 dermatome (that is, the left of his neck and postauricular area). The accompanying pain was continuously throbbing and burning in nature; shooting pain, additionally, was sporadic and intermittent. The intensity of his continuous pain registered six on the 11-point Numeric Rating Scale (NRS), and his intermittent pain, eight. It presented with allodynia and hyperalgesia. He also had pain-related sleep disturbance. The laboratory evaluation revealed a normal coagulation profile with a platelet count of more than 100,000/μL.
We performed stellate ganglion block (SGB) on the left of his neck, recommended augmented doses of gabapentin (to 1200mg/day) and amitriptyline (to 20mg/day), and prescribed EMLA® cream (a cream containing a eutectic mixture of local anesthetics: lidocaine and prilocaine). The following day, his pain was sufficiently alleviated to enable sleep. Routine laboratory findings included abnormal liver and renal function test data considered to have resulted from the patient’s underlying diseases. He was transferred to the Department of Internal Medicine and prescribed half doses of gabapentin (600mg/day) and amitriptyline (10mg/day). On the basis of his clinical condition, we administered intravenous patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) with fentanyl, and repeated the SGB four times at intervals of 2 or 3 days. Notwithstanding the gradual improvement of his symptoms, sporadic neuralgia, seemingly quite centralized in the dermatome of the SCP , still bothered him at dawn. In addition to the SGB, we performed ultrasound-guided SCP block with 6mL of 0.125% ropivacaine and 10mg of triamcinolone acetonide, after which his throbbing dawn pain disappeared. His NRS score fell to three through the course of the pain management. However, his allodynia and hyperalgesia did not quickly or significantly improve. About 10 days after starting the PCA, on the fifth day following the SCP block, he requested its discontinuance. The total numbers of SGB and SCP block applications were six and one, respectively, during his hospitalization.