A 50-year-old Moroccan man presented to our orthopedic department after tripping on a step and falling onto his left side. He had a 4-year history of type 2 diabetes and hypertension. His medication included furosemide, captopril, and metformin. He had a tobacco smoking history of 30 pack years, but he had quit smoking approximately 5 years ago.
A review of his social and environmental history did not indicate exposure to any other known toxins or carcinogens. He denied any family history of cancer. He is a police officer and he lives with his wife and two children.
A physical examination revealed a blood pressure at 135/80 mmHg, a normal pulse rate, and no fever; he had no symptoms except for the left clavicular pain.
Radiographs showed a lytic lesion in his left clavicle and an asymptomatic lytic lesion in the left humeral head. A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and objectified multiple osteolytic lesions on the whole skeleton .
A neoplastic origin was first suspected; our patient was then referred to our nuclear medicine department with suspected bone metastases.
A whole-body bone scintigraphy with technetium-99m (99mTc)-methylene diphosphonate (MDP) was particularly interesting insofar as it was able to orient the diagnosis to a metabolic bone disease. It demonstrated diffusely increased uptake in both axial and appendicular skeleton, absent urinary activity, and prominent calvarian and periarticular uptake, with a focal accumulation of radiotracer on the left clavicle .
His complete blood count hemoglobin level was 15 g/dl, white cell count at 8900, and platelet count at 170,000; his transaminases and his serum electrolytes were normal. Hepatitis A serology, hepatitis B serology, hepatitis C serology, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology were also negative.
Laboratory studies also revealed an elevated serum calcium level of 3.8 mmol/l (corrected range, 2.15 to 2.60) and a circulating level of PTH of 1905 pg/ml (normal range, 14 to 72), his creatinine level was within normal limits. The diagnosis of PHPT was then confirmed.
Considering possible hyperparathyroidism caused by a parathyroid nodule, a cervical ultrasound was done and identified an adenoma in the right inferior parathyroid gland; this was confirmed by a parathyroid scintigraphy with 99mTc-methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI) using washout method, which showed a focal increased uptake in inferior right parathyroid gland .
A parathyroidectomy was performed and a large parathyroid tumor was removed and confirmed to be a benign parathyroid adenoma on histological examination.
After surgery, our patient’s PTH level returned to normal but he developed hypocalcemia, requiring doses of orally administered calcium. He was alive and showed no symptoms during a 6-month follow-up period.