A 60-year-old North-African male patient, who was a non-smoker with a history of Type II diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department 20 h after the onset of left hemiplegia. For 3 days prior, the patient suffered from typical anginal chest pain and New York Heart Association Class II heart failure symptoms. He reported no other symptoms that suggested recent infection or respiratory distress.
On admission, the patient was haemodynamically stable with normal vital signs, including blood pressure 142/93 mmHg, heart rate 77 b.p.m., and temperature 36.5°C, but tachypnoeic with a respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute. Oxygen saturation on room air was 93%, but lung auscultation did not reveal any crackles, wheezing, or rhonchi. The cardiovascular examination was normal. On neurological examination, the patient did not follow orders correctly, with a Glasgow coma scale score of 14. He presented with left hemiplegia, hypotonia, and left sensory deficit. Capillary glycaemia was 3.2 g/dL, with glycosuria on the urine test strip, but no ketonuria was present.
Initial laboratory tests revealed elevated high-sensitivity troponin levels at 661 pg/mL [normal values (NV) 0.00–13.00 pg/mL] and inflammatory syndrome with an elevated white blood cell count, with a neutrophil predominance and normal platelet count. C-reactive protein was positive at 119 mg/L (NV 0.00–5.00 mg/L). The patient had dyslipidaemia. All other laboratory exams were normal.
Electrocardiographic findings were suggestive of inferior STEMI with ST segment elevation in the II, III, and aVF leads and a concomitant second-degree Mobitz 1 atrioventricular block .
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal dimensions of the left ventricle with hypokinesia of the basal and mid-inferior and inferolateral segments, and preserved ejection fraction. No valvular disease was detected and no other abnormalities from the right cavities, pericardium, or thoracic aorta were present. No intracavitary thrombus was found.
Afterwards, the patient was transferred to the imaging department for non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan, which revealed an acute ischaemic stroke of the superficial and profound territory of the right middle cerebral artery.
A chest CT angiogram (CTA) was performed to rule out aortic dissection that may have extended to the coronary arteries and the supra-aortic vessels; moreover, the CTA could perhaps elucidate the underlying cause of the stroke and acute myocardial infarction (AMI). Aortic dissection was ruled out but the presence of a thrombus in the proximal part of the right pulmonary artery and distal part of the left pulmonary artery was revealed. Ground-glass opacities could be observed in both lungs graded with the COVID-19 Reporting and Data System at Grade III .
D-Dimer levels were then measured and found to be high at 3194 µg/L (NV 0–500 µg/L). Fibrinogen levels were also high at 8.1 g/L (NV 1.5–2.5 g/L). The ferritin level was normal. A COVID-19 reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) nasal swab test was performed twice and was negative both times but the SARS-COV2 serology test was positive for IgG antibodies and negative for IgM.
The neurological team evaluated the impairment caused by the stroke by using the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) and assigned a score of 17. Despite the need for optimal doses of low molecular weight heparin, due to the high risk of intracranial haemorrhage, the patient was initially treated with aspirin 75 mg daily, low-dose enoxaparin (4000 UI daily), insulin, atorvastatin 80 mg daily, and lansoprazole 30 mg daily. The uptitration of enoxaparin was scheduled for Day 15 after the stroke according to the neurologist’s guidelines.
With regard to myocardial infarction, the patient was admitted 72 h after the onset of typical anginal chest pain, which is considered a long delay. However, his chest pain symptoms were no longer present at admission. Therefore, because the delay exceeded 48 h, primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was not performed, and according to the guidelines, a non-invasive test for the presence of residual myocardial viability was scheduled.
Further investigation was performed to identify the cause of this simultaneous development of acute myocardial infarction, bilateral pulmonary embolism, and cerebral ischaemic stroke.
To establish the diagnosis of a delayed COVID 19 complication, we thoroughly ruled out all other possible causes of this multi-systemic thrombotic state, as shown in .
Coronary angiography performed on Day 14 (, and ) revealed extensive multiple significant stenoses of the right coronary artery (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 3 flow) and an atheromatous left system without significant lesions .
A supra-aortic vessel ultrasound showed bilateral atheromatosis of both common carotid arteries but no significant stenosis.
A 24-h Holter electrocardiogram was performed to search for occult paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. No rhythm or conduction disturbances were detected.
A transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) examination with bubble contrast infusion and the Valsalva manoeuvre did not confirm a patent foramen ovale. No thrombi or other sources of emboli were detected according to the TOE .
Further investigation included Doppler examination of the lower limbs that was normal for deep venous thrombosis.
Immunological tests for autoimmune diseases, 24 h urine proteins, hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus, and syphilis serologies were negative. Antiphospholipid antibodies and thrombophilia tests were also negative. Colour Doppler ultrasound of the temporal arteries was normal.
The clinical presentation of the patient was not indicative of intravascular disseminated coagulation.
A thoraco-abdominopelvic CT scan was performed to search for a neoplasia, but no tumours or adenopathies were found. The plasmatic protein electrophoresis was normal.
The patient remained stable for the rest of his hospitalization, his neurological issues improved slightly, and he had better verbal responses, but maintained the same motor impairments. A follow-up CT scan showed an improvement of the lung lesions. The patient was discharged on Day 18, on apixaban 5 mg bid for 3 months, aspirin 75 mg daily, atorvastatin 80 mg daily, lansoprazole 30 mg per day, and insulin therapy. Delayed complications of COVID-19 infection were considered the most probable diagnosis.