A 75-year-old asymptomatic woman presented with a 10-cm-diameter mass on her chest radiograph, which was not evident 6 months prior . She had been taking warfarin for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and a transient ischemic attack for 6 years. There was no history of chest trauma, warfarin overdosing, or suspected interactions with other drugs such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or antibiotics. She had no fever, leukocytosis, or elevated C-reactive protein. The prothrombin time/international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was prolonged at 4.73 and her hemoglobin level was 8.7 g/dl. Chest computed tomography(CT)revealed an air-fluid mass adjacent to the right upper and middle lobes with a pleural effusion . A CT scan obtained 15 years prior revealed a cyst at the corresponding site , and the mass was diagnosed as a warfarin-related hemorrhage within the pre-existing pulmonary cyst. Immediately after the withdrawal of the warfarin and administration of vitamin K, the PT-INR normalized to 0.96 without any further progression of the anemia or remarkable change in the mass and effusion. A surgical resection of the cyst to prevent a worsening hemorrhage and subsequent infection was planned.
Thoracoscopic view revealed the pulmonary cyst filled with a clot and 650 ml of bloody effusion . We performed wedge resection of the affected mass mainly arisen from the middle lobe. No intraoperative frozen section examination was performed. There were no other obvious bleeding points. The operation time was 102 min and the blood loss was 5 ml. The pathological findings revealed an emphysematous bulla filled with a blood clot with an alveolar hemorrhage. The cause of the bleeding remained uncertain because there were no neoplastic lesions with any specific blood vessels involved in the resected specimen. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 3rd postoperative day. A direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) was administered thereafter. She currently remains disease-free at 2 months after the operation.