A 65-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of low back pain and left posterior thigh and calf pain. When symptoms of sciatica began 2 months previously, she underwent radiography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine at another hospital. These showed a vertebral tumor in the lumbar spine. Both the patellar tendon and the Achilles tendon reflex were normal. The sensory exam was also normal. Although the left tibialis anterior (TA) muscle and extensor hallucis longus (EHL) muscle were manual muscle testing (MMT) grade 3, muscles other than the TA and EHL were MMT grade 5. Laboratory blood tests revealed hypoalbuminemia, anemia, and increased alkaline phosphatase and C-reactive protein. She had undergone resection of retroperitoneal DDL 5 years previously and repeated resection for recurrence 3 years previously. Recurrence occurred again 1 year previously, and spinal metastasis of WDL component occurred in the L2 vertebrae 8 months previously and gradually increased in computed tomography (CT), but she did not undergo additional treatment . MRI showed a mass with high signal intensity on both T1-weighted images and T2-weighted images and no enhancement on gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images . The revised Tokuhashi score was 11/15, and the Spinal Instability Neoplastic Score (SINP) was 10/18 . Therefore, we diagnosed the vertebral tumor as the metastasis of WDL component in DDL and planned surgery for symptomatic improvement. Tumor curettage and L1 laminectomy followed by percutaneous pedicle screw fixation from the Th11 to L3 using intraoperative 3-D CT computer navigation were performed . Histological examination showed mixed well-differentiated and well-dedifferentiated liposarcoma in the primary lesion . Lipoblasts containing hyperchromatic nuclei were apparent in the well-differentiated area. Myxoid liposarcoma was ruled out in the dedifferentiated area. Positive staining for MDM2 and CDK4 (data not shown) by immunohistochemistry and negativity of DDIT3 or FUS by FISH (data not shown) confirmed dedifferentiated liposarcoma. She could walk and had no pain in her back and no signs of palsy. However, the retroperitoneal mass subsequently increased, and she died 1.5 years after surgery.