A 68-year-old Caucasian female presented to our hospital with shortness of breath and unintentional weight loss of 30 pounds three months prior. The patient was an active smoker and her past medical history included well controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus (Hemoglobin A1C 6.0%) and non-obstructive coronary artery disease. Her medication included insulin, aspirin and metoprolol succinate. Thoracic computed tomography showed an interlobular mass in the medial right upper lobe with extension into the right hilum . Tissue biopsy was performed and histopathology was consistent with non-small cell adenocarcinoma with negative EGFR mutation, ALK and ROS-1. Programmed Death Ligand-1 (PD-L1) expression by immunohistochemistry was 70%. The clinical staging with Positron Emission Tomography- Computed Tomography (PET-CT) scan showed mediastinal metastatic lymph nodes and scattered osseous metastases in the axial and proximal appendicular skeleton (Stage IV; T4, N3, M1b). Given the high expression of PD-L1 > 50%, immunotherapy with pembrolizumab was started at (200 mg) intravenously once every three weeks per KEYNOTE-024 protocol . Subsequent surveillance with CT showed a significant decrease in the size of the primary tumor in the lungs from 8.5 × 5.5 cm to 2.7 × 0.9 cm with a decrease in the size of bone metastases. In addition, patient’s Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG) improved from 2 prior to therapy to 0. After week 25 of pembrolizumab, she developed Raynaud’s like symptoms in both hands with mild non-purpuric erythema, pain and paresthesia at the fingertips bilaterally aggravated by cold weather. A thorough history revealed no prior autoimmune disease, recent trauma or similar symptoms in the past. The patient was started on nifedipine 30 mg extended release orally once daily due to potential vasospasm demonstrated by the triad of pallor, cyanosis and hyperemia. There was no improvement of symptoms on 1 week follow up and nifedipine dose could not be increased due to labile blood pressure. The mild intermittent discoloration progressed to persistent periungual blue discoloration over the course of 2 weeks in the digits bilaterally. The patient was started on oral prednisone 30 mg daily (0.5 mg per kg daily) in conjunction with nifedipine. An autoimmune panel revealed anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) of 1:80 with a homogenous pattern; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 70 mm/hr. Further testing, including ANCA-c, ANCA-p was negative. Complement levels were within normal limits in our lab reference range. Simple nailfold capillaroscopy did not yield any abnormalities. Additional work up did not reveal a septic source, hypercoagulable disease, hyperviscosity related immunoglobulinopathies, lymphoproliferative disorders or vascular occlusion as shown in Table . The patient continued on pembrolizumab given the significant interval tumor response. Over the course of 2 weeks, the patient experienced progression of the discoloration into dry gangrene, ulceration with necrosis involving all fingertips and extending to the proximal phalanges in right digits (1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th) and (1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th) digits in the left . Arterial Doppler ultrasound showed normal arterial waveforms through the upper extremity arteries with peak systolic velocity ratios within normal limits. There were no signs of stenosis, atherosclerotic disease or occlusion. CT angiography showed a normal appearance of the arterial branch up to the palmar arch artery without evidence of saccular aneurysm formation, stenosis or occlusion; digital arteries were not adequately visualized. The patient underwent sympathectomy given the rapid progression of necrosis with no response to calcium channel blockers or glucocorticoids. The decision of amputation was deferred until necrotic tissue would have clear demarcation .
Pembrolizumab was stopped later (week 37) due to tumor progression and it was noted that the involved necrotic area in the digits did not progress further after discontinuation of PD-1 inhibitor. Unfortunately, the patient transferred to hospice care and expired two months after.