We report the case of a previously healthy 21-year-old male patient from Bucharest, Romania, presenting in June 2020, during the first COVID-19 wave in Romania, with a two-day prodrome of fatigability and headache, followed by sudden onset high-grade fever (highest recorded temperature of 39.8 °C) and malaise. Nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs were collected and the real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) results came back positive for SARS-CoV-2. In accordance to the national regulations in June 2020, the patient underwent isolation, treatment and monitoring in the hospital, and remained hospitalized until he met the criteria of clinical remission plus two consecutive negative RT-PCR tests at least 24 h apart.
The patient had been self-isolating at home for the past two months and a half, and had only left the house for one meeting, 4 d prior to symptom onset. After being confirmed with COVID-19 by RT-PCR, epidemiological tracing revealed that the meeting consisted of indoor close contact, without mask wearing on either side, with one person who had no signs or symptoms of infection at the time of the meeting. Upon evaluation of the contact, she was confirmed by RT-PCT to be an asymptomatic carrier of SARS-CoV-2. According to the national regulations at the time, she was also admitted to the hospital, where she remained completely asymptomatic, and reverted to negative RT-PCR on days 16 and 17 from the initial RT-PCR confirmation.
Upon hospital admission, our patient underwent a complete evaluation, which revealed pharyngeal erythema at physical exam, normal hematology and biochemistry laboratory tests and normal computed tomography (CT) of the chest. He received antiviral treatment with umifenovir 200 mg orally every 8 h for 5 d, and thromboprophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin subcutaneously once daily for 14 d. The course of disease was mild, with no occurrence of pneumonia, and all symptoms subsided 4 d after onset; no further symptoms developed throughout the course of the disease.
While still in the hospital for isolation and monitoring purposes, an increase in liver enzymes was noted, with alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) starting to increase around day 14 from symptom onset, reaching a peak of 736 U/L ALT (15 times the upper normal limit) and 290 U/L AST (5 times the upper normal limit) on day 24 . All other liver function tests were normal, and no other changes were seen in other laboratory parameters, including complete blood count, total and direct bilirubin, gamma-glutamyl transferase, fibrinogen, and coagulation markers. The peak ALT was reached at approximately the same time when RT-PCR became negative (on days 22 and 23 since onset).
For the differential diagnosis of the ALT increase, multiple plausible causes of hepatic cytolysis were ruled out : drug-induced liver injury was excluded based on the fact that no drugs had been recently administered. Systemic replication of SARS-CoV-2 was ruled out through negative RT-PCR from peripheral blood, which paralleled the negative RT-PCR from nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs. Another potential hypothesis considered was a COVID-19 cytokine storm that could also affect the liver. However, the timing of the ALT increase was not superposable to a cytokine storm, as the peak ALT occurred on day 24. We also checked the values of inflammatory markers at that time point and the results were within the normal range, and we repeated the chest CT, which was normal, confirming that no pulmonary lesions had been constituted throughout the course of the disease. We also ruled out infections with other hepatotropic viruses, through negative serological tests for hepatitis viruses A, B, C, E, adenovirus, coxsackie virus, echo virus, herpes simplex viruses, Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus.