A 62-year-old Caucasian male presented for inpatient assessment of a soft tissue mass in the right superior sulcus of his lung (see fig. ). He had presented to his local medical officer some weeks previously with headaches typical of his migraine as well as with right peri-orbital throbbing, nausea and photophobia. He had not had his migraine-type headaches for more than 3 decades. The character and associated nausea with light sensitivity were identical to those from the distant past. The current headaches only differed by being triggered and relieved by postural changes. He was headache free when supine but suffered from headache within minutes of standing. Symptoms were relieved on adopting the recumbent position. In the weeks prior to admission, he had also suffered from a loss of appetite, loss of weight, right posterior chest wall pain and postural light-headedness. The patient did not report any other symptoms of dysautonomia.
His relevant past medical history included a stable ischaemic heart disease, mechanical aortic valve replacement (life-long anticoagulation), atrial fibrillation, type 2 diabetes mellitus and being an ex-smoker with a 40-pack-year history. His medications on admission included metformin 500 mg b.d., atorvastatin 80 mg nocte, gliclazide 60 mg mane, nebivolol 2.5 mg nocte, sitagliptin 100 mg mane, thyroxine 125 μg daily and venlafaxine 75 mg mane. There had been no recent changes to this regimen. An examination revealed a significant postural drop in BP (60 mm Hg systolic and 25 mm Hg diastolic) with an appropriate increase in heart rate (20 bpm) within 2 min of standing. The patient had no evidence of dehydration or intravascular volume depletion. No features of Horner's syndrome were detected. There were no other neurological, cardiovascular or endocrine findings of concern.
CT-guided biopsy of the lung mass was undertaken, which provided a diagnosis of poorly differentiated squamous cell cancer, likely of lung origin. Staging CT and a bone scan likely revealed metastatic disease in the left 5th rib and left iliac bones. There was no evidence of metastatic disease at other sites including the brain and adrenal glands. Basic haematology and biochemistry were unremarkable (including thyroid function and serum cortisol). Multiple urine analyses were unremarkable. He had an HbA1c of 9.6. His electrocardiogram was unremarkable and in sinus rhythm. An echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular systolic function with mild left ventricular hypertrophy.
The patient was commenced on regular paracetamol, oxycodone and pregabalin for his headache and chest wall pain. This was titrated up with good relief of his chest wall pain but not the headache. Palliative chemotherapy was commenced with carboplatin and gemcitabine. He continued to experience consistently significant postural symptoms including migraine-type headache. Significant postural BP drops continued to occur (drop in systolic BP between 30 and 60 mm Hg). Non-pharmacological options including increase in salt and fluid intake, wearing of compression stockings and cessation of nebivolol did not provide relief. Endocrinology, neurology and cardiology teams were consulted; the patient was diagnosed with likely paraneoplastic aetiology for his postural hypotension. A combination of high-dose fludrocortisone (800 μg daily) and midodrine (2.5 mg t.d.s.) achieved objective (systolic BP falls consistently less than 20 mm Hg) and symptomatic relief of postural hypotension and the headaches. The patient was subsequently discharged home. At outpatient review 3 weeks later (second cycle of chemotherapy) the patient remained free of the migraine-type headaches or postural light-headedness. There was no significant postural drop in BP.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and the accompanying images.