A 31-year-old Asian woman presented with slurred speech and limb weakness. She first noticed slurred speech in September and subsequently developed drooping of the bilateral eyelid and, eventually, limb weakness. The above symptoms increased during periods of activity and improved after periods of rest. She was treated with pyridostigmine bromide (60 mg/8 hours) in a local hospital initially. The symptoms improved after taking medicine, but occasional weakness of both legs and chest tightness remained. Regarding past medical history, this patient underwent a cesarean section to give birth to her second child 3 months ago.
General physical examination revealed a yellow discoloration of facial skin and sclera. Neurological examination revealed mild dysarthria, mild droop of both side ptosis, and generalized muscle weakness after exercise. Weakness was most pronounced in the lower extremities. The upper eyelid fatigue test score was 2. Repetitive nerve stimulation showed that the amplitude of right axillary nerve decreased significantly at 1, 3, and 5 Hz, with a amplitude reduction of 35.6%, 45.2%, and 62.8% respectively. Besides, the amplitude of left facial nerve decreased by 13.9% and 17.5% at 3 Hz and 5 Hz. Reduced density of liver parenchyma is observed on contrast-enhanced chest computerized tomography (CT), and fatty liver may have been present. Positive results of laboratory tests are presented in Table . Rheumatoid factors, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody and anti-thyroid antibody were negative. Thyroid hormone levels were within normal intervals. According to the clinical, electromyographic, and laboratory findings, the diagnosis of MG was unambiguous. In addition, the patient’s liver enzymes were elevated with positive AMA-M2 serology; according to the guidelines , she was diagnosed with PBC.
The patient was diagnosed with MG after she came to our hospital. Therefore, she was treated with pyridostigmine bromide (60 mg/8 hours) and methylprednisolone after admission. The initial dose of methylprednisolone was 30 mg/day, then gradually increased to 80 mg/day for maintenance 3 days, and finally decreased to 30 mg/day for maintenance treatment. Ursodeoxycholic acid (250 mg/8 hours) and azathioprine (50 mg/12 hours) treatment was added after diagnosis of PBC. The patient’s condition improved steadily during 1 month of hospitalization. She continued to receive a combined treatment with pyridostigmine bromide (60 mg/8 hours), methylprednisolone (16 mg/12 hours), ursodeoxycholic acid (250 mg/8 hours), and azathioprine (50 mg/12 hours) after discharge.
During the 2 years follow-up after discharge, the patient’s methylprednisolone was gradually reduced to discontinuation within 1 year. Daily ursodeoxycholic therapy was administered strictly according to our instructions for 6 months after discharge, and the patient ceased ursodeoxycholic on her own. Interestingly, her liver enzyme indexes were all normal, although she stopped taking ursodeoxycholic acid after discharge. Now, the patient is receiving long-term maintenance treatment with pyridostigmine bromide (60 mg/8 hours) and azathioprine (50 mg/day). During the 2 years follow-up, the patient had no obvious discomfort except weight gain, and the relevant liver enzyme indexes were normal.