A two-year-old Greek girl was referred to our Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) with a two-day history of fever (39.3°C), vomiting, reduced appetite for feeding and seizures. A physical examination showed nuchal rigidity, a decreased level of consciousness and multiple erythematous, flat macules present on her hands and the dorsal and plantar aspects of her feet , taking a curvilinear appearance . Our patient had an unremarkable medical history; she had not been vaccinated for S. pneumoniae.
A complete blood cell count revealed 18,000 cells/μL white blood cells (neutrophils 80%, leukocytes 17%), her C-reactive protein serum level was 28.87 mg/dL, and pronounced coagulation disturbances were detected (prothrombin time: 15.4 seconds; activated partial thromboplastin time: 33 seconds; international normalized ratio: 1.38; fibrinogen: 375 mg/dL, D-dimers: 91.63 mg/dL). Results of a lumbar puncture showed white blood cells at 40 cells/mm3, a total protein content of 169 mg/dL and hypoglycorrhachia of 2 mg/dL. Gram-staining results revealed the presence of Gram-positive cocci in pairs. Two days after admission, blood and cerebrospinal fluid cultures yielded pure growth of vancomycin susceptible (MIC # 1 μg/mL, 25 mm) and penicillin susceptible (MIC # 0.12 μg/mL) Streptococcus pneumoniae. Serotype 23F was identified by PCR from two blood samples and in the first sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The same isolate was also cultured from our patient's throat. IgG subclasses were normal and the results of an HIV test were negative. Due to the lack of clinical improvement, an urgent diffusion-weighted MRI scan was performed six days after admission. The MRI showed ill-defined hyperintense lesions at the peri-ventricular and white matter, exhibiting restricted diffusion .
Boluses of intravenous fluids, fresh frozen plasma and intravenous dexamethasone (0.15 mg/kg) were given, immediately followed by systematic administration of ceftriaxone (100 mg/kg/day) and vancomycin (60 mg/kg/day). Due to persistent drowsiness and further clinical deterioration, a second lumbar puncture was taken. The results of this were 90 leukocytes/mm3, a glucose level of 36 mg/dL, and protein 124 mg/dL, whereas a further CSF culture did not reveal any isolation. Aiming at better permeability through the blood brain barrier, intravenous rifampicin (40 mg/kg/day, MIC # 1 μg/mL, 27 mm) was added. Although the responsible isolate was sensitive to the antibiotics administered, our patient showed a slow clinical response; consequently the combined antibiotic regimen was administered for a total of 14 days after therapy initiation. Her fever and atypical rash started resolving after the first week. Our patient made a full neurological recovery, apart from bilateral hearing impairment confirmed by brain stem response.