A 53-year-old man with transient dysarthria and left hemiparesis was admitted to our hospital. The patient had recovered from neurological deficits before being transferred to our hospital, and serological examination showed no presence of vascular risk factors. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an UCA originating from the MCA bifurcation (7 mm in diameter) without evidence of acute cerebral infarction . The patient was diagnosed with transient ischemic attack (TIA); subsequently, careful observation was performed because of the UCA. He had a medical history of hypertension and a familial history of SAH. Cerebral angiography was performed 1 week after the initial TIA, wherein a saccular aneurysm including the superior trunk of the M2 branch was confirmed . Surgical treatment for the aneurysm was scheduled a few months later because of the acute state of brain ischemia. A month later, the patient was transferred again and admitted to our hospital on account of TIA recurrence. MRI showed no acute brain ischemia, but revealed that the aneurysm had expanded from 7 mm to 14 mm in diameter . Three days after admission, the left hemiparesis and dysarthria reappeared, and MRI showed acute cerebral infarction in the area supplied by the MCA perforating artery [ and ]. In addition, parenchymal edema in the insular cortex surrounding the aneurysm was observed on a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image . Intimal thrombosis within the aneurysmal sac was not clearly detected on MRI. Computed tomography (CT) angiography clearly depicts rapid enlargement of the aneurysmal sac . We considered that the direct compression to the adjacent proximal perforating artery was caused by the rapidly enlarged UCA, which led to cerebral infarction. Although the cerebral infarction was in an acute state, we considered that the rapid enlargement of the aneurysm was due to an imminent rupture. Thus, the patient was assigned to undergo surgery. Surgical clipping was performed 2 days after admission. The MCA aneurysm was exposed through the pterional approach. Because the UCA was enlarged, the intimal pressure was suspected to be high, and the perforating arteries from M1 located behind the aneurysmal sac were difficult to observe under the microscope. Initially, the proximal M1 and distal M2 trunks from the aneurysm were occluded by temporal clipping to decompress the aneurysm. However, the aneurysmal intimal pressure remained high after blocking blood flow by temporal clipping. Therefore, we decompressed and shrunk the enlarged aneurysmal sac using the suction and decompression technique. After adequate decompression, angioplastic clipping using multiple clips was successfully completed without obstruction of the parent artery and perforating arteries. Post application of surgical clips, intraoperative endoscopy clearly showed an association between the aneurysmal sac and the perforating artery [-]. Postoperatively, CT angiography showed no evidence of the M2 trunk obstruction and the aneurysmal neck remnant . The patient’s mild hemiparesis improved, and recurrence of infarctions could not be verified clinically for 2 years after surgery.