A 31-year-old female experienced poststernum swallowing pain for 2 days after eating a meal of fish. She denied any other symptoms such as fever or hematemesis. Gastroscope demonstrated a fishbone-like foreign body penetrating the esophagus wall 30 cm from the incisor . A further chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a sharp foreign body with a bone-like CT value just below the tracheal bifurcation, which had penetrated the thoracic aorta, resulting in mild pneumomediastinum and exudative changes around the esophagus . She was diagnosed with an AEF and referred for emergent open surgery.
The patient was placed in a right lateral position. A double-lumen tracheal tube was used to facilitate ventilation of the right lung during the operation. Extracorporeal circulation was established via femoral arterial and venous cannulas. A left posterolateral thoracotomy through the fifth intercostal space was performed to gain access to the esophagus and descending aorta. The upper and lower normal aorta was isolated from the lesion area and blocking bands were set. Then, the mediastinal pleura was opened and the tissue adjacent to the lesion was separated. A long sharp fish bone emerged, which had penetrated the left esophageal wall approximately 2 cm below the tracheal carina level and pierced the descending aorta . The surrounding tissues had good vitality with mild edema. No obvious abscess was noted. After clamping the proximal and distal aorta, the contaminated tissue around the fish bone was removed and sent for culture . After removal of the fish bone and thorough debridement and irrigation with diluted polyvinylpyrrolidone-iodine and physiological saline solution, the injured aorta was repaired with 4–0 prolene suture, and the perforated esophagus was repaired with 3–0 absorbable coated Vicryl Plus antibacterial suture with the surrounding tissue flap. After repeated flushing, a drainage tube was placed in the mediastinum, and the chest was closed after the placement of another drainage tube in the chest cavity. Then, the patient was changed to the supine position and underwent laparoscopic jejunostomy. The patient recovered smoothly after the operation without complications and has lived freely for 5 years.