An 18-year-old Saudi female known to have type I diabetes mellitus, who was on an insulin pump, presented to the emergency department with epigastric abdominal pain of 3 days’ duration, which was non-radiating, colicky in nature and associated with attacks of nausea and vomiting of food content. There was no haematemesis.
On examination: a conscious, alert, oriented young female appearing to be in pain, vital signs were stable with a temperature of 37.7°C and a random blood sugar (RBS) level of 179 mg/dl. Abdominal examination revealed a soft and lax abdomen with tenderness in the epigastric area and right renal angle. There were no signs of rigidity or rebound tenderness. Bowel sounds were present. There was no sign of ascites, splenomegaly or hepatomegaly. The insulin pump was functioning and in place. Per rectal examination was normal.
The patient was initially evaluated by the general surgery team, with the impression of appendicitis. Abdominal ultrasound was normal; this was followed by abdominal CT with contrast, which revealed reduced enhancement of the right kidney, likely indicating acute pyelonephritis. In addition, the left portal vein was oedematous, with complete non-visualization of the supply to liver segment 2, in keeping with complete left branch PVT; there was partial visualization of the right portal vein supplying liver segment 8 with surrounding oedema, in keeping with partial non-occlusive right PVT ( and .)
Laboratory investigations revealed a complete blood count showing haemoglobin of 10.7 g/dl, platelets of 255,000/mcl, a white blood cell count of 10.2 × 103 cells/mcl, neutrophils 65%. Renal and liver function results were within normal limits, as were amylase and lipase levels. Haemoglobin A1c was 6.4%. The prothrombin time was 14.1 seconds (11.7–14.5), the INR was 1.48 and the activated partial thromboplastin time was 30.9 seconds (24.1–34.7), the ESR was 48 mm/h (0–20) while CRP was 4.2 mg/dl (0.05–0.3).
Urine analysis showed WBCs at 30–50 per high power field microscopy, pH=7, negative nitrite presence, while culture showed more than 10,000 colony forming units (CFU)/ml. A urine pregnancy test was negative.
The serological testing, including work-up for underlying thrombophilia, is shown in .
Gastrojejunoscopy and colonoscopy findings were normal. Biopsy revealed chronic non-specific inflammation, preservation of villus architecture and no evidence of intraepithelial lymphocytosis or malignancy.
The patient was managed with ciprofloxacin and anticoagulation therapy (enoxaparin) followed by warfarin. She was then discharged on 8 mg of warfarin with a therapeutic INR. The long-term plan was to continue anticoagulation treatment for 6–12 months and follow up in the outpatient clinic with gastroenterology and haematology assessment; the follow-up imaging showed complete resolution of thrombosis .