A 57-year-old female with a history of a 4th ventricular CPP presented with increased thirst and urination. She initially underwent suboccipital craniotomy for tumor resection in 2004 and again in 2018 for tumor recurrence. She received subsequent Gamma Knife radiotherapy in 2019. Pathology from both resections revealed atypical CPP, WHO grade II. Since her initial surgery, she has experienced significant gait imbalance, diplopia, dysphagia, and right-sided hemiparesis and hemisensory loss. Surveillance magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done, showing an enhancing 1.5 × 1.8 cm suprasellar lesion, as well as a stable residual 5 × 5 mm lesion in the left posterolateral margin of the 4th ventricle . Preoperative visual field testing showed decreased left eye visual acuity without field cuts. She has patched the left eye since her initial surgery to improve diplopia. The endocrine evaluation revealed a prolactin level of 82.2 ng/mL attributed to the stalk effect without additional overt hormonal deficiency. Given the growth of the suprasellar lesion and the need for tissue diagnosis, she presented in April 2023 for left-sided craniotomy for tumor resection.
The patient was treated with a left supraorbital craniotomy for tumor resection. Given her baseline functional status, we felt that an eyebrow incision provided the least invasive approach to access the tumor. A craniotomy was performed on the left side due to her existing right-sided deficits. We decided against an endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal approach, given the patient’s obesity and associated increased risk for CSF leak. We additionally felt an endonasal approach and potential complications may exacerbate the patient’s baseline dysphagia. During resection, the firm lesion was densely adherent to the hypothalamic surface. Meticulous dissection with microinstruments allowed a tissue plane to be developed, and tumor resection continued toward the sellar floor. Preservation of functioning pituitary tissue was attempted; however, the normal-appearing pituitary gland was not visualized throughout tumor dissection and debulking. A small tumor was residual and densely adherent to the optic apparatus and was left behind to allow vision preservation. Closure was completed in standard fashion using a pericranial graft for watertight dural repair. Similarly to her prior surgeries, pathology revealed WHO II atypical CPP, suggesting metastasis. She developed panhypopituitarism treated with a regimen of desmopressin, levothyroxine, and hydrocortisone. She had a prolonged hospital course complicated by worsened dysphagia and altered mental status attributed to hypoxia secondary to atelectasis. Her respiratory status gradually improved with positive pressure ventilation through BiPAP, and her mental status returned to her preoperative baseline. Her worsened that dysphagia, however, did persist and ultimately required gastrostomy tube placement. Postoperative imaging demonstrated a small residual lesion within the sella without evidence of surrounding