A 22-year-old male cook was admitted to the Dermatology Department of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University with a 15-day history of fever as well as escharotic and purpuric skin lesions on his lower limbs. The patient had self-administered ibuprofen (sustained-release capsules) and diclofenac sodium enteric-coated tablets for one week, one tablet per day, to relieve fever and pain; in addition, the local hospital gave him cephalosporin antibiotics intravenously for four days. The administered medications did not seem to work. The patient had a history of alcoholism, drinking 50–600 mL of beer or hard liquor (with an alcohol level of 58) per day for two years.
On admission, the patient’s body temperature (T) was 39°C, his pulse was 120 bpm, and his blood pressure was 154/108 mmHg. His height was 166 cm, and his weight was 90 kg, suggesting severe obesity according to Chinese weight standards. The physical examination found a black necrotic eschar with an area of approximately 3×7 cm in the center of the redness and swelling in his left groin area, at the root of the thigh. The texture was hard and difficult to peel, and there were subcutaneous nodules on the periphery . The skin T of the lesion area was higher than the surrounding normal tissue. Several enlarged lymph nodes could be palpated in the groin on both sides. The lower limbs were scattered with purpuric and necrotic crusted lesions . A color Doppler ultrasound examination revealed sonographic images of thrombosis in the small saphenous vein of the right lower limb, the calf segment of the bilateral great saphenous vein, the forearm segment of the cephalic vein of both arms, and the upper arm segment of the right cephalic vein. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large, fresh cerebral infarction, intracranial infection, lung infection, pleurisy, and pericardial effusion. A magnetic resonance imaging head scan with diffusion and lumbar spine analysis suggested large fresh infarctions in the left parietal frontal lobe and the occipital lobe.
The blood cell analysis showed the following: white blood cell (WBC) count 14.67 × 109/L; neutrophils (NEUT) 7.08 × 109/L; lymphocytes (LYMPH) 2.39 × 109/L; monocytes (MONO) 0.64 × 109/L; eosinophils (EO) 4.53 × 109/L; basophils 0.03 × 109/L; red blood cell (RBC) count 4.69 × 1012/L; hemoglobin (HGB) 148 g/L; and platelet (PLT) count 19 × 109/L. Coagulation showed a prothrombin time (PT) of 17.8 s, a PT ratio of 1.37, an international normalized ratio of 1.49, an activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 50.9 s, a fibrinogen (FIB) of 2.00 g/L, a thrombin time of 17.0 s, a D-dimer of 44.28 ug/mL, an antithrombin III (AT) of 87.0%, and fibrin degradation products of >150.0 μg/mL.
On day two, the patient experienced pain in the skin lesions and in the back, headache with vertigo, sputum-free cough, diarrhea, and stomach ache, all gradually increasing in severity.
On day seven, the patient developed abdominal pain. Hematemesis was 20 mL, and blood in the stool was 1500 mL. Occult blood tests of fecal and stomach contents were both positive. An ordinary gastroscopy and duodenal examination showed gastrointestinal bleeding, but no bleeding points were found. A pulmonary artery CT angiography (CTA) showed multiple pulmonary embolisms in each lobe, segment, and sub-segment of both lungs. An abdominal CT revealed the following: (1) there was suspected liver damage; (2) the middle and right veins of the liver, the main portal vein, the left and right branches, the splenic vein, and the superior mesenteric vein had multiple embolisms; (3) the left inguinal area had obvious swelling, and the density of the subcutaneous fat was mixed. This was considered inflammatory.
On day 10, the patient had difficulty breathing, irritability, and a progressive decline in blood oxygen saturation and partial pressure of oxygen. Respiratory failure was considered. He was transferred to the Department of Emergency Critical Care Medicine and was injected with sedative drugs. A right subclavian vein puncture and a catheterization were performed to give intravenous hypernutrition. There were no special findings in the fiberoptic bronchoscopy. A blood biochemical analysis showed liver function damage, renal function damage, hypokalemia, hyperchloremia, and hypernatremia; the blood gas indicated a decompensated period of metabolic acidosis. The patient was in a continuous coma without sedation medicine with a T of 37.6°C–39.5°C.
On day 20, the patient was given continuous renal replacement therapy. The patient’s consciousness improved, and he was able to respond. He had a body T of 37.6°C–38.5°C. He defecated tar-like stools with positive occult blood test twice for a total of 800 mL. The PLT increased to 61 × 109/L, after which the patient was extubated, and oxygen was administered by mask.
On day 22, the patient was returned to the Dermatology Department.
On day 24, his blood chloride increased, his oxygen partial pressure was 48%, his carbon dioxide partial pressure was 23%, his HGB was 48 g/L, and he was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). In addition, femoral artery puncture catheterization and monitoring by Pulse index Continuous Cardiac Output (PiCCO) (Pulsion Medical Systems, Germany), radial artery puncture catheterization and invasive blood pressure monitoring, and peripheral puncture central venous catheterization were given.
On day 30, the patient still had active bloody stools (170 mL) and a bruise (15 × 20 cm) with edema appeared on the right upper limb.
On day 36, his T was 37°C–39°C, and his HGB was 80 g/L. He was returned to the Dermatology Department.
On day 41, red liquid drained from the patient’s gastric tube, accompanied by palpitations, shortness of breath, and convulsions after a little activity.
On day 44, his breathing difficulty symptoms worsened. The mask was given at 66–78% oxygen saturation, and the patient was transferred to the ICU again. He was given thoracentesis catheter drainage, tracheal intubation, and mechanical ventilation.
On day 52, his condition gradually improved. His T was 37°C–37.8°C, and the PLT was 355 × 109/L. His coagulation function was improved.
On day 56, the patient was in a stable condition with normal body T, and he was returned to dermatology.
On day 57, a gastroscopy showed varicose veins in the fundus of the stomach and chronic non-atrophic gastritis.
On day 66, a portal venous system CTA showed the following: (1) the manifestations of splenic infarction and the (2) thrombosis of the portal vein, hepatic arteriovenous, and inferior vena cava had disappeared.
On day 67, the patient’s thigh root skin lesion area was significantly reduced, the texture became soft, and there was no tenderness. The purpura-like skin lesions on both calves had completely subsided, his vital signs were stable, and all laboratory indicators were stable Additionally, his weight had dropped to 46 kg. Therefore, the patient was discharged.
Daily laboratory tests showed the following: continually increasing WBC and EO counts; thrombocytopenia ; elevated PT/APTT; elevated thrombolytic dimer; reduced AT; low FIB, a concern for DIC ; decreased serum total protein and albumin; abnormally elevated transaminase; high levels of serum bilirubin and bile acids, suggesting liver damage ; abnormally elevated muscle enzymology ; abnormally elevated creatinine and uric acid causing a concern for renal function failure ; abnormally elevated fasting blood glucose and serum iron ; proteinuria; fecal occult blood; and an abnormal decrease in protein C of 43.1% (70.0–140.0).
All the autoantibody profiles were negative. Complement C3 reduced to 0.43 g/L (0.79–1.52 g/L), and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein increased between 97.10–354.00 mg/L (<10 mg/L).
Pathogen culture: The blood, sputum, and secretions under the skin lesions were cultured for a variety of bacteria, including multi-drug-resistant bacteria . Three specimens were positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae . The results of the high-throughput genetic testing of the pathogenic microorganism DNA were consistent. Human herpesvirus type 5 was detected in both the patient’s blood and skin lesions . Additionally, an oral mucosa fungus microscopic examination was positive .
Histopathological examination of the skin lesions revealed the following: (1) the formation of epidermal serous callus; (2) extensive liquefaction and degeneration of the basal layer; (3) stenosis and occlusion of most of the vascular lumen of the dermis and subcutaneous tissue; (4) fibrinoid necrosis of the blood vessel walls; (5) inflammatory thrombosis filling in part of the blood vessel cavities; (6) extensive dermis collagen sheet necrosis; (7) hyperplasia of the subcutaneous superficial adipose tissue; (8) necrosis of the fat cells in the lobules; and (9) mixed inflammatory cell infiltration ( and ).
Rescue and treatment: (1) Continuous renal replacement therapy, tracheal intubation, mechanical ventilation, continuous alternating infusion of ordinary frozen plasma and cryoprecipitate clotting factors, and suspended RBC and PLT apheresis were administered when necessary. (2) A variety of sensitive and broad-spectrum antibiotics were utilized and administered based on experience or drug sensitivity results. (3) Medium-dose glucocorticoids (ie, methylprednisolone), intravenous immunoglobulin, hemostasis, acid suppression and stomach protection, liver protection, etc., were given (: Main medications and treatments). After treatment, the patient’s condition improved, and all abnormal laboratory indicators mentioned above gradually returned to their normal ranges (: Changes in laboratory examination results).
The main diagnoses were AIPF, acute cellulitis, sepsis, diffuse intravascular coagulation, multiple organ failure, acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding, acute respiratory distress syndrome, pulmonary embolism, extensive cerebral infarction, hepatic vein thrombosis, portal vein thrombosis, splenic vein thrombosis, superior mesenteric vein thrombosis, deep vein thrombosis of upper limbs and lower extremities formation, lung infection, oral Candida infection, and liver damage/abnormal liver function.