A healthy 28-year-old woman presented with vesicular genital lesions. She was diagnosed with primary HSV-2 infection, as confirmed by a positive HSV-2 PCR performed on a genital lesion swab. She was treated with valacyclovir 500 mg twice a day for 10 days. Ten days after the end of treatment, she experienced two episodes of urinary retention episodes, requiring intermittent urinary catheterization, as well as paresthesia involving the soles of the feet, as well as her toes, vulva and anus.
On admission, she was alert and oriented in time, space and situation (Glasgow score: 15), hemodynamically stable and afebrile. She did not have any signs of meningitis, cranial nerves, deep tendon reflexes, and motor and sensory exams were normal apart from the persistence of paresthesia. The anal tone was preserved. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
The serum leukocyte count was normal (7.2 G/L; normal value: 4–11 G/L), and the C-reactive protein was <0.30 mg/L (Normal value: 0–10 mg/L). The analysis of the CSF showed a clear fluid, a moderately elevated white blood cell count (58 M/L; Normal value: 0–5 M/L) with a lymphocytic predominance (94%), a discrete proteinorachia at 0.76 g/L (Normal value: 0.15–0.045 g/L) and a discrete hypoglycorachia (2.6 mmol/L; normal value: 2.8–4.0 mmol/L).
The multiplex PCR BioFire® FilmArray® Meningitis/Encephalitis (ME) Panel was negative for HSV-2 and positive for human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6); of note, the assay used does not distinguish HHV-6A from HHV-6B. The panel results for all other tested pathogens were negative.
An HSV-1/-2 real-time PCR (rPCR) assay in CSF was also negative, and so was the intrathecal anti-HSV-2 IgG synthesis antibody index. However, HSV-2 serology was positive with an IgM index at 29.3 (threshold 10) and IgG at 7.4 (threshold 1), which was suggestive of primary HSV-2 infection; HSV-1 serology IgM was positive with an IgM index at 24.8 (threshold 10) and serology IgG was negative at 0.3 (threshold 1); Epstein-Barr virus serology IgM was weakly positive at 1.50 (threshold 1) probably due to cross-reactivity with HSV-1.
The presence of HHV-6 DNA in the patient’s CSF was confirmed by a qualitative rPCR and quantified at 50,000 copies/mL using a quantitative rPCR (qPCR) assay. HHV-6 DNA was also detected and quantified in plasma (26,000 copies/mL), as well as in the patient’s nails, indicating inherited chromosomally integrated HHV-6 (iciHHV-6).
Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbosacral spine showed evidence of medullary cone myelitis, with possible inflammation at the level of the cauda equina, especially at sacral roots 1 and 2 and thoracic roots 11 and 12 .
The patient’s final diagnosis thus was primary HSV-2 infection-related radiculomyelitis, with fortuitous iciHHV-6 discovery.
A treatment consisting of intravenous (IV) acyclovir (10 mg/kg/8 h) associated with IV boluses of methylprednisone (1 g/daily for 3 days) was initiated on admission. IV Antiviral treatment was prescribed for a total of 12 days. Corticosteroid therapy was continued with a tapering regimen of oral prednisone, for a total of 17 days. Twelve days after her admission, the patient described an almost complete resolution of her paresthesias, the urinary catheter was removed without post-micturition residue, and good bladder emptying was observed despite the persistence of a slightly pathological flow curve.