The patient was a 4-month-old male infant who presented to the hospital with complaints of abdominal distention. The distension was noticed two months prior to presenting to our hospital. The distension was generalized and has been progressively increasing until presentation . There was no associated abdominal pain and no other abdominal symptoms.
Patient is the fourth child in a monogamous setting of
four children. There is no history of twining in the
family or in parents family. Prenatal period was
essentially uneventful with two prenatal ultrasound scans which were normal. He was delivered through
vagina delivery and birth weight was 4.6kg.
On examination, the abdomen was grossly distended. An abdominal ultrasound scan was done which revealed a huge heterogeneous predominantly cystic multiloculated intra-abdominal mass measuring about 26cm by 22cm containing areas of calcifications which appear to be arising from the upper right side of the abdomen extending inferiorly towards the pelvis and crossing the midline. The ultrasound scan suggested a teratoma. The electrolytes, urea and creatinine levels were normal. The full blood count and liver function test were also normal. The level of alpha -fetoprotein (AFP) and beta HCG were normal.
The patient had an MRI done which shows an extremely huge well circumscribed heterogeneous solid-cystic mass with varying signal intensities including fat located in the abdomen to the right possibly within the retroperitoneum. The cystic components are multilobular and do not show marginal enhancement following contrast
administration. It measures 18.2cm by 15.8cm by 15.
9cm.The MRI findings was that of features in keeping
with a mature cystic teratoma of the retroperitonuem.
The patient had an exploratory laparotomy. The patient was put under general anaesthesia and endotracheal intubation and through a transverse skin crease supraumbilical incision the peritoneal cavity was entered.
At laparotomy there was a huge cystic retroperitoneal
mass covered by a transparent membrane . This was displacing the bowels to the left ). The sac was opened revealing a huge mass with multiple fetal parts like the head with hair, back, poorly developed limbs and trunk. The mass was displacing the right kidney inferiorly and
the bowels to the right. The mass crossed the midline and was observed to be supplied by a vessel from a
branch of the ascending aorta.
The mass was completely removed and sent for histological examination.
Histological examination revealed on macroscopy; an irregularly shaped solid to cystic mass weighing 650g and measured 16.0 by 12.0 by 7.0cm. The mass had hair attached to the superior part of the mass, surface appendages which look like poorly developed extremities and other poorly defined fetal structures. The cut section revealed solid to cystic structures. Three tubular tissues were identified. The solid components contained bony structures in the midline appearing like vertebra column.
The microscopy showed sections of retroperitoneal mass showing benign lesions and composed of well-formed organs and structures from three germ layers. The structures from the ectoderm included the skin and appendages, neural tissue, ectocervical epithelium, meninges with psammoma bodies and brain tissues. Parts of the tissues from the mesoderm include chondroid and spongy bone, ectocervical stroma and myometrium. Parts of the endodermal tissues were intestinal glands.
The patient recovered smoothly and was discharged on the 12th day post operation with good healing at the first clinic attendance.