A 79-year-old man with a sustained virological response due to liver cirrhosis secondary to hepatitis C virus infection was diagnosed with a liver tumor on regular abdominal ultrasonography. The tumor, suspected to be HCC, was found in liver segment 5 on enhanced computed tomography (CT), and the patient was referred to our department for detailed examination and treatment. The patient was diagnosed with congenital FV deficiency approximately 20 years ago, and was hospitalized twice for epistaxis. As indicated in Table , blood tests showed markedly decreased FV activity of < 2.6%, PT activity of 11%, and prolonged APTT by 100.3 s, which are indicative of coagulopathy. Other coagulation factor activities, were within the normal range. The patient’s FV activity had been tested several times over the past 20 years and consistently resulted in markedly decreased FV activity. No FV inhibitors were detected using the Bethesda assay at our hospital [, ]. Cross-mixing tests revealed a pattern of coagulation factor deficiency. Although he had not undergone genetic testing, based on the blood test results and the reproducibility and ubiquity of these blood tests, he was diagnosed with congenital FV deficiency. The liver function reserve was Child–Pugh grade B (7 points). Liver damage was grade A, and the hepatic reserve was judged to be good . As no esophageal varices, gastric varices, or splenomegaly were observed, severe portal hypertension was ruled out. We consulted a cardiologist regarding the patient's cardiac function. The patient’s exercise tolerance was good, and no abnormalities were observed in active cardiac conditions and the revised cardiac risk index [, ]. Based on the above findings, the patient's cardiac function was considered acceptable for surgery, although caution was advised against excessive fluid infusion. Pulmonary function was good. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 24 mm-sized nodule in liver segment 5, which was deeply stained in the arterial phase and washed out in the delayed phase . Magnetic resonance imaging also showed a contrast effect in the segment 5 tumor in the early phase and wash-out in the delayed phase. A well-differentiated HCC was suspected. Based on the radiological findings, the patient was diagnosed with HCC (T2N0M0 stage II, according to the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control staging system). Based on the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging algorithm, this case was regarded as early stage (A). It was confirmed that surgery was recommended as the tumor was an isolated nodule, and portal pressure and bilirubin were normal. We also considered radiofrequency ablation (RFA); however, since the tumor was in contact with the Glissonean pedicle 5 + 6 and RFA may cause bile duct injury due to a rapid increase in intratumoral pressure during cauterization, surgery was judged to be superior from the viewpoint of safety and curability. However, invasive treatment involved a high risk due to the coexistence of congenital FV deficiency. After discussing the safety of the operation with a hematologist, we decided that surgery was possible by transfusing fresh frozen plasma (FFP) during the perioperative period, maintaining FV activity at ≥ 15% and closely monitoring PT and APTT. Two days before the operation, 480 mL (approximately 7.4 mL/kg) of FFP was transfused, coagulation FV activity was ≥ 15% was confirmed, and PT and APTT were reduced. As our hospital can only measure FV activity once per week, we estimated the necessary FFP based on the above results and created an FFP transfusion plan. The FV activity immediately before the operation was 14.5%, and the operation was performed with a transfusion of 480 mL of FFP. The changes in perioperative coagulation data are presented in Table . The surgical procedure and results of this case were as follows: the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position, and six ports, including a Pringle method taping port, were used. The pneumoperitoneum pressure was maintained at 10 mmHg. An ultrasonic scalpel and Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA; AMCO Inc., Tokyo, Japan) were used for the incision of the liver parenchyma. The tip of the CUSA was connected to a VIO 300 D generator (ERBE Elektromedizin GmbH, Tubingen, Germany), and hemostasis was performed in soft coagulation mode using bipolar forceps held in the operator's left hand. Intermittent pedicle clamps (15-minocclusion, 5-min reperfusion, Pringle method) were used during parenchymal cutting. Hemodynamic control aimed at maintaining low central venous pressure (< 5 mmHg) under anesthesia and weight loss perfusion minimizes blood loss Airway pressure was maintained at 14–16 cmH2O, reducing central venous pressure and volumetric perfusion. We adjusted the volume of transfusion during liver parenchymal cutting to approximately 5 mL/kg/h and aimed to achieve a urine volume of 0.5 mL/kg/h. Preoperative three-dimensional simulation was conducted using a SYNAPSE VINCENT volume analyzer (Fujiflim Co., Tokyo, Japan) . To resect the Glissonean pedicle 5 + 6, we first secured it by clamping . Segments 5 and 6 of the liver were identified by negative staining using indocyanine green fluorescent imaging navigation, and hepatectomy was performed Bleeding was minimized during the transection of the liver parenchyma and no bleeding tendency was observed . After hepatectomy, no bleeding was observed on the cut surface of the liver . Tachosil® was applied around the hepatic vein and Gleason stump, and Bolheal® was dripped onto the cut surface of the liver. Surgical procedures included laparoscopic hepatic segment 5 + 6 subsegmental resection and cholecystectomy. The operative time was 445 min, and the amount of intraoperative bleeding was 171 mL. The cumulative time of the Pringle method was 208 min and 51 s. Immediately after the operation, FV activity was 17.7%, and no bleeding from the wound or drain was observed. FFP (240 mL) was transfused on postoperative days 1 and 2. FV activity decreased to < 2.6% on the fifth postoperative day; therefore, another 240 mL of FFP was transfused and the drain was removed. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 8 days after the operation . Postoperative pathological examination revealed that the tumor was macroscopically demarcated and accompanied by a capsule, which was diagnosed as a stage IB (pT1bN0M0) HCC . One month after the surgery, no complications were observed.