A 56-year-old man with no previously known comorbidities presented with a 3-week history of radicular pain along the medial aspect of the left arm and forearm, numbness along the medial aspect of the left arm and forearm, and progressive left-hand grip weakness.
On examination, he had left-sided partial ptosis and miosis , wasting of the left forearm muscles and small muscles of the hand , weakness of the intrinsic muscles of the left hand, and decreased sensation along the medial aspect of his left arm and forearm. His reflexes were normal.
Blood counts and inflammatory markers were normal. Chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) thorax were normal. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervicothoracic spine revealed T1-T2 disc prolapse on T2-weighted images [ and ]. On injecting gadolinium, contrast-enhancement [ and ] was seen around the T1-T2 disc space. The lesion was seen compressing the left T1 nerve root. The radiological differential diagnosis of the lesion we considered was (i) inflammatory lesions such as pyogenic discitis or Pott’s spine, (ii) benign lesions such as schwannoma, neurofibroma, or meningioma, (iii) malignant lesions such as metastasis, lymphoma, or Pancoast tumor, or (iv) cervicothoracic IVDP.
Under general anesthesia, he underwent left T1 hemilaminectomy, upper half of left T2 hemilaminectomy, and removal of the lesion through a posterior approach in prone position with electrophysiological monitoring. Intraoperatively, the foraminal lesion was seen filling the left T1 foramen and pushing the T1 nerve root superiorly and the dural tube medially. The lesion appeared fibrous and was seen extending into the T1-T2 disc space. The lesion was removed and the nerve root and dural tube were made lax. The dura and the nerve roots were not infiltrated by the lesion. There was no purulent material. Biopsy of the lesion revealed tissue consistent with disc material with no evidence of granuloma, atypical, or malignant cells. The tissue culture from the lesion was reported as sterile. Immediately after surgery, his left upper limb radicular pain improved significantly. At 3-month follow-up, there was a total improvement in his left upper limb radicular pain, numbness, and weakness. Left forearm wasting was gradually improving, and there was residual minimal Horner’s syndrome.