A 10-year-old Caucasian male was referred by his optometrist due to a ‘chorioretinal scar’ found incidentally in the left eye during a routine dilated examination in 2010. The patient had no ocular complaints and his best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 OU. The patient had no significant past medical or ocular history, including exposure to retinotoxic drugs or infectious processes such as toxoplasmosis. There was no known family ocular history. Observation was elected and a fundus photograph was taken at this time.
The patient returned for a routine follow-up visit in 2015. He remained asymptomatic and there was no change in vision and no new medical history. Color fundus photography from October 2015 shows a well-defined, ovoid-shaped, hyperpigmented lesion that is 1.74 × 0.67 mm in size and temporal to the macula. It is surrounded by a halo of patchy hypopigmentation. Color fundus photography from June 2010 shows the same lesion 5 years ago.
Over these 5 years, the hyperpigmented torpedo lesion appears to have assumed a more ovoid shape and increased in size in the vertical axis. There also seems to be a change in the area of the surrounding hypopigmentation, most notably an increased amount of hypopigmentation superonasal to the lesion. The appearance of a small, hypopigmented, almost pearlescent-colored spot becomes more apparent in the 2015 image (arrow in fig. ). The same hypopigmented spot can also be seen in the photo from 2010, although it was much smaller at that time .
EDI-OCT of the lesion from 2015 demonstrates RPE clumping and migration that corresponds to the pseudo-lacuna . There is also disruption of the ellipsoid zone and mild thinning of the outer retina, which is overlying a subretinal cleft . The inner retinal layers appear normal and well organized. The choroid beneath the lesion demonstrates hyporeflectivity and normal choroidal thickness.
FAF reveals globally reduced autofluorescence of the hyperpigmented torpedo lesion with a surrounding rim of hyperautofluorescence. The pseudo-lacuna lesion demonstrates an area of markedly increased autofluorescence .
Early and late phases of FA show a hypofluorescent lesion with a rim of hyperfluoresence . The area of the pseudo-lacunae in the center of the lesion also remains hypofluorescent in both phases (arrow in fig. ). There is no leakage on the angiogram.
Given the lack of symptoms and the absence of neovascular activity or leakage on the OCT and FA, it was decided to continue to observe the patient on an annual basis. The patient was given an Amsler grid and instructed to call if he experienced any new vision changes.