The 4-year-old girl described here was hospitalized in the Pediatric Ward of the General Hospital of Terni in the Umbria Region of Italy due to a productive cough over the previous 3 weeks and a fever > 38 °C associated with tachypnea over the previous 2 days. Her familial and personal medical histories were negative for relevant diseases, including respiratory infections. The child was born at term after a normal pregnancy. At admission, her physical and neurodevelopmental growth were in the normal range. However, she was febrile (axillary temperature 39.2 °C) and had dyspnea with retractions, grunting and nasal flaring. An examination revealed a respiratory rate of 40 breaths/min, heart rate of 111 beats/min, oxygen saturation in room air of 96%, and blood pressure of 104/68 mmHg. A chest examination revealed fine crackling rales in the left upper field associated with bilateral wheezing. All other systems were normal.
Chest radiography and a series of laboratory tests, including a blood culture, complete blood cell count, serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin levels, liver enzymes, renal function markers, and Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae antibody concentrations were performed. Moreover, a nasopharyngeal swab for the identification of respiratory bacteria and a Mantoux test were performed. A chest X-ray revealed segmental consolidation of the lingula of the left lung. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis (15,800 white blood cells/mm3 with 50.3% neutrophils), a slight increase in serum C-reactive protein (11.9 mg/L) and normal procalcitonin values (< 0.12 ng/mL). Blood liver enzymes and renal function markers were normal. A nasopharyngeal swab culture did not reveal viral or bacterial respiratory pathogens, including atypical bacteria. The Mantoux test was negative after 48 h, and atypical bacterial antibodies were not detected.
A blood culture revealed the presence of a Gram-negative, lactose-fermenting rod that was oxidase negative and catalase positive. The isolate was identified by means of the VITEK®2 identification system (bioMérieux, Firenze, Italy) as Ea. This identification was confirmed by sequencing the 16 s ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) and comparing the result with a previously published genetic sequence. The antimicrobial susceptibility test carried out by disk diffusion method showed susceptibilities against amikacin, ampicillin, cefotaxime, cefoxitin, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, imipenem, piperacillin, piperacillin-tazobactam, and tetracycline, but was intermediate against sulfametoxazole/trimethoprim and resistant to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, fosfomycin, and oxacillin.
Table summarizes clinical, laboratory and radiological findings at admission, during hospitalization and at the follow-up visit. The child was immediately treated orally with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (50 mg/kg/die of the amoxicillin component in 3 doses) and erythromycin (50 mg/kg/die in 3 divided doses). Moreover, aerosolized beclometasone in saline solution was administered two times per day. The improvement in the patient’s respiratory condition was rapid. Two days after hospital admission, the resolution of her respiratory abnormalities was complete, CRP levels returned to normal values, and the aerosolized therapy was stopped. Moreover, based on the results of a blood culture and sensitivity tests, the amoxicillin-clavulanic acid medication was stopped after 3 days. Erythromycin was continued for a total of 10 days, and the child was discharged after 3 days in the hospital. Follow-up visit 1 month later did not reveal any respiratory problems.
Management of the case was approved by the Ethics Committee of General Hospital of Terni, Italy (2018-PED-02). The patients’ parents provided their written informed consent for the management of their child and the publication of the case report.