A 52-year-old male with a past medical history significant for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, dyslipidemia, and hypertension presented to our facility for an elective atrial fibrillation ablation after his atrial fibrillation became increasingly symptomatic and refractory to medical therapy. Electrocardiogram at time of elective ablation revealed a normal sinus rhythm with heart rate of 79 beats per minute and a normal early repolarization pattern with no other findings . After a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed no identifiable thrombus, the patient underwent the procedure. The patient underwent cryoablation of the pulmonary veins and the posterior wall of the left atrium. The left isthmus was ablated without successful bidirectional block despite aggressive ablation of the endocardial and epicardial region. The right isthmus was then ablated with successful bidirectional block. The patient tolerated the procedure well, with the maintenance of the activated clotting time (ACT) greater than 300 with heparin that was reversed with protamine sulfate after the procedure with removal of the right femoral vein sheaths. The patient was discharged later that day with sotalol 80 mg orally twice daily, clopidogrel 75 mg orally daily, and aspirin 325 mg orally daily.
The following day, the patient returned to the emergency department with nine out of ten chest pain that was mid-sternal in location. Electrocardiogram at time of presentation revealed normal sinus rhythm with heart rate 78 beats per minute with anterolateral ST-segment elevations in leads I and aVL and V2 -V4, reciprocal inferior ST-segment depressions in leads III and aVF and subtle PR-segment depressions . Serum troponin I was 17.2 ng/ml, with a creatinine concentration of 0.97 mg/dl and hemoglobin level of 15 g/dl. Because of the evidence of ST-segment myocardial infarction (STEMI), the patient underwent emergent coronary angiography. Coronary angiography revealed no significant coronary artery disease (<50% luminal stenosis), with a left ventriculogram revealing an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 60% and no mitral valve regurgitation or regional wall motion abnormalities.
A 2D transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed the day following the left heart catheterization to evaluate for pericardial effusion, revealing a LVEF of 55-60%, normal left ventricular diastolic filling, and a normal pericardium with no evidence of pericardial effusion.
It was thought that patient was suffering from regional post-procedural pericarditis and treated with colchicine 0.6 mg orally and aspirin 325 mg orally with resolution of chest pain. The patient was then discharged the following day with colchicine 0.6 mg orally daily for 30 days, hydrocodone/acetaminophen 5 mg/325 mg orally every 8 hours as needed for pain, aspirin 325 mg orally daily, clopidogrel 75 mg orally daily, sotalol 80 mg orally twice daily, and pantoprazole 40 mg orally daily with resolution of chest pain.