A 17-year-old male, presented to the emergency department of our institute, following road traffic accident. He was unable to stand after the accident and was complaining pain around left hip, left thigh, and leg. Patient was managed as per advance trauma life support protocol. On secondary survey, pelvic compression test was positive and tenderness was elicited over left thigh and leg. There was no distal neurovascular deficit. Radiological evaluation showed left transverse mid shaft femur fracture, spiral fracture distal third tibia, and transverse acetabulum fracture with complete disruption of sacroiliac (SI) joint . Fracture of transverse process of L5 vertebra and left superior and inferior pubic rami was also present. Computerized tomography (CT) was done to further appreciate the fracture geometry. CT showed superior and medial displacement of ileum which was completely separated from sacrum and also ischium and pubis through transverse fracture through ileum .
Patient developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) the same day and was intubated and shifted to critical care unit. As a measure of damage control orthopedics, tibia and femur were temporarily stabilized with external fixator. Patient was kept on ventilatory support for 2 weeks. One week after weaning off from ventilator, intramedullary nailing was done for both tibia and femur. Five days; thereafter, patient was planned for open reduction anterior and internal fixation of pelvis and acetabulum. SI joint dislocation was addressed first from lateral window of ilioinguinal approach along with anterior superior iliac spine osteotomy for enhanced exposure. As already it was about a month post-injury, reduction of ileum to its anatomic position was a sizable challenge, which was accomplished using following maneuvers in synergism. Axial traction was applied by an assistant. A Schanz Pin was inserted through the lateral aspect of ileum percutaneously, in a manner similar to iliosacral screw up to the articular facet under vision and was then withdrawn slightly. This Schanz Pin was used to apply lateral traction. A blunt Hohmann retractor was passed from under the ileum up to lateral aspect of sacrum, protecting L5 nerve root. Maintaining the axial and lateral traction, Ileum was levered into its position and fixed anteriorly using recon plates. Acetabulum was then reduced using a picador through the same approach and fixed with 7 mm ccs inserted as anterior column screw. Post-operative radiographs are shown in .
Postoperatively, patient had weakness in ankle dorsiflexion which completely recovered by 3 months. Aspirin 75 mg along with compression stockings was advised for 6 weeks in post-operative period as prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis. There were no other complications. Patient was discharged on seventh post-operative day. Follow-up was scheduled at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and yearly thereafter. Sitting and partial weight bearing was allowed at 6 weeks. Radiograph at 6 months follow-up showed bony consolidation of all the fractures suggestive of fracture union and hence full weight bearing was initiated. Patient resumed his normal routine after 1 year.