The patient was a 46-year-old man who had undergone vascular grafting of the ascending aorta and aortic arch for Stanford type A aortic dissection one year before coming to our department. He had experienced occasional fevers and night sweats for 6 months prior to his presentation to our department (4 months after surgery). He later presented weight loss of 10 kg and a fever of 39 °C, and visited the emergency room the day before coming to our department. At the time of his emergency visit, his CRP was only slightly elevated, with no obvious focus of fever, and his general condition was relatively good; therefore, blood cultures were taken, and follow-up was done as an outpatient. However, from blood cultures (4/4), gram-positive cocci were detected, and the patient was referred to our department for consultation and hospitalized the next day.
On admission, his vital signs were as follows: consciousness level clear, temperature 39.3 ℃, blood pressure 116/74 mmHg, pulse rate 96/min, respiratory rate 21/min, oxygen saturation 98% on room air. No abnormalities were found on head and neck examination. Heart and lung sounds were normal. Abdominal examination revealed no tenderness or hepatomegaly, but showed splenomegaly. There were no petechiae, Janeway lesions, Osler nodes, swollen or inflamed skin and joints, or lymphadenopathy. Laboratory data revealed 7, 700/μL (neutrophil 81.0%, lymphocyte 12.4%, monocyte 4.5%) of white blood cells; 7.9 mg/dL of C-reactive protein CRP; ferritin, 353 ng/mL; rheumatoid factor, 19 IU/mL; C3, 83 mg/dL; C4, 28 mg/dL; anti-nuclear antibody < 40 titers; PR3-ANCA, 2.7 IU/mL; MPO-ANCA, 1.4 IU/mL; and soluble Interleukin 2 receptor 1130 U/mL. T-SPOT.TB was negative. Urinary dip test revealed protein 3 + and blood 1 + . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed fluid correction around the aortic graft, hepatomegaly (spleen index = 720), and splenomegaly with multiple thrombi .
Because meeting the modified Duke criteria was possible, we suspected aortic graft infection with infective endocarditis, and intravenous ampicillin (2 g every 4 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g every 12 h) were initiated. Blood culture identified Enterococcus faecalis (E. faecalis) by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF Biotyper, Bruker Daltonics). Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography revealed no vegetation. Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT on the 10th day showed hyperaccumulation around the aortic graft and spleen . We finally diagnosed aortic graft infection due to E. faecali, and the cardiac surgeon performed aortic arch replacement on the 20th day. After surgery, we de-escalated antibiotics to ampicillin monotherapy. The fever resolved on postoperative day 2 (the 22nd day from admission), and E. faecalis was identified in the tissue culture of the graft . After six weeks of intravenous ampicillin monotherapy, his clinical condition improved, and he was discharged on postoperative day 44 (the 64th day from admission) and switched to oral amoxicillin for three months . After a half-year follow-up, the size of the splenomegaly decreased , and there was no relapse after antibiotic therapy was completed.