A 24-year-old G4 P3 Caucasian female with a history of hypertension and type II diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency room with vaginal bleeding at 13 weeks of gestation. On presentation, she reported dizziness, diaphoresis, tremors, anxiety, palpitations, nausea, and leg swelling. Review of system was negative for headache or scotomas. Her vital signs showed blood pressure 141/80 mmHg, heart rate 97 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 per minute, and temperature 98.4°F. Physical examination was significant for gravid uterus and bilateral lower extremity edema and had fine tremors of both hands. Thyroid gland was normal in size without any nodules. Laboratory studies revealed suppressed TSH, elevated free T4, and absence of thyroid antibodies including thyrotropin-receptor antibodies (TRAb), thyroperoxidase antibodies (TPOAb), and thyroglobulin antibodies (TgAb). 24 hour urine protein was 200 mg/day and urine protein/creatinine ratio 0.2 in a random urine specimen. Pelvic ultrasound showed twin gestation with one complete HM and one coexisting normal fetus . Based on clinical and biochemical evidence of hyperthyroidism with elevated human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) levels in the absence of autoantibodies, a diagnosis of GTH was made.
After extensive discussion regarding risk of developing complications associated with molar pregnancy , she preferred to proceed with her current pregnancy until viability of fetus. As she was into her 2nd trimester of pregnancy, she was started on methimazole and the dose was titrated to achieve a goal free T4 in the upper range of normal (normal range = 0.8–1.7 ng/dL) to prevent fetal hypothyroidism. She was also on metoprolol 25 mg daily for chronic hypertension which was continued throughout the pregnancy. She also developed preeclampsia at 16 weeks of pregnancy with 24 hr urine protein of 3729 mg/day. She was again recommended termination of pregnancy, but she preferred to proceed with her pregnancy. At 24th weeks of gestation, pregnancy was complicated by worsening preeclampsia and she eventually underwent a lower segment cesarean section with delivery of a viable fetus and evacuation of molar pregnancy. The weight of the baby was 645 gram, and APGAR score was 1 at 1 minute, 2 at 5 minutes, and 3 at 10 minutes. Postoperatively, gross examination of the tissue revealed fragments of pink-red spongy soft tissue without any fetal parts or abnormal Z line, while microscopic examination revealed hydropic villi and trophoblastic proliferation confirming the diagnosis of a complete mole . Histopathology of placenta revealed a singleton placenta weighing 156 grams and measuring 13.8 × 11.3 × 2.6 cm. At the time of delivery, she was on very low dose of methimazole, and therefore, it was discontinued. She remained clinically and biochemically euthyroid in the postpartum period. Her hCG gradually trended to a normal range of 17 weeks after delivery, and she had spontaneous remission of molar pregnancy as supported by low hCG levels at 1-year follow-up . The preterm infant did not have any gross abnormalities, and screening for congenital hypothyroidism was negative both at birth with TSH < 2.91 μU/mL (normal range < 20 μU/mL) and free T4 8.2 μg/dL (normal range ≥ 5 μg/dL) and at two months postdelivery with TSH < 2.91 μU/mL (normal range < 20 μU/mL) and free T4 6.7 μg/dL (normal range ≥ 5°μg/dL). Unfortunately, the baby needed mechanical ventilation for respiratory distress syndrome and gradually developed bronchopulmonary dysplasia requiring need for prolonged mechanical ventilation and underwent tracheostomy. He was transferred to a long-term care facility.