A 55-year-old woman was investigated for nonspecific lower abdominal and back pain. The patient's past medical and surgical history was clear and physical examination as well as routine haematological and biochemical laboratory investigations were unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed an approximately 10 × 10 cm tumor in the retroperitoneal space, immediately anterior to the aortic bifurcation, high in the pelvis, and posteriorly to the upper third of the rectum . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis followed and confirmed the solid nature of this mass, showing that it was independent from the bowel/rectum, featuring a retroperitoneal sarcoma type of mass rather than a lymph nodal bloc .
After multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting discussion, surgical exploration was decided and performed via midline laparotomy. Bilateral ureter guidewires were inserted intraoperatively, to facilitate identification of the ureters. The left colon was mobilized and the total mesorectal excision (TME) surgical plane was entered; the tumor was mobilized and excised in clear margins macroscopically without any intraoperative adverse events . There was no close relation of the tumor to any adjacent anatomical structure, having its blood supply from small arterial branches originating from the common iliac arteries and the mesentery of the rectum. The mass was resected without compromising the integrity of the rectum or the sigmoid colon, excluding any relationship with the uterus as well. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on the 7th day postop.
Histopathological examination showed a neoplasm composed of bland and uniform oval to spindle cells with minimal cytoplasm, small elongated nuclei, and indistinct nucleoli . The tumor exhibited an overall patternless architecture of hypo- and hypercellular areas separated by thick, hyalinized collagen with cracking artifact and staghorn vessels. The neoplasm had minimal pleomorphism, no atypia, and rare mitotic figures (<1 mitoses per 10 High Power Fields). Neither necrosis nor hemorrhagic alterations were observed. Immunohistochemical examination showed positive staining for Bcl-2, CD34 , vimentin, and CD99 while desmin and S-100 were negative. The Ki-67 index was 7%, confirming the overall indolent nature of this tumor. Final diagnosis was retroperitoneal solitary fibrous tumor.
No adjuvant treatment was decided on the MDT and the patient remains asymptomatic and tumor free on follow-up visits one year later.