The patient was a 19-month-old infant girl who presented with a two-week history of fever. with no sign of cough, respiratory distress, or abdominal tenderness. The patient did not have any history of recurrent infections; however, since the patient’s sibling had passed away at two months old following vaccination with BCG, oral poliovirus vaccine, and hepatitis B vaccine, the possibility of immunodeficiency was considered. The consanguinity history of her parents was positive and the patient’s grandmother suffered from systemic lupus erythematous. She had hepatosplenomegaly and generalized lymphadenopathy in her physical examination. The patient had not received BCG vaccine due to the possibility of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). HLH was then ruled out by bone marrow aspiration and biopsy which showed essentially cellular marrow with mild shift to the left and no evidence of hemophagocytosis. Chest and abdominopelvic CT scans were taken which showed multiple lymphadenopathies in hilar and para-aortic regions as well as ground-glass opacities suggestive of pneumonic infiltration in the lower lobes of both lungs. Immunodeficiency workup was done for the patient and the results of her laboratory studies are summarized in Table . She had near-normal flowcytometry with high IgM and IgE. Moreover, since she had eosinophilia in her complete blood count, fungal infections were considered. PCR of whole blood for Aspergillus fumigatus came back positive and the whole blood PCR for Mycobacterium came back negative. The Whole Exome Sequencing of the patient showed autosomal recessive IFNGR1 (NM_000416:exon6) mutation of Chr6-137522134 T-c.745delA:p.1249Ffs*11 which was confirmed by Sanger sequencing method. Also, the parents of the patient underwent whole exome sequencing and they were heterozygote for the same mutation; thus, showing the autosomal recessive nature of this disease.
The patient also had a homozygote mutation in SH2B3 mutation; however, this mutation was not confirmed by Sanger sequencing method due to financial constraints.
The patient then received two weeks of intravenous Voriconazole 4 mg/Kg every 12 h, Vancomycin 10 mg/Kg every six hours, and Meropenem 40 mg/Kg every eight hours. She was discharged with oral Voriconazole 4 mg/Kg every 12 h for three months. In her follow up session after one month she had no signs and symptoms and her lab data was as follows in Table .
She was planned to have hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and HLA typing was done for her and her family members; however, no matched donor was found. Prophylactic antibacterial, antiviral, and antifungal antibiotics were started for her. Moreover, due to the mutation in SH2B3 she was put on Rituximab 375 mg/m2/dose once every two weeks; however, after three doses of Rituximab, she developed severe bloody diarrhea which in further follow up turned out to be Salmonellosis which she was previously prone to due to IFNGRD. Rituximab was discontinued for the patient but she developed septic shock and is currently under treatment for this condition.