A 62-year-old male, known case of hypertension, presented to our department with complaints of swelling, deformity of the right knee, and inability to walk comfortably without the support of a cane. The patient presents with a history of trauma to the right knee – traumatic anterior dislocation, in a road traffic accident in rural India 12 years back for which he received treatment from local osteopaths. There was no other significant history and the patient did not receive any other formal treatment. Physical examination revealed a deformed right knee with anteroposterior (AP) enlargement and fullness in the suprapatellar pouch . Range of motion included a passive hyperextension of 20° and active flexion up to 110° . Further examination revealed a very unstable lax knee in the mediolateral and AP planes. An anterior drawer test leads to anterior dislocation of the knee with tibia subluxation anterior to the femoral articular surface. The extensor mechanisms and neurovascular functions were found intact. On radiological examination, the right knee AP X-ray revealed a dislocated knee with secondary osteoarthritic changes . On lateral view, an anteriorly dislocated knee with increased posterior slope with bone defect of the tibia articular surface is seen with secondary osteoarthritic changes. On giving a posterior drawer force, it is seen that the knee gets reduced proving the instability of the knee joint . Additional pre-operative scanogram is taken to measure the limb alignment . MRI scan of the knee was done which revealed severe degenerative osteoarthritis with posterior femoral translation, upper tibial remodeling, severe joint effusion with villous lipomatous proliferation, and synovial thickening. Anterior cruciate ligament was not visualized, lax hyperintense posterior cruciate ligament, lax collateral ligaments with volume loss degeneration of both medial and lateral menisci. These findings seconded the clinical examination findings. The importance of MRI in such cases is to reveal the soft-tissue conditions and status of the ligaments which can help in operative decision-making.
After detailed explanation of the risks and benefits to the patient and relatives, total knee replacement of the right knee was performed.
A midline incision using the conventional medial parapatellar approach to the knee was made. Intraoperative examination revealed loss of articular cartilage with alteration in the morphology of both femoral and tibial condyles. Tibial posterior condyles had huge bony defects more in the posteromedial condyle . The medial and lateral collateral complexes were found to be lax. The proximal tibial and femoral cuts were taken as per standard practice to achieve standard mechanical alignment. The posteromedial tibial defect was reconstructed with bone grafts and cement . Further, to add stability, a metaphyseal sleeve with stem was used along with tibial base plate. The final implantation was done using DePuy Sigma®TC3 (Depuy Synthes, Warsaw, Indiana) cemented femoral component with distal augments and a 14 × 125 mm PFC® Sigma® fluted femoral stem, a DePuy MBT Revision Tibial Tray Rotating platform Cemented with 29-mm MBT Revision Cemented Metaphyseal Sleeve and 13 × 30 mm cemented modular stem. Stability was achieved using Sigma® Rotating platform TC3 Tibial Insert of size 17.5 mm .
The patella was resurfaced with Oval Dome Patella-3 peg of size 35 mm. The mediolateral and AP stability along with patella tracking were ascertained during trial implantation and after final implantation hence hinged fully constrained prosthesis was not used, even though it was kept ready in our surgical armamentarium. There was no residual hyperextension or fixed flexion deformity and passive flexion on table was up to 130° which was felt satisfactory. No major complications such as infection, wound breakdown, deep venous thrombosis, or vascular injury occurred.
The post-operative radiograph revealed a well-aligned and well-fixed prosthesis . The patient was made to walk comfortable on the same day and was very satisfied with the final outcome. At the latest 3rd-month follow-up, the patient has a stable knee with a good range of motion of 0–110° . 3rd-month radiographs show a well-fixed prosthesis .