A 55-year-old female patient visited a local clinic with a tick bite. She had no symptoms such as a headache, fever, nausea, or vomiting, but she had visited the local dermatology clinic on the day before our hospital visit to have the tick removed. She had been prescribed minocycline at the local clinic and had taken one dose in the evening before and one in the morning on the day of the visit to our hospital. She came to the Chosun University Hospital, Korea, outpatient clinic on June 19, 2018, for a second opinion. The patient was not sure of when she had been bitten by the tick. On the basis of her statement, that she had worked in fields 10–15 days before the hospital visit, we suspected that the tick had been on her for ~ 10 days. During the physical examination, we found a tick bite site on the lower part of her right clavicle. Although the tick was disposed of after it was removed, she brought a picture of the tick after the removal .
Although we could not accurately classify the tick morphologically or genetically, it was highly likely a nymph of either Amblyomma spp. or Haemaphysalis spp., which are common in Korea. All the laboratory test results were within reference ranges: the first blood test results revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 5.1 × 103/μL, hemoglobin of 13.8 g/dL, and a platelet count of 2.47 × 105/μL; the blood biochemical test results showed aspartate aminotransferase (AST) at 17.9 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) at 17.1 U/L, γ-glutamyltransferase at 21 U/L, total bilirubin at 0.48 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) at 56 U/L, glucose of 86 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen of 13.3 mg/dL, creatinine at 0.66 mg/dL, cholesterol at 211 mg/dL, and triglycerides at 98 mg/dL.
Although the patient was asymptomatic, we tested for tick-borne infectious diseases, e.g., anaplasmosis and rickettsiosis, by nested PCR (nPCR) and serological assays.
After extracting genomic DNA from the patient’s blood sample using the QIAamp Tissue and Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), nPCR was conducted using Ehrlichia- or Anaplasma-specific primers: the primer pairs GRO607F/GRO1294R and GRO677F/GRO1121R , which target the groEL (heat shock protein chaperone) gene; primer pairs ANK-F1/ANK-R1 and ANK-F2/ANK-R2 , which target the ankA (ankyrin-repeat protein) gene; and primer pairs AE1-F/AE1-R and AP-F/AP-R, which target the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene .
To detect SFG rickettsiosis, nPCR was carried out using primer pairs sca1-6545F/sca1-7360R and sca1-6647F/sca1-7354R, which target the sca1 (rickettsial surface protein) gene, and primers RR190.70F, RR190.602R, and RR190.701R , which are specific to the ompA gene. All primers that target the sca1 gene were designed after sequence alignment to amplify this genomic region of all Rickettsia spp. The PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on a 1.2% agarose gel. In each PCR run, the reaction mixture without the template DNA served as a negative control. The genomic DNAs of A. phagocytophilum KZ_A3 and Rickettsia conorii were employed as positive controls for Anaplasma-specific and SFG Rickettsia–specific targets, respectively. The details of the experimental conditions are presented in Table .
An indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) was performed for the serological diagnosis of the patient. To detect antibodies to SFG Rickettsia, we utilized antigen slides of R. conorii, R. japonica, and R. montanensis. To perform the IFA, 20 μL of two-fold serial dilutions from 1:16 of the patient’s serum was reacted with each rickettsial antigen slide in a humidified chamber at 37 °C for 30 min. The antigen slides were washed three times with PBS and then another three times with distilled water and were air-dried. Next, the slides were incubated with 20 μL of a 400-fold–diluted secondary antibody (a fluorescein isothiocyanate [FITC]-conjugated anti-human IgG or IgM antibody), washed, and air-dried in the same manner as mentioned above. The slides fixed with a mounting medium were visualized under a fluorescence microscope (U-LH100HG, Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan) to detect SFG Rickettsia-specific fluorescence.
To diagnose anaplasmosis, an IFA was performed in a similar manner on an antigen slide containing an A. phagocytophilum strain. A four-fold or greater increase in the antibody titer in the acute-phase and convalescent-phase serum samples was assumed to be a positive indicator of SFG rickettsiosis and anaplasmosis .
The nPCR that was performed on the patient’s first visit (June 19) yielded a positive result on the Ehrlichia- or Anaplasma-specific groEL and ankA genes; however, the nPCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene gave a negative result. DNA sequencing of the positive-result PCR products from the patient showed that the groEL gene sequence was a 100% match (332 out of 332 bp) for A. phagocytophilum isolates “S-DD-21,” “D-SE-63,” “D-GB-39,” and “lp11–2” (GenBank accession numbers KU519285, KU519286, KU519287, and JQ622144, respectively). Genotype S-DD-21, D-SE-63, and D-GB-39 were originally identified in Korean cats and dogs, and isolate lp11–2 originates from a Japanese tick. Isolate gw1, which was originally collected from a Korean patient, had the second-highest homology with our strain, and phylogenetic-tree analysis showed that our strain belongs to the same group as A. phagocytophilum . The ankA gene sequence from the microbe(s) found in our patient was 99.8% (558/559 bp) homologous to that of A. phagocytophilum isolates gw1 and KZA1 (accession numbers KJ677106 and KT986059, respectively), which were originally collected from a Korean patient. Moreover, the phylogenetic-tree analysis confirmed that the ankA sequence places our microbial isolate into the same group as A. phagocytophilum . DNA sequence analysis and the phylogenetic tree based on the groEL and ankA sequences confirmed the presence of A. phagocytophilum in the patient, despite the lack of symptoms. By contrast, in the PCR assay, the same blood sample collected during the patient’s hospital visit tested negative for Rickettsia-specific ompA and sca1.
To isolate the bacterial strain, we performed an animal experiment. The patient’s blood was intraperitoneally injected into a BALB/c mouse obtain from ORIENT BIO (Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, Korea), treated with cyclophosphamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The mouse was euthanized by inhalation of 5% isoflurane and then dissected, subsequent nPCR performed on the mouse’s spleen, kidney, and liver yielded a negative result on the Rickettsia-specific sca1 gene and Anaplasma-specific genes groEL and ankA.
The IFA for antibodies to an A. phagocytophilum antigen on June 19th (first visit) gave a negative result on both IgG and IgM . By contrast, the IFA for an anti-A. phagocytophilum antibody performed on June 22nd (second visit) yielded an IgG-negative but IgM-positive result (1:16). On June 28th (third visit), seroconversion was confirmed because the serum sample was IgG negative and IgM positive (1:32). The anti-R. conorii antibody IFA performed on June 28th showed an elevated (to 1:64) IgG titer .