A 39-year-old female premenopausal, P4 +0, presented to the breast surgery clinic with right breast swelling for ten years. The swelling started gradually following the excision of a right axillary lump. The mass was diagnosed as a right axillary CH of about 2cm × 1cm in dimensions. Just before her presentation, the swelling became big enough to disturb her daily activities. She had no family history of breast cancer. There were no other swellings elsewhere in her body. She was not a smoker or alcoholic, and there was no previous surgery or chronic illnesses. Examination revealed a swollen right breast with “peau d’ orange” and erythema around the right nipple-areola complex (NAC). There was asymmetry in the shape of the right breast compared to the left and right breast ptosis. The skin was thickened and red but no hotness or tenderness. No masses were felt in the right breast. The right NAC appeared normal. Apart from the linear scar of the previous CH excision in the right axilla, the axilla was normal. Left breast and axilla examination revealed no obvious or palpable abnormalities . Ultrasound examination of the breast and axilla revealed mild skin thickening. The breast parenchyma was dense and showed an anechoic tubular and round structure. The right breast showed a loculated cystic area with internal septations. It measured 3.4cm × 1.2cm × 5.1cm and multiple smaller cyst . The mammogram showed marked skin thickening with edema .
We attempted needle aspiration away from the cysts, and the fluid was easily aspirated from the edematous breast tissues. The fluid was watery and clear yellowish. The laboratory result of the fluid was lymphatic fluid. Aspiration trials were repeated twice with almost a complete resolution of the edema, but there was a recurrence within two weeks in every aspiration attempt. Subsequently, the patient consented to a shunt catheter placement between the edematous breast and the peritoneal cavity, a relatively new technique for breast edema secondary to CH. There was a partial resolution of the breast edema after the shunt surgery. The patient was followed up for five years. The last ultrasound and mammogram showed recurrence of cysts of the same axilla, and new cysts appeared in the breast .