The patient, a 65-year-old Caucasian woman, had a history of refractory chronic urticaria. She was treated by an allergiologist with omalizumab, an anti-IgE monoclonal antibody, for more than 3 years, but showed poor response. She also suffered from recurrent chronic uveitis for the last 2 years and complained about arthralgias. Six months before referral to our clinic, she developed isolated microscopic hematuria, followed 2 months later by subnephrotic proteinuria. Gradually, proteinuria increased to nephrotic level and she presented to us with nephrotic syndrome, with edema and hypalbuminemia.
Her medical history consisted of hypertension and type II diabetes mellitus, both diagnosed 10 years ago. Hypertension was well-managed with 5 mg of amlopidine, 160 mg of valsartan and 2,5 mg of nebivolol and diabetes with 1.700 mg of metformin daily. She also had Hashimoto’s disease, on levothyroxine for the last 20 years and was an active smoker (45 pack/years).
Οn examination remarkable were the urticarial rashes on her face, neck, torso and extremities that she described as rather pruritic than painful. They were refractory to antihistamines and resolved after a few days, leaving, hyperpigmentation of the skin. Physical examination also revealed tender tibial edema and arthritis of the small joints of the hands.
Serum creatinine was normal (0.9 mg/dl). Microhematuria of glomerular origin and nephrotic protinuria (6,6 g/d), with hypalbuminemia (3 g/dl) were also present. Inflammatory markers were high and complement components low, namely C1q, C4 and particularly C3 .
Eye examination was positive for bilateral chronic anterior uveitis. Pulmonary function tests led to the diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), with FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) 51%, FEV1/FVC (forced vital capacity) 60,5% without reversibility. It should be pointed out that the patient underwent two skin biopsies during the previous months, with findings compatible with common urticaria.
Subsequently, an ultrasound-assisted percutaneous kidney biopsy revealed an immune-complex membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. Light microscopy displayed 9 glomeruli, none of which was sclerosed. Mesangial matrix was segmentally increased, in association with mesangial cell proliferation. Glomerular basement membranes (GBM) exhibited focal thickening. Mild segmental thickening of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) was seen . In immunofluorescence examination, in scale intensity 0–4+, IgG and IgM immunoglobulins showed 3+ deposition with a granular pattern in the mesangium and focally along GBMs (subendothelial and subepithelial space), while IgA showed trace. C3 complement component showed 3+ with a similar pattern with IgG and IgM, while trace for C1q complement component was seen. Light chains, κ and λ showed an intensity of 3+ each, along GBM. Electron microscopy was also performed and demonstrated numerous electron-dense deposits mainly in the mesangium and less frequent in the subendothelial space, as well as subepithelial deposits. Focal podocyte foot process effacement was also observed .
In this context, the diagnosis of hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis syndrome was established. Indeed, the patient fulfilled both major criteria, namely urticaria for more than 6 months and hypocomplementemia, and three of the six minor criteria which were arthritis, renal involvement and ocular inflammation.
Induction treatment with steroids, cyclophosphamide and hydroxycholoquine was subsequently initiated. The patient received three daily intravenous pulses of 500 mg methylprednisolone, followed by 30 mg oral methylprednisolone daily (0,5 mg/kg prednisolone) with gradual tapering to 4 mg over a period of 5 months, six monthly pulses of cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2) and 400 mg of hydroxychloroquine daily. Omalizumab and antihistamines were discontinued. The patient’s response to therapy was quick and sustained. The urticarial rash and arthralgias disappeared spectacularly a few weeks after treatment initiation. Uveitis relapsed two times since, but remains under control with local treatment. Renal and immunological indices normalized in the course of time . Maintenance therapy consisted of rituximab 500 mg on Day 0 and 15, and every 6 months thereafter until month 18.
Eight months after diagnosis, the patient is normotensive, without skin presentations, stable renal function 24 h proteinuria of 800 mg.