In May 2008, a 74-year-old heavily smoker Caucasian man was referred to our institution following ultrasonography showing multiple lesions ranging in diameter from 0.3 to 2.0 cm in both liver lobes, without any evidence of ascites. The patient was work retired in good state of health (ECOG PS 0), with an history of HCV-related liver cirrhosis well balanced while familiar history was not medically relevant. He reported a previous history of cardiovascular illness consisting in chronic ischemic post-infarction cardiomyopathy leading to a substantial decrease in left-ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), arterial hypertension, obesity (98 kg weight and 174 cm height), stroke with cerebral vascular disease and alterations of respiratory system (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).
Total-body CT scan confirmed the presence of the hepatic lesions previously observed at ultrasonography without any other evidence deserving consideration . Blood chemistry tests showed a substantial elevation of α-fetoprotein values (1500 mg/ml), and slight increases of bilirubin (1.21 mg/ml), of γ-GT (116 U/L) and of GOT (76 U/L); the absence of encephalopathy and ascites, and the normality of coagulation parameters and of albumin led to classify the patient into the functional class Child-Pugh A. The echo-guided liver biopsy and the subsequent histo-pathological assessment definitely confirmed the diagnosis of HCC.
At the objective clinical examination the patient only displayed slight indolent hepatomegaly. He also showed a good hemodynamic steadiness: no signs of heart failure such as declivous edema, jugular turgor and pulmonary noises have been observed. In addition, no important symptoms, particularly those related to dyspnea or workload angina were complained of. The instrumental cardiac function assessment confirmed the serious systolic dysfunction with a LVEF of 35%. The patient was on treatment with bisoprolol, furosemide, ramipril and anti-aldosterone drugs.
Based on these evidences, the disease was categorized as stage C according to the Barcelona-Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) classification and, consequently, only amenable to the best available systemic treatment; therefore, starting June 2008, a treatment with sorafenib continuous dosing at the reduced dose of 400 mg/day was started.
Instrumental assessments with ultrasound carried out every two months showed a substantial unchanging of the size of the hepatic lesions. Conversely, α-fetoprotein values constantly and progressively decreased up to 260 ng/ml in June 2009, while the other hematochemical parameters showed an improvement of liver function indexes. Presently the patient is continuing the treatment with sorafenib at the same dose. Treatment was extremely well tolerated without, with the exception of asthenia, the onset of any peculiar drug-related side-effect requiring medical interventions, drug-dose reductions or treatment discontinuation. Due to the particular patient's cardiac conditions, the echographic evaluation of LVEF was carried out every two months: as it appears in Figure , no further drops or significant fluctuations have been observed, and the values of LVEF substantially remained stable over the time.