A 16-year-old female patient referred to our outpatient clinic with gradual deterioration of vision for the age of 1 year mostly in the right eye, with episodes of sharp headaches. Ophthalmic examination confirmed reduced visual acuity with only perception of light in the left eye. Neurological examination showed no other neurologic deficit. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a solid mass lesion involving the hypothalamus and the optic chiasm. The lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted images, hyperintense on T2-WI, and showed marked homogenous enhancement after the administration of contrast material . The patient was operated by the right pterional craniotomy and transsylvian approach. Bulging of the optic chiasm and the site of lamina terminalis were seen. Incision with knife was done on the right side of optic chiasm through the exophytic part of the tumor and tumor evacuation done from inside the chiasm . Furthermore, resection of the suprachiasmatic part of the tumor was performed and lamina terminalis was opened. Tumor entry sites were planned to minimize the risk of neural injury. Entry to the optic chiasm was performed from the lateral part of the right optic chiasm where tumor was bulging and exophytic with minimal covering neural tissue. Furthermore, this site is far from the median part of the chiasm in which crossing of optic fibers takes place. In the suprachiasmatic part, we also aimed to the exophytic part of the tumor and planned to enter through the lamina terminalis, which is known for its safety for dissection, to the anterior part of the third ventricle. In general, there was no clear-cut plain of cleavage, and dissection was carried on according the difference of color and consistency between the normal tissue and the friable grayish tumor tissue. Yet, subtotal resection of the tumor was achieved due to the absence of this difference between a part of the tumor and the hypothalamus. Thus, we decided to leave this part rather than inducing hypothalamic injury. Early postoperative period was uneventful, however, the patient showed no change in the visual status.
Histopathological examination revealed ganglioglioma (WHO Grade I). Microscopic examination showed clusters of abnormal neurons which exhibit enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei and some are binucleated. Between the neurons, there are dissecting fibrillary cells highlighted by GFAP. No necrosis, mitosis or endovascular proliferation were seen. The abnormal neurons are immunoreactive for S-100 and Synaptophysin, negative for EMA and CEA. CD68 highlight scattered macrophages in the background. KI67 was less than 1% . The low KI67 and the low grade of the tumor (WHO Grade I) influenced our decision to follow up the patient than subjection radiotherapy, and until this report it has been 3 years and 8 months with stable neurologic and radiologic findings of the patient .