An 18-year-old Caucasian female presented with bilateral lower limb paraesthesias followed by increasing leg weakness and difficulty in walking over a period of 2 days. She reported an episode of an upper respiratory tract infection 3 weeks prior to the onset of her neurological symptoms. Past, personal and social history was unremarkable. Clinical examination revealed decreased muscle strength in all extremities associated with hypotonia and areflexia.
A diagnosis of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) was considered and a lumbar puncture was performed. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed albuminocytologic dissociation (elevated protein with normal white blood cell count in CSF) suggestive of GBS. She was started on intravenous immunoglobulin G, but within 48 hours, she progressed to complete flaccid quadriparesis with involvement of respiratory muscles and required mechanical ventilatory support.
On day 12, a cardiac electrophysiology consultation was requested for bradycardia and multiple episodes of asystole. These episodes occurred spontaneously, unrelated to tracheobronchial suctioning, blood drawing or any other intervention. The longest observed pause was 12 seconds. Electrolyte profile was normal and oxygenation was satisfactory. The result of her 12-lead ECG is shown in Figure .
In view of the multiple episodes of bradycardia and asystole the decision was made to insert a pacemaker. The patient initially received a temporary pacemaker. However, due to an anticipated prolonged clinical course and the potential for recurrent bradycardia and asystole, an INSIGNIA Ultra DR dual chamber permanent pacemaker was implanted after 5 days. The pacemaker was initially programmed to VVI mode at 40 beats per minute to prevent pacing as much as possible. The pacemaker mode was switched to DDDR at the time of discharge because of lack of spontaneous sinus node activity. A paced rhythm was present 18 days post implant, suggesting occurrence of intermittent bradycardia.
The patient returned to our office for a routine pacemaker check 3 months after implantation. The pacemaker check revealed that she was in paced rhythm for most of the time in this period. Seventy percent was atrial paced ventricular sensed rhythm with a set lower rate of 40 beats per min. Twenty percent was atrial paced ventricular paced rhythm with a set AV delay of 220 msec. Only for ten percent of the time was she in atrial sensed ventricular sensed rhythm. This may indicate prolonged influence on the autonomic tone even after complete somatic recovery and likely justifies the need for a permanent pacemaker. As far as choice of pacemaker mode is concerned, our patient received a DDDR mode. However, as the 3 month follow up interrogation showed ventricular pacing of <40%, a Managed Ventricular Pacing or the AAIsafeR would have also been a good pacemaker mode option in retrospect.