A 26-year-old Indian woman was admitted to our gastroenterology unit with extrahepatic portal vein obstruction with features of massive malena at 29 weeks of gestation. She had a previous pregnancy that resulted in a single offspring. She was referred for an antenatal check-up to our obstetric unit, where after clinical examination, an ultrasonography was performed which revealed gross fetal hydrops. She was transferred to our obstetric unit for further evaluation and management.
Her prenatal course was complicated by recurrent episodes of hematemesis and malena for 10 years prior to admission and she was previously diagnosed with esophageal varices. She had a history of multiple blood transfusions and sclerotherapy sessions. Her first pregnancy was 2 years prior to admission, in which she had regular supervised antenatal checkups on her first and second trimesters with a normal anomaly scan. Her pregnancy was complicated by gestational diabetes mellitus that was controlled through diet. She had episodes of recurrent malena in this pregnancy. Her third trimester was unsupervised at home and she was admitted to a local private practitioner at the onset of her labour. She underwent caesarean section for meconium-stained liquor. She delivered a grossly normal male baby with jaundice at birth. Details pertaining to the baby are not available, but the baby had received a blood transfusion on the third day of life and died on the seventh day.
Her present pregnancy was a spontaneous conception. Her first and second trimester antenatal checkups were with a private practitioner in her hometown. She presented in the gastroenterology department of our institute at 29 weeks of gestation with massive malena and anemia. Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy revealed the presence of grade II esophageal varices for which sclerotherapy was done. She was given three units of packed red blood cells to raise her haemoglobin from 6 gm% to 10 gm%. Upon obstetric referral, ultrasonography at 30 weeks and 5 days revealed severe fetal hydrops. Doppler studies were suggestive of fetal anemia. She was given corticosteroids for fetal lung maturity. At 31 weeks, cordocentesis was done and intravascular intrauterine fetal transfusion with O-negative cross-matched blood was given. Since she was Rhesus (D) O type positive, non-immune hydrops was suspected. Fetal blood was thus sent for blood grouping, haemoglobin, haematocrit, TORCH serology, parvovirus B19 serology, haemoglobin electrophoresis, G6PD enzyme assay and karyotype.
The results of fetal echocardiography were normal. Fetal blood group was A-positive and was negative in workup for non-immune hydrops. Maternal serum indirect Coomb's test was positive, thus leading to a suspicion of the presence of non-anti-D antibodies. A special request was sent to the blood bank to screen for uncommon rare blood groups and non-D antibodies. Anti-c was detected in maternal serum in 1:4 dilutions.
Maternal blood was resent to the blood bank to establish exact Rhesus haplotype, which was determined to be R1R1 (CDe/CDe). The fetus was monitored with bi-weekly biophysical profiling and a second intrauterine transfusion was given one week later with compatible O-negative and c-negative cross-matched blood. At 32 weeks and 5 days, an emergency caesarean section was done due to poor biophysical profile.
A grossly hydropic female baby with a birth weight of 1.6 kg was born with massive ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, pallor and hypotonia. At birth, 150 ml of ascitic tap was done and the baby was transferred to the nursery on bag and tube ventilation. Her cord blood hematocrit was 15 and total serum bilirubin was 6.5 mg/dl. A partial exchange transfusion followed by double volume exchange transfusion with O-positive, c-negative blood was performed. Intravenous immunoglobulin in doses of 1 gram/kg was administered after the exchange. The baby required intense phototherapy for 4 days. By the second week, she developed conjugated hyperbilirubinemia due to inspissated bile syndrome, which resolved on its own. The baby was then managed conservatively and was discharged in stable condition on the 30th day of her life.
The fetal rhesus haplotype was established finally as cDe/cDe. The source of maternal isoimmunisation may be either fetomaternal haemorrhage in the mother s current or previous pregnancy or from multiple blood transfusions.