The proband is a 10-year-old Sri Lankan girl of Sinhala ethnicity born to healthy non-consanguineous parents with two other older, healthy sons. She had an uneventful pregnancy and birth history and there was no family history of ophthalmological or neurological diseases. Although her parents noted delayed development, they had not sought medical attention for this. She started walking unaided at around 9 years and continues to have a significantly unsteady gait. Her hearing was not affected but speech was delayed (first word at 3 years and currently speaking 3–4-word complex sentences). Her parents reported photophobia since infancy.
On examination aged 10 years, her height, weight and occipito-frontal circumference were 132 cm (10th–25th centile), 26 kg (25th–50th centile) and 51 cm (25th–50th centile) respectively. She had no dysmorphic features. A pigmented macule with a serpiginous border (22 cm × 10 cm), which may represent a blaschcoid pattern suggestive of a cutaneous mosaicism, was noted on her right thigh . Neurological examination revealed an ataxic gait, hypotonia, dysdiadochokinesia, intention tremor, horizontal nystagmus and dysarthria, all consistent with cerebellar disease. No pyramidal or extrapyramidal signs were identified. She had bilateral pes planus . Ophthalmological examination revealed her pupils to be fixed and dilated and slit lamp examination revealed bilateral partial aniridia with a scalloped edge of the irises, normal fundi and impaired pupillary light reflexes. Pupillary membrane remnants were not seen and the cornea and lens were clear. Visual acuity was reduced (bilateral 6/30). Intelligence Quotient (IQ) assessment revealed moderate learning disability with better verbal IQ (verbal comprehension, working memory and processing speed scales) than non-verbal IQ (Test of Nonverbal Intelligence – TONI version 3- score 70). Her short-term memory was within normal limits although she had deficits in long-term memory.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed cerebellar hypoplasia especially affecting the vermis and white matter changes . Cervical spine x-ray, echocardiogram and ultrasound abdomen were normal. Mutation analysis by region-of-interest targeted sequencing (NM_001168272.1/ENST00000302640 coding exons 46 and 52–56, which encode the region spanning Glu2094 and the entire calcium ion channel domain, respectively) was performed as previously described . This identified a previously described pathogenic heterozygous variant in the ITPR1 gene, namely c.7786_7788delAAG p.(Lys2596del). The clinically unaffected parents’ DNA have not been tested for this variant due to lack of availability of samples.