An 82-year-old Japanese man with a history of RA presented with fever and malaise. His medical history revealed RA for 10 years. He had been undergoing treatment with MTX, prednisolone, and bucillamine for 9 years and 6 months (MTX 12 mg/week, prednisolone 2.5 mg/day, and bucillamine 100 mg/day). The MTX dose was initially 4 mg/week; however, the RA symptoms were not well controlled. Therefore, the dose was gradually increased to MTX 12 mg/week, and the total dosage was 3454 mg. Other medical history included benign prostatic hyperplasia and gout. He smoked cigarettes at 1.5 packs per day for 20 years but did not drink alcohol. His family history was unremarkable.
On presentation, he was alert, and his Glasgow Coma Score was 15. His body mass index was 23.7 kg/m2 with no noticeable body weight changes. He had a fever, but his other vital signs were stable: blood pressure, 128/57 mmHg; pulse, 88/minute; body temperature, 39.2 °C; respiratory rate, 18/minute; and oxygen saturation, 98%. No particular abnormal physical findings were noted other than chronic swelling of his wrists and ulnar deviation of his digits, although he was adequately treated. Furthermore, no enlargement of superficial lymph nodes was observed. Laboratory studies revealed findings of elevation of C-reactive protein (CRP) and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R). Serum hepatobiliary enzymes, rheumatoid factor, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody were also elevated . Three months prior to the admission, his serum hepatobiliary enzymes were within normal range: aspartate aminotransferase, 20 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 18 IU/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 180 IU/L; γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 26 IU/L; and alkaline phosphatase, 323 IU/L. No lymphoma cells were detected in his peripheral blood. Tests for viral markers revealed: hepatitis B surface antigen negative, hepatitis C antibody negative, and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) viral capsid antigen antibody immunoglobulin G and EBV anti-Epstein–Barr nuclear antigen titers were elevated (1:320 and 1:20, respectively). Serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9, sialyl Lewis X-I antigen, and neuron-specific enolase were slightly elevated. Abdominal ultrasonography showed several hypoechoic masses in his liver. We performed contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of his chest and abdomen to identify the cause of his fever, which revealed multiple nodular masses without enhancement in his lung, liver, spleen, and para-aortic lesions . He was admitted for further evaluation to make a definitive diagnosis.
Soon after admission, MTX was discontinued considering the possibility of MTX-LPD. The differential diagnoses included hepatic malignant lymphoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, and metastatic liver cancers because sIL-2R and some tumor markers were elevated. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy were performed, but no malignant findings were noted. Although percutaneous liver biopsy was performed, it failed to approach the mass. Subsequently, endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy for liver tumors was performed. Histological examinations of the specimens revealed cluster of differentiation 20 (CD 20)-positive B cell lymphocytes with necrotic tissue and no malignant findings . The EBV-encoded small ribonucleic acid by in situ hybridization of liver specimen was negative. The tumor began shrinking after MTX was discontinued, and CT of his lung and abdomen 3 months later revealed the disappearance of most of the tumors spontaneously and dramatically . Serum levels of sIL-2R, LDH, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 also improved spontaneously (314 U/mL, 120 IU/L, and 74.3 U/mL, respectively), and serum levels of sialyl Lewis X-I antigen and neuron-specific enolase were normalized as well. Serum level of liver enzymes also became within normal range in our case. A definitive diagnosis of MTX-LPD was made based on the clinical course and pathological findings. After withdrawal of MTX, he started abatacept for his RA and experienced no deterioration in his joints. There has been no sign of recurrence for 6 months.