Woman, 83 years old, emergency hospitalised for generalized abdominal pain. She reported some alimentary vomiting episodes and diarrheic bowel had occurred during the 3 days before admission and a history of colonic diverticular disease. In the physical examination globular abdomen and pain after deep palpation of the epi-mesogastric region were observed. Laboratory tests resulted within the normal range: leukocytes were 4720/mm3 (normal range 4500-10800/mm3), hematocrit was 50,5% (normal range 38-46%), haemoglobin was 11.4 g/dl (normal range 12–16 g/dl). The patient underwent plain abdominal X-Ray, which revealed neither free sub-diaphragmatic air nor air-fluid levels. Computed tomography (CT) scans, taken in emergency, showed a densitometric alteration in the periduodenal adipose tissue for the presence of multiple pools which extended along the right lateroconal fascia and occupied the anterior pararenal space, which includes the second and the third portion of the duodenum . At this exam a subtle perihepatic effusion layer was also detected. Within the third day from admission, after the onset of fever, leukocytosis, because of the increase of abdominal pain and the progressive clinical worsening a second abdominal CT scan was performed . This last radiological exam allowed to definitively exclude pneumoperitoneum; a wall herniation in the third portion of the duodenum containing endoluminal material and a breach in the medial wall of the same bowel segment were observed. Furthermore, contiguously to the duodenal breach, within the adipose tissue, in the context of an underlying fluid layer, air bubbles were detected. Being these findings strongly suggestive of a locally confined perforation, the patient in sepsis (temperature 39°C, increased heart rate, leukocytes 16400/mm3) underwent emergency surgery. A partial coloepiploic detachment, Kocher manoeuvre to the proximal half of the II duodenal portion and subsequent isolation of the III one were performed; at this level, on the upper edge, a perforated diverticulum occupied the retroperitoneal space and it was partly surrounded by an abscess. The large implant base of the diverticulum prevented both the resection and the direct suture, being the laceration too jagged, thickened and oedematous . The septic condition of the patient prevented a derivation surgery, which would have been time consuming, demolitive and hazardous. A surgical toilette of abscess was performed passing through the perforated diverticula and the Petzer’s tube drainage was placed in the duodenal lumen . On the first post-operative week the patient was fed with parenteral nutrition, on the second week the patient started a liquid diet and on the 15th post-operative day the patient got a solid diet. No postoperative complications occurred and the patient was discharged on the 30th post-operative day. The duodenostomic Petzer was endoscopically removed 4 months after the surgery. The Petzer’s drainage tube was grasped by endoscopic transgastric way and then removed outside by oral way. In relation to the general condition of the patient was necessary to insert a nasogastric tube into the duodenum for 15 days to reduce the possibility of leak. During the procedure a nasogastric tube, previously anchored on the cutaneous edge of the Petzer, was pulled in the duodenum without effort, being the former on guide of the latter. A drainage tube was percutaneously positioned in the fistulous tract with its distal extremity outside the duodenum. Radiologic follow up with Gastrographin® confirmed the right position both of the nasogastric tube in the duodenum at the level of the fistulous orifice and of the drainage tube inside the tract, at about 4 cm from the wall of the duodenum. The drainage tube was left in place for 15 days . This procedure ensures less trauma and fewer potential complications in the subjects strongly debilitated. Fourteen days after, the patient underwent transit X-Ray with Gastromiro® which showed a normal passage of the contrast medium without any sign of spillages or fistulous tracts. Check-up carried out after 12 months shows normal results.