An 82-year-old male was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology in November 2020 with intermittent melena for a duration of 2 months and hematemesis over the past 10 h. He had a history of hypertension, coronary artery disease after stenting, gout and diabetes mellitus, and he had been treated with clopidogrel hydrogen sulphate tablets since stenting. The patient was treated with analgesics that he could not describe before admission because of epigastric discomfort. His brother died of lung cancer. In 2014, he received endoscopic treatment due to a gastric ulcer complicated with hemorrhage in our hospital, and pathology revealed chronic active gastritis of the gastric mucosa. Two weeks before admission, the patient had a large amount of melena, and endoscopy was performed, which revealed multiple lesions of ulceration in the descending part of the duodenum. Gastroenterography showed the image of barium protruding out of the lumen in the descending part of the duodenum, which was considered a diverticulum. No biopsy was performed.
The patient was tachycardic, but vital signs were otherwise normal. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the epigastric region and a pale appearance, but was otherwise unrevealing. Laboratory values indicated anemia (hemoglobin of 94 g/L) and renal dysfunction (blood urea of 25.4 mmol/L and creatinine of 352 μmol/L). Tumor makers, such as carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 12–5 (CA12-5) were normal. Computed tomography (CT) and abdominal ultrasound showed no abnormalities. During hospitalization, the patient received two endoscopic hemostasis procedures and one interventional embolization. The first endoscopy revealed a 1.0 × 1.0 cm lesion with ulceration and active bleeding in the duodenal bulb. No active bleeding was observed after multipoint injection with a solution consisting of lidocaine, hypertonic saline and epinephrine (L-HS-E) . Four days later, however, the patient had a feeling of epigastric discomfort. To decompress the stomach, drainage was performed with a nasogastric tube, and blood was observed. After discussion, an interventional embolization was performed but no contrast extravasation was observed in the gastroduodenal artery (GDA). According to the endoscopy results, GDA was embolized, but hemostatsis was not achieved. The patient then received a second endoscopy, which revealed a slightly depressed centre with active bleeding in the posterior wall of the duodenal bulb . L-HS-E was injected into 5 points, with 1–1.5 mL per point. Unfortunately, adequate hemostasis was still not achieved. Persistent bleeding was observed in the nasogastric tube, and an increased heart rate appeared, indicating hemorrhagic shock. Considering that the patient was critical, distal subtotal gastrectomy, which included the duodenal bulb was performed to achieve adequate hemostasis. Duodenal bulb swelling with hemorrhage was found during the operation, and erosions with edema in the mucosal was significant. Postoperative histologic examination identified a 3 × 2.5 cm tumor consisting of proliferation of SRCs with vacuolated foamy cytoplasm and displaced ovoid nuclei, resembling xanthoma cells . The tumor was limited to the mucosa and submucosal duodenal gland (pT1). No lymphovascular invasion, pancreatic invasion or metastasis was observed in 6 (4 in the lesser curvature and 2 in the greater curvature) resected lymph nodes (pN0). The proximal margin was negative for SRCs, but the distal margin was positive for SRCs. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated a positive reaction for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) in the carcinoma cells , the Ki-67 labelling index was approximately 10% . The p53, CerbB-2, CD68, CD56, Syn and CgA markers were negative.
After the operation, the patient still suffered from persistent gastrointestinal bleeding, and his family declined reoperation. After blood transfusion, melena and blood in the nasogastric tube gradually decreased, and enteral nutrition was provided. Within two weeks after the operation, extubation was attempted several times but failed. Lung CT revealed the presence of an air bronchogram, indicating atelectasis. Therefore, a fibreoptic bronchoscope was used to aspirate secretions. However, the patient’s respiratory function continued to worsen. Finally, tracheotomy was performed. Later, the patient’s hospital course was complicated by ileus. Moreover, signs of peritonitis appeared, and intra-abdominal infection (IAI) originating in the gastrointestinal tract was considered. Antibiotic treatment and other symptomatic therapies were given, but the symptoms did not improve. As time went by, the patient also suffered from an inflammatory process and gradually had a fever. The situation worsened, and a jejunal nutrient tube was placed instead of enteral nutrition. The patient died one month postoperatively.