A case of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and spindle cell sarcoma (SCS) arising from a mature cystic teratoma of the ovary in a 36-year-old woman was reported. The clinical features of the patient at baseline were summarized in . Follow-up time was 29 months.
In our case, the patient presented with short-term progressive abdominal distension and self-touching abdominal mass. Due to severe abdominal distension within a month, she came to our hospital for treatment. Physical examination revealed a large mass in the pelvic cavity, reaching umbilical level, with clear boundaries and no tenderness. The mass appeared fixed. No supraclavicular lymph nodes were involved and no abnormalities were observed on breast examination. Ultrasound examination indicated that there was an uneven echo mass of 14.2 cm × 9.3 cm × 12.8 cm in the pelvic cavity, the boundary was clear, attenuation was observed in the rear, and no blood flow signal was observed . Tumor markers only indicated an increase in CA199 (115.9 U/ml) and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) (2.9 ng/ml). Other tumour markers like AFP, beta HCG and LDH, which are associated with germ cell tumors (GCT), were also tested and showed to be normal.
The woman underwent transabdominal excision of the left ovarian cyst on October 20, 2020. A large solid cystic mass was found in the pelvic cavity, with a diameter of about 14 cm, smooth surface, solid tissue size of about 5.0 cm × 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm, and obvious vascular filling on the surface. No ascites or peritoneal deposits were found. An incision of about 1.0 cm was made on the surface of the left ovarian cyst, and a large number of hairs were found inside the cyst, with cephalic segment and solid crisp tissue. The cyst fluid was sucked, about 1,000 ml, pale yellow and thick. The cyst was extracted completely and sent for frozen pathological examination. The results showed mature cystic teratoma (left ovary), with spindle cell hyperplasia in local cyst wall accompanied by mild atypia.
Postoperative routine paraffin pathology showed: (left ovary) high-grade spindle cell sarcoma, first considering pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma with squamous cell carcinoma (from mature cystic teratoma malignancy) . The immunohistochemical results are shown in . The positive rate of Ki-67 was 90%. CK and Vimentin reactions were positive, suggesting bidirectional differentiation toward epithelial and mesenchymal tumors, while other sarcoma differentiation lineage markers such as CK5/6(−), Desmin(−), SMA(−), HMB45, SOX-10(−) suggest undifferentiated sarcoma. Positive p53 is consistent with the diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma.
Although the patient was young and unmarried, considering the high degree of malignancy and poor prognosis, the patient finally underwent radical surgery, i.e., hysterectomy, bilateral adenectomy, and pelvic lymphotomy.
The patient was finally diagnosed with ovarian malignant tumor IC1 stage. The combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin chemotherapy was administered every 3 weeks, and no signs of recurrence were found after follow-up.