A 63-year-old female patient with hypothyroidism presented to our hospital with continuous nausea and five episodes of vomiting. Her complaints began after ingesting steak and a glass of wine 9 h prior to admission. Her supine blood pressure was 184/75 mmHg, and her heart rate was 68 bpm. The patient occasionally did visit a local clinic due to her high blood pressure, but upon subsequent measurements, her blood pressure was found to be normal, and therefore, she was not treated. EKG showed ST depression in leads II, III, aVF, and V4, 5, and 6 . Creatine kinase-MB and high-sensitivity (hs)-troponin T levels were 10.4 ng/mL (reference range, 0–0.5 ng/mL) and 0.325 ng/mL (reference range, > 0.014), respectively. After 3 h, her hs-troponin-T levels rose to 0.519 ng/mL ; therefore, she was diagnosed with NSTEMI and received intravenous unfractionated heparin and oral dual antiplatelet therapy. She was scheduled for an early coronary angiography (CAG). Transthoracic echocardiography showed inferior wall hypokinesia with a normal ejection fraction.
Twelve hours after admission, CAG was performed, and the findings were unremarkable, except for mild myocardial bridging at the mid portion of the left anterior descending artery . The patient experienced persistent nausea and dizziness, both during and after the angiography; therefore, dual antiplatelet therapy and heparin treatment were immediately discontinued. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) was performed to exclude gastrointestinal causes. It demonstrated a patent gallbladder, stomach, and intestines. However, a 1.7 cm enhanced nodule was detected on the right adrenal gland, suggesting an adenoma . Further physical examination revealed a newly developed gaze palsy. Brain CT revealed an acute ICH with perilesional edema in the parietotemporooccipital lobe and an acute intraventricular hemorrhage, causing a midline shift to the left . After undergoing emergency craniotomy with hematoma evacuation in the intensive care unit (ICU), her cardiac biomarkers and EKG gradually normalized. During the 1-month recovery period, she developed pneumonia and deep vein thrombosis, which extended her ICU stay. Furthermore, she required treatment for high blood pressure (systolic blood pressure up to 170 mmHg) since her blood pressure was uncontrolled despite combination therapy with nimodipine (60 mg six times daily), amlodipine (5 mg twice a day), candesartan (16 mg daily), carvedilol (12.5 mg twice daily), and doxazosin (4 mg once daily), with continuous intravenous nicardipine infusion (up to 40 mg per hour). Laboratory test results performed for the analysis of the uncontrolled hypertension and adrenal adenoma showed increased urinary catecholamines level (epinephrine > 230 mcg/day, reference value < 80 mcg/day; norepinephrine 625.33 mcg/day, reference value < 80 mcg/day; dopamine > 919.75 mcg/day, reference values 65–400 mcg/day; metanephrine > 7.5 mcg/day, reference value < 0.71 mcg/day). Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with pheochromocytoma. She received phenoxybenzamine (30 mg/day for 2 weeks) and underwent an adrenalectomy. A biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. After the surgery, amlodipine 5 mg once daily and carvedilol 12.5 mg twice daily successfully controlled her blood pressure (130/75 mmHg). Urine and plasma catecholamine levels normalized. Figure A–E shows the improved ST depression over time. Inferior wall hypokinesia on echocardiography was sustained. She is now clinically stable and alert.