Our patient was a three-year-old Arabic boy who presented to a peripheral medical center with a two-month history of lower back pain followed by progressive paraparesis. He had no symptomatology related to posterior fossa syndrome or increased intracranial pressure. Six weeks after the start of his symptoms, he developed urinary and bowel incontinence. During the physical examination, the boy was fully awake and cooperative. All cranial nerves were intact. His pupils were 2 mm, bilaterally equal and normally reacting to light. He had full extra-ocular movement with no nystagmus. There was no papilloedema. An examination of the upper extremities was normal. He had symmetrical lower limb weakness with muscle group power grade 1/5 distally and 3/5 proximally associated with hypotonia, absent reflexes and diminished sensations up to the L1 dermatome. His anal tone was reduced. Cauda equina syndrome was suspected, for which he underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the spine that revealed spinal canal filling and lesions in the thoracic and lumbar regions. At that stage, he was referred to our institution as a patient with a spinal tumor.
Upon reviewing his spinal MRI, drop metastasis was suspected. A cranio-spinal MRI scan was performed, which showed a posterior fossa tumor associated with radiographic features of intracranial and spinal metastasis, . This MRI feature was suggestive of medulloblastoma. Given the fact that the thoracolumbar pathology is mainly a diffuse process affecting cauda equina roots, which is probably not amenable to surgical removal, we decided to direct the surgical treatment to the primary posterior fossa tumor only. Therefore, he underwent a suboccipital craniotomy and subtotal resection of the posterior fossa tumor. Neuropathological examination of the resected specimen revealed features of classic medulloblastoma. The cells had primitive nuclei, which were packed without signs of differentiation . Also, the tumor lacked any anaplastic or large cell features. The tumor cells were uniformly expressing synaptophysin (Novocastra™, clone 27 G12, 1:100, Newcastle, UK) . Since our patient was young and the clinical course was atypical, immunostaining for integrase interactor 1 (INI-1) protein (BAF47; BD Biosciences, clone 25, 1:200) was also performed and the neoplastic cells were uniformly immunoreactive to it . This practically excludes atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor as a diagnostic possibility. Subsequently, our patient received cranio-spinal axis radiotherapy (36 Gy) and 18 Gy boost to the posterior fossa. Adjunctive chemotherapy was given, which consisted of vincristine, cisplatin, and CCNU (lomustine).
During his treatment course he received rehabilitation therapy. Three months after his initial treatment, he had substantial improvement in his overall neurological functions. He started to walk without assistance and was able to control his bladder and bowel functions. A neuroaxis follow-up MRI after one year showed regression of his cranial and spinal disease . At the time of writing this report, he has retained good neurological function.