A 64 year old man with non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy presented with exertional dyspnea, and progressive New York Heart Association class IV symptoms despite treatment with optimal medical therapy. Following admission to our hospital, the patient was started on a milrinone infusion, but developed refractory ventricular tachycardia associated with worsening cardiogenic shock. This necessitated emergent institution of femoral veno-arterial Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation (ECMO). While on ECMO, the patient’s condition stabilized but it was not possible to wean support. It was determined that a durable LVAD would be the appropriate therapy as a bridge to transplant.
Pre-operative echocardiography demonstrated a severely dilated LV with an ejection fraction of 15%. The right ventricle was moderately dilated with moderate dysfunction. The AV was mildly thickened and calcified with moderate AI. Both the mitral and tricuspid valves had severe, functional regurgitation.
The patient underwent AV replacement with a 23 mm Intuity valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA), tricuspid valve repair with a 30 mm MC3 annuloplasty ring (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA), and HeartWare™ HVAD implant (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN). The surgery was performed via median sternotomy with aortic and bi-caval cardiopulmonary bypass. The heart was arrested with Del Nido cardioplegia via an antegrade cannula. Through an oblique aortomy the AV cusps were excised and the annulus debrided. The annulus was sized to a 23 mm Intuity valve, and the valve was implanted in standard fashion per the “Instructions for Use”. The aortomy was then closed and the cross-clamp was removed after 51 min. With beating-heart cardiopulmonary bypass, the tricuspid valve was repaired and the LVAD implanted in standard apical-to-ascending aortic fashion. The patient was weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass after 178 min without difficulty.
Post-operatively, the patient was extubated on day 4. He developed a delayed pericardial effusion requiring re-exploration on day 15. He was discharged in stable condition on day 20. Echocardiography prior to discharge demonstrated a well-seated, prosthetic valve with a peak gradient of 3 mmHg and no AI. The AV opened every third beat and the LV was decompressed consistent with a well-functioning LVAD. There was trivial tricuspid and mitral regurgitation.