The patient was a 79-year-old Japanese man who visited a previous physician for positive fecal occult blood. Colonoscopy revealed a type 2 mass in the cecum, and a biopsy revealed Tub1, so he was referred to our hospital. He was 149 cm tall and weighed 51 kg, with a body mass index (BMI) of 23.2 kg/m2. His performance status (PS) was 0, his history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and his American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) PS was 3. Computed tomography revealed no obvious distant metastasis, and the preoperative diagnosis was cT2N0M0 stage I. We performed surgery using Senhance. In our hospital, it is conventionally implemented with 5 ports as shown in Fig. . This time, the port arrangement was changed as shown in Fig. . With reference to the port arrangement for left colon surgery in the report of Spinelli et al. , this arrangement was determined by arranging for the right colon . The operation time was 198 min, and the estimated amount of bleeding was 10 g. The docking time and the console time were not measured but required approximately 30 to 40 min to dock. The patient’s body was placed in the lithotomy position, with the head and the left side of the patient slightly lower. First, the pedicle of the ileocolic artery and vein was grasped and towed, the mesentery was incised caudally, and the mesenteric mobilization was started. After dissection around the root of the ileocolic artery and vein, the blood vessel was treated with scissors after double clipping. The exercise was completed toward the hepatic flexure. Subsequently, the small intestine was moved cranially, and a peritoneal incision was made outside the ascending colon. Finally, the hepatic flexure was activated as the head was elevated, and the console procedure was completed. A small incision was made in the umbilical 12-mm port insertion, the ileocecal part was pulled out and excised outside the body, and a functional end-to-end anastomosis was performed to return the anastomosis into the body. Even in the conventional laparoscopic ileocecal resection, we perform resection anastomosis outside the body from the small umbilicus in our department. The ileocecal region can be easily pulled out from a small laparotomy wound. If intraperitoneal anastomosis is performed, the operator’s right port must be 5 to 12 mm for inserting the stapler. Therefore, it was judged that there is little merit to perform an intraperitoneal anastomosis. Although bloody stool was temporarily observed after the operation, the condition improved only with conservative treatment. The diet was resumed on the sixth postoperative day, and the patient was discharged on the ninth postoperative day.