A 63-year-old man was referred to our corneal unit 2 weeks after undergoing an uneventful prophylactic bilateral Nd:YAG LI for occludable angles. He complained of bilateral deterioration of visual acuity (VA) that began 3 days following the procedure. His surgical records described the Nd:YAG LI as being uneventful, with normal postoperative IOP and no hyphema or intraocular hemorrhage. Following the procedure, he was treated with topical 0.1% dexamethasone four times a day for 1 week. His medical history included benign prostatic hypertrophy treated with an α1-adrenergic receptor blocker and an ocular history that included high hyperopia and mild nuclear sclerosis cataract. He did not complain of decreased vision before the Nd:YAG LI procedure, and there was no personal or familial history of fluctuating vision, episodes of ocular pain, corneal dystrophy, or corneal transplantation.
He underwent an ophthalmic examination in our clinic, and it revealed a corrected VA of RE 20/60, LE 20/40 (glasses +7.50 D-0.75 D × 21 and +8.50 D–1.75 D × 92 right eye and left eye, respectively). The IOP was 12 mm Hg in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination revealed bilateral diffuse corneal edema with Descemet's membrane folds and a few epithelial bullae. The corneal edema was worse in the right eye, and inferior predominance edema was detected in the left eye . There were no signs of guttae, Descemet's membrane detachment, corneal opacities, or focal corneal damage. The rest of the examination demonstrated shallow and quiet anterior chambers, bilateral normal-sized and transilluminated superotemporal peripheral iridotomies, round and reactive pupils, and mild nuclear sclerosis cataract. The fundus examination ruled out any definitive changes in the retina.
Non-touch specular microscopy (EM-3000, Tomey, Japan) failed to measure endothelial density in both eyes. Anterior segment spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Heidelberg-Spectralis, version 6.9.4.0, Heidelberg Engineering, Germany) demonstrated an attached Descemet's membrane with prominent folds in each eye , and ultrasound biomicroscopy confirmed the presence of narrow angles. The axial length was 20.45 and 20.17 mm, the anterior chamber depth was 2.10 and 2.25 mm, and the central corneal thickness was 736 and 689 μm in the right and left eyes, respectively (Swept-Source OCT Biometer, IOLMaster 700, Carl Zeiss, Germany).
The patient was diagnosed as having acute corneal decompensation following Nd:YAG LI. He was treated with topical 0.1% dexamethasone and NaCl 5% ointment for 2 months without improvement and was subsequently referred for bilateral endothelial keratoplasty.