A 54-year-old female dancer was admitted to our center, presenting with edema in both lower limbs, profuse proteinuria, and hypoalbuminemia. On admission, the patient’s height was 166 cm and her weight was 62 kg, which increased by 6 kg in 10 days. Her blood pressure was 108/74 mmHg. Urinalysis revealed high total protein levels (5.9g/24 h) without hematuria, a serum creatinine level of 72.4 μmol/l, a serum albumin concentration of 20.7 g/l, and a total cholesterol concentration of 14.7 mmol/l, and autoantibodies such as ANA and ANCA were negative. Various viral tests were also negative; there were no decline in complement C3 or C4, and the glycated hemoglobin level was 5.7%.
On the 5th day of hospitalization, an ultrasound-guided renal biopsy was performed. After 2 days, based on professional habits, the patient conducted daily training. During the process, the patient suddenly experienced bilateral blurred vision. We applied for an ophthalmic consultation for her, and ocular evaluations were as follows: the visual acuity of the left eye was 0.4 and of the right eye was 0.4. Optical coherence tomography indicated bilateral serous retinal detachment, with retinal interlaminar cystoid changes in both eyes . Her daily training was suspended. Anticoagulant therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin was administered. Furosemide was administered, accompanied by salt and fluid intake restriction to control systemic edema.
On the 10th hospital day, light microscopy of a renal biopsy specimen showed no significant glomerular abnormalities. Immunohistochemistry showed that there was no significant deposition of IgA, IgG, IgM, C3c, C3d, or C1q. Electron microscopy revealed extensive foot process effacement, and no electron-dense depositions, with no basement membrane abnormalities . We diagnosed her with minimal change disease. We administered 40 mg/day of methylprednisolone. From admission, her urine volume was about 900–1500 ml per day, her body weight increased from 62 to 64 kg, and there was no significant improvement in the edema or blurred vision. From the 14th day of hospitalization, her urine volume increased to over 2500 ml, even without diuretics. Edema resolved after a weight loss of 8 kg, and her visual acuity improved markedly to 0.8 in both eyes. In addition, optical coherence tomography showed that bilateral serous retinal detachment had resolved completely, the macular area was equatorial, and there was no obvious retinal detachment . The glucocorticoid regimen was changed to oral prednisone. The patient achieved complete remission 2 weeks after discharge, with no relapse in the 2 years following her first visit. The patient is still engaged in the dance profession and maintains daily training, and there has been no blurring of vision.