A 37-year-old female with a history of depression and obesity (body mass index: 32) presented to emergency room with a week-long history of nausea, decreased appetite, fatigue, and two days of jaundice.
Four days prior to admission, she noticed that her stools were becoming tanner and eventually turned white. She also reported that her urine was dark. Two days prior to admission the patient noticed jaundice and scleral icterus which prompted her to seek treatment. Her only home medication was venlafaxine, which she had been taking for several years. She has no history of alcohol abuse.
On further questioning about new medications or supplement use, the patient reported using an herbal supplement containing Kratom two weeks prior to the onset of her symptoms. She used the supplement for the first time in her life. Encouraged by a friend to use the supplement to “boost energy levels,” she believed it was safe because it was “all natural”. She consumed approximately three grams in total over the course of three days in the form of powder (which she dissolved in water) and tablets. During her hospitalization, the patient’s liver enzymes continued to rise. On day 3 of her hospitalization, a liver biopsy was performed.
History of depression and obesity.
Unremarkable except jaundice.
On admission, the patient had markedly elevated liver enzymes . Other basic laboratory findings including blood count, basic metabolic panel, coagulation panel, serum thyroid stimulating hormone and antinuclear antibody were within normal range. Viral and autoimmune hepatitis studies were normal. Ceruloplasmin level was also normal. AMA was negative.
An abdominal ultrasound showed diffuse increased echogenicity of the liver with normal liver size and contour suggests diffuse hepatic steatosis . No intrahepatic or common biliary duct dilation or gall stones seen. An abdominal computed tomography scan showed similar findings. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography did not demonstrate any further abnormalities.