We report a case of a 40-year-old Moroccan woman who consulted our hospital for immense swelling in the right neck area of 2 years’ duration and slowly increasing in size. She had no personal or family history of malignancy. She had slight dysphagia and dyspnea. She had no dysphonia, fever, syncopal attacks, compression complaints, or nasopharyngeal discomfort.
The patient’s physical examination revealed unusual swelling measuring approximately 10 × 10 cm in the right carotid triangle . The swelling was firm, oblong, nonpulsatile, nontender, and not fixed to the overlying skin. The patient’s oropharyngeal examination showed a visible bulge in the right tonsil and posterior pillar embarrassing respiration and deglutition. Indirect laryngoscopy revealed that both vocal cords were mobile. The results of her nasal endoscopic and cranial nerve examinations were normal.
Computed tomography highlighted a huge, well-defined mass measuring 110 × 100 × 147 mm, occupying the right carotid triangle, and descending to the superior mediastinum. The mass was heterogeneous and pushing the carotid artery and internal jugular vein anteriorly. It was displacing the larynx, the trachea, and the thyroid gland outside. Contrast dye showed late contrast enhancement of the peripheral portion of the mass, with its center remaining isodense. No neck node was observed . The results of fine-needle aspiration provided no additional information.
A decision was made to perform surgical excision because the clinical results and computed tomography observations were deemed sufficiently suggestive of the diagnosis and in the absence of risk factors (alcohol, tobacco). Surgical excision was done using a transcervical approach with the patient under general anesthesia. A large tumor was found deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. It was separated from the surrounding structures by blunt dissection using a finger. The carotid artery and the internal jugular vein were displaced anteriorly but were not compressed. The mass appeared to have developed from the cervical sympathetic chain and not the vagus nerve. The mass was removed completely with difficulty after sacrificing some nerve fiber .
After the operation, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. During the first day, a partial, well-tolerated Horner’s syndrome was observed, and the patient was treated with corticosteroids. No significant bleeding was seen. On the third day after surgery, the patient was found to have a rhythm disorder (arrhythmia). Her histopathological report showed a benign Antoni type A schwannoma originating from the cervical sympathetic chain .