The patient, a 29-year-old African male, was admitted in September 2019 and diagnosed with schizophrenia and comorbid cannabis and tobacco use disorders. At the time of admission, he reported a 7-year history of auditory hallucinations that were derogatory in nature, paranoid thoughts, and a lack of motivation. In addition, he reported experiencing his thoughts as though they were someone else’s and had beliefs that his thoughts were being taken out of his mind. During the 7-year period, he had been on varying doses of oral olanzapine (2.5–10 mg/day) and fluphenazine long-acting injectable (25–37.5 mg monthly) on and off, with the two being given in combination at certain times. He reported to have been using an average of one roll of cannabis and five cigarettes per day to “feel better.”
He was initially admitted into a psychiatric ward for stabilization of acute psychotic symptoms. This was immediately followed by admission into an in-patient substance use disorder rehabilitation unit for tobacco and cannabis use disorders. Altogether, he was hospitalized for a continuous period of 5 months up to February 2020.
During this time, with supervised medication administration and no substance use, the patient failed adequate trials of oral olanzapine at 20 mg/day and oral quetiapine at 800 mg/day (about 9 weeks each). He reported persistent auditory hallucinations, delusions of reference, delusions of thought possession, and a lack of motivation. A brief trial of oral risperidone at 6 mg/day was attempted for 2 weeks but was halted by a worsening of the psychotic symptoms. Consequently, a decision to initiate clozapine was made. During the last 2 weeks of hospitalization, oral clozapine was started at a dosage of 25 mg/day. This was escalated by 25 mg/day up to a dosage of 400 mg/day in divided doses by the end of the second week. We utilized the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved prescribing guidelines for clozapine administration and titration in this patient. At 400 mg/day of clozapine, the patient reported no psychotic symptoms, had improvements in motivation, and was discharged from the hospital. In addition to the antipsychotics, the patient was on nicotine gum at 8–12 mg/day and bupropion at 150 mg/day throughout the period of hospitalization. The bupropion and nicotine gum were, however, dropped at discharge to allow for finances to be spent on the purchase of clozapine. He had no cravings for tobacco and cannabis at the time of discharge.
Two weeks after discharge from hospital, while on clozapine only, the patient presented with a dysfluency characterized by random hesitations during speech and repetitions of speech sounds. This caused him to avoid social interaction. The patient had no prior history or family history of stuttering. Clinically, he had no extrapyramidal symptoms and no evidence of seizures. A neurological examination and the findings of an electroencephalogram (EEG) were both normal. The patient reported no tobacco or cannabis use after discharge from hospital, and this was corroborated by family. We did not perform a urine drug screen since the procedure was costly and not affordable to the patient.
The author was not aware of stuttering as a side effect of clozapine at the time. A literature search was done that identified a number of case reports on the subject. This prompted the clinician to consider a diagnosis of clozapine-induced stuttering. A gradual dose reduction of clozapine was attempted based on reports indicating this as an effective strategy for clozapine-induced stuttering [, ]. Two weeks after onset of dose reduction, while at 200 mg/day, the stuttering stopped but the psychotic symptoms reemerged. A second trial of a dose escalation, but more gradual this time (12.5 mg on alternate days), was halted 2 weeks later by reemergence of stuttering and persistence of psychotic symptoms at 300 mg/day. This prompted the use of combination therapy with oral aripiprazole (10 mg/day) and oral clozapine (200 mg/day). Such a combination has been shown to be safe and effective for patients experiencing suboptimal response with clozapine [–]. At the time of writing this paper, the patient has been on the aripiprazole/clozapine combination for 4 weeks. The patient reports a reduction in intensity of psychotic symptoms and a complete resolution of stuttering.