A 54-years old obese female patient was hospitalized in July 2015 with severe cutaneous calciphylaxis. She suffered from congenital cystic kidney disease and had been undergoing hemodialysis since 1996. She received her first kidney transplant in 1999, which failed in 2004 because of acute rejection. A second allograft transplanted in 2009 had a complicated course with acute T cell- and antibody-mediated rejections and despite treatment, development of chronic antibody-mediated rejection. Allograft function never exceeded a GFR (cystatin C) of 27 mL/min. First symptoms of cutaneous calciphylaxis began after failure of the first allograft. At this time, intact parathormone (iPTH) level was 510 pg/mL, serum calcium 2.25 mmol/L, serum phosphate 1.71 mmol/L, and alkaline phosphatase activity 69 units/L. Gluteal regions, lower limbs, abdomen, and mammae were affected, requiring surgery and skin transplantation. Bone pain or fractures had never occurred. Subtotal parathyroidectomy in 2006 and total parathyroidectomy in 2009 were not successful to control hyperparathyroidism. Therefore, cinacalcet was administered from 2009 until March 2015. The iPTH ranged between 265 and 463 pg/mL, the alkaline phosphatase activity between 61 and 110 units/L, and serum calcium between 2.0 and 2.3 mmol/L during this treatment. Nevertheless, smouldering calciphylaxis symptoms remained.
At admission, the medication included tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, prednisolone, cholecalciferol, alphacalcidol, calcium acetate, sevelamer, a thiazide diuretic, three antihypertensive drugs, bicarbonate, pantoprazole, simvastatin, and insulin for type II diabetes which had been present since 2012. Coumadin had been given for deep vein thrombosis, but was discontinued 3 months prior admission. Body weight was 96.6 kg at a height of 162 cm. Painful cutaneous lesions were present at multiple sites of the lower trunk, not restricted to the locations of insulin injection. CT imaging additionally showed severe calcifications of the abdominal arteries . Initial laboratory evaluation indicated inflammation, with a C-reactive protein of 259 mg/L (normal < 9 mg/L) and leukocytosis of 13.5/nL (normal range 3.9–10.2/nL). Hemoglobin was 7.7 g/dL (normal ≥ 12.0 g/dL). Serum protein was 52 g/L (normal ≥ 65 g/L). Renal function was marginal but unchanged to previous values (serum creatinine 374 μmol/L, cystatin C eGFR 11 mL/min). The cholecalciferol level was 4.5 ng/mL (normal 20–50 ng/mL). Initial and subsequent levels of ionized calcium, phosphate, iPTH, and bone-specific alkaline phosphatase activity (BAP) as well as subsequent specific treatments are shown in Fig. .
At first, calcium-containing drugs, vitamin D compounds, and the thiazide were discontinued. A low-calcium diet and vitamin K supplementation were prescribed. Infusion of sodium thiosulfate was begun, and because of worsening metabolic acidosis during this treatment, hemodialysis was initiated. To achieve better control of calcium and phosphate levels and to intensify sodium thiosulfate therapy, dialysis sessions were extended (≥6 h, 5–7 times/week). Furthermore, four plasma exchanges were performed with fresh frozen plasma according to recent suggestions . Supportive therapy included antibiotic prophylaxis with clindamycin, opioide analgesics and interdisciplinary wound care. The course was further complicated by recurrent septic episodes of unknown origin and an atraumatic bowel perforation, a rare complication in systemic calciphylaxis .
To evaluate the bone metabolism after prolonged cinacalcet treatment, a bone biopsy (without prior tetracycline labelling) had been performed shortly after admission. When the histology results were obtained and showed adynamic bone disease , the treatment was adapted to stimulate bone metabolism by inducing a negative calcium balance. For this, dialysate calcium was reduced to 1.0 mmol/L, citrate anticoagulation was used, and extended daily dialyses sessions were maintained. After 7 weeks, increased iPTH and BAP suggested an activated bone metabolism. Dependence on daily dialysis and temporary dialysis access problems led us to explore an additional therapeutic option, recombinant human PTH (teriparatide). Teriparatide induces bone turnover and is indicated for low turnover osteoporosis [, ]. No increase in serum calcium was observed during daily treatment with 20 μg teriparatide and the patient reported improvement of pain. Notably, the duration of dialysis sessions could be reduced to 4 hours without impairment of calcium levels. Unfortunately, the patient died from septic shock a few weeks later. We obtained permission to take a postmortem bone biopsy. The biopsy revealed resorption lacunae at multiple sites, several lining cells and osteoid deposition, indicative of an activated bone turnover .