In January 2015, a 72-year-old female with no history of smoking received a medical examination due to persistent cough. Multiple metastatic lung cancer (cT2aN2M1) was diagnosed by computed tomography and positron emission tomography. Histological examination of the bronchoscopic biopsy revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, which was confirmed immunohistochemically (IHC) based on strong nuclear expression of thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1). Both IHC-based and sequencing assays indicated an EGFR mutation in exon 21 (L858R) and negative results for EML4-ALK and ROS1. The patient subsequently underwent gamma knife radiosurgery for brain metastases and radiation to the primary lung lesions. In March 2015, the patient started treatment with the TKI inhibitor gefitinib (250 mg/day orally for 15 months). However, by June 2016, disease progression was observed. Histological analysis based on re-biopsy from progressive subphrenic mass revealed small cell transformation and tested positive with TTF-1 (+), CD56 (+), and synaptophysin (+) . The tumor was refractory to two cycles of cytotoxic chemotherapy and docetaxel . However, a partial response was observed during the seven cycles of irinotecan and carboplatin regimen in March 2017. After cessation of chemotherapy, her disease progressed in July 2017 . The metastatic subphrenic and liver masses presented dramatic progression despite subsequent cytotoxic chemotherapy with pemetrexed or etoposide/carboplatin from July to September 2017 . Re-biopsy of hepatic mass lesions revealed the original EGFR mutations in exon 21 (L858R) without small cell transformation and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression. Therefore, rechallenge with the first-line TKI, erlotinib (150 mg/day), was decided rather than second-generation TKI, afatinib, due to the high costs. Erlotinib treatment for 4 weeks showed mixed response including a partial response by the liver masses and progression of subphrenic and adrenal gland metastases, which suggested coexistence of small cell transformation. Therefore, erlotinib combined with the cytotoxic chemotherapy of irinotecan and carboplatin previously effective yielded a favorable response in all the metastatic lesions in November 2017 . No significant adverse effects were observed with the combination chemotherapy.