We present a 9-year-old boy with a history of recurrent respiratory infections. In July 2022, the child swallowed an awn during a walk on a field in Northwest Bulgaria, and after two days, he started to cough. On the third day after the accident, he became febrile, and antibiotic therapy was prescribed (Clarithromycin). This treatment was not effective, and the child suffered left-sided chest pain, irradiating to his left shoulder. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were prescribed. On the 10th day, the patient was admitted to the Department of Pediatric Pulmonology for further diagnostic workup and treatment. The child’s condition was stable, with a productive cough and reduced vesicular breathing paravertebrally and axillary on the left side of the chest. His hemodynamic was stable, and his abdomen was not tender, without hepatosplenomegaly. His blood tests showed inflammation—increased C-reactive protein (CRP) 36.29 mg/L and leukocytes 10,9 x109 L, and stable hematological parameters (hemoglobin 126 g/L, hematocrit 39%, erythrocytes count range 4.69, platelets 347). Biochemical markers were also in the normal range—sugar level 6.08 mmol/L, creatinine 42 µmol/L, urea 2 mmol/L, ASAT 15 U/L, ALAT 12 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 127 U/L, total protein 65.3 g/L, albumin 41.26 g/L. Frontal and lateral chest X-rays showed faint reticular and patchy opacities with unclear margins in the lower lobe of the left lung (A,B). Treatment comprised antibiotics (Ceftriaxone), corticosteroids (Methylprednisolone), and saline inhalations.
The patient’s complaints persisted, and the child was admitted to the Department of Pediatric Thoracic Surgery for further exams. The condition of the child was stable, with reduced productive cough and reduced vesicular breathing paravertebrally and axillary on the left side of the chest. His hemodynamic was stable, and his abdomen was not tender, without hepatosplenomegaly. Blood and biochemical tests were in the normal range, with slightly increased inflammation markers (leucocytes 11.8 G/L, hemoglobin 137 g/L, hematocrit 0.43 L/L, thrombocytes 404 G/L, CRP 0.59 mg/dL, ASAT 21 U/L, ALAT 13 U/L, creatinine 53 µmol/L). Frontal and chest X-rays revealed atelectasis of the posterior basal segment (A,B). A flexible bronchoscopy was performed. The trachea, right main bronchus, and segmental and subsegmental bronchi were without obstruction and pathology. The left main and upper lobe bronchi also were normal. A thick secretion was found in the left lower lobe bronchus, and a bronchoalveolar lavage was performed. Stenosis and obturation resulting from hypergranulation were found in the segmental and subsegmental bronchi of the posterior basal segment (LB10). Recanalization of the LB10 was performed with histopathology and microbiology samples. After five days, a second flexible bronchoscopy was made. Poor improvement was marked by persisting stenosis and obturation of LB10. Again, a biopsy and recanalization with new samples were performed. The microbiology was negative, and the histology showed acute bronchitis. Antibiotics (Ceftriaxone) and symptomatic treatment (Pulmicort inhalations) were extended during the entire hospital stay. The patient was discharged on the 7th day and transferred back to the Department of Pediatric Pulmonology for prolonged treatment.
After two weeks, the child was admitted again to the Department of Pediatric Thoracic Surgery. Blood and biochemical tests were in the normal range (leucocytes 8.9 G/L, hemoglobin 136 g/L, hematocrit 0.42 L/L, thrombocytes 281 G/L, CRP 0.06 mg/dL, ASAT 26 U/L, ALAT 17 U/L, creatinine 57 µmol/L). A frontal chest X-ray revealed the persistence of the radiological findings from the last stay . A CT scan showed a zone of consolidation and a typical view of a lung abscess in the left posterior basal segment (A,B). Then, the decision for surgery was taken. A left-sided VATS was performed. An abscess (3 cm/4 cm/5 cm) was found in the 10th segment, and an atypical lung resection was performed. After the procedure, the lung specimen was cut, and a foreign body (an awn from the species Hordeum murinum) was found (A,B). A 20 Ch drain tube was inserted into the pleural cavity. After the surgery, the improvement was marked. Perioperative and postoperative therapy comprised Sultamicillin, Cefoperazon/Sulbactam, Clindamycin, and postoperative analgesia. The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was discharged on the 9th postoperative day.
During the follow-up, the child had no complaints, and the physical examination was normal . The incision wounds healed primarily, and no complications were noticed. The patient recovered uneventfully. Annual physical and functional examinations of breathing will be conducted.