A multiparous 54-year-old woman presented to the department of otolaryngology in February 2018 with a round mass, approximately 5 cm in diameter, in the posterior triangle of the right side of the neck . The mass was firm, fixed, and painful on palpation. For the past 6 months she had been suffering from neck pain, which was interpreted as torticollis and treated with analgesics without relief. Whole-body contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a solid 5.5 × 4.5 cm mass in the right posterior neck region near C1 and C2, without bone infiltration or enlargement of the carotid space lymph nodes ; there was also a 0.8-cm subcutaneous nodule near the anterolateral arch of the right third rib and the axillary cavity. The lungs and liver were normal. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck showed a heterogeneously hyperintense mass displacing the paravertebral muscles, and a distinct cleavage plane between the mass and the sternocleidomastoid muscle . Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was performed twice, however, only few lymphoid cells and erythrocytes were observed.
About 4 years earlier, in October 2013, the patient underwent surgical removal of a large nodule present in the right broad ligament, and homolateral salpingo-oophorectomy (Additional file ). The nodule was diagnosed as leiomyosarcoma. One month later the patient was treated with total abdominal hysterectomy, left salpingo-oophorectomy and radiotherapy. The histological analyses did not show any other leiomyosarcoma localizations, thus, the diagnosis of primary leiomyosarcoma of the right broad ligament was formulated (TNM: pT1, pN0, pM0). In 2017, she had had leiomyosarcoma relapse on the scar of the previous surgical procedure, indicative of shedding of sarcomatous cells, probably during surgery of the leiomyosarcoma nodule, and received one cycle of adriamycin plus olaratumab, a monoclonal antibody approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2016 for the treatment of metastatic soft tissue sarcomas.
The rarity of metastasis of leiomyosarcoma to the head and neck region, and the absence of lung and liver metastases, led us to suspect a primary neck tumor.
The neck mass and the subcutaneous nodule near the right axilla were excised. The morphological features of the neck lesion matched those of the earlier broad ligament leiomyosarcoma, and so secondary leiomyosarcoma was diagnosed. The primary leiomyosarcoma was a large (19 × 16.8 × 6 cm) light-gray mass, with the cut section showing yellow areas of softening and occasional foci of hemorrhage. Microscopically, a few atypical pleomorphic elements were interspersed between bundles of uniform spindle cells and necrotic areas . The neck mass was a lobulated gray nodule, 5.7 cm in diameter, presenting whorled and necrotic areas on cut section, without macroscopic and microscopic evidence of skeletal muscle infiltration. Necrosis was present in < 50% of the samples of both the primary and the secondary tumors. Mitotic figures (MF) were infrequent: < 3 MF/10 HPF and < 5 MF/10 HPF in the primary and in the secondary leiomyosarcomas, respectively; no atypical MF were present. On immunohistochemical examination, both lesions showed MIB-1 nuclear immunoreactivity of < 5% , focal marked smooth muscle actin and desmin immunoreactivity, marked diffuse p16 immunoreactivity , and weak diffuse vimentin immunoreactivity (not shown). Both tumors were negative for estrogen receptor (ER), p53, CD117, DOG-1, Bcl2, and cyclin D1. According to the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group (FNCLCC) grading system, the score of the mitotic count (score 1 for a mitotic count of 0–9 MF/10 HPF, 2 for 10–19 MF/10 HPF and 3 for > 20/10 HPF) combined with the scores of the differentiation degree and the necrosis extension establish LMS diagnosis and grade. The broad ligament sarcoma was classified as a grade 1 well-differentiated leiomyosarcoma. The metastatic leiomyosarcoma also displayed a well-differentiated morphology.
The postoperative course was uneventful. She continued olaratumab therapy and remained in good condition until 13 months after the surgery, when a chest CT scan detected two intracardiac masses. Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan and MRI confirmed the presence of the intracardiac masses. Echocardiography showed two hyperechogenic inhomogeneous intracardiac nodules: one (21 × 33 mm) in the lateral wall of the left ventricle and the other (17 × 15 mm) at the apex of the right ventricle. The patient experienced tachycardia. Biopsy was not performed because of the high surgical risk. She was treated with three cycles of chemotherapy (dacarbazine and gemcitabine). At follow-up in November 2019, the nodules were found to have increased in size (37 × 28 mm and 44 × 25 mm, respectively) thus monotherapy with pazopanib was introduced. In February 2020, the nodule at the right ventricle apex had grown further, therefore a chemotherapy regimen with paclitaxel alone was initiated. After the fifth course, in April 2020, no further increase in size of either nodule was observed. Heart rhythm had also returned to normal. The disease has been stable since then. The results of a CT scan, performed in July 2020, are shown in Fig. .