A previously healthy, 5-year-old female admitted to our neurology department 7 days after the onset varicella zoster infection, because of ataxia, vomiting, headache, and progressive drowsiness.
Neurological examination revealed left hemiparesis.
At the time of admission, she was drowsy, afebrile, and had vesicular lesions with scab over the trunk and limbs. Vital signs were normal. Child body weight 17 kg and height 115 cm.The laboratory investigations revealed complete blood count, liver function, hepatitis B and C serology, and CSF analysis within normal limits. Laboratory tests for collagen vascular disease and vasculitis, including antinuclear (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasm (ANCA), and antiglomerular basement membrane antibodies, were also negative.
Computed tomography brain showed hemorrhagic infarct in the left temporo-parietal region. Coagulation profile was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain revealed hemorrhagic infarct in the same region. Coronal T1-weighted post-contrast images confirm filing defects within left transverse sinus and internal jugular vein .
Magnetic resonance Venogram showed thrombosis of left transverse sinus and sigmoid sinus and internal jugular vein .
Coagulation profile was performed including protein S and C, anti-thrombin II, prothrombin, and factor V leiden, which were negative, but the patient was carrier for MTHFR(C677T) mutation.
Although CSF VZV- IgG antibody was positive, CSF VZV PCR (Polymerase chain reaction) was found to be negative.
In view of straight forward clinical history of chicken pox rash followed by development of CVST along with virological evidence of VZV in CSF, the etiology seems to be viral (VZV) only.
After obtaining the patient's informed consent, treatment was planned.
Hence CSVT secondary to primary VZV was diagnosed intravenous acyclovir for 15 days, and low-molecular-weight heparin for 3 days overlapped with oral Warfarin for 3months. After 3 months follow up, the patient experienced a complete recovery. Follow-up MRI revealed recanalization of the sinuses after 3 months.