A 27-year-old man with stage IVB thymic carcinoma was diagnosed 7 years ago. He initially presented with a 7.7 × 7.1 cm bulky anterior mediastinal mass, bilateral jugular, bilateral peritracheal, and bilateral cardiophrenic lymphadenopathy with small pericardial effusion. Biopsy of the mediastinal mass revealed a primary lymphoepithelioma-like thymic carcinoma with metastatic Epstein-Barr virus-positive undifferentiated carcinoma from peripheral right neck lymphadenopathy. He received neoadjuvant therapy with five cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel. The patient underwent surgical excision of the thymus, pericardium, part of the involved lung, and regional lymph nodes. Pathological examination confirmed poorly differentiated lymphoepithelioma-like thymic carcinoma with local invasion of the pericardium and lungs with regional metastatic adenopathy. The patient received three cycles of adjuvant cisplatin-etoposide-based chemoradiation. The patient did well and underwent ablation of pulmonary recurrence 2 years later. Surveillance imaging 4 years after surgery revealed recurrent bilateral mediastinal adenopathy. He was treated with pembrolizumab IV every 3 weeks for 53 cycles over 39 months. He tolerated the treatment well, except for bilateral pruritus of the eyes, which responded to antihistamine and abdominal pain managed with omeprazole after negative upper endoscopy. The patient developed bleeding oral lesions approximately 38 months after the pembrolizumab therapy. On exam, there were numerous lesions. One lesion on the left inner cheek was quarter sized, red, and fissured. There were an additional 4 lesions under the patient’s tongue. The patient’s throat and gums were without lesions, redness, or bleeding. There were no white patches or enlarged lymph nodes. There was also no drainage, foul odor, or bleeding observed. The patient was prescribed dexamethasone mouthwash for discomfort and inflammation and was referred to oral surgery for further evaluation.
Oral surgery evaluation revealed a 4.0 × 3.0 cm red and fissured soft tissue with redundancy in the left inner cheek. There was a second similar lesion measuring 2.0 × 3.0 cm on the left lower inner lip (, ). Four small red lesions were observed under the patient’s tongue. The patient noted these patients were painful. Again, there was no drainage, foul odor, or bleeding present at the time of evaluation. It was recommended the patient have these lesions biopsied by ENT.
Biopsy of the lesions from the buccal mucosa and lip revealed infiltration of mature plasma cells beneath the epithelium (, ). There was no evidence of granulomatous or lichenoid-like inflammation noted on pathology report. Serum protein electrophoresis and PET scan were obtained to exclude monoclonal lymphoproliferative disorder and were ultimately not indicative of this condition. It was concluded that this was most likely circumorificial plasmacytosis induced by pembrolizumab. Ultimately, it was determined that the risk of cancer outweighed the risk of side effects at this time, so pembrolizumab treatment was continued.