A 39-year-old woman, suffering from meningiomatosis, was operated in our institute several times. The first operation was performed in 2006, when she underwent exeresis of a paramedian meningioma (meningothelialmeningioma) arising in the right paramedian region. In 2009, she presented with a gran mal seizure and left hemiparesis; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multicentric meningiomas in the right parietal paramedian and bilateral falcine regions. These lesions were partially removed and the postoperative course was good, with an improvement in her seizures and weakness. In addition, in this case, the histological diagnosis was meningothelialmeningioma. Therefore, after operation, the patient was subjected to radiotherapy and a close neuroradiologic follow-up. Since February 2015, she noted progressive numbness and weakness in both lower extremities with gait disturbance. She denied sphincter disturbance.
Spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an extramedullary mass, located between D3–D4 vertebral levels, extending to the left D3–D4 foramen . Another extramedullary mass was located between D5–D6 vertebral levels, extending to the right D5–D6 foramen . Both lesions were hypointense to the spinal cord on T1-weighted images, T2 hyperintense, displayed important enhancement after Gadolinium injection, and compressed the spinal cord dorsally.
Neurological examination revealed a severe paraparesis with motor strength of 2/5 in both legs (left more than right) and a T6 sensory level bilaterally. A mild weakness in her arm was also noted (outcome of previous intervention). The following deep tendon reflexes were exaggerated: Bilateral knee jerk, bilateral ankle jerk, and bilateral medial hamstrings. Left-sided Babinski reflex was noted. General physical examination was normal.
Using an operative microscope, the patient underwent a radical surgical excision of both lesions by D4 laminectomy and D5 left partial hemilaminectomy. Two purely extradural tumors were found intraoperatively; lesions were found to be gray, with hard consistency, along with calcifications and signs of bone erosion. Intraoperative findings were suggestive of a metastatic extradural and vertebral secondary location (even if no primary lesion was found in the preoperative laboratory and radiological evaluation). Extradural masses were completely removed and dural basements were cauterized [Figures and ]. Pathological examination of masses revealed, in both cases, a meningothelialmeningioma . Ki67 was expressed in 2% of neoplastic cells.
Postoperatively, there was a marked improvement in the muscle strength of the lower extremities; follow-up neuroimaging revealed complete removal of lesions and no spinal instability. No apparent tumor recurrence or regrowth was detected in a follow-up study 6 months later.