A 19-year-old black female presented with painful lower lip swelling of 2 weeks duration. She was initially seen by a physician whom she claimed had given her anti-allergic medication and painkillers in the form of tablets for 1 week, but the situation worsened and the swelling and pain increased. She was then prescribed intravenous penicillin for another week with no improvement, after which she presented to our hospital for assessment and further management. There was lower lip swelling with discharge from the exfoliated crusted lower lip surface. The condition had started as a small pimple on her chin just below the lower lip on the left side which was painful and increasing in size. She attempted to open it and did not use any antibiotic. After 48 h she became febrile and her lower lip became swollen. She went first to a physician, then presented to our dental hospital. The patient’s medical and family history was non-contributory, and there was no history of trauma, hospitalization or current medication except those prescribed by the physician. She was lactating and had a 6 month old boy.
The patient’s oral cavity was examined carefully and good oral hygiene was noted. There were no obvious odontogenic causes or lip paraesthesia. Panoramic radiograph was done to exclude odontogenic causes and was insignificant. A thorough facial examination followed and a small crusted pimple was noticed on the left side of the chin. There was extensive swelling involving the whole lower lip and extending to involve the chin and submental area with pus discharging from the left side of the chin just beneath the site of the pimple . The patient’s blood investigations were negative for HIV and hepatitis, with a TWBC of (25.8×), random blood glucose of 190 mg/dl and a creatinine of 0.7 mg/dl. She was anemic (10 g/dl), mildly hyponatremic (134 mmol/l) and hypokalemic (2.5 mmol/l). Potassium correction was started within travenous potassium chloride at 10 meq/l over 4 h for 1 day, after which she was shifted to diet supplements. Normal saline 500 ml/day was given for 2 days, as well as ferrous sulphate tablets. Electrolyte and blood levels were back to normal after 6 days (K = 3.5 mmol/l, Na = 137 mmol/l and Hb = 12 g/dl.
Based on the history and clinical presentation, the diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis was made and a swab of the site was taken for culture and sensitivity. Treatment started with lower lip debridement and exploration where necrosis of the middle part of the lower lip was noted. A segment of necrotic fascia on the left side of the chin was found and removed with preservation of the overlying skin except over the acne-affected area where skin was removed . Multiple mental and submental incisions were made for drainage. Irrigation with normal saline was done and corrugated rubber drains were inserted and secured. The patient was admitted to the hospital where intravenous fluids and an empirical triple antibiotic regimen were started immediately (Ceftazidime 1Gm/day, Metronidazole 500 mg 8 hourly and Gentamycin 80 mg/day), and continued after culture and sensitivity results revealed no microbial growth. After 3 days, further tissue necrosis was noticed, so a second debridement was done with consequent tissue loss over the middle upper surface of the lower lip. Additionally, irrigation with hydrogen peroxide followed by normal saline wash was performed. Ten days later, dramatic improvement was seen, where only the Gentamycin was stopped and irrigation was continued with normal saline and topical application of Tetracycline ointment for 7 days. The drain was removed on day 19 and the patient was discharged on the 20th day on oral antibiotics for another week. On follow up, the wound showed good healing by secondary intention and there was no need for reconstruction .