We present a 66-year-old male patient with a history of mechanical mitral valve replacement due to mitral valve disease (severe stenosis and regurgitation) caused by rheumatic heart disease. He developed left ventricular dysfunction with left ventricular ejection fraction of 33%, narrow QRS, New York Heart Association functional class II and was receiving optimal medical treatment (bisoprolol 10 mg daily, spironolactone 25 mg daily, sacubitril 97 mg/valsartan 103 mg twice daily, furosemide 40 mg twice daily). The patient had no other relevant past medical history.
In the outpatient clinic, a conventional pre-implant ECG screening was performed to determine eligibility for an S-ICD implant with the automatic screening tool: the only suitable sensing vector, both in left and right parasternal lead position (LPP/RPP), was the primary vector but only in supine position. All the others failed the test. For this reason, the option of an S-ICD implant was at first excluded.
The patient was admitted for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implant 1 week after. At the time of admission, he did not present any heart failure signs or symptoms. Once in the operating room, before undergoing prepping and sterile draping for device implantation, an S-ICD demonstration system was positioned and secured with adhesive tape on the patient’s chest. The device position was checked by fluoroscopy, and it was subsequently repositioned to fit the cardiac shadow outline in a simulated defibrillation vector. Once this was achieved, the system position was drawn onto the chest with demographic marker pen and surface electrodes were positioned to match the sensing electrodeś intended position, the distal sensing tip and the can. A modified screening was performed using these landmarks . This adjusted screening resulted in a positive outcome in LPP, with a suitable secondary sensing vector both in supine and standing/sitting position.
As the patient was at high risk of ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death (SCD), and considering his valvular disease history and therefore higher risk of intravascular lead infection, it was decided that S-ICD would be the most adequate option. This took into account the favourable fluoroscopy-guided screening result. The risks and benefits of the procedure were discussed with the patient. He agreed to the procedure and signed the consent form.
The S-ICD was implanted (Emblem S-ICD 219) guided by the pen landmarks and immediately afterwards, defibrillator threshold test was performed [an induced ventricular fibrillation (VF) was terminated in 12 s, with a 65 Joules energy shock with an impedance of 67 Ohm]. Following implantation, interrogation of the S-ICD confirmed that the secondary sensing vector was suitable. The patient did not suffer any procedure-related complications and was discharged the next day. We observed no T-wave oversensing in the exercise test done on the first follow-up 3 weeks after the procedure. From then on, we scheduled follow-up visits every 3 months (through remote device monitoring system) and in-office visits every year. After 22 months follow-up, no ventricular arrhythmias occurred and he did not present with sensing problems nor had he received any shocks.