31-year-old Caucasian male with no significant past medical history presented with fever of 102 F, chills and 4 centimeters painful redness induration at right inguinal region for 1 week. He denied chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitations, cough, headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, bowel or urinary symptoms, weight or appetite changes. He has no drug use, sick contacts, recent travel, exposure to tuberculosis and unprotected sexual exposure. He does not smoke. He drinks beer occasionally on weekends but denies illicit drug use. He works in a food store with no direct raw food contact. He has no history of sexually transmitted diseases. His paternal aunt has Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA).
Physical examination demonstrated mild pallor, cellulitis at right inguinal area and left inguinal lymphadenopahy. Arthritis and rheumatoid nodules were absent.
Hemoglobin was 10.6 g/dL, hematocrit was 30% with MCV of 86.4, white blood cell count was 1.2 × 109/L with absolute neutrophil count of 450 (0.45 × 109/L) and platelet was 221 × 109/L. Peripheral blood smear showed no significant abnormality with normal appearing white blood cells with few toxic granulations. Bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular and maturing trilineage hematopoiesis. Flow cytometry showed no evidence of lymphoproliferative disorder. He had negative tests for Syphilis, HIV, hepatitis B and hepatitis C. Monospot test, PPD skin test, ANA panel and Parvovirus B19 also were negative. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 50 mm/hr. C-reactive protein was 60.2 mg/l. Lymph node biopsy from left inguinal node revealed benign reactive lymph node. Abdominal computed tomography showed splenomegaly with triangular hypodense lesion at the lateral aspect of the mid portion of the spleen (abcess versus infarct). Negative Galium scan confirmed the diagnosis of splenic infarct. Rheumatoid factor (RF) was positive with titer of 1:640. Antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCP) were positive >250. Joint x-rays including wrists, hands, knees, ankles, feet showed no evidence of erosions.
The provisional diagnosis was Felty's Syndrome (FS). Treatment was initiated with methotrexate and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). The neutropenia initially corrected and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein improved significantly. However, 2 weeks after cessation of G-CSF therapy the neutrophil count declined and second course of G-CSF was given. Overall treatment was tolerated well, except for the development of mild fever, mild arthritis and transient thrombocytopenia which are known side effects of G-CSF treatment. He currently remains on methotrexate with reasonable control of his symptoms.