A 38-year-old Ivorian woman came to our attention in September 2012 with a painful ulnar shaft nonunion and an important dysmorphism of her left forearm, with a shortening of 11 cm and varus deviation in comparison with the contralateral limb . The clinical outcome was the result of an unspecified left upper forearm road trauma in childhood (approximatively at the age of 8 years). The patient arrived in Italy as an immigrant in 2012 (the correct date of arrival could not be determined due to a lack of documentation provided by the patient). During the examination, the patient was nulliparous, with a subsequent pregnancy in March 2014 (male child in good health), unemployed, and living with her partner. In her past medical history, she had type II diabetes mellitus since 2014 treated with metformin (1000 mg twice a day). She also had a history of retroperitoneal lymph node tuberculosis in 2015, treated for a year with a triple antibiotic regimen (isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol), with follow-up visits every 8 months by an infectious disease specialist. There was also a previous platelet disorder, likely of post-tubercular origin, which was being monitored by a hematologist and in a regressive stage. Additionally, she had cutaneous sarcoidosis with nodular-papular skin eruptions on her shins. The patient reported neither smoking nor habitual alcohol consumption. The patient’s vital signs were within normal limits (blood pressure: 130/85 mmHg; oxygen saturation 99% in ambient air; heart rate about 80 beats per minute; respiratory rate about 15 breaths per minute). The neurological physical examination did not report any neuropathic alterations in either the upper or lower limbs; all muscle groups were regularly recruited without significant deficits.
As regards the orthopedic pathology, she did not receive any kind of acute treatment, followed by a subsequent undocumented surgical procedure with avascular autologous bone grafting. At the same time, an almost impossible to understand inner fixation device had been placed, of which there were no signs in the available X-rays. Her left wrist showed a significant range-of-motion reduction, about 60% than contralateral: limitation in pronation + 55°, in supination − 70°, in extension + 80°, in flexion − 30°), a long history of forearm pain (NRS 7), weakness and discomfort. However, DRUJ and elbow joints did not show major impairments, and there were no signs of peripheral nerves disfunction. She received two surgical attempts with debridement (September 2012 and August 2014), autologous avascular bone graft from iliac crest and plating fixation, resulted in poor outcome (nonunion with plate breakage) . In March 2021 we decided to treat the nonunion with a vascularized free fibular flap. It is well established that this type of flap has numerous advantages and indications in the treatment of recurrent nonunion: matching anatomic shape compared to forearm long bones in terms of length and diameter, low risk of complications at the donor site, possibility of one-stage and multi-tissue reconstructions, high resistance to infections and strong alternative to avascular bone grafts [–]. We had another major issue to overcome, represented by the completely altered ulna and radius anatomy, which hindered the possibility to use a standard locking compression plate. One feasible and promising solution was to integrate in our planning the use of a patient-specific 3D custom made plate [, ]. Therefore, we decided to cooperate with KLS Martin to plan a patient-specific reconstruction of the atrophic ulna nonunion starting directly from a 3D scan of the affected limb and using the broken plate as a template to guide ulnar shaft realignment . Accurate planning focused also on pre-existing screw holes (to be considered as loci minoris resistentiae), poor native bone quality and sclerotic extremities to resect at the nonunion site. The study resulted in a unique 2.8 mm width custom plate with a proper screw number and length for every section , relative left ulna and right fibula cutting guides. In particular, the fibular flap length was carefully predetermined, in order to be 63 mm. The patient performed also a lower limbs CT angiography to assess fibula vascularization (in order to avoid anatomical variations in its course, that is peronea arteria magna), and a Doppler ultrasonography of the left forearm. Both of these exams ruled out possible complications. Surgery was performed in general anesthesia, by two teams of two surgeons each. Preoperatively antibiotic prophylaxis by administering Cefazolin 2 g intravenously and postoperatively crystalloid infusion therapy for volume replenishment was performed. In particular, no post-operative antibiotic prophylaxis was performed. The examinations performed in the preparatory and postoperative periods are shown in Table . At surgery, three biopsy samples of the preudoarthrosis focus were collected for microbiological studies, which were negative for the presence of pathogens. After free fibular flap elevation and ulnar shaft preparation, the flap was properly cut, inserted and stabilized with custom plate and screws. The entire surgical procedure was conducted under fluoroscopy guidance. Peroneal artery was anastomized in end-to-lateral configuration on the ulnar artery, while concomitant peroneal vein was anastomized in end-to-end configuration on a local tributary vein . We didn’t modify the pre-existing ulna plus deformity, which could have been easy to perform due to ulnar shaft cut. This indication was considered after the relatively good pronation-supination movement showed before surgery by the patient and absence of ulnar wrist pain . The forearm was then protected with a dorsal elbow splint for 4 weeks. In the post-operative course there were no anemias such as to require transfusion support. No complications were detected during surgical wound healing at the donor and recipient sites. We planned regular follow-up evaluations with X-rays at one, three and six months after surgery. Fibular flap healed at the proximal ulnar junction 6 months after operation, while it took up to eight months to appreciate healing in the distal junction point, probably due to scarce distal ulnar bone quality . After removing the splint, physiotherapy and functional recovery sessions were performed for 4 months, in order to stimulate the patient to regain competence in pronation-supination and flexion–extension movements. After 6 months, we clinically assessed functional improvement with significant pain reduction (NRS 2) and a range-of-motion restoration as it was before the surgery.