A 40-year-old man with chronic renal failure and undergoing long-term hemodialysis (7 years) was admitted to the hospital as a result of chronic flank pain. Subsequent Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) of the abdomen revealed an approximately 12 cm × 6 cm × 5 cm solid mass in the right kidney with calcification, a cystic lesion in the left kidney and enlargement of the retroperitoneal lymph nodes . Radical nephrectomy of the right kidney was performed.
Grossly, the renal parenchyma was almost replaced with a grayish tan and fleshy tumor with focal necrosis, hemorrhage and calcification. The tumor invaded the renal pelvis, calyces and the hilar area of the kidney and extended to the capsule.
The tissues were fixed in 10 % buffered formalin solution, embedded in paraffin block, 4 μm thick sections were obtained and subsequently stained with hematoxylin-eosin. Under the microscope the tumor cells were arranged in an organoid pattern with a well-defined cell border and eosinophilic voluminous cytoplasm. The nucleus was enlarged and possessed vesicular chromatin with apparent nucleoli, indicating a high nuclear grade. In some areas, rhabdoid cells were observed. These rhabdoid cells were non-adhesive and showed eccentric nuclei and intracytoplasmic inclusions of eosinophilic hyaline globules . The high malignancy was indicated by high mitotic activities (Ki 67 index approximately 40 %) and increased necrosis in the lesion. The tumor invaded to the adipose tissue of the renal hilum.
Next, immunohistochemistry was performed on the sections to assess tumor classification using an avidin-biotin peroxidase technique with hematoxylin counterstaining. The antibodies used in the present study included anti-vimentin (V9, 1:400, Dako), anti-pan-CK (AE1/AE3, 1:200, DAKO), anti-PAX2 (EP3251, 1:1000, Abcam), anti-PAX8 (ZR-1, 1:100, Abcam), anti-HMB45 (HMB45 + 50, 1:100, DAKO), anti-MelanA (A103, 1:100, DAKO), anti-MyoD1 (58A, 1:100, Santa Cruz), anti-Myogenin (F5D, 1:50, Santa Cruz), anti-TFE3 (H-300, 1:100, Santa Cruz), and anti-SMARCB1 (H-300, 1:100, Santa Cruz). As demonstrated in Fig. , vimentin and pan-CK were both positive in all tumor cells, with more prominent perinuclear and intense cytoplasmic staining in rhabdoid cells . The neoplastic cells showed positive staining for PAX2 and PAX8, indicating renal tubular differentiation, and negative staining for CD10, HMB45, MelanA, myogenin, myoD1, desmin, CD31 and CD34. Interestingly, we observed that all tumor cells showed the complete loss of nuclear staining for SMARCB1 in both the organoid and non-adhesive areas with rhabdoid cells compared with the ubiquitous expression of SMARCB1 in surrounding normal tissue , indicating a renal malignant rhabdoid tumor. Surprisingly, the tumor cells demonstrated strong nuclear and weak cytoplasmic staining for TFE3 , a relatively specific IHC marker for Xp11.2 translocation RCC.
To determine the TFE3 rearrangement status, we performed FISH in paraffin-embedded material using a probe comprising 2 contigs flanking the TFE3 gene on Xp11.2 (ZytoLight SPEC TFE3). For males, one fuse signal reflects an intact TFE3 allele. Positivity was defined based on the separation of red and green signals via more than 2 signal diameters (split signals). We used a cutoff of >10 % of the tumor nuclei with any pattern of break-apart signals. In this case, approximately 15 % of the tumor cells showed split signals, and a copy number gain of TFE3 gene was also observed in some tumor cells with or without translocation (3 to 5 signals per nucleus) . RNA was extracted from the formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tumor samples using a FFPE DNA/RNA Kit (AmoyDx, Guangzhou, China), and subsequently reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed using the PrimeScript™ Reagent kit (Takara, Dalian, Japan). The primers used to detect the gene fusion products of all translocation types (ASPSCR1-TFE3, PRCC-TFE3, PSF-TFE3, CLTC-TFE3 and Nono-TFE3) are listed in Table . A band for the ASPSCR1-TFE3 fusion product is demonstrated in Fig. . Thus, an ASPSCR1-TFE3 translocation RCC was considered.
In addition to the TFE3 rearrangement, the tumor cells showed the complete loss of SMARCB1 expression. Subsequent DNA sequencing to determine the genetic alteration of SMARCB1 (exon 1–9) revealed a frameshift mutation in exon 4 of SMARCB1 .
Taken together, a diagnosis of Xp11.2 translocation RCC was preferred. Considering the loss of SMARCB1 expression observed herein, this case presents a unique Xp11.2 translocation RCC with SMARCB1 inactivation.
This patient died 6 months after the surgery.