A 52-year-old woman was referred to our Unit after a routine medical check-up that revealed a cardiac murmur. The patient reported having suffered from episodes of chest pain and fainting in previous years. There were no other relevant elements in her medical history. The physical examination revealed a continuous cardiac murmur (3/6) along the sternal border, mostly eared on the base, and no other pathological signs. The electrocardiogram (ECG) detected a counter-clockwise rotation of the QRS axis on the longitudinal plane without any sign of ischaemia . Transthoracic echocardiography found a severe dilation of the left coronary artery ostium with an enlarged convoluted coronary artery on the posterior aspect of the left atrium. The coronary artery was draining into a dilated CS with a high flow left–right shunt suggesting the presence of a coronary fistula ( and , Video S1). The computed tomography (CT) coronary angiogram ( and , Video S3) confirmed the diagnosis and showed an enlarged left coronary artery with a convoluted segment and giant aneurysm of the circumflex artery (diameters up to 35 mm). The preoperative magnetic resonance revealed preserved contractile left ventricular (LV) function and no late gadolinium enhancement in the myo-pericardium, excluding the presence of tissue damage. Coronary catheterization excluded stenosis of the coronary arteries and the aneurismatic circumflex tract draining into the CS through a fistulous connection was measured at 9 mm in diameter . There was a significant left to right shunt (Qp/Qs: 2/1), with a slightly increased mean pulmonary pressure (26 mmHg; normal range: 14–25 mmHg). After collegial discussion, the patient was scheduled for elective percutaneous closure. The interventional cardiologist attempted to close the fistula with a 10 mm Amplatzer device, but due to a significant residual shunt and device instability, the percutaneous procedure was abandoned in favour of a surgical closure (, Video S2).
The surgical operation was conducted through a median sternotomy, using standard bicaval cannulation. The aorta was cross-clamped, and cold blood cardioplegia was used for myocardium protection. After the right atriotomy we were not able to achieve good visualization of the fistulous drainage site in the CS. Therefore, we proceeded with the incision of the posterior aspect of the circumflex artery, exposing the fistulous tract that was closed with a Prolene 5/0 continuous suture . The intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography showed a mild systolic dysfunction of both ventricles.
The postoperative course was uneventful until Day 2 when the patient developed signs of myocardial ischaemia with an elevation of the ST segment in inferolateral leads and cardiac troponin T (peak of 1151 ng/L; normal values < 14 ng/L). Echocardiography showed moderate LV dysfunction [ejection fraction (EF) 48%] with hypo-kinesia of the inferolateral wall and apical portion of the septum. We performed a postoperative coronary angiography that showed the successful closure of the fistula without any relevant alteration of the coronary arteries (, Video S5). The patient was started on antiplatelet (aspirin) and oral anticoagulation therapies [International Normalized Ratio (INR) target range: 2.5–3.5]. The remaining postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged in good clinical condition. At discharge, ECG showed negative T waves in the inferolateral site (V3–V6) . At 1-month follow-up, a routine transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated the presence of a hyperechogenic formation within the dilated circumflex artery, for which a dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) was introduced. The angio CT performed after 3 months confirmed the persistence of a thrombotic formation with the presence of a residual lumen inside that allows perfusion of the circumflex artery without any consequence on the LV function or clinical/ECG signs of ischaemic origin. At last follow-up, 2 years after the operation, the patient was in good clinical conditions, without cardiovascular symptoms or signs of ischaemia. The LV function was completely recovered (EF 55%) (, Video S4).