A 35-year-old woman presented to the hepatology department with progressively worsening jaundice.
Patient’s symptoms started a week ago with progressively worsening jaundice. The patient denied fever, anorexia, fatigue, and abdominal distention.
The patient had a history of AOSD 6 years previously and responded well to standardized glucocorticoid therapy in the first episode, but experienced a relapse 5 mo before the self-discontinuation of methylprednisolone. She had no risk factors for viral hepatitis or toxin. She does not smoke and drink. Her family history was not notable for autoimmune diseases or hepatic virus diseases. She had no risk factors for viral hepatitis.
No abnormalities.
The patient’s temperature was 36.7 °C, heart rate was 84 bpm, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per min, blood pressure was 116/75 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 100%. The clinical examination revealed that the skin and sclera were jaundiced.
Liver chemistry tests revealed a significantly increased alanine transaminase (ALT) level (1009.71 IU/L; normal: 5-40 IU/L), aspartate transaminase level (455.41 IU/L; normal: 5-40 IU/L), gamma-glutamyl transferase level (721.85 IU/L; normal: 8-57 IU/L) and bilirubin level (137.59 µmol/L; normal: 0-21 µmol/L). Peripheral blood revealed a mildly elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (11.6 × 109/L; normal: 4-10 × 109/L) with 76.5% neutrophils (normal: 50.0%-70.0%) and a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 31.22 mg/dL (normal: 0-8 mg/L). Results of other liver markers are demonstrated in Table . Full-blood screening analyses to determine the etiology of liver involvement were all negative or within normal limits.
Ultrasound showed a smoothly contoured liver and healthy thin-walled gallbladder. Thorax and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans demonstrated generalized lymph nodes with the largest one measuring 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm; no solid masses were identified. Echocardiography and serum protein electrophoresis were normal.
Liver histopathology revealed that most hepatic lobules were still recognizable. Fusional necrosis was observed around most central veins. A few bridging necrotic zones were also present. Infiltration of multiple plasma cells was observed in the necrotic zone, and the reticular scaffold was still expanded, without obvious collagen deposition . Additionally, no obvious fibrosis was observed in the portal area. Mild mixed inflammatory cell infiltration was noted in the interstitium of the portal area. Interfacial inflammation was not significant .