A 41-year-old pregnant woman (gravida 0, para 0) was admitted to our hospital at 38 weeks and 5 days of gestation owing to premature rupture of the membranes. The patient had no significant medical history and was not taking medication. On the admission day, she complained of fever. Laboratory testing indicated leucocytosis (29 800 µl−1) and an elevated C-reactive protein level (2.0 mg dl−1). The clinical diagnosis was chorioamnionitis. Ampicillin (2 g) was administered intravenously and the patient delivered by caesarean section. The amniotic fluid was uncontaminated. Although cefmetazole was administered (1 g every 8 h) following the operation and the wound appeared clean, the patient complained of lower abdominal pain and had persistent fever. At post-operative day 7, the patient continued to experience symptoms and laboratory tests indicated leucocytosis (19 400 µl-1) and elevated C-reactive protein level (13.0 mg dl−1). Two sets of blood culture were performed and antibiotic therapy was switched to doripenem (1 g every 8 h). Enhanced computed tomography revealed the formation of an abscess around the endocervix, right paracolic sulcus, under abdominal wall at the left lower abdomen and in the Douglas pouch . The patient underwent percutaneous abscess drainage under ultrasound echo guidance. However, we could not drain the abscess fully through the indwelling catheter, and therefore, it was removed after 3 days. Pus from the abscess and vaginal secretions was cultured. Gram staining of both indicated presence of polymorphonuclear leucocytes but no pathogens. However, cultures on blood agar showed growth of pinpoint–sized colonies in an anaerobic environment within 48 h . The decision was taken to administer metronidazole (500 mg every 8 h) in addition to the current therapy. However, no changes were observed in the patients symptoms. The isolate could not be identified using the MicroScan Walkaway system (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics). We performed antimicrobial susceptibility testing and evaluated the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of various antibiotic agents using Dry Plate Eiken (Eiken Chemical) and Brucella Broth (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) for 48 h in an anaerobic environment. The MICs of the antibiotic agents are shown in . In accordance with these results, antibiotic therapy was switched to a combination of clindamycin (600 mg every 8 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 h). The patient recovered immediately and continued this treatment for 10 days. The neonate was not infected.
To identify the organism, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and sequencing were performed to analyse a 16S rRNA gene and a yidC gene that was related to a membrane protein of M. hominis as previously described . We performed sequence analysis (1384 bp) using a GenBank BLAST search. The isolates 16S rRNA gene sequence exhibited identity with M. hominis AF1 (GenBank accession number: ) and the yidC gene exhibited greatest similarity to M. hominis AF1 (99 %).