On May 2018, a 75-year-old man was referred to our Department due to an increasing low-back pain and right-sided radicular pain irradiating down to the right lower limb, along the posterior thigh and the postero-lateral aspect of the lower extremity up to the lateral aspect of the foot, numbness in the sole of his right foot, especially marked on the plantar surface of his toe (VAS 8); the patient’s pain was refractory to conventional medical treatment. He complained also with a subjective decrease in strength in his right lower limb; his walk was slow and difficult due to the pain.
On clinical examination hypoesthesia at the right S1 and S2 dermatome areas and moderate muscle weakness in the right lower limb (3–4/5) were observed, reflexes were bilaterally normally elicitable and plantar response was flexor.
His past medical history included total gastrectomy, omentectomy, regional lymphadenectomy (D2) and reconstruction by mean Roux-en-Y anastomosis 2 years before (on January 2016) due to a gastric adenocarcinoma in the subcardial region; the histopathological diagnosis was poorly-differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma of intestinal type and 4/14 lymphnodes were positive for metastatic disease (pT3 pN2 R0; stage IIIa). Before surgery (January 2016), he underwent a whole body CT scan using a first-generation 640-slice CT scanner (Aquilion One, Toshiba Medical Systems, Outerwear, Japan), that showed the subcardial neoplasm measuring about 25 × 15 mm without sign of distant metastases. The patient had a family history of gastric adenocarcinoma, his mother being affected. After surgery, the patient underwent 4 courses of adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of Oxaliplatin 120 mg/m2 and Capecitabine 825 mg\mq2. In clinical and radiological follow-up, the last on December 2017 (a), no local recurrence or metastases were observed.
His past medical history also included a L1 vertebral body fracture 3 years before (on July 2015), requiring a lumbar MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) performed on a 1.5T General Electric Medical System (a), with subsequent surgical stabilization.
On May 2018, patient underwent a lumbar MRI using a 1.5T General Electric Medical System, that showed a significant enlargement of the intraforaminal right S1 nerve root due to the presence of a right-sided S1 nerve root mass involving the spinal ganglion in its intra-foraminal region and growing along the spinal nerve root, measuring about 25 × 20 × 25 mm; the mass showed homogeneously hypo-intensity signal on SE T1-weighted images (repetition time [TR] 400 ms; echo time [TE] 14 ms; e), significant hyper-intense signal on TSE T2-weighted images (repetition time [TR] 3960 ms; echo time [TE] 114 ms; b–d), avid and homogeneous contrast enhancement on SE T1-weighted images (repetition time [TR] 400 ms; echo time [TE] 14 ms; f, g) enhanced by gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic acid (16 ml Dotarem, 0.2 ml/kg). The mass was not evident in the previous MRI (a) – CT (a) exams and was considerate suspicious for metastasis.
Afterwards he received an 18F – FDG (18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose) CT-PET (h) that showed an area of focal hyperaccumulation within the sacral foramina of right S1 nerve root (SUV max. 5.2), suggestive of metastasis.
He also underwent a whole body CT scan using a first-generation 640-slice CT scanner (Aquilion One, Toshiba Medical Systems, Outerwear, Japan), that confirmed the presence of the slightly hypervascular right-sided S1 nerve root mass (b–d) and showed initial erosive bone changes (e) on S1 sacral foramina; no other CT alterations suspicious for metastatic lesion was detected in the brain, thorax, abdomen and pelvis.
A fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was performed and the histologic examination confirmed a metastasis of gastric adenocarcinoma (f).
Following interdisciplinary discussion, the patient was referred for radiotherapy; radiation to the right S1 nerve root mass was performed to relieve the local pain and a total dose of 16 Gy in two fractions was given. The patient reported a reduction of pain intensity (VAS 6) and muscle weakness in the right lower limb (2+/5).