A 14-year-old female child had complaints of pain and swelling over the base of her right thumb for 1 year. The swelling was initially pea-sized and gradually increased in size over 1 year. Pain in the region start 2 months after noticing the swelling, which was dull aching, non-radiating, and aggravated with movements of the thumb. She has no similar swellings elsewhere in the body. She had no preceding history of trauma, fever, loss of weight, or appetite. She had no history of other medical conditions. She was right-hand dominant.
On examination, a solitary and hard swelling of size 2.5 × 2.5 cm was palpable over the region of the head of the first metacarpal. The skin over the swelling showed no dilated veins and was pinchable. The swelling was found to be tender, having a smooth surface, borders were well defined, and the swelling was fixed to the bone. The range of movements of the first metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint was found to be terminally restricted and painful .
Routine blood investigations were normal. Radiographs of the hand revealed a solitary, expansile, and lytic lesion in the head of the first metacarpal . The lesion involved the epiphyseal and metaphyseal regions, extending up to the distal articular surface. A narrow zone of transition and a sclerotic rim were noted. Periosteal reaction, cortical breach, and soft-tissue extension were absent. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hand, the lesion showed a hypointense signal on T1 and T2 sequences and was hyperintense on STIR sequences . Endosteal scalloping was also noted. The radiological appearance led the radiologist to suggest a diagnosis of enchondroma of the first metacarpal.
The location of the tumor in the hand and the benign radiological appearance led to the primary diagnosis to be considered as enchondroma of the first metacarpal head. This was also based on the fact that enchondromas are the most common chondrosarcomas of the hand. The closest differential to enchondroma we had to consider was low-grade chondrosarcoma. Low-grade chondrosarcomas share many of the same radiological features as enchondromas . The presence of cortical breach was also favoring the possibility of low-grade chondrosarcoma. However, the absence of a cortical breach, permeative appearance, and soft-tissue involvement suggested enchondroma was more likely. An aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) and chondroblastoma were two other less likely differential diagnoses that needed to be considered. However, the absence of septations and fluid-fluid levels on MRI made the diagnosis of ABC unlikely . Chondroblastoma was considered unlikely due to the absence of calcifications and the fact that the location was very uncommon for chondroblastomas. Furthermore, chondroblastomas usually do not produce expansion of bone .
The child underwent an excisional biopsy of the lesion . The distal end of the first metacarpal was reconstructed with a bone graft obtained from the iliac crest and fixed with two Kirschner wires . The biopsy showed classical sheet-like proliferation of chondroblasts. The presence of a fine network of pericellular “chicken wire” calcifications was characteristic of chondroblastoma. Since chondroblastoma is also a benign lesion with recommended treatment being curettage and bone grafting, the excision biopsy was deemed adequate for its treatment.
A radial slab was kept for 8 weeks. After 8 weeks, the Kirschner wires were removed and mobilization of the thumb started. The child was found to have no residual pain in the thumb. The child was followed up for 1 year and was not found to have a recurrence of the lesion. The movements of the first MCP joint, however, remained limited at 1-year follow-up. The patient was offered for further surgical work-up to regain MCP movements. But the patient and her attenders denied the surgical procedure and the patient is still under follow-up.