A 70-year-old man with no contributory medical history presented to the outpatient clinic complaining of a 4-year history of dysgeusia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a space-occupying lesion appearing hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging in the pons . The area of abnormal signal intensity extended to the midbrain . The patient initially preferred to be followed-up with imaging, during which time mild impairment of deglutition and memory disturbance gradually developed. During the course of 2 years, the lesion extended from the pons to the right middle cerebellar peduncle and invaded the midbrain and thalamus , followed by the development of obstructive hydrocephalus.
As diffuse glioma was strongly suspected, he underwent endoscopic third ventriculostomy together with stereotactic biopsy of the brainstem lesion. Histopathological investigations showed proliferation of pleomorphic glial cells with nuclear atypia . Negative results for IDH R132H were obtained with immunohistochemical staining . ATRX positivity was retained . Tumor cells were negative for H3K27M .
Tumor DNA was extracted from frozen tumor tissue using a DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Tokyo, Japan). IDH1 R132 and IDH2 R172 were analyzed by Sanger sequencing, as previously reported [, ], revealing no hotspot mutations. The two mutation hotspots in the TERT promoter were analyzed in tumor DNA by Sanger sequencing, as previously reported , showing the presence of C250T mutation . Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed in the following steps. A bisulfite modification was performed using 400 ng of genomic DNA from frozen tissues using an EZ DNA methylation-Gold Kit (Zymo Research Corporation, Irvine, CA) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Primer sequences were: 5'-TTTCGACGTTCGTAGGTTTTCGC-3' (forward) and 5'-GCACTCTTCCGAAAACGAAACG-3' (reverse) for methylated product; and 5'-TTGTGTTTTGATGTTTGTAGGTTTTTGT-3' (forward) and 5'-AACTCCACACTCTTCCAAAAACAAAACA-3' (reverse) for unmethylated product. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed using TAKARA EpiTaq (Takara Bio, Tokyo, Japan) according to the protocol from the manufacturer. Initial denaturation was performed at 94 °C for 30 s, followed by 37 cycles of amplification consisting of denaturation at 94 °C for 20 s, annealing at 59 °C for 30 s and extension at 72 °C for 30 s, with a final elongation at 72 °C for 2 min. TAKARA 3522 EpiScope Methylated HCT116 Genomic DNA (Takara Bio) and TAKARA 3521 EpiScope Unmethylated HCT116DKO Genomic DNA (Takara Bio) were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. The results demonstrated that the present case harbored an unmethylated MGMT promoter . Taking all these findings together, the patient was diagnosed with glioblastoma, IDH-wildtype, CNS WHO grade 4.
Chemoradiotherapy was implemented based on the Stupp regimen, as radiation (54 Gy in 27 fractions) with concomitant temozolomide (75 mg/m2/day) for a 30-day period. After completing this regimen, the patient was continued on maintenance temozolomide at the outpatient clinic.
Five months after histopathological diagnosis and following 2 cycles of temozolomide maintenance treatment, the patient reported constitutional symptoms including fever, anorexia and general malaise. Physical examination showed systemic lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography exhibited marked avidity for fluorodeoxyglucose in lymph nodes of the neck, axillae, mediastinum and para-aorta region .
Blood examinations revealed profound cytopenia and hyponatremia. Platelet count was decreased to 20 × 103/µL on admission. Although hemoglobin and white blood cell count were both within normal limits at first, hemoglobin decreased from 12.5 g/dL to 9.3 g/dL and white blood cell count decreased from 7400/µL to 2900/µL within one week. Atypical lymphoid cells resembling plasmacytes were also observed in peripheral blood smears, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R) was elevated to over 9000 IU/L. An enlarged cervical lymph node was biopsied for diagnostic evaluation. Pathologically, the lymph node architecture was widely effaced with infiltration of small to medium-sized lymphocytes, plasma cells and histiocytes . Large, atypical lymphocytes with prominent nucleoli were sparsely observed. These large lymphocytes were positive for CD20 , PAX5 and BCl-6. In situ hybridization revealed cells positive for EBV-encoded small RNAs .
These EBV-positive cells were negative for LMP1 and EBNA2. Light chain restriction was not detected by in-situ hybridization and monoclonality was not demonstrated. EBV-viral capsid antigen antibody immunoglobulin G and EBV-nuclear antigen (EBNA) antibody were also increased, and EBV PCR yielded positive results. Based on the presence of EBV infection, abnormal proliferation and infiltration of EBV-positive lymphocytes, lack of monoclonality and the occurrence after temozolomide administration, the diagnosis of OIIA-LPD was considered highly likely. Temozolomide therapy was therefore discontinued.
After ending temozolomide therapy, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly and pancytopenia gradually resolved over the course of a month, and the patient became afebrile and asymptomatic. Platelet count gradually returned to 121 × 103/µL one month after onset of OIIA-LPD. At the same time point, hemoglobin was 9.4 g/dL and white blood cell count was 3400/µL. Achievement of remission was confirmed and the patient was discharged. Temozolomide was kept on hold.
Four months after the onset of OIIA-LPD, the patient experienced intractable epistaxis. Platelet count decreased to 2 × 103/µL and hemoglobin was 6.3 g/dL at this time, necessitating platelet and red blood cell transfusion. White blood cells were also decreased to 1300/µL. Although histopathological evaluations of the tonsils and bone marrow were inconclusive, relapse of OIIA-LPD was suspected clinically and CHOP chemotherapy was introduced. It was not until 3 weeks later that the platelet count returned to 77 × 103/µL, and hemoglobin and white blood cell count returned to 8.7 g/dL and 2900/µL, respectively. Since then, the patient has undergone vigilant follow-up for 14 months on an outpatient basis. Fortunately, the brainstem glioma has remained radiographically stable without requiring resumption of temozolomide treatment and the patient has not experienced any further recurrence of OIIA-LPD.
The patient provided written informed consent for the case to be reported.