A 62-year-old male with permanent AF (CHA2DS2-VASc = 2) was referred for LAA closure due to right cerebellar haematoma on Warfarin in December 2020. He had a previous history of urothelial low grade adenocarcinoma treated with transurethral resection of bladder tumour and recently underwent pulmonary resection for lung adenocarcinoma.
The pre-procedural CT showed a very unfavourable LAA anatomy with a short neck and two proximal symmetric lobes opposite one another. The landing zone measurements were 16 × 22 mm with an available depth of implant of 12 mm .
Considering this rare and challenging anatomy, also known as ‘Whale Tail’ LAA, we obtained a prediction of implantation with a Watchman FLX device with the simulation support of FEops HEARTguide. According to Watchman sizing chart, this appendage was fit for a 24 mm FLX device, aiming at a very proximal deployment. The main question we asked to the software was if the 24 mm size was suitable for this anatomy, achieving a good closure with no final significant leaks or excessive protrusion into the left atrium (LA). FEops analysis confirmed the suitability of the 24 mm device suggesting a proximal implant to avoid any leaks, with a predicted final compression of ∼10%, good apposition degree and not excessive buldge into the LA. We also tried a simulation with a 27 mm FLX device with a deeper deployment but it was expected to extremely protrude into the LA .
The procedure was performed with the patient under general anaesthesia, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and fluoroscopy guidance. Adequate anticoagulation with heparin throughout the procedure was maintained by testing the activated clotting time every 20–30 min to gain a level of 200 to 300 s.
Intraprocedural TEE confirmed the bilobated whale tail-like LAA with landing zone diameters of 19 × 15 mm and a maximum depth of 12 mm. No thrombi were found .
By using a 14-F delivery system, the 24 mm Watchman Flex device (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was definitely selected and implanted, as intended, in the proximal LAA.
After two attempts of proximal deployment, the device was sitting tilted towards the inferior lobe, leaving a wide leak around the opposite one. Then we pulled it into the LAA ostial part with gentle retraction, obtaining a perfect sealing with adequate compression and stability at push and pull test. The device final position and deformation confirmed both at TEE and angiography resulted quite similar to FEops prediction . The patient was discharged at home on postprocedural day 2, the in-hospital course was uneventful. His home therapy included only aspirin after three months of dual antiplatelet therapy without oral anticoagulants, according to his high bleeding risk profile. At 45-day follow-up TEE control, the device was in its correct position with no residual leak and no evidence of embolization or thrombi .