A 10-year-old girl with high-risk B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia who relapsed with 91% lymphoblasts underwent salvage chemotherapy
through a totally implantable venous access port. During the hospital stay, she presented two episodes of febrile neutropenia,
the first without microbiological isolation and the second with neutropenic colitis and extended-spectrum beta-lactamase producing Escherichia coli (E. coli)
bacteremia with secondary septic shock and an episode of oral herpes simplex. The patient received several broad-spectrum antibiotic regimens,
including meropenem, vancomycin, cefepime, and prophylaxis for the underlying disease with voriconazole (6 mg/kg/day), acyclovir (30 mg/kg/day),
and trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole (5 mg/kg/day) every other day. On day 22 of the hospital stay, the patient presented with a fever of 39.5 degrees Celsius,
erythematous violaceous papules with a necrotic center in the skin ,
limitation of gait, and intense pain on palpation of the gastrocnemius muscles. The case had neutropenia (neutrophils=0/mm3)
for 17 days and was treated with vancomycin and meropenem in dosages of 60 mg/kg/day and 100 mg/kg/day, respectively.
However, due to the patient’s underlying disease and associated risk factors, invasive fungal infection was suspected, empirical therapy was
initiated with liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/day), and prophylactic voriconazole was stopped.
In the skin biopsy, septate hyaline hyphae were observed in the mid-dermis and the lumen of some vessels.
Additionally, in the Becton-Dickinson cultures of this sample, mold growth was observed, whose microscopic characteristics
revealed a crescent-shaped micro and macroconidia emerging from a specialized cell type phialide as typical characteristics
of Fusarium species . In the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of the lower limbs , there were intramuscular and fascial microabscesses,
accompanied by acute myositis, and bone microabscesses in the bilateral distal and proximal meta-epiphyseal regions of the tibia and fibula.
The panfungal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was conducted accompanied with sequencing, in which the D1D2 region of ribosomal DNA was
amplified with primers NL1 and NL4 of skin lesions, and peripheral vein and catheter (port) blood cultures were positive for Fusarium spp.
Subsequently, the port was removed and the patient presented partial clinical improvement. Moreover, although the pain in the gastrocnemius decreased,
the fever persisted despite the recovery of the neutrophil count .
Therefore, it was decided to add intravenous voriconazole in a dosage of 16 mg/kg/day on day 11 of therapy with liposomal
amphotericin B. Eventually, the fever subsided two days after the start of voriconazole and 10 days after the start of liposomal amphotericin B.
Susceptibility tests were interpreted as intermediate or dose-dependent susceptibility to voriconazole (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC): 3 µg/mL)
and resistance to amphotericin B (MIC: 8 µg/mL). In addition, a search was performed using images of possible distant seeding foci with
computerized axial tomography (CAT) of the paranasal sinuses, which was normal, as well as chest CAT that showed areas
with ground-glass opacity . In total, the patient received amphotericin B for 21 days,
which was suspended due to renal failure (creatinine 1.29 mg/dL) and intravenous voriconazole for 14 days. The administration of oral voriconazole
was continued since another cycle of consolidation chemotherapy was performed to achieve optimal serum levels of 2 mg/L.
The patient had a satisfactory clinical evaluation with the disappearance of fever and skin lesions. The patient died four months later due to a new relapse of leukemia.
A 3-year-old girl with a diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia with differentiation to neutrophils was undergoing treatment with
induction chemotherapy through a totally implantable venous access port. On day 10 of chemotherapy, she presented abdominal pain,
liquid stools, fever of 39 degrees Celsius, heart rate of 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 78/48 mmHg,
and pain on palpation of the abdomen with neutrophil count 0/mm3 .
E. coli was isolated from the blood cultures of the patient. She was treated with piperacillin/tazobactam (400 mg/kg/day) for 10 days.
In addition, she received prophylaxis for her underlying disease with trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole (5 mg/kg/day) three times a week,
voriconazole (16 mg/kg/day) every 12 h, and acyclovir (30 mg/kg/day) every 8 h. Despite the improvement of abdominal pain and diarrhea,
fever persisted, and new blood cultures showed growth of budding blastoconidia. Caspofungin was started at 50 mg/m2/day after a loading dose of 70 mg/m2/day.
Extension studies were carried out to look for distant seedings of the fungus: abdominal ultrasound and normal echocardiography,
reviewed by the ophthalmology service who reports fundus without lesions. Seven days later, the patient presented generalized erythematous maculopapular
skin lesions with a violaceous center associated with pain in the gastrocnemius. A biopsy of the skin lesions showed septate hyaline hyphae.
The growth of white, flat, and fuzzy colonies compatible with Fusarium spp. was observed on peripheral vein blood culture.
Spindle or crescent-shaped phialides with macro and microconidia were observed through microscopic preparations with lactophenol blue made from the culture.
Growth of Fusarium solani in blood cultures was identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF)
mass spectrometry (equipment Bruker, of the company Becton Dickinson with BDLA library, New Jersey, USA) .
Growth of Fusarium spp. was observed in peripheral vein and catheter control blood cultures. Therefore, the catheter was removed,
and negative blood cultures were achieved subsequently. Liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/day) was started, caspofungin was suspended,
and voriconazole was continued. Antifungal sensitivity tests showed elevated MICs .
Chest-abdominal CT showed no pathological findings; however, in the lower limb ultrasound, the gastrocnemius microabscesses without liquefaction were
observed which was approximately 9.6 x 5.5 mm in diameter and not susceptible to percutaneous drainage. On the eighth day of treatment with
liposomal amphotericin B, the patient presented an episode of desaturation, respiratory distress, and increased oxygen requirements.
The chest radiograph showed perihilar interstitial opacities with laminar atelectasis and neutropenic persistence (neutrophils: 4/mm3).
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was performed for SARS COV 2, which was positive.
Despite having recovered from neutropenia and having negative control blood cultures, the patient remained febrile.
At 30 days of treatment with liposomal amphotericin B, pain and edema of the left elbow appeared. The MRI of the affected joint indicated signs
of osteoarthritis which required surgical drainage, and no microbiological growth was observed in the obtained cloudy fluid.
A few days later, the patent presented subcutaneous nodules in the lower limbs, edema, and pain in both ankles and the second finger of the left hand,
without joint effusion, with the persistence of fever. Total body MRI indicated acute multifocal disseminated osteomyelitis
with extensive involvement of the appendicular skeleton, associated with myositis and microabscesses not susceptible to drainage in both
subcutaneous and intramuscular cellular tissue, in upper and lower extremities, and septic arthritis of both elbows.
Possibly all this was due to the spread of infection caused by Fusarium solani. The patient required another surgical intervention,
during which multiple encapsulated abscesses were found. The largest multiple encapsulated abscess was drained, and multiple samples of bone,
tissue, and joint fluid were sent to the microbiology laboratory, which was seeded in culture media for aerobes, mycobacteria, and fungi. However, no growth was obtained.
A small cylindrical structure observed in the tissue biopsy could correspond to a fragment of hyphae and multiple abscessed epithelioid granulomas.
It was decided to add caspofungin (50 milligrams/m2/day) after a loading dose of 70 mg/m2/day to obtain synergism with the other antifungals.
In total the patient received 6 months of treatment with Amphotericin B, and voriconazole in addition to 4 months of caspofungin
due to bone involvement, which resulted in resolution of the skin and bone lesions. The total body MRI after 6 months showed resolution
of almost all lesions and only residual inflammation persisted in the calcaneus and left fibula. At the time this case was written,
the patient was in remission and received maintenance chemotherapy. In addition, voriconazole was continued as secondary prophylaxis.