A 47-year-old female was admitted to Binzhou Medical university hospital. The patient had no tumor-related family history or medical history of tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), inflammatory bowel diseases, or malignant melanoma. Her physical examination results were within normal ranges. The blood and biochemical parameters, including the tumor markers such as the levels of serum CEA, CA19-9, AFP, CA15-3, and CA-125, were also within the normal ranges. The patient underwent a colonoscopy at the outpatient department of our hospital for constipation. The examination revealed a 1.5 cm × 2.0 cm polyp with surface erosion in the colon, 18 cm away from the anus. The polyp had a large basal lesion with an eroded surface. The patient was referred to our inpatient department for polyp resection. Although we considered the possibility of neoplastic polyps, we did not consider the possibility of GI PEComa initially.
The well-circumscribed tumor was 2.0 cm in maximum diameter and had a wide base . Because the tumor had a wide base, we used endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) to remove the lesion and improve postoperative pathology.
Microscopically, the tumor is composed of nests of round, oval, or polygonal epithelioid cells with abundant clear eosinophilic granular cytoplasm. In our case, the nests were separated by thin fibrovascular septa . The tumor cells had large nuclei with prominent nucleoli and the obvious local atypia of tumor cells . The mitotic rate was >1/50HPF and about 20% of the cells expressed Ki67 . In addition, the tumor showed invasive growth and foci of coagulation necrosis.
Immunohistochemically, the cells stained positive for HMB-45 and TFE-3 . However, they were negative for Melan-A, desmin, smooth muscle actin (SMA), S-100, CD117, and CK . Therefore, depending on the endoscopy, histology, and immunohistochemistry results, we diagnosed the tumor as GI PEComa. Of note, we did not find any vascular invasion and base incision margin involvement in the postoperative pathology, which showed complete curative resection.
Given the tumor invasive growth, obvious local atypia, focal coagulation necrosis, mitotic rate >1/50HPF, and the high expression of Ki67, the possibility of malignancy was high. Therefore, we used chest X-ray, total abdominal CT, and gastroscopy to exclude metastasis.
We also conducted relevant laboratory and imaging examinations. The examinations did not show any signs of malignancy or metastasis. Combined with pathological findings, the case was diagnosed as GI PEComa with unclear benign and malignant origin. Therefore, a long-term follow-up was necessary to exclude tumor malignant transformation, recurrence, and metastasis. Three months after EMR, colonoscopy showed that the postoperative healing was good . The laboratory examinations and abdominal and pelvic CT showed no signs of recurrence and metastasis.