A 45-year-old female was hospitalized due to pain and swelling in the medial left thigh for one month. The patient is a farmer, and the neighbors raise pigeons. One month prior, she had no obvious inducement for the unbearable pain and swelling of the left thigh. Cupping and acupuncture methods had no obvious effect. The size of the mass gradually increased, so she came to the hospital. A physical examination showed that the skin temperature on the surface of the mass was increased, and the tenderness was obvious. The patient had no fever, a normal heart rate and cardiac examination, and she had high blood pressure for more than 10 years.
After entering the hospital, the laboratory examination revealed WBC: 10.89*109/L, RBC: 4.50*1012/L, and albumin: 33.9 g/L. The immune function of the patient was normal, and she had no history of HIV, immunosuppressive therapy or diabetes. MRI of the pelvis suggested that the soft tissue mass in the left inguinal region and the bone destruction of the left inferior pubic branch should be considered malignant tumors, and infectious lesions should not be excluded . CT imaging of the lesion also suggested that the patient suffered from a tumor, and the lesion contained some pus. Subsequently, we carried out a soft tissue biopsy under the guidance of B-ultrasound, and a small amount of tissue and a large amount of blood-red sticky fluid were obtained in the process. We gave the patient cephalosporin antibiotics, but her symptoms did not show a significant improvement. Re-examination of the indicators of inflammatory infection revealed CRP: 36.4 mg/L, ESR: 54 mm/h, PCT: 0.06 ng/mL, and IL-6: 12.95 pg/mL. We also performed a biopsy of the pubic lesions, and Cryptococcus neoformans was found in the bacterial culture of the biopsy tissue. The drug sensitivity results showed that the lesion was sensitive to AMB, 5-FC and fluconazole. Pathology after biopsy showed a fungal infection with mild dysplasia of histiocytic cells . After an imaging examination of the brain and lungs, no special lesions were found, so cryptococcal infection in the central nervous system and lungs was excluded. After receiving the bacterial culture results, fluconazole (400 mg/d) was taken orally for 4 weeks. During the 4-week oral fluconazole treatment, the wound was broken , so pus aspiration was performed on the tumor on the inside of the thigh, and cephalosporins were used to control the infection. Four weeks after taking fluconazole, re-examination MRI showed that the mass on the medial side of the left thigh and the pubic lesions had decreased in size .
The patient continued to take fluconazole (400 mg/d) orally for 12 weeks after discharge. Then, she went to the hospital for re-examination and found that the medial thigh and pubic lesions had basically disappeared , and the swelling of the patient’s left thigh had disappeared . At the 2-year follow-up, the patient was doing well. There were no complications or recurrences, the WBC count was normal, and the ESR and CRP were normal. After 12 weeks of oral fluconazole (400 mg/d) treatment, the pubic lesions and surrounding soft-tissue lesions disappeared.