A 31-year-old man was diagnosed as having DORV with complete atrioventricular septal defect, pulmonary stenosis, and polysplenia at birth. He underwent left Blalock–Taussig surgery when he was 1 year old. At the age of 17 years, he underwent surgical repair, including extracardiac Fontan operation and common atrioventricular mechanical valve replacement. Five years after the Fontan operation, he visited a hospital owing to palpitations and dizziness. A 12-lead electrocardiogram detected wide QRS tachycardia, which indicated right bundle branch block with superior axis morphology . The wide QRS tachycardia was treated using adenosine infusion. Although the morphology of the wide QRS tachycardia was different from that of the sinus rhythm , it was considered as supraventricular tachycardia with aberrant conduction. He was prescribed pilsicainide, and temporary oral intake of verapamil was also effective in terminating the wide QRS tachycardia. However, owing to persistent wide QRS tachycardia, emergency hospital visit was required, and he was referred to our hospital for definitive treatment.
Physical examination showed pulse rate of 66 b.p.m., blood pressure of 110/72 mmHg, no leg oedema, and oxygen saturation on room air of 82%. Pulmonary auscultation was normal but cardiac auscultation revealed systolic murmur of Levine II/VI at two left sternal border. The systemic ventricle was the anatomical right ventricle. Transcutaneous echocardiography showed that systemic ventricular contraction was diffusely reduced with end-diastolic area of 51.7 cm2 (normal range: 10–24 cm2), end-systolic area of 36.4 cm2 (normal range: 3–15 cm2), and fractional area change of 29% (normal range: 35–56%). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that end-diastolic volume was 115 mL (normal range: 42–100 mL), end-systolic volume was 73 mL (normal range: 16–52 mL), and ejection fraction was 36% (normal range: 42–68%). Prior to electrophysiological study, cardiac MRI showed diffuse late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) observed in the right ventricle and left ventricle (LV) . The VT was presumed to originate from the scar or low voltage area. During the electrophysiological study, an atrial catheter was advanced from the left jugular vein to the extracardiac conduit, which could record the atrial electrogram and stimulate the atrial myocardium. Ventricular catheters were advanced retrograde from the right femoral artery to the ventricle. Although diffuse LGE region was observed in the right ventricle, apparent low voltage area and fractionated potential were not obtained from endocardial voltage mapping . Wide QRS tachycardia was induced by programmed atrial and ventricular electrical stimulations and was terminated by single ventricular extrastimuli. Wide QRS tachycardia was diagnosed as VT, because atrial programmed stimulation could not produce wide QRS morphology, and activation mapping showed that the earliest activation site was located at the mid-inferior septum of the hypoplastic LV . At this site, abnormal fractionated potentials or low voltage zone were not observed, however, Purkinje potentials were observed before the local ventricular electrogram obtained during VT and sinus rhythm . Diastolic pre-Purkinje potential was not observed. Entrainment pacing from this site was not performed, because VT was not sufficiently sustained. The paced QRS morphology at this site was similar to that of spontaneous VT. As the coupling interval of single ventricular extrastimuli became shorter, the return cycle of the VT became longer, which indicated that VT was caused by a re-entry mechanism and was not a triggered activity . No further VT has been observed at 12 months following RFCA.