A 60-year-old woman was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) for altered consciousness. She was receiving lithium for a bipolar disorder for more than 10 years. Her last lithium level was on the therapeutic window (1.19 mmol/l 2 months before the admission) with a 400-mg twice-daily lithium carbonate intake without recent change in her drug regime. Her kidney function was normal (creatinine level 50 μmol/l).
The physical exam showed an altered consciousness (Glasgow score 9) with a bilateral nystagmus. She was apyretic and there was no hemodynamic or respiratory failure. Urine output was less than 100 ml over 6 h.
Her biological exams were as follows: white blood cell 28,640/mm3 (85% neutrophils); hemoglobin 15.9 g/dl; platelet count 140,000/mm3; prothrombin time 100%; activated partial thromboplastin time 27/32 s; creatinine 184 μmol/l; urea 18 mmol/l; K+ 2.9 meq/l; Na+ 138 meq/l; Cl− 104 meq/l; blood gaz sample pH 7, 49; PO2 95 mmHg; PCO2 31 mmHg; HCO3
− 24 meq/l.
ALAT 30 IU/l; ASAT 30 IU/l bilirubin 7 mg/l; screening test for benzodiazepine, barbituric and tricyclic antidepressant were negative. Brain computed tomography did not show any bleeding or ischemic stroke.
The lumbar puncture did not show any sign of cerebral nervous system infection (0 cell/mm3; protein level 0.52 g/l; glucose level 0.97 g/l).
The electrocardiogram was normal with a normal QT and PR space and without any pattern of ischemia.
The patient condition deteriorated dramatically after the sixth hour. Status epilepticus happened and orotracheal intubation was required after clonazepam and phenytoin’s failure. Urine output was still under 100 ml over 6 h. Seizure cessation was obtained with midazolam and sufentanil. Antiepileptic therapeutic were settled (levetiracetam and clobazam).
The lithium level was belatedly obtained soon after the patient was intubated. It was at 8.21 mmol/l (therapeutic window 0.7–1.2 mmol/l).
We decided to begin a continuous extrarenal epuration by veno-venous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF), the only technic available in our center. Our CVVHDF was obtained thanks to femoral venous access. The mean session duration was 24 h. Mean flow blood rate was 180 ml/min, predilution 600 ml/h, postdilution 1200 ml/h; ultrafiltration rate adapted to volemia estimation. Anticoagulation was obtained with unfractionated heparin. Lithium concentration was determined on admission, at the beginning, and at the end of each CVVHDF session. Lithium level quickly decreased ; a rebound happened but it was still on the therapeutic window .
CVVHDF was pursued until the fifth day after admission due to persistent oliguric kidney failure.
Conversely, we noticed a profound bicytopenia: hemoglobin content fell below 8 g/dl by the sixth day and platelets started to fall below 30,000/mm3. Hemolysis parameters were normal. Reticulocyte count was low (20,000/mm3). The bone marrow aspiration showed a poor bone marrow without any malignancy. Biological exams ruled out any infections (parvovirus B19, hepatitis, HIV), vitamin deficiency, or immunological etiology (antinuclear antibody; anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody). Iterative blood and platelet transfusion was required.
Sedations were taken out by the seventh day. Consciousness was rapidly normal without any seizure happening. We noticed a tetraplegia with depressed reflex: the muscular testing was of 2/5 over each muscular limb. Deglutition and cough was severely altered. The electromyogram showed severe axonal polyneuropathy without demyelinating pattern.
Kidney function quickly went back to normal with a urine output of 1200 ml/24 h and a plasmatic creatinine at 50 μmol/l on day 8. The patient soon became polyuric and the sodium level rose to 146 mmol/l with inappropriate urinary osmolarity (212 mosmol/l) indicating diabetes insipidus. Normal sodium level was obtained with 3500 ml water intake for 24 h.
We noticed diffuse severe alopecia without any scalp lesion.
Muscular weakness rapidly resolved: the muscular testing was mildly altered on the four limbs, gag reflex was efficient and the patient was then able to cough. Extubation was obtained on day 11 without any ventilatory failure. Eating was possible without swallowing the wrong way. Hematological disturbances corrected slowly and transfusions could be discontinued by the 11th day. Hemoglobin was still low at 8 g/gldl and platelet count was still low at 50,000/mm3. Two weeks later, the hematological parameters had reached normal values.
Our patient firmly denied any intentional overdose and her psychiatrist confirmed she had stable bipolar disorder. However, we failed to find any infectious or iatrogenic trigger which led to this extremely high lithium concentration. So we cannot formally exclude an intentional overdose. Acute kidney injury with oliguria may have increased the toxicity of lithium although the etiology of acute kidney failure remained unclear.
The lithium was definitely stopped and she received divalproate instead. As a new seizure happened, she was granted to an antiepileptic dose of divalproate. Polyuria and polydipsia remained. She still complained about sensory defect and thin motricity weakness.
To conclude, we report the case of a severe acute on chronic lithium intoxication with five scarcely reported complications.