A 43-year-old woman with remittent abdominal pain, dizziness, and fatigue for 20 years was admitted to our hospital in May 2018. She was also suffered from iron deficiency anemia since her adolescence. There were positive results of stool occult blood test but no evidence of bleeding in gastroscopy and colonoscopy during the progression of the disease. On examination, she had lower limbers edema and mild abdominal tenderness around the umbilicus. Vital signs were within normal range.
Her past medical history included appendectomy, oophorocystectomy, and caesarean section. She denied NSAIDs taking. Laboratory examination confirmed iron deficiency anemia (hemoglobin level 86 g/L, normal range: 130–175 g/L) and hypoalbuminemia level (14.7 g/L, normal range: 35–55 g/L), C-reaction protein (30.95 mg/L, normal range: 0.08–7.6 mg/L) was elevated. In addition, the fecal occult blood test was positive. Other test results, such as renal and liver functions, autoimmune antibodies, T-spot were within normal range. Meanwhile, colonoscopy and gastroscopy showed normal results. However, abdominal CT scan revealed segmentally thickened small intestinal walls but no mention of stenosis . Due to the presence of a metal intrauterine device, magnetic resonance (MR) enterography was prohibited. Therefore, CE was used for further inspection. The result found multiple circular ulcerations, and stenoses . Double balloon endoscopy (DBE) was performed for capsule retained which showed multiple ulcerative stenoses but failed to find out the retained capsule. Biopsy report suggested nonspecific moderate chronic inflammation, and villi became widen and shorten. The culture of bacteria or acid-fast stain for tuberculosis were negative. Based on the results above, CMUSE was diagnosed temporarily. The patient received a tentative treatment of methylprednisolone (40 mg/day) and parenteral nutrition and the retained capsule was waiting for discharge by itself.
Unfortunately, exploratory laparotomy was performed because of acute intestinal obstruction which may be induced by retained capsule after 2 weeks. During the operation, multiple segmental stenoses of the small intestinal were observed and the endoscopy-capsule was found in the ileum. A section of the small intestine, about 60 cm in length, was removed. There were approximately 26 circumferential superficial ulcers with strictures and the minimal distance between two strictures was about 1.5–3.5 cm . Postoperative pathology showed superficial ulcerations which limited to the mucosal and submucosal layers without granulomas, lymphadenopathy or vasculitis. Finally, CMUSE was diagnosed and she was recovered well after the surgery. Oral steroids were suggested to the patient, but she refused.