A 59-year-old man complaining of heart burn for two decades was diagnosed with LSBE with an irregular surface on esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) during a routine check-up. A targeted biopsy of the irregular mucosa revealed an adenocarcinoma. The patient was reported to have a 10-year history of LSBE on his annual check-ups, but no irregular mucosa in LSBE had been previously found. No remarkable medical history was elicited. Clinical examination and laboratory studies had unremarkable results. EGD showed a sliding herniation in the esophagus and LSBE was classified as C4M5 according to the Prague C & M criteria . LSBE surface mucosa was unevenly reddish and contained an erosive area . Narrow band imaging (NBI) with magnification revealed a scattered lesion with LSBE mucosal and vasculature irregularities . The biopsy revealed that most of LSBE was replaced with a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Endoscopic ultrasound (20 MHz) revealed thickening of the mucosal layer, although the submucosal layer was intact . No metastatic lesions were detected on enhanced CT. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with early esophageal adenocarcinoma corresponding to the LSBE area; the lesion was totally circumferential and longitudinally measured 50 mm. After receiving written informed consent, ESD was performed using an EG-580RD (Fujifilm Medical, Tokyo, Japan) with a distal attachment (D201–11804; Olympus Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan). A submucosal injection of 0.4% sodium hyaluronate (MucoUp; Johnson and Johnson, Tokyo, Japan) was administered. Marking, incision, and dissection were performed using a hook knife (KD-620QR; Olympus Medical Systems). An electrosurgical generator (VIO300D, ERBE Elektromedizin, Tübingen, Germany) was used with specifications set at dry-cut mode 60 W, effect 3, and spray coagulation mode 60 W, effect 2. Carbon dioxide was used for insufflation. ESD procedure was performed as follows: distal marking at 5 mm caudally from the EG junction and proximal marking 10 mm cranially from the SC junction , followed by circumferential incision at the caudal end of the lesion . A submucosal tunnel entrance was created by a partial incision at the cranial end of the lesion and submucosal dissection was performed , followed by the creation of three submucosal tunnels in the same way . Finally, incision between the opening of each tunnel and dissection of the connective submucosal tissue between each tunnel assisted by the thread-traction method was performed. En bloc resection was achieved without intraoperative adverse events . The operation period was 12 h. Histopathological analysis of the resected tissue demonstrated that the adenocarcinoma occupied the entire lumen circumference and was well differentiated. Both the cranial and caudal margins were tumor free . The depth of the tumor invasion was the superficial muscularis mucosa without lymphatic vessel and vascular involvement , and minimal lateral extension under the adjacent squamous epithelium was observed . The timeline after ESD is shown in Fig. . Postoperative adverse events such as pneumomediastinum, mediastinitis, or bleeding did not occur. The hospitalization period was 4 weeks. An intralesional steroid injection of 40 mg triamcinolone acetonide diluted with saline to a total dose of 20 mL (40 injection points, 0.5 mL per point, 8 points per circle every 10 mm) was completed on the first day post-ESD. Oral prednisolone was administered at an initial dose of 30 mg/day on the third day post-ESD, which was gradually tapered and discontinued 14 weeks later. Prophylactic endoscopic balloon dilation (EBD) with 12–15 mm balloon diameter (CRE balloon; Boston Scientific, Boston, USA) was commenced on the 10th day post-ESD and was conducted once every 1–8 weeks for 30 weeks (20 sessions). A proton pump inhibitor (PPI), proteinase inhibitor (100 mg camostat mesylate, three times after each meal), and prokinetic agent (5 mg mosapride citrate hydrate, three times after each meal) were orally administered for almost 2 years to prevent the occurrence of GERD and promote the natural healing of the post-ESD ulcer . At the 2-year follow-up, the post-ESD ulcer had been covered with regenerated squamous epithelium, although small erosions still existed at the center of the post-ESD area and EG junction . The patient does not have dysphagia and there is no evidence of esophageal stricture or recurrence 2 years after ESD.