A 64-year-old Caucasian female presented to our department with slowly developing left side hearing loss and recurrent external otitis. Physical examination revealed a tender solitary, skin-colored, dome-shaped nodule arising from the inferior and posterior wall of the left external auditory canal that narrowed the external auditory meatus and canal . Pure tone audiometry revealed a mild conductive hearing loss on the left side. Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the temporal bone demonstrated a well-circumscribed, soft tissue narrowing most of the external auditory canal. The mass arised from the inferior and posterior canal wall at the cartilaginous portion of the external auditory canal, with no bone erosion and no middle ear or mastoid involment.
The patient underwent, under local anesthesia, an excisional biopsy of the mass via an intra-aural incision. The mass was removed while preserving the osteocartilaginous canal wall and the integrity of the underlying tympanic membrane. The external auditory canal was packed with a Merocel wick to support the skin and to prevent canal stenosis for two weeks. The patient made an uneventful recovery and there was no recurrence during two years of follow-up.
Histopathologic examination of paraffin sections of the specimen, stained with haematoxylin-eosin , revealed the presence of a cyst in the dermis lined by a one-or two-layered cuboidal or flattened epithelium resting on a layer with spindle myoepithelial cells. In close vicinity to the cyst were groups of apocrine glands, partly dilated, showing the typical eosinophilic epithelium with evidence of decapitation secretion, the pathognomonic finding of apocrine differentiation [[,], and ]. The deepest group of glands was situated close to mature cartilage. Immunohistochemistry revealed epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) expression in all the cells of the cyst wall, while carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) focally-decorated the luminal cells. Smooth muscle actin (SMA) was present in the basal layer. Human milk fat globulin 1 (HMFG) and gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15), which is regarded as a marker of apocrine epithelium [,], were weakly positive in some cells of the cyst wall, showing decapitation secretion, while being strongly positive in the cells of all of the above described glandular groups. These light microscope findings were considered diagnostic of the apocrine nature of the lesion in question.