A 79-year-old woman, with a medical past history of obesity (BMI 30.8 kg/m2) and arterial hypertension, was admitted to the orthopedic ward followed by the operating theater, for the reduction of a luxation of her right hip total prosthesis. In the immediate postoperative period, she presented fever (39 °C), dyspnea with low oxygen saturation, and paroxysmal atrial flutter that resolved after bisoprolol administration. The patient was confuse and developed a progressive alteration of consciousness that required transfer to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). On admission in the ICU (3 days after orthopedic surgery), the patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 9/15 (E2V2M5). Physical examination revealed temperature 38.7 °C, regular tachycardia (120/min) with arterial blood pressure 136/60 mmHg. There was no evidence of lateralized neurological deficit. Routine laboratory investigations showed: CRP 330 mg/L, white blood cell count 12,800/mm3, creatinine 95 μmol/L. Urine analysis confirmed leukocyturia (3658/μL), and Escherichia coli was isolated from a pure culture of urine (> 100.000 CFU/mL) and blood sampled simultaneously. Abdomen echography found a moderate left hydronephrosis (pyelic cavity 18 mm) in relation with a ureteral lithiasis. A percutaneous left nephrostomy was successfully performed and antimicrobial therapy was initiated with intravenous cefuroxime (4500 mg/day). The brain computed tomography (CT) with angiography failed to reveal any lesion. The electroencephalogram was characterized by diffuse slowing, without evidence of epileptic activity. The patient developed neck stiffness and remained with altered consciousness. No septic embolic lesions were noted on the skin. The lumbar puncture was technically not feasible due to lumbar arthrosis. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not reveal brain abscesses, but well multiple ischemic embolic lesions. The analysis of the different MRI sequences concluded that these lesions were not recent. Despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy and drainage, E. coli septicemia persisted for more than four consecutive days. In front of persistent bacteremia, there was a suspicion of either an intra-abdominal infectious source (urinary or biliary) or of an infectious endocarditis. The abdomen CT (on the fourth day in the ICU) suspected acute cholecystitis and a percutaneous drainage was proposed; the bile returned positive for E. coli. There was no sign of persisting hydronephrosis. Additionally, a transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed 3 days after sepsis onset and demonstrated two vegetations (8 mm for the greatest) on the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve and its chordae tendineae, with a mild mitral insufficiency, and the diagnosis of infective endocarditis was determined. Coronary angiography did not reveal significant lesions. Intravenous ciprofloxacin (1200 mg/day) was added to the treatment and the patient underwent on day 10 a mitral valve repair with pericardial patch on the anterior leaflet. The total duration of the combined antimicrobial therapy (cefuroxime and ciprofloxacine) was six weeks. The mitral valve endocarditis was confirmed by the inspection during the procedure, with also mitral valve calcifications. The culture of the native valve remained sterile. Histopathology confirmed the presence of a neutrophilic infiltrate and fibrinoid necrosis. Notably, there was a slow neurological improvement during the postoperative period. A second brain CT with angiography was performed 14 days after the first exam; a recent ischemic lesion was suspected in the right centrum semi-ovale. The patient was discharged from the ICU on day 28. Investigation by positron emission tomoscintigraphy (PET-FDG18) (performed on postoperative day 29) failed to demonstrate other peripheral embolization, and in particular no sign of infection on the site of the hip prosthesis. Two months later, the patient presented a new episode of E. coli septicemia due to the failure of the external drainage of the gallbladder. A new TTE confirmed the integrity of mitral valvuloplasty. At the six month follow-up, the patient was still dependent for daily life activities.
The E. coli isolate (C615–19), isolated from the patient, was whole genome sequenced (WGS) and phenotypically serotyped by The International Escherichia Centre (IEC) at Statens Serum Institut (Copenhagen, Denmark). Sequence type (ST), in silico serotype and virulence genes were determined from the de novo assembled genomes using the the E. coli plug-in in BioNumerics version 7.6.35510 (Applied Maths, Ghent, Belgium) and web tools available at and an extended beta version of VirulenceFinder including 38 ExPEC related genes . The O:K:H serotype was determined as being O2:K7:H6. Also WGS data analysis showed that the isolate belonged to phylogenetic group B2 and was ST141 and harboured 32 putative and proven virulence genes . The antimicrobial resistance profile showed that C615–19 was resistant to ampicillin (MIC > 8 mg/L), piperacillin (MIC> 16 mg/L) and cotrimoxazole (MIC> 4/76 mg/L) as confirmed by the presence of the genes blaTEM-1, sul2 and dfrA5 (coding for ß-lactam, sulphonamide and trimethoprim resistance respectively). Furthermore, the isolate showed the presence of genes strAa and strB encoding kanamycin, neomycin, and streptomycin.