Patient 43 y.o., male, high fall accident, with bilateral calcaneum fracture, both type III of Sanders’ classification. (-). Both legs were posed in anti declivous position and checked every day for two weeks. After this period the right foot showed a compromised conditions of the soft tissues with the presence of blisters but the left foot showed a recurrence of skin folds. For this reason we have chosen to treat the left foot with ORIF and the right one with closed reduction and application of an external fixator . Post-operatively, weight-bearing was not permitted for eight weeks for both legs. The fixator was removed after 10 weeks (-). Patient was followed up radiologically with radiographs at 2, 12 and 24 months, and clinically at 15 days, 1, 3, 6, 12, 18 and 24 months with the Maryland Foot Score, as suggested by Sanders et al. . In our case report we obteined a good reduction of the fractures with both surgical techniques with a restoration of physiological angles of both calcaneum. Böhler’s angle before surgery was 6° in the left one and 3° in the right side, after surgery it was 27° in the left foot and 37° right one. The axial varus angle before surgery in the left calcaneum was 32° and in the right calcaneum was 28°, afther surgery it was 7° in the left calcaneum and 6° in the right one. The height before surgery in the left one was 23 mm and in the right one was 22 mm, after surgery it was 34.7 mm in the left calcaneum and 38,3 in the right one. The lenght before surgery in the left one was 68.3 mm and in the right one was 69.5 mm, after surgery it was 80 mm in the left calcaneum and 81 in the right one . The clinical outcomes showed, until one year’s follow-up, better clinical results in the foot treated with external fixator, (Maryland Foot Score 83 p), then in the foot treated with ORIF (Maryland Foot Score72 p.) (--). After one year the outcomes resulted good (Maryland Foot Score 87 p.) in the foot treated with ORIF and fair (Maryland Foot Score 69 p.) in foot treated with external fixation