An unmarried male in his early 20s presented to the outpatient department (OPD) with complaints of dysuria and burning sensation during micturition for the past 4 months. He also had a history of nocturia (2–3 times). He denied history of fever, abdominal pain, increased frequency or urgency of urination, vomiting, hematuria and urethral discharge. This patient has received a course of intravenous antibiotic administration for treatment of UTI in another medical facility and documented evidence of therapy was not available with the patient. He did not have any co-morbidities like diabetes, hypertension or any other past chronic illness. He was a non-smoker and non-alcoholic. Urological history for voiding and storage symptoms was elicited. Apart from presenting symptoms, he did not have any complaints of incomplete voiding, increased intermittency, straining during voiding or urgency incontinence. He did not have any previous history of surgery. He was not on any medications.
On physical examination, he was conscious, oriented and had a normal build. There was no evidence of pallor, icterus, cyanosis, clubbing, lymphadenopathy or pedal oedema. Pulse rate was 88 beats per minute and blood pressure was 116/64 mm Hg. Respiratory rate was normal and auscultation revealed normal breath sounds present. On palpation, abdomen was soft without any tenderness or organomegaly and on auscultation, normal bowel sounds were heard. Physical examination of the cardiovascular and central nervous systems was unremarkable. Examination of genitourinary system revealed presence of congenital phimosis. There was no costovertebral angle tenderness. Digital rectal examination was normal.
The patient was advised to undergo ultrasonography (USG) of urinary system and specific laboratory investigations were done. An ultrasonography of urinary system showed right kidney measures 9.9×4.5 cm, normal in size and shows normal parenchymal echoes. Cortico medullary differentiation was present. Pelvicalyceal system and ureter were minimally dilated. Presence of multiple calculi was noticed in all the calyces, largest measuring 9 mm in the lower calyx of right kidney. Left kidney measures 10.6×5.6 cm, normal in size and showed normal parenchymal echoes and cortico medullary differentiation was present. Pelvicalyceal system and ureter were dilated with a calculus in the upper ureter measuring 9 mm. Also a calculus measuring 9 mm was noted in the middle calyx. No free fluid was seen in abdomen. Para aortic region and urinary bladder appeared normal. Prostate appeared normal in size and echoes.
Impression of bilateral intrarenal calculi with right minimal hydroureteronephrosis and left hydroureteronephrosis due to upper ureteric calculus was made.
Serum creatinine and random blood sugar were normal, 0.92 mg dl−1 and 123 mg dl−1 respectively. Glycosilated HbA1C was 5.4 %. Complete hemogram showed red cell count, total leucocyte count and platelet counts were within normal limits.
Urinalysis revealed macroscopic parameters within normal limits. Microscopy revealed increased WBCs (38 cells per high power field) and chemical analysis also showed the presence of leucocytes (3+), indication of UTI. Sample was negative for crystals or casts.
A clean catch midstream urine sample was sent to the microbiology department for aerobic culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Wet mount microscopic examination showed 3–4 pus cells / hpf and presence of bacteria.
Semiquantitiative culture on urochrome agar showed colourless colonies greater than 105 colony forming units per millilitre and Gram-negative bacilli were seen on Gram-stain performed from the colony. Conventional biochemical tests led to presumptive identification of spp. Biochemical reactions were as follows: Indole – negative, glucose fermented with gas production, lactose and sucrose not fermented, citrate utilised, urease – negative, mannitol motility medium – fermented and motile, triple sugar iron medium – K/A with gas and H2S, phenylpyruvic acid test – negative. Serotyping was performed with the antisera procured from Central Research Institute [CRI], Kasauli, India. The isolate was agglutinating with group specific O9 antisera but not with Hd. Denoting that it belonged to O9 group by Kauffman white Classification scheme. The isolate was found susceptible to ampicillin, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, chloramphenicol and cotrimoxazole by Kirby–Bauer disc diffusion method (CLSI). The isolate was identified as Group B or Group D with 98 % probability using Vitek two automated identification system (bioMérieux SA, France). The isolate was also subjected to MALDI-TOF Biotyper (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) and was identified as Salmonella cholerasuis with a score value of 2.33, indicating highly probable species identification. This isolate was further sent to the National Salmonella and Escherichia Centre (NSEC), National Reference Centre for serotyping of and , CRI Kasauli, India and it was identified as (antigenic structure – 9,12;gm:-) using serovar typing method.
The patient was started on T.ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily (BD) for 14 days for the treatment of UTI. He was also advised surgery (bilateral ureterorenoscopy [URS] with laser lithotripsy with bilateral Double J [DJ] stenting) for renal calculi and circumcision was advised for phimosis.
On telephonic reminder post-two weeks of his visit to OPD, for a review visit, he informed that his symptoms had resolved. Unfortunately the patient was lost to follow up and surgery could not be performed at our centre.