An 18-year-old female with relapsed high-risk acute myeloid leukemia (AML) was evaluated for a haploidentical stem cell transplant (HSCT). She was initially diagnosed with high-risk AML in May 2021 (with central nervous system involvement at the time of diagnosis) and completed treatment under the Children’s Oncology Group study protocol AAML0531 in December 2021. In April 2022, she presented with thrombocytopenia and easy bruising, and subsequent bone marrow evaluation revealed relapse of her AML. She completed 1 cycle of relapse therapy with azacitidine, venetoclax and gemtuzumab in early June 2022. Soon after, she developed cellulitis of her right superior-medial gluteal region. She was admitted to a local hospital and initiated on cefepime and vancomycin. Vancomycin was subsequently switched to clindamycin, and a targeted ultrasound of the affected area revealed a 1.2 cm fluid collection with a fistula tracking to the skin. The patient was discharged home on oral clindamycin, and her cellulitis and abscess resolved after several days.
In late June 2022, she developed a new skin lesion on her left hip. The lesion started as a “red spot”, which appeared like “bleeding under the skin.” Over the course of a few days, the lesion became swollen and turned black. One week later, the patient noticed several new lesions on her buttocks around the intergluteal cleft, which she described as “boils”. The patient was then admitted in early July 2022 for further evaluation of her skin lesions.
Of note, the patient reported that she swam in a freshwater river and a chlorinated swimming pool in late May 2022. She also reported swimming in a freshwater lake in late June 2022 (after the development of the lesion on her left hip). She denied any exposure to or recent history of hot tubs, camping, travelling, or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections. The family’s well water was reportedly treated. The patient’s only animal exposures were her two dogs at home, neither of which had any recent health issues or unusual skin lesions. The patient denied systemic symptoms, including fevers or chills. The patient had remained on clindamycin throughout development of the new skin lesions. She was also on prophylaxis with levofloxacin, acyclovir, pentamidine, and micafungin, as prescribed by her pediatric oncologist.
On admission, her skin lesions were initially presumed to be cellulitis and furunculosis caused by Streptococcus or Staphylococcus spp., so clindamycin was continued. Cefepime was also added for gram-negative coverage, including Pseudomonas sp., given her immunocompromised status. The skin lesion on her left hip was biopsied by a pediatric dermatologist, and bacterial and fungal cultures were obtained. The fungal culture began growing aseptate hyphae, concerning for mucormycosis, and the patient was started on isavuconazole, a newer broad-spectrum azole. A fungal blood culture was drawn, which demonstrated no growth. A whole-body computerized tomography scan and fundoscopic exam were performed to assess for invasive fungal disease, which did not reveal any other foci of disseminated fungal disease. Two days later, histopathology from the skin biopsy revealed broad, aseptate hyphae that were Gomori methenamine silver (GMS) stain positive. They were described as “sausage-like,” branching at 90° angles, and surrounded by dermal and subcutaneous acute and chronic inflammation with extensive necrosis. There were microabscesses in the specimen but no signs of angioinvasion. The specimens were then sent to the Fungus Testing Laboratory, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, for definitive species identification by DNA sequencing and antifungal susceptibility testing following the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institution (CLSI) broth microdilution methods . Amphotericin B was started for combination therapy for suspected mucormycosis as invasive mucormycosis carries significant morbidity and mortality. Pediatric surgery debrided the left hip lesion, and surgical pathology was consistent with the skin biopsy.
The patient’s gluteal lesions initially had a different appearance from the left hip lesion. Four days after surgical excision of the left hip lesion, the three gluteal lesions started draining fluid. The gluteal lesions appeared indurated, with purple discoloration, mild warmth and no tenderness to palpation. Fungal and bacterial cultures of the gluteal lesions were obtained at that time and demonstrated no growth. Without significant clinical improvement on clindamycin and cefepime, pediatric surgery excised these lesions, and dermatopathology revealed granulomatous inflammation with GMS positive fungal organisms in all three specimens.
Genomic DNA was extracted from cultures grown on potato flakes agar. Phenotypic characterization, DNA sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the internal transcribed spacer region of the nuclear rDNA (ITS) and the mitochondrial Cytochrome c oxidase subunit II (COXII) identified the causal organism as Lagenidium deciduum, as seen in Figs. and (GenBank accession numbers OR165095 and OR167557, respectively). Susceptibilities revealed the organism was not sensitive to amphotericin B, anidulafungin, caspofungin, fluconazole, itraconazole, micafungin, posaconazole, voriconazole, and isavuconazole (MIC/MEC values all greater than 8 μg/mL). However, when it comes to interpreting MIC data for fungi, clinical correlation cannot always be predicted. The patient’s antifungal regimen was adjusted from amphotericin B and isavuconazole to micafungin since oomycetes have abundant β-glucans in their cell walls . Azithromycin, doxycycline, and terbinafine were also added because these antibiotics in combination have been effective in treating human pythiosis [, ].
Maximum likelihood tree based on combined ITS and COXII showing the relationship of isolate UTHSCSA DI23–100 with other Lagenidium species. Homologous sequences were aligned using Muscle and analyzed using IQ-TREE v.2.2.2.6 for the maximum likelihood method, SH-alrt, aBayes and Ultrafast bootstrap [–]. The combined data sets included sequences of taxa listed in Spies et al., 2016 and Vilela et al., 2019 [, ].
All excision sites healed well. She was discharged home on oral doxycycline, azithromycin, terbinafine, and IV micafungin. The patient enrolled in a clinical trial (NCT05322850) to receive an allogeneic stem cell transplant for her AML and was readmitted in August 2022 for HSCT. Antifungal treatment was continued through her bone marrow transplant until engraftment occurred. She was discharged home without recurrence of her skin lesions, and she has remained without evidence of fungal disease at more than 100 days post-transplant. Her full clinical course is outlined in Fig. .