A 30-year-old female patient was found to have decreased white blood cells (WBCs) when she saw a doctor for diarrhea in 2015, which did not attract attention. In early April 2017, she developed a fever of more than 38°C, accompanied by a sore throat, and was hospitalized. She had no special medical, family and psychosocial history. The lung fiber bronchoscopy showed abnormal echogenic lesions in the right lower lung basal segment, and bronchoscopy liquid-based cytology showed Aspergillus . The diagnoses of agranulocytosis, pulmonary fungal infection, drug-induced rash, hypoproteinemia, and severe anemia were made. The patient still had fevers intermittently after discharge until being re-hospitalized at the end of April 2017. During this hospitalization, she was diagnosed with suspected T-cell LGL leukemia. The patient’s body temperature returned to normal after receiving cyclosporine, methylprednisolone, and voriconazole.
The patient had a relapse in July 2017. Blood tests showed that WBCs were 1.32×10^9/L, neutrophils 0.03×10^9/L, and red blood cells (RBCs) 2.53×10^12/L. A bone marrow pathological biopsy showed a decrease in hematopoietic cells between the trabecular bone marrow. There were many scattered lymphoid cells among the hematopoietic cells, which were suggested to be T cells by immunohistochemical tests. Combined with the immunohistochemical characteristics and particular staining results, the possibility of early involvement of T-cell lymphoma in bone marrow could not be excluded. Bone marrow cytology showed that the proliferation of bone marrow granulocytes was extremely inhibited. The T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement test in bone marrow was negative for TCR beta (TCRB), TCR gamma (TCRG), and TCR delta (TCRD). The previous T-cell LGL leukemia diagnosis was confirmed. The patient again received cyclosporine, methylprednisolone, and voriconazole for treatment. After discharge, the patient maintained a normal body temperature for more than three and a half years.
On March 3, 2021, the patient suffered right flank pain and discomfort in the tail vertebra after she stopped taking medications due to intolerable nausea and vomiting. Blood routine showed that WBCs were 0.63×10^9/L, and lung CT showed a mass in the right lower lung . On March 4, the patient developed chest tightness, shortness of breath, and malaise, with a fever up to 38°C. Flow cytometry found phenotypes of CD45+, CD3 dim+, CD5-, CD4-, CD8+, CD7+, CD57 p+, CD25-, and CD30-, revealing atypical abnormal T cells (0.8%) . TCR test showed positive γδ rearrangement, and metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) detected Aspergillus. Etiological examinations of the lower respiratory tract specimens were negative, with no fungal growth after seven days of culture. The serum (1,3)-β-D glucan (G-test) and galactomannan (GM-test) were negative. The patient was diagnosed with agranulocytosis and pulmonary fungal infections (Aspergillus). The patient received voriconazole (0.4g q12h followed by 0.2g q12h) and inhaled amphotericin B (5mg bid). The therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of voriconazole was performed to adjust voriconazole dosing. On March 9, the patient’s temperature rose to 38.2°C. Also, she received vancomycin, piperacillin/tazobactam, imipenem/cilastatn and linezolid successively for empirical antibacterial therapy.
The plasma concentration of voriconazole reached 5.393μg/mL on March 17, and the dosage was reduced to 0.15g once a day. Amphotericin B nebulized inhalation was discontinued because of coughing and aggravated pain. The results of the bone marrow smear showed active bone marrow hyperplasia with increased erythrocyte colonies and decreased lymphocyte colonies compared to those of the last time . A peripheral blood smear showed an increase in large granular lymphocytes, accounting for 43% of WBCs. Flow cytometry showed that 8.37% of the cells were abnormal mature γδ T cells. The signal transducer and activator of the transcription-3 (STAT3) Y640F mutation and fusion gene NPL-DHX9 rearrangement were confirmed by RNA-sequencing analysis . The patient was diagnosed with γ/δ variant T-cell LGL leukemia (NPL-DHX9 positive) on March 22. After assessment, treatment for T-cell LGL leukemia planned to be initiated as soon as possible when pulmonary infection improved.
On March 24, the symptoms of chest tightness and shortness of breath mostly disappeared, and the patient was fever-free. When the lung CT on April 8 showed further improvement , Cladribine was administrated at 0.14mg/Kg/day daily for 5 days. The patient had no fever for nearly half a month and had no other discomfort, and she was discharged on May 2. Complete response was achieved after four-cycles cladribine treatment. The timeline of the disease and treatments are shown in .