A 66-year-old Caucasian lady presented with a painless, enlarging lump in her right breast. There was no history of trauma, skin changes, nipple discharge, or any other breast lumps. She was otherwise asymptomatic with no symptoms of bone pain. There was no family history of breast cancer. She had a past medical history of severe chronic obstructive airways disease, previous fracture neck of femur and surgery for a hiatus hernia. There was no prior history of radiotherapy. Clinical examination revealed a non-tender hard lump in right upper quadrant with no palpable axillary lymph nodes. Mammography showed features of fibroadenoma with calcification. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was positive for malignant cells (C5).
Wide local excision of the breast lump was performed in August 1998. This was performed under local anaesthesia due to her poor respiratory function. Macroscopic examination of the excised specimen revealed it to be composed of a piece of fibrofatty tissue measuring 6 × 4 × 2 cm that weighed 33 grams. There was a 2 cm cystic mass containing a necrotic tumour. The tumour appeared to infiltrate the cyst wall and extended to within 3 mm from the nearest resection margin. Microscopically, an encapsulated tumour composed of spindle cells, osteoclastic giant cells and osteoblasts was found. The spindle cells contained plump nuclei with prominent nucleoli. The cytoplasm was pale to eosinophilic with indistinct cell border. The tumour showed high apoptotic activity that was mitotically active with 24 mitoses/10 high power field. The tumour demonstrated osteoclastic and osteoblastic activity with marked osteoid formation . Immunohistochemistry was performed and the tumour cells were positive for vimentin. MNF116 and CAM5.2 (which are broad spectrum cytokeratin epithelial markers) staining was negative proving this was a primary osteosarcoma rather than metaplastic breast sarcoma . The tumour was also negative for S100, desmin and smooth muscle actin. The tumour infiltrated the breast capsule and extended very close to the resection margins, therefore it was not possible to be certain that excision was complete and further excision was advised.
Computer tomography of the thorax and abdomen showed no evidence of distant metastasis. The patient was optimised for general anaesthesia after consultation with a Consultant Respiratory Physician who managed to improve her respiratory function with medical therapy. Subsequent right sided mastectomy was performed under general anaesthesia in January 1999. As the spread of extraskeletal osteosarcoma is haematogenous rather via lymph, axillary lymphadenectomy was not perfomed. Histology of the mastectomy specimen showed no evidence of residual tumour involvement.
She was followed up in the outpatient clinic every 6 months. In March 2001, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of right axilla was performed for a clinical suspicion of an axillary lump, but this was found to be normal. She was last reviewed in the breast clinic in November 2006 and was found to have no clinical evidence of recurrent disease and was therefore discharged back to the care of her General Practitioner.