A 49-year-old man suffered a traumatic motor vehicle accident (MVA). The patient stated that he was in the driver’s seat when the incoming vehicle struck the left side of his vehicle. The airbags did not deploy during this accident, and the patient was restrained in his seat by a seatbelt. The patient first presented for medical evaluation regarding his right hip pain 3 months after the MVA. The patient noted at this time the mass was soft in structure, but maintained the same dimensions that were then observed by the care team at the time of surgical excision. A large hematoma, with the exact dimensions undocumented at this time, presented on initial examination at the lateral right hip, anterior to the proximal femoral head. The patient also endorsed a gradual decline in lower extremity mobility since the MVA and was observed with an abnormal gait. At this point, the patient was prescribed Tizanidine and Mobic for the pain and inflammation. In follow-up imaging, the surgeon noted new internal sclerosis of the mass, despite the stable size of the lesion. The patient appraised pain as six out of ten, worsening with activity. At this time, both a computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance imaging were taken and shown in (, , and ). The pre-operative imaging indicated a large bone density on the right iliac wing extending distally about 12 cm, consistent with Class IV HO. In re-evaluation in the clinic a month later, the patient stated a return of pain after completing prescribed pain medications. He now expressed a pain level of eight out of ten in his anterior hip that worsened with activity but improved with medication. Four months after the initial presentation to the clinic, the surgeon and patient discussed treatment options for the painful lesion, which had hardened significantly since the initial evaluation. Approximately 8 months had elapsed from the inciting trauma to the presentation of a completely ossified mass. During this visit, the patient consented to undergo surgical excision of the HO. The pre-operative assessment was completed before the date of surgery in the outpatient clinic.
The surgery took place 5 months after the trauma. By the time of surgery, the patient had developed severe FAI of the right hip with overlying myositis ossificans, which significantly impaired the right hip range of motion and function to complete daily recreational and occupational activities. Imaging was taken on the day of the surgery and shown in . This was conducted by the primary surgeon (author F.M.), with the assistance of a vascular surgeon due to the proximity of the femoral artery and vein. The primary surgeon used an anterior Smith–Petersen approach to expose the right hip joint. A 10 cm anterior incision from the lateral curve of the anterior superior iliac spine inferiorly in the direction of the lateral patella was made. The fascial gap between the sartorius and tensor fascia latae was identified, and dissection exposed the ascending branch of the lateral femoral circumflex artery and vein which were cauterized and ligated. Additional deep dissection with retraction of the rectus femoris and gluteus medius exposed the hip capsule and the HO mass is visualized as seen in . The anterior neck of the mass was cut and released from the attached soft tissue. Fluoroscopic guidance was used to confirm the localization of the mass. The rest of the mass was removed in a piecemeal fashion by serial osteotomes and rongeur. Radiofrequency ablation was used for hemostatic control.
Adequate margins of excision were confirmed by fluoroscopy to reduce the risk of recurrent HO formation, especially as there is an increased incidence of HO following orthopedic surgery [, , ]. Imaging confirmed excision of the anterior HO lesion, however, imaging also demonstrated additional minimal lateral ossification, not easily accessible through the anterior approach and not affecting the range of motion of the hip. Due to the lack of functional impairment and increased risk of prolonged, unanticipated surgery, this lateral ossification was not removed. The wounds were copiously irrigated, and the hip capsule was reapproximated and tied down. The musculofascial layers were then reapproximated and closed layer by layer with appropriate irrigation and hemostasis. The external wounds were closed, cleaned, and bandaged with clean dressings. Before being taken to the recovery room, an external hip abduction brace was applied to help stabilize the patient’s hip, with hip precautions described to the care team and the patient in post-operative recovery.
The patient was further instructed to continue taking mobic 15 mg daily for 30 days with an initial follow-up in the clinic scheduled for 1 week postoperatively. At the initial follow-up a hematoma, of lesser size than the original, at the same site of the HO was observed on physical examination. An attempt was made to aspirate the hematoma but failed. Two additional short-term follow-up appointments were conducted over the next 3 weeks. In the most recent follow-up, the patient reported a current pain level of zero out of ten and the post-surgical hematoma had resolved. The patient consented to his condition and clinical procedures being published.