A 14-month-old male with congenital sensorineural deafness was admitted to an ear, nose and throat (ENT) ward at Samsung Medical Center for cochlear implantation. The patient was born by vaginal delivery, without perinatal problems, at gestational age 34 + 0 weeks having a weight of 2.3 kg. He was the first-born child of non-consanguineous Korean parents with no known family history of hearing loss.
Hearing loss in both ears was detected at 3 months of age by brainstem evoked response audiometry (BERA) as part of an initial screening test. Additional serial audiological evaluation included repeated BERA that were not evocable at maximum stimulation levels, otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) that were absent bilaterally, auditory steady state response (ASSR) without hearing aids that revealed a profound hearing loss with residual hearing only at low frequencies. Thus, the diagnosis of SNHL was made by the age of 11 months. Vital signs upon admission found a blood pressure of 100/61 mmHg, heart rate of 131 beats/min, respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min, and body temperature of 36.6 °C. His height and weight were 76 cm (−0.7 SDS) and 9.5 kg (−1.3 SDS), respectively. Physical and neurological examinations were normal.
Preoperative computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the temporal bones showed bulbous dilatation of the internal auditory canals, bilateral cochlear hypoplasia and a fistulous connection between the internal auditory canal and the cochlear basal turn suggestive of congenital X-linked stapes gusher syndrome . We conducted gene analysis of POU3F4, which is responsible for X-linked stapes gusher syndrome; however, this mutation was not detected.
The initial laboratory studies during preoperative work up presented the following results: total calcium 7.0 mg/dL (reference range [RR], 8.4–10.2 mg/dL), phosphorus level: 7.5 mg/dL (RR, 2.5–4.5 mg/dL), ionized calcium 0.83 mmol/L (RR, 1.05–1.35 mmol/L), magnesium 2.2 mg/dL (RR, 1.9–2.5 mg/dL), serum alkaline phosphatase 204 U/L (RR, 180–380 IU/L). The serum intact-parathyroid hormone (PTH) level measured by immunoradiometric assay (IRMA) was 6.8 pg/mL (normal range: 11.2–62.0 pg/mL) and the level of 25(OH)-vitamin D was 21.90 ng/mL (RR, 30–100 ng/mL). The calcium-creatinine ratio in randomly collected urine samples was 0.13 (normal rage: < 0.3). On the fifth day of preoperative evaluation for cochlear implants, he was discharged with oral calcium supplements for asymptomatic hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism.
Five days later, he was brought to the pediatric emergency room (ER) of our hospital following a brief generalized tonic-clonic seizure for a few seconds. At that time his serum calcium, ionized calcium and phosphorous levels were 6 mg/dL, 0.83 mmol/L, 8 mg/dL, each respectively. Electroencephalogram (EEG) and brain MRI at that time were unrevealing. He was treated with a single dose of 10% calcium gluconate solution intravenously. In addition, oral medication with calcium and vitamin D supplementation was started. Although the patient was not obviously dysmorphic, the presence of seizures due to secondary hypocalcemia, in association with hypoparathyroidism during early childhood, prompted fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis for DiGeorge syndrome. His karyotype was normal. There were no abnormal findings detected by echocardiography and ophthalmologic examination.
Because he exhibited both SNHL and hypoparathyroidism, HDR syndrome was suspected.
To investigate suspected kidney problems, a kidney ultrasound (US) was performed, and the result revealed a 1.6 cm sized renal cyst in the left kidney. Finally, the combination of hypoparathyroidism, congenital deafness, and renal anomalies let us reach a diagnosis of HDR syndrome.
He was discharged with calcium supplements (75 mg/kg/day) and alfacalcidol (0.1 μg/kg), and exhibited normocalcemia (serum calcium 9.3 mg/dL) at the last examination. There have been no subsequent seizures and his milestones and development are normal. In addition, he showed advanced development of language skills following the cochlear implantation.
For identification of an underlying genetic cause for the observed symptoms, mutational analysis for the POU3F4 and GATA3 genes was performed. This study was approved by the institutional review board at Samsung Medical Center. After obtaining informed consent from both parents, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes of the patient and his parents using a Wizard genomic DNA purification kit (Promega, Madison, WI) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
All coding exons and flanking intronic regions of the POU3F4 and GATA3 genes were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primers designed by the authors (available upon request). Cycle sequencing was performed with the BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) on an ABI 3730 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). The sequence chromatograms obtained were compared with the reference sequences (POU3F4, NM_000307.4; GATA3, NM_001002295.1). Identified variants were described following the recommendations of the Human Genome Variation Society .
The patient was heterozygous for a 2-bp deletion at position 1201 to 1202 (c.1201_1202delAT) in exon 6 of the GATA3 gene, which is predicted to cause a frameshift of the reading frame (p.Met401Valfs*106) . Both parents did not have this variant; therefore, this variant is a de novo mutation (Additional file : Figure S2). No pathogenic variant was observed in the POU3F4 gene. The CARE guidelines were followed in this study. The case report timeline is presented in Additional file : Figure S1.