The patient is a 55-year-old female with a history of a bilateral tubal ligation, robotic assisted hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for uterine fibroids, and a family history of ovarian cancer in the patient’s mother. The patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction in June 2020. She did not require hospitalization. She had no loss of taste or smell, and no respiratory symptoms. During quarantine for COVID-19, the patient developed intermittent melena without abdominal pain. The patient’s stool tested positive for occult blood. At this time the patient was not taking blood thinners nor nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. This persisted for several months. Due to the pandemic, she was unable to have a face-to-face physician visit, nor be seen by a gastroenterologist immediately. Eventually, she was seen by her gastroenterologist after her melena had ceased. The gastroenterologist performed an outpatient workup that included an upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy toward the end of 2020, which was normal except for a hiatal hernia. The patient then developed acholic stools and an outpatient colonoscopy in 2021 demonstrated diverticulosis.
Approximately one year after her initial COVID-19 diagnosis, the symptoms progressed, and the patient was admitted to the hospital with crampy abdominal pain mostly localized to the epigastric and right upper quadrant. She also had nausea and emesis. The patient’s labs were within normal limits with aspartate aminotransferase: 27, alanine aminotransferase: 23, and total bilirubin: 00.7. The patient underwent a right upper quadrant abdominal ultrasound that demonstrated cholelithiasis and a positive sonographic Murphy’s Sign. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated cholelithiasis and distended gallbladder; there was no evidence of gallbladder wall thickening or pericholecystic fluid (see ). Patient then underwent an uneventful laparoscopic cholecystectomy during her admission. Pathology revealed mild chronic cholecystitis with cholelithiasis. The patient was discharged the same day of her cholecystectomy feeling better.
Unfortunately, the patients’ symptoms recurred and progressed over the subsequent weeks. She was admitted to the hospital three times in one month for recurrent partial small bowel obstruction (SBO). The patient underwent a CT abdomen and pelvis with contrast. The CT showed dilated loops of small bowel with a probable transition point at the midline pelvis; however, a precise location of the stricture could not be identified. This finding was concerning for a developing SBO. Most of the colon was relatively decompressed. No pericolonic inflammatory stranding was seen. There were multiple colonic diverticula without evidence to suggest acute diverticulitis. There was a small ventral anterior abdominal wall defect containing some fat. These findings were not appreciated on prior CTs.
She was managed nonoperatively each time. She reported a 40-pound weight loss in two months after the surgery. Approximately six weeks after surgery, she underwent upper endoscopy and lower endoscopy due to her persistent symptoms. She had focal gastritis and diverticulosis. Of note, the terminal ileum was intubated; about 30 cm of distal small bowel was examined and found to be grossly and pathologically normal. Patient was discharged home upon resolution of symptoms.
The patient was then given a “dummy” capsule in preparation for possible formal capsule endoscopy approximately one week after discharge. Serial abdominal x-rays demonstrated failure of the capsule to traverse the small bowel into the colon and eventual dissolution. The patient became intolerant of liquids and solids, and oral intake triggered crampy abdominal pain. The patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital with increasing abdominal pain, multiple episodes of emesis, and per os (PO) intolerance since ingesting the “dummy” capsule. CT scan confirmed the recurrent partial SBO.
During admission, the patient underwent laparoscopic hand-assisted segmental small bowel resection (12 cm ileus) with side-to-side stapled functional entero-enterostomy. During the surgery, a single stricture was identified in the jejunal portion of the small bowel. No other strictures were identified throughout the small bowel.
Surgical specimens were taken during the procedure. The specimen grossly demonstrated that the serosal surface showed congested blood vessels over the affected portion of bowel. Once the specimen was opened, the mucosa showed a 1.5 cm × 10.5 cm area of superficial ulceration. The lumen was diminished (00.3 cm in average diameter) and the intestinal wall was indurated. The healthy bowel diameter was found to be 30.5 cm in diameter. The histopathology showed evidence of ulceration and active inflammation; the margins were histologically viable.
The patient recovered well postoperatively. She has resolved her primary persistent symptoms of crampy abdominal pain, weight loss, and PO intolerance.