An 81-year-old male was admitted to our hospital in June 2018 due to recurrent episodes of hypotension, profuse sweating, pale complexion, and syncope for 3 years and progressive dementia for 2 years. These symptoms beginning 2015 were not related to body posture. Blood pressure lower than 90/60 mmHg occurred several times during the episode, even undetectable in severe cases. Consciousness typically returned within 10 min. Pallor, profuse sweating, and hypotension usually fully recovered within 30 min. Before the episode, the patient had no limb movement disorder, dizziness, diplopia, slurred speech, palpitations, and chest pain. During the episode, the patient had no limb twitching, foaming at the mouth, and urinary and fecal incontinence, and multiple blood glucose test results were 6–16 mmol/L. About 1 year after the onset of autonomic symptoms, cognitive decline, weakness of limbs, unsteady walking, repeated vomiting, and intractable constipation gradually appeared.
Admission physical examination: blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, heart rate 80 beats/min, no obvious abnormalities in heart, lung, and abdomen. Neurological exam: decreased recent and remote memory, acalculia, and decreased spatiotemporal orientation. According to the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale, the patient's muscle strength was grade 5 in both upper limbs and grade 4 in both lower limbs. Muscle tone was normal in the four limbs, but the deep reflexes of the two lower limbs were symmetrically weakened. Negative pathological signs, positive Romberg's sign, and normal finger-nose and heel-knee-shin tests. Walking with the aid of a walker, the patient exhibited a wide-based gait. Mini-Mental State Examination score was 7. Head computed tomography (CT) scan on admission showed brain atrophy and white matter lesions (, ). Dynamic electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm, occasional atrial premature beats, incomplete paired beats, transient atrial tachycardia, and occasional ventricular premature beats. Echocardiography revealed thickened ventricular septum, decreased aortic elasticity, and decreased left ventricular diastolic function with an ejection fraction of 75%. Routine blood test: red blood cell count 3.53 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 110 g/L, hematocrit 32.3%, albumin 30.40 g/L, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 1.87 mmol/L, random blood glucose 12.48 mmol/L, and estimated glomerular filtration rate 71.12 mL/min/1.73 m2. Cardiac enzymes, troponin, brain natriuretic peptide, electrolytes, coagulation tests, thyroid function, and β-hydroxybutyric acid were normal. Urinalysis revealed leukocyte count 178.90 μL. Stool routine examination was normal. DWI was not performed due to the presence of metal residues in the body. Skin biopsy indicated intranuclear inclusion bodies in eccrine sweat gland cells, fibroblasts, and adipocytes. p62 immunohistochemistry demonstrated nuclear immunoreactivity . Finally, genetic testing by repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction (RP-PCR) found that the patient had GGC repeats in the 5′UTR of the NOTCH2NLC gene . The patient was therefore diagnosed with adult-onset NIID.
During hospitalization, the patient was mainly given supportive care to maintain vital signs. Due to long-term malnutrition, the treatment plan included supplementing vitamin C and dextrose and sodium chloride injection, increasing oxygen supply though oxygen inhalation, and maintaining normal blood pressure and electrolyte balance. Since the onset of the disease, the patient manifested progressive aggravation of symptoms such as dementia and limb weakness, repeated vomiting, and intractable constipation, accompanied by recurrent episodes of autonomic symptoms such as pale complexion, excessive sweating, hypotension, and syncope.
For some symptoms such as nausea and vomiting, the patient received symptomatic treatment. In 2019, the patient was already severely demented and bedridden. He was readmitted to our hospital in April with severe pneumonia. Eventually, he developed multi-organ failure and died in June 2019 at the age of 82.