A 51-year-old woman presented a lump in the upper outer quadrant of right breast, and it was accompanied by continuous breast pain and bilateral axillary itching for more than 2 months. There were no other symptoms found. Previously she didn't undergo any breast cancer screening, and had no family history of breast cancer. Physical examination revealed an irregular mass by palpation where was 3.5 cm away from the nipple, about 11 o 'clock in the right breast, with hard texture, clear boundary, mobility and mild tenderness. Doppler ultrasound showed no echogenic and irregular mass in the right breast, with solid striped septum, and weak echogenic deposition in the dorsal side, and the mass was well circumscribed. There was no blood flow signal in the lesion. Mammography showed a lobed mass with slightly higher density in the right breast, smooth edge, partially concealed boundary, and there was no calcification in the mass. It was classified as category 4A by BI-RADS assessment. It was considered to be a benign cyst with septum on ultrasound, but ductal carcinoma of breast, adenoid cystic carcinoma could not be excluded. We suggested the patient undergo MRI examination, but the patient refused. Since breast cancer could not be excluded, the patient was urged for a partial mastectomy. Postoperative general features: A 3.5 cm × 3 cm × 2.2 cm mass was observed at 11 o 'clock of the right breast, 3.0 cm from the nipple, with an unclear boundary and enveloped, also a 2.8 cm maximum diameter cyst was observed on the section, and a 2.2 cm × 1.8 cm × 1.5 cm gray-white neoplasm was observed inside the cyst. Micrographs of histological specimens with HE staining showed the mass was biphasic appearance.The outer myoepithelial cells were single or multilaye, the cytoplasm was clear and the nuclei was not atypia. The inner layer were glandular epithelial cells, arranged in an adenoid structure, with abundant cytoplasm and no nuclear atypia. And immunohistochemistry showed that: CK 5/6 (+, myoepithelial), P63 (+), calponin (+, myoepithelial), CK (+), CK7 (+, epithelial), L-CK (+, epithelial), SMA (−), H-caldesmon (−), so it was diagnosed as AME. Because of the pathology and immunohistochemistry showed the tumor was well differentiated, she did not receice any further treatment after the surgery.