An 80 year-old Caucasian male was referred to our institution in November 2011 for consideration of endoscopic therapy of BE with high grade dysplasia. Previously, the patient had underwent an endoscopy at an outside institution which demonstrated long segment BE from 20 to 30 cm, two discrete linear ulcers from 25 to 22 cm and a tiny hyper-pigmented erosion in the cardia. Esophageal biopsies at the outside institution demonstrated Barrett esophagus with high-grade dysplasia. At the time of endoscopy at our institution, there were esophageal mucosal changes secondary to established long segment BE extending from the upper extent of the gastric folds which were 35 cm from the incisors to the squamocolumnar junction, which was at 20 cm from the incisors. Nodularity was present from 24 to 28 cm. Mucosal resection was performed with the endoscopic resection within the BE limited to the area of nodularity. The resection was performed with a band ligation and snare resection technique (Duette Kit, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN) with a total of four pieces resected .
Microscopic examination of the resected tissue demonstrated BE with HGD extending to the edge of the specimen. No invasive adenocarcinoma was identified . Also present in one resected specimen was a well circumscribed nodule of tumor cells involving the submucosa with overlying mucosal ulceration . A second, smaller nodule of tumor cells with prominent intra-cytoplasmic pigment was present in a separate section from the mucosal resection, involving the muscularis mucosa. These latter tumor cells were arranged in nests and demonstrated moderately atypical nuclei with frequent prominent nucleoli, surrounded by moderate amounts of eosinophilic cytoplasm . Immunohistochemical stains were performed and demonstrated that the tumor nodule was negative for pan-cytokeratin and positive for S–100, HMB 45, and Melan-A . These findings were consistent with melanoma. A review of the H&E stained sections did not demonstrate the presence of any melanoma in situ in the overlying mucosa, which instead demonstrated high-grade dysplasia of BE. Overall, the findings were consistent with metastatic melanoma.
A subsequent PET scan demonstrated multiple areas of uptake in the bone marrow and skull consistent with widespread metastatic disease. Bilateral pleural effusions were present, as well as a small focus of uptake in the esophagus. Numerous lesions were identified in the liver and spleen, consistent with metastatic disease.
Molecular studies were performed on formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue from the esophageal mucosal resection. Following tumor enrichment by macro-dissection of an area containing approximately 85% melanoma nuclei, molecular testing demonstrated the presence of a 1799T>A (V600E) mutation in BRAF . No mutations were found in exons 9, 11, 13, 17 and 18 of KIT. Due to the side effects of BRAF inhibitors, it was believed the patient would not benefit from this form of therapy. After discussion about other potential palliative therapy, the patient's family decided on hospice care.