A 11-year-old Asian boy presented to a tertiary-level trauma center with complaints of severe abdominal pain for 2 days after a fall from a bicycle. There was no history of nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension or fever. On examination, the child was conscious and oriented, with a normal breathing pattern. Assessment of vital signs revealed that he was afebrile, heart rate was 120 beats per minute (tachycardia for age), respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure in the supine position was 110/70 mmHg. Rhythmic pulse with good volume was palpable at all examination sites. No signs of external injuries were noted. All limbs were able to move freely in all directions with complete range of motion. Abdominal assessment revealed a slightly elevated temperature, with contours maintained and no abdominal distension; guarding and rigidity were present, and deep palpation was not possible.
Focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) showed the presence of free fluid in the hepatorenal pouch. Subsequent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the torso demonstrated pneumoperitoneum with thickening of the proximal jejunal loops . Blood test results showed hemoglobin of 8.9 g/dL and total leucocyte count of 12,700/mL In view of the pneumoperitoneum, exploratory laparotomy was performed. Intraoperatively, 200 mL of purulent peritoneal fluid was noted, with a 2 cm jejunal perforation located 30 cm from the duodenojejunal (DJ) junction. Primary repair of the perforation was performed with generous peritoneal lavage, and a drain was placed in Morrison’s pouch. The rest of the bowel, along with the ileocecal region, was examined and was found to be healthy.
The child was monitored in intensive care, where vital signs were stable and electrolytes were within normal limits. He was continued on no oral intake of food or fluids, as he had passed flatus only. However, on postoperative day (POD) 6, the child developed fever with increasing abdominal girth. Serosanguinous discharge was noted from the drain site. On POD 7, serosanguinous discharge was noted at the wound site as well, followed by bluish discoloration and thickening of the skin around the wound. The peripheries were warm and pink with palpable lower limb pulses. A few hours later, wound dehiscence was noted. The child was then taken to the operating room, where exploratory laparotomy was performed. Intra-operatively, purulent peritoneal fluid was observed with flimsy inter-bowel loop adhesions, for which gentle adhesiolysis was done. A tube-like structure, suspected to be free-floating appendix, was noted in the left paracolic gutter . The previous jejunal repair was intact. Examination of the rest of the bowel showed that it was healthy. However, erythema was present around the ileocecal junction, and no appendiceal stump was noted around it. Pus flakes were noted in all quadrants, for which generous peritoneal lavage was performed. The drain in Morrison’s pouch was replaced.
The child was stable during the postoperative period. On POD 4, he passed flatus and stool, following which he was allowed oral intake of food which was built up gradually to full diet over 5 days. The nasogastric tube and abdominal drain were removed on POD 3 and POD 5, respectively. The child was discharged on POD 8 on full diet following the second surgery.
The histopathology report of the tubular structure confirmed it to be appendix with areas of necrosis, acute inflammatory infiltrates and focal areas of hemorrhage. On retrospective evaluation of the initial CECT, the appendix was confirmed and localized in the right iliac fossa at the ileocecal junction .
The child has been followed up for a year now and has been asymptomatic.