A 35 year old male was referred with an 8 month history of intermittent macroscopic haematuria, associated with mild right sided iliac fossa and groin pain. Past medical history included a prior right inguinal hernia repair and orchidopexy for undescended testis. The patient was also found to have azoospermia and was undergoing assessment in preparation for In vitro fertilization (IVF)/Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI). Examination of genitalia, testes and prostate was essentially unremarkable outside of an old right inguinal scar consistent with the history of orchidopexy and hernia repair. There was some thickening of the tissues around his right testicle consistent with previous orchidopexy. Initial workup of haematuria was performed. Urine microscopy demonstrated nonglomerular microscopic haematuria, cytology revealed atypical cells and the computerized tomography (CT) intravenous pyelogram (IVP) reported normal appearance of the upper urinary tract and bladder. However, it also described the incidental finding of a 7 × 3.5 × 2 cm fluid density mass at the posterior aspect of the bladder continuous with the right seminal vesicle. Blood tests were unremarkable including a PSA of 0.6 ng/ml. The seminal vesicle mass was further investigated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which reported two cystic structures adjacent the bladder and appearing related to the seminal vesicle . The larger structure terminated at the level of the verumontanum appearing to be a Müllerian duct remnant, and comment was made on the appearance of debris within the smaller structure. Operatively blood stained debris was seen at the verumontanum meatus and a rigid ureteroscope was used to perform seminal vesiculoscopy to inspect the lesion. A papillary mass was visible macroscopically and biopsies were taken of the mass. The biopsy histology noted atypical epithelial lesion with papillary features. Following discussion of these findings the patient elected to proceed and the cystic structure was excised via a robotic approach and sent for histopathology. The patient made a smooth recovery with normal ejaculation function and volume. The urine cytology also normalized post removal of the seminal vesicle.
Macroscopically, the right seminal vesicle contained a friable tan-brown colored lesion measuring 15 × 13 mm . On microscopy, the seminal vesicle lumen was dilated up to 15 mm containing several well developed organized papillary structures, some of which were infarcted. Both the cyst and papillae were lined by benign seminal vesicle and focal benign squamous and mucinous type epithelium. While cytological atypia was present in the seminal vesicle epithelium this was degenerative in nature with inconspicuous mitotic activity and a low Ki-67 index. Staining was positive for CK7, CK903, Ca-125 and PAX-8 and negative with PSA and PSAP, a typical staining pattern for seminal vesicle epithelial neoplasms .
Given the atypical findings the specimen was referred to Uropathologist Professor Jonathan Epstein at the Johns Hopkins Hospital (Baltimore, USA) where a final diagnosis was made as a benign Cystic Papillary Adenoma of the seminal vesicle, which was considered a unique, distinct entity from cystadenoma of the seminal vesicle, which lacks the papillary component seen in this case.
The patient will continue with IVF workup and treatment. His MRI and urine cytology will be repeated 6-monthly for 2 years as a precaution prior to discharge.