A 55-year-old man was transported to our emergency room following cardiopulmonary arrest.
Eight days before admission, he moved to Minamisoma city to begin the decontamination work. Six days before admission, he developed flu-like symptoms. Oral intake gradually decreased, and a coworker attempted to bring him to the hospital on admission day. During transfer, he lost consciousness. He was immediately brought to a nearby fire station and was found to be in cardiopulmonary arrest. Thereby, he was transported to our hospital with cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
The following was clarified from our medical records. He had a history of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, recently indicated hypertension, and past history of tuberculosis. While details of his health condition before engagement in decontamination work were not available because of lack of hospital history, potentially owing to settling in an unfamiliar place, his health condition may have worsened after starting work. He originated from outside Fukushima prefecture, lived alone in a dormitory, and had an income of 2.5-3 million yen per year [mean Japanese male income was 5.1 million yen in 2014], and he did not complete high school. In Minamisoma city, decontamination workers are managed as per the following working conditions: 8 hours of work per day, 5 days a week, with a 1-hour break per day. Workers must wear long-sleeved shirts, long pants, and paper masks to prevent external or internal radio-contamination. These conditions are strictly enforced by employers following governmental regulations for radiological protection for decontamination work. Our patient drank more than 60 g of ethanol per day and had a 25-year history of tobacco smoking one pack a day but had stopped for the treatment of tuberculosis at the age of 45 years.
On arrival to the hospital, we found him in cardiopulmonary arrest: asystole and not breathing. Three milligrams of adrenaline and 1 mg of atropine were intravenously administered with high-flow oxygen administered under intubation. Twenty-seven minutes after arrival to the hospital, spontaneous circulation was restored. On examination in the emergency room, the body temperature was 37.6°C, blood pressure was 96/62 mmHg, pulse was 135 bpm, and oxygen saturation was 98% while being administered oxygen (15 L) from a ventilator. Results of a laboratory examination of blood revealed the following: pH 6.62, partial pressure of oxygen 57.5 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 154 mmHg, white cell count 11900 cells/μL, C-reactive protein levels 26.98 mg/dL, HbA1c 13.8%, blood glucose 584 mg/dL, urea nitrogen 76.4 mg/dL, creatinine 3.07 mg/dL, and positively for hepatitis C virus antibody. Computed tomography showed disseminated shadow and air bronchogram on the bilateral lung field.
No evidence of active tuberculosis was found from the cultures of gastric juice and sputum and from interferon-gamma release assay. K. pneumoniae was positive in two sets of blood cultures. The patient was diagnosed with pneumonia-induced bacteremia and sepsis. Despite post resuscitation care using a ventilator and vasopressor, he died a day after admission.