A 37-year-old right-handed man presented progressive speaking difficulty for the previous six months. The family history was negative for any neurodegenerative disease. When first examined at age 37 his speech was effortful, hesitating at the beginning of each sentence and speaking syllable by syllable in a telegraphic way lacking in abstraction. Phonological errors in naming tasks, decreased fluency by letters, and difficulties in Similarities tests were also detected. In addition, his family had noticed behavioural changes in the patient during the previous year. His behaviour seemed childish with some disinhibition and loss of manners. Dietary changes with a preference for sweets and, subsequently, weight gain were also reported. At that time, an MRI showed left fronto-insular atrophy, and PET-18F-FDG revealed hypometabolism in the same region. Blood and CSF examinations were not remarkable. A first electromyogram, including bulbar muscles, was normal. No mutation was identified by whole exome sequencing test (WES) in the genes for tau, progranulin, C9ORF72, FUS, TDP-43, CHMP2B, or VCP.
Throughout the following year, the changes in the behaviour of the patient were getting worse with a loss of decorum, empathy, and compulsive actions. Dysarthria worsened, and then dysphagia emerged. At 38 years old, marked utilization behaviour and lack of insight were already evident. The neurological examination also revealed spastic dysarthria, difficulty mobilizing the soft palate, and increased jaw and gag reflexes, all consistent with the pseudobulbar syndrome. Deep tendon reflexes were slightly increased in all limbs, with right predominance. The patient did not show tongue atrophy or fasciculations either in the initial or middle phase of the illness, and no other muscle weakness, atrophy, or fasciculation was found. A second electromyogram was again within normal limits.
At 39 years of age, on examination, his gait was already impaired, mutism was already evident, and oculomotor and buccofacial apraxia had emerged. Right rigidity, bradykinesia, and ideomotor apraxia were first observed and, at that time, a DaT-SCAN® showed bilateral low dopamine transporter uptake (the specific binding ratio from the right striatum was 26,596 and from the left striatum was 22,483). Six months later, paresis and atrophy were first observed in his right forearm and hand on a background of upper motor neuron signs with a right predominance. He became bedridden at 39 years old. At that time, a third electromyogram showed diffuse denervation, and a computer tomography scan showed generalized frontal and temporal atrophy. He died from bronchopneumonia at 41 years of age. His disease duration was almost four years.
A post-mortem examination confirmed a reduced brain weight (1138 g) and a marked asymmetric frontotemporal lobar degeneration, with severe caudate nucleus atrophy and moderate pallidus nucleus involvement. Histological examination with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) revealed cortical neuronal loss and reactive gliosis and identified abundant basophilic neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs). Specifically, moderate pyramidal neuron loss and reactive gliosis were found in the primary motor cortex. Besides this, moderate myelin pallor was evident in the pyramidal tract and mild signs of degeneration were present in some motor neurons of the lower motor neuron pool. The substantia nigra showed mild loss of pigmented neurons, macrophages with neuromelanin and reactive astrogliosis, but no Lewy bodies and basophilic inclusions were identified. FUS immunohistochemistry highlighted much more widespread NCIs with a wide spectrum of morphologies in the neocortex, hippocampus, and subcortical regions. Few FUS negative neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NIIs) were also recognized with H&E and ubiquitine. Basophilic NCIs, characteristic of the basophilic inclusion body disease (BIBD) subtype of fusopathy, were found . No beta-amyloid or alpha-synuclein were identified, and only very occasional TAU-positive neurofibrillary tangles in the amygdala and neuritic plaques in the hippocampus were found.