A 75-year-old previously healthy female was referred to our Urology Department for a large renal mass. She had noticed a palpable mass on her left flank half a year prior, which had been steadily increasing in size. She had also been experiencing dyspnea upon exertion in recent weeks. Her laboratory data showed elevated serum creatinine of 1.49 mg/dL, and mild hyperkalemia of 5.4 mEq/L. A non-contrast CAT scan revealed a 16 × 10 cm mass almost replacing the left kidney and upper ureter, marked left hydronephrosis, and a paraaortic lymph node swelling of 22 mm, together suggesting malignant tumor of left renal or upper ureteral origin . Serum tumor makers SCC, NSE, and sIL-2R were slightly elevated, while CEA and CA19-9 levels were normal, their values 1.7 ng/mL (normal range 0–1.5 ng/mL), 22.9 ng/mL (0–16.3 ng/mL), 630 U/mL (122–496 U/mL), 3.1 ng/mL (0–5.0 ng/mL), and 28.7 U/mL (0–37.0 U/mL), respectively.
She underwent a retrograde pyelography and ureteroscopy, however, the guide-wire and ureteroscope were unable to pass the ureteral obstruction at the U1-U2 border. No visible lesions were observed on the ureteral mucosa up until the obstruction. Urine cytology sampled from this site was positive, and a cold-cup biopsy revealed signet-ring cell-like cancer cells. A clinical staging of cT3N1M0 ureteral carcinoma was made, and she underwent an open radical left nephroureterectomy accompanied by paraaortic lymph node dissection 1 month after her initial hospital visit. The surgery was performed in the supine position, with Chevron incisions made for the nephrectomy, and Rutherford-Morison incision for the ureterectomy. Most notably, strong adhesions were observed between the tumor and distal pancreas, as well as the spleen. The tumor was mucinous in appearance, and pathology determined a SRCC, originating from the renal pelvis . Lymph node metastases were also confirmed. The pathological stage was pT4N1, with positive surgical margins.
She was started on adjuvant Gemcitabine plus Carboplatin, however, chemotherapy was discontinued after the second course due to grade 2 erythema multiforme. A small papillary tumor was detected in the bladder 9 months after surgery, and transurethral resection of this bladder tumor was performed, confirming pTa urothelial carcinoma. Periodic CAT scans were negative for distant metastasis up until this point in her follow-up.
One year after the initial surgery, metastases in the right lung, mediastinum, and sacrum were detected. Salvage chemotherapy with Pembrolizumab was scheduled, though her rapidly deteriorating overall health did not allow for its induction. She died 2 months after the initial confirmation of metastases.
Following consent from her family members, a post-mortem examination was performed. Signet-ring cell metastases were confirmed in the lungs, abdominal lymph nodes, retroperitoneum, distal pancreas, and much of the vertebral bones . No evidence of gastrointestinal lesions was observed. On immunohistochemistry, the SRCC cells stained positive for CK20 and negative for uroplakin II, CK7, and GATA3.