A 43-year-old male was referred to our hospital with progressive dysphagia and chest pain for nearly one year. He also had frequent instances of regurgitation of food especially when lying down at night. He denied any history of smoking, alcohol drinking or cardiac problems. Physical examination and basic laboratory tests were normal. An electrocardiogram did not show any abnormal findings. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed no neoplastic or vascular obstruction outside the esophagus. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed abnormal contractions in the distal esophagus with grossly normal-appearing mucosa and loose adherence of the esophagogastric junction without signs of esophagitis . There was no eosinophilic infiltration on biopsy. Barium esophagogram showed irregular mucosa changes along the distal esophagus . 24-h esophageal pH monitoring showed abnormal acid exposure with a DeMeester score of 15.24. The patient was diagnosed as non-erosive reflux disease and received PPI therapy (Esomeprazole, 20 mg, QD) for 12 weeks without symptom improvement. Subsequent HRM revealed intermittent hypertensive esophageal contractions with 7 of 10 swallows with a DCI > 8000 mmHg.s.cm and a maximum DCI value of 20,656 mmHg.s.cm. The median integrated relaxation pressure (IRP) was high at 24.6 mmHg . HE was diagnosed based on the HRM study.
The patient was treated with P-CAB (Vonoprazan, 20 mg, QD) for 4 weeks with markedly symptoms improved. At follow-up 14 weeks later, the patient felt well with much improved symptoms with no regurgitation and complete resolution of his chest pain. He then suspended the use of vonoprazan for one week and no signs of recurrence were detected. After discontinuation of vonoprazan for three weeks, the follow-up HRM demonstrated a mean DCI of 2173 mm Hg.s.cm and a median IRP of 2.3 mmHg . 24-h esophageal pH monitoring showed a decreased acid reflux with a DeMeester score of 5.22. He refused to undergo barium esophagogram again as the symptoms had alleviated a lot.