A 7-year-old female patient admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (ICU) with a known medical history of GT was referred to a pediatric dentist for opinion and management for bleeding gums. The patient presented with a chief complaint of severe bleeding from the upper left back tooth region since the previous night. History of presenting illness revealed that the patient was apparently normal the previous day morning, after which spontaneous bleeding started by afternoon leading to severe blood loss and hypovolemic shock for which she was admitted to the ICU. Bleeding was continuous; there were no aggravating or relieving factors. Previous hospitalization history revealed she was admitted twice earlier within a period of 30 days, with a similar complaint of bleeding from the oral cavity leading to a significant decrease in the hemoglobin (Hb) levels. No dental treatment was performed in the earlier visits, as it was advised by the pediatrician to wait for a month for the complete recovery of the patient. The parent also gave a history of a similar episode of bleeding from gums, vomiting containing clots of blood 1 year back with decreased Hb level at the time of hospitalization. The patient was discharged without being referred to the dentist one year back. A family history of consanguineous marriage was present. On extraoral examination, purpuric spots were seen in the left leg along with crusting and bleeding from the lips. Intraoral examination revealed root stump in relation to 54, 65, dental caries in relation to 53, 74, 36, and mobile crown structure in relation to 75, 55. Spontaneous bleeding was evident from 54, 55, 21, 11, 12, 22, and 46 and the patient also had anterior tooth crossbite in relation to 11, 21 . The provisional diagnosis was given as gingivitis and chronic irreversible pulpitis in relation to 55, 54, 65, 75.
Laboratory investigation revealed a hemoglobin level of 1.3 g/dL on the night of admission. The next day the prothrombin time was 18.2 seconds, partial thromboplastin time was 22.8 seconds, international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.70, and hemoglobin was 6 g/dL. On the day of performing the dental procedure (fourth day of admission) as mentioned below, the hemoglobin level was 11 mg/dL, platelet count was 141,000, and bleeding time was 16.5 seconds. Orthopantomogram (OPG) revealed root stump in relation to 54, 65, dental caries involving enamel, dentin, and approximating pulp in relation to 53, 74, and resorbed roots in relation to 75, 55 .
Consent was taken from the pediatrician and hematologist. Treatment planned was oral prophylaxis followed by extraction of 55, 54, 65, and 75. Placement of soft splint with absorbable gelatin sponge (Ab gel, Sri Gopal Krishna Lab Private Limited, India) after extraction. Restorative treatment included deep caries management in relation to 53 and 74, followed by stainless steel crown in 74, glass ionomer restoration in 36, pit and fissure sealants in 16, 46, 26.
After being admitted to the ICU, two units of random donor platelet and two units of packed cell volume transfusions were performed and the patient was shifted to the ward after an increase in the Hb levels. Two units of random donor platelets transfusion were performed on the next day. The patient was advised to use tranexamic acid mouth wash (500 mg tablet mixed with 10 mL of water—5%) 6 times a day for 2 days before the procedure. Instructions regarding maintenance of good oral hygiene and use of a soft-bristled toothbrush with fluoridated toothpaste and brushing using the Fones technique were emphasized. The dental procedure was planned for the fourth day. Half a unit of single donor platelets was infused pre- and postoperatively. Impression was made using putty and a soft splint (1.5 mm thick) was prepared. Following buccal infiltration, extraction of 55, 54, 65, and 75 was done. Tranexamic acid (500 mg tablet) was then powdered using mortar and pestle, mixed with saline, and packed into the socket. A paste of tranexamic acid was made, placed on gauze, and held with pressure for ten minutes on the socket after which the gauze was removed. The patient was advised to swallow the remaining tranexamic acid paste. An absorbable gelatin sponge (Ab gel, Sri Gopal Krishna Lab Private Limited, India) was then packed into the socket followed by splint placement. Post extraction instructions were given and the patient was advised to keep the splint in place. The patient has advised a liquid diet until the next day and intravenous (IV) paracetamol and tranexamic acid (200 mg) 6 hours once were prescribed to the patient. After 2 hours, the patient did not show any signs of active bleeding. The splint was removed, the next day. No active bleeding was evident from the extraction socket. The patient was advised to wear a soft splint for two more days except during meals.
The patient was instructed to stop using the splint from the seventh day of admission (3 days after the dental procedure) and no active bleeding was evident from the extraction sockets. Few hours after removal of the splint, there was spontaneous bleeding from 12, 11, 21, 22, 46 and an extraction socket of 55. One unit of random donor platelets was infused on that day followed by infusion of half unit of single donor platelets the next day. Intermittent spontaneous bleeding was evident from the 11, 12, 21, 22, and 46 region. On the tenth day (sixth day of dental procedure), the remaining dental procedures were performed after infusion of one unit of random donor platelets pre- and postoperatively. Oral prophylaxis followed by deep caries management in 53, 74 with stainless steel crown in 74, glass ionomer restoration in 36, and type VII glass ionomer sealant in 16, 26, 46. Postoperatively, oral hygiene instructions were reinforced and IV tranexamic acid 200 mg once in 6 hours was prescribed. Spontaneous bleeding was still evident from 11, 12, 21, 22, and 46 the next day. The pediatrician advised stopping the oral bleeding to discharge the patient. Hence, on the eleventh day (the seventh day after the dental procedure), it was decided to use tranexamic acid paste (crush 500 mg of tranexamic acid and mix with saline) in the area of bleeding on the splint and then place the splint intraorally. The patient was advised to keep the splint in place for 2 hours after which they were instructed to remove the splint and swallow the remaining tranexamic acid paste. The parent was advised to do the same whenever spontaneous bleeding occurred. The parent was also advised not to use more than two tablets of tranexamic acid (500 mg) each per day based on its maximum permissible dosage. Bleeding was completely reduced after 2 days of using this technique and the patient was discharged from the hospital.
Diet counseling was done. Stringent oral hygiene instructions were advocated by the patient. The patient was advised to use a soft-bristled toothbrush, fluoridated toothpaste, and gargle after every meal. Also, the parent was advised to use the soft splint with tranexamic acid paste whenever bleeding occurred.
Postoperatively, a 1-week follow-up revealed no active bleeding from gums. The patient has been reviewed every month for 4 months. The parent gave a history of using soft splint with tranexamic acid paste in the first 2 months during the eruption of the premolars with no history of hospitalization. Sealants were placed in relation to the premolars in the subsequent follow-up visits. At 7 months follow-up, there was no active bleeding and no history of hospitalization . Loss of sealants was evident in relation to 16, 15, and 26 which was replaced.