A 13-year-old boy came to our clinic with his parents due to a mass on the left side of his neck for 1 mo.
One month prior to admission, the patient accidentally felt a mass on his left neck, approximately 2 cm × 2 cm in size, and there was no local discomfort such as redness, swelling and tenderness. After learning this, his parents brought him to the hospital for treatment.
The patient had been in good health until he showed evidence of the disease.
The patient was not from a consanguineous marriage and there was no family history of similar disease.
During the physical examination, a clear soft tissue mass was palpated on the left supraclavicular area and was determined to be an ovoid-shaped mass of approximately 2 cm × 2 cm in size.
The results of laboratory examinations on admission were normal, including routine blood and coagulation function tests, liver and kidney function tests, tumor markers, urine tests and stool tests.
Duplex ultrasonography showed that a circular solid hypoechoic mass could be seen on the left clavicle along the external jugular vein, with a general length of approximately 4.2 cm . There was no blood flow signal passing through the lumen, and the mass invaded into the subclavian vein along the external jugular vein. Hypoechoic masses were observed in some areas of the subclavian vein, involving a length of approximately 2.1 cm, and no obvious involvement was observed in the left internal jugular vein . Similarly, the left supraclavicular fossa showed irregular patchy patterns on cervical magnetic resonance imaging. The lesion was mostly located between the left common jugular vein and the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and the boundary was not clear. The contrast-enhanced scan showed slight enhancement, and the wall of the adjacent left subclavian vein was thickened. Lesions with abnormal signals in the left supraclavicular fossa were tested by biopsy, considering the possibility of lymphatic or granulomatous lesions . The abnormal signal in the left supraclavicular fossa was considered to indicate lymphatic or granulomatous lesions, and biopsy was recommended.
The pathologist reported that the mass was a spindle cell mesenchymal tumor without definite malignant features, but the specific tumor type and nature needed to be determined by routine histology and immunohistochemistry. Surgery was then performed; because only the mass was removed, no vein reconstruction was required.
Pathologic examination was based on a microscopic investigation, which reported that the mass from the left jugular vein was a fibroblast/myofibroblast tumor, consistent with intravascular nodular fasciitis. Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed that the mass was composed of spindle cells, which were mainly fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. The cell morphology was relatively consistent, with an irregular fascicular-shaped arrangement. The atypia was mild, with a small amount of nuclear division, a small amount of mucous degeneration and collagen deposition in the stroma, as well as scattered inflammatory cell infiltration and erythrocyte extravasation . Immunohistochemistry studies showed that the spindle cells were positive for vimentin, caldesmon and smooth muscle actin and negative for S-100 protein, desmin, CD34, and c-kit; Ki-67 staining revealed a low proliferative index (5%-10%), confirming their myofibroblastic differentiation . The USP6 rearrangement test was also positive . Overall, the results were consistent with IVF.