A 30-year-old woman gravida 3 para 2 carrying MC biamniotic twins was admitted to the obstetrics department at 12 WG for severe HG. She reported vomiting and nausea since 8 WG with progressive worsening despite use of oral metoclopramide. Compliance with pyridoxine supplementation previously prescribed to her was poor. She weighed 60.9 kg, having lost 5 kg over 4 weeks. Clinical examination showed hypotension (98/56 mmHg) and tachycardia (110 bpm). She had no tremor and thyroid examination was unremarkable. Abdominal ultrasound showed normal fetal status. Initial laboratory tests showed severe hypokalemia (2.4 mmol/l) with U-wave in V2-V6 on ECG. Other electrolytes, renal and liver function tests were normal. The patient was admitted to the intermediate care unit (IMCU) and was immediately started on i.v. potassium repletion, 0.9% sodium chloride and 5% dextrose infusion, i.v. thiamine 100 mg q.d., i.v. metoclopramide and rectal pyridoxine. Within 24 hours, hypokalemia had resolved and the patient was hemodynamically stable. Further investigations revealed overt hyperthyroidism . The patient had no history of thyroid disease or GTT during her previous pregnancies. Antibodies against thyroid peroxidase (TPOAb) and TSH receptor (TRAb) were negative, and thyroid ultrasonography was normal. The operational diagnosis was HG-associated GTT in the setting of a twin pregnancy. One week later, the patient was discharged with weekly follow-up at the outpatient clinic. Vomiting relief and normalization of serum levels of both free T4 (fT4) and free T3 (fT3) were observed by 14 WG.
In the setting of the monochorionic twin pregnancy, continued fetal ultrasound screening at 17 WG revealed TTTS stage 3 according to the Quintero classification (oligo-polyhydramnios sequences according to maximal vertical pockets of 1 and 10 cm in donor and recipient, respectively, absent bladder in donor and abnormal Doppler flows in both fetuses). Therefore, the patient was admitted in order to perform FLC using the Solomon technique, a minimally invasive procedure under endoscopic fetoscopy; this procedure ablates initially all visible placental vascular anastomoses, and then coagulates the entire vascular equator of the placenta to avoid recurrence of TTTS. Upon admission, the patient reported vomiting relapse since two weeks; her clinical status was consistent with severe malnutrition, and laboratory tests performed before FLC showed hypokalemia (2.6 mmol/l) with T-wave inversion in V1-V4 and hypophosphatemia (0.44 mmol/l). Supportive treatment including i.v. potassium infusion was immediately started, and FLC was successfully performed under spinal anesthesia without immediate complications. Supportive treatment was continued at the IMCU. The unexplained persistence of tachycardia (up to 120 bpm) 24 hours after FLC prompted thyroid function tests that showed overt hyperthyroidism ; TPOAb and TRAb were again negative and thyroid ultrasonography was still normal. Both thyroid function tests and hCG plasma levels before FLC were retrospectively assessed on a stored plasma sample obtained at 16 WG and were clearly consistent with a relapse of overt thyrotoxicosis along with a substantial increase of hCG plasma level . Considering that hyperthyroidism was pauci-symptomatic and not related to Graves’ disease, neither beta-blockers nor antithyroid medications were prescribed. Within 1 week following FLC, vomiting had ceased and a significant drop in fT3, fT4 and hCG serum levels was observed; at 19 WG, fT3 and fT4 serum levels had normalized and the patient was discharged. She gave birth to preterm infants by emergency caesarean section at 27 WG in the setting of premature rupture of membranes for twin 1 and breech presentation for twin 2. Both preterm infants were eutrophic for gestational age. Both male twins were admitted in the neonatal intensive care unit (ICU) for respiratory distress syndrome caused by surfactant deficiency. Screening for primary congenital hypothyroidism (Güthrie card) was done at day 4 and was unremarkable in both twins. They were discharged 3 months later. In both twins, weight had reached the target for gestational age.