We describe the case of a premature Bahraini girl born at 29 weeks of gestation by spontaneous vaginal delivery, to a 39-year-old gravida 6 para 5 mother. She was born “flat” with an APGAR score of 4 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes respectively and a birth weight of 910 g. Ventilatory support was required during her first 6 days of life, with a dose of surfactant. She had an uneventful Neonatal Intensive care stay, tolerating breast milk and was gaining weight at a steady pace. On her 47th day of life she developed sepsis and required repeated ventilator support for 3 days. At day 51 she weighed 1400 g, but developed abdominal distension and feed intolerance. She was referred to the pediatric surgeon on day 54 when pneumoperitoneum was detected by a shoot-through lateral plain abdominal film . Our examination showed her abdomen to be distended but soft with mild diffuse tenderness and no signs of peritonitis. There was no abdominal wall erythema or visible bowel loops. We did not find any hernias or abdominal masses. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) was 37 mg/L which is 12 times higher than the normal range. In view of pneumoperitoneum, she was taken for exploratory laparotomy. A classic right transverse upper abdominal incision was used to open her abdomen as the diagnosis was NEC. Her entire small and large bowel was healthy and normal in appearance . Her appendix measured approximately 2 cm in length and was acutely inflamed with a perforation at the tip. Except for the site of perforation, there was no other evidence of gangrene . The findings were consistent with a perforated appendix with no evidence of peritonitis or NEC. An appendectomy was performed. She had a smooth postoperative recovery where she was started on breast milk on the second postoperative day and her CRP was normal on the eighth postoperative day. Histology demonstrated mucosal ulceration of her appendiceal wall, marked acute transmural inflammation, and necrotic wall at the perforated end but the rest had intact mucosal lining . A neuron-specific enolase (NSE) immunohistochemical stain showed positive staining for nerve fibers which excluded Hirschsprung’s disease. She was discharged home at day 120 of life and was thriving at 2-year follow-up.