A 62-year-old female complained of low back pain for 1 month and referred to our institute in April 2016. Previously, the patient was diagnosed as acute leukemia (M2 type) due to fatigue accompanied by remarkably elevated white blood cells in August 2015. From August 2015 to December 2016, she received nine courses of chemotherapy. During this period, she was diagnosed as oral candidiasis because of intermittent fever, oral leukoplakia and ulceration. She received fluconazole and voriconazole treatment successively. However, the anti-fungal courses were interrupted unintendedly because of the digestive side effects and liver function damage.
On physical examination, the patient had a limited range of motion at the lumbar spine and tenderness at L4–5 level. No positive sign was detected for both lower extremities. Serum inflammatory indicators, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and procalcitonin (PCT) showed significant elevation. Immediate magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed collapsed L4–5 disc space and hyperintense on T2-weighed imaging (T2WI) at both intervertebral and paravertebral space, which was speculated to be a suppurative spondylodiscitis . Empirical anti-microbial treatment was implemented for 5 months, but the back pain got worse and subsequent MRI verified that the lesion further expanded to paravertebral psoas space . Computed tomography (CT) depicted more detailed information upon the end plate destruction and vertebral erosion .
Considering the immunosuppressive condition of the patient, an open surgery was abandoned for its high risk of uncontrollable infection. Finally, a posterolateral endoscopic discectomy was adopted to debride the necrotic lesion and to acquire enough tissue for organism culture . The culture result revealed a rare fungi species, Candida tropicalis. Antifungal drug susceptibility test indicated that amphotericin B was the most suitable drug . The patient experienced immediate pain relief after surgery. Systematic anti-fungal drugs together with supportive therapy for more than 1 year showed further clinical improvement and laboratory effectiveness.
However, the patient reported aggravated intermittent claudication and numbness at the left L5 sensory area in March 2019. The white blood cell counting, CRP, ESR, and PCT were all normal at this time. Dynamic roentgenography confirmed the local kyphosis but no evidence of lumbar instability . Compared to the previous imaging, CT scan and MRI showed further collapse of the disc space and bony destruction . Sclerosis at the edges was prominent and no hyperintense T2WI at or around L4–5 level was observed, which suggested the primary elimination of the fungal infection. Therefore, secondary spinal stenosis was considered. Since the patient was in fear of open surgery and firmly requested minimally invasive surgery, we conducted a transforaminal approach endoscopic foraminoplasty and discectomy . The nerve root and dual sac decompression was confirmed by intraoperative visualization and postoperative CT scan and MRI . The patient was satisfied with the procedure and discharged uneventfully.
Unfortunately, the patient returned back again 2 months after her second operation because she experienced rapidly progressed low back and leg pain as well as gut and urine dysfunction. She was immediately arranged for emergency CT scan and MRI. Surprisingly, both CT and MRI presented a cyst-like lesion in the lumbar spinal canal at the L4–5 disc level . The cyst had close connection with the disc, much alike the discal pseudocyst. Since the patient manifested symptoms of cauda equina syndrome, a thorough decompression surgery, i.e., laminectomy and pseudocystectomy together with instrumentation and fusion, was planned after discussions among surgeons and a sufficient informed consent with the patient and her family.
For this case, there were two technical challenges encountered by spinal surgeons. The bony capacity for screws, either the traditional pedicle (TP) screw or the cortical bone trajectory (CBT) screw, reduced because the erosion by the previous infection, especially at the L5 vertebra . Therefore, strength of either instrumentation system was predicted to be biomechanically insufficient. Hence, we utilized the Renaissance robotic system (Mazor Robotics Ltd.) to design a unique “double trajectory system” which contained both TP and CBT screw systems at the same level . Benefit from the cautious preoperative planning and precise intraoperative execution, the K-wire and cannulated screws were eventually inserted successively . Another challenge was the pattern for spinal fusion. As obviously shown in preoperative CT scan , the osseous interface between L4 and L5 vertebral bodies became sclerotic and rugged, which made the interbody fusion difficult and indefinite. Consequently, we decided to implement a more feasible posterolateral fusion instead.
After the laminectomy and elaborative dissection between the dural sac and the pseudocyst, a piecemeal pseudocystectomy was completed . The content of the cyst was serous and the pathology for the cyst wall showed hyperplasia of fibrous tissue without typical presentation of lining cells.
The patient felt instant relief on her back and leg pain after surgery. Postoperative roentgenography confirmed the positions of implanted screws . She felt recovery of her gastrointestinal and urine function except mild numbness at perineum after 1 month. The patient was followed up for 2.5 years and no evidence of recurrence was observed. The bony fusion was observed at the sagittal CT scan . The adjacent L3–4 degeneration and canal stenosis was also obvious but it was asymptomatic . The perioperative information of the three surgeries was listed as Table .