A 73 year-old Japanese woman underwent arthroscopic surgery of the knee for a torn medial meniscus. She had a surgical history of excision of a right frontal meningioma 11 years ago. She was receiving medications for hypertension and hyperlipidemia. She had no history of trauma, headache or coagulation abnormalities.
From around four years before presentation to our center, our patient started to experience right knee pain and was treated at her local hospital with intra-articular injections of hyaluronic acid and physical therapy. She was referred to our center because of deterioration of pain and a catching sensation on the medial side of her right knee joint. Examinations at presentation detected pain from the medial side to the popliteal region of her right knee joint, a restricted range of motion to -10 degree extension and 110 degree flexion and a positive McMurray test. A plain radiograph showed findings of osteoarthritis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a degenerative tear of the medial meniscus. Arthroscopic surgery was scheduled and our patient was admitted.
Spinal anesthesia was conducted by puncturing the L4-5 space with a 26-gauge spinal needle and injecting 2.3 mL of 0.5% isobaric bupivacaine. The puncture was successful on the first attempt, and the course of anesthesia was without incident. During surgery, arthroscopic examination showed wear of the articular cartilage and a degenerative tear of the medial meniscus; partial excision of the medial meniscus was conducted. Her intraoperative vital signs were normal and the surgery was completed uneventfully. The operation time was 87 minutes. At discharge from the operation room, her sensory block region was below the 10th thoracic vertebra.
Our patient used a wheelchair one day after the operation and started physiotherapy on her third postoperative day. There were no symptoms of a postdural puncture headache, and the postoperative course was uneventful. On the fifth postoperative day, our patient started to have a headache with vomiting at 6 a.m. while defecating in the toilet. The severe headache persisted even in a supine position, and her blood pressure was 232/103 mmHg. Pentazocine was administered for the headache. Our patient appeared somnolent but showed no definitive paralytic symptoms. At 9 a.m., a computed tomographic (CT) scan was performed, which showed a subdural hematoma from her left frontal to temporal region. The greatest thickness of the hematoma was 1 cm, and a slight midline shift was observed . MRI performed consecutively did not show an aneurysm, only the subdural hematoma. The size of the hematoma did not change on CT examinations performed six hours and 24 hours later.
Our patient was treated conservatively with blood pressure control, administration of a hemostatic agent and bed rest. Her headache was resolved after seven days of rest. On day 12 after onset, a CT scan showed that the hematoma had reduced in volume and in density , indicating hematoma absorption. Rehabilitation was restarted from the 13th postoperative day. A CT scan one month later showed further reduction in the volume of the hematoma . On the 49th postoperative day, our patient had no subjective symptoms and was discharged.