A 34-year old lady presented with intermittent lower abdominal pain associated with abdominal distension for five months. There was no history of gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea or vomiting and the bowel habits were normal. There was no history of seizures, mental retardation, behaviour problems, and skin abnormalities suggestive of tuberous sclerosis. She had undergone a caesarean section, seven months back. On examination there was a midline reducible incisional hernia with minimal tenderness in the right iliac fossa.
Computed tomography scan demonstrated an unexplained right iliac fossa density, which could represent a caecal or pericaecal abnormality . An infraumbilical incisional hernia containing bowel loops was also seen. Colonoscopy showed erythema at the ileo-caecal junction. Biopsies from this area were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of the mass in the right iliac fossa. It was separate from the caecum and lying inferior to it. The differential diagnosis was an inflammatory mass or a pedunculated lesion from the small bowel such as a pedunculated tumour or even a Meckel's diverticulum. Both ovaries were normal. Operative findings were that of a retroperitoneal mass. Excision of the mass was done with repair of the hernia.
Macroscopically, the tumour was well circumscribed with a thin fibrous capsule and the consistency was soft. The cut surface showed lobules of fatty tissue with bands and nodules of firm white tissue with a whorled appearance .
Microscopic examination showed a lesion composed of lobules of mature fatty tissue harbouring multiple variable sized nodules of smooth muscle fibres. The smooth muscle fibres were arranged in broad interlacing fascicles. No cytological atypia was seen and only one mitotic figure was identified in the multiple sections examined and no necrosis. No proliferation of medium-sized arteries with thick muscular walls was observed. The spindle cells were positive for smooth muscle actin and desmin and negative for CD34 and CD117 . The staining for HMB-45 was not performed, as blocks were not available. The features were those of benign myolipoma (lipoleiomyoma).