A 64-year-old man presented to our emergency department with a lower abdomen crushed between iron plates weighing approximately 2 tons at work. His past medical history included hypertension and hyperlipidemia. His consciousness level on admission was clear, and his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 78/53 mm Hg, heart rate, 133 beats per minute; respiratory rate, 25 breaths/min; blood oxygen saturation, 99% (O2: 10 L/min); and body temperature, 36.1°C. Physical examination revealed that the pulses of the left dorsalis pedis artery were not palpable, and his left limb was cold.
Although blood circulation was barely maintained in this case, we decided to conduct whole-body enhanced CT next to the primary survey because the hybrid ER enabled safe performance of CT even in patients with hemodynamic instability as long as the airway and breathing were intact. Whole-body enhanced CT was conducted six minutes after arrival. The scan showed active intraperitoneal hemorrhage from the mesentery of the small intestine and kidney; adrenal injury with extravasation; stable pelvic ring fracture (left pubis and ischium); right transverse process fracture of the 1st, 2nd, and 5th lumber vertebrae; and common iliac artery occlusion and dissection . Laboratory data showed a serum hemoglobin level of 12.1 g/dL, platelet count of 224 × 103/μL, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio of 1.1, and fibrinogen level of 220 mg/dL. Metabolic acidosis markedly deteriorated with a base excess of −19.1 mmol/L. His Injury Severity Score was 26, the Revised Trauma Score was 6.08, and the probability of survival according to the Trauma and Injury Severity Score method was 63.5%.
After CT, his systolic blood pressure dropped to 50 mm Hg, and crash laparotomy was performed immediately after endotracheal intubation and Resuscitative Endovascular Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (REBOA) via the right femoral artery. Because the patient experienced CPA during laparotomy, we performed chest compression, manually clamped the abdominal aorta, and intravenously injected 1 mg of epinephrine. Two minutes after the cardiac arrest, spontaneous and sustained heart rhythm restarted. We soon established REBOA in Zone I and started controlling the bleeding and contamination for DCS. Intraperitoneal findings showed a tear in the small intestine; the sigmoid was extensively crushed at the root, and bleeding from the small mesentery continued. The retroperitoneal tissue was also severely crushed to an oozing state, and the pulses of the left common iliac artery were not palpable from the bifurcation.
We resected the small intestine (150 cm) without anastomosis and performed a gauze packing of the retroperitoneum. To control damage and intraperitoneal contamination, we selected endovascular treatment for common iliac artery occlusion and performed temporary abdominal closure using ABTHERA™. In addition, we performed transarterial embolization (TAE) for renal and adrenal extravasation using a gelatin sponge. Finally, stent grafting was performed in the left iliac artery .
All examinations and therapeutic procedures were performed within 6 h of arrival: 46 min for surgery, 33 min for TAE, 3 h for stent graft, and 0 min for patient transfer . The intraoperative transfusions included 18 units of packed red blood cells, 20 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 20 units of platelets. A second operation involving ileocecal resection, retroperitoneal tissue repair, and conventional abdominal closure was performed the following day. The patient recovered after overcoming surgical complications and was discharged with only minor gait disturbance on day 143.