51-year old, male patient with a basically insignificant medical history except for arterial hypertension, a recent meniscus surgery, and an appendectomy in childhood was first referred to the Department of Dermatology with a highly suspicious for melanoma mass in the transition from the back to the right gluteus maximus. Post resection, subsequent histopathological workup revealed a superficially spreading, malignant melanoma with a diameter of 3.5 cm and a depth of 3.5 mm. The tumor formula was: pT3 L0 V0 R0. However, due to an only minimally tumor-free margin (approx. 1 mm), yet another surgical resection including puncture of the scintigraphic (28 MBq 99mTc-Nanokoll) defined sentinel lymph node was performed. This subsequent resection revealed the necessary 2 cm safety margin. The lymph node was histopathologically free of malignancy. As part of the extended staging, a whole-body CT was undertaken. Cerebral or pulmonary tumor manifestations could not be detected, however, an unclear lesion of 4.2 × 4.1 × 3.3 cm in size was observed intraabdominally in the left middle abdomen . This exhibited both cystic as well as calcified areas, positive enhancement and the perifocal adipose tissue was imbibed. The lymph nodes along the Aa. iliacae demonstrated moderate, suspicious swelling (up to 15 mm shortest axial diameter). Further malignancy-related findings were not observable. From a radiological point of view, a metastasis of the known melanoma or a primary tumor of the mesentery (e.g. neuroendocrine tumor, gastrointestinal stromal tumor) appeared possible, as well as a benign lesion such as, for example, sclerosing mesenteritis. The lesion was inaccessible to a CT-assisted puncture, therefore after endoscopic tumor exclusion (i.e., gastroscopy, colonoscopy), the decision for surgical exploration was made. Post sparing median upper abdominal laparotomy, the above-described tumor was located within the mesentery, very close to the small intestine and approximately 100 cm post ligament of Treitz. The tumor and the surrounding mesentery presented palpably solid and suggestive of malignancy. A small intestine resection was carried out along with the mesentery to the aorta, so that ultimately 33 cm small intestine and an 18.5 × 11.5 × 3.7 cm large piece of mesentery were resected. The anastomosis was uncomplicated, and the surgery was completed without any complications. The postoperative phase was also uncomplicated, so that we were able to discharge the patient to outpatient follow-up on the fifth postoperative day.
Histopathological analysis revealed angiofollicular hyperplasia (i.e. Castleman disease, ). The lymph node architecture itself was conserved and no evidence of infiltrates of malignant melanoma or any other malignancy was found. The other lymph nodes and the small intestine were completely unremarkable.