The 55 years old male patient received a locking distal tibial plate along with distal fibular plate 3years back from UAE. Now patient came with complaint of non healing ulcer over medial aspect of lower 1/3rd of right leg from past 1 year. Patient was also type 2 diabetic diagnosed 5 years back. Non operative management did not improve the symptoms. The patient consented to implant removal, with the express understanding that implant removal might be impossible because already one failed attempt had been performed at some other hospital six months back. One of the 5 proximal locking screws was removed using the standard screwdriver. Rest of the proximal screws were stripped headed. For their extraction we used the AO synthes screw extraction kit along with conical extraction screw (AO Synthes) but the screws did not come out. The carbide drill was not available at that time. We then decided to proceed with the new technique. The rest of the proximal screws were removed using a technique not previously described. We used stainless steel metal cutting blades that are used to cut door locks or pad locks to cut the remaining stripped headed screws. Firstly, after exposing the plate to be removed a space is created between locking plate and bone adjacent to screws to be cut with the help of sharp osteotome. Then an iron cutting blade which was previously autoclaved introduced between plate and bone adjacent to screws to be cut and with to and fro motion all the remaining screws were cut. The remaining threaded parts of screws were left in the bone because there removal may further weaken the bone. Overall 2 blades were used to cut the 4 screws. Screws were cut with care with slow to and fro motion of blades but with firm pressure on blade to avoid any unnecessary soft tissue injury. It only takes 10 minutes to cut all the remaining 4 proximal screws and there was no heating problem during the cutting of screws as there is with other procedures such carbide drills and high speed burrs. At the end of the procedure, the surgical wound was washed thoroughly with normal saline to remove metal debris. We name this technique as Rohit’s technique for removal of stripped headed/jammed interlocking screws.