A 60-year-old man was scheduled to undergo his third aortic root replacement using a homograft because of infectious endocarditis in the aortic valve. At the age of 58, he underwent Bentall operation, mitral valve replacement, and Maze operation because of aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, and atrial fibrillation. Two months later, because infection with methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci in the artificial vessel was indicated, a second aortic root replacement surgery with coronary artery bypass grafting surgery (CABG) were performed. This time, because he developed a slight fever that persisted for about 3 weeks, he visited our hospital. Infectious endocarditis (IE) in the aortic valve , a false aneurysm in the dorsum of the artificial vessel , and mediastinitis were indicated by echocardiography and computed tomography. As the infection of the artificial vessel was repetitive, a third aortic root replacement using a homograft and CABG were scheduled.
During the hospitalization before the surgery, administration of dopamine, dobutamine, and isoproterenol was started as his circulation dynamics became unstable because of complete atrioventricular block. The examination of blood data before the operation is shown in Supplementary Table . On the operation day, anesthesia was induced with a support of catecholamine, followed by the establishment of a cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) from the femoral artery and vein before starting the operation. Although the operation was difficult and accompanied with bleeding because of severe adhesion attributed to the two previous operations, aortic root replacement using a homograft and CABG were performed as planned; two saphenous vein grafts were connected from the aorta to the left anterior descending artery and right coronary artery. At the time of withdrawal from CPB, we had difficulty in maintaining hemodynamics because of bleeding from the surgical site, which led to hypovolemic shock. Subsequently, his cardiac function deteriorated. Therefore, VA-ECMO was established and the operation was finished.
After the operation, mechanical ventilation and VA-ECMO support were continued in the intensive-care unit. The bleeding from the drains continued. His activated clotting time was in the range of 160 to 180 s without the use of heparin. At postoperation day 1 (POD1), echocardiogram demonstrated cardiac hypofunction, but thrombi were not detected in the right and left atria and ventricles. Improvement of cardiac function was not obtained, pulse pressure decreased gradually, and central venous pressure increased gradually. At POD3, an intrathoracic and pericardial hematoma was suspected and evacuation of hematoma was performed for cardiac tamponade.
The hematoma in the thoracic cavity and pericardium was removed by operation. However, cardiac function was not ameliorated. As the visualization of the ascending aorta by transesophageal echocardiography was unclear , direct echography in the ascending aorta was performed by the operator to observe the inside of the homograft. The homograft was completely occluded by a thrombus , which was about 4 cm long and was located at the origin of the ascending aorta; however, as the surgeon confirmed the bypass graft patent, the entries of the coronary arteries were intact because entries of the coronary arteries were moved to peripheral side by CABG operation. The thrombus inside the homograft was removed and the operation was finished.
After the operation, the pulse pressure was slightly improved but cardiac function was not ameliorated. The patient had brain infarction at POD3 and died at POD5.