A 29-year-old male with no previous medical history presented to us with rapidly progressing dyspnea on exertion. He was admitted to the intensive care unit for further evaluation. His blood investigations showed anemia (hemoglobin 9.7 g/dl), normal renal, and liver function tests. His echocardiography revealed a large cystic mass in the right side of the IVS with hypokinesia of the involved septum and an ejection fraction (EF) of 35% . For further delineation of the cystic mass a CMR was done which revealed a 4.5 × 4.5 cm well-defined hyperintense multilocular cystic lesion in the basal and mid IVS with reduced motion of involved septum and on post-contrast, there was less perfusion in the involved septum and a CMR calculated EF of 35% . Ultrasound abdomen also showed a calcified cystic lesion in the 7th segment of the liver. In view of multiple cystic masses a possibility of hydatid was kept, and he was started on albendazole 400 mg twice daily along with supplemental oxygen (FiO2 0.4 @ 8 l/min). His serology for hydatid was positive. As he was having continuous fever despite anti-parasitic therapy we have started broad spectrum antibiotics (piperacillin–tazobactam and vancomycin). Investigations done to look for any secondary infection were not helpful (blood culture was sterile, urine culture was sterile, procalcitonin was 0.4 ng/ml).
Three days later, his dyspnea worsened with requirement of high amount of oxygen (FiO2 0.6, 15 l/min). Chest X-ray revealed multiple hazy opacities in bilateral lung fields. Contrast enhanced CT chest revealed multiple areas of cavitatory-consolidation and centrilobular nodules with tree in bud appearance and feeding vessel sign . CT pulmonary angiography showed a dilated main pulmonary artery (PA) and filling defects in the segmental and subsegmental PA’s . F18 Deoxy Glucose–Positron Emission tomography (FDG-PET) CT revealed low grade FDG uptake [Standardized uptake value (SUV) max 2.5] in the IVS and FDG avid (SUV max 4.6) multiple cystic lesions in the bilateral lung fields and one of them as a cavitatory lesion in the left upper lobe of the lung with intense FDG uptake (SUV max 10) . Owing to decrease in EF, large size of the cyst and with high risk of rupture, we went ahead with the surgical enucleation of the cyst. After midline sternotomy and heparinization aorto-bicaval cannulation was done. After application of aortic cross clamp and right atrium was opened and septal tricuspid leaflet was retracted. Incision was given in septum just below septal leaflet. Hydatid cyst was removed and septal incision was closed with 4-0 prolene . During cardio pulmonary bypass superior vena cava and inferior vena cava was snared to prevent inflow to the operative field. Right pulmonary artery and left pulmonary artery were also snared to prevent return. After excision of the cyst scolicidal agent 3% hypertonic saline was applied in right atrium and right ventricle and kept there for few minutes. After that right atrium and ventricle was washed with normal saline. After excision of the cyst all snares were removed. As both inflow and outflow were snared, dissemination of cyst and scolicidal agent has not occurred. After decannulation and insertion of chest drain and pacing wire, sternum was closed. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram showed complete excision of the cyst .
Immediately post-surgery, the patient had difficulty in weaning from ventilation and point of care ultrasound showed high pulmonary arterial pressures. He developed refractory hypotension which could not be corrected even with the use of multiple inotropes and vasopressors (noradrenaline, dopamine, vasopressin). His antibiotics were changed to meropenem and vancomycin was continued. Despite the above measures his hypotension worsened and patient developed renal failure and ischemic hepatitis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. He succumbed 2 days later due to multiorgan dysfunction.