The subject is a healthy 30 year old woman of European descent with an uneventful medical history. There was a large (approximately 9 mm in diameter; large arrow Figure ) common wart on the middle knuckle of the right hand as well as 23 smaller warts (1 mm to 4 mm) at the base of and behind the knuckle of the index finger (small arrows, Figure ). The large wart was first noticed 9 years earlier. Within 1-2 years it had reached its maximum size as well as spread to multiple surrounding sites. Because of her occupation as a piano teacher, the subject reported experiencing considerable psychological distress over the visibility of the warts and the need to frequently use her hands in front of others. Over the course of the previous 2 years, several treatments for common warts on the right hand were unsuccessful despite perfect compliance. The treatments attempted included two courses of essential oil blends which were applied to all warts three times daily as directed. The initial preparation was marketed OTC for wart treatment, guaranteed by the manufacturer to be effective within 8 weeks, and consisted of cedrus, lycea, malaleuca alternafolia, and limonium. After 3 months of perfect application resulted in no change, a second specially-formulated stronger blend was applied three times daily for an additional 2 months. This consisted of a stronger concentration of the same aforementioned essential oils plus juniper and cypress. It resulted in no change. The second unsuccessful treatment was an OTC 40% salicylic acid preparation that was applied only to the large wart for 3 months of daily application. The salicylic acid treatment resulted in very little benefit and a plateau effect after 3 weeks with no further improvement. A third unsuccessful treatment was apple cider vinegar applied to two of the smaller warts. The supradermal portion of the warts sluffed off after a few days of apple cider vinegar treatment, but promptly regrew. In addition, this treatment resulted in moderate to severe irritation of the surrounding skin.
Throughout the course of the failed attempts at treatment, the number of warts increased. All warts had returned to their original appearance prior to treatment with vitamin A. The source of vitamin A was natural fish liver oil (NOW® Foods, 25,000 IU softgels, Manufacturer SKU: 733739003409). A needle was used to puncture the softgels and the oil was applied topically to the warts every night prior to sleep. The oil was allowed to soak into the tissue before the excess oil was removed with a dry towel. Soap was not used to wash the hands until the morning. On 3-4 days of the week, the oil was applied a second time, usually around midday. The daily topical application of vitamin A led to replacement of all the warts with normal skin. Most of the smaller warts had been replaced with normal skin by 70 days . The largest wart on the middle knuckle of the right hand, although replaced by mostly normal tissue after 4 months of treatment , required 6 months of vitamin A treatment to completely resolve . The slight discoloration of the tissue likely represents residual scar tissue from prior unsuccessful treatments. Interestingly, during the course of treatment three tiny warts on the left hand also disappeared even though vitamin A was not applied to them.