On May 10, 2016, a 47-year-old man was referred to our clinic for recurrent vision loss and relative central scotoma in the left eye. He had had two previous CSC episodes in 2015. Any other medical history or drug use was denied. Visual acuity was 20/20 in his right eye and 20/50 in his left eye.
Intraocular pressure, eye movements, and anterior segment examination were unremarkable in both eyes. Dilated funduscopic examination demonstrated some hyperpigmented retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) lesions in the right eye and retinal elevation in the macular region of the left eye . The patient was diagnosed with CSC recurrence in the left eye and pachychoroid pigment epitheliopathy (PPE) in the right eye after receiving color fundus photography (CFP), fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), indocyanine green angiography (ICGA), and optical coherence tomography (OCT) examinations . The patient chose to receive photodynamic therapy (PDT) treatment in a local hospital.
On November 10, 2016, he presented again for an assessment of the left eye. Visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 10/20 in the left eye. His right eye remained stable while CFP, FFA, ICGA, and OCT examinations confirmed CSC recurrence in the left eye. However, the PED was resolved spontaneously while he was still in our clinic and recurred the next morning . The OCT image taken on his arrival at our clinic showed the existence of a PED, which was flatter than 5 months ago . However, about two and a half hours later, a second OCT scan showed the absence of his PED . A third OCT scan taken about 5 h later in the afternoon definitively confirmed the resolution of the PED again . The patient was asked to return to the clinic the next morning. To our surprise, the OCT image showed the recurrence of PED . This time, the patient was asked to receive regular follow-ups to monitor the disease progression.
The same situation was observed again on December 1, 2016, that is, the PED appeared in the morning of the first day, was completely absorbed in the afternoon, and recurred the next morning. This time dilated FFA or ICGA examinations were not conducted so the influence of contrast agents (sodium fluorescein and indocyanine green) and mydriatic drugs can be excluded.
The pattern of spontaneous resolution of PED within the day was continuously observed in several next follow-ups. During this period, we have tried many ways to explore the possible external factors that may affect the PED. We tried to use the single-line scanning mode to image the PED quickly instead of using the time-consuming multi-line scanning mode, so as to eliminate the possible impact of long-time OCT or infrared (IR) imaging on PED. Besides, the patient was required to sit still in a comfortable chair during the examinations to avoid the possible impact of physical activity and nervousness on his PED. He was also asked to avoid consuming tea, coffee, chocolate, cola, and other foods that might excite him two days before and on the day of the examination. However, all these changes did not accelerate or slow down the resolution of PED.
His last follow-up to show the spontaneous resolution pattern of PED was on August 10, 2017 . Consistent with previous follow-ups, this time the PED also appeared in the morning and disappeared in the afternoon. One year later, when the patient came back, visual acuity dropped to 20/100 in the left eye. OCT scans showed that there was sub-foveal RPE atrophy instead of a PED . In the following two years, the RPE atrophy slightly enlarged, and the patient’s visual acuity eventually decreased to 20/200 at his most recent visit . From the discovery of time-dependent recurrence and resolution of his PED to his last follow-up, his right eye kept a visual acuity of 20/20. The patient was a non‑smoker, and no drugs were used during the follow-ups. The patient had good sleep quality and a well-regulated lifestyle. No other concomitant diseases were found despite general and ophthalmic examinations.