A 38-year-old Japanese woman came to our institute with a complaint of epigastric pain after meals. She had no medical history and no exposures to plants or animals prior to her hospital stay or invasive procedures. She never smoked tobacco and was not an alcohol consumer. She was diagnosed as having acute cholangitis induced by stone based on symptoms and laboratory findings , and was admitted . Her body temperature was 37.1 °C, blood pressure 97/57 mmHg, and heart rate 85/minute. She did not exhibit any jaundice. An abdominal examination revealed tenderness on the epigastric portion. No rebound tenderness was confirmed. Her cardiac, respiratory, and neurological examinations were normal. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) findings showed gallstones with gallbladder wall thickening . Antibiotic therapy of sulbactam (SBT)/cefoperazone (CPZ) was started empirically at the same time. When undergoing endoscopic nasobiliary drainage, she had a high fever and two sets of blood cultures were obtained on day 6. Growth of Gram-negative rods was reported in both aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures within 24 hours on BACTEC™ (BD, Tokyo, Japan). Antibiotic therapy of meropenem (MEPM) was started empirically. Our patient’s clinical condition and laboratory data improved rapidly. After 3 days of intravenously administered MEPM, the antibiotic therapy was switched to orally administered levofloxacin (LVFX) 500 mg daily for another 7 days according to microbiological sensitivity. The infection did not recur and she was discharged on day 28. During 1 year, recurrence of the infection was not observed.
First, the pathogen by positive blood culture was identified as Klebsiella ozaenae by means of a MALDI Biotyper® (Bruker Daltonics). Subsequently, genetic investigation by 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) analysis was performed in order to identify this organism. Finally, the pathogen was identified as P. dispersa with 100% homology (1343 of 1343 bases) on the EZ taxonomy database . We also conducted additional biochemical tests using API® 50 CH kit, according to previous reports to confirm the isolate as P. dispersa. The organism had no activities of esculin and salicin, and had activities of lactose, melibiose, and gentiobiose, which were consistent with P. dispersa .
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed according to Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) criteria for Enterobacteriaceae using the newly developed, fully automated microbiology system, RAISUS (Nissui Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Tokyo). The organism was susceptible to all antimicrobial agents tested, including ampicillin, cefazolin, gentamicin, LVFX, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole .