A 73-year-old man was hospitalized for chronic diarrhea and serum creatinine of 8.4 mg/dL (vs. 1.2, 1.8, and 3.1, respectively, 4 months, 5 weeks, and 8 days earlier) . He had a past history of chronic alcoholism, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, heart failure, and hypothyroidism (all resolved or controlled).
On examination, he appeared chronically ill, afebrile, alert, and fully oriented. Blood pressure was 121/75 mmHg. O2 saturation was normal. He weighed 68 Kg, 2 Kg lighter than 3 months ago. His lungs were clear and heart rhythm was sinus. His abdomen and extremities were normal, without edema or asterixis.
Admission blood tests were remarkable for creatinine of 8.4 mg/dL, which quickly became 11 mg/dL despite fluids . HCO3 was 19 mM (22–29 mM). Anion gap was 14. Ca was 10.4 mg/dL (normal 8.5–10.5 mg/dL). Ionized Ca was high at 1.24 mM. Phosphorus was 4 mg/dL (normal 2.5–8.5 mg/dL). CBC was abnormal for hemoglobin of 9.2 g/dL and persistent megaloblastosis. Urine pH was 5. Specific gravity was 1.020, without casts or eosinophils. Urine protein:creatinine ratio was 1.2. Kidneys were 10.1 × 7.4 × 5.1 cm (right) and 10.6 × 3.8 × 4 cm (left) on ultrasound.
Serial creatinine suggested chronic slowly-progressive failure, until 5 weeks ago, when creatinine rose abruptly. Since there was no history or evidence for diabetes, accelerated hypertension, nephritis, contrast dye, sepsis, allergic reactions, obstruction, thrombo-emboli, or volume overload or depletion, we postulated nephrotoxins exposure at home to explain his slow, insidious relentless renal impairment. Diet scrutiny revealed excessive beans and chocolate, rich in oxalate. Medication review showed daily 5 mg lisinopril, 75 μg levothyroxine, 800 mg MgO, 650 mg CaCO3, 500 mg niacin, 10,000 IU vitamin A, 500 mg vitamin C, and a multivitamin with 180 mg of vitamin C.
Since urinalysis was negative and proteinuria was minimal, oxalate-induced tubulointerstitial nephritis was proposed, given history of alcoholism, chronic diarrhea, and high-dose vitamin C. On day 2, 24-hour urine was submitted for oxalate. Given his weight loss, renal failure, and hypercalcemia, multiple myeloma was considered unlikely given negative serum and urine protein electrophoresis and negative bone marrow exam. Other causes for hypercalcemia were excluded by normal PTH, PTH-related peptide, 1,25 (OH)2 vit D, 25 OH vit D, alkaline phosphatase, and free T4. Neoplasms were excluded by CT scans of chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and endoscopies.
His creatinine continued to rise despite drinking plenty of fluids and stopping lasix and lisinopril . Salt depletion was excluded by lack of fall in creatinine despite several liters of saline, arguing against dehydration as the cause for his acute renal failure. While still waiting for urine oxalate results, which were delayed due to erroneous submission of un-acidified aliquot, we stopped vitamin C on day 4. Hypercalcemia was attributed to CaCO3, vitamins A and D, as it resolved off these agents. Diarrhea was attributed to MgO, vitamin A, and niacin, all known to have cathartic potential. Indeed, diarrhea resolved once they were stopped. These responses reinforced the suspicion of nephrotoxic "over-the-counter" medications.
He received 6 hemodialysis treatments to correct metabolic acidosis (that otherwise reduces urine citrate and predisposes to Ca precipitation and to remove excess oxalate (from presumed enhanced absorption and impaired excretion). Discontinuation of vitamin C resulted in slow steady recovery of renal function. Within days, serum creatinine started falling and continued spontaneously . Nine days after his last dialysis, creatinine was 3.1 mg/dL. Six weeks later, while on metolazone (to reduce urine Ca), a low oxalate diet, and 100 mg daily vitamin B6, his creatinine was 1.8 mg/dL. It stayed there 3 months after presentation. Urine oxalate to creatinine ratio steadily decreased, from 0.084 pre-treatment to 0.02 (normal < 0.035) .
The presumptive diagnosis of oxalate-induced interstitial nephritis was confirmed on day 14 by a renal biopsy, showing extensive interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy , and diffuse intraluminal birefringent crystals under polarized light . CAT scan documented scattered renal calcifications and a 1-cm calculus . Urine from day 2 showed increased oxalate:creatinine ratio excretion of 0.084 , biochemically corroborating the clinical diagnosis and biopsy findings.
The hyperoxaluria was attributable to vitamin C, as it resolved on discontinuation of vitamin C (urine oxalate:creatinine ratio 0.052, Fig ). A low oxalate diet further reduced this ratio to 0.039 and to 0.028 . We did not measure urine citrate during his peak renal failure since severe metabolic acidosis is expected to non-specifically suppress excretion. However, 11 and 30 days post-discharge, when serum HCO3 approached normal (22 and 21 mM) and creatinine substantially improved (4.6 and 2.9 mg/dL), we still documented markedly reduced urine citrate (respectively, 14 mg and 18 mg per gram of creatinine; normal being ≥ 250). These results suggest significant ongoing metabolic acidosis preceding or paralleling the steady rise in serum creatinine in previous months.