A 3-year-old boy born to non-consanguineous parents of Chinese/Malaysian ethnicity presented at 2 months of age with acute respiratory distress requiring mechanical ventilation and an interstitial pneumonitis on X-ray . Bronchoalveolar lavage identified Pneumocystis jirovecii by both PCR and immunofluorescence. He was treated with co-trimoxazole and made a full recovery . Immunological work up performed at the time revealed normal immunoglobulin levels, with CD4+ and CD8+ lymphopenia . The CD8+ count normalized rapidly but his CD4+ lymphopenia persisted until he was 5 months of age. CD19+ B cell and NK cell numbers were normal; however, the B cell numbers climbed and have remained high (range 2.5–6.0 × 109/L—reference range 0.2–2.1 × 109/L). T cell immunophenotyping identified no abnormality . Mitogen-specific T-cell blastogenesis with phytohemagglutinin (PHA) was preserved; however, T-cell stimulation with anti-CD3 in early life was absent, and stimulation with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 at 9 months of age was reduced threefold compared with a control sample . He displayed features of global developmental delay at 7 months and was noted to be hypertonic floppy with normal deep tendon reflexes and a normal MRI of the brain. These features improved slowly and required intensive allied health (physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and dietician) support that is ongoing. He had failure to thrive complicated by frequent vomiting necessitating insertion of a gastrostomy at 10 months of age. Endoscopy revealed a thickened (but non-occlusive) pyloric antrum. He developed acral erythematous papules and vesicles on his upper and lower limbs. Skin biopsy revealed superficial subcorneal neutrophil microabscess formation with superficial and deep dermal and subcutaneous neutrophilia . Neutrophils were also present within the lumen of a sweat duct. There was no evidence of vasculitis, although interstitial leukocytoclasis was present. The acral papules gradually resolved around 9 months while the skin of his extremities demonstrated a livedo racemosa pattern . Notably, at the time of presentation he had raised inflammatory markers; however, these decreased to within normal range when tested during a routine follow-up (CRP < 3 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate < 14 mm/h) .
The patient was managed as a primary immunodeficiency with prophylactic co-trimoxazole and immunoglobulin replacement. He did not suffer from any further significant infections. Co-trimoxazole was ceased at 2 years of age and immunoglobulin replacement ceased at 21 months of age, since when he has remained free of infections. The patient underwent routine immunization and demonstrated adequate post vaccination serological responses.
At 33 months, the patient developed a pulmonary hypertensive crisis episode characterized by hypoxia following minor stimulation. Electrocardiogram suggested right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy, subsequently confirmed by echocardiogram which demonstrated suprasystemic pulmonary hypertension and a pressure loaded RV. Notably cardiac echocardiogram performed at age 21 months was normal. High resolution computed tomography of the chest to identify a pulmonary cause was abandoned due to hypertensive crises on stimulation. He was subsequently started on the pulmonary specific vasodilator, sildenafil.
To establish if there was a genetic cause of this disease, whole genome sequencing (WGS) was performed on the family trio. This identified a novel de novo missense variant c.852G>T in exon 7 of 8 in the gene TMEM173, encoding p.Arg284Ser in the protein STING . The variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing, and is not present in the Exac database . In silico analysis predicted the mutation to be pathogenic based on; the physiochemical difference between arginine and serine (Grantham score 110); SIFT prediction (deleterious), PolyPhen (probably damaging), CADD (scaled = 26.7), mutation taster (disease causing), and Provean (deleterious). Interestingly, a previous case report documented a different de novo change in the same amino acid residue; c850A>G (pArg284Gly, R284G) in a patient suffering from SAVI with upregulation of IFN genes secondary to constitutive STING activation .
We hypothesized the substitution of a serine for an arginine at position 284 in TMEM173 would result in constitutive activation of STING and consequently, autoinflammatory disease charactered by IFNαβ and NF-κB activation. To investigate this, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from patient blood samples and analyzed for mRNA expression of ISGs and inflammatory cytokines by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Compared to healthy controls (HCs) our patient showed an IFN-gene signature with markedly raised levels of IFNB1 and the ISGs IFNA1, ISG15, IRF7, and MX1 supporting the diagnosis of an interferonopathy . We also interrogated the mRNA expression of several NF-κB-dependent inflammatory cytokines: TNF, IL6, and IL1B. Interestingly, while TNF was not elevated, IL6 and IL1B were significantly upregulated .
We next sought to directly determine if R284S triggers STING activation. STING expression plasmids encoding R284S and other known SAVI mutations were created by site-directed mutagenesis for in vitro studies. We then transfected HEK293T cells with wild-type (WT) and mutant versions of STING before assessing IFNβ and NF-κB activation using luciferase reporter systems. The R284S mutant STING induced high IFNβ activity compared to WT STING, similar to the previously published STING GoF mutants . We further found that all SAVI mutants assayed, including R284S, induced markedly enhanced NF-κB activation compared to WT STING . Therefore, in vitro analysis confirms R284S as a pathogenic GoF STING mutation.
After confirming the diagnosis of an interferonopathy, the patient was treated with a combination of oral prednisolone (2 mg/kg/day) and the JAK 1/2 inhibitor Ruxolitinib (5 mg daily) which was well tolerated. His mobility and demeanor improved within days of steroid therapy including quality of sleep, respiratory effort, and cessation of his frequent vomiting episodes. His appetite improved, with weight gain of approximately 1.5 kg in 4 weeks. Serial weight velocity has subsequently increased from <3rd to 20th percentile in 5 months. His pulmonary pressures became sub-systemic within 8 weeks of sildenafil, steroids, and Ruxolitinib therapy. Initial steroid therapy coincided with a notable neurodevelopmental improvement. He made rapid gains in mobility (gross motor), self-feeding (fine motor), sleep/social interactions (personal social), and receptive speech (communication) compared to previous years while on intensive support. This correlated with a reduction in ISGs and inflammatory cytokines in the patient PBMCs following 6 months of treatment . However, the lividinous rash persisted, and 6 months later the patient developed complete loss of his nasal septum while continuing on Ruxolitinib therapy. There was partial recrudescence of his gastrostomy feed related vomiting when his steroids were weaned. In summary, the treatment regime resulted in an excellent systemic response; however, it is possible that some tissue specific processes may remain uncontrolled.