The patient is a 7 years and 5 months old boy who has been adopted at birth with no information about the biological parents, therefore we were unable to realize an adequate family investigation with a pedigree and a molecular analysis for the biological mother. The patient had a normal development until he reached 6 years and 11 months old when he suddenly showed hearing difficulties, a decline in visual acuity and a hyperactivity. He also became violent and failed in school.
The neurological examination revealed pyramidal syndrome of the lower limbs, walking difficulties and cerebellar ataxia. Besides, MRI images were consistent with active demyelination as usually observed in childhood cerebral ALD. A high bilateral symmetrical signal intensity was detected in T2 and Flair within the pons and midbrain. Furthermore, a low signal intensity was found in T1 and a diffuse high signal intensity of the white matter in T2 and Flair within the parietal-occipital area and the splenium of corpus callosum .
Visual evoked potential (VEP) and brainstem auditory evoked potential (BAEP) tests have shown that both visual and auditory pathways evoked potential damage. Serum cortisol level reveals that the adrenal glands were not affected. VLCFAs analysis by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) revealed high levels of C24/C22 and C26/C22 ratio in plasma.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples using standard phenol–chloroform extraction method. The DNA concentration and purity were determined using a nanodrop spectrophotometer (NanoVue™-NV - General Eletrics Healthcare Limited, UK). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primer pairs of the ABCD1 coding regions were designed following the NCBI Reference Sequence: NM_000033.3 .
DNA sequence analysis of the ten coding exons of ABCD1 gene, including the flanking region of each exon (exon-intron boundaries) was performed using conventional Sanger sequencing. DNA samples were first amplified in a final volume of 25 μl containing: 1× reaction buffer, 1× Q-Solution, 200 μM of each dNTP, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 μM of primers, 2.5 U Hotstar Taq polymerase and 50 ng of genomic DNA (Qiagen GmBH, Hilden, Germany). PCR conditions were as follows: denaturation at 95 °C for 15 min; 94 °C for 1 min; 60 °C- for 1 min; and 72 °C for 1 min for 35 cycles followed by a 10 minute final extension at 72 °C. PCR products were electrophoresed on a 1 % agarose gel and visualized with ethidium bromide staining under ultraviolet light to verify their size and quantity. All the PCR products were treated with exonuclease I and shrimp alkaline phosphatase enzymes prior to sequencing according to the following protocol: 37 °C for 40 min and 80 °C for 15 min. The sequencing reaction was performed on the purified products using the BigDye Terminator v 1.1 Standard Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Electrophoresis of samples was performed on the 3100 ABI Applied Biosystems sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
A mutation was identified in the exon 7 of the ABCD1 gene, with C substituted by G at nucleotide 1677, corresponding to the stop codon at the residue 559.
The ALDP potentially generated by the appearance of the stop codon exclude a part of exon 7, 8, 9 and 10 coding for the ATP binding domain .