A 64-year-old Chinese female patient admitted to a tertiary care cancer hospital was presented with abdominal unease due to increased stool frequency and bloody stools. Digital rectal examination revealed adenocarcinoma, computerized tomography (CT) imaging identified inguinal nodule shadow and enlarged lymph nodes, which implied the presence of rectal cancer. Further, a mediastinal aortic arch nodule shadow indicated metastasis. Subsequent histopathological examination of the biopsy confirmed the rectal adenocarcinoma. The patient got admitted to the general surgery department in January 2016 and underwent Miles’ resection to remove the distal portion of the pelvic colon, followed by intestinal adhesion release surgery that relieved the intestinal obstruction. Iliac vessel exploration facilitated containment of the hemorrhagic episodes. Post-operative histopathological results reported ulcerative and moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (in the rectum and part of the sigmoid colon) with the invasion of adventitia. Based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM classification system, the tumor stage was T3, N0, M0 (IIA). Genetic profiling of the tumor resections detected wild-type KRAS codon 12 and 13 mutations. Also, MSI analysis for detecting germline mutations of MMR genes showed microsatellite-stable (MSS) phenotype. The adjuvant chemotherapy regimen consisted of three cycles of oral capecitabine 1.5-g tablets (twice daily) and oxaliplatin 200 mg from February 2016, followed by four cycles of capecitabine tablets 1.5 g (twice daily). Additional file illustrates a detailed pictorial case presentation. The patient’s medical history included a cesarean section 30 years ago and no familial history of hematological disorders. The physical examination and vital signs were within normal limits. Blood biochemistry and renal and hepatic function tests showed no anomaly either. Additional file elaborates the detailed physical examination results.
On the 27th month (April 2018), a follow-up CT screening from the first surgery revealed vegetative tumor growth in the perineum requiring surgical management. In July 2018, the patient had transperineal pelvic tumor resection to stem the local recurrence of the tumor with the TNM staging of T3, N×, M1a (IVA). Histopathological examination showed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma and infiltration/metastasis associated with the invasion of the skin. All surgical margins were free of residual tumor. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated positive expression of CDX-2, cytokeratin 20 (CK20) homeobox, and villin proteins, while cytokeratin 7 (CK7) protein demonstrated negative expression. First-line adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of irinotecan 240 mg/m2 + levoflofolate 150 mg + fluorouracil 0.6 g (intravenous) was initiated. Additionally, fluorouracil 0.9 g was administered to the patient as an infusion. The patient showed stable disease progression during the treatment, with an adverse reaction of Grade 3 gastrointestinal discomfort. However, during a follow-up CT screening in December 2018, a small inguinal nodule was found on the left side without any discomfort. By March 2019, the tubercle size increased gradually even with oral homeopathic treatment (cantharis capsule) by Heishi County Third People's Hospital (unknown specifics) with a poor prognosis. The further enlargement of the nodules called for another screening. CT scan indicated multiple metastatic tumors, rectal fistula, and enlargement of bilateral inguinal lymph nodes. Due to further enlargement of nodules with the formation of gall stones and enlarged inguinal lymph nodes, the patient received local bilateral inguinal radiography for bilateral inguinal lesions to a dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions. Follow-up CT imaging showed recurrent metastasis, due to which following the subsequent modification of second-line chemotherapeutic regimen to bevacizumab 400 mg + oxaliplatin 200 mg + capecitabine 1.5 g (twice daily) was given for 14 days. However, due to adverse gastrointestinal reaction (Grade > 3) caused by due to oral capecitabine, the capecitabine dose was reduced to 1 g, this modified second-line chemotherapeutic regimen was led to an interruption in chemo regimen, following which bevacizumab 400 mg + oxaliplatin 200 mg + capecitabine 1 g (twice daily) was started and given for a single cycle in January 2020. The multiple rounds of chemotherapy showed partial response with recurrence of multiple nodules and masses. A follow-up CT imaging in March 2020 showed disease progression, additionally presented nodule formation in the left upper lobe and right lower lobe, with an iso-dense nodule. The TNM status at this instance was T3, N×, M1b (IVB).
Further, the patient tested positive for hepatic C virus, following which an oral administration of Jisandai (Bantongsha) that is sofosbuvir 400 mg and velpatasvir 100 mg as a composite tablet once a day was administered. Adverse effects included tooth pain caused by gingivitis, which was cured by oral administration of ornidazole 500 mg twice daily. Following recurrence of rectal adenocarcinoma, regorafenib was administered at 120 mg once daily combined with sintilimab 200 mg five times a day, and the patient's progress was followed up (as an out-patient once every week). Eventually, the sintilimab dosage was tapered to 100 mg four times a day due to economic reasons. CT scans of the chest and abdomen suggested that treatment achieved a complete response (CR). During the last follow-up in April 2020, re-examination by CT imaging showed that the bilateral inguinal area had multiple nodules and masses, some of which were slightly smaller than the previous assessment. Follow-up CT imaging showed the absence of the frontal lobe iso-dense nodule that was present before. There were no severe adverse events, and the patient presented good overall performance status. The patient also received prophylactic treatment for hepatitis C. Additional file briefly outlines the reports of the medical imaging history. The clinical effect of regorafenib plus sintilimab was classified as CR according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1 criteria, and the patient exhibited no tumor progression. CT imaging could not identify the presence of metastasis. The predictors of efficacy of regorafenib combined with sintilimab remain to be further analyzed.