A 43-year-old Chinese man, admitted into the inpatient cardiovascular ward on the 9th July 2011, was diagnosed with anterior acute myocardial infarction (AMI) after more than 12 hours following the onset of symptoms. A transradial CAG via the right radial artery was planned to be performed one week later, before the PCI. Physical examination of the patient before the procedures found no functional disabilities of both arms and the hands were warm and well perfused. Strong palpable pulse of the arteries could also be felt at both wrists and Allen’s test was positive. Under the guidance of the pulse, the right distal artery was successfully punctured. However, the guidewire could not traverse through smoothly subsequently.
Therefore as a routine, arteriography of right upper-limb arteries was performed to delineate the anatomic features. The arteriogram of the right arm showed an absence of the radial artery (see Figure ) and the arteriogram of the left upper limb arteries were also discovered to be similar to the right (see Figure ). Thus, CAG and PCI were performed via the brachial artery since transradial PCI failed.
The patient had no history of operation or trauma. Right upper extremity arteriography (see Figure ) revealed that the radial artery, arising from the brachial or axillary artery, was not present and the anterior interosseous artery was unusually large in size. The anterior interosseous artery which coursed vertically between radius and ulna in the distal forearm branches off into two small lateral arteries to supply blood to the hands. One of the branches curled round the carpus and anastomosed with the branches of the ulnar artery, whereas the other branch traversed to radialis and became large-caliber vessel. Distal ulnar artery was small in size and together with the interosseous artery supplied blood to the hands. No other vessel that coursed distally with resemblance to the radial artery was observed. An additional movie file shows this in more detail [see Additional file
].
Left upper extremity arteriography (see Figure ) revealed exactly the same pattern, vessels of both forearms were symmetrical in course, An additional movie file shows this in more detail [see Additional file
].