The 24-year-old South-Asian female, primigravida, presented at 31 weeks of gestation with epigastric pain for 6 hours. The pain was sharp, radiating to the back and was worse on lying supine. Pain was associated with fever, nausea, and vomiting for the same duration. The patient denied any history of recent infection, or of consuming any new medication or herbal drugs. The patient was only on iron and folic acid supplements during the course of her pregnancy. The patient was a nonsmoker and had never consumed alcohol. Her past medical, surgical, and family history were not significant. The patient was a housewife and comes from a middle-class family. Her obstetric follow-up was uneventful so far. The patient received the first dose of the Pfizer vaccine 1 week prior to the onset of symptoms.
On general examination, the patient was conscious, oriented, and alert. Heart rate of 106 beats per minute, blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg, body temperature of 101°F, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 98% in room air were recorded. On abdominal examination, no obvious skin rashes were visualized in the abdomen. There was abdominal distension with gravid uterus and severe epigastric tenderness. The cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurological examinations were unremarkable.
The initial blood investigations revealed a total leukocyte count of 17 × 109/L, serum lipase of 4376 U/L, and serum amylase of 83 U/L. An ultrasound scan of the abdomen showed features of pancreatitis. Her gall bladder was normal and no gallstones were seen. Acute pancreatitis was diagnosed and treated with intravenous hydration, antibiotics (intravenous ceftriaxone 1 g twice daily for 7 days), proton pump inhibitors (intravenous pantoprazole 40 mg twice daily for 5 days), and pain relief (intravenous paracetamol 1 g every 6 hours for 3 days) in the intensive care unit (ICU). A real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase-chain-reaction (rRT-PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 screening was done prior to admission and was negative. On the second day of admission, the patient had a spontaneous vaginal delivery and the baby was shifted to the neonatal ICU in a stable condition. In view of ongoing upper abdomen pain, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was performed, which revealed bulky pancreas with mild enhancement and marked peripancreatic fat stranding with inflammation, suggestive of acute interstitial edematous pancreatitis . Over the next 48 hours, her pain settled and slowly oral intake was encouraged. Blood cultures taken at admission were sterile. The pancreatic enzymes on day 4 of admission were in the normal range. Her diet was changed to regular after the improvement of symptoms, and the patient was discharged in a stable condition on day 7. She was reviewed at 1 month and again after 6 months in the clinic and has remained stable since then.
Detailed evaluation of all possible etiologies for pancreatitis did not reveal any specific etiology. Her liver function tests, calcium, and triglycerides were normal since admission . Her antinuclear antibody(ANA) was negative. Her ultrasound done at admission and a magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) at 3 weeks did not show any gallstones. Her pancreatic duct was normal and there was no abnormal pancreaticobiliary union.