A 46-year-old man presented to our hospital with the chief complaint of recently recurrent chest pain.
The patient had no history of present illness.
He had a history of hemangioma of the bilateral carotid artery that had been surgically removed in 2003 and 2018.
The patient had no personal or family history.
The patient’s heart rate was 125 beats/min, and blood pressure was 134/76 mmHg. There were no other abnormal findings on physical examination.
Electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia (heart rate 125 beats/min) . Other laboratory examinations are shown in Table .
Echocardiography revealed a 4.26 cm × 2.98 cm intracardiac mass in the right atrioventricular groove, which was wrapped around the proximal segment of the right coronary artery . Coronary artery computed tomography (CT) showed that abnormal blood vessels were present between the right atrium and right ventricle, indicating that there might be a fistula between the right coronary artery and right atrium or a right coronary artery malformation. Coronary angiography (CAG) demonstrated that there were abundant blood vessels from the proximal segment of the right coronary artery that were wrapped around and supplied the intracardiac mass in the right atrioventricular groove . Positron emission tomography/CT suggested that the intracardiac mass in the right atrioventricular groove was a malignant tumor .
Normetanephrine blood level was 950.5 pg/mL, which was 5.8 times the upper limit of the normal range (normal range, < 163 pg/mL). The level of metanephrine and 3-methoxytryramine in the blood and vanillylmandelic acid in urine were all normal.
Considering his symptoms, physical examination, history, and laboratory examinations, we suspected that the intracardiac mass was a paraganglioma. The patient was referred to the Department of Cardiac Surgery. Open heart surgery was performed, and a dark red intracardiac mass was found located in the right atrioventricular groove. The right coronary artery crossed over the intracardiac mass. The mass, which was 3 cm × 2.5 cm × 2 cm in size, was completely excised. When the mass was cut open, it showed a solid content dark red in color . Quick freezing pathology indicated that the intracardiac mass was a malignant mesenchymal tumor, and a hemangiosarcoma could not be excluded. The combination of immunohistochemistry results and final pathology results demonstrated that the intracardiac mass was a cardiac paraganglioma. Given the patient’s history of surgery for bilateral carotid hemangioma in 2003 and 2018, we considered whether this hemangioma could also be a paraganglioma. On magnetic resonance imaging, an obvious mass in the left neck was observed. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the following parameters: Synaptophysin (positive), chromogranin A (positive), Ki67 (3% positive), CD56 (positive), S100 (positive), CD34 (vascular positive), and epithelial membrane antigen (negative) . The combination of pathology and immunohistochemistry results demonstrated that the bilateral carotid masses were also paragangliomas.