A 28-year-old woman, with a history of type 1 diabetes mellitus (HbA1c = 14,9%) since the age of 12, poorly controlled despite intensified insulin treatment, who worked as a salesperson in a ladies garment department, which entailed long standing hours, was referred to our Diabetic Foot Clinic due to severe symmetrical oedema in both feet/ankles for at least 8 months without fever or other joint swelling. There was no history of recent trauma. Her body mass index (BMI) was 22,5 kg/m2, and she was non-smoker. She was not taking any other medicine except insulin. She had nothing to mention in her past medical history except two episodes of complicated urinary tract infections.
The patient had been hospitalised few months ago in another hospital for the same reason without been diagnosed.
Upon clinical examination, she had excessive bilateral ankle swelling . Both ankle joints were warm, but she had no foot ulceration, open wounds, or other deformity. Both feet had a loss of sensation, with abnormal monofilament and biothesiometer examination, as well as abnormal Neuropad® test. Thermal sensitivity was not evaluated. The peripheral arterial foot pulses were normal.
Except from the abnormal Neuropad test, she did not have any other symptoms or signs of autonomic neuropathy.
Blood tests showed normal white blood cells (WBC) count (6900/μL) and slightly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): 56 mm/h, and C-reactive protein (CRP): 16,4 mg/L (normal values < 3). The levels of serum albumin, serum creatinine, transaminases, uric acid and electrolytes were between normal ranges. Urine microalbumin test did not detect albuminuria. Abdominal ultrasound and echocardiogram were normal. Funduscopy revealed background retinopathy.
Main physical and laboratory characteristics of the patient are summarized in Table .
Based on the above biochemical and urimalysis results, nephrotic syndrome had to be ruled out.
In the color Doppler sonography (CDS), the only pathological finding was highly elevated blood flows in the proximal tibial and dorsal arteries, which were attributed to increased pressure on the above mentioned vessels to the excessive oedema and to inflammation.
Plain X-rays revealed bilateral soft tissue oedema, heel osteolyses, and free bone segments, findings compatible with Charcot disease in both feet . Ordering MRI was not considered necessary, since X-ray findings were revealing.
Treatment plan included immediate offloading of both feet by the use of an aircast type device. She was advised to rest and stop working standing, if possible. Aircast was put on and she was clinically evaluated four weeks after initiation of treatment and monthly afterwards, in order to ensure no recurrence of the disease. Patient had not painful meuropathy, so pharmacological treatment was not considered.
During follow-up period, oedema seemed to retreat and radiological lesions remained stable. After 3 months of conservative treatment, the patient presented a satisfactory clinical improvement . Additionally, no episodes of ulceration were mentioned.
Unfortunately, after another 2 months, oedema seemed to worsen, probably because of non-compliance . She was wearing aircasts intermittently, and she was walking long distances using tennis shoes. Patient had depression, her HbA1c was 11% and presented tachycardia, probably attributable to autonomic neuropathy. X-ray findings had worsened . Medical situation was explained to her in detail. She was asked to wear aircast devices continuously, and at least to wear custom-made shoes when not in aircasts, in order to distribute weight pressure equally across sole. Also, psychological support was demanded. Patient remained non-complient for the next 2 months. We considered irremovable total contact cast, but then she was lost to follow-up.
She revisited our foot clinic 2 years later. She was then 31 years old, on depression medications, and her HbA1c was 8%. She reported intraocular haemorrage, foot infections and nephrotic syndrome, due to which she was hospitalized several times. She had severe deformities of both feet. Lesions were more prominent in the right ankle and foot, with joint being dislocated and warm . She had further bony destruction of calcaneus and talus upon X-rays . She was advised to visit a specialized Charcot surgery center, since no conservative treatment was considered to be helpful.