A 60-year-old male presented to a dental office complaining of worsening daytime sleepiness.
For the treatment of OSA, MAD treatment had been initiated and he had complied with this treatment as prescribed for approximately 10 years. However, the patient had recurrent episodes of excessive daytime sleepiness and sought further clinical advice.
The patient had a previous medical diagnosis of severe OSA since an overnight sleep study undertaken in June 2008 had revealed an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) of 32.8/h.
The patient was unable to comply with CPAP therapy and declined surgical intervention.
The patient’s body mass index was 25.7 kg/m2, indicating that obesity was not a pertinent consideration in this case. The neck circumference was 15 inches (38 cm) and the blood pressure was 131/96 mmHg, without any other pathological signs. Intra-oral examination revealed that the patient had good oral health with no signs of either dental decay or periodontal disease. The patient volunteered that four premolar teeth and four wisdom teeth had been removed for orthodontic reasons during his college years. On examination, it was noted that the upper and lower arches were reduced in size with mild crowding and wear facets of the anterior teeth . A Mallampati score of 3 indicated that the oropharyngeal inlet was reduced in aperture. The tongue was crenated but not restricted by the lingual frenum.
The initial home sleep apnea test (HSAT) taken in June 2008 (Watch PAT, United States) was available. It had recorded an AHI of 32.8/h, a respiratory disturbance index (RDI) of 34.3/h, a mean oxygen desaturation index of 13.8% and a mean oxygen saturation of 95%. There was 21.3% rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and a mean pulse of 76 bpm. Therefore, another HSAT was taken in February 2019 with no device in the patient’s mouth, which revealed an AHI of 67.9/h, an RDI of 68.4/h, a mean oxygen desaturation index of 52.6% and a mean oxygen saturation of 93%. There was 6.7% REM sleep and a mean pulse of 65 bpm.
In this case, a pre-treatment 3D cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) scan was available. The minimum transpalatal bone width measured at the cervical margin of the mesio-palatal cusps of the first molars on the CBCT scan was 32 mm . The nasal airway volume was 35.2 cm3 and the area of the posterior nasal aperture was 589.6 mm2.