An 18-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital with right knee pain for 6 months.
The patient experienced right knee pain 6 months prior without any apparent cause. The pain was intermittent, dull, and aching. It significantly affected his sleep and exacerbated while climbing stairs or bearing weight, whereas bed rest provided some relief. The pain was not significantly influenced by seasons or weather conditions and was not associated with swelling or restricted movement. The patient experienced pain on deep flexion without any locking or catching sensation. During periods of pain relief, normal activities were possible. He sought admission to our department for further treatment. He did not experience chills or fever and reported normal appetite, sleep, and regular bowel and bladder habits. There was no significant weight loss observed.
There was no history of infectious diseases such as hepatitis, tuberculosis, or malaria; hypertension; heart disease; recent aspirin intake; diabetes; cerebrovascular disease; psychiatric disorders; surgeries; traumas; or blood transfusions. He had no known allergies to substances, medications, or foods. The patient vaccination history was not available.
The patient had no significant personal or family medical history. There were no known cases of hypertension, diabetes, hepatitis, pulmonary tuberculosis, or allergies to medications or foods in the family.
Both the knee joints exhibited no deformities. Tenderness was noted in the posterior lateral gap of the right knee joint. Skin temperature was normal. Floating patella sign was positive, patellar grind and lateral stress tests and Murray sign were negative, deep flexion and hyperextension tests were partially positive. Both the knee joints showed negative results for anterior and posterior drawer tests and Lachman sign. Range of motion for both knee joints was 0° to 110°. Longitudinal and axial percussion tendernesses were absent. Muscle strength in both the lower limbs was graded as V. Sensation in both the lower limbs was symmetrical. Dorsalis pedis pulses were bilaterally palpable.
Preoperative white blood cell and lymphocyte counts and percentage of neutrophils were all elevated.
Computed tomography (CT) showed a nodular lesion beneath the cortical bone of the posterior medial plateau of the right tibia, nature of which was undetermined (OO or other pathologies). There was a small amount of effusion in the right knee joint capsule.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed abnormal signal focus with extensive bone marrow edema on the posterior lateral aspect of the right tibia, possibly indicative of an OO. Additionally, there was a small amount of effusion in the right patellar bursa and joint cavity.