A 70-year-old male presented to an urban community emergency department (ED) complaining of substernal chest pain, FB sensation in his esophagus, and difficulty swallowing after taking his multiple, morning oral medications. He stated that he felt as if “something had gotten stuck in his throat” after taking his morning medications. The patient had a past medical history significant for chronic dysphagia, Barrett’s esophagus, congestive heart failure, nystagmus, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, renal insufficiency, and lower esophageal sphincterotomy. After undergoing evaluations for chest pain and epigastric pain, which were negative, he was tolerating per oral (PO) fluids post glucagon and metoclopramide therapy. The ED care team concluded the patient could be discharged safely for out-patient follow-up. A final ambulatory test and a second PO challenge were administered prior to discharge. Upon this PO challenge he reported that he was again unable to swallow PO liquids and had a return of the feeling of “a knot in my esophagus.”
The discharge was halted, and a non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the chest was ordered to evaluate the esophagus for stricture or FB. The CT results showed a 15-millimeter (mm) FB located within the gastroesophageal (GE) junction/lower esophageal sphincter (LES) causing a moderately distended and fluid-filled esophagus . The ED care team again attempted to mechanically and pharmacologically dislodge the distal FB but was unsuccessful. The fluid in the esophagus was suctioned via insertion of a nasogastric tube to prevent aspiration and to empty the esophagus for possible esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD).
The patient was admitted to the hospitalist service with a gastroenterology consultation for urgent EGD. Upon further inspection with an EGD, the desiccant canister was found in the GE junction along with esophageal strictures . The EGD was initially performed under procedural sedation but the endoscopist was also unable to advance the FB through the GE junction with the endoscope alone. The endoscopist then had the patient endotracheally intubated, placed under deep sedation, and performed a second EGD attempt to remove the FB via a Roth Net retriever (STERIS Healthcare, Mentor, OH), which was successful. The FB, after successful removal, was determined to be a cylindrical silica gel canister measuring 11.5 mm. There were no complications secondary to the EGD, deep sedation, intubation, or removal of the FB. The patient tolerated the procedure well, was extubated quickly post EGD and was discharged home after recovery with instructions to follow up with the gastroenterologist as an outpatient. He was also educated to avoid taking multiple medications at once without identifying them.