A 55-year-old Caucasian man was referred because of abnormal thyroid function tests and intermittent atrial fibrillation. He reported of occasional palpitations, episodes of tachycardia (up to 200 bpm), especially under exertion, and excessive sweating. The patient was previously started on bisoprolol 2.5 mg once daily and presented with normofrequent sinus rhythm. On physical examination his thyroid was moderately enlarged (WHO grade Ib) and soft. Thyroid function tests revealed hyperthyroidism with complete suppression of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (<0.01 μIU/mL, see Table for reference range), elevated FT4 (3.03 ng/dL) and increased total thyroxine (TT4) and total triiodothyronine (TT3) levels (132 and 2.53 ng/mL respectively). Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) and thyroglobulin autoantibodies (TgAb) were negative, but TSH-RAbs were elevated (2.6 IU/L), indicating that the patient suffered from Graves’ disease (See Table ). Upon initial admission the patient showed no clinical signs of Graves’ orbitopathy. A thyroid ultrasound showed multiple hypoechoic nodules in both thyroid lobes. The most prominent nodule appeared in anterior caudal position of the right lobe embedded in a diffusely heterogeneous thyroid gland. The lesion measured 1.1 × 0.9 × 2 cm, showed no signs of microcalcification, but was highly vascularized in the Doppler color flow, whereas the rest of the thyroid tissue showed moderate signs of hypervascularization . A 99mTechnetium thyroid nuclear scan displayed an orthotopic, V-shaped thyroid with asymmetrical uptake and a hot area in the right lower lobe compatible with the hypoechoic, hypervascularized lesion discovered in ultrasonography . Uptake in the remaining thyroid tissue was comparatively lower but not suppressed, with increased overall uptake (4.29%, reference range: 0.5% – 2%) and almost no detectable background activity. Thus, both signs of Graves’ disease and thyroid autonomy were coexisting in our patient hence the diagnosis Marine-Lenhart syndrome.
The patient was then started on 20 mg methimazole twice daily for the first seven days after his initial presentation, followed by 20 mg methimazole once daily for the following 8 weeks, which completely resolved his hyperthyroid condition until follow up 2 . However, because of the unlikeliness of a permanent remission, the existence of multiple “cold” nodules and the relative resistance of patients with coexisting Graves’ disease and toxic adenoma to radioiodine therapy , a definitive, surgical treatment was aspired. The patient therefore underwent thyroidectomy three months after initial diagnosis. The patient received alternating 10 mg and 20 mg methimazole once daily until the thyroid gland was removed. After thyroid surgery bisoprolol 2.5 mg once daily was stopped. Notably, embedded in the nodular area of the right thyroid lobe a, macroscopically, white and firm elastic area was discovered, which was diagnosed as a papillary microcarcinoma (5 mm) in an intraoperative frozen section. Histological work-up revealed a unifocal papillary microcarcinoma (9 mm, pT1a, R0) in the right thyroid lobe with signs of a hyperfunctioning nodular goiter (see Figure A and B). Furthermore, the carcinoma sections were positively tested for the BRAF V600E mutation using the ViennaLab BRAF Strip Assay (Vienna, Austria) . After a short postoperative recovery phase the patient was discharged under levothyroxine therapy.
A postoperative follow up 17 weeks after the initial diagnosis showed subclinical hypothyroidism, which was fixed by adjusting the levothyroxine therapy . Notably, the patient developed a moderately active orbitopathy postoperatively, which was treated with IV corticosteroids for 3 months.