A 31-year-old Chinese woman presented with headache and poorly controlled hypertension. Her blood pressure was 170/100 mm Hg in the brachial artery and 150/90 mm Hg in the thigh. She had a history of hypertension for about 20 years and her medical therapy comprised four antihypertensive medications (hydrochlorothiazide, amlodipine, arotinolol, irbesartan). Two years previously, she was diagnosed with Takayasu's arteritis and had undergone stenting for bilateral renal artery stenoses at another hospital. However, her arterial hypertension failed to improve. In the present admission, laboratory investigations revealed that a blood urea nitrogen level of 26.2 mg/dl, serum creatinine level of 4.9 mg/dl and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 7 mm/h. Technetium-99m-diethylenetriaminepentacetic acid (99mTc-DTPA) renogram revealed decreases in the renal blood flow and the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The GFR of the left and right kidney were 20.4 ml/min and 12.1 ml/min, respectively (total GFR 32.5 ml/min). Computed tomography angiography showed marked narrowing of the abdominal aorta, stents in bilateral renal arteries, well-established arc of Riolan, and ostial stenoses of the superior mesenteric artery and the celiac artery. Her right kidney was significantly atrophied . The thoracic aorta and its branches were normal.
Finally, an open repair was required for relief of her hypertension and preservation of the renal function. An aortoaortic bypass (between the suprarenal and infrarenal abdominal aorta) with a Gore-Tex® ring reinforced tube (16 mm diameter, WL Gore & Associates Inc, USA), an orthotopic right renal autotransplantation and an aorto-left renal arterial bypass with autogenous saphenous vein grafts were performed. The operation was performed through an arch incision below the costal margin under general anesthesia. We obtained a satisfactory exposure through appropriate division and traction. The aorta coarctation extended approximately 7 cm. After heparinization, the descending aorta was clamped and the prosthetic graft was anastomosed to the aorta in an end-to-side fashion. The autogenous saphenous vein grafts were harvested. To revascularize the right renal artery, we performed an ex vivo right renal artery repair and orthotopic autotransplantation. The right renal artery and vein were detached and the kidney was cold perfused with University of Wisconsin (UW) solution at 4°C. The ureter was left intact. The proximal stenosis containing the stent was resected. The right kidney was then re-implanted into its original fossa. Then the right renal artery was reconstructed with the autogenous vein graft and re-implanted onto the prosthetic graft. And the right renal vein was re-implanted onto the inferior vena cava . The ischemic time for the right kidney was 1 hour and 45 minutes. The right kidney was fixed to the surrounding tissues to prevent migration or kinking. Next, the proximal stenosis of the left renal artery containing the stent was resected and the artery was re-implanted onto the prosthetic graft in an end-to-side fashion with autogenous saphenous vein graft.
The postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative anticoagulant therapy consisted of low molecular weight heparin (4000 U/twice a day) for 2 weeks. The therapy was then switched to clopidogrel (75 mg/day) for 3 months and aspirin (100 mg/day) for 6 months.
Evaluation at one year showed that the patient was well, still on nifedipine on a daily basis, and had a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg. 99mTc-DTPA renogram revealed that the GFR of the left and right kidney were 53.7 ml/min and 10.1 ml/min, respectively (total GFR 63.8 ml/min). The computed tomography angiography showed that all the grafts were patent and there were no abnormalities at the anastomosis .