A 6-year-old female patient diagnosed with pentasomy X was referred for oral evaluation presenting acute pain associated with ulcers in the attached gingival and dorsum of tongue mucosa. The mother signed the informed consent. The girl was born from a second gestation of non-consanguineous parents, the mother age was 31-year-old. Parents denied systemic disease or medical conditions. His only brother was diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder. During pregnancy, four episodes of polyhydramnios required intervention with therapeutic amniocentesis. A Cesarean was performed at 31 weeks. Two weeks later, the patient presented breathing difficulties and received treatment in the Intensive Care Unit for pulmonary atelectasis; and she remained hospitalized for four months. Genetic analyses were requested around that time (see next paragraph). At six months, febrile episodes related to cystic fibrosis were noted, and she was treated with additional oxygen up to 2 years old.
Chromosome culture was performed from isolated lymphocytes in peripheral blood. Conventional, special high-resolution banding techniques (Trypsin G Bands; C; Q; NOR) were obtained. Autosomal/sexual chromosomal mosaic was ruled out. The conclusion was a karyotype 46, XX; 48, XXXX; 49, XXXXX predominantly XX. The presence of sexual mosaicism was detected XX; XXXX; XXXXX (78; 10: 12%) .
The medical file also revealed recurrent seizures, dysautonomia with low blood pressure, interatrial communication, a few episodes of thrombosis, convergent strabismus, hyperopia, umbilical hernias, and cognitive delay with limited oral communications skills. Diurnal but no nocturnal control of sphincters was reported. Daily medical treatment was 10mg of Nitrazepam and 75mg of Lamotrigine.
Teledentistry was used for anamnesis and triage of dental urgency, considering COVID-19 pandemic limitations ( & ). Fever and prodromal symptoms were denied. Nutritional limitations were associated with oral pain. Both generated significant concerns. After acute primary herpetic gingivostomatitis was diagnosed, the primary recommendations were adequate oral hygiene, soft and bland diet and palliative treatment with a topical mixture of antacid and diphenhydramine three times per day; before meals to avoid pain and sensitivity.
Teledentistry was also used for control follow-up. Complete healing was seen after two weeks. Then, a photo showing an open bite with possibly anterior crossbite and a yellowish primary dentition at three years old .
Meanwhile, six months later, oral examination revealed brachycephaly, early mixed dentition, acceptable oral hygiene, no dental caries lesions and hyperplastic gingival tissue. Dental enamel was observed in primary dentition without post-eruptive enamel breakdowns or dental hypersensitivity. An improvement in dental coloration in primary dentition was observed in comparison to the above-mentioned photograph at three years of age ( & ). Short stature, adequate weight and difficulties in communications skills were also noted.
Behavioral problems and interruptive conduct created difficulties during clinical evaluation and dental management. At seven years old, the first permanent molar was absent and upper permanent central and lower central and lateral permanent incisors fully erupted, presenting delayed eruption. The enamel in dental units 11 and 21 showed white and creamy demarcated opacities and 31 showed a yellow demarcated opacity, all of them less than 1/3 of the extent in buccal surfaces, also 41 showed hypoplastic enamel in buccal surface , conversely to symmetrical hypocalcified enamel found in the primary dentition. The gingival tissues showed a hyperplastic appearance. The treatment planning for this enamel defect case was a nonsurgical approach with scaling, oral hygiene instructions considering the absence of dental caries and hypersensitivity, and limitations in the patient´s dental treatment cooperation. Therefore, appointments were scheduled every four months to evaluate gingival tissues and the accumulation of local irritants.
The patient was evaluated in control visits four times since the first evaluation. The positive outcomes were higher than expected. The mother referred to an improvement in hygiene cooperation and the use of a power-driven toothbrush for oral hygiene.