A 29-year-old previously healthy Pakistani female presented with fever, cough, and subjective weight loss for three months. The fever was gradual in onset, low grade, and was associated with rigors, chills, and night sweats. The cough was productive in nature with whitish sputum and was not associated with chest pain. A review of systems was remarkable for lethargy, malaise, and myalgias, for the past year. The patient never smoked and had no sick contact or a recent travel history.
On examination, the patient was alert and oriented. She had conjunctival pallor with no palpable lymph nodes. On presentation, the patient was afebrile (98 °F), blood pressure was 122/81 mmHg, pulse rate was 90 beats per minute, and respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute. Abdominal examination revealed tender left hypochondrium along with splenomegaly. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
A working diagnosis of likely pulmonary tuberculosis was made, and the patient was isolated with an airborne precautions protocol. Three sets of sputum analysis were negative for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear. The chest x-ray was unremarkable. The initial workup included a complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), liver function test, renal function test, and three sets of blood culture. Concurrently, an echocardiogram was also done, considering the possibility of subacute endocarditis, but was unremarkable.
The ESR was significantly elevated (135mm/hr.), and the patient had severe microcytic hypochromic anemia with thrombocytopenia . Transthoracic echocardiography showed no vegetations or valvular leaks.
Ultrasound of the abdomen showed an enlarged (15cm) spleen with a large hypoechoic lesion involving the spleen's upper and mid pole region measuring 8 × 9cm. A contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography scan was ordered and revealed a hypodense lesion in the spleen with central necrosis .
A peripheral blood smear was unremarkable, and a bone marrow biopsy was done as part of the workup for cytopenia. The marrow was normocellular with active erythropoiesis, myelopoiesis, lymphopoiesis, and plasma cells.
A working diagnosis of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and a splenic abscess was made. She was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics with no improvement. Three pints of packed red cell concentrate were transfused. Due to a lack of local expertise on the percutaneous aspiration of the splenic abscess, the patient was vaccinated against Pneumococcus, Meningococcus, and Haemophilus Influenzae, followed by a splenectomy.
Histopathology report of the splenic specimen showed a diffuse large B cell lymphoma with strong positivity for common leukocyte antigen (LCA), CD-20, and CD-10 with negativity to pan-keratin, CD-30, and CD-5, which favored a diagnosis of diffuse large B cell (DLBL) subtype.
The patient was started on a cyclical combination of chemo-immunotherapy, including cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, rituximab prednisolone, and vincristine. The patient improved clinically within three months of treatment and is now in remission.