A 78 year-old woman with a history of kidney transplant on immunosuppression presented to our academic medical center with altered mental status and seizure-like activity in March 2020. The patient was observed at home to have sudden-onset uncontrolled limb movements with ocular deviation followed by several minutes of unresponsiveness. At her baseline, the patient lived independently and had no previous diagnosis of dementia or confusion. However, three days prior to admission, she was noted to have confusion and disorientation. In addition, she was noted to have fever and nasal congestion for 2 days prior to admission. The patient was known to be adherent with her medical care and medications including tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and lisinopril.
00Upon arrival the emergency department, the patient was febrile to 100.7 but was otherwise hemodynamically stable. On neurological examination, she was noted to be alert and oriented to be intermittently confused. She was tremulous, but there were no sensory or motor deficits, and cranial nerve functions were intact. The complete blood count was notable for a pancytopenia with a white blood cell count of 1.8 × 103/μL, hemoglobin of 10.8 g/dL, hematocrit of 37.4% and platelets of 130 mm3. Absolute neutrophil count was 0.9 ×103/μL and absolute lymphocyte count was 0.6× 103/μL. The basic metabolic panel was notable for normal serum electrolytes and stable renal function. Alkaline phosphatase was slightly elevated to 139 U/L but hepatic function was otherwise unremarkable. Thyroid-stimulating hormone was elevated to 8.1 mIU/L, but thyroxine (T4) was within normal limits. Tacrolimus level was 3.1 mcg/L (lower than therapeutic range). Procalcitonin was 0.5 μg/L and her respiratory viral panel was negative. Two sets of blood cultures did not grow any organisms. EKG showed normal sinus rhythm. Chest X-ray (, left) did not reveal any focal consolidation, pulmonary edema, pleural effusion or pneumothorax.
The patient was admitted to the general medicine floor for further work-up of her altered mental status. She underwent an electroencephalogram that demonstrated mild generalized slowing, and an MRI with contrast that revealed generalized atrophy and patchy periventricular and subcortical white matter hyperintensities, which were interpreted as sequelae of small vessel ischemic disease .
She subsequently underwent lumbar puncture, which revealed CSF that was clear in appearance with no xanthrochromia. The CSF analysis revealed 350 red cells/uL, 1 white blood cell/uL, 75% lymphocytes, 25% monocytes, glucose 67 mg/dL and protein 43 mg/dL. The CSF HSV and VZV PCR were negative. The plasma CMV and adenovirus testing were negative by PCR, and serologies indicated prior EBV and Parvovirus B19 infection. On hospital day 3, the patient had persistent fevers and developed cough with dyspnea requiring oxygen supplementation. A chest X-ray revealed bilateral pulmonary infiltrate (, right). She therefore underwent SARS-CoV–2 PCR testing using a nasopharynx swab and was found to be positive. Sequencing of this SARS-CoV– 2 isolate revealed a virus similar to other SARS-CoV–2 circulating in the region .
Further investigation of the CSF was done following the patient’s COVID–19 diagnosis. Inflammatory cytokines were measured in CSF and plasma using a multiplex cytokine assay. This patient’s CSF and plasma were tested alongside CSF and plasma specimens obtained from three healthy control volunteers: Female age 63, Female age 45, and Male age 62. . These control samples were collected during the last year for unrelated studies and were kept frozen until the current cytokine assays, when they were run in parallel with this patient’s sample. Levels of IL–6, IL–8, and IP–10 appeared to be elevated in both CSF and plasma of this patient compared to control, with a unique MCP–1 signature found only in CSF and not plasma.
The patient’s CSF was next tested for the presence of SARS-CoV–2 by several methods and was negative. First, qRT-PCR was performed using the US CDC SARS-CoV–2 assay. Sequencing of SARS-CoV–2 in the CSF was then attempted using both targeted (tiled PCR-amplicons) and unbiased (“shotgun” metagenomic) approaches. From the targeted sequencing, 316,111 reads were generated from the sample and a total of 60 reads aligned to SARS-CoV–2, which was not above background. From the unbiased sequencing approach, about 40 million reads were generated and none aligned to SARS-CoV–2 or any other respiratory pathogen. Finally, culturing of SARS-CoV–2 was attempted from the CSF supernatant, and after 4 days of culture, SARS-CoV–2 by PCR was not detected.
summarizes the patient’s laboratory findings at the time of diagnosis of COVID–19 and the follow-up course. Based on the patient’s age and co-morbidities, she met criteria for treatment initiation per our academic center treatment protocol. The patient received hydroxychloroquine 400mg twice daily for one day followed by 200mg twice daily for nine additional days. Her confusion slowly improved. However, on hospital day 13, she had worsening of her mental status and became hypoxemic, with chest X-ray showing worsening bilateral infiltrates. She was therefore treated with the IL–6 inhibitor, tocilizumab, with overall improvement in her confusion and respiratory status. The patient was able to be weaned off oxygen and discharged home safely after one month of hospitalization. She remained in good condition at the time of this case report.