A 19-year-old male was referred to our institution in 2021. He suffered from a severe gunshot wound injury (GSW) that caused significant loss in the zygomatic bone, maxilla, nasal bone, infraorbital rim, and mandible with extensive wounds in the skin and the soft tissue. Initially, soft tissue interventions were performed in order to stop bleeding and sew the wounds. A few months later, when the general condition had improved, he underwent computed tomography (CT) scan to generate multislice 3D modeling of both affected and unaffected face bones .
The other case was an 18-year-old female who was referred to our institution for evaluation and treatment plan 8 years after a war injury to the left side of the face, including left eye loss and significant loss in the lower-left edge of orbit in 2013. She has also undergone a CT scan to generate slices for the 3D modeling template.
Regarding both cases, the software package processed the CT slices to provide a mirrored 3D shape of the skull, identical to that of the injured young man, including the affected and the unaffected bones. Our simple 3D printer (Ender 3 Pro 3D printer, China) uses polylactic acid (PLA) materials for producing 3D printed objects which have excellent biocompatibility. This allows us to safely adapt and pre-bend the reconstruction titanium mesh on the produced PLA skull prior to surgery to ensure symmetry and less surgical time.
The titanium mesh was generated with a thickness of 0.5 mm based on the shape of the 3D printed skull of the affected area . The intervention on the area was using the Weber Ferguson surgical approach, which includes an incision under the lower eyelid extending to an incision on the side of the nose, then an incision around the nasal wing, finally an incision on the middle line of the upper lip. Then, after sterilizing the mesh, the patient's specific manufactured titanium was implanted and fixed using mini-screws made of titanium as well .
In both cases, implants' position was assessed using postoperative CT scans. The same type and thickness of the mesh were used in both cases as well.
Regarding the time for each procedure, the 3D skull printing lasted about 45 minutes for each case. The time of bending the titanium mesh was 2.5 hours in the first case and 2 hours in the second. The surgical intervention for mesh implantation took less than 2 h in both cases.
This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 Criteria .