A 60-year-old female patient suffering from a peripheral arterial occlusive disease stage IIb on the right side according to Fontaine was presented for an elective revascularization using balloon angioplasty due to a short occlusion of the distal superficial femoral artery. A retrograde femoral access from the left common femoral artery was decided and the intervention took place with a technical success. Later that day, the patient showed signs and symptoms of an acute limb ischemia in the left foot. Doppler, Duplex and CTA confirmed an acute occlusion of the distal left popliteal artery as well as BTK trifurcation. Due to our previous experience with a similar case, which our surgeons treated surgically after failure of endovascular mechanical thrombectomy using an aspiration catheter and was histologically confirmed to match the PEG sealant of a MynxGrip device, we immediately considered this a similar case of a MynxGrip PEG sealant embolization. The previous attempt to remove the PEG sealant probably did not work due to the consistency of the sealant, which is quite different to that of blood clots.
A retrograde femoral access from the right common femoral artery was decided with using a 60 cm long 7F Destination® Guiding Sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). For thrombectomy a SOFIA 6F aspiration catheter (Microvention Inc., Aliso Viejo, CA) and a pRESET stent retriever were used.
We decided to use a pRESET stent retriever with a diameter of 6 mm (as the popliteal artery measurement during the intervention was 5 mm) and a length of 30 mm (which is enough to cover up the entire embolus length). The sheath was placed about 3 cm proximal to the foreign body, then the SOFIA aspiration catheter was placed at the proximal end of the foreign body and the pRESET was advanced through a Rebar®-18 Micro Catheter (ev3, Minneapolis, USA) and deployed over the foreign body with the foreign body at the upper end of the deployed pRESET . The retrieval took place in two steps. The first step was pulling back the pRESET into the SOFIA catheter together with simultaneous manual aspiration over the SOFIA catheter. The second step was a successive manual aspiration over the sheath as soon as the SOFIA catheter was completely pulled into the sheath. This action was repeated three times with the last time removing the main bulk of the embolus. A control series showed complete removal of the foreign body with normal blood flow restored . A final picture of the leg arteries to prove absence of distal embolization of the foreign body with previously known chronic occlusion of the posterior tibial artery was done . The patient was postinterventional symptom free. A histological analysis of the removed material confirmed its origin as a foreign body .