A 72-year-old Dutch female presented to the emergency department with fever and concomitant confusion. Three years before this admission, a symptomatic MM was diagnosed for which melphalan, prednisolone and bortezomib were initiated. Eighteen months before presentation lenalidomide in combination with dexamethasone was given for relapse of her MM, and 2 months later cyclophosphamide was added to this regimen. Six months later she progressed and received third line therapy consisting of bortezomib, thalidomide and dexamethasone. Four months before this presentation the MM was regarded refractory to bortezomib and immunomodulatory drugs, thus immunotherapy with weekly daratumumab in combination with prednisone was offered. Although amyloidosis was suspected due to proteinuria, no confirmation by fat tissue biopsy was performed. One year before presentation an echocardiography showed no structural abnormalities of valves or heart. At admission, no (septic) shock was present with vital signs showing mild tachycardia (100 beats per minute), blood pressure of 110/60 mmHg, temperature of 37.2 °C and respiratory rate of 15 per minute. History revealed fever, pollakisuria and confusion since 2 days. At physical examination no cardiac murmur, no signs of systemic major emboli, normal pulmonary auscultation and no signs for an acute abdomen or heart failure were found. No infusaport was in situ. Laboratory investigations showed mildly elevated leukocyte count (10.9 × 109/L) together with elevated C-reactive protein (127 mg/L). Kidney function, electrolytes and liver enzymes were normal. Immunoglobulin gamma was 31.4 g/L, which was stable over time and hypo-albuminaemia was also stable at 11 g/L. Electrocardiogram was unchanged when compared to 1 year earlier, without signs of arrhythmia, AV-blocks or myocardial ischemia. Pulmonary X-ray was normal. Urine tests were compatible with a urinary tract infection with positive nitrite and leukocytosis. Dipstick screening showed also signs of albuminuria and microscopic hematuria, which were not investigated further at this point. Intravenous amoxicillin with clavulanic acid (1000/200 mg 4 times daily) was initiated corresponding to Dutch guidelines for urinary tract infections. Hydrocortisone (100 mg bolus followed by continuous infusion of 100 mg per 24 h) was initiated because of suspected tertiary adrenal insufficiency due to prolonged use of prednisolone. One day after admission the results of urine culture confirmed bacterial growth of Escherichia coli. In contrast, all four blood cultures showed growth of M. morganii. Ciprofloxacin (200 mg 2 times daily) was added due to the penicillinresistance of the Morganella species. There was no evident portal of entry for the M. morganii, though no specific work-up was done.
Two days after admission, the patient acutely deteriorated with hemodynamic instability. Under the diagnosis of septic shock gentamicin (4 mg per kg) and once more hydrocortisone (100 mg bolus injection) were administered without improvement of hemodynamic status after 1 h. Transthoracic echocardiography showed severe aortic regurgitation and a mobile structure, 10 by 10 mm, attached to left or non-coronary cusp, strongly suspective of vegetation . These findings led to the diagnosis of bacterial endocarditis of the native aortic valve. Half an hour after diagnosis, the patient died due to ongoing hypoperfusion and refractory shock.
At autopsy, vegetation with gram-negative rods in the native aortic valve was observed, consistent with a diagnosis of M. morganii-endocarditis. Additional staining for amyloid confirmed advanced light-chain (AL) amyloidosis in heart, kidneys and spleen. The aortic valve itself contained patchy amyloid depositions near the adherent vegetation . These observations led to our hypothesis that the patient became susceptible to IE caused by the opportunistic pathogen M. morganii due to valvular endothelial damage related to amyloid depositions and a severely compromised immune system.