A 24 years old nonalcoholic male Ethiopian, with no prior comorbidities, presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of; severe central abdominal pain, easy fatiguability, and vomiting of one-day duration. He had been complaining of increased thirst, water intake, and urination for the past one week before his presentation. He was told to have a high cholesterol level and was on dietary management for the past three years.
On examination, he had a pulse rate of 120 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute, a blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg, a temperature of 36 °C, oxygen saturation of 88% on room air, and a Body mass index of 26.4 kg/m2. He had right posterior basal third crepitation and decreased air entry, suggestive of atelectasis with reactive effusion. The abdomen was diffusely tender with increased tenderness over the epigastric area. There were also nodular firm lesions over the extensor aspect of both elbows, suggestive of tendon xanthomas.
His investigations showed that he had a leukocytosis of 21,700 cells/mm3, hemoglobin of 14 g/dl, and a platelet count of 214, 000 cells/mm3. He had a serum triglyceride level of 4775 mg/dl, a serum cholesterol level of 1080 mg/dl, and a low-density lipoprotein level of 395 mg/dl. His arterial blood gas was significant for metabolic acidosis with a serum PH of 7.34, bicarbonate of 18.9 mmol/L, partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 35 mmHg, and serum lactate of 3.67 mg/dl. His serum amylase and lipase levels were elevated at 1136 and 1687 U/L respectively. His admission random blood sugar was 313 mg/dl with a urine ketone level of + 2 and a HgbA1c of 8. His renal function test, transaminase levels, and electrolytes were in the normal range on admission .
His admission abdominal ultrasound showed a diffusely hypoechoic pancreas with peripancreatic fat stranding. An abdominal CT scan with contrast done two days later showed a diffusely swollen pancreas with poor contrast uptake and peri-pancreatic fat stranding with a peri-pancreatic fluid collection. As there were financial and investigation access limitations, we failed to perform genetic tests for hyperlipidemia .
He was admitted to the ICU with a diagnosis of severe HTGP and diabetic ketoacidosis, and an intravenous loading dose of regular insulin at 0.1 IU/Kg was given, followed by an hourly IV infusion of 0.1 IU/Kg every hour. He was also put on a standing dose of morphine, six bags of IV normal saline, and heparin 5000 IU SC twice a day. He had an hourly measurement of his blood sugar, with two hourly measurements of his urine ketone. He had required infusions of 500 ml, 5% dextrose in water, mixed with 500 ml of normal saline in one bag, along with intravenous potassium chloride, when his random blood sugar dropped below 250 mg/dl, and his serum potassium dropped below 5.3 meq/L. He had three episodes of hypoglycemia at 62,69 and 54 mg/dl during his management, which required 1.25 ml/kg Iv push of 40% dextrose. He was taken out of diabetic ketoacidosis in 30 h, and the serum TG level had dropped below target, within three days of his treatment. He was discharged one week after admission, with Omega 3 fatty acids, gemfibrozil, and Neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin.
He had two follow-ups in three months during which he had; good functional status, no abdominal complaints, serum TG of 250 mg/dl, and no local pancreatic complications on a repeat abdominal CT scan.