A 50-year-old man complained of sudden chest pain during exercise and subsequently collapsed due to cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was immediately started, and the patient was brought to the emergency department (ED). Six years prior to presentation, he had undergone successful ASO treatment using a 36-mm Amplatzer device at another hospital. No complications due to ASD had been reported. The defective foramen was 29.527.0mm2, the aortic rim was not deficient, and the superior rim was floppy. No problems occurred during the annual follow-ups.
Circulation spontaneously returned during transport. On arrival at the ED, he was intubated in a hypotensive condition with metabolic acidosis (lactate, 5.4mmol/L; HCO3,16.0mEq/L; base excess, 7.6mEq/L). Echocardiography showed pericardial effusion; contrast-enhanced computed tomography demonstrated no evidence of aortic dissection or extravasation of contrast medium from the myocardium or great vessels such as the aorta . Pericardial drainage was performed because he sustained a hemodynamically unstable status due to pericardial effusion. After 300mL of bloody effusion was drained, the patients condition improved substantially, but substantial blood drainage from the pericardial sac persisted. The patient was immediately transferred to the operating room, where surgical repair was performed.
The chest was opened through a midline sternal incision. While searching for the left atrial dome and the root of the aorta around the ASO device, the chord-like tissue had partially injured the left atrial dome, and hemorrhage was observed. Resection of the chordae revealed a fistula, which was diagnosed as ASO-induced erosion. There was no apparent extracardiac prolapse of the device, and an autologous pericardial patch was formed at the same site to reinforce the left atrial wall. The aortic wall was directly sutured and repaired . During the operation, hemodynamic improvement was observed with an increase in systemic blood pressure, and acidosis was normalized without cardiopulmonary bypass.
The patient was hemodynamically stable after admission to the intensive care unit. The patient was allowed to recover and wake up from anesthesia, and he was finally extubated without coma and had a good postoperative course. Postoperative contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed no evidence of extracardiac leakage of contrast medium or pericardial effusion due to persistent erosions. He was discharged from the hospital on day 12 post-surgery, walking unaided. Before hospital discharge, following adequate discussions with the interventional cardiologist and the patient, we decided to follow up with the previous surgeon who inserted the ASO. Four months after this surgery, the previous hospital reevaluated the erosion, and the device was removed. The erosion site and ASD were safely repaired in a planned cardiac surgery.