A sixteen-year-old boy nonswimmer was hospitalized after drowning in cold river water. Based on data given by the passing eyewitness, the teenager jumped into the river to retrieve a sheep he was tending but immediately disappeared from the water surface. This youth of the same age promptly dived into the river, found the victim's body on the bottom at a depth of 2 metres, raised him, and swam to the shore, which was about 3 metres away. Based on the rescuer's statement, the drowning boy was unconscious, was not breathing, had blue lips and nail pates, and had very cold skin. Due to knowledge about First Aid acquired in high school, the rescuer started measures for basic life support (BLS (Basic Life Support)), freed the airway, performed several mouth to mouth breaths, and started chest compression. After 2-3 minutes the victim vomited, threw up water, coughed, and started breathing. In the next few minutes he regained consciousness. In the meantime, members of his family had been called and they brought the patient to our institution in a private vehicle.
At arrival he was somnolent, oriented, anxious, and pale, with tachypnea (number of respirations 30/min), with hypothermic-body temperature 35.1°C, shivering (whole body), and with the subjective sensation of cold. He was admitted to the JIT and the following was monitored: ECG TA, pulse, body temperature, and pulse oximetry. A nasogastric tube and a urinary catheter were placed. Auscultation of both lungs revealed weakened breathing sounds, especially in the basal and middle parts, with many early and late inspirium cracklings and low tone whistling. Cardiac action was arrhythmic accompanied by tachycardia up to 120/min, BP (blood pressure) 100/55 mmHg. There were no signs of neurological deficit or lateralization, GCS (Glasgow Coma Scale) 13/15.
Using transcutaneous pulse oximetry at admission we measured the following: O2 saturation, which was 80% (during the course of treatment it normalized); pH 7.32; O2 54.8 mm Hg; CO2 55 mm Hg; BE—1.60 mmol/L; C-reacting protein 96 mg/L; Er 5.11 × 1012/L; Hb 136 g/L; Le 14.3 × 109/L; glycemia 4.0 mmol/L. Chest radiography showed spotty shadows in the middle and inferior lobes with free costodiaphragmatic recess sinuses bilaterally.
The ECG at arrival indicated an irregular rhythm, HR (heart rate) 120/min with short-term atrial fibrillation that later corrected spontaneously into normal sinus rhythm.
Immediately upon admission we continued reanimation. The patient was warmed up with thermal blankets. Oxygen therapy was applied using an oxygen mask with reservoir without rebreathing, at a flow rate of 8 l/min, decreasing to 6 l/min in order to maintain SpO2 ≥ 94%. Parenteral antibiotic therapy (III generation cephalosporin, aminoglycosides, and metronidazole) and parenteral rehydration were administered.
On the fifth day after admission the patient showed complete recovery, including withdrawal of the chest radiographic symptoms and no pathological signs were visible on physical examination of the lungs.
However, during each attempt to get up, we registered atrial fibrillation or individual SVES (supraventricular extrasystole) and VES (ventricular extrasystole) triplets. On echocardiographic examination the structure of the left ventricular myocardium was hyperechogenic; echocardiography was performed with slightly restricted LVEF
During halter ECG examination we registered multiple strings of VES triplets, frequency 150 per minute. An appropriate dose of Presolol was included in the therapy, with advice of strict inaction and avoidance of any kind of physical exertion.
Two months later the control echocardiography revealed that heart function had improved further, FS 0.34%; EF > 45%.