A 16-year-old Italian male, with a family history of sudden cardiac death (SCD), was referred to our center with a diagnosis of HCM. His mother died of suspected postpartum DCM when she was 24 years old. The proband had received a diagnosis of HCM one year before, when he was admitted for palpitation in a secondary hospital. The ECG showed atrial tachycardia. He underwent two unsuccessful right atrial catheter ablations. Electrophysiological workup was negative for the induction of ventricular arrhythmias. Therefore, he was not considered suitable for ICD implantation at that time.
Upon admission to our institution, at the age of 17 years, he was symptomatic for palpitations, with evidence of atrial tachycardia (atrial cycle length 330 msec) during ECG monitoring, (NYHA class I) . The echocardiogram confirmed the severe biventricular hypertrophy (LV septum thickness was 30 mm, PWT 23 mm and LVOT 30 mmHg), with mild LV outflow tract obstruction, previously documented. Moderate biventricular contractile dysfunction was observed, without any evidence of dilation . Cardiac MRI was performed and confirmed preserved ventricular volumes associated with a severe increase in RV and LV wall thickness and moderate biventricular dysfunction (LVEF 45%; RVEF 42%). The calculated LV mass was 268 g/m2. T2w sequences indicated multiple “patchy” areas of increased signal intensity within the biventricular wall, associated with hypoperfusion at rest and late gadolinium enhancement, suggesting multiple foci of fibrosis.
Due to the persistence of symptomatic atrial tachycardia, 3D electroanatomic mapping of atrial tachycardia activation was performed. The earliest atrial activation was recorded close to the area between right pulmonary vein. Subsequently, antral right pulmonary veinelectrical isolation was performed by Smarttouch Navistar catheter (Biosense Webster) (max temp 32 °C, max power 30 W) with interruption of clinical tachycardia. Atrial tachycardia was not re-inducible any longer up to 4 extra-stimuli.
Drug therapy during hospitalization included betablocker (metoprololo 100 mg), diuretic (furosemide12.5 mg) and anticoagulant therapy for 3 months after catheter ablation. Upon admission, genetic counseling was offered to the family and genetic testing was performed .
Subsequently, further neurological investigations, including skeletal muscle biopsy were performed during this period. These revealed mild intellectual disability, mild weakness of distal upper and lower limb muscles and bilateral pes cavus, with an elevated serum CK (562 UI/L). In particular, clinical history revealed intellectual and adaptive functioning deficits in conceptual, social, and practical domains with childhood onset, including difficulties in acquiring academic skills, immature language and the need of assistance in daily living tasks. No other clinical exams was conducted at that time. Finally, since the predicted 5 years risk of SCD was 4.34%, according to the 2014 guidelines on diagnosis and management of HCM, ICD was implanted and muscle biopsy was requested.
DNA isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes was screened for genes associated with HCM and related phenotypes using a sequencing panel (Custom Ion Panel, ThermoFisher-US) including 11 genes (MYBPC3, MYH7, TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1, MYL2, MYL3, ACTC1, PLN, LAMP2, GLA), encoding for sarcomeric and non sarcomeric proteins. All deep intronic and synonymous coding variants were excluded from further analysis. Then, we filtered out all the variants with an allelic frequency (MAF) of more than 1 × 10− 4 in . Variant annotation results showed a hemizygous 1 bp deletion, c.453delT, in LAMP2 (NM_002294), which was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The variant (chrX:119582932_delT) causes a frameshift in exon 4, p.(F151Lfs*32) resulting in a putative premature stop codon at position 183 of the protein. To the best of our knowledge, it has not previously been reported in the literature, and it is absent in gnomAD and in other electronic databases, including ClinVar . Clinical variant interpretation was performed using the ACMG criteria . In particular, the variant was classified as likely pathogenic based on the molecular defect (PVS1; frameshift with premature protein truncation) and on its allele frequency in the general population (PM2).
At that time, genetic counseling was also offered to the older brother of the patient. During counseling, it was explained that probably the mother was a carrier of the LAMP2 pathogenic variant, and that he had a 50% chance of having inherited it. He then agreed to undergo targeted genetic testing for the disease causing variant. The result was negative, indicating that he is not at risk of developing manifestations of Danon disease.
Skeletal muscle biopsy demonstrated mild variation in fiber size and numerous scattered small dot-like basophilic granules and vacuoles that showed an enhanced activity of lysosomal acid phosphatase and acetylcholine esterase. The lysosomal vacuoles had the characteristics of autophagic vacuoles with unique sarcolemma features since the limiting membranes were positive for sarcolemma proteins such as dystrophin, sarcoglycans, dystroglycans, and caveolin. Immunohistochemistry using anti-lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP2) antibodies revealed the absence of the protein in all fibers, concordant with a diagnosis of Danon disease.