The patient was an 11-year-old male who visited a local hospital in August 2021 after discovering skin bleeding spots and ecchymosis that had been present for 3 days. The boy had paroxysmal epigastric pain and constipation for two weeks before his presentation. He denied any recent history of respiratory infection or vaccination. The physical examination revealed hemorrhagic spots and ecchymosis on the skin of the calf. The superficial lymph nodes, liver, and spleen were not palpable or enlarged. Routine blood tests showed that the platelet count (PLT) was 13 × 109/L; the white blood cell count, red blood cell count, and hemoglobin were normal . ALT, AST, creatinine, urea, PT, APTT, and electrolytes were normal. B-scan ultrasound of the liver, gall bladder, pancreas, spleen, intestine, and appendix failed to identify any abnormalities. At the same time, the platelet IgG was tested, and the result was positive. The boy was considered to have ITP, and a series of treatments were instituted . First, gamma globulin was administered at 1 g/kg. The next day, routine blood tests showed that the PLT count had increased to 23 × 109/L. The gamma globulin infusion was administered again at the same dose. On the following day, the PLT count dropped to 17 × 109/L. Considering this treatment failure, the local physician conducted screening for possible underlying infectious factors and immune diseases. On the following day, the PLT count was 19 × 109/L, and a plain chest X-ray showed no abnormalities. Mycoplasma pneumoniae IgM, Chlamydia pneumoniae IgM, respiratory syncytial virus IgM, adenovirus IgM, and Coxsackie virus IgM antibodies were negative; HIV, HBV, HCV, HAV, and Helicobacter pylori antibodies were negative . In addition, the boy's C13 urea breath test was negative and the urine test was normal. Autoantibody and thyroid function showed no abnormalities. In order to rule out acute leukemia and aplastic anemia, they tested the bone marrow examination. The bone marrow examination showed plate-producing megakaryocytopenia, which was consistent with thrombocytopenic bone marrow. According to these results, the patient was commenced on oral prednisolone at 1 mg/kg/d. Over the next twenty days, the PLT count was fluctuated around 21 × 109/L. During the above treatment, the patient was also given an infusion of 10 mg/kg of sulfoethylamine (Because of a lot of skin bleeding spots) and 200 mg of cimetidine . However, the boy continued reporting episodic abdominal pain and constipation, and the thrombocytopenia could not be relieved.
At this point, the boy presented to our hospital for treatment. We found that the PLT count was 17 × 109/L. Considering the failure of first-line treatment and the patient's accompanying gastrointestinal symptoms, we conducted a stool pathogen examination. BH was found in the stool . Subsequently, we performed a DNA pathogenic microbial macro analysis of the boy's stool and blood. The results showed that BH infection was found in the stool and negative in the blood. In addition, we found that in the boy's blood the level of cytokines (IL-6, IL-17, IFN-γ) was increased ; TNF-α, IL-4, IL-8, IL-10, IL-5 and IL-2 were not significantly altered. Then, metronidazole was administered against BH. The following day, the PLT count increased to 42 × 109/L and to 74 × 109/L and 105 × 109/L over the next two days. After 1 week of continuous oral metronidazole, the PLT count increased to 417 × 109/L. At the same time, the abdominal pain and constipation were relieved. Re-examination of stool showed negative. The metronidazole was ceased and the patient’s PLT count was maintained at 350–420 × 109/L during follow-up over the following six months.