A 39-year-old woman complained about post-coital bleeding one year ago. The menstrual cycle was normal and sometimes, she had intermittent lower abdominal pain. She married when she was 16 years old, has only one sexual partner, and has two children. She has not been vaccinated for HPV. Visual Inspection with Acetic Acid (VIA) examination result was negative with the feature of severe cervicitis, and then the patient was given Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA) procedure. Three weeks after TCA's procedure, speculum examination found morphological features of cervix malignancy. Speculum examination revealed a large exophytic cervical tumor sized 3 × 3 × 2 cm with atypical blood vessels, fragile, easy bleeding. Biopsy examination found mucinous adenocarcinoma, signet ring cell variant, with lymphovascular invasion. Both whole abdomen Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) with contrast and thorax x-ray were performed, and no abnormalities from those imaging studies .
The patient was performed a radical hysterectomy, right salpingectomy, left salpingo-oophorectomy, transposition of right ovary, and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. During the procedure, the exploration in the spleen, liver, colon, gaster, omentum, and diaphragma were discovered smooth without nodules .
The specimens were sent for histopathology examination. Seven days after surgery patient was discharged. Histopathology examination revealed mucinous adenocarcinoma, signet ring cell variant of the cervix. There was lymphovascular invasion and metastasis in one of the 11 right pelvic lymph nodes. While no metastatic deposit found in the left pelvic lymph nodes. Microscopically, the tumor mass is mainly arranged in non-cohesive clusters with abundant intracytoplasmic mucin and peripherally located nuclei, which resemble a signet ring. In addition, glandular and solid patterns were also found.
Malignant tumor cells invade almost the full thickness of the cervix. There was no invasion of the vagina or bilateral parametrium. According to FIGO staging, the stage was 1B2. The patient received 25 fractions external radiation therapy and two fractions for internal radiation therapy.
The patient routinely visits the oncology gynecology clinic for a routine follow up. In six months and a year after this patient had completed a series of radiotherapy, she was reported in good condition and got a MRI study. The MRI study found no pathological signal in the tumor bed cervix and vaginal punctum. There was no lymphadenopathy in parailliaca and paraaortic lymph nodes .