A 36-year-old French white woman with no underlying chronic conditions and a medical history of spontaneous pneumothorax presented to our institution for a motor deficit of the proximal portion and pain in her left lower limb with fever, which appeared 48 hours after implantation of a TVT-O for stress urinary incontinence (we did not know if she received any perioperative antibiotics). She took an anti-inflammatory drug (ketoprofen 50 mg, three times a day) for 4 days prior to admission to our hospital.
On clinical examination we did not find cellulitis or a collection, and she reported pain on palpation of her left thigh adductors. We performed a computed tomography (CT) scan on day 3 of her admission, which revealed an abscess of her left adductor muscle, measuring 53×28 mm , and the presence of a fistula between the abscess and the transobturator tape . Blood tests demonstrated very high inflammation parameters: C-reactive protein 300 mg/L and leukocytosis 18.54 giga/L [see Additional file : Table S1]. As she was clinically stable, we did not initiate antibiotic therapy before sampling the abscess.
On day 7, we sampled the abscess under ultrasound guidance. The liquid was purulent, and piperacillin-tazobactam 4 g three times a day and vancomycin 30 mg/kg/day intravenous treatment was initiated.
Two days later a purulent vaginal discharge appeared; our patient was still febrile. Surgery was indicated to allow local lavage and resection of the left part of the tape; the remaining transobturator tape could not be removed. The next day a necrotizing fasciitis of her inner and posterior left thigh appeared, her thigh was swollen, her skin was discolored and crepitus was present; she had tachycardia at 110 beats/minute and her blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg. A second laparotomy was conducted, with drainage and surgical lavage of the abscess. No hyperbaric oxygen was used due to her history of spontaneous pneumothorax.
The guided puncture cultures as well as the blood cultures were positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. Citrobacter koseri, sensitive to ampicillin-clavulanic acid, piperacillin-tazobactam, ceftriaxone, gentamycin, ciprofloxacin, and co-trimoxazole was recovered in the guided puncture culture. We adjusted the treatment to clindamycin 600 mg three times a day and piperacillin-tazobactam 4 g three times a day the same day. The local and general outcomes were favorable; we switched to oral antibiotic therapy with rifampicin 300 mg three times a day and ofloxacin 200 mg three times a day after 1 week and she was discharged. She had a monthly follow-up; the follow-up CT scan 1 month after discharge showed a complete disappearance of the abscess.
No vaginal discharge, pain, or fever was reported; the antibiotic therapy was given for a total duration of 2.5 months.