A 66 year old male presented with reduced vision in right eye 17 days after uneventful phacoemulsification with intraocular lens implantation at our centre. Uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) in right eye was 20/200 and left eye was 20/80. Slit lamp examination revealed right eye diffuse corneal stromal edema more pronounced centrally with descemet’s folds Fig. . The anterior chamber was deep and quiet and intraocular lens was in situ. On fundus examination, details were hazily discerned due to stromal edema. Left eye had immature senile cataract and no other positive findings were noted. The intraocular pressure was 14 mm Hg in both eyes. Conservative management in the form of Prednisolone acetate 1 % eyedrop, Hypertonic Saline 6 % eye ointment (Hypersol-6 Eye Ointment) and Homatropine eyedrop were started. Review of previous records revealed that right eye cornea was clear and BCVA was 20/30 at 1 week postoperative visit. Patient followed up three days later (Post-op day-20) and a DMD was noted Fig. . Intracameral SF6 20 % (0.2 ml) was injected under topical anesthesia. Oral Acetazolamide was also started. Next day (POD-21), DM was well apposed, inferiorly cornea was clear but superiorly corneal edema persisted Fig. . The very next day (POD-22), DM was seen re-detaching and Injection SF6 was repeated Fig. . The DM was still detached the next day (POD-23), hence pneumatic descemetopexy was repeated but this time with air. Four days later (POD-27), corneal edema was seen resolving, improving the uncorrected visual acuity to 20/120 but central DM cleft was still present Fig. . This time corneal venting incision with air tamponade was performed. Under topical anesthesia, a venting incision was made at the site of maximum stromal edema, using MVR blade. Air was injected to fill almost 2/3 of the anterior chamber to provide tamponade. Corneal massaging was done in a centripetal fashion (from periphery to centre) with rounded edges of a blunt forceps and egress of supra-descemet’s fluid was seen. This was continued till DM appeared apposed to corneal stroma. BCL was applied at the end of the procedure. DM was re-attached the next day and corneal edema cleared completely in a week’s time Fig. and . Patient was followed up at 2 weeks and at 6 weeks postoperatively the BCVA was 20/30. Both AS-OCT and Scheimpflug imaging revealed the central location of DMD Fig. and . Pachymetry at the apex was 856 μm and thinnest pachymetry was 698 μm as seen on Scheimpflug imaging Fig. .