A 51-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our out-patients’ clinic with a 2-week history of worsening abdominal pain in her left upper quadrant, exacerbated by abdominal flexion and extension maneuvers. She described symptoms as intermittent, and accompanied by loss of appetite, nausea, and having a “feculent” taste in her mouth. Her previous medical history was notable for an elevated body mass index (BMI) of 41 kg/m2, and in the year 2000 for laparoscopic adjustable gastric band (LAGB) implantation. She experienced weight loss of 30 kg after her original procedure, although 3 years later a partial perforation of the band into her stomach developed (confirmed endoscopically). Over the subsequent years, she required serial endoscopic follow-ups until 2005 when the band was covered by the gastric mucosa only on one third of its surface. From then on and for unknown reasons the endoscopic follow-up ceased. She remained asymptomatic and regained weight up to a BMI of 36.3 kg/m2 until her current presentation.
A clinical examination revealed left-sided abdominal tenderness without signs of abdominal guarding. The blood results were unremarkable, except white blood cells (WBC) with 11.3 G/l. A plain abdominal radiograph showed signs of small bowel obstruction ; and abdominal computed tomography scanning revealed intraluminal migration of the gastric band into the distal jejunum – still connected to the subcutaneous reservoir – folding the intestine on the catheter like a hand organ instrument .
After an unsuccessful attempt to remove the band endoscopically, our patient underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy, which showed that the gastric band was impacted in the distal jejunum causing obstruction. An enterotomy was performed via umbilical mini-laparotomy, and the partially digested silicon band was retrieved . The involved jejunal segment was resected due to its conglomerate formation with possible stenosis, followed by an end-to-end anastomosis. The operation was completed by removal of the port with the remaining catheter through the original port-site incision. The catheter entrance into the stomach was left untouched, and our patient’s recovery was uneventful. She explicitly did not want a conversion about an alternative bariatric surgery and refused further follow-ups.