A four-year-old female patient was admitted to the pediatric infectious ward due to a fever of unknown origin in January 2020.
She was a known case of Marfan syndrome with a family history of this syndrome in her mother. Both of them had a history of anterior
lens dislocation that led to surgery.
She also had a history of congenital heart disease, including atrial septal defect type 2 (ASD2), mitral regurgitation (MR),
and MV prolapse regarding fever, headache, and meningeal signs a lumbar puncture was performed. She was treated for probable
bacterial meningitis since the result of her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) test was positive and active; moreover, the white blood
cell was observed in CSF fluid.
After five days and secondary to the changing of heart murmur intensity that revealed progressive severe MR, she was referred to
a tertiary referral center for the evaluation of cardiac involvement. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a large dense
heterogeneous and oscillating mass (18 mm×12 mm in size) attached to the atrial septum closed to the hinge point of the anterior
leaflet of MV with independent movement towards the heart valve (an argument for the fungal endocardial vegetation)
.
Results of color Doppler flow imaging revealed an abnormal regurgitation flow at the areas of A3 anterior leaflet of mitral suggestive
of perforation of MV. In addition, valvular destruction, perforation of the anterior leaflet at the site of the lesion, as well as
the existence of perivalvular infection and severe eccentric MR reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. Sub-systemic pulmonary
hypertension was found with mild pericardial effusion due to acute heart failure, previous history of congenital heart disease, and ASD2.
Neurologic physical examination for the evaluation of meningeal involvement contains clinical examination and paraclinical data.
The cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed meningeal irritation and brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed a small subcortical
focus of involvement probably due to post-endocarditis embolic lesions.
Infective endocarditis (IE) was diagnosed according to the DUKE criteria. Regarding the clinical and paraclinical criteria,
one major criterion and two minor criteria were observed. Persistent fever and the presence of refractory heart failure due to
severe acute MR led to surgery for vegetation removal, MV repair, and ASD closure. Surgical findings in the operation room
indicated large fungal vegetation with perforation in the infection site. She was discharged after daily slow intravenous (IV)
injection of liposomal amphotericin B dose 0/3 mg/kg for four-week. Moreover, the daily consumption of oral antifungal Voriconazole
200 mg film-coated tablets was continued for one month at home.
The results of the present study showed in vitro resistance to fluconazole (minimum inhibitory concentration> 16 µg/mL).
The TTE in the outpatient clinic after two weeks, as well as one, three, and six months after discharge showed no recurrence
except mild eccentric non-significant MR.
summarize the results of the hematologic indices. Biochemical test results revealed
creatinine 0.3L mg/dl (NR: 0.6-1.4); AST(SGOT) 70H IU/L (NR 5-40); ALT(SGPT) 83H IU/L (NR 5-40).
The peripheral blood sample was taken and inoculated into an anaerobic blood culture medium (manufactured in BC, USA)
at 30ºC for five days in an automated blood culture system (manufactured in BC, USA); at 30ºC for five days; however,
no growth was observed. The resected vegetation was inoculated into formalin and normal saline solution. The pathology result
revealed a fibrohyalinized tissue with an area of fibrinoleukocytic exudate, mixed inflammatory cell infiltration,
and neovascularization consistent with endocarditis. Furthermore, the hematoxylin and eosin staining showed a few
thin hyphae-like elements. To confirm the fungal infection, the second portion of the specimen was sent to the Medical
Mycology Laboratory of the Center for Research and Training in Skin Diseases and Leprosy in Tehran, Iran for further evaluations.
Initially, the biopsy specimen of the MV was taken and a sub-culture was made on Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA)
(manufactured in Merck, Germany) at 35ºCfor seven days. After seven days, the colonies of Aspergillus spp.
were grown in the SDA medium. The PCR for the amplification of the β-tubulin gene was conducted to identify the species precisely.
Genomic DNA was obtained from the colonies cultured on the Czapek’s Agar (manufactured in Merck, Germany)
forseven days at 35ºC using the genomic DNA extraction kit (manufactured in Roche Life Science, Germany).
In this study, the amplification of the β-tubulin gene was performed using the β-tubulin forward and β-tubulin reverse primers
. The PCR amplicon was subjected to sequence using the same primers.
Subsequently, the sequences were compared with reference data available from the Gene Bank database using the BLAST
sequence search tool .
The antifungal susceptibility test was performed by the broth microdilution methodusing four antifungal agents,
including voriconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, and amphotericin B (manufactured in Sigma-Aldrich, USA).
Based on the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M38 3rd ed ,
Candida parapsilosis (ATCC 22019) was chosen as a quality control strain in every run.
The culture on SDA revealed green and powdery surface colonies. The microscopic examination of the colonies was compatible
with A.flavus. The sequencing result was interpreted and deposited in the GenBank under accession no: MW195498.
The A. flavus strain showed resistance to fluconazole with minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC>16 µg/mL).
Furthermore, susceptibility to voriconazole (MIC 0.313 µg/mL), amphotericin B (MIC 0.313 µg/ML), and itraconazole
(MIC 0.25 µg/mL) was noted in this study.
The patient was first treated with vancomycin and ceftriaxone which was
later switched to the combination of meropenem, ciprofloxacin, and vancomycin when the fever continued and the clinical
status deteriorated. The patient was treated with liposomal amphotericin B regarding the result of cultures and the diagnosis
of IA. She was discharged after four weeks of treatment with IV amphotericin B. It is worth mentioning that the antifungal
treatment was continued with oral voriconazole for an additional four weeks after the performance of the susceptibility test.
This case report was performed in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and written informed consent was obtained
from the legal guardians of the patient. The details will be included in the manuscript for publication.