A 69-year-old woman had been suffering from an intrathoracic mass with paravertebral localization at the level of the tracheal bifurcation, in the posterior left mediastinum at the level of the 4th to 7th thoracic vertebrae, for 5 years . With increasing back pain, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed again. The size of the tumor (37 mm × 39 mm × 64 mm) was found to be progressive and the indication for robot-assisted thoracotomy and tumor removal was given in case of unclear dignity. Retrospectively, a paraganglioma or schwannoma was considered as a differential diagnosis by the radiologists but was not further clarified preoperatively and no serum and urine tests were ordered.
The patient also complained of recurrent pectanginal symptoms and shortness of breath. At least two episodes of hypertensive disorders requiring hospitalization have been described with adjustments to antihypertensive medication. Acute coronary syndrome due to recurrent chest pain was repeatedly ruled out by negative troponin values. No further endocrinological examinations were carried out. A cardiac catheter examination in 2017 revealed a 50% stenosis of the LAD, which was treated conservatively. Echocardiography showed a normal cardiac ejection fraction, mild-left ventricular hypertrophy without relevant lesions. There were no significant changes in the follow-up examinations.
She is self-adjusted with a five-drug combination of antihypertensives (candesartan, lercanidipine, carvedilol, moxonidine, molsidomine). The patient's other cardiovascular risks include obesity (154 cm, 96 kg, BMI: 40.5 kg/m2), diet-managed diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia. Hypertensive encephalopathy has also been described.
Furthermore, she is taking atypical neuroleptics for schizophrenia and anxiety disorder and mirtazapine as an antidepressant.
Preoperatively, the patient received a peridural catheter, the placement of which was anatomically difficult (loss of resistance at 10.5 cm). After induction of anesthesia with propofol, sufentanil and rocuronium, intubation with a double lumen tube was performed without any problems. The insertion of a catheter for arterial pressure measurement in the left radial artery and a right internal jugular vein catheter was problem-free. Anesthesia was maintained by continuous administration of propofol (4.0 mg/kg/min), remifentanil (0.5 µg/kg/min), and cis-atracurium (1.0 µg/kg/min) and administration of 0.2% ropivacaine 5 ml/h, continuously + 10 ml ropivacaine 0.3% as an hourly bolus via epidural catheter. The depth of anesthesia was monitored by BIS and ranged from 40 to 50.
Robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (RATS) was performed by using da Vinci Xi® (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with 8 mm ports. The positioning of the patient was on her right side. After insertion of the camera trocar in the 8th ICS, the tumor was identified in the mediastinal area, between the spine and aorta, just below the aortic arch. Two further trocars were then placed under direct thoracoscopic view, and the operation was taken over by the console surgeon. After the circular incision of the parietal pleura around the tumor, there was an isolated rise in blood pressure from 130/70 mmHg to 220/100 mmHg, so opioid was administrated additionally, resulting in a brief improvement.
The removal of the tumor from the thoracic wall and from the posterior mediastinum and the free dissection of the tumor was free of technically problems. During this stage of operation, a fulminant blood pressure crisis occurred with an increase to 300/130 (MAP 187) mmHg as well as the increase in heart rate from 80/min to 130/min.
Immediate deepening of anesthesia and administration of a total of 100 mg urapidil and 10 mg metoprolol did not result in sufficient improvement; systolic blood pressure continued to exceed 220 mmHg and was sufficiently lowered by nitroprusside sodium bolus administration followed by continuous i.v. administration via a perfusor. After completely resection of the tumor, there was a significant reduction in blood pressure, so that low-dose catecholamine therapy was now necessary. The patient was ventilated for further monitoring in the intensive care unit and extubated promptly. No further blood pressure spikes occurred. The patient could be discharged from the hospital 5 days after surgery without neurological deficits. The patient recovered without complications.
During the hypertensive crisis, blood was drawn for analysis of catecholamine breakdown products of epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine: metanephrine i.p. 117.8 pg/mL (normal value: < 84.0 pg/mL), normetanephrine i.p. 514.4 pg/mL (normal value: < 190.0 pg/mL), 3-methoxytyramine i.p. 17.2 pg/mL (normal value: < 16.0 pg/mL). Histologic examination of the specimen revealed a picture of paraganglioma without evidence of malignancy.
Postoperatively, all antihypertensive medications were paused, and resumption of medication was not necessary due to the normotensive values. A follow-up endocrinological examination 3 months after surgery revealed values in the normal range for metanephrine, normetanephrine, and 3-methoxytyramine in plasma. Similarly, the patient was referred to the genetic outpatient clinic for further diagnosis.