A 48-year-old male presented to our emergency department with sudden severe back pain without a history of trauma and infection.
The patient, initially presenting with sudden severe back pain for about three day, was admitted to a local hospital. No abdominal pain, limb pain, syncope, or other neurologic changes occurred at this time. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed space occupying and calcification within the lumen of thoracic aorta . His back pain persisted after sedative and analgesic treatment. He was immediately transferred to our institution.
The patient was previously healthy, and had no history of trauma, infection, hypertension, or diabetes mellitus.
He denied a history of alcohol consumption and smoking.
Upon admission, his heart rate was 89 bpm, blood pressure was 123/70 mmHg, and respiratory rate was 21 breaths/min. Physical examination showed normal mental status, and no focal neurologic changes were noted. Abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness were not detected. All peripheral pulses were present, and no carotid or subclavian bruit was observed.
The laboratory tests yielded a troponin T value of 5.7 ng/L, brain natriuretic peptide of 162 pg/mL, blood leukocyte count of 6.7 × 109/L, creatinine level of 78.2 µmol/L, alanine aminotransferase of 37.5 IU/L, and aspartate aminotransferase of 43.9 IU/L. Thrombin, prothrombin, and partial thromboplastin times, antithrombin III, protein C and S antigens, lupus anticoagulant, and anticardiolipin antibodies were examined and found to be within the normal limits. No evidence of coagulopathies was found. The electrocardiogram was unremarkable.
CTA revealed a hypermobile pedunculated thrombus attached to the lesser curve of the aortic arch and extending to the descending aorta . Multiple calcified plaques were located at the aortic arch, and some calcified plaques were within the floating thrombus . The floating thrombus was connected to the aortic wall by a pedicle . The visceral, carotid and main peripheral arteries were patent.
However, the etiology of this floating aortic thrombus remained unknown, and the CTA images were insufficiently clear as to make a definitive diagnosis. Subsequently, a 3D-printed model of the aorta and floating thrombus were made according to the imaging data. Using this model, a longitudinal thrombus in the lumen and an intimal defect in the adjacent aortic wall were found. Moreover, a longitudinal intimal flap connected the floating thrombus and adjacent abnormal aortic wall . Based on these findings, an occult AD resulting in a floating aortic thrombus was identified.