We report the case of a 30-year-old Asian woman, with no past medical history, diagnosed with locked-in syndrome due to multiple postpartum infarctions. Intracerebral hemorrhage and intraventricular hemorrhage were confirmed during follow-up, after which she was admitted to the intensive care unit. Long-term mechanical ventilation care was expected after intubation; the patient was thus referred to the thoracic surgery department for tracheostomy.
Tracheostomy was performed in the usual manner . In this case, complications such as subcutaneous emphysema or pneumo-mediastinum did not occur; however, tidal volume did not shift to the lung once the tube was connected to a mechanical ventilator. After noting that the ventilator was not working appropriately, the endotracheal tube was reinserted through the oral orifice. Then, through bronchoscopy, we found that the posterior tracheal wall was torn. The tearing wound was 5–6 cm in length, from the middle to distal parts of the trachea (approximately, third to fifth tracheal rings). At this point, following general guidelines, we should have considered right thoracotomy for management. However, we performed extending tracheostoma technique and endotracheal suture.
After examining the torn tracheal wall via bronchoscopy , the endotracheal (ETT) tube was lifted from tracheostoma level, and the tracheostoma was extended on both sides to expose the laceration area. After the area was confirmed, under direct vision, suturing was started from the superior part, with vicryl 4–0, using an open needle holder. While lifting the thread, the trachea under the opening level was exposed as much as possible, and continuous suture was performed downward. After suturing was complete, the tracheostomy tube was placed slightly below the lesion, facilitating mechanical ventilation care.
After 7 days, antibiotics for pneumonia were discontinued. There were no postoperative complications .
On day 13, the patient was moved to the general ward, and her first tracheostomy tube change was performed 2 weeks later. No oxygen requirements were present. She was then transferred to a rehabilitation hospital.