In September 2012, a 37-year-old woman was hospitalized due to a two-week history of persistent fever. Thirty days before she had given birth to a healthy child through normal vaginal delivery in the 39th week. The patient had a history of asymptomatic uterine fibroid, but no systematic follow-up had been performed, despite two first-trimester abortions in the two years prior to hospitalization. She had had no recent history of antibiotic treatment, and her records showed no previous invasive procedures, instrumentation or foreign bodies in the uterus.
On admission, body temperature was 39°C, blood pressure 105/50 mmHg, and pulse 100 beats/min. Her respiratory rate was 30 breaths/min. Physical findings were normal, except for tenderness in lower abdominal quadrants. Gynaecological examination revealed an enlarged uterus with tenderness upon deep palpation. Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 14,200/mm3 (81.5% neutrophils) and platelet count of 95,000/mm3. C-reactive protein and procalcitonin were 10.8 mg/dL and 59.71 ng/mL, respectively. Chest X-ray was negative for pleuroparenchymal lesions, and transthoracic echocardiogram was negative for valvular vegetations. Abdominal ultrasound revealed hepatosplenomegaly, but was negative for effusion and nodular lesions.
Since no evident source of infection was apparent, a full-body CT scan was performed. Images showed mild bilateral hydroureteronephrosis and an enlarged uterus with heterogeneous masses suggestive of leiomyoma .
The patient was accordingly started on meropenem and amikacin, but after a three-day course, her temperature remained high (39°C) and her clinical conditions failed to improve. Antibiotic treatment was therefore supplemented with teicoplanin and metronidazole.
Blood cultures grew S. paucimobilis, which was fully responsive to all tested antibiotics including β-lactams, carbapenems, and fluoroquinolones .
A new CT scan documented a thickening of the pulmonary interstitium, bilateral basal pleural effusion, and slight effusion in the rectouterine pouch and pelvis. Transvaginal ultrasound confirmed uterine enlargement, and revealed two hypointense solid masses located over the fundal portion and left side of the uterine body.
Explorative laparotomy revealed a large myoma (10 cm) located over the fundus of the enlarged uterus, and a smaller myoma (3 cm) on the left side of the uterine body. A small amount of ascitic fluid was also present in the rectouterine pouch. The fundal myoma was dissected from the uterus, resulting in an outflow of purulent fluid and colliquative necrotic material . Hysterectomy was not deemed necessary, and no complications arose during the postoperative course.
Antibiotic therapy with teicoplanin, metronidazole and meropenem was given for fifteen days, and histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of pyomyoma. Aerobic and anaerobic cultures obtained from the specimen did not yield bacterial growth. The patient was discharged from hospital in good condition on postoperative day 16.