A 57-year-old male experiencing abdominal pain for 1 mo was admitted to our hospital in September 2020.
The patient developed epigastric pain 1 mo prior, which had worsened over the previous week.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
Review of the patient’s medical records indicated the patient had denied any history of HBV vaccination, HBV infection or hepatitis, as well as any history of blood transfusion, tattooing, intravenous drug abuse or family history of HBV infection.
Initial physical examination of the patient demonstrated mental clarity and good spirits. The patient had a dull complexion with no yellow staining on sclera or skin surfaces. Cardiopulmonary auscultation showed no abnormality. No tenderness or rebound tenderness were found across the entire abdomen, except for percussive pain in the liver area. Bowel sounds were normal, no edema was detected in the lower extremities and the patient tested negative for hepatic encephalopathy asterixis.
Results of laboratory testing assessments of serum marker levels were as follows: Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level greater than 2000.00 ng/mL (normal range: 0.89-8.78 ng/mL); negativity for both HBsAg and hepatitis B virus e antigen (HBeAg); and anti-HBsAg antibody level greater than 1000.00 mIU/mL (normal range: < 10 mIU/mL), anti-HBeAg level of 0.04 S/Co (normal range: > 1.0 S/Co) and anti-HBcAg level of 9.06 S/Co (normal range: > 1.0 S/Co). Analysis of serum marker levels related to liver function indicated abnormal liver function, with alanine aminotransferase of 29 U/L (normal range: 9-50 U/L), aspartate transaminase of 65 U/L (normal range: 15-40 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase of 274 U/L (normal range: 120-250 U/L), gamma glutamyl transpeptidase of 213 U/L (normal range: 10 to 60 U/L), alkaline phosphatase of 145U/L (normal range: 45-125 U/L) and alpha hydroxy butyric acid deaminase of 224 U/L (normal range: 72-190 U/L).
B-ultrasound scanning of the posterior abdomen revealed a hypoechoic solid mass in the right lobe of the liver with uneven density and irregular edges, a characteristic presentation of HCC. Moreover, mild splenomegaly was observed, which warranted further examination. Therefore, enhanced computed tomography (CT) scanning was conducted. CT scan results revealed an area of low-density soft tissue in a scanned plane within the upper abdomen, with mild density enhancement observed in the arterial phase and non-homogeneous density enhancement observed in the portal phase that together were suggestive of HCC accompanied by splenomegaly .
The anti-HBs concentration of the patient's serum was quantified by chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay after dilution, which was finally confirmed to be 30,936 mIU/mL. Next, we selected a sample from this patient and ordinary anti-HBs-positive (200 mIU/mL) samples to conduct in vitro serological neutralization experiments along with HBsAg samples. The results showed that the effective neutralization rate of patients' serum was 88.8%, which was much higher than the 21.9% of ordinary anti-HBs-positive serum. It is concluded that the surface antibody of hepatitis B still has a strong protective effect in patients, and the patients may still be in the active period of virus replication.
Results of all serum marker-based assessments of HBV disease status in this patient revealed very high titers of anti-HBsAg and anti-HBc antibodies. Meanwhile, Novartis screening test results of patient blood indicated a positive HBV DNA result (detection sensitivity: 3 IU/mL), supporting categorization of the patient’s disease status as an Occult Hepatitis B virus infection (OBI); OBI status refers to an HBV patient’s serological state as characterized by a negative HBsAg detection result accompanied by detectable HBV DNA in serum and/or liver tissues and a positive anti-HBcAg antibody detection result with or without detected anti-HBsAg antibody.