A 75-year-old Caucasian man was admitted for bicytopenia in May 2013. His blood cell count was as follows: hemoglobin 8 g/dl, platelets 87 × 109/l, and leukocytes 6.1 × 109/L . His medical history included T2D treated with biphasic insulin aspart, 50 units at breakfast and 30 units at bedtime, and the dose of rapid-acting insulin was adjusted according to his blood glucose level at lunch. He was also followed for triple-bypass surgery for coronary disease in 2010. No family history of hematological malignancies was noted. Initially, he was hospitalized in an intensive care unit for grade IV anemia at 5.5 g/dl. After blood transfusions, he was admitted in our hematology department. Bone marrow aspiration showed multilineage dysplasia with 8% of blasts , consistent with a diagnosis of MDS with excess blasts: refractory anemia with excess blasts-1 (RAEB-1). A karyotype analysis identified trisomy 13. Immunophenotypic evaluation showed the presence of CD34+, CD117+, cytoplasmic myeloperoxidase (CMPO+), and CD33− cells. Plasma folate, vitamin B12, iron, and thyroid stimulating hormone levels were normal. No inflammatory syndrome was found. He was initially treated with darbepoetin 300 μg per week, without response.
Two months later, because of a worsening of cytopenia, a second bone marrow aspiration was performed. It showed 29% of blasts, consistent with the diagnosis of AML progression . He consented to participate in a phase I–II clinical research study assessing the combination of 5-azacitidine with idarubicin in July 2013. He showed a partial response with 8% of bone marrow blasts after six cycles, and transfusion independence. After four cycles of 5-azacitidine, he reported higher blood glucose levels 2–3 days after the start of each 5-azacitidine cycle, requiring an increased dose of self-administered insulin. No change in diet or in physical activities or other causes of glycemic dysregulation such as corticosteroids were noted. Further monitoring confirmed higher blood glucose levels from days 4 to 12 of each 5-azacitidine cycle . Our patient experienced such dysregulation during all the additional 15 cycles until a fatal progression of AML.