A 49-year-old woman was investigated for intestinal dysmotility with symptoms of gradual weight loss, postprandial epigastric bloating, a sense of repletion and vomiting over an 8-month period. Since her teenage years, she had maintained a steady weight of 48 kg, but had lost 6 kg over the last 8 months. Her past medical history was remarkable for symptoms suggestive of Raynaud's syndrome, multi-joint arthralgia and an episode of anorexia 4 years previously. She started to experience symptoms of Raynaud's syndrome nearly 5 years ago when she changed her occupation and started working in the food catering industry. There was no deterioration of the symptoms of Raynaud's syndrome associated with the weight loss. There was no history of recent trauma, surgery, prolonged immobilisation or neurological illness. Her weight loss was gradual. A gastroscopy demonstrated a large residue of fluid and undigested food in her stomach with a dilated duodenum extending approximately 10 cm distal to the pylorus. Duodenal and gastric biopsies were negative. Symptoms of presumed delayed gastric emptying failed to resolve after a trial of prokinetics and proton pump inhibitors and she was admitted with hypoalbuminaemia, hypokalaemia and continued weight loss.
A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a hugely dilated stomach extending to the pelvis. The second part of the duodenum (D2) was dilated proximal to a point of sharp obstruction at the level of the third part of the duodenum (D3). At this point of obstruction, the aorto-mesenteric distance was reduced to 6 mm . A CT scan also confirmed the impingement of the left renal vein between the aorta and superior mesenteric artery (SMA; see Figure ). There was no thickening of the wall of the duodenum or extrinsic mass lesion. Sagittal reconstruction of CT images through the mid-abdomen showed that the angle between the SMA and the aorta (SMA-aorta angle) was reduced to 16°. A diagnosis of Wilkie's syndrome was made on the basis of clinical suspicion and CT findings. The potential cause of the syndrome was unclear and the only obvious precipitating factor was her gradual loss of weight over 8 months.
A 7-day trial of conservative management with a nasogastric tube, enteral feeding supplements and prokinetics failed. The patient's symptoms worsened, and she experienced more frequent vomiting and lost a further 1 kg. In view of the continued weight loss and worsening symptoms, the conservative management was abandoned and the patient chose to have Strong's procedure and open surgery.
An attempted laparoscopic duodenojejunostomy and mobilisation of the duodenum (Strong's procedure) was abandoned as the massively distended stomach did not allow a satisfactory assessment of the third part of the duodenum. During the open procedure (laparotomy), the duodenum was Kocherised and the duodenojejunal flexure was mobilised to perform a side-to-side duodenojejunostomy. There was no evidence of alternative causes of obstruction. Her symptoms gradually improved after the operation, she steadily gained weight and her biochemical markers returned to normal. The patient returned to work 3 weeks after surgery.
A subsequent CT scan showed less gastric distention with evidence of continued poor gastric emptying secondary to an enlarged redundant stomach, suggesting persistent gastroparesis. The symptoms of vomiting and poor gastric emptying returned 5 months after surgery. A gastroscopy confirmed an enlarged redundant stomach with a patent duodenojejunostomy and poor gastric emptying. Her symptoms improved with supplement feeding for 3 days and correction of her hypokalaemia. Endoscopic biopsies of the duodenum and stomach failed to indicate any alternative diagnosis such as intestinal myopathy.
She was also reviewed in our hospital and a tertiary hospital 14 months after the initial operation. She still had a few episodes of vomiting especially after eating a large meal and her weight remained unchanged. Again endoscopic and radiological investigation confirmed the diagnosis of gastroparesis related to Wilkie's syndrome.