A 62-year-old woman was admitted to First Department of Surgery Faculty of Medicine University of Fukui with concerns of severe pain associated with a firm mass in the anus. Her medical history included a hysterectomy for cervical cancer at the age of 36 years. She was a non-smoker and did not drink alcohol. The findings of a physical examination revealed no abdominal masses or tenderness; however, the rectal examination revealed a firm nodular mass at the anal verge advancing along the left side of the rectum. Endoscopic evaluation revealed an anorectal mass , and biopsy results were consistent with moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. The laboratory tests showed elevated levels of squamous carcinoma antigen at 3.9 µg/L (normal < 1.5 µg/L) and normal levels of serum carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed thickening in the left lateral wall of the anal canal . CT and small paramagnetic iron oxide magnetic resonance imaging showed several vague low-density foci in both hepatic lobes, the largest measuring 2.5 cm, that were suspicious of metastatic disease . The cancer was classified as stage IV, T4N0M1.
The patient underwent rectal amputation with lateral lymph node dissection (D3). Macroscopically, a type 2 tumor was found half way around the wall of the anal canal. The tumor was histopathologically diagnosed as moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma . No metastasis in the regional or lateral lymph nodes was observed. Additionally, immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor was positive for p16 , which indicates the presence of human papilloma virus (HPV).
Ileus was observed on the 5th postoperative day. Thereafter, a small bowel decompression tube was inserted, and a conservative treatment was performed. On the 14th postoperative day, the patient underwent an ileus release procedure. The cause of the ileus was adhesion of the small intestine to the pelvic floor. Postoperatively, we found a recurrence of ileus and a pelvic abscess; therefore, 1 month later, we performed an ileus release again and abscess drainage. The patient had severe adhesions in the abdominal cavity, which made dissection of the intestine and drainage of the abscess difficult. Postoperatively, the midline wound was contiguous with a vulnerable area of the small intestine, and a small bowel leak was formed. Healing was achieved by continuous aspiration of the small bowel leak. It took approximately 3 months from the initial surgery to the healing of the complication. The abdominal CT scan after treatment for complications showed notable enlargement of the liver metastases .
Because the patient was physically exhausted due to the complications, she underwent RF hyperthermia as first-line treatment for the liver metastases, as this modality is less burdensome. We combined anticancer drug treatment with mitomycin c (MMC) and cisplatin, which is sensitized by RF hyperthermia. RF hyperthermia was administered once a week for 5 weeks. As the next line of treatment, systemic chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin (CDDP) was administered, which is recommended for stage IV anal canal squamous cell carcinoma in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines . To meet the patient’s request for outpatient chemotherapy, low-dose CDDP (10 mg) and 5-FU (600 mg/m2) were administered once a week as an outpatient. She underwent this treatment regimen until 22 months postoperatively and showed notable reduction in the size of the liver metastases . The patient experienced an allergic reaction to CDDP, and the regimen was changed to a combination of TS-1 and docetaxel, which was continued until 58 months postoperatively.
During the course of systemic chemotherapy at 16 months postoperatively, one metastasis appeared in the left lower lung field and radiation therapy was performed. After receiving a total dose of 50 Gy, the lung metastases disappeared and remained in complete remission (CR) for over 9 years . For the remnant liver metastases at segment 6 and 8, 50 Gy radiotherapy was administered at 23 and 49 months postoperatively. The liver metastases resolved 54 months postoperatively , and the anticancer drug treatment was discontinued. The patient remained in CR for 10 years after the initial presentation.