A 52-year-old woman experienced a blunt neck trauma due to a bicycle accident. After a car collision car the impact with the windscreen wipers caused the injury. At the time, the patient was suffering from Graves’ disease, positive for anti-thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies, with a multinodular goiter and was receiving long-term medical therapy with carbimazole 5 mg per day. Two hours after the accident, the patient presented to the emergency department with painful swelling of the neck, inspiratory stridor and increasing hoarseness. The clinical examination revealed a palpable mass on the right anterior part of the neck. Emergency tracheal intubation was performed due to progressive breathlessness and dyspnea. Subsequently, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a laceration of the right thyroid lobe with surrounding hematoma and tracheal deviation to the contralateral side . Therefore, the patient underwent emergency neck exploration with a 4-cm Kocher incision followed by a right hemithyroidectomy. Intraoperatively, the dorsal aspect of the right lobe of the thyroid gland was found to be ruptured with active arterial bleeding from branches of the inferior thyroid artery. The recurrent laryngeal nerve was macroscopically identified and preserved. Because of the bleeding into the surrounding tissue, it was particularly difficult to definitely identify the parathyroid glands due to anatomical complexity in this case. Even the location of the upper parathyroid gland, normally identified on the posterior surface of the upper pole of the thyroid gland, was not obvious, due to disturbed surrounding tissue caused by the bleeding. Postoperatively, the patient was monitored in the intensive care unit for 32 h. The patient was extubated after a further six hours, and the subsequent postoperative course was uneventful. Hoarseness disappeared spontaneously after two days. The histopathological analysis confirmed a multinodular goiter. Laryngoscopy was performed three days postoperatively and did not indicate any pathological alterations. Thyroid hormone levels were in the normal range directly after surgery and three weeks postoperatively. The one-month postoperative follow-up revealed normal thyroid function, consistent with full recovery of the patient.