A 45-year-old man presented to our eye clinic with complains of unbearable pain in the left eye and headache. The patient had history of GDI surgery 3 years ago in his left eye with Ahmed glaucoma valve (AGV) implantation. He experienced pain of the left eye in early February, went to see doctors in mid-February with treatment of intravenous clindamycin 1.2 g/qd for more than 10 days, the medication could temporarily relive the ocular pain. Due to COVID-19 pandemic, the patient did not consult doctors again, he took counter paracetamol by himself to relive pain. One month later he noticed displacement of AGV from his left eye, and then came to our eye clinic. The patient did not have any underlying diseases or medication history, his work was on freshwater aquaculture.
On ophthalmic examination, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 (OD) and no light perception (OS), with intraocular pressure (IOP, normal range 10–21 mmHg) of 17 mmHg (OD) and Tn (normal tension) + 1 (OS). The left eye showed conjunctival edema with congestion, corneal edema, hypopyon, and ocular fundus was not visible microscopically. No obvious abnormality was found in the right eye. The blood count revealed mild leukocytosis. Ocular ultrasonography showed vitreous opacity and mild atrophy of the left eye . Thus the condition was presumptively diagnosed as infectious endophthalmitis. Considering the infection has resulted in severe intraocular tissue destruction and deteriorated vision, emergency enucleation of the infected eyeball was performed to prevent dissemination of the infection and sympathetic ophthalmia [, ]. During the surgery purulent exudates were observed, the ocular specimens and purulent exudates were subjected to microbiological investigation.
Within 48 h, bacterial growth was observed in blood agar when cultured in 5% CO2, at 35 °C . Ziehl-Neelsen staining of the monoclonal colonies revealed the presence of acid-fast bacilli , which was further identified as Mycobacterium houstonense by 16S rRNA and 16S–23S rRNA PCR, the primers are listed in Table . The amplified sequences of 16S rRNA and 16S–23S rRNA spacer region gene were compared with those available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information GenBank database, which revealed homology of 99.86 and 98.7% with M. houstonense (GenBank sequence ID: KJ913784.1) respectively.
Antimicrobial susceptibility against M. houstonense was determined using minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) by micro broth dilution method, the procedure and interpretation of the results were conducted in accordance with the CLSI M100 guidelines [, ]. The results showed that the strain was susceptible to levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin and amikacin, which was resistant to doxycycline, sulfamethoxazole and tobramycin. Subsequently, the patient was treated with a combination of intravenous amikacin 0.6 g/qd and oral levofloxacin 0.5 g/qd according to the drug sensitivity results for a week, and then microbiological investigations on conjunctival sac secretion and the blood were tested negative. Subsequently the patient was discharged to see the infectious specialist, and the treatment regimen was changed to oral levofloxacin 0.5 g twice a day for 40 days, the patient was followed up for 4 months without any systemic and ocular abnormality.