We report the case of a 24-year-old female patient with no significant history who was admitted to the emergency room following the onset of acute confusion and fear of imminent death. Few days before her admission, she had rhinitis with sore throat and headache.
In the emergency room, she presented agitation, hallucinations, echolalia with ideas of death and aggression. Physical and neurological examination were not showing pathological features. Laboratory testing demonstrated no abnormalities, with a normal white blood cell count and normal C-reactive protein. Toxicology screening for barbiturate, tricyclic, benzodiazepine, amphetamine, methamphetamine and cocaine was negative. Electroencephalogram (EEG) and brain scan were also normal. The patient was hospitalized for an additional assessment.
At first, there was a spontaneous resolution of her psychiatric symptoms. Two days later, the reappearance of agitation, impulsive aggression, and visual hallucinations led to psychiatric hospitalization on suspicion of anxiety disorder. In the psychiatric department, a treatment with olanzapine 30 mg per day, risperidone and lorazepam was initiated. Nevertheless, after 4 days, her clinical condition worsened, including impaired consciousness, pyrexia, tachycardia, swallowing disorders and food refusal. In views of this clinical picture, a neuroleptic malignant syndrome was suspected and the patient was transferred to the emergency room.
In the emergency room, she presented a state of catatonia with fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, muscle rigidity and swallowing disorders. Laboratory testing revealed inflammatory syndrome (CRP 50 mg/L) with a normal white blood cell count. Screening for autoimmune diseases (anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-nuclear antibodies) was negative. Lumbar puncture revealed transparent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with IgG–oligoclonal bands without pleocytosis and normal values for glucose and protein. Polymerase chain reactions for herpes zoster, enterovirus and herpes simplex on CSF were normal. Blood and CSF cultures were negative. Further immunologic tests on CSF were sent to a university laboratory. EEG and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were also normal.
Due to the deterioration of consciousness, swallowing disorders, respiratory distress syndrome and severe bradycardia, the patient was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Neuroleptics were stopped. On day 23, a new Brain MRI was performed and showed asymmetry of the hippocampal regions as well as a diffusion restriction on the whole temporal cortex (see Fig. ), suggesting autoimmune limbic encephalitis. Pulsed therapy with 1 g/day methylprednisolone was initiated. The patient continued to develop dysautonomia disorders (low blood pressure, tachycardia, apnoea and Cheyne–Stokes respiration) as well as episodes of acute agitation. A tracheotomy was performed due to the necessity of a long-term mechanical ventilation. Finally, CSF results showed the presence of IgG oligoclonal bands and testing for anti NMDA receptor antibodies were positive in the CSF. The 48-h EEG did not demonstrate any epileptogenic activity. A transvaginal ultrasound and a whole-body PET–CT were performed in search of a tumoral origin, such as ovarian teratoma, which were both negative.
The patient benefited from intravenous methylprednisolone therapy as well as 10 plasmapheresis sessions, followed by oral corticosteroid therapy (64 mg/day as starting dose) followed by a mycophenolic acid 500 mg twice a day for 2 weeks then 1 g twice a day (to be continued for 6 months). The patient’s clinical condition gradually improved, and she was transferred to the neurology department.
A neuropsychological and neurological assessment showed a pyramidal syndrome with proximal predominant left hemiparesis, a deficit in verbal fluency and pathological denomination. Clinical progress was slow but favourable with corticosteroid therapy and mycophenolic acid treatment. The patient returned home after 56 days of hospitalization. At an 18-month follow-up, there was still a functional deficit (dexterity and balance) but the 18F-FDG PET scan for oncologic follow-up remained negative.