A 42-year-old female with abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant (RUQ) for the past three months, was admitted to Afzalipour Medical Center hepatobiliary surgery ward in Kerman. The patient was a housewife living in rural areas of the southeastern province of Sistan and Baluchestan in Iran. . She reported very little raw vegetable consumption since she has been suffering from indigestion. No history of fever, weight loss, urticaria, diarrhea, jaundice, and cough was described. Remarkable laboratory findings include mild leukocytosis (WBC: 5700/mm3), anemia (RBC: 3.64 × 106/mm3, Hb: 8.7 g/dl, HCT: 28.5%, MCV: 78.3 fl.), and hypoglycemia (FBS = 77 mg/dl). Other serum factors like bilirubin, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were within normal range. A history of hypothyroidism was recorded in the patient hospital documents.
In abdominal ultrasonography, a dilated biliary tract was reported. Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed dilated Common Bile Duct (CBD) and an ill-defined mass in CBD. Subsequently, Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS) was performed by linear echo-endoscope. EUS reported a hyperechoic parenchyma in the liver seen without intrahepatic stone and normal left adrenal. CBD was dilated and measured at 15 mm and 8 mm in proximal and distal parts, respectively. CBD contained a large 14 mm in diameter mass lesion. Gallbladder had a lot of sludge and micro lithiasis. In the pancreas, dilated pancreatic duct was measured at 4 mm at the neck. The patient underwent laparotomy for CBD exploration. Cholecystectomy was performed. Distal CBD was opened up, and nine leaf-like motile flatworms were found with thick bile discharge. The organisms were preserved in 70% ethanol for further investigations. A single dose of oral triclabendazole (10 mg/kg) was administered. The patient was discharged in good condition 14 days after admission. On the 5th post op seven months after hospital discharge, her health condition was satisfactory.
Morphological and molecular characterization of the organisms was performed in the Department of Medical Parasitology, Kerman University of Medical Sciences. The organisms were identified as helminths belonging to the class Trematoda. The flukes were morphometrically studied, and the body length and width were measured using a digital caliper. The length and width of the flukes were 17.4–26.7 mm and 12.1–14.6 mm, respectively.
For molecular identification, a small piece of the posterior parts of the flukes was cut, and DNA extraction was performed. According to previous studies, fragments of the single-copy genes phosphoenol- pyruvate carboxykinase (pepck) were amplified from nuclear DNA by multiplex PCR assay [, ]. The PCR products were run on a 1.5% agarose gel. For phylogenetic analysis, a 500 bp partial mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (cox1) gene fragment was amplified by Ita8: ACGTTGGATCATAAGCGTGT and Ita9: CCTCATCCAACATAACC . The PCR products were sequenced by Sanger sequencing, and the sequence data were published in GenBank under the Accession Number OP600486- OP600489. Phylogenetic analysis was performed by MEGA 6.0 as described elsewhere. The phylogenetic tree was inferred by Maximum Likelihood method based on Kimura 2- parameter model with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Specific identification was also confirmed by comparison with the known sequences of the corresponding species in GenBank . All the Fasciola isolates were identified as F. hepatica using both pepck multiplex PCR and cox1 sequencing. DNA sequence polymorphism analysis using DnaSP V.6.12.03 software revealed four haplotypes and five polymorphic sites in the 423 bp fragment among the nine sequenced isolates.