A 63-year-old woman underwent investigations for epigastric abdominal pain. She had no history of alcohol consumption or pancreatitis. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a moderate-sized pancreatic cyst on the pancreatic body with extrapancreatic growth. An enhanced computed tomography scan (Toshiba Aquilion™ 64) revealed that the massive simple cyst in the pancreatic body was an extrapancreatic growth with poor enhancement, which was approximately 52 × 32 × 23 mm in size. The cyst had developed extrapancreatically and the main pancreatic duct had slight dilatation with compression of the pancreatic parenchyma. There was neither a mass lesion nor a low-density area suggestive of pancreatic cancer. The pancreatic parenchyma was compressed around the cyst. We did not suspect pancreatic cancer based on CT imaging alone . The simple cyst in the pancreatic body showed low signal intensity on T1-weighted MRI and high intensity on T2-weighted MRI. Additionally, MRI (Siemens Magnetom Aera 1.5 T) showed slight dilatation of the main pancreatic duct. The compressed pancreatic parenchyma remained unchanged around the cyst on MRI . MRCP findings are shown in Figure -C. Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a 40-mm cystic lesion with a thick wall and an intramural nodule in the cyst lesion. There was no mass lesion in the pancreatic parenchyma. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed no mucinous discharge and no enlargement of the ampulla of Vater. ERCP also showed extrinsic compression of the main pancreatic duct from the pancreatic head to the body. Washing cytology from the pancreatic duct was classified as Class III. Blood tests for pancreatic enzymes (amylase, lipase, and elastase) and serum levels of tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9, DUPAN-2, and Span-1) were all within the normal range. The differential diagnoses were mucinous cyst neoplasm (MCN), serous cyst neoplasm (SCN), intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), pseudocyst with chronic pancreatitis, and pancreatic ductal carcinoma, but we were unable to reach a definitive diagnosis preoperatively. We had planned a pancreaticoduodenectomy but we could not remove the tumor because of significant invasion of the surrounding tissue (portal vein, superior mesenteric vein, etc.). The fluid content of the cyst was serous and not mucinous. Aspiration cytology from the pancreatic cyst revealed papillary cell clumps with nuclear expansion and clear nuclear bodies. The cells had irregular nuclei with substantial chromatin content. However, these cells were few and the findings were therefore classified as Class III (no malignancy) . The surrounding white connective tissue samples were found to be positive for pancreatic adenocarcinoma on pathological examination during surgery . Histopathology is shown in Figure . The pathological findings demonstrated invasive adenocarcinoma with an irregular small lumen and small alveolar configuration. We initiated chemoradiotherapy after the operation.