A 19-year-old male patient reported to the Oral & Maxillofacial Department of Brong Ahafo Regional Hospital in Sunyani, Ghana, with involuntary, spontaneous, conjugated, and rhythmic upward eye deviation and inability to close both eyes. Two days prior to presentation at our facility, he visited a pharmacy with complaints of fever measuring 37.9 °C, general body pains, and weakness. A rapid diagnostic test (RDT) conducted at the pharmacy was positive for Plasmodium falciparum. Therefore, the patient received antimalarial therapy artemether/lumefantrine, Coartem® (Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland), at a dose of 80/480 mg and to be taken after 8 h on day one and twice daily thereafter for 2 days.
Just after initiation of treatment, the patient complained of double vision, involuntary upward eye deviation, and inability to close both eyes . The patient did not have any significant medical history. On physical examination, no signs of dyskinesia with abnormal, uncontrollable, involuntary movements were found. On neurological examination, the patient was fully alert and cooperative. Both eyes exhibited conjugate upward deviation, and the patient was unable to fully close both eyes (oculogyric crisis). The patient exhibited difficulty in bringing his eyes back to the primary position and could not sustain the position; the eyes resumed the upward position within seconds.
Upon the examination of the eyes, the pupils were isocoric and reactive to light. Ocular motility and visual acuity could not be evaluated due to the crisis. Based on the above-mentioned findings, the patient was diagnosed with Coartem-induced oculogyric crisis. AL drug treatment was immediately stopped, and 25 mg/ml promethazine hydrochloride, Phenergan® (Sanofi, Paris, France), was administered through intramuscular (IM) route. The symptoms of oculogyric crisis significantly improved 1 h after the IM injection. The patient was discharged home on the same day with oral cetirizine (Dexcel-Pharma Ltd. Daventry, UK) 10 mg daily for 5 days. He attended a follow-up visit 1 week later, and all symptoms had completely disappeared .