A well built 76-year-old otherwise healthy male who was a known case of node negative squamous cell carcinoma of the left buccal mucosa, involving left retro molar trigone region, anterior tonsillar pillar and soft palate, and was treated with 60 Gy of external beam radiation using photons over 30 fractions delivered using cobalt 60 source in 1998, presented six years later in 2004 with the gradually progressive swelling and pain in left malar region for last 3 months. He developed numbness of left cheek and blurring of vision in left eye along with epiphora of left eye and nasal obstruction of left nare. There were episodes of epistaxis. He was a chronic chewer and smoker for more than 30 years but quit the habit after diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma in 1998. Examination showed a bony swelling in left malar region measuring 2 × 3 cm, with diffused margins and blunting of infra orbital rim. Parasthesia of cheek left side, epiphora, blurring of vision in left eye, and obstruction of left nare were also present. Overlying skin appeared normal. Intra orally a total edentulous mouth and tender bony swelling in left maxillary alveolar region involving both buccal and palatal aspect was noted. Swelling was more pronounced over the buccal aspect and extended along whole of the anterior wall of maxilla. Computed tomographic scan demonstrated radiodense mass in left maxillary sinus with expansion of the anterolateral and posterolateral wall . Tumor was seen to be infiltrating the orbital fat. At surgery the tumor was seen infiltrating ethmoid sinus, pterygoid muscles, lateral wall of nose and superomedial part of orbit. A local wide excision with left radical maxillectomy and orbital exenteration was carried out. The defect was grafted.
Microscopic examination of the resected specimen demonstrated, a neoplasm composed of sheets of spindle cells having eosinophilic cytoplasm and hyper chromatic nuclei . Laying of osteoid by the tumor cells was seen. Scattered mitotic figures were noted. The picture was consistent with osteogenic sarcoma of maxilla T3N0M0G1 AJCC stage III. The patient is disease free and on regular follow-up 6 months after the surgery.