A previously healthy and asymptomatic 22-year-old male police officer was confirmed SARS-CoV-2 positive by PCR testing while in contact quarantine at home (= day 0). Ten days later, he was admitted to our hospital because of severe headache (verbal rating scale, VRS 8/10) that had started a week previously, few days after his positive test. He reported fever, neck stiffness, general weakness and a loss of smell and taste. He had been started on ASS, low-dose heparin, dexamethasone and aciclovir.
On physical examination at admission, he was fully oriented and had some neck rigidity. Further neurological examination was normal. Blood laboratory tests were unremarkable. Brain MRI (day 11) showed multiple disseminated pathological T2 and FLAIR hyperintensities, predominantly cortically, without any contrast enhancement . Comprehensive neuropsychological assessment on day 16 showed no memory impairment, but mild impairment in executive functions . CSF analysis revealed a pleocytosis with 31 cells per μl (normal range, nr, < 5). Total CSF protein was 39.9 mg/dL (nr, 15–45), CSF glucose 64 mg/dL (nr, 40–70), and lactate 11.8 mg/l (nr, 10–22). There was no intrathecal IgG synthesis An extensive search for infectious, paraneoplastic, and autoimmune causes of encephalitis was performed. SARS-CoV-2 and HSV 1, 2 PCR in the CSF were negative, as was serology for Lyme borreliosis and HIV. Serum and CSF studies revealed a serum myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibody titre of 1:640 (live-cell assay, see Fig. ), and a low metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 (mGluR1) antibody titre (fixed cell assay, 1:40; see also Table ). Dexamethasone and aciclovir were discontinued. One thousand milligrams methylprednisolone i.v. per day was given for 5 days. The patient’s general condition and headache improved gradually after completing the treatment, corresponding to marked improvement in the brain MRI on day 17 . He was discharged home and gradually resumed work. At a follow-up visit (day 35), the patient felt well. There was no headache, no focal neurological deficits, and no meningism. Extensive follow-up neuropsychological assessment was entirely normal, with above average results in all dimensions . Follow-up MRI showed a resolution of signal alterations . The serum MOG antibody titre was reduced to 1:320, while further laboratory tests including mGluR1 antibody were normal. Upon telephone consultation after 2 months (day 63), he reported he felt well and was back to work in shifts, with no residual symptoms, no restrictions, and no medication.