A 48-year-old female was consulted for recurrence of massive pericardial effusion. Pericardial window through left thoracotomy had been done 3 months ago for cardiac tamponade. The fluid cytology was negative. This time she had orthopnea without pulsus paradoxus. Laboratory data were normal. Chest X-ray (CXR) showed abnormal borders of the heart. Echocardiography revealed recurrence of massive pericardial effusion without right ventricular (RV) collapse. Ejection fraction was normal, and a suspicious mass on RV was reported. In computed tomography scan a large (10 × 7 cm) superior mediastinal mass containing calcific density foci suggesting mesenchymal origin was mentioned with pericardial effusion .
Hence, she was prepared for operation. As midsternotomy was done a large whitish mass obscuring and compressing the heart was seen . After early dissections, although it had severe adhesions to superior vena cava, right atrium (RA), RV and specially aorta it seemed to be resectable. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established through the femoral artery and RA cannulation after releasing RA from the tumor. The highly vascularized tumor was resected encapsulated only after careful dissections separating it from adhesive cardiac elements specially aorta. She came off CPB with low dose inotrope. But while hemostasis was being done oxygen saturation began to decrease and cardiac contractions became weak with sudden ventricular fibrillation, which was resistant to internal shocks and medications.
During 15 min of internal cardiac massage about 15-20 internal shocks were given with various drugs. At last, heart began to contract in sinus rhythm again. Bleeding points were packed, and she was brought to intensive care unit after only closing the skin. Although high dose inotropes and 100% FiO2 were supplied, oxygen saturation was about 60%. CXR showed patchy densities in both lungs similar to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Echocardiography showed moderate RV dilatation and dysfunction with left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of about 50%. Respiratory support for ARDS and inotropic support for RV failure was continued. After the 3rd post-operative day, arterial oxygen saturation began to rise and inotrope requirements were decreased. A multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumonia complicated the weaning course and tracheostomy was done. Pneumonia responsed to empirical fluconazole prescription. Furthermore, she was complicated with acute illness myopathy, which she could hardly move her extremities. Pathology report was 14 × 10 × 8 cm solid to cystic tumor, which after checking immunohistochemistry examinations solitary fibrous tumor was diagnosed. She was transferred from intensive care unit (ICU) on 3rd post-operative day and was discharged from hospital on 33rd post-operative day. Myopathy nearly completely resolved after 3 months of physiotherapy, but moderate RV failure did not resolve after 3 months despite no clinical symptoms.