A 48-year-old female presented to the department of cardiology with recurrent episodes of dizziness, lightheadedness, headache, and fatigue occurring at rest, occasionally associated with elevated arterial blood pressure up to 180/90 mmHg. The past medical history was suggestive for arterial hypertension, sub-optimally treated with perindopril 5 mg once daily, and one episode of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation occurring when the patient was 15 years old. Detailed medical history revealed cardiovascular conditions of the first-degree relatives as well: the mother of the patient was diagnosed with bradycardia and high blood pressure and the two male children of the patient (aged 16 and 20 years, respectively) were also diagnosed with asymptomatic bradycardia. During the physical exam, we measured a heart rate of 44 b.p.m. at rest, but no other significant findings were noted. The resting electrocardiogram recorded sinus rhythm, with a heart rate of 41 b.p.m, QRS axis at 31 degrees, PQ interval of 122 ms, QRS complex of 94 ms, and negative T-wave in V1 . The echocardiography revealed mild concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle, associated with impaired relaxation diastolic dysfunction . A 24 h Holter monitoring was performed, which recorded more than 30 000 pauses longer than 1500 ms (32 187 pauses), with a maximum length of 3215 ms, during the night (12:41 a.m.). The medium heart rate was 41 b.p.m., while the minimum and the maximum was 25 b.p.m. and 93 b.p.m., respectively. A paroxysmal episode of atrial fibrillation with a duration of 13 min was recorded, as well as multiple episodes of junctional rhythm, but no atrioventricular (AV) conduction disorders . Supine and upright blood pressure measurements were suggestive for orthostatic hypotension, and head-up tilt table test was performed. During the passive phase of the tilt testing, a clinically significant decrease in the blood pressure was recorded, associated with a transient loss of consciousness at a minimal heart rate of 46 b.p.m. at the onset of the symptoms. An electrophysiological study was performed and emphasized sinus node with normal function and chronotropic incompetence but normal anterograde conduction . Taking into consideration the positive family history for bradycardia, a resting electrocardiogram was performed in all the first-degree relatives, and it showed sinus bradycardia in all of them . The echocardiography of the children did not show signs of structural cardiac disease, while the mother of the patient had a mild aortic and mitral regurgitation, with mild hypertrophy of the left ventricle. The patient and her sons underwent sequential genetic testing which revealed a mutation of the LMNA gene, pathogenic variant c.686T>C (p.Ile229Thr) for the patient, but both children were negative for the mutation. The differential diagnosis with myocarditis or infiltrative myocardial disease was addressed by performing cardiac magnetic resonance imaging which did not show any abnormality suggestive for the abovementioned conditions.
The patient was discharged on treatment with perindopril, midodrine, and dabigatran. At 6-month follow-up, a 24 h Holter ECG monitoring was performed, recording an average heart rate of 42 b.p.m., with a minimum heart rate of 29 b.p.m. during the night and a maximum heart rate of 78 b.p.m. The monitoring recorded 24 959 pause intervals longer than 1.5 s, and the longest pause had 2.887 s at 02:14 am. The monitoring did not detect any signs of atrial fibrillation or conduction disorders. The echocardiography showed normal systolic function, without signs of dilatated cardiomyopathy or other structural signs of disease.