A previously-well 31-year old Caucasian man presented to the Emergency Department with acute onset severe central abdominal pain which had been preceded by a four-day history of intermittent colic and six episodes of vomiting. He had also experienced up to ten episodes of watery blood-stained stools per day over this period.
Over the preceding thirteen months the patient had presented nine times to hospital with the same symptoms but of lesser severity. Upon closer questioning he admitted to experiencing altered bowel habits (alternating constipation and diarrhoea) for up to one month before presentation but denied any abnormalities in bowel habit frequency during childhood or adolescence.
His past medical history included an episode pericarditis of unknown aetiology 8 years prior and recurrent left shoulder dislocations. He had not previously undergone any prior abdominal operations or endoscopies. He had no known allergies. He was a previous habitual methamphetamine user but stated he had not used illicit substances for four years and was not taking any regular prescription medications.
His mother had been diagnosed with colorectal cancer at 42 years of age. There was no other relevant family history.
Physical examination revealed a slender man with a body mass index (BMI) of 22.5 kg/m2 with generalised abdominal pain and voluntary guarding. The tenderness was more severe on the left side and suprapubic region. Heart rate was 135 bpm, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, blood pressure 133/82 mmHg and oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. Temperature on arrival to hospital was 39.1ºC but normalised to 37.1°C on repeat testing.
Blood analysis revealed normal haemoglobin of 145 g/L, raised white cell count of 12.05 × 109/L and high C reactive protein level of 454 mg/L. Liver function tests and electrolytes were all within the normal range.
An abdominal and pelvic computed tomography scan (with oral and IV contrast) was performed which demonstrated wall thickening, mucosal thickening and fat stranding most marked in the transverse, descending and sigmoid colon consistent with colitis . There was a suggestion of mild arteritis affecting the superior mesenteric artery on this scan so formal catheter angiography was performed to investigate this further. Digital subtraction angiogram demonstrated patency of the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries with no hallmarks of active vasculitis such as stenosis, filling defects, arterial beading or aneurysm formation.
Serum vasculitis and autoimmune screens were performed and returned negative. Serology testing for amoebic infection and human immunodeficiency virus were also negative. Stool culture and sensitivity, stool microscopy for cysts, ova and parasites, stool antigen and toxin testing for Clostridium difficile were negative.
Initial colonoscopy revealed confluent mucosal ulceration for a length of 20-25 cm from the rectosigmoid junction with rectal sparing . Biopsies were consistent with necroinflammatory change but an underlying ischaemic, infective or inflammatory cause could not be proven. There was no evidence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection on immunoperoxidase staining of biopsies and there were no pathognomonic histological features to suggest a specific aetiology. Repeat colonoscopies several months later revealed almost complete mucosal healing although there was some ongoing oedema and granulation tissue with one persistent ulcer in the sigmoid colon still present after eleven months.