A 15-year-old girl presented to our Pediatric Dermatology Clinic with painful purplish red plaques on her left cheek, neck, chest, left shoulder, and back. Her father reported that the lesions were first noted at the age of three months as purplish dots on his daughter’s chest. Five years prior to admission, the lesion gradually progressed to multiple plaques and was increased in size and number, expanding to the left cheek, neck, left shoulder, and back. These skin lesions were painful. Six months prior to admission, the pre-existing skin lesions became more painful. The patient went to a dermatologist and was given 0.1% mometasone furoate cream twice daily for one month but her skin lesions became more painful, and she subsequently underwent PDL treatment. After two sessions, the skin lesions slightly faded but she was still bothered by the localized pain, thus she was referred to our clinic. There were no signs and symptoms of kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KHE), coagulopathy, and Kasabach-Merritt phenomenon (KMP). Physical examination revealed pain, as indicated by visual analogue scale (VAS) score of 2 as well as purpura, ecchymosis, palpable purpura, purplish red plaques, and hyperpigmented macules on her left cheek, neck, chest, left shoulder, and back without any presence of warmth and tenderness upon palpation. Diascopy examination revealed that they were non-blanching lesions. Spectrophotometric measurements of erythema based on Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (CIE) L*a*b* color analysis from the skin lesions on the left cheek, chest, left shoulder, and back, showed a* values of 11.4; 13.88; 10.6; and 15.39, respectively. Laboratory examination revealed normal platelet count and fibrinogen level. Skin biopsies were performed and histopathological findings showed lobules of tufts with a “cannonball” appearance in the dermis and round oval spindle cells resembling this appearance . Based on these findings, the diagnosis of TA without complications was made. We treated the lesions using 595-nm PDL with 6.5−8.5 J/cm2 fluence of, 1.5 ms pulsed duration, and 5−7 mm spot size. The laser treatment was performed once every three weeks. After four sessions of treatment, a* values of spectrophotometric measurements from the skin lesions on the left cheek, chest, left shoulder, and back were decreased to 9.92; 8.92; 8.57; and 12.20, respectively. The purplish red plaques partially faded . Furthermore, the patient’s VAS score was reduced from 2 to 0.