A 69-year-old male with a body mass index of 21.5 kg/m2 was referred to our hospital due to jaundice for a suspected cholangiocarcinoma.
His past medical and surgical history was unremarkable, except for diabetes type 2 and hypertension; both conditions were controlled with medications, including metformin 500 mg twice a day, glimepiride 1 mg twice a day, nifedipine CR 20 mg daily, valsartan 80 mg daily and enalapril 5 mg daily.
His social history was significant for smoking 20 cigarettes per day for 46 years and the frequent intake of alcohol at approximately 360-540 mL a day.
Family history was notable for a father diagnosed with esophageal cancer, a mother with uterine cancer and an elderly brother with duodenal cancer and leukemia.
On examination, the patient had icteric sclera and pale conjunctiva. His vital signs were stable, and physical examination did not reveal any extraordinary signs.
Laboratory tests on admission were within the normal range, except for a mild elevation in the levels of alkaline phosphatase (507 IU/L; normal range, < 359 IU/L), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (199 IU/L; normal range, < 47 IU/L) and total serum bilirubin (1.4 mg/dL normal range, < 1 mg/dL). Carcinoembryonic antigen and CA 19-9 were within the normal range (2.7 ng/mL, 13.6 U/mL, respectively). Serology was negative for hepatitis B and C infections.
Endoscopic ultrasonography detected a solid lesion filling the intrapancreatic CBD to the main biliary. There was no evidence of extension outside of the bile duct wall, and invasion into the right hepatic artery was not observed. In addition, multilocular and unilateral cystic lesions of the pancreas, which had a maximum diameter of 13.1 mm, were found. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography revealed bilateral intrahepatic biliary tree dilatation with a ﬁlling defect in the upper and middle bile duct, which extended partly to the left hepatic duct. Intraductal ultrasonography confirmed that there was no extended lesion in the right bile duct. Tumor and adjacent tissue biopsies were performed, and a 5 Fr endoscopic nasobiliary drainage ENBD was placed to facilitate biliary drainage. Pathological results endorsed IPNB with high grade and intestinal type neoplasia. In addition, images obtained from peroral cholangioscopy POCS delineated a tumor with a papillary pattern located at the CBD to the left hepatic duct . Multidetector computed tomography detected an interruption for a long segment of CBD causing biliary occlusion, which resulted in bilateral intrahepatic biliary tree dilatation with no intrahepatic lesion. The tumor was predominantly extended into the left hepatic duct. An enlargement of the pancreatic duct suggested the extension of injury into the intrapancreatic CBD. Traces of metastasis, such as lymph node growth, ascites, lung mass or pleural effusion, have not been reported. Three-dimensional liver surgery simulation demonstrated that the right hepatic artery and right portal vein were not in contact with the tumor. Mmagnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography confirmed these findings .
Therefore, an initial diagnosis of IPNB cT1N0M0 was established with good prognosis.