A 27-year-old young man, who previously had sexual contact with other men, was diagnosed with human immunodeficiency virus(HIV) infection 2 months ago. His CD4 + T cell count was 33 cells/μL. His serum anti-cytomegalovirus immunoglobulin M (IgM) was 23.6 U/mL (normal range: 0–18 U/mL), and CMV IgG was 139.0 U/mL (normal range:0–12 U/mL). His serum CMV DNA load was 4.54 × 103 copies/mL. The patient had no ocular symptoms and signs. No abnormalities were found on funduscopic screening examination . The preemptive anti-CMV treatment was not performed. His acid-fast smear of sputum, interferon-gamma release assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and tuberculin skin test were negative. The IgM antibodies of rubella virus, herpes simplex virus(HSV), varicella-zoster virus(VZV), and Epstein-Barr virus(EBV) were all negative. The IgM and IgG antibodies of toxoplasma gondii, mycoplasma, and legionnella were all negative. The specific antibody of syphilis was negative. The blood sugar level was normal. Abdominal ultrasound screening, chest computed tomography, and brain magnetic resonance imaging were normal. Then, the patient received antiretroviral therapy (ART), including tenofovir, lamivudine, and efavirenz as well as oral co-trimoxazole, two tablets daily, for primary prophylaxis of Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia.
On the 35th day of ART, the patient complained of floaters and blurred vision in the left eye and was admitted to our hospital due to worsening of eyesight. No other systemic abnormal symptoms and signs had been found, such as fever, rashes, cough, watering nose, sneeze, sore throat, parotid enlargement, mouth ulcer, diarrhoea, and bloody stool, etc. His CD4 + T cell count rapidly increased to 172 cells/μL. The HIV RNA load was 1.80 × 103 copies/mL. The left and right eyes were not red and swollen. His visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/30 in the left eye. Bilateral intraocular pressures were normal. Slit-lamp examination showed diffuse punctate keratic precipitates and positive aqueous flare in the left eye. The size of the pupils and the light response were normal. The lens was transparent. Fundal examination revealed extensive retinal perivenous exudate, forming frosted branch vascular sheathing in the left eye . At the lower border of the right eye, peripheral retinitis, characterized by white granular exudates with minimal haemorrhage, was detected. Eye ultrasound revealed a slightly vitreous haze . Optical coherence tomography did not reveal macular oedema . The serum CMV DNA became negative (< 1.0 × 103 copies/mL). The level of C-reactive protein was 5.60 mg/L (normal range:0.00–5.00 mg/L). The levels of antistreptolysin O and rheumatoid factor were normal. Blood screening results of autoantibodies were all negative. A 100 μL sample of Aqueous humour (AqH), collected by anterior chamber puncture, was sent to Beijing Zhi De medical laboratory science finite company. CMV DNA in the left AqH was 6.54 × 105copies/mL. Using BD-Pharmingen cytometric bead array, the interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8 levels in the AqH were 2845.0 pg/mL (normal range: 1–50 pg/mL) and 967.8 pg/mL (normal range: 0–20 pg/mL), respectively. The DNA of HSV, EBV, and VZV were all negative in the left AqH. He was treated with intravitreal ganciclovir (2 mg twice a week for a total of four times) and intravenous ganciclovir (5 mg/kg twice daily for 2 weeks, followed by 5 mg/kg/day for 1 month). No non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug was prescribed for the patient. His previous ART regimen was continued. Oral co-trimoxazole, two tablets daily, was continued. His FBA significantly improved . Thereafter, he had to switch to foscarnet at 180 mg/day because of leukopenia. Subsequently, foscarnet was replaced with oral ganciclovir (3 g/day). During the sixth-month follow-up, the peripheral granular lesion in his right eye subsided, and the vascular sheath-like exudates in the left eye resolved . His visual acuity became 20/25 in the left eye. His serum CMV DNA was undetectable. CMV DNA in the left AqH was also negative (< 1.0 × 103 copies/mL), and the levels of IL-6 and IL-8 in the left AqH decreased to 28.5 pg/mL and 5.6 pg/mL, respectively. His CD4 + T cell count was 131 cells/μL, and HIV RNA load was 30.3 copies/mL. His serum CMV IgM was negative, and CMV IgG exceeded 180.0 U/mL.