A 45-year-old female with profound left-sided sensorineural hearing loss, left facial palsy (House–Brackmann Grade 3), and left cerebellar signs of 3 months duration with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showing well enhancing mass in the left CPA with adjacent nonenhancing cerebellar cyst , underwent left retromastoid suboccipital craniectomy and gross total removal of tumor at local district hospital. Histopathology was that of HBL. Immediate postoperative period was uneventful without any added deficits, and she showed gradual improvement in her neurological status (markedly in cerebellar signs and mild subjective improvement in hearing and facial palsy). However, she was lost to follow-up and presented 10 years later to our institute with recent onset cerebellar signs and headache, with persistent left-sided hearing loss and facial palsy (House–Brackmann Grade 3). MRI showed recurrent solid densely enhancing tumor in left CPA . Digital subtraction angiography of cerebral vessels showed majority of blood supply (anterior 2/3) from neuromeningeal division of ascending pharyngeal branch of external carotid artery (ECA). Posterior 1/3 was supplied by left posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) and few small dural branches from left vertebral artery . Near total (>90%) embolization of both the feeders was done. Check angiogram showed very little blush in the tumor region . Embolization was followed on the next day by “en-bloc” excision of the tumor . The tumor was dark red, highly vascular, abutting the lower cranial nerves. The blood loss was minimal, and no blood transfusion was required. There was transient worsening of the facial palsy (House–Brackmann Grade 4) and impairment of the gag reflex (feed by Ryle's tube), which improved to preoperative state by the 9th postoperative day. The histopathology was typical of HBL. The blood vessels within the tumor showed presence of glue material within their lumen. Some of the blood vessels also contained fibrin thrombi. There was no area of infarction within the tumor. However, secondary degenerative changes were seen within the stroma in form of stromal hyalinization and edema. There were microcystic changes as well. These changes were more prominent adjacent to the vessels . Postoperative contrast MRI confirmed total excision of the tumor .