We present a case of a 49-year-old male repatriated back to the United Kingdom (UK) following a left middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory ischaemic stroke which occurred whilst abroad. The initial National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 15. His primary deficits were a severe mixed aphasia and verbal apraxia (NIHHS 2), with difficulty following two-step commands and impaired comprehension at the sentence level. He had a partial right facial paralysis (NIHSS 2) with severe right arm and leg weakness (NIHSS 4 and 2 respectively). Left MCA infarct involving frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes was demonstrated on initial CT and MRI imaging . He was also found to have both a pulmonary embolism on CT pulmonary angiography and a right popliteal artery thrombus on lower limb ultrasonography.
He had a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease, that was well controlled with azathioprine and for which a colectomy and ileostomy were performed over ten years prior. There was no evidence of active Crohn’s colitis during his admission. He did not smoke or drink alcohol. However, after his stroke, it came to light that he had engaged in covert persistent anabolic androgenic steroid (AAS) use over six years for body building.
An extensive young stroke screen based on local stroke unit guidelines was completed including normal lipid and Hba1c profiles, negative thrombophilia panel including anti-phospholipid antibodies, negative HIV, hepatitis, syphilis, and autoimmune vasculitis screens. JAK2 gene testing, alpha-galactosidase activity (Fabry disease), and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria screen were also normal.
Carotid doppler studies, interval MRI and CT did not reveal any intracranial vascular abnormalities. Investigations for cardioembolic stroke including trans-thoracic and bubble echocardiography, and prolonged cardiac monitoring were negative. A CT-PET was performed that was negative for malignancy and Crohn’s disease activity.
He had an elevated total homocysteine concentration of 87 µmol/L (Reference range (RR): 5–12 µmol/L) following the acute infarct with a corresponding normal methylmalonic acid 0.11µmol/L (RR: <0.29 µmol/L), low vitamin B12 74 pg/mL (RR: 160–800 pg/mL), and low folic acid level < 2.2ng/mL (RR: >2.7 ng/mL). Serum testosterone was suppressed at 0.8nmol/L (RR: 10-30nmol/L) secondary to presumed exogenous steroid use. Subsequent genetic testing for methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) variants showed that he was homozygous for the common c.677 C > T MTHFR thermolabile variant.
His admission was complicated by significant agitation due to a combination of AAS withdrawal, and combined aphasia. He was temporarily commenced on risperidone (1 mg daily). His initial antiplatelet medication was converted to apixaban due to his pulmonary and peripheral artery emboli. He was treated with hydroxocobalamin (1 mg intramuscular 3 monthly) and folate replacement (5 mg once daily), both of which normalized along with homocysteine.
He made significant improvements following several months of stroke rehabilitation. Interval MRI imaging demonstrated a mature left MCA infarct . Prior to discharge he was self-caring and mobilizing independently. He had persistent speech apraxia and limited verbal output but was able to communicate using written methods. He was repatriated to a local hospital awaiting social care input and ongoing speech and language therapy.