A 52-year-old man presented with FAP. At the age of 34 years, he underwent a two-stage restorative proctocolectomy and a hand-sewn ileal J-pouch anal anastomosis at a previous hospital because of FAP co-presenting with sigmoid colon cancer. The clinical stage according to the TNM 8th edition was T3 N1b M0, Stage IIIB. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not prescribed and regular observation was undertaken. He had no other symptoms, including constipation, and he did not visit the hospital for follow-up 1 year postoperatively. However, 6 years following surgery, he experienced abdominal distension and constipation. He visited our emergency department with complaints of severe pain in his lower abdomen. On physical examination, signs of peritoneal irritation were observed throughout the abdomen, and anal strictures were palpable upon digital examination. Laboratory examination demonstrated an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count of 13,800/μl and a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 2.19 mg/dl. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a pneumoperitoneum . Perforation of the digestive tract was also diagnosed. Accordingly, laparotomy was performed on the day of admission. A large amount of cloudy ascites in the abdominal cavity was observed, and the blind end of the ileal J-pouch was enlarged. A 2-mm perforation was observed at the top of the pouch, and the upper part of the blind end was resected using a stapler . Gastrointestinal gastrography during surgery revealed an anastomotic stricture . The perforation was found to have been caused by increased intraluminal pressure in the extended pouch from the anastomotic stricture; hence, the anastomotic stricture was manually dilated to 20 mm in diameter . Histopathological examination revealed no significant findings on the mucosal or muscular surfaces, and only inflammatory findings on the serous surface were observed (perforation and peritonitis) . The patient was discharged 22 days postoperatively. Following this episode, the patient had no symptoms and was unable to visit the hospital for follow-up. Eighteen years after initial surgery (12 years after the first perforation), he presented with severe abdominal pain. Laboratory examinations revealed an elevated WBC count of 17,900/μl and CRP level of 1.79 mg/dl. CT demonstrated free air in the abdomen , and physical examination revealed that pain and the abdominal signs, which were mild at the time of presentation, gradually increased in severity until peritoneal irritation symptoms were subsequently observed throughout. Therefore, intestinal perforation was suspected, and laparotomy was performed. Contaminated ascites and inflammation of the ileum in the abdominal cavity and a 2-mm perforation at the top of the ileal J-pouch were once again observed. The perforation was repaired followed by abdominal intraperitoneal drainage and temporary loop ileostomy . Postoperative endoscopy revealed multiple mucosal ulcers , and gastrointestinal gastrography revealed stricture of the anastomotic segment . The patient was discharged 27 days after surgery without complications. After 1 month, the multiple mucosal ulcers improved without antibiotics.