A 60-year-old man with a height of 162.5 cm and a weight of 70.6 kg, who has a medical history of bronchial asthma, medicated with inhaling steroids, presented with a fever. Three days later, the patient was diagnosed as COVID-19 with PCR positive for SARS-CoV-2. He was admitted to our hospital with a high fever and loss of appetite 7 days after the diagnosis. On admission, his consciousness was clear, body temperature 36.8 °C, SpO2 94%. Chest CT images showed ground glass opacity spread over a quarter of both lung areas. We initiated treatments with remdesivir 100mg/day following 200 mg on the first day and dexamethasone 9.9mg/day. The course after hospitalization is shown in Fig. . On the second day of hospitalization, the patient experienced desaturation, and tracheal intubation was performed uneventfully. During the mechanical ventilation, the patient was deeply sedated with propofol, midazolam, and fentanyl. The cuff pressure of the tracheal tube was controlled between 25 and 30 cmH2O with an automated cuff pressure controller. After 68 h of mechanical ventilation, the tracheal tube was removed without performing a cuff leak test due to the relatively short duration of intubation. There were no findings suggestive of upper airway obstruction or asthma attack, but weak vocalizations were present, and the patient complained of mild dysphonia. A modified water swallowing test revealed no swallowing problem. He had a persistent sore throat, hoarseness, and dry cough and complained of dyspnea, especially at night, 4 days after extubation. Six days after the extubation, the patient complained of severe dyspnea, and biphasic stridor was heard. We performed a pharyngeal fiberscope and found bilateral vocal cord edema and laryngeal midline paralysis . Initially, an emergency tracheal intubation was considered; however, we decided to perform an awake tracheostomy under local anesthesia to avoid the risk of cannot ventilate cannot intubate (CVCI). A significant improvement in his vocal cord’s movement was observed with oral corticosteroid therapy with hydrocortisone 300 mg for 2 days, then decreased by 100 mg every 2 days for a total of 6 days. Although there are restrictions on the glottis opening , the tracheostomy was closed 14 days after the tracheostomy without further respiratory complications.