A 23 year old African American female with a history of pre-diabetes and oral contraceptive use since age 11, presented to an outside facility complaining of right-upper-quadrant pain, generalized weakness, and emesis for one day. She had been in her usual state of health until that morning when she experiences the acute onset of stabbing right-upper-quadrant pain that radiated to her chest. She quickly felt nauseous and had several episodes of non-bloody emesis.
She had a past medical history significant for pre-diabetes and oral contraceptive use, but otherwise had no other medical problems and took no other medications.
She had no history of alcohol, tobacco, or drug abuse, and no family history of liver disease.
Her initial physical exam was remarkable for pallor. She was afebrile with an initial blood pressure of 96/52 mmHg and a heart rate of 126 beats per minute. Her abdominal exam was notable for right-upper-quadrant tenderness and fullness. Her cardiopulmonary exam was normal except for tachycardia. Initial labs revealed a hemoglobin 8.7 gm/dL, platelets 396 × 109/L, lactic acid 5.6 mmol/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 100 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 166 IU/L, total bilirubin 0.3 mg/dL, creatinine 1.30 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen 13 mg/dL, and bicarbonate 18 mEq/L. A urinary pregnancy test was negative.
Initial imaging would include a CT of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast demonstrated a large 22 cm x 15 cm heterogenous, hypoattenuating mass encompassing nearly the entire liver. The mass demonstrated hypervascularity along the border and hyperattenuating areas, suggesting a large hemorrhagic liver mass with active hemorrhage. There was no rupture of the liver and no perihepatic, subcapsular hematoma . She was given preliminary diagnosis of hemorrhagic shock due to this hemorrhagic liver mass and was transferred to a second hospital for interventional radiology.
On arrival, her hemoglobin was 9.6 gm/dL after transfusion of 6 units of packed red blood cells. She underwent gel foam embolization of the right hepatic artery. However, throughout the evening she required ongoing blood transfusions. A repeat CT scan demonstrated enlargement of the intrahepatic hematoma with new intraperitoneal fluid, retroperitoneal fluid, and bilateral pleural effusion concerning for ongoing hemorrhage. She was then taken back for a mesenteric angiogram with embolization of the middle hepatic artery and repeat embolization of the right hepatic artery. During this period, her ALT increased to 1023 IU/L, AST 2287 IU/L, bilirubin 3.2 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 506 IU/L, and lactic acid 8.3 mmol/L. She had ongoing hemodynamic instability and anuric kidney injury (creatinine 1.73 mg/dL). She was then transferred to our facility.