A 66-year-old man with a long history of smoking (20 cigarettes a day for more than 30 years) was admitted to the respiratory department of our hospital on April 16, 2020, with a history of right chest pain over the past 10 days. Chest computed tomography revealed a space-occupying lesion in the right upper lobe and multiple mediastinal lymph node enlargement . The patient underwent bronchoscopy, and a bronchial neoplasm with discoloration under fluorescence was observed in the upper lobe of the right lung . The histopathological diagnosis was moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Genetic testing revealed no mutant genes, including epidermal growth factor receptor-21 (EGFR-21) and echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase (EMLA4-ALK) fusion.
The patient was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma (T4N2M1), according to the Union for International Cancer Control 7th edition TNM classification of lung cancer. Other detailed laboratory data were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen = 172 ng/ml (normal range: 0-5 ng/ml), cytokeratin 21–1 fragment = 37.7 ng/ml (normal range: 0–3.3 ng/ml), neuron-specific enolase = 21.00 ng/ml (normal range: 0–16.3 ng/ml). His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status score was 0. The patient was treated with six cycles of systemic chemotherapy combined with bevacizumab, specifically; pemetrexed 800 mg/d + cisplatin 40 mg/d1 − 3 + bevacizumab 300 mg/d, followed by 3 cycles of bevacizumab monotherapy for every 21 days (300 mg/d).Imaging every two months revealed that the tumor decreased in size , and serum lung cancer biomarkers were significantly reduced.
On November 24, 2020, the patient was admitted to our department again with chest tightness and shortness of breath for five days. He complained of severe shortness of breath when eating, as well as right chest pain. His temperature was 36.8 °C, respiratory rate was 25 breaths/min, and the respiratory sound of the right lower lung disappeared. Laboratory data included a white blood cell count of 16.35*109 /L, neutrophil percentage 89.1%, C-reactive protein 310.7 mg/l, procalcitonin 2.548 ng/ml, and D-dimer 4.60ug/ml. All lung cancer biomarkers were normal. Bed-side chest radiography revealed a severe right hydrothorax . Ultrasound detected an unclear fluid sonolucent area in the right thorax, with a floating hyperechoic mass . We performed thoracocentesis, which resulted in the extraction of 50 ml melicera, gray pleural effusion, with food (egg yolk) inside. The patient was subsequently treated with carbapenem antibiotic. EPF was confirmed by upper gastrointestinal radiography after oral administration of iohexol . After pleural effusion drainage, the patient underwent gastroscopy, revealing a 15 mm diameter fistulaon the esophagus 30 mm away from the incisor; however, the proximal esophagus of the fistula could not be exposed and the distal esophagus could not be found . Therefore, we contacted the department of general surgery for consultation and performed jejunostomy for internal nutrition. Unfortunately, the patient died of septic shock on January 16, 2021.