A 65-year-old male with past medical history of hypertension, AAA without rupture status post endovascular repair (six months prior), mixed hyperlipidemia, and tobacco usage presented to the emergency department (ED) from an outside physician for an abnormal potassium of 2.3 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range: 3.5–5.1 mmol/L) and hypertension. On evaluation, he reported 2–3 months of polyuria and polydipsia that had progressively worsened. He reported needing to urinate hourly and was unable to sleep due to this symptom. He also reported generalized weakness and some constipation. He denied dysuria, abdominal or chest pain, shortness of breath, fever, cough, or diarrhea. Presentation vital signs showed a blood pressure of 195/122 millimeters mercury, oxygen saturation of 97% on room air, heart rate of 89 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute.
Of note, the patient had been admitted six months prior with a non-ruptured AAA. He underwent aneurysm repair with aortoiliac stent graft and left renal artery snorkel placement/stenting. On exam, the patient was alert and oriented with no signs of trauma. Heart, lungs, and abdominal exam were all normal. Initial labs in the ED were notable for sodium of 133 mmol/L (reference range: 136–145 mmol/L), potassium of 2.4 mmol/L (3.5–5.1 mmol/L), chloride of 89 mmol/L (98–107 mmol/L), and hemoglobin of 17.6 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (12.0–16.0 g/dL). Venous blood gas revealed a pH of 7.53 (7.35–7.45), arterial bicarbonate of 38.5 mmol/L (21–27 mmol/L), and a total carbon dioxide of 40 mmol/L (36–42 mmol/L). Glomerular filtration rate was 55 mL/min/1.73 m2 and glucose was 129 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (35–125 mg/dL). Urinalysis resulted in a urine protein of 9,087 (50–80 mg/day). On imaging, a CTA abdomen and pelvis showed chronic occlusion/thrombosis of the right main renal artery, moderate right renal atrophy, postsurgical changes of the endovascular repair, and left renal artery stent with a non-flow limiting focal area of stenosis midway through the stent. These findings were new in comparison to a CTA abdomen and pelvis obtained six months earlier prior to EVAR. An ultrasound Doppler of the abdomen and pelvis also showed the left renal artery stent with patent flow. Chest radiograph was unremarkable.
The patient’s initial presentation was concerning for secondary hyperaldosteronism given his hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Given the patient’s history of AAA status post EVAR and abnormal CTA results, vascular surgery was consulted. Similarly, endocrinology and nephrology were consulted due to metabolic derangement. In conjunction with the various consulting specialties, the patient was admitted for four days and was started on amlodipine, hydralazine, and spironolactone (which was up titrated during the hospital stay due to persistent hypertension and hypokalemia). At discharge, renin-aldosterone levels were pending but eventually resulted at 44.4 nanograms per milliliter per hour (ng/mL/hr) (reference range: supine = 0.2–1.6; upright = 0.5–4.0) for renin, and 56.0 nanograms per deciliter (ng/dL) (less than 16 ng/dL) for aldosterone. Upon discharge, all three medications above were continued, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers were recommended to be avoided, and the patient was scheduled for an outpatient captopril study.