We present a case of an 81-year-old female who had surgical fixation performed for a comminuted four part left intertrochanteric fracture 3 years previously at the same institution with an intramedullary device. After an initial uneventful post-operative recovery , she returned 13 months post-fixation with groin pain, with radiographs confirming avascular necrosis of the femoral head with resultant cut-in of the blade . Having failed initial conservative management and with worsening function and pain, the patient eventually opted for surgery.
Pre-operative computed tomography scan of the left hip was performed, revealing a healed intertrochanteric fracture without any peri-implant fractures, as well as flattening and deformity of the femoral head with degenerative changes in the hip joint suggestive of avascular necrosis. The patient was consented for removal of implants and total hip replacement and underwent the surgery 38 months post-index procedure.
Intraoperatively, difficulty was encountered during the removal of the distal interlocking screw. This was likely secondary to a divergent trajectory of the bolt resulting in cold welding to the screw to the intramedullary nail. Attempts were made at removal using vise grip pliers, which failed due to insufficient purchase on the screw head. Subsequently, the Synthes broken screw set was utilized to attempt screw removal, with conical extraction screws as well as extraction bolts. This was also unsuccessful. With every attempt at screw removal, the screw head became progressively more deformed, making subsequent removal increasingly difficult.
We then decided to use a different approach for the screw removal. A high-speed burr was used to burr around the screw, helping to “square” the circular screw head so as to achieve a better grip on the screw head with the extraction devices. With this, it was now possible to achieve adequate grip on the screw head with vise grip pliers, and the screw was then removed in entirety with relative ease. The screw was observed to be otherwise intact with no broken sections (, ).
The remainder of the procedure was uneventful and a successful total hip replacement was performed .