A 30-year-old Asian man presented with a 6-month history of recurrent pain localized to the lateral side of his left knee. A physical examination revealed slight tenderness and swelling in the lateral side of his knee; however, no other abnormality was noted. Routine radiography showed no remarkable findings, and laboratory data were normal. MRI revealed an intra-articular space-occupying lesion (SOL) in his knee joint, measuring 1.5cm in diameter, which was invading his tibia . The mass appeared homogenous and isointense in contrast to normal muscle on the T1-weighted sequences, and it appeared heterogeneous with specks on T2-weighted sequences. In addition, the mass was unremarkable on observation under T2 with saturated fat signal sequences. Therefore, we performed a Gd-enhanced MRI for differential diagnosis including malignant tumor, and to accurately study the extent of the mass with enhancement being observed only in the peripheral area . No other abnormalities, such as satellite lesions, were detected with the enhancement. Arthroscopic examination was performed to confirm the nature, location and extension of the mass. The tumor was present in the bottom of the anterior horn of lateral meniscus with vascular invasion, but grasp of a total image and total excision using this method was impossible. Therefore, an arthrotomy was performed through a 4-cm skin incision just lateral to the patellar tendon. We performed complete excision of the mass and debridement of the corresponding tibia. A macroscopic examination revealed an oval, smooth-surfaced, soft, and elastic excised mass, which was white and red in color and measured 15×12×10mm . When cut in halves, the tumor was encapsulated. A microscopic examination revealed that the tumor comprised numerous blood vessels of various sizes with abundant fascicles of smooth muscle surrounding the vessels. No atypia was noted in any of the specimens. Histological diagnosis was a benign angioleiomyoma . The patient recovered completely after the surgery. No signs of recurrence were observed up to 1 year after surgery in an MRI examination.