A one year and four months old male child presented with preaxial polydactyly of the right foot and dysplastic tibia associated with shortening and varus deformity in the right leg and foot. On examination the child was found to have normal mental and physical milestones. Obstetric history of the mother revealed no previous history of abortion. No history of any previous pregnancy. She was a primigravida with the first child being the present one with no siblings. The child was born from a full term pregnancy with caesarean for pregnancy induced hypertension. There was no history of consanguineous marriage in the family. On examination the child had a varus deformity in the right leg with a shortening of 5cm . The right leg as maintained in an attitude of flexion at the knee. Extension was possible actively with grade 3+ power in the right knee. Active flexion was possible up to 100 degrees. Complete range of movements possible at the hip however the ankle was fixed in a rigid equinovarus position. No instability was associated at the knee or ankle. Radiographs relevealed a trapezoid tibia with preaxial polydactyl (, ). At the time of presentation the child was 1 year 3 months but unable to walk. Since the other milestones both physical and mental had progressed well, the child’s inability to walk was attributed to the deformity in the left foot and tibia associated with shortening. Other associated anomalies included a preaxial polydactyly at the right hand with an additional right thumb. The child had an undescended testis on the left side with an absent kidney on the right side as well as no testes on the right side.
Problem faced by the child at the time of presentation were mainly: shortening, severe varus deformity of the tibia and foot which were not passively correctible, preaxial polydactyly causing inability to wear footwear and also giving the foot a grotesque cosmetic deformity. Aim of surgery at this stage was to provide the child with a plantigrade foot, improve cosmosis and enable child to wear footwear.
Surgical procedure: Surgery was performed under general anesthesia with intubation. Surgery involved two stages. The first part was removal of the preaxial polydactyly in the foot. This was performed with a racquet shaped incision in which the toes were removed with the metatarsals. This procedure did not include excision of the duplicated talus. Thus 2 metatarsals and 2 sets of phalanges were excised. The wound was then closed over the medial aspect. The second part of the surgery was correction of the varus deformity in the trapezoid tibia. This varus deformity was corrected by a lateral incision over the leg on the most prominent part of the tibia. This was also marked by a small dimple in the skin. The tibia was dissected out subperiostialy. Two guide wires were used to mark out a lateral closed wedge osteotomy. A fibular osteotomy was done with excision of 1 cm of fibula to allow correction to occur at the osteotomy site. Correction was achieved with a lateral closed wedge osteotomy held in place with a pair of K wires. Closure of the wound was done. Cast maintained for a period of 2 months till the osteotomy site healed completely. K wires removed at 4 weeks of cast change when check x-ray showed good healing at osteotomy site. Post operatively the child was given a supportive clam shell brace extending up to the thigh with a shoe raise. This facilitated the child’s ability to walk and run. It also was expected to maintain the correction achieved.
At 2 years follow up there was recurrence of varus deformity (, , ). There was overgrowth of the fibula with prominence of the fibular head. However the child was walking and running with help of orthosis and parents refused to undergo corrective surgery. The patient was lost to follow and finally was traced back 5 years after corrective surgery. At this time the tibia vara had increased with ankle inversion and overgrowth of fibula, however ankle dorsiflexion was 90° and plantar flexion was 30°. There was a limb length discrepancy of 9 cm, however the child was able to walk and run with shoe raise (, , ). Knee quadriceps was grade 5 with no flexion deformity and full range of knee movements. At present again the child’s parents are not ready for corrective surgeries but promise to keep regular follow up.
Contemplated surgeries for the future are a repeat osteotomy of the tibia and epiphysiodesis of the fibular head to prevent further growth at the fibula from causing recurrence of the deformity.