A 52-year-old male, who had a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension without regular medication control, presented without fever, but with headache and dizziness for 2 months. These headaches were located over the right occipital area without radiation. The headache worsened while thinking or looking at objects for a long time. Also, he did not have any cutaneous/mucosal lesions prior to or during the period in which these headaches occurred and he had not received any injections or acupuncture. On hospital admission, he still did not have any fever and physical examination revealed normal findings, but a neurological examination showed left side homonymous hemianopia. Brain computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) showed a right occipital brain abscess. Systemic third-generation cephalosporins (Ceftazidime) and Metronidaole were initially administered pre-operatively for one day by IV. Then, crainotomy and surgical extirpation were performed promptly after a completed image study identified the abscess. The capsule of the abscess was completely removed during the operation. Pus culture yielded a gram-positive microorganism identified as Kocuria Varians by the Vitek 2 system. Post-operatively, Metronidazole was ceased due to the outcome of an antibiotic susceptibility test report, for 4 weeks Ceftazidime was administered and then shifted to oral form third-generation cephalosporins (Ceftibuten) for 2 weeks. Neurological function was successfully recovered after operation
Culture of brain abscess was performed with sheep blood agar, eosin methylene blue agar and chocolate agar. The plates were incubated at 35 degrees for 48 hours. Anaerobic culture was performed on Bacteroides Bile Esculin agar and incubated at 35 degrees for 48 hours. Gram-positive cocci arranged in tetrads and non-hemolytic, catalase positive, coagulase negative and nonmotile were found. . Anaerobic culture did not find any anaerobic microorganism activity. Identification was performed using the Biome Rieux Vitek 2 system. The isolate was identified as Kocuria varians with very good validity . A useful alternative means of identification, 16s RNA was not performed. The antibiotics sensitivity was performed and sensitive to penicillin, cloxacillin, cefmetazole, clindamycin, Meropenum, penicillin G, Ampicillin/sulbactan, Piperacillin/tazobactam.