On 16 December 2011, a 40-year-old white woman was hospitalized with dyspnea and a small-volume hemoptysis that had started 2 weeks before. She reported asthenia, but no weight loss, cigarette smoking (20 pack-years) that was not stopped afterwards, no exposure to toxic chemicals. Her medical history included pre-eclampsia during her two pregnancies, but no previous pulmonary disease or family history of renal/cardiac/pulmonary diseases. No other relevant finding was recorded.
Clinical examination upon admission highlighted apyrexia, hypertension (184/105 mmHg), pulse rate of 96 beats/minute, and skin pallor. A chest X-ray showed bilateral infiltrates, and the thoracic CT scan indicated diffuse and bilateral ground-glass opacification. The laboratory work-up showed normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin level of 7 g/dL), but normal platelet and leucocyte counts. The creatinine level of 614 μmol/L (50 μmol/L in June 2011) indicated acute renal failure. Due to respiratory failure and renal impairment, the patients received three daily boluses of methylprednisolone (500 mg) followed by 1 mg/kg/day of prednisone.
A bronchoscopy performed on day 4 after hospitalization revealed the presence of hematic traces with a Golde score of 197 (bacterial cultures were negative). Serologic tests for auto-antibodies (antinuclear antibodies, ANCA, and anti-GBM antibodies) were negative, and the hemolytic complement fractions within the normal values (C3 = 1.22 g/L and C4 = 0.28 g/L). The ELISA test for anti-GBM antibodies using purified collagen IV alpha3 chain was negative. The renal biopsy showed fibrinoid necrosis in 10 glomeruli (among the 29 assessed; 34.5%), glomerulosclerosis in 30% of glomeruli, and cellular glomerular crescents in 28%. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed linear deposition of IgG, compatible with GS.
The patient underwent daily PLasmatic EXchanges (PLEX) for 11 days and started oral immunosuppressive therapy (100 mg of cyclophosphamide per day) on day 13 of the prednisone treatment. Due to severe renal failure and anuria, hemodialysis (3 times per week) was started on December 20, 2011. Hemoptysis stopped rapidly, but diuresis was not improved. At day 37 of hospitalization, due to neutropenia (<1G/L), the cyclophosphamide treatment was reduced to 75 mg per day, and then discontinued after 3 months. The patient remained on dialysis. As the serologic tests were all negative in 2011, the anti-GBM antibodies could not be monitored, but the patient did not show any other GS symptom in the following years.
In 2014, when the patient was still taking 5 mg of prednisone per day, a new episode of hemoptysis occurred confirmed by bronchoscopy. This was associated with acute pneumonia of the left lung lower lobe, with favorable outcome after treatment with prednisone (50 mg per day for 1 week) and fluoroquinolone-based antibiotic therapy.
In March 2015, the patient received a living donor (her mother) kidney transplant. In the years from the GS episode to the kidney transplant, all serologic tests for auto-antibodies were negative. Conversely, panel-reactive antibodies against class I and class II antigens were detected, but not against the donor’s human leukocyte antigen (HLA) (identical HLA profiles for donor and patient). Anti-Epstein Barr virus and cytomegalovirus IgGs were detected in serum samples from donor and recipient. The patient was induced with anti-thymocyte globulin (rabbit) and received standard immunosuppressive therapy with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), tacrolimus (residual serum tacrolimus between 6 and 8 ng/mL), and prednisone. After the graft, the creatinine level was stabilized between 110 and 130 μmol/L. She developed new onset diabetes after transplantation that was treated with metformin and repaglinide.
In November 2016, microscopic hematuria without any proteinuria or renal dysfunction (creatinine level = 104 μmol/L) was detected. In February 2017, the patient was hospitalized because of hemoptysis and anuric acute renal failure (creatinine level = 1696 μmol/L). Like in 2011, blood pressure was increased (220/113 mmHg). The laboratory work-up showed normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin level of 10.4 g/dL), platelet count of 100G/L, and normal leucocyte levels. At this time, the patient was taking tacrolimus (5 mg per day; residual tacrolimus level = 4.2 ng/mL), MMF (500 mg twice per day), and prednisone (5 mg per day). The serologic tests for auto-antibodies (antinuclear antibodies, ANCA, and anti-GBM antibodies) were negative, and the hemolytic complement factors within normal levels (CH50 = 79 U/mL, C3 = 1.28 g/L and C4 = 0.35 g/L). Renal biopsy of the transplanted kidney (25 glomeruli) confirmed the GS relapse with glomerulosclerosis in 36% of the analyzed glomeruli, cellular glomerular crescents in 56%, and linear IgG deposition on the GBM .
The patient underwent daily PLEX for 14 days, and received prednisone (500 mg/day for the first 3 days followed by 1 mg/kg/day). At the end of the 14th PLEX, a bronchoscopy indicated active hemoptysis with the presence of 99.5% sideroblasts and a Golde score of 200. Due to the absence of effect, PLEX was stopped and intravenous infusion of cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2 every 21 days) was introduced combined with prednisone (5 mg per day) and tacrolimus (2 mg twice per day).
After five infusions of cyclophosphamide the patient has now recovered and the anemia is under control with EPO supplementation. Conversely, the grafted kidney does not work, and the patient needs hemodialysis 3 times per week. Tacrolimus has been stopped.