A 53-year-old Caucasian man with a past medical history of recurrent pancreatitis for the last 18 months, depression, alcohol and tobacco abuse, was referred to our hospital after a 10-day hospitalization in a pulmonary clinic, where he was admitted due to dyspnea and two episodes of hemoptysis. An extensive workup had already been performed, including bronchoscopy, gastroscopy, chest and upper abdomen computed tomography (CT) scans. A diagnostic paracentesis had already been carried out and fluid samples were sent for further analysis. His upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and bronchoscopy did not show any remarkable findings, and his pleural fluid was plenteous in protein and amylase. His cytology reports were negative for malignancy and his pleural fluid adenosine deaminase levels showed no evidence of mycobacterial infection . He had a good clinical status, except for a mild shortness of breath on exertion. He reported no fever or chills and, despite having a good appetite the last six months, he noted a weight loss of 25kg. Additionally, he mentioned that over the last four months he had experienced difficulty in swallowing solid food. On admission, his physical examination revealed bilateral diminished breath sounds at the lung basis and a firm liver edge 5cm below the right costal margin. His laboratory results showed anemia, malnutrition and slightly elevated serum amylase (360U/L) . His chest CT scan revealed bilateral pleural effusions and a mass in the lower mediastinum ; these radiological findings were not present on his previous examinations nine months ago . After a successful chest drainage clinical improvement was noticed, however, further chest CT imaging showed a longitudinal fluid collection in the mediastinum, along the lower esophagus, measuring 3×8cm . This collection extended beyond the diaphragm and seemed to be connected with a small pseudocyst at the pancreatic tail . He was on a specific enteral diet, lipase supplementation and octreotide (administered subcutaneously). Further evaluation with magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed the pancreatic duct to be slightly dilated. No further interventions were performed at that time. A month later he was discharged in good clinical status and scheduled for outpatient observation.
Two months after his discharge he was readmitted with clinical signs of respiratory distress and bilateral pleural effusion was visible on his radiology chest imaging. The results from his serum blood and pleural fluid laboratory tests were similar to his first admission. As similar findings were identified on his chest and abdomen CT scan compared to the images from his last admission, a decision for surgical intervention was made. Upon completion of the preoperative diagnostic workup he was transferred to the general surgery ward. He was on a triple antibiotic regimen (meropenem, vancomycin and fluconazole) and was scheduled for elective surgery. On the fourth hospitalization day he suffered from nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. His physical exam showed that his abdomen was rigid, with noted pain on the upper abdomen and guarding. His laboratory tests showed a significant drop in his hemoglobin level and his vital signs revealed borderline tachycardia. After resuscitation with fluids and blood transfusions, a CT scan of his abdomen was performed where an extended hematoma at the lesser sac was identified with no active bleeding. Subsequently, he underwent an elective embolization of the splenic artery followed by an emergency laparotomy. Intraoperatively, a sizable hematoma was found at the lesser sac, pushing his stomach anteriorly. Due to chronic inflammation his pancreas was fibrous and hard. The splenic vein was thrombosed and splenomegaly with left-sided portal hypertension was present. A distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed; his post-operative course was uneventful and he was discharged on the 11th postoperative day.