A 61-year-old man was referred to our hospital due to abdominal distention. Physical examination demonstrated a huge, hard, tender mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. Laboratory data showed inflammation (white blood cells, 15,600/μL; C-reactive protein, 19.1 mg/L), anemia (hemoglobin, 9.8 g/dL), malnutrition (albumin 2.0 g/dL), and an elevated tumor marker (carcinoembryonic antigen 64.1 U/mL). Abdominal computed tomography showed a huge 18-cm mass in the right upper abdomen . The tumor was located close to surrounding organs such as the duodenum and right kidney. Enlarged surrounding lymph nodes were also noted. There were no distant metastases. The small intestine was dilated due to obstruction by primary tumor. Colonoscopy showed a circumferential type 2 tumor located at the transverse colon . The scope could not pass through to the oral side of the tumor. Biopsy showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma ; RAS status was mutant. Though an ileus tube was inserted, the patient’s symptoms did not improve. Finally, locally advanced transverse colon cancer T4b N2a M0 Stage IIIC was diagnosed. Considering the extensive invasion to surrounding organs and difficulties in achieving margin-negative surgery, emergency ileostomy was performed first. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) consisting of a combination of 5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin, irinotecan, and leucovorin (FOLFOXIRI) plus bevacizumab, followed by primary tumor resection, was then planned. During NAC, the patient developed grade 2 neutropenia, but the planned course of treatment was completed. After 6 courses of treatment, the primary tumor had shrunk remarkably, from 18.0 cm to 5.0 cm , and invasion to surrounding organs was not observed. Laparoscopic extended right hemi-colectomy was then performed. First, the ileostomy was closed. Then, EZ access (Hakko-medical, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted through the wound. Five ports, one for the scope and the others for the handling forceps, were used. The procedure was started with the cranial approach for right colectomy, beginning with hepato-colic ligament resection. From the cranial view, the duodenum was not invaded by the primary tumor. After resection of the hepato-colic flexure, the pedicle of the ileocecal artery and vein was grasped by the assistant’s forceps. Then, the regional lymph node and vessels were resected. To mobilize the intestine, the mesentery proper was grasped, and the insertion of the mesentery proper was cut. The tumor had not invaded the right kidney. To remove the lesion from the body, the wound was dilated to 5 cm. The tumor was then resected by a suture instrument. A functional end-to-end anastomosis was created. Macroscopic examination showed a 4.8cm × 4.1cm tumor at the transverse colon (a). Histopathologically, the primary tumor and enlarged lymph nodes consisted of fibrous or granuloma-like tissues, and no residual cancer cells were found (pCR) (b). The final diagnosis was transverse colon cancer, ypT0 ypN0 ypStage 0. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 10.