A 5-year-old girl with Down's syndrome presented with an erythematous, indurated area on her right leg surrounding an insect bite noticed two days prior to admission. Oral cefaclor therapy was started for suspected systemic infection by S. pyogenes or S. aureus/epidermidis the day before admission by the GP. Despite antibiotics, the erythema continued to migrate proximally towards the inguinal region. On arrival at the emergency department, the conscious patient presented with diarrhea but stable vital signs: breathing rate 26 breaths/min, heart rate 110 beats/min, and blood pressure 98/57 mmHg. Blood examination revealed leukocytosis (15.44 G/L), neutrophilia (84.8%, absolute or 13.1 G/L), mild anemia (Hb 107 g/L, Hct 32%), a normal platelet count (238 G/L), and an elevated CRP (260.98 mg/L).
During the first two hours her status deteriorated so rapidly that she needed to be transferred to the intensive care unit. Capillary blood gas analysis revealed a severe uncompensated metabolic acidosis: pH 6.77, pCO2 37.6 mmHg, HCO3 5.2 mmol/L, and lactate 7 mmol/L. Septic shock was diagnosed and three intravenous fluid boluses (20 mL/kg) and oxygen therapy were started. Blood cultures were taken and the antibiotic therapy augmented by parenteral clindamycin and vancomycin. Due to an unsatisfactory cardiovascular response to fluid resuscitation, dopamine was started at 5 μg/kg/min and then increased to 10 μg/kg/min. Low ventricular contractility on ultrasonography required additional dobutamine at 5 μg/kg/min while clinical signs of decreased systemic vascular resistance necessitated noradrenaline at 0.1 μg/kg/min which had to be increased up to 0.5 μg/kg/min later. Due to pronounced cardiovascular instability and suspected adrenal gland insufficiency, hydrocortisone was prescribed at 2 mg/kg/12 hours.
Considering the well-known immunodeficiency of patients with Down's syndrome, an antimycotic agent (fluconazole) was administered preventively, and intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (1 g/kg) for septic shock due to S. pyogenes or S. aureus was given on the day of admission and the following day. Fresh frozen plasma (15 mL/kg) and low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin 6 mg/kg) were administered for laboratory signs of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Deep vein thrombosis of the right lower extremity was ruled out by Doppler ultrasonography. Chest X-ray revealed increased perihilar lung markings.
Eight hours after admission to the ICU an altered state of consciousness, hypercapnia, tachydyspnoe, and increasing oxygen needs required intubation and pressure controlled SIMV at PIP 17 cm H2O, PEEP 5 cm H2O, respiratory rate 25/min, and FiO2 0.4.
Based on the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines multiorgan failure was diagnosed. The patient had cardiovascular instability requiring complex vasoactive therapy (dopamine, dobutamine, noradrenaline, and milrinone); DIC indicated deteriorating liver function, poor lung function on ventilatory support alluding to Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS), and deteriorating kidney function. Microbiological examinations were inconclusive as to the causative pathogen.
During the first 48 hours of therapy diffuse erythroderma with purpura and petechiae appeared, while the right leg became livid, and bullae appeared in places subjected to external pressure . Periodic pediatric surgery consultation excluded necrotizing fasciitis. The clinical picture now matched that of TSS. While skin lesions improved gradually and necrotic areas recovered fully under local conservative therapy from day seven onwards, new bullous eruptions continued to appear.
In an attempt to modulate the dysregulated immune response, plasma exchange therapy was performed without complications. Despite an increasing urine output during the first 24 hours from 0.4 to 5.4 ml/kg/hour her fluid balance remained positive. Thereafter, diuresis declined and the patient became anuric by hour 56 such that continuous venovenous hemodialysis was started. Thrombocytopenia, anemia, and hypoproteinemia were supported by blood products and an augmentation of the low neutrophil levels by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor tried on days four and five.
As previous attempts of immune modulation therapy were unsuccessful, renal replacement therapy was supplemented by the cytokine absorber CytoSorb (Cytosorbents Corp., Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). CVVHD was performed with multiFiltrate (Fresenius Medical Care) machine, using a AV400S polysulfone dialyzer. Blood flow (Qb) of 40 mL/min could be achieved; dialysis fluid (MultiBic) flow (Qd) of 800 mL/hour was maintained, with an ultrafiltration rate of 100 mL/hour. Because of hepatic failure with DIC, regional citrate anticoagulation was used during the whole course of CRRT without any remarkable complication. As a result of a 72-hour uneventful course of the CVVHD-CytoSorb therapy, cardiovascular stability improved on lower vasopressor doses; FiO2 decreased from 0.95 to 0.4, airway pressures PIP/PEEP from 27/10 to 24/8 cm H2O, and respiratory rate from 25 to 15/min, respectively. In addition, levels of important laboratory parameters decreased as did plasma concentrations of proinflammatory and immunomodulatory cytokines . This attenuation of the inflammatory response correlated with the clinical improvement. The need for platelets decreased dramatically 48 hours after CytoSorb therapy and the diffuse erythroderma, purpura, and petechiae started to fade. CVVHD was continued for a further 8 days due to pronounced fluid overload, reaching normal rates of diuresis on day 17, three days after successful extubation and termination of the initial empiric antibiotic combination therapy. After six days of total parenteral nutrition the patient was switched to enteral feeding.
On day 20, her condition deteriorated again with tachypnea and desaturation together with elevated levels of CRP, PCT. This time, blood cultures revealed a staphylococcal infection; however, sepsis did not develop during the targeted antibiotic therapy. After 25 days the patient left the intensive care unit although her right ankle was still swollen.
The reappearance of fever accompanied by mildly elevated inflammatory laboratory parameters gave rise to the thought of deep tissue infection. MRI could not rule out an osteomyelitis of the os naviculare. The patient remained afebrile while the inflammation of the ankle became smaller under local conservative therapy. Complex physiotherapy tried to counteract muscle wasting and decreased tone. The girl was discharged home after 42 days where she recovered completely.