A 41-year-old male presented to us with complaints of holocranial headache for last 1 year, progressive diminution of vision for last 6 months, ataxia for last 3 months, and memory disturbance for last 1 month. On neurological examination, we found bilateral papilledema with impaired vision in both eyes. Computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed well-defined hypodense and nonenhancing mass in the pineal region, and patchy calcification in the peripheral part of the tumor, with hydrocephalus . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed complex heterogeneous, ill-marginated mass in pineal region, with extension encroaching midbrain and infratentorium. The mass was compressing the aqueduct and causing obstructive hydrocephalus [Figure and ]. On T1-weighted imaging, the mass was hypointense and nonenhancing. On T2-weighted imaging, the mass was hyperintense. On fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), the mass showed some restriction within the lesion with marked hyperintense signal [Figure –]. His serum α-fetoprotein, β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG), and placental alkaline phosphatase were within normal limits. Our pre-op diagnosis was pineal epidermoid. The patient was positioned in three-quarter prone position. We approached through occipital–transtentorial route. Using microsurgical techniques, we explored the pineal region. Just in front of thickened arachnoid in the quadrigeminal cistern, there was a pearly tumor . Cyst wall was glistening; intratumor decompression was done. Cystic contents were avascular, pearly white, soft, and waxy debris. Contents were removed piecemeal, followed by performing extracapsular decompression. A near-total removal was achieved without any injury to neural or vascular structures . We had to leave in situ a tiny fragment of the capsule that was adherent to the vein of Galen. Postoperative period was uneventful. Patient improved neurologically. Histopathology confirmed it as a case of epidermoid . On post-op CT scan, there was minimal residual tumor and hydrocephalus decreased .