A 55-year-old previously healthy Caucasian man suffering from persistent unremitting symptoms of long COVID attended our clinic for evaluation. The clinical presentation included memory problems, worsening of multitasking abilities, fatigue, low energy, breathlessness, and reduced physical fitness, which all started after acute SARS-CoV-2 infection diagnosed 3 months before. He initially developed high-grade fever without chest pain, cough, or shortness of breath, on 21 January 2021. He was admitted to hospital because of dehydration on 30 January 2021 and was diagnosed with COVID-19 by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). During the hospital stay, he developed acute respiratory syndrome due to pneumonitis and required supportive treatment with high-flow oxygen for 1 week. He was discharged from hospital on 16 February 2021. At discharge, he was stable with normal oxygen and no neurological deficiencies were noted on physical examination. In addition, 6 weeks after being diagnosed with COVID-19, he developed a pulmonary embolus and was treated with rivaroxaban. Prior to the SARS-CoV-2 infection, he had been a healthy, high-functioning, and athletic individual.
The baseline evaluation done at our clinic, 3 months after the acute infection, included brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with perfusion and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), computerized neurocognitive evaluation, cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET), and pulmonary function tests.
At baseline, the patient complained of shortness of breath with exercise as well as difficulties with memory and multitasking that started after his COVID-19 illness. Physical and neurological examination was normal. Brain MRI evaluation demonstrated reduced perfusion that correlated with the cognitive decline as detailed below. He was referred to hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) that included 60 sessions, 5 days per week. Each session included exposure to 90 minutes of 100% oxygen at 2 atmosphere absolute with 5-minute air breaks every 20 minutes.
The patient started his first HBOT on 19 April 2021 and finished on 15 July 2021 without any significant side effects. After the first five sessions, he reported that his breathing had started to improve and that he no longer had muscle aches after exercise. After 15 sessions, he noted less fatigue and an improvement in his previous low energy. After 20 sessions, he noticed that his breathing and exercise capacity had returned to his capacity pre-SARS-CoV-2 infection, returning to running mountain trails. Additionally, he noted that his memory and multitasking ability returned to his pre-COVID-19 levels.
The baseline brain MRI, prior to the HBOT, showed two small foci of signal alterations in the right and left parietal regions suggestive of early small-vessel disease. In addition, there was a global decrease in the brain perfusion. As detailed in Fig. and Table , re-evaluation after HBOT (done 4 weeks after the last HBOT to avoid any potential intermediate effect) revealed a significant increase in brain perfusion. Tables and present the improvements in the brain microstructure as demonstrated by MRI–DTI.
Neurocognitive assessment was done using NeuroTrax full computerized testing battery to measure different aspects of brain function, such as memory, information processing speed, attention, and executive function, was done before and after HBOT. The post-HBOT neurocognitive testing showed significant improvement in global memory with the most dominant effect being on nonverbal memory, executive functions, attention, information procession speed, cognitive flexibility, and multitasking. Table summarizes the pre- and post-HBOT scores in the different cognitive domains.
Physical capacity was evaluated by maximal cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET) conducted on a COSMED treadmill using the Boston 5 protocol. Table presents the pre- and post-HBOT physiological evaluated parameters. As detailed, there was a 34% increase in the VO2 max from 3083 to 4130 mL per minute after HBOT. The forced vital capacity (FVC) improved by 44% from 4.76 to 6.87 L, the forced expiratory volume (FEV) by 23% from 3.87 to 4.76 L, and peak flow measurement (PEF) by 20.2% from 10.17 to 12.22 L per second.
After receiving full information at the end of his post-HBOT evaluation, the patient signed an informed consent allowing publication of his medical information.