A 46-year-old woman presented with fever, asthenia, and abdominal distention for more than 20 days.
Twenty days before the present admission, the patient’s initial clinical symptom was fever, and then she developed a sore throat. She went to a hospital, and her objective examination was negative. She had a diagnosis of upper airway infection and was prescribed antibiotic therapy, initially with levofloxacin. One week after the first hospital consultation, the patient returned with an ongoing fever, asthenia, and abdominal distention. Laboratory results included a white blood cell count of 3.45 × 109/L, platelet (PLT) count of 41 × 109/L, and hemoglobin (HGB) level of 123 g/L, indicating a decreased PLT count. On the following day, she was admitted to our hospital for close examination and treatment.
She had no chronic illnesses.
She had no new sexual contacts, recent travel, sick contacts, or illicit drug use. She had no history of alcohol intake or smoking, and lacked a family history of other diseases.
Her vital signs included a blood pressure of 105/62 mmHg, pulse rate of 89 beats/min, maximum temperature of 37.6 °C, and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. The sclera of her eyes was yellow. On chest auscultation, respiratory sounds in the bilateral lungs were weak. She had a distended abdomen with a shifting dullness on percussion.
A full blood count revealed bicytopenia with leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. The test for the Epstein-Barr (EB) virus antibody was positive. Repeated blood and urine cultures were negative. Her laboratory results of alanine aminotransferase (207 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (244 U/L), total bilirubin (7.68 mg/dL), serum albumin (ALB: 33.6 g/L), and prothrombin time (PT; 52%) indicated liver injury. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 46 mm/h. An increased ferritin level of 997 mg/dL was observed. The lactate dehydrogenase level was elevated to 3278 U/L. The fibrinogen level was reduced to < 1.52 g/L. The triglyceride level was elevated to 2.45 mmol/L. The test for the EB virus antibody was negative; however, the level of EB virus DNA was 1.56 × 107. Immunologic examinations were normal. Hepatitis markers were negative. The T-cell spot test for tuberculosis infection was negative. All investigations resulted from the hospital admission . The cytology test results of the ascites and pleural fluid were negative. The pleural fluid and ascites were exudative according to Light’s criteria, and the cultures were negative.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed mild pericardial effusion, pleural effusion, hepatosplenomegaly, and a large amount of ascites. Color Doppler echocardiography showed pericardial effusion and normal left ventricular systolic function.
On hospital day 7, bone marrow aspiration was performed, and hemophagocytosis was observed in the bone marrow .