A 14-year-old girl presented with complaints of fatigue, inability to walk, urinary incontinence, dysarthria, and ataxia that had worsened in the last three weeks. She also had fever, weight loss and decreased appetite. In her past medical history she had been treated for seizures with valproic acid (15 mg/kg/day) for three years. Her seizures were documented by EEG findings.
On physical examination, her blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg and she had a pulse rate of 88/min, a respiratory rate of 14/min and oral temperature of 38.6°C. Her growth and development were normal, reaching menarche at the age of 13, followed by regular cycles until two months before admission. Her weight was 48 kg and her height was 154 cm. She had received all vaccinations since birth according to the national vaccination plan. Her family history was negative for any hereditary or metabolic disorders.
Her consciousness level was normal and she had no neck stiffness. In spite of being awake, she could not communicate with anyone and only used indistinct words. The pupils were normal in size and equally reactive to light. Her sclera were pale.
On neurological examination, her upper limbs were mildly spastic, and her muscle strength was 2–3/5 as far as she could cooperate. Her upper limb reflexes, including the biceps, brachioradialis, and triceps, and also her sensory examinations were normal.
Her lower limbs, however, were flaccid and atrophic; the muscle strength was 0/5 and the patellar and Achilles reflexes were absent. She showed an extensor plantar reflex. Her lower limb sensory examination showed lost senses of light touch, pain, temperature, vibration and joint position. This may have been unreliable due to her overall condition.
As she was not able to stand or walk, gait and cerebellar examinations were not performed. We also found a deep infected 5 × 4 cm bedsore in her sacral area, as a result of being bedridden for more than three weeks. Her abdominal, chest and heart examinations were normal. Her hemoglobin was 8.3 gr/dl (See Additional file : Table 1 for the CBC result). All other blood tests were normal (See Additional file : Table 2 for other blood tests). Her cerebrospinal fluid examination and chest X-ray were also normal.
B12 deficiency was documented by serum vitamin B12 level <100 (normal, 160–970) pg/ml and peripheral blood smear that showed hypersegmented neutrophils (6 and 7 segments).
EEG findings included some sharp activity that could indicate epileptogenic activity. The MRI demonstrated senile dilatation in the CSF space and sulci of both hemispheres; a finding compatible with mild atrophic changes .
EMG/NCV showed prolonged distal latency of motor nerve, decreased amplitudes of compound muscle action potential, decreased conduction velocity, and increased F wave latencies. Sensory nerve action potentials were not detected. All above finding are compatible with mixed sensorimotor polyneuropathy.
Treatment was begun with vitamin B12 (1 mg/IV/day) and folic acid (5 mg/oral/day). After a few weeks, her symptoms improved and she was able to speak and eat. Her upper limb mobility improved and she began to communicate with us. Her reticulocyte count also increased dramatically from 0.9% to 7.1% (on the 7th day of treatment) indicating a favorable treatment response. However, she was febrile in spite of being treated with vancomycin (1 gr/BID) and imipenem (500 mg/QID) which were chosen based on the infected bed sore cultures and antibiograms. After one month, her hemoglobin slightly rose and remained in the range of 8–9 gr/dl. Although her serial blood cultures were negative, she remained febrile, and we suspected an unusual source of infection that did not respond to broad spectrum antibiotics. Therefore, a bone marrow aspiration and biopsy was performed three weeks after initiating the treatment, and the specimen was examined for unusual germs such as tuberculosis and brucellosis.
Bone marrow examination showed some degree of megaloblastic changes, giant metamyelocytes and nuclei/cytoplasm dissociation. The laboratory report showed there were acid fast bacilli in her bone marrow aspiration smear. Therefore, we started a six month antituberculosis treatment with isoniazid 5 mg/kg/day, rifampin 10 mg/kg/day, ethambutol 15 mg/kg/day, and pyrazinamide 20 mg/kg/day.
This treatment resulted in the termination of fever on the second day, further elevation of the hemoglobin level and improvements in her general health. Her upper-limb force became normal and she was able to eat by herself. Her lower-limb force improved and the plantar reflex was now flexor. To find the cause of megaloblastic anemia, we reassessed the case. Valproic acid was not the cause, she was not a vegetarian, and she had no sign or symptoms of malabsorbtion or malnutrition. Her growth and development were normal. We concluded that her vitamin B12 deficiency may be of a gastrointestinal origin. As the Schilling test was not available at our center, we conducted a small bowel series by barium examination and the results showed terminal ileum narrowing, irregularity and mucosal ulceration; all highly indicative of tuberculosis .
Colonoscopy showed a normal colon but a severely strictured and edematous ileocecal valve, obstructing the path to the terminal ileum for the endoscopic tube.
We concluded that M. tuberculosis had caused the terminal ileum disease and possibly vitamin B12 deficiency in our patient. At present, our patient has been treated for vitamin B12 deficiency and M. tuberculosis. After being treated with anti-tuberculosis drugs her fever terminated and her hemoglobin level returned to normal. Currently, 10 months after admission, she can eat, write, and speak normally as well as walk and ride a bicycle, but she has some degree of foot drop. Her latest tests showed a hemoglobin level of 13.7 gr/dl, hematocrit 39.4, and her MCV was 89.3 fl. The small intestine barium examination at the completion of the anti-tuberculosis treatment showed less narrowing and irregularity, which further confirmed the diagnosis.