A 28-year-old Caucasian man with history of testicular cancer in remission presented with altered mental status, syncope, vertical gaze palsy, ataxia, and tremor. He was in his usual state of health until 2 years ago, when he noticed a large right testicular mass. Work-up revealed marginally enlarged intraabdominal lymph nodes without evidence of metastases. One and a half years ago, he underwent radical unilateral orchiectomy. Pathology revealed malignant mixed germ cell tumor with abundant necrosis, comprising 50% teratoma, 45% embryonal carcinoma, and 5% yolk sac tumor. The mixed germ cell tumor was limited to the testicle without evidence of invasion. Lymph nodes were not examined pathologically. Alpha fetal protein (AFP) was mildly elevated at 9 ng/mL (reference range: 0–6.7 ng/mL) and normalized postoperatively. The patient opted for surveillance instead of chemotherapy after consultation with an oncologist.
Three months prior to admission, the patient started experiencing fatigue and weight gain of 18 kg over 2 months. He was diagnosed with hypogonadism based on a low testosterone level of 127 ng/dL and started testosterone supplementation. Three weeks prior to admission, he began experiencing difficulty with upward and downward gaze. His fatigue continued to worsen, and he stopped working. One week prior to admission, he developed confusion, which manifested in difficulty remembering his dogs’ names and asking questions in strangely worded ways. He also developed bilateral tremor and ataxia, causing him to fall on a daily basis.
The worsening of these neurological symptoms led him to present to the emergency department. While hospitalized, he had an episode of syncope. As this was being evaluated, he was noted to have hypovolemia due to polyuria, which was concerning for diabetes insipidus and, consequently, hypothalamic involvement of his underlying disease. Ultimately, the patient did not meet criteria for diabetes insipidus but did have elevated prolactin of 52.0 ng/mL, concerning for some hypothalamic injury. Due to suspicion that his condition could extend to the pituitary, the patient underwent testing for thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The decreased levels of the above hormones revealed probable panhypopituitarism, with TSH of 0.11 mcIU/mL, free T4 of 1.0 ng/dL, ACTH of <2 pg/mL, LH of 0.5 pg/mL, and FSH of 1.3 mIU/mL. Of note, he was placed on high-dose steroids immediately and has consistently been on these higher-dose steroids, so he has been unable to undergo a cosyntropin test to confirm central adrenal insufficiency.
He also underwent a neurologic work-up, including brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and MRI imaging of the pituitary, which showed T2 prolongation involving the bilateral mesial temporal lobes, hippocampi/fornices, hypothalamus, mammillary bodies and mammillothalamic tracts, and midbrain including periaqueductal gray with normal pituitary . His presentation was concerning for encephalitis involving subcortical white matter, deep brain structures, and dorsal midbrain. A lumbar puncture showed lymphocytic pleocytosis with elevated protein and was positive for oligoclonal bands. A broad infectious work-up was otherwise negative. He received high-dose steroids, five sessions of plasmapheresis, and 5 days of intravenous immunoglobulin, without significant improvement in his physical examination or mental status. Repeat ultrasound of the testes, positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) scans, and AFP levels were all normal without evidence of recurrent testicular cancer. He was discharged with close follow-up, and eventually anti-Ma2 antibodies returned positive, consistent with anti-Ma2 PLE.
After discharge, the patient was treated with rituximab. Unfortunately, the patient did not make significant improvement after his hospitalization, losing the ability to walk and to clear his nasopharyngeal secretions. A few months later, the patient was readmitted to the hospital and intensive care unit (ICU) for progression of his anti-Ma2 PLE, which was complicated by thrombocytopenia, gastrointestinal (GI) bleed, sepsis, and worsening neurological status. During this hospitalization, the patient underwent tracheostomy and placement of a gastric tube. Repeat brain MRI showed similar areas of signal abnormality from prior brain MRI but with mildly decreased intensity . Repeat PET/CT scans and ultrasound of the testes were once again normal without evidence of recurrent testicular cancer or metastases. However, the patient was initiated on cyclophosphamide and lacosamide. Upon discharge, the patient continued with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, lacosamide, and levetiracetam. Now, 8 months after his initial hospitalization, the patient is closely followed by neurology and endocrinology and remains disoriented with fluctuating levels of alertness.