A 40-year-old female, height 145 cm, weight 45 kg, gravida 1 para 0, was planned for an elective caesarean section at 38 weeks of gestational age. She has a significant past medical history of thalassaemia minor, migraine and a type I ACM. She presented 5 years ago with persistent left-sided headaches, numbness of the left side of the face, upper limb and neck. The initial MRI had depicted a large syringohydromyelia seen in the entire spinal cord extending from C1 to T12 level with only a small syrinx in the conus medullaris. There was herniation of the cerebellar tonsils below the level of the foramen magnum by about 11 mm. She underwent a foramen magnum decompression. The intraoperative findings were that of a thickened dural band at the foramen magnum, with elongation of tonsils down to the upper border of C1. The follow-up MRI done the following year showed that the CSF space around the craniocervical junction had improved, though the large syrinx still persisted and extended from C1 to beyond T5.
Neurosurgical consult was made early in pregnancy by the obstetrician and she was deemed suitable to proceed with either a normal vaginal delivery or a caesarean section.
Pre-operative assessment was conducted 1 day prior to the surgery. There was residual left-sided numbness over her face and left upper limb and the headaches were still present but not worsening. There were no other signs or symptoms of raised intracranial pressure (ICP). These symptoms were not aggravated with pregnancy, coughing, or neck movements.
A physical examination was done, specifically, there was decreased sensation over the left face and left upper limb. Airway examination was unremarkable. There was a slight thoracic scoliosis over her back but the spinous processes were well felt in the lumbar region.
She was counselled regarding the risks and benefits of spinal NA versus general anaesthesia (GA) together with the obstetrician, with consideration of the input from the neurosurgeon. A normal vaginal delivery was discussed again as it was not a contraindication. However, she had concerns with lying supine for a prolonged period due to her thoracic scoliosis.
She had initially decided to proceed with the caesarean section under a GA. However, after thorough discussion of the risks and benefits of a GA versus spinal NA, the decision was made to proceed with the surgery under spinal NA.
The patient was positioned in the sitting position, and a single shot spinal anaesthetic was given at the level of L3/4 interspace. This was a single attempt using a 27-gauge Whitacre spinal needle, with a spinal introducer. Given her relatively short stature, intra-thecal hyperbaric bupivacaine 0.5% 1.6 mL with fentanyl 15 µg and morphine 100 µg was administered. Assessment of block height to cold sensation was performed, and a level corresponding to that of T4 was achieved prior to surgical incision.
Intra-operatively, the patient had mild discomfort from intraoperative surgical stretching of the abdomen, which was transient in nature. She was given intravenous (IV) fentanyl 50 µg in titrated boluses, together with Entonox, just prior to the delivery of the baby. After the delivery of the baby, she was given IV 1 mg of midazolam. The surgery was completed uneventfully thereafter without further complaints. Post-operatively, she was monitored in the high dependency unit overnight. Follow-up on the patient on the first day following surgery revealed no worsening of her pre-existing neurological symptoms, which was that of a left-sided numbness over her face and left upper limb. There was also no interval development of new neurological symptoms. She was discharged on post-operative day 3 and remained well on her follow-up visit with the obstetrician 2 weeks later.