A 41-year-old male patient with lymphoma had previously visited a local hospital and underwent bronchoscopy to examine the BALF. The routine microbiological examination did not detect any pathogenic bacteria; Gram staining did not show any bacteria; the culture did not show fungal growth; Grocott’s methenamine (hexamine) silver technique did not show PJP cysts, and tuberculosis smears did not detect acid-fast bacteria. However, BALF-NGS found 5225 PJP reads and four Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) reads. Due to the uncertainty regarding tuberculosis infection, he was transferred to our designated tuberculosis hospital for continued treatment.
The patient presented with relapsed refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (R/RDLBCL) with MYC, BCL-2, and BCL-6 expression. After treatment with R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), R-GDP (rituximab, cisplatin, gemcitabine, and dexamethasone), venetoclax, obutinib, and immune checkpoint inhibitors were administered. The patient developed acute type 1 respiratory failure, severe pneumonia, PJP, cytomegalovirus retinitis, secondary immune deficiency, and secondary pulmonary tuberculosis.
The patient underwent a computed tomography (CT) examination after admission , which indicated that two lung infections should be considered first. In addition, the immune response to MTB by T-cell receptor clustering was negative, and MTB complex from sputum samples, non-tuberculous mycobacterial DNA, and tuberculosis DNA and RNA were negative. Meropenem (1 g q8h) was administered for infection, TMP-SMX 1.44 g q6h for PJP, and rifampicin, isoniazid, and levofloxacin for tuberculosis. Simultaneously, methylprednisolone 40 mg q12h was administered to control inflammation. Ganciclovir was used as a prophylactic treatment for cytomegalovirus retinitis, and tiopronin was used for liver protection.
Unfortunately, the patient developed drug-induced liver injury after six days of treatment, with alanine transaminase (ALT) levels up to 269 U/L and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels up to 299 U/L. Due to the gastrointestinal reaction of nausea and vomiting combined with drug-induced liver injury, the patient could not tolerate high-intensity treatment, so the dose of TMP-SMX was reduced to 0.96 g q8h, combined with micafungin 0.2 g qd for PJP treatment. However, after four days of continued treatment, a reexamination CT scan indicated the progression of the infection . The patient’s high fever remained unrelieved, with a temperature as high as 40.4°C (see for the temperature trend chart) accompanied by shortness of breath and chest tightness. Blood gas analysis indicated type 2 respiratory failure and the arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) decreased to 57 mmHg. Indicators of particularly abnormal laboratory tests, including levels of procalcitonin (PCT) 5.32 ng/mL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 167.53 mg/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 564 U/L, and white blood cell (WBC) count 2.7*109/L, are shown in .
Based on the persistent fever, tachypnoea, PaO2 of 57 mmHg, arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 89% at rest, and extensive interstitial shadowing on chest CT, the patient was classified as having severe PJP according to the PJP grade. Therefore, the treatment regimen for PJP was adjusted to TMP-SMX 0.96 g q6h + caspofungin 50 mg qd, while teicoplanin 0.4 g q12h was added to enhance the anti-infection effect.
After a multidisciplinary team discussion, the anti-tuberculosis drugs were discontinued because MTB was considered a non-pathogenic bacterium. Leukocyte and platelet-ascending drugs were used, human immunoglobulin was added, and nutrition was improved.
After four days of treatment for multiple infections, the patient’s temperature decreased to 37°C, and acute infection indicators improved (PCT 0.39 ng/mL, CRP 30.30 mg/L). Anti-infection de-escalation therapy consisted of cefoperazone and sulbactam 3 g q8h. PJP treatment continued for 30 days, and pulmonary infection lesions were completely relieved . TMP-SMX 0.96 g qd was continuously administered as a PJP prophylactic therapy. The patient then began treatment for the lymphoma.