A 39-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with abdominal pain and fever following a traffic accident the prior evening. Although the airbag was activated, no apparent injuries, such as seatbelt marks or abdominal symptoms, were evident; therefore, she went home without medical attention. During the night, she experienced the sudden onset of left lower abdominal pain and was transported to the hospital. The patient had a 17-year history of small bowel colonic CD and had undergone eight balloon dilations for descending colonic strictures. The CD was in remission with azathioprine, mesalazine, and adalizumab treatment. Vital signs showed no decrease in blood pressure (106/47 mm Hg), but tachycardia (108 bpm) and tachypnea (23 times/min) were observed. The saturation of percutaneous oxygen (SpO2 98%) remained stable without oxygen administration. The patient had a high fever of 40.0°C and tenderness and rebound pain throughout her abdomen, with the strongest point being in the lower left abdomen. Blood tests showed a white blood cell count of 5,200/μL and a C-reactive protein concentration of 0.92 mg/dL, indicating a slight inflammatory reaction; there were no other notable abnormal findings. Computed tomography revealed thickening of the descending colon wall, increased fat concentration around the wall, and some air in the mesentery near the intestinal wall . Notably, the descending colon had undergone endoscopic balloon dilatation multiple times (a, b), which was thought to be a contributing factor. Based on these findings, we diagnosed generalized peritonitis due to traumatic penetration of the mesentery of the descending colon and performed emergency surgery.
Laparoscopy was selected for intraperitoneal observation, with the surgical procedure to include irrigation and drainage of the abdominal cavity and construction of an artificial anus. Using the open method, a camera port was inserted into the abdominal cavity from the umbilical region, revealing a moderate amount of cloudy ascites throughout the abdominal cavity, consistent with generalized peritonitis. No intraperitoneal adhesions were observed. When 5 mm ports were inserted into the right lower abdomen, right upper abdomen, and left lower abdomen. The perforated area was identified using forceps, and an edematous mesenteric area with white moss and redness was found in the descending colon . No perforation was observed in the intra-abdominal cavity; therefore, this site was determined as the responsible lesion, and diagnosed as mesenteric penetration of the descending colon due to trauma. Surgery was performed as planned. The abdominal cavity was washed with 5 L of physiological saline, and a transverse colon double-hole colostomy was constructed. The operation time was 1 h and 58 min, with minimal blood loss. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit after surgery, where she remained stable, before being discharged from the intensive care unit the day after surgery.
From postoperative day 4, the patient resumed eating and was treated with antibiotics until postoperative day 7. Discharge from the hospital occurred on postoperative day 14, when she was able to manage the colostomy. Postoperative colonoscopy revealed a scar and an inflammatory polyp on the anal side of the endoscopic balloon dilation site, 30 cm from the anal verge, which was not seen during preoperative colonoscopy (c, d), and fluoroscopic examination showed no leakage of the contrast medium. The polyp was biopsied and pathologically diagnosed as an inflammatory polyp unrelated to CD. Five months postoperatively, she underwent colostomy closure surgery; she is doing well postoperatively and is being followed up on an outpatient basis.