A twenty-six year-old unmarried woman was admitted to our hospital due to intermittent pain and discomfort in the lower abdomen. Prior to this, she had undergone laparoscopic exploration combined with retroperitoneal mass resection at other hospitals.
The postoperative pathological report showed spindle cell sarcoma of the right broad ligament. In order to receive further treatment, we conducted pathological consultations on the patient's tumor lesion. The final consultation opinion showed that the right broad ligament and retroperitoneal malignant tumor were considered as malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors . At the same time, we also conducted imaging examinations for the patient. Among them, abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed multiple lumpy low-density shadows in the pelvic cavity near the sacral anterior and bilateral iliac vessels, with unclear boundaries and a maximum volume of about 4.3 cm × 3.6 cm × 5.1 cm. Moreover, the lower end of the right ureter was affected, resulting in dilation and hydronephrosis of the ureter and pelvis. Based on the patient's medical history, tumor metastasis was considered. Chest CT showed multiple lesions in both lung lobes, combined with medical history so that we cannot rule out the possibility of tumor metastasis. The results of pelvic magnetic resonance (MRI) examination indicated that after surgery for malignant pelvic neurilemmoma, multiple lesions near the sacral anterior and bilateral iliac vessels are present in the pelvic cavity, and tumor metastasis is considered based on her medical history .
In view of this, we have implemented individualized treatment for the patient's condition, with the specific plan as follows: Doxorubicin liposomes+ifosfamide+arotinib, with a cycle of twenty-one days, and chemotherapy for two cycles. Before the patient received chemotherapy, the blood test results showed no significant abnormalities and no contraindications for chemotherapy. Due to severe bone marrow suppression (grade IV) after chemotherapy, the patient insisted on discontinuing the medication for over a month. Therefore, we consulted with external hospitals to modify the patient's chemotherapy regimen, which is a combination therapy of pazopanib, gemcitabine, and dacarbazine, with a treatment period of three weeks. The patient experienced decreasing in platelet counts (grade III) in both the first two cycles of receiving the above protocol. After receiving targeted treatment, the patient's platelet indicators tended to improve, and chest and abdominal CT showed that the patient's condition was in a stable stage. However, during the interval after the third cycle, the patient suddenly experienced a decrease in platelet count (37 × 109/L), accompanied by severe cough and fever . In order to further evaluate whether the patient's condition has progressed or worsened, we conducted another chest CT examination of the patient, and the results showed that lung infection was not excluded, as was cancerous lymphangitis. So, we gave the patient antibiotic treatment for three days, and the condition continued to worsen, accompanied by severe chills and high fever.
For this reason, we have increased the types of antibiotics used, including meropenem, moxifloxacin, vancomycin, caspofungin, cefoperazone sodium, sulbactam sodium, oseltamivir, and minocycline, but the patient's fever symptoms have not improved. So, blood culture continued, and the results showed that no microorganisms with suspected backgrounds such as fungi, bacteria, DNA/RNA viruses, parasites, mycoplasma tuberculosis complex, chlamydia, rickettsia, etc. were found. In addition, abdominal ultrasound indicates normal spleen size. For this reason, we performed platelet perfusion therapy on the patient, followed by two courses of platelet infusion. The results of bone marrow puncture showed hypoplastic bone marrow. In addition, the patient's antinuclear antibodies and antiplatelet surface related antibodies were all negative.
Continuing to review the patient's abdominal ultrasound report, it is indicated that the spleen is approximately 200 mm (length) and 63 mm (thickness), with an increase in spleen volume. Another bone marrow biopsy was performed, along with natural killer (NK) cell and CD25 testing.
At this time, clinical suspicion was highly suspected of hemophilia syndrome. The bone marrow biopsy report for the patient again indicates that NK cell activity is reduced; SIL-2R/sCD25 soluble interleukin-2 receptor > 75000 U/mL, bone marrow biopsy showed that bone marrow fibrosis with bone marrow necrosis, tumor necrosis cannot be ruled out.
In addition, we found in the results of bone marrow puncture reports that bone marrow hyperplasia is active, the proportion of granulocytes is reduced, and toxic changes are visible in neutrophils, which meets the diagnostic criteria for hemophilia syndrome. In view of this, we gave the patient dexamethasone intravenous therapy, but the patient's condition did not improve and continued to worsen. She was declared dead at 5 am on March 28, 2022 .