A 48 years old diabetic male complained of intermittent high fever associated with chills and rigor, abdominal discomfort and generalized body ache for more than a year. He had visited several hospitals with these complaints and had already been treated with several antimicrobial agents that included antitubercular and antimalarial drugs. However, his symptoms persisted.
He had also visited our hospital six months ago when he was diagnosed as Brucellosis (based on Brucella abortus antibody titre > 1:320) with splenic abscess. He was then treated with doxycycline and rifampicin for three weeks. It should be noted that aminoglycoside was not preferred due to deranged renal function test. Eventually, fever subsided and patient remained asymptomatic for three months. Unexpectedly, the patient re-developed high fever and visited our center again. This time he complained of accompanying pain in the right elbow that was consecutive for five days. A thorough examination revealed that he was anemic but his respiratory and gastrointestinal findings were normal. The lateral aspect of right elbow was tender; however, no swelling or redness was noticeable. In addition, blood examination revealed normocytic normochromic anemia, raised inflammatory markers like ESR and C-reactive protein, deranged renal function test, raised random blood sugar (32 mmol/L) and raised Brucella Ab titre (both IgG and IgM). His chest radiography showed infiltration in left upper and middle zone of lung whereas the ultrasonography of abdomen showed splenomegaly. The patient was treated with ceftriaxone and flucloxacillin and his blood sugar level was maintained to normal by intravenous insulin. But fever didn’t subside instead an abscess developed in lateral part of his right elbow which was drained and pus was sent for evaluation in microbiology laboratory.
The patient’s condition had begun to deteriorate after fifth day of admission, which accompanied high fever (5 spikes with maximum 104 °F), tachycardia, tachypnoea and decreased oxygen saturation below 60%. Therefore, he was immediately shifted to intensive care unit and managed.
Meanwhile, the pus sample showed gram negative bipolar bacilli in the gram stain. The organism formed off white wrinkled colony on blood agar and pinkish wrinkled colony on MacConkey agar at 48 h of incubation. Various biochemical tests were performed that suggested the organism to be Burkholderia pseudomallei which was susceptible to ceftazidime, meropenem and doxycycline but resistant to amoxicillin with clavulanic acid, polymyxin B, colistin and aminoglycoside.
The patient had traveled to Malaysia ten years ago for employment and stayed there for four years, after which he returned to Nepal and indulged in farming. His travel and occupational history accord with the diagnosis of melioidosis. Thus, the patient was treated with intravenous meropenem for the next 28 days. For eradication phase, oral cotrimoxazole and oral doxycycline was prescribed for three months.