The patient was a 44-year-old man presenting with vomiting as the main complaint. He had undergone ileocecal resection for cecal cancer at age 29. Abdominal CT showed thickening of the wall of the descending colon and dilation of the digestive tract. The diagnosis was obstructive descending colon cancer, and a colonic stent was inserted . A colonoscopy revealed tumors in the rectum and sigmoid colon in addition . Due to multiple occurrences of colorectal cancer and its prevalence in the patient’s family (his grandfather on his father’s side and mother died due to colon cancer, and his father underwent colon cancer at 49 years of age, and died due to duodenal cancer), LS was suspected. The operation which was a subtotal proctocolectomy with ileo-anal canal anastomosis and a temporary loop ileostomy were performed. Ascending colon cancer was also observed during surgery. Pathological analysis was complete curative resection and the descending colon cancer of the obstructed portion was at the most advanced pathological Stage IIIC in UICC TNM classification, and the tissue type was NEC. The tissue type of other lesions of rectal, sigmoid and ascending colon was adenocarcinoma, either. Anisonucleosis and mitosis of the NEC were observed by H&E staining. The Ki-67 index of the NEC was 70%, which suggests proliferative activity. By immunostaining, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56, which are all characteristic markers of NEC or neuroendocrine tumor (NET), were positive. CK7 was negative and CK20 was positive, indicating the NEC originating from colon . SSTR2 expression was negative. The results of the microsatellite instability (MSI) test showed high-frequency MSI. The BRAF V600E variant was negative. The immunoexpression of MLH1 was positive, MSH2 was negative, PMS2 was positive, and MSH6 was negative. And LS was strongly suspected as was expected. Adjuvant chemotherapy was administered by cisplatin and etoposide combination. The patient developed hypomagnesemia, and chemotherapy was halted after three courses. At 6 months postoperatively, there was no relapse and made for surgical closure of the ileostomy.