In February 2002, a 47-year-old man presented to our institution with a 2-year history of worsening low back pain, difficulty urinating, weakness, and lower extremity paresthesias. His physical examination demonstrated paresis of the lower extremities with hypoesthesia and hypoalgesia and a sensory level of T8. He was hyperreflexic with upgoing toes bilaterally. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with enhancement revealed an enhancing mass of the spinal cord at T8-9, with edema extending to the mid T6 region rostrally and to T12 caudally . As part of his workup, the patient also underwent MRI of the brain [Figure , ], showing no intracranial pathology. Continued progressive neurological decline prompted surgical intervention. On 23 February 2002, the patient underwent a T8, T9, and T10 laminectomy and intramedullary tumor resection. The pathology showed a high degree of nuclear atypia and mitotic activity. In regions of high cellularity, there was vascular proliferation, with occasional glomeruloid vascular structures. Some vessels were also thrombosed, and small regions of necrosis were identified. On the basis of this histopathology, a diagnosis of GBM was made . Postoperatively, his neurological exam remained unchanged. After discharge, he received 30 cycles of radiation therapy and one cycle of procarbazine, lomustine, vincristine (PCV) combination therapy, which was poorly tolerated, followed by one cycle of temozolomide.
An MRI taken 7 months after surgery revealed tumor recurrence . At that time, the patient's neurological exam remained unchanged; he was wheelchair-bound with a T8 sensory level and an American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) score of C. The risks and benefits of a cordectomy were discussed with the patient and his family, and it was decided to proceed with tumor resection and cordectomy. On 11 October 2002, he underwent a T6, T7, and T11 laminectomy and transdural cordectomy . The proximal and distal dural stumps were oversewn in a watertight fashion. He tolerated the operation well and had a sensory level at T6 with flaccid paraplegia. Following the second surgery, he was started on carboplatin for seven cycles. He was placed on daily thalidomide from April 2004 to June 2007.
For nearly 6 years, he remained stable in regards to his physical examination, and surveillance MRIs of the thoracic cord were performed every 2 months. In August 2008, he presented with dizziness and diplopia of several months duration. MRI of the brain identified a left frontal mass . On 16 September 2008, he underwent a stealth-guided biopsy of the left frontal mass, which revealed grade III astrocytoma . Subsequently, he received 59.4 Gy in 33 fractions of radiation and was restarted on monthly cycles of temozolomide. Thoracic spine MRIs continue to show stable postoperative change and enhancement . Most recently, brain MR taken on 14 May 2013 showed interval resolution of the left frontal mass . When last seen, on 19 November 2013, he was becoming increasingly fatigued and felt that he was not tolerating his chemotherapy particularly well. His neurological exam remained stable. MRI taken on 12 November 2013 showed a left occipital mass with extension into the corpus callosum. The left frontal lobe appeared stable. The patient missed his last appointment on 17 January 2013 as he was too ill to travel, and passed away on 29 January 2014, 12 years following his initial presentation.