A 69 year old Caucasian male retired lawyer presented for evaluation of lethargy, fatigue, memory impairment, generalized weakness, severe constipation, anorexia, and weight loss of 18 kg over the preceding eight months. Approximately six weeks before the onset of his symptoms, he began using an Ayurvedic herbal medication, “Bhasma”, which he obtained while traveling in India. The medication was used to treat partial aphasia, cognitive impairment, and right-sided motor weakness resulting from a spontaneous left temporoparietal hemorrhagic stroke experienced two years previously.
Prior to presentation at our hospital, the patient had been admitted to another facility for evaluation of his symptoms and was found to have a hemoglobin level of 6.4 gm/dL (reference range: 13.2 gm/dL – 17.7 gm/dL). CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, upper endoscopy and colonoscopy revealed no etiology for his anemia at that hospital. Subsequent to starting the Bhasma, the patient was also treated with citalopram (a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressant) for depressed mood. He had no prior psychiatric history nor tendency toward depressed mood.
On further laboratory evaluation, a blood lead level (BLL) of 94 μg/dL (reference range: 0.0-4.9 μg/dL) was obtained. After the family suggested the Ayurvedic “Bhasma” medication could be the cause, it was analyzed for heavy metals and found to contain 19,400 mg/kg of lead and 1,430 mg/kg of arsenic. At the recommendation of the Iowa Poison Control Center, he was admitted to the medical intensive care unit for monitoring, given intramuscular chelation with Dimercaprol (BAL) at a dose of 5 mg/kg q4 hrs for three days, and given intravenous chelation with calcium disodium EDTA at a dose of 1500 mg/m2/day as a continuous infusion for five days beginning after the second dose of BAL. While in the ICU, he was monitored with daily labs including a CBC with differential, electrolyte panel including BUN and creatinine, calcium, phosphorous, magnesium, alkaline phosphatase, AST, ALT, glucose, and urinalysis. The patient’s blood lead level following two days of chelation with BAL and EDTA as described above had dropped to 27.1 μg/dL.
After six days, the patient was discharged from the hospital. His blood lead level on discharge was 25.5 μg/dL and he was instructed to complete a nineteen day course of oral chelation with dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA), 10 mg/kg three times daily for five days, then 10 mg/kg twice daily for fourteen days.
After completion of the nineteen day course of DMSA, the patient’s BLL had decreased to 23 μg/dL and he reported feeling much more energetic. Over the next six weeks his BLL rose to 38 μg/dL and the patient reported a coincident decline in speech fluency and memory. Additional chelation was recommended and he was treated with another course of oral DMSA which reduced his BLL to 20 μg/dL. The patient again reported that his mood was much improved and he then discontinued use of antidepressant medication without recurrence of depressed mood. Three months later, he received an alternative treatment at an Ayurvedic Health Clinic due to continued symptoms of cognitive impairment. The alternative treatment consisted of thirteen days of “Bastis” (enemas) and oil massages which were intended to rid his body of lead.
Six months after initial diagnosis and after having completed four courses of chelation therapy and an alternative treatment, the patient and his wife reported that he had persistent difficulty with “mental focus and clarity” in comparison to his post-stroke baseline. Repeat BLL was 29 μg/dL at that time. Although not typically offered to patients with a BLL below 40 μg/dL, a third nineteen day course of oral DMSA chelation therapy was administered in an effort to treat the patient’s cognitive symptoms. His blood lead level following the third course of chelation with DMSA was 7 μg/dL. Neuropsychological testing was performed both before and immediately following completion of the third course of DMSA to assist in distinguishing reversible neurocognitive effects of lead from fixed residual effects of his prior stroke. His clinical presentation was most notable for dysfluent aphasia referable to his cerebrovascular accident in 2009. Impairments were found in aspects of language, working memory/executive functions, and right-sided fine motor dexterity. He was oriented to time, personal information, and place. Working memory for digit sequences and geometric figures was low average to average. Visual processing speed was average for symbol discrimination and coding tasks. Speeded visuomotor sequencing was average under focused attention, but mildly impaired under divided attention. Verbal sequencing was borderline impaired. Letter-word verbal fluency was borderline impaired. Fine motor coordination was moderately impaired for dominant right hand and borderline impaired for non-dominant left hand.
The post chelation test showed “modest performance gains across various tests of attention and cognitive efficiency”. Specifically his performance on the Controlled Oral Word Association Test revealed a doubling of his raw score from 11 to 22 reflecting a significant improvement in semantic and phonetic verbal fluency. In addition his performance on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale test revealed more than doubling of the Digit Span score from 3 to 7 and more modest improvements in the Symbol Search and Coding scores from 7 to 9 and 8 to 10, respectively. Although it is possible that practice effects contributed to the observed improvement, the patient reported a reduction in fatigue and greater clarity of his thinking after this third course of DMSA chelation suggesting at the least subjective clinical improvement.