A male child aged 5 years was referred to the dental OPD with the chief complaint of decayed upper and lower front and back teeth. On examination, significant medical history was found. The child was born in the first pregnancy to nonconsanguineous phenotypically normal parents. At birth, parental age was 30 for mother and 33 for father. The mother had pregnancy preeclampsia and the pregnancy was completed by the lower segment cesarean section. Examination at birth revealed that the baby had perinatal asphyxia, meconium-stained amniotic fluid (MSAF), and he did not cry immediately after birth. Birth weight was 2.4 kg and height was 106 cm. The patient had persistent thrombocytopenia and was admitted in NICU for 11 days.
After birth, he was prone to upper respiratory tract infections frequently. At 5 years of age when examined, it was noted that patient had microcephaly with alar facies, blue sclera, upslanting eyes, overhanging columella, prominent cup-shaped ears, reduced mouth opening, protruding tongue, triangular-shaped face with small chin, and fifth finger clinodactyly. He was identified with noticeable speech delay and behavioral inhibition, difficulty in adapting to new situations, and speaks loudly at times showing hyperactive behavior.
Several investigations like 2D echo and DNA chromosome analysis, ophthalmology, ENT, and audiology evaluation were carried out. In ENT evaluation, it was found that moderate hearing loss was seen with respect to the right and left ears. Ophthalmology evaluation was found normal. The 2D echo analysis has shown small atrioseptal defects.
On intraoral examination, inflamed gingiva in relation to maxillary anteriors and normal appearing mucosa, freni, and tongue was observed. The patient had a full set of primary dentitions with mesial step molar relation on both right and left sides with anterior proclination and high arched palate. The patient had a habit of mouth breathing. The patient had undergone restorations in relation to 54, 55, 64, 65, 74, 75, 84, and 85. The mother reported the history of bottle feeding from 5 months to 4 years. 51, 52, 61, and 62 had deep dentinal caries suggestive of chronic irreversible pulpitis and secondary caries was noted in relation to 55, 64, 74, 84, and 85.
The glass ionomer cement (GIC) restorations were done in relation to 55, 64, 74, and 84. Pulpectomy followed by composite restoration in relation to 52 was done; Pulpectomy followed by stainless steel crown in relation to 85 was performed. Stainless steel crowns in relation to 54, 55, 64, 65, 74, 75, and 84 were cemented. Extraction of 51, 61, and 62 was carried out.
For the mouth breathing habit, underlying etiology, i.e., frequent upper respiratory tract infection, has to be corrected, which will allow this habit to correct automatically.