Our patient was a 32-year-old Caucasian man with an eight-year history of type 1 diabetes mellitus. At the time of his diabetes diagnosis, he was noted to be positive for both elevated levels of antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase at 64 U/mL (normal, less than 1.45 U/mL) and anti-islet cell antibodies with a titer of 1:256 (normal, less than 1:4), but was otherwise healthy. His thyroid function was normal. He had no family history of diabetes or other autoimmune disease. Over the past eight years, his diabetes had been treated with insulin by using a MiniMed Paradigm 722 insulin pump (Medtronic Inc., Northridge, CA, USA) as well as with pramlintide 15 μg three times daily prior to meals. His average blood glucose level was 150 mg/dL, and his hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 7.5%. He had no evidence of retinopathy, neuropathy or nephropathy.
He presented for medical care with a complaint of unintended weight loss of 22 pounds, from 203 pounds (body mass index (BMI) 26.1) to 181 pounds (BMI 23.2), over a period of three months. His weight loss was not associated with abdominal pain, diarrhea, steatorrhea or a change in diet or exercise. He denied palpitations, heat intolerance, neck soreness or other symptoms referable to his thyroid. His physical examination revealed a well-developed, well-nourished man in no apparent distress. He had a normal blood pressure level of 130/80 mmHg, and his pulse was within the normal range at 72 beats/minute. There was no lid lag or proptosis. His thyroid gland was not enlarged and was non-tender. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy or appendicular tremor. The remainder of his physical examination was within normal limits.
His laboratory assessment revealed normal blood counts, electrolytes and liver and kidney function. His serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level was suppressed at 0.033 mIU/L (normal range, 0.4 to 5.0 mIU/L), and his free thyroxine level was elevated at 33 pmol/L (normal range, 7.7 to 15.4 pmol/L). An anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody was elevated at 13.2SD (normal, < 2.0SD), and the results of a thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) assay were undetectable. His serum thyroglobulin was normal, arguing against thyroid hormone self-administration (thyrotoxicosis factitia) . A radioactive iodine update scan was performed to exclude the possibility of TSI-negative Graves' disease. The uptake of radioactive iodine at four hours was 1.3% (normal, 4% to 20%) and 0.5% at 24 hours (normal, 10% to 30%), consistent with thyroiditis. Notably, his HbA1c improved to 6.9% without any change in his insulin regimen.
The patient was diagnosed with autoimmune thyroiditis and instructed to watch carefully for signs or symptoms of hypothyroidism. Six weeks after his diagnosis he developed fatigue, cold intolerance and had regained all of the weight he had lost earlier. His TSH level was elevated to11 mIU/L, and his free thyroxine concentration was below the lower limit of the normal range at 5.4 pmol/L. Therefore, given the combination of his biochemistry and symptomatic hypothyroidism, the decision was made to initiate thyroid hormone replacement therapy at a dose of 1.5 μg/kg (137 μg daily for a 91 kg individual), which normalized his serum TSH and free thyroxine values and alleviated his symptoms of hypothyroidism . The patient has remained euthyroid on a stable dose of thyroxine for over 12 months without recurrence of his hyperthyroid symptoms. His glycemic control has returned to baseline values.