A 51-year-old hypertensive Pakistani male patient was admitted in the cardiac intensive care unit in King Fahd University Hospital on 30 July 2017 complaining of chest and back pain for two weeks prior to the presentation; he took nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs but were not effective. Physical examination was done in the emergency department and revealed stable vital signs; the patient was conscious, moving all his limbs; there were warm palpable pulses of the upper arms.
The CTA of the aorta revealed a large dissection flap from the origin of the left subclavian artery extending down all the way to the level of renal arteries; there was enlargement of the false lumen at the proximal aorta with large aneurysmal dilatation (mural thrombus) and a compression of the true lumen (ascending aorta). Additionally, there was a large entry point seen 2 cm distal to the right subclavian artery. The aberrant right subclavian artery was noted crossing posterior to the trachea and arising as a last branch of the aortic arch distal to the left subclavian artery; also, the left vertebral artery was arising directly from the aortic arch. There was no other evidence of vascular dissection or occlusion below the level of the renal arteries .
The patient underwent general anesthesia for thoracic endovascular repair (TEVAR) two days after his first day of admission; the procedure was done through the right femoral approach; an angiogram was performed intraoperatively . Stent graft with a size of 34 mm × 15 cm was used and deployed into the descending thoracic aorta; the intimal entry tear was completely covered by the stent, and the false lumen was obliterated. A postdeployment angiogram revealed successful proximal occlusion of the entry point with no perfusion of the false lumen and good flow through both carotid and left vertebral arteries as well as patent right and left subclavian arteries.
The patient was postoperatively moving all his limbs, and the peripheral pulses were intact. He got discharged one day after the surgery and was doing well afterward. We evaluated patient's prognosis by following up for 3 to 6 months for a chest X-ray, CTA, and CT aorta 3D reconstruction which confirmed no endovascular leak as well as no ischemic or stroke signs in the clinical follow-up; we assessed the patency of the subclavian arteries by examining the bilateral upper arms' blood supply in addition to radial arteries by evaluating the pulses with no evidence of morbidity.