A 56-year-old Japanese man with a serum PSA level of 24.6 ng/mL was diagnosed with stage IV prostate cancer in May 2018 after prostatic biopsy. The Gleason score was 5 + 5, and computed tomography showed that prostate cancer had invaded the bladder , with metastases to the proximal bilateral lymph nodes and left iliac bone . Staging was T4N1M1b, according to the UICC TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, 8th edition. His LDH was 298 U/L and ALP was 229 U/L. He underwent androgen deprivation therapy with abiraterone (1000 mg), leuprorelin (22.5 mg), and prednisolone (5 mg). One month later, his PSA decreased to 16.1 ng/mL, LDH was 252 U/L, and ALP was 327 U/L. Three months later, he noticed shortness of breath on exertion, and his symptoms worsened in October 2018. He was admitted to another hospital and diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension, but the cause of the pulmonary hypertension was not found. He was sent to our hospital for further examination after 3 days.
On admission, his blood pressure was 108/64 mmHg, heart rate 110/min, oxygen saturation 93% with 6 L of O2, and respiration rate 30/min. The average pulmonary artery pressure was 28.6 mmHg in the catheterization performed at the previous hospital. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.473, PaO2 76.9 Torr, PaCO2 32.7 Torr, and HCO3- 23.6 mmol/L. His white cell count was 5370/μL, platelets 28 000 μL, and FDP level was 30.9 μg/mL. His PSA level was 22.5 ng/mL, LDH was 2529 U/L, and ALP was 2425 U/L. The antinuclear antibody was negative.
A decrease in platelets and an increase in FDP were observed, suggesting the presence of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the thorax revealed slightly enlarged pulmonary vessels with no parenchymal lesions.
The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary thrombosis. Despite treatment with oxygen inhalation, intravenous heparin, phosphodiesterase inhibitor, and urokinase, he died of respiratory failure 2 days after admission.
Autopsy confirmed pulmonary hemorrhage. The prostate was replaced with tumor tissue, but there was no dissemination of poorly differentiated prostate cancer to the diffuse pulmonary arteries. There was no lymph node metastasis. Microscopic findings revealed diffuse pulmonary occlusion due to a cell mass. The cell mass was positive for PSMA , and the cause of death was determined to be pulmonary artery occlusion due to prostate cancer. In the prostate, there was no vascular invasion with a volume that could become an embolus.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition is involved in the formation of tumor emboli, and we stained for its expression markers; E-cadherin and N-cadherin. E-cadherin was suppressed and N-cadherin was upregulated in both the prostate and the pulmonary artery . Despite androgen deprivation therapy, the patient’s symptoms were progressing and heterogenesis was suspected in the lesion. When AR staining was performed, AR expression was not observed in the prostate, but was observed in the pulmonary artery. In order to evaluate cell proliferation, we stained with Ki-67. The pulmonary tissue was stained 39% and the prostate was stained 3% .