A 18 years old male sustained a direct trauma to his right knee when a car hit his bicycle; following which he developed acute pain and swelling in his right knee and was unable to bear weight on the affected limb. He was referred to our center for further management after getting his limb splinted at a primary clinic. Patient was managed following proper Advanced Trauma Life Support protocol. On examination, abrasion and gross swelling was seen over his right knee. Distal neurovascular status was normal and no signs of compartment syndrome were present. Proper radiographs and non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) of the affected limb were obtained. Radiographs showed coronal plane fracture of distal femur. NCCT further revealed patellar dislocation with vertical fracture of patella with BCHF of distal femur with patellar fracture fragment incarcerated into it Legend- NCCT of right knee with red arrows showing: (a) Incarcerated patellar fragment into the femoral condyles, (b) Bony continuity between two fractured femoral condyles (conjoint), (c) Patellar dislocation, (d) Patellar fracture.
After routine evaluation and resuscitation of the patient, he was taken up for surgery. Under epidural anesthesia with the patient in supine position, upper thigh pneumatic tourniquet was applied. After part preparation, painting and draping, knee joint was approached using medial parapatellar approach Legend- Intraoperative picture of knee showing: (a) Bruises over anterior aspect of knee, (b) Medial parapatellar incision, (c) Hoffa fracture. Medial patello-femoral ligament (MPFL) was found to be torn along with a rent in the medial retinaculum. After incising the deep fascia, part of the quadriceps tendon was also found to be torn from the upper pole of patella. As the knee was flexed, Hoffa fracture was identified and the patellar fragment was incarcerated between it. The Patellar fragment was dis-impacted from the fracture ends. BCHF was reduced and held with reduction clamps and provisionally secured with K-wires and fixed with three 6.5 mm and a 4 mm partially threaded cannulated cancellous screws (PTCS) from anterior to posterior. Then, patella fracture was reduced and fixed with two 4 mm PTCS Legend- 3: Post-operative radiograph; (a) Immediate post-operative radiograph showing fixation; (b) 6weeks post-operative radiograph showing union. Quadriceps tear was repaired with non-absorbable no.5-braided polyester suture- Ethibond (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) with drill hole in the patella. MPFL was repaired with non-absorbable suture after relocating patella in the trochlear groove. Stability of knee was checked in flexion and extension and closure was done in layers with drain in-situ.
Quadriceps strengthening exercise and active range of motion exercise was started from postoperative day 1 (POD1). Patient was discharged on POD 5 with advice of protected non weight bearing mobilization. The patient was followed at 2 weeks, 4 weeks and 6 weeks intervals. He was advised full weight bearing after radiological union. Patient attained 130° of flexion with no extension lag at 6 months, and there was complete union of all the fractures. Legend- Flexion of the knee achieved at 6 months of follow-up.