We present the case of a 26-year-old Caucasian female patient with a past medical history significant for non-sustained broad complex tachycardia and extrasystoles. After onset of palpitations at the age of 12, the patient experienced an exercise-related syncope when she was jumping trampoline. At that time, she was admitted to an emergency department. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a structurally normal heart. Due to polymorphic wide complex extrasystoles in an otherwise unremarkable resting electrocardiogram (ECG), she was started on beta-blockers and discharged. After a few months, beta-blocker therapy was discontinued due to persistent palpitations despite medication. At the age of 20, she experienced another syncope when standing still for a longer period. No further workup was initiated. In February 2022, outpatient cardiology workup due to chronically impaired physical fitness following symptomatic SARS-CoV2 infection in May 2021 again revealed wide complex extrasystole and non-sustained wide complex tachycardia with different QRS axes. Subsequently, she was referred to our electrophysiology clinic. Family history was unremarkable in respect to sudden or unexplained deaths. Apart from frequent cardiac extra beats, physical examination revealed normal findings. Vital signs, height, and body mass index were within normal range. Surface ECG showed normal sinus rhythm (SR) with marked left axis deviation due to left posterior fascicular block; PR, QRS, and QTc intervals were within normal range. Frequent supraventricular extrasystoles with monophasic negative P-waves in leads II, III, and aVF and monophasic positive P-waves in lead V1 were detected, suggestive of an origin from the inferior mitral annulus/inferior pulmonary veins. Even at low levels (50 Watt), treadmill testing showed a significant increase in narrow and wide complex extrasystoles. After reaching the 100 Watt level at a heart rate (HR) of 153/min, treadmill testing was discontinued due to recurrent polymorphic wide complex extrasystoles and couplets. Wide complex extrasystoles/tachycardia showed either left bundle branch block (LBBB) or right bundle branch block (RBBB) morphologies . Twelve-lead Holter ECG subsequently conducted for 24 h showed marked rhythm instability with both frequent narrow and wide complex extrasystoles. The two predominant wide complex extrasystoles again showed either LBBB or RBBB morphology. Ten non-sustained wide complex tachycardias with either LBBB or RBBB morphology with a maximum HR of 185/min and a maximum duration of 9 beats were detected. Transthoracic echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) excluded structural heart disease; no signs of myocarditis were detected. Given the possibility of underlying CPVT, abstinence from exercise was imposed until further clarification and beta-blocker therapy was re-initiated. To rule out CPVT, we performed an intravenous epinephrine infusion test with beta-blocker therapy being discontinued prior to the study. We observed an increase in both, supraventricular extrasystoles/runs and polymorphic wide complex extrasystoles/couplets with either LBBB or RBBB morphologies . Ectopic complexes with RBBB morphology further showed relative/atypical left anterior and left posterior fascicular block . Surface ECG-based analysis of the interplay of atrial and ventricular activation raised suspicion of aberrantly conducted atrial extrasystoles/tachycardia. Therefore, the investigation setup of epinephrine testing was shifted to an electrophysiological (EP) study and a decapolar coronary sinus (CS) catheter was inserted to allow precise differentiation between supraventricular ectopy with aberrant conduction or fascicular ectopy. Intracardiac electrograms (EGMs, CS catheter) revealed (i) definite atrio-ventricular (AV) conduction preceding wide complex extrasystoles and runs, (ii) an A > V pattern during wide complex tachycardia, and (iii) induction of RBBB aberrancy with either left anterior or left posterior fascicular block during programmed atrial stimulation ( and ). We found no evidence for ventricular ectopy. Supraventricular runs of ectopic beats showed a concentric CS activation pattern with a predominantly superior axis on body surface ECG indicating focal atrial tachycardia (FAT) with a likely origin from the right inferior pulmonary vein, the interatrial septum, or the CS ostium. Beta-blocker therapy was resumed and titrated to the maximum tolerated dose (metoprolol 47.5 mg twice daily). When follow-up in November 2022 revealed no improvement of palpitations as well as fitness levels, we scheduled 3D-navigated radiofrequency (RF) catheter ablation of FAT. In April 2023, electroanatomical mapping revealed a direct parahisian origin of FAT . Given a normal HV interval (44 ms), underlying Purkinje system disease was excluded. Due to the significantly increased risk of AV block during ablation, the patient refused ablation therapy. Antiarrhythmic drug treatment with flecainide 50 mg twice daily led to freedom from symptoms.