A 68-year-old, right-handed Caucasian man was diagnosed with Gleason grade 4 + 3 adenocarcinoma of the prostate in March 2009. A partial prostatectomy and pelvic node dissection was completed, and our patient started androgen blockade with leuprolide (Lupron), dutasteride (Avodart) and bicalutamide (Casodex). His prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels decreased from an initial value of 41.6 to 0.07 ng/ml in April 2010. In May 2010, one month prior to admission, a transurethral debulking of his prostate was completed for difficulty in initiating a urine stream and an indwelling Foley catheter was left in place. In the 48 hours prior to admission, he developed a worsening saddle anesthesia. On the day of admission, June 10 2010, he described increasing headache as well as new-onset fecal incontinence but denied weakness. His past history, family history and a review of his systems were not significant.
On admission, his mental status, cranial nerve and upper extremity examinations were unremarkable. A motor examination was intact in his legs but there was significant numbness below his ninth thoracic vertebra. Reflexes were absent in his lower extremities. Rectal sensation and tone were absent.
Magnetic resonance imaging scans of his brain and thoracic and lumbar spine showed two irregularly enhancing lesions. The first, 2cm in diameter, was in the region of the fourth ventricle but was without secondary hydrocephalus. The second was a spindle-shaped intramedullary lesion of the conus medullaris . The lesion was approximately 2cm in the vertical extent and appeared partially cystic.
Our differential diagnosis included ependymoma, astrocytoma, a metastasis from the known prostate cancer or a metastasis from an undiscovered second primary tumor.
Because of our patient’s increasing neurological deficit, and given the uncertainty of the diagnosis, a decompression and an excisional biopsy were undertaken on the day of admission. With somatosensory and motor evoked potential monitoring, a twelfth thoracic to first lumbar vertebral laminectomy was completed. The level of the lesion was confirmed using intraoperative ultrasound. On opening the dura, abnormal appearing tissue was immediately identified involving the posterior surface of the conus. A small biopsy was consistent with malignant tissue. A more aggressive resection to the edges of the abnormal appearing tissue was completed and his cord appeared adequately decompressed. The closure was uneventful.
On microscopy, the lesion showed sheets and nests of cells with abundant cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli. Mitoses were common. Intracytoplasmic and extracellular mucin was demonstrated. AEI/AE3 cytokeratin, CAM5.2, CK7, and CK20 were positive. PSA, Prostatic specific acid phosphatase (PSAP), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), caudal type homeobox-1 (CDX-1), and S100 were negative. The pathology was consistent with metastatic adenocarcinoma of the prostate .
Following surgery, his sensory changes improved and the motor examination remained intact. His bowel and bladder function remained poor. The intracranial lesion and the resection cavity in the conus were both treated with CyberKnife® radiosurgery. The spinal resection cavity, contoured to the edge of the enhancing tumor on a postoperative scan, was treated to a marginal dose of 27Gy at the 85% isodose line in three sessions. Our patient remains neurologically stable three months after treatment, with no new neurological deficits and no new lesions.