A 60-year-old Japanese man underwent a comprehensive medical examination with brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The neurological examination indicated no significant findings. However, MRI revealed a 25 mm × 17 mm, nonenhanced lesion with gadolinium in the left superior frontal gyrus as a hypointense mass in T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and hyperintense in T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) without any mass effect or edema [Figure –]. He was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. Since he did not show any neurological symptoms and the images suspect a benign lesion, we proposed him and his family to wait and see. However, they proposed us to remove the lesion and make a confirmed diagnosis.
The tumor was exposed via a transcortical approach and we could not identify the obvious boundary between tumor and normal brain. Total en bloc resection was performed with intraoperative navigation. The postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged on the 8th day after the operation without any complications. He remained stable without recurrence of the lesion on MRI at the 16-month postoperative follow-up [Figure –].
We could resect the tumor en bloc and performed total resection of tumor . The lesion had a multinodular appearance laying on the gray-white matter junction under low-power magnification microscopic examination [Figure –]. We could see alpha-internexin expression in tumor stroma and the proliferation of cells resembling ganglion cells, with eccentric round nuclei, foamy, and relatively ample eosinophilic cytoplasm [Figure and ]. Mitotic figures or vascular proliferation were absent. On immunohistochemical analysis with neuronal antigens, the tumor cells showed positive staining for HuC/HuD . The neuronal tumor cells demonstrated weak to moderate cytoplasmic immunoreactivity to neuronal nuclear antigen (NeuN), synaptophysin, and nuclear oligodendrocyte transcription factor (Olig2) [Figure –]. The ganglioid cells showed negative staining for glial fibrillary acidic protein . Immunostaining for p53, CD34, and mutant IDH1R132H was negative. The MIB-1 staining index was <1%. These findings led us to diagnose the lesion as MVNT.