Donor 1 was a 6-year-old boy from Guangxi province in China. The initial symptoms on 13 May 2015 were fever of unknown cause with insomnia and refusal to eat or drink. He was sent to a local hospital due to subsequent agitation, screaming and incoherent speech. Three days later, he suffered from dysphagia and hypersalivation. His condition subsequently worsened despite treatment with ribavirin. Finally, he died on 26 May after receiving an initial diagnosis of viral encephalitis of unknown cause . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed an opening pressure of 60 drops/min, transparent and limpid fluid, a glucose level of 4.7 mmol/L, and a protein level of 265 mg/L. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a slightly decreased density in the bilateral temporal lobes. Tests for HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and syphilis yielded negative results. Earlier, the donor had frequent contact with domestic dogs but no longer had this type of exposure since moving to live with his grandmother in another city. His family members denied either exposure to potentially rabid animals or history of rabies vaccinations. His kidneys and corneas were donated for transplantation.
Donor 2 was an 11-year-old girl who lived in Hebei province in China. Her initial symptoms were nausea, chills and vomiting on 22 Sep 2016. One day later, her condition worsened, and she suffered from fever, disorder of consciousness, coma, respiratory failure and decreased blood pressure, followed by insipidus and myasthenia gravis on 5 Oct. She died on 11 Oct after an initial diagnosis of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis . The results of CSF analysis were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed diffuse signal abnormalities throughout the brain and cervical spinal cord. Tests for HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis, cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr virus, coxsackie virus, herpes simplex virus, adenovirus and rubella virus yielded negative results. Her family members denied exposure to potentially rabid animals or history of rabies vaccinations. Her kidneys and liver were donated for transplantation.
Recipient 1 was a 55-year-old male who received a kidney transplant from donor 1 on 27 May 2015. The allograft recovered successfully, and the immunosuppressive regimen included tacrolimus, mycophenolate sodium and prednisone. The patient initially became symptomatic on 10 Jul 2015 . MRI revealed mottled signal abnormalities around the bilateral ventricles and deep white matter (low or equal signal on T1WI and high signal on T2WI and Flair), which indicated white matter demyelination. He was clinically diagnosed with rabies on 24 Jul according to the typical symptoms; this diagnosis was confirmed 4 days later by detectable rabies virus-specific nucleic acids in saliva, urine, and sputum samples. The patient died on 23 Aug. His family members denied exposure to potentially rabid animals or history of rabies vaccinations.
Recipient 2 was a 43-year-old male who received a kidney transplant from donor 1 on 27 May 2015. The allograft recovered successfully, and the immunosuppressive regimen included tacrolimus, mycophenolate sodium and prednisone. The patient initially became symptomatic on 14 Jul 2015 . CT revealed a suspicious mottled low-density region in the right basal ganglia region. He was clinically diagnosed with rabies on 24 Jul according to the typical symptoms, which was confirmed 4 days later by detectable rabies virus-specific nucleic acids in saliva and urine samples. The patient died on 17 Aug. His family members denied exposure to potentially rabid animals or history of rabies vaccinations.
Recipient 3 was a 57-year-old female who received a liver transplant from donor 2 on 11 Oct 2016. The allograft recovered successfully, and the immunosuppressive regimen included tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and methylprednisolone. The patient initially became symptomatic on 18 Mar 2017 . CT revealed a suspicious mottled low-density region in the left basal ganglia region. She was clinically diagnosed with rabies on 24 Mar according to the typical symptoms, which was confirmed 2 days later by detectable rabies virus-specific nucleic acids in a saliva sample. The patient died on 26 Mar without invasive mechanical ventilation. Her family members disclosed that she had contact with a domestic pet half a year before transplantation but denied exposure to potentially rabid animals or history of rabies vaccinations.
Recipient 4 was a 50-year-old male who received a kidney transplant from donor 2 on 11 Oct 2016. The allograft recovered successfully, and the immunosuppressive regimen included tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone. The patient received post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) immediately after confirmation of rabies in deceased recipient 3 on 26 Mar 2017, which consisted of a 5-dose vaccination regimen (5 doses of purified chick embryo cell rabies vaccine, the first given directly after suspected exposure and subsequently on days 3, 7, 14, and 28) with 1 dose of rabies immunoglobulin (20 IU/kg). However, he still became initially symptomatic on 10 Aug 2017 . He was clinically diagnosed with rabies on 14 Aug according to the typical symptoms, which was confirmed 1 day later by detectable rabies virus-specific nucleic acids in saliva, urine, and sputum samples. The patient died on 16 Aug without invasive mechanical ventilation. His family members denied exposure to potentially rabid animals or history of rabies vaccinations.
Recipient 5 was a 46-year-old male who received a kidney transplant from donor 2 on 11 Oct 2016. The allograft recovered successfully, and the immunosuppressive regimen included tacrolimus, mycophenolate sodium and prednisone. The patient received PEP immediately after confirmation of rabies in deceased recipient 3 on 26 Mar 2017, which consisted of a 5-dose vaccination regimen with 1 dose of rabies immunoglobulin. The recipient currently remains asymptomatic . Unfortunately, the level of rabies-specific neutralizing antibody was not quantified.
Rabies virus-specific nucleic acids were detectable in saliva, urine, and sputum samples from recipient 1 and were also detectable in saliva and urine samples from recipient 2. The same results were found in a saliva sample from recipient 3 and in saliva, urine, and sputum samples from recipient 4. According to diagnostic criteria in China , these recipients were laboratory-confirmed as positive for rabies.