A 34-year-old primigravida woman was referred to our hospital as no movements were detected in the fetus’s legs on transabdominal ultrasound examination at 26 + 5 weeks of gestation. Prenatal MRI performed at 27 + 4 weeks of gestation failed to reveal apparent abnormalities in the lumbosacral regions, hydrocephalus, or a Chiari malformation.
The mother vaginally delivered a girl weighing 2,471 g and with an Apgar score of 8 at 37 + 4 weeks of gestation. A skin defect (15 × 25 mm) associated with a dysplastic neural placode exposed to the surface was detected in the infant at the lumbosacral region without cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage [-]. The infant had spastic paraplegia and severe flexor contractures in the cross-legged position [-], and the infant’s anus was patulous with fecal incontinence. The infant had urinated frequently, indicating urinary dysfunction.
Spinal three-dimensional (3D) computed tomography revealed that the spinal column at L1–L3, including both vertebrae and posterior elements, was absent and that the lumbar spine below L4 and bifid sacrum deviated anteriorly [-1 and b-2]. The spine showed no other deformities. Postnatal MRI examinations, including 3D-heavily T2-weighted images and 3D-T1-weighted images,[,] showed that the spinal cord was divided into two segments above and below the spinal agenesis [ and d, ]. The upper segment seemed normal [-1], but the spinal cord abruptly ended with a “cigar-shaped” appearance at the lower thoracic and caudal regions [ and d, -2 and b-3]. The lower segment originated from around the L4 level, of which caudal end was a neural placode without cystic component at the S1 level [-4]. These features were consistent with MMC. Neither band-like structures nor delineation of the intensity of CSF was detected between the upper and lower spinal cords [-2 and b-3]. The brain MRI did not provide evidence of hydrocephalus or a Chiari malformation Type II.
On the day after birth, the infant underwent repair surgery for MMC. The open neural placode was circumferentially resected from the surrounding skin, and proximal spinal cord and nerve roots continuing with the ventral side of the neural placode were observed in the open dural sac filled with CSF . No pulsation of the CSF was observed and the Valsalva maneuver did not increase the CSF volume. The proximal depth of the spinal canal could not be clearly visualized. Direct stimulation of the placode, proximal spinal cord, and nerve roots elicited no evoked compound muscle action potentials on intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring of the legs and anus (maximum current, 30 mA). We resected the surrounding margin of the neural placode and approximated with pia-arachnoid sutures, followed by multiple-layer closure, including the dura mater and muscle layer. Postoperatively, the patient’s neurological function did not change from the preoperative level. At 3 months, she presented with mild hydronephrosis detected on ultrasonography.
The histopathological examination of the resected tissue from the margin of the neural placode showed a glial fibrillary acidic protein-immunopositive neuroglial tissue adjoining a fibrotic leptomeningeal tissue [ and c]. The histopathological findings confirmed the diagnosis of MMC.