A 73-year-old male was referred to the former hospital with complaints of gross hematuria and general fatigue. Laboratory tests revealed severe thrombocytopenia (PLT count 16 × 103/μL) with mild anemia (hemoglobin 9.5 g/dL), normal prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and fibrinogen degradation products. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography imaging revealed a right renal tumor measuring 8 × 7 × 5 cm and multiple lymphadenopathy without intravenous thrombus and hepatic metastasis . Upon diagnosis of ITP, a total of 40 units of PLT were transfused to the patient, and a 5-day course of high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin was administered. However, these treatments were totally ineffective for the thrombocytopenia. The patient was transferred to our institution for further examination and treatment.
Upon hospitalization, laboratory tests revealed a low PLT count of 28.0 × 103/μL with elevated levels of lactate dehydrogenase (268 IU/L), creatinine (1.09 mg/dL), and C-reactive protein (12.9 mg/dL). Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy results revealed a normocellular marrow with megakaryocytic overgrowth and no signs of neoplastic infiltration or myelodysplasia. Bone scintigraphy was also normal.
On suspicion of cancer-induced ITP (i.e. secondary ITP or ITP-like syndrome), we decided to perform right nephrectomy and lymph node dissection. Since PLT count remained at a low level of 12 × 103/μL, 20 units of PLT were transfused on the day before surgery. However, on the day of surgery, PLT count was still 16 × 103/μL, and an additional 30 units of PLT were transfused. Tumor resection and lymph node dissection were subsequently performed. The operation took 347 min, with intraoperative blood loss of 3250 mL.
Histopathologic examination revealed clear cell carcinoma (pT3a, grade 3) and metastatic cancer in the lymph nodes. Without additional PLT transfusion, PLT count dramatically improved to 84.0 × 103/μL and 270.0 × 103/μL at postoperative days 1 and 2, respectively . The patient was discharged without any complications 14 days after surgery. However, lymph node recurrence appeared 2 months after surgery. PLT count decreased again as the tumor volume increased. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment was administered but was discontinued due to hemorrhagic gastric ulcer. Eventually, the patient died of cancer 4 months after surgery.