A 76-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital because she was incidentally found to have a pancreatic tumor during a regular health checkup. The patient did not have any family members with pancreatic cancer. Her serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level was 217.0 U/mL (normal range, 0–37 U/mL). Other laboratory test results, including serum carcinoembryonic antigen level, were normal. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a 35-mm hypovascular mass located in the pancreatic tail. The tumor involved the splenic artery and veins . Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration revealed a tubular adenocarcinoma. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron-emission tomography (PET)/CT showed high FDG accumulation in the pancreatic tumor and no other abnormal accumulation suggesting distant metastasis or other solid tumors . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with resectable PDAC (T2N0M0 stage IB) according to the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control staging system. She was administered two cycles of neoadjuvant gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2, days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle) plus S-1 (100 mg/body on days 1 through 14 of a 21-day cycle), after which the tumor size decreased slightly from 35 to 32 mm, and her serum CA19-9 levels decreased to 75.3 U/mL. No serious adverse events were observed during chemotherapy.
She underwent distal pancreatectomy with regional lymphadenectomy after confirmation of no atypical cells on lavage ascites cytopathology. The midline wound was protected using a wound protector during the surgical procedure. The resected specimen was a whitish tumor 3.3 × 2.8 × 2.0 cm in size. Pathological examination revealed that the cancer cells were almost viable and had invaded the splenic vessels. The surgical margins were negative. The pathological stage was IIB (pT2N1M0). The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. She received eight cycles of adjuvant S-1 (100 mg/body on days 1 through 14 of a 21-day cycle).
Approximately 14 months after surgery, abdominal plane CT and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 30-mm mass in the abdominal wall at the middle wound that involved the transverse colon, suggesting postoperative recurrence . CT was performed without contrast medium because the patient experienced allergic symptoms on a previous CT with an iodine contrast medium. FDG-PET/CT showed high FDG accumulation in the abdominal wall lesion without abnormal accumulation in other organs . An endoscopic gastrointestinal examination revealed no malignant tumors. She was diagnosed with postoperative recurrence of PDAC. Regarding the recurrence pattern, it was difficult to distinguish abdominal wall infiltration of peritoneal dissemination from implantation in the abdominal wall. Considering the risk of rush progression from potential peritoneal dissemination, two cycles of GnP (gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 and nab-paclitaxel 125 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15 of a 28-day cycle) were administered. During chemotherapy, the tumor size decreased slightly, and no other distant metastases appeared. As we expected the resection range to reduce and surgical margins to be negative owing to tumor downsizing, we added chemoradiotherapy (45 Gy in 4 weeks with S-1 at a dose of 100 mg/body for the first 21 days). Subsequently, two cycles of GnP were administered as maintenance therapy, but the tumor slightly increased in size. Therefore, modified FOLFIRINOX (oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m2; irinotecan, 150 mg/m2; leucovorin, 400 mg/m2; and 5-fluorouracil, 2400 mg/m2) was administered . After seven cycles of modified FOLFIRINOX, the tumor size decreased to 25 mm, and no other metastatic lesions had appeared. We performed surgical resection of the recurrent lesion. After intraoperative confirmation of no peritoneal dissemination and no obvious malignant cells by lavage ascites cytopathology, partial resection of the abdominal wall and transverse colon was performed. The resected specimen was a whitish tumor 6.0 × 4.8 × 4.5 cm in size, and pathological examination revealed it to be metastatic adenocarcinoma, consistent with a metastasis of the primary PDAC . The surgical margin was 1 mm. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful.
Nine months after resection of the recurrent lesion, abdominal contrast-enhanced MRI showed a new mass in the abdominal wall at the site of the previous wound . FDG-PET/CT also showed abnormal FDG accumulation in the tumor . We diagnosed the lesion as re-recurrence from the first recurrent lesion due to insufficient surgical margins. As the mass was localized within the abdominal wall, we performed resection of the re-recurrent lesion with sufficient surgical margins . We repaired the large defect of the abdominal wall after resection using a femoral myocutaneous flap. The pathological findings of the resected specimen were the same as those of the previous specimens . The surgical margin was 20 mm. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Seven years after the initial surgery and 3 years and 7 months after the third surgery, the patient is alive without recurrence.