A 6-year-old Chinese boy with a 2-year history of persistent haematuria and proteinuria found by routine screen was referred to our department. He had suffered several episodes of otitis media and maxillary sinusitis since the age of 3 years without requiring hospitalisation. He was diagnosed with selective IgM deficiency at the age of 5 years. Clinical examinations revealed a normal gross appearance and growth percentile, and there was no pitting edema or skin rash. His family history was unremarkable except that his elder brother, who had experienced recurrent sinusitis and atopic dermatitis, had been diagnosed with selective IgM deficiency at the age of 3 years. His brother had received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatments and has normal renal function without proteinuria and haematuria. Examining our patient’s kidneys by using ultrasound revealed that his kidneys and urinary tract system were grossly normal. Performing a dipstick urinalysis revealed that the urine contained occult blood 3+ and protein 2+. His daily protein loss was 1.4 g/d. Other blood and urine biochemistry data, including titres of the antinuclear antibodies, antistreptolysin-O, and autoantibodies related to systemic lupus erythematosus were all negative (Table ).
At the age of 6 years, the patient received 20 mg/d of prednisolone orally for 3 months, which was later combined with 2 mg/d of chlorambucil for a further 6 months. Neither treatment improved his proteinuria and haematuria. He suffered from more frequent episodes of sinusitis during this treatment. Because of increased episode of infections and persistent proteinuria, the treatment regimen was followed by an IVIG of 400 mg/kg/4 wk for a total of 16 weeks with no change in his proteinuria. Three months after the first IVIG therapy, he was referred to us because of the proteinuria, and a renal biopsy was performed. Under light microscopy, only a mild increase in the glomerular cellularity was noted. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated a strong staining of IgG, IgA, C3, IgG κ, and λ in the mesangium and glomerular basement membrane with equivocal patterns of IgM and C1q (Figure A-E). Electron microscopy revealed diffuse foot process effacement and electronic dense deposits over the subendothelial, subepithelial, and paramesangial areas, where focal proliferative lupus nephritis was suspected (WHO Class III) (Figure ). These lupus-like pathology results were inconsistent with his clinical and autoimmune profile, whereby the diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus cannot be made. His following treatment regimen for nephritis consisted of 10 mg/d of prednisolone orally, in addition to a 6-month regimen of 500 mg/m2/d of mycophenolate mofetil. His proteinuria and haematuria gradually improved. Further analysis of the surface antigens of T cells and B cells showed considerably low CD19+ (Table ), where XLA was one of the potential diagnoses. An analysis of the BTK gene revealed that the patient and his brother both exhibited a c.347C > T (p.P116L) mutation inherited from their mother (Figure ). After a 2-year follow up, our patient remains proteinuria-free with normal kidney function and no infections. Written informed consent was obtained for the subjects included in this study and was approved by the Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital Institutional Review Board. The reference sequences for the BTK gene are NG_009616.1 and NM_000061.2.