A 30-year-old woman, previously in good health, visited the emergency department reporting swelling in the left-sided neck veins for one month, along with heaviness and swelling in the left arm for one week. Additionally, she experienced distension of the right-sided neck veins for three days, accompanied by a generalized headache. She had no shortness of breath or chest pain. Notably, she denied experiencing fever, facial swelling, difficulty swallowing, night sweats, or weight loss.
On examination, her temperature was 36.8°C, blood pressure was 129/86 mmHg, heart rate was 102 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 96% on room air. She had visible swelling in the left arm and engorged veins in both arms and neck. Notably, there were no signs of hyperemia, warmth, or tenderness . The right arm had no visible swelling. The brachial and radial pulses were present and strong in both arms.
The emergency physician performed a PoCUS of the neck and bilateral upper limb veins. Using a high-frequency linear transducer and with the patient in a semi-recumbent position, the internal jugular (IJ) veins were assessed by gentle compression in B-mode. The subclavian and axillary veins were also evaluated using compression and with colour Doppler. The PoCUS revealed that the left internal jugular vein was noncompressible and displayed echogenic material in the lumen, raising a high suspicion of left internal jugular vein thrombosis . In addition, thrombus was identified in the left subclavian and axillary veins . The right IJ vein did not have any evidence of thrombus, however it was significantly engorged and noncompressible even when the patient was positioned fully upright . In addition to the vascular findings, PoCUS of the heart demonstrated a small pericardial effusion .
A chest X-ray and Doppler ultrasound were ordered. The chest X-ray revealed a widened mediastinum . A Doppler ultrasound of the neck and bilateral upper extremities veins revealed the presence of an occlusive clot in both the left IJ, subclavian, and axillary veins. Further investigation through a contrast-enhanced CT chest revealed an ill-defined anterior mediastinal mass with diffuse necrosis, extending into the left and right lungs and exhibiting two nodular lesions. This mass measured 6.75 × 5.4 × 8.5cm and exerted pressure on the right brachiocephalic vein and the superior vena cava .
In response to the thrombotic findings, anticoagulation therapy with enoxaparin was initiated, and the patient was admitted to the internal medicine service for ongoing management. A CT-guided right anterior mediastinal mass biopsy was conducted during the hospitalization. Following successful treatment and stabilization, the patient was discharged with a prescription for direct oral anticoagulants. The biopsy results identified a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and she was subsequently referred to the oncology clinic where she was started on chemotherapy.