A 21-year-old previously healthy Hispanic woman presented to the hospital with acute cervical spinal cord transection at C7 level after involvement in a high-speed motor vehicle rollover. She was intubated on arrival and placed on mechanical ventilation, then underwent early surgical decompression with C6 laminectomy and C4-T2 posterior spinal fusion. She was started on gastrointestinal prophylaxis with daily famotidine, and on enoxaparin postoperatively per standards of care for venous thrombotic event prophylaxis. Notably, she was positive for SARS-CoV-2 virus (COVID-19) on admission, and one week post admission, she became symptomatic with COVID-19 pneumonia, for which she received a 10-day course of dexamethasone.
Two weeks post injury, a tracheostomy was performed and a percutaneous endoscopic gastrotomy tube was also inserted. During the latter procedure, normal gastric and duodenal anatomy was noted. The patient remained mildly anemic for the remainder of her intensive care unit (ICU) stay, with intermittent fever that eventually broke 3 weeks post-injury. On day 21 of her hospital stay, the patient’s BUN spiked from 18 mg/dL to 43 mg/dL , along with a 2.5-fold increase in her BUN: Creatinine ratio, suggestive of possible GIB . However, typical symptoms or signs of a recent or active bleed were absent. Hemoglobin remained stable initially, even on recheck, for 25 h following BUN spike, and neither diaphoresis nor change in stool color was noted. PEG tube was inspected by general surgery and showed no abnormal findings, suctioning of gastric contents revealed only normally colored feeding formula. The patient also denied abdominal pain or a sense of impending doom, further reassuring against a possibly significant GIB.
The following day, a 3.5 g/dL drop in hemoglobin was noted while the patient remained asymptomatic, prompting a gastroenterology consult under heightened suspicion of GIB . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy evaluation was performed and revealed three non-bleeding duodenal ulcers with clean bases in the duodenal bulb and sweep . A biopsy for Helicobacter pylori was collected during the procedure and later interpreted as negative. No signs of active bleeding were noted at this time from the ulcer. Gastroenterology recommended an eight week course of omeprazole. She received a one-time transfusion of two units of packed red blood cells (pRBCs). Large amounts of melanotic stool consistent with GIB followed that afternoon and lasted for several bowel movements.
By the evening, her hemoglobin had plateaued at 9.1 g/dL, and she remained clinically stable until her discharge to a spinal cord injury rehabilitation center. At the time of discharge, the patient remained ventilator dependent.