A 95-year-old woman visited a local clinic as soon as she became aware of a mass in her left breast. After undergoing mammography and breast ultrasonography, the patient was referred to our department for suspected breast cancer. On clinical examination, the mass measured 2 cm in diameter and was well defined and mobile, with the normal overlying skin and nipple-areola. The axillary lymph nodes were not palpable. No café-au-lait spots and no neurofibromas on the skin were observed. The patient had no family history of breast cancer or any other comorbidities. Mammography revealed a well-defined mass in the mid-lateral area of the left breast . The shape of the mass is round, hyperdense to the breast glandular tissue, it was not accompanied by calcification. No abnormal skin thickening, nipple retraction or significant axillary lymphadenopathy is noted. Breast ultrasonography revealed a 16 × 16 × 15-mm round mass with posterior enhancement in the lower outer quadrant of the left breast at 4 o’clock, approximately 5.0 cm from the nipple, corresponding to the mammographic mass . The internal echo of the tumor was a mixture of relatively uniform hypoechoic areas with posterior enhancement and heterogeneous hyperechoic areas. Color Doppler revealed no blood flow signal in the tumor . Elastography was almost uniformly blue, indicating a poorly deformable lesion . Tsukuba Elasticity Score was 4. The tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 15-3, were within normal limits. She underwent a core needle biopsy. The pathological findings revealed a spindle cell lesion with no malignant findings. At 2 months follow-up, repeat breast ultrasonography revealed that the mass had increased in the size (27 × 26 × 19 mm) . A repeat core needle biopsy, however, provided no particularly new information. The tumor was resected without exposure, due to the tumor’s tendency to grow, and the malignant nature of the tumor could not be completely ruled out.
Macroscopically, the tumor measured 20 × 19 × 17 mm and had a white cut surface . The results of the hematoxylin and eosin staining are shown in Fig. b. The area indicated by the red dotted line was densely populated with spindle-shaped cells and shredded-carrot collagen bundles , and this area was homogeneous with posterior enhancement on ultrasound. Immunohistochemical antibody markers (S100, SOX10, and cluster of differentiation [CD] 34) were positive in the spindle cells , indicating a neurofibroma. In contrast, the blue dotted area maintained the bilayer nature of luminal cells and myoepithelial cells, which led to the diagnosis of adenosis. Hence, a histological diagnosis of neurofibroma with adenosis was made. At 6 months follow-up, no recurrent lesions were found .