A 75-year-old woman presented with intermittent claudication in both thighs (right>left), along with a burning sensation for 6 months. She had undergone lumbar spinal fusion surgery for spondylolisthesis at L4–6 14 years prior and the outcome was kept good. The thigh pain with burning sensation was induced by walking or standing for 5 min. There was no muscle weakness, numbness, sensory disturbance, or hyperreflexia in the upper and lower limbs. Hoffmann’s reflex, Babinski’s sign, and straight leg raising test were all negative. The 10-s grip and release test were 20 times at both sides. There was no urinary symptom. We initially suspected radicular pain caused by lumbar lesions even though Kemp’s test was negative.
However, no significant lesions were seen at the lumbar level on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . After careful examination, thigh pain was found to be induced by cervical extension. We considered that the intermittent claudication could be caused by spinal cord compression and performed a cervical MRI, which revealed multi-level cervical spinal cord compression. Next, we performed myelography and post-myelogram dynamic computed tomography (CT) myelography of the cervical region. Myelography showed no lumbar lesions ; moreover, the subarachnoid space was found to be narrowed with the spine in the neutral and extension positions rather than during flexion . CT myelography in the cervical extension position showed narrowing of the subarachnoid space at C3/4, 4/5, 5/6, and 6/7 levels; the patient reported pain in the front of the right thigh during the procedure . As shown the myelogram on neutral and extended position, the whole spine x-rays showed the slight cervical hyperlordosis following the lumbar lordosis and the thoracic increased kyphosis . We performed an electromyogram (EMG), which implied neurogenic changes below the C5 level.
Based on these results, we diagnosed cervical spinal cord compression and performed laminoplasty at C4–6 and dome-like laminectomy at C3 and C7 because the compression of spinal cord was observed at the C3/4, C4/5, C5/6, and C6/7 levels. Postoperatively, the patient’s leg pain was completely relieved and discharged 2 weeks after the surgery. She could walk for 40 minutes continuously without thigh pain. Six months after the procedure, a repeat MRI showed adequate subarachnoid space around the spinal cord due to posterior spinal cord shift . Adverse events were not recognized.