The proband (II.4) was a 51-year-old man born from unrelated healthy parents (I.1 and I.2) after an uneventful pregnancy. Familial history was negative . He had neither psychomotor delay nor behavioral disorders. His medical history began at age 7, with acute unilateral walking difficulties that progressively became bilateral. The walking difficulties were mainly due to spasticity first, with tiptoeing, with no ataxia or weakness. Walking difficulties slowly worsened over time. He walked with a stick at 19 and he’s using a wheelchair since age 26. He presented a generalized onset motor seizure at age 25 that revealed a frontal angioma, treated with radiotherapy. He presented memory impairment from age 30. Neuropsychological evaluation highlighted moderate difficulties for fronto-parietal efficiency. He complained from dysuria at age 30, and urodynamic testing showed detrusor and external sphincter dyssynergia. Clinical examination found at age 45 a tetraparesis with brisk reflexes, bilateral Hoffmann and Babinski’s sign. Spasticity was mostly found on lower limbs with atrophy of proximal muscles. Sensory function was impaired with light touch and vibration deficits, localized preferentially at the lower limbs. He also had a cerebellar kinetostatic ataxia, with truncal hypotonia. He had no extrapyramidal symptoms; cranial nerves examination was normal. No signs of dysmorphia were noted. At age 49, worsening of ataxia and swallowing troubles with episodic false passages were noted. At age 51, he presented focal onset evolving into bilateral convulsive status epilepticus revealing structural epilepsy and requiring chronic use of anti-epileptic medication. Blood analyses revealed normal levels of cholestanol, very long chain fatty acid, normal 25 and 27-hydroxycholesterol plasma level and normal organic and amino acids chromatography. No abnormality was found on urine chromatography of organic acids. At age 51, brain MRI showed atrophic cerebellum mostly on the vermis and an atrophic spinal cord. After-effects of frontal angioma were also present .