A 52-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department with the main complaint of high-grade fever (38.5°C) and myalgias for 1 week.
His medical history was significant for a Bentall operation for an ascending aortic aneurysm associated with a bicuspid aortic valve 14 years before the current presentation, and subsequent redo surgery with implantation of a biologic aortic valve prosthesis 11 years later, for prosthetic degeneration. The only medication he was taking was aspirin 100 mg daily for carotid artery disease.
A rapid nasopharyngeal swap for COVID-19, done as soon as the patient presented to the emergency department, excluded SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Physical examination was unremarkable except for a 2/6 systolic murmur at the upper sternal border.
Shortly after hospital arrival, the patient experienced sudden onset of typical chest pain: an electrocardiogram (ECG) showed junctional rhythm and an inferior STEMI . Bedside echocardiography revealed inferior and apical akinesia and a double lumen image in the aortic root, which initially raised the suspicion of aortic dissection, promptly excluded with an emergent aortic CT-angiogram.
The patient was then transferred to the cath-lab, where coronary angiography showed a suspected embolic occlusion of the mid-distal circumflex coronary artery, immediately re-opened with embolectomy using an Export aspiration catheter (Medtronic) (, Videos 1 and 2). All other coronary branches were normal. Given the likelihood of a septic nature of the embolus according to the patient’s clinical presentation, angioplasty, and stenting of the lesion were not performed. Dual antiplatelet therapy was not started for the same reason and the lack of atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. The embolic material was sent for cultural examination but did not grow any pathogen.
Repeated transthoracic echocardiography after the procedure confirmed the presence of a periaortic hypo-echogenic image suggestive of a periaortic abscess (, Video 3, ). The aortic prosthesis was well-functioning and showed no signs of endocarditis as did the other native valves; a moderate degenerative mitral valve regurgitation was also noted; left ventricular systolic function had recovered, without residual wall motion abnormalities. A subsequent transoesophageal exam confirmed these findings. Post-procedural ECG showed normal sinus rhythm and T-wave inversion in the inferior leads.
Laboratory exams were significant for neutrophilic leucocytosis with a WBC count of 12 900/mm3 and an elevated CRP at 108 mg/L (procalcitonin was negative), as well as a significant rise in high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T peaking at 2771 pg/mL; creatinine was 1.03 mg/dL (reference values 0.7–1.2 mg/dL), liver function tests showed mild elevation of the alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (0.88 mg/dL, reference values 10–50 mg/dL) with a normal AST (44 mg/dL, reference values 10–50 mg/dL).
Empiric antibiotic therapy with vancomycin (1 g every 12 h), gentamicin (80 mg every 8 h) and rifampin (600 mg daily) was immediately started.
Blood cultures eventually grew penicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus
lugdunensis and antimicrobial therapy was switched from vancomycin to oxacillin (2 g every 6 h), continuing gentamicin and rifampin (at the increased dosage of 450 mg twice daily).
After the introduction of antibiotic therapy, white blood cell (WBC) count normalized and C-reactive protein (CRP) progressively declined at 32 mg/L.
A PET-CT exam confirmed the presence of a hypermetabolic area around the aortic prosthesis compatible with a periaortic abscess .
The patient underwent redo Bentall procedure with the positioning of a mechanical prosthesis mounted on a Dacron vascular prosthesis and mitral valve repair 15 days after the initial presentation. The timing of surgery was influenced by the need for all the necessary preoperative imaging exams to achieve a definite diagnosis—considering also the patient’s high surgical risk, being at his second redo operation (EuroSCORE II 13.21%). He recovered well from surgery and had no major complications apart from some initial episodes of junctional rhythm and atrial flutter. He was put on anticoagulant therapy with warfarin with the indication to re-evaluate the need for anticoagulation after 3 months, aspirin was stopped considering the patient had no atherosclerotic coronary artery disease; antibiotic therapy with gentamicin was stopped after a total of 3 weeks and the patient was discharged with the indication to continue oxacillin and rifampin for a total of at least 6 weeks of treatment. At discharge, the aortic prosthesis was well-functioning (, ), left ventricular systolic function was preserved and there was no residual mitral regurgitation.
At 1-month follow-up the patient was asymptomatic and in sinus rhythm, echocardiography confirmed the good result of the surgery.