A 68-year-old man was referred to our department for the treatment of his PC. His initial serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was 18.9 ng/mL , and all his 14 prostate biopsy cores comprised almost totally of adenocarcinoma. His Gleason score was 4 + 5, and his clinical stage diagnosis was cT2cN0M0. Although we suggested androgen deprivation therapy combined with radiotherapy, he refused the latter owing to concerns about aggravating his preexisting ulcerative colitis. Therefore, he was treated only with combined androgen blockade comprising bicalutamide and degarelix acetate. Fourteen months after commencing treatment, the disease progressed to non-metastatic castration-resistant PC (CRPC). At that time, his neuron-specific enolase (NSE) level was 15 ng/mL (normal range, <12 ng/mL). We switched his oral regimen from bicalutamide to ethinylestradiol and subsequently to enzalutamide. Ultimately, he consented to undergo intensity-modulated radiotherapy (76 Gy in 38 fractions) to the prostate in combination with enzalutamide and degarelix acetate.
Although his PSA level decreased and remained under 0.02 ng/mL, computed tomography (CT) 6 months later revealed abnormal right inguinal lymph nodes; moreover, his NSE increased to 21 ng/mL. We performed a biopsy of a metastatic lymph node in the right inguinal area; pathological examination revealed characteristics typical of SCCP, including positive immunohistochemical staining of synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56 . Since no other primary small-cell carcinoma lesions were detected, he was deemed to have metastatic SCCP 15 months after the CRPC diagnosis. During this time, the disease rapidly progressed, and NSE increased to 75 ng/mL.
Next, we administered the combination chemotherapy of etoposide and cisplatin once every 3 weeks according to the regimen recommended for small-cell lung cancer (SCLC). At the end of the third course, his NSE decreased to 7 ng/mL, and CT showed metastatic lymph node shrinkage . Since his PSA remained continuously low, we ceased enzalutamide administration. At the time of administering the eleventh course, however, his NSE increased to 15 ng/mL. Magnetic resonance imaging showed infiltration of local prostate lesions to the bladder and the seminal vesicle .
Next, we administered amrubicin, but after transient improvement, its effectiveness waned; new lymphadenopathy and bone metastases appeared after 6 courses , his NSE rose to 15 ng/mL, and pain in his perineum and back worsened.
At this time, we were uncertain as to how to proceed. Therefore, we thought that olaparib could be used as a PARP inhibitor if there was a BRCA1/2 mutation, so we decided to carry out a genetic test. Genetic testing (FoundationOne CDx; Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA) of the previously biopsied lymph node specimen revealed BRCA2 loss of heterozygosity with base substitution mutation . Therefore, we administered olaparib, a PARP-2 inhibitor shown to be effective in patients with BRCA2 mutations. His severe pain improved after commencing treatment, and the lymph node shrank . Olaparib treatment thereby achieved partial remission that has continued for 8 months after initiation; his NSE levels currently range between 12 and 15 ng/mL.