A 62-year-old male patient admitted to endocrinology clinic with polyuria, poly-dipsia, increased appetite, weight loss, pigmentation, haemoptysis, and fatigue that developed over two months. This was his first coming to the hospital.
The patient had underwent phacoemulsification ten years ago.
The patient reported a history of smoking (40 packs/year), and denied drug use. His father died of the unknown cause and his mother died of a heart attack. His brother had diabetes mellitus.
The blood pressure was 151/99 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa), and body mass index was 21.09 kg/m2. Pigmentation was observed on his face, his lip and buccal mucosa. Respiratory sounds in the bilateral lungs were rough, although no rales were heard.
Laboratory data also revealed an increase in levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (12.37 ng/mL), fasting plasma glucose (FPG) (12.76 mmol/L), HbA1c (8.9%), and urine sugar (3+). An oral glucose tolerance test indicated diabetes mellitus. Levels of blood ACTH, blood cortisol, and 24 h urine cortisol were elevated, and cortisol secretion was found to be disordered . Low-dose and high-dose dexamethasone suppression tests both were not suppressed (8 am cortisol before test was 31.17 μg/dL, after low-dose dexamethasone suppression test was 37.04 μg/dL, after high-dose dexamethasone suppression test was 53.5 μg/dL). Levels of testosterone, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), total thyroxine (TT4), total tri-iodothyronine (TT3), and free tri-iodothyronine (FT3) were all reduced, although levels of blood luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, prolactin, growth hormone (GH), free thyroxine (FT4) were all normal . The patient’s 24 h urine potassium level was 105.5 mmol, while the synchronous serum potassium level was 2.96 mmol/L. Water deprivation and vasopressin tests indicate partial central diabetes insipidus . A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a hilar mass and chronic obstructive inflammation in the left lower lung . A fiber optic bronchoscopy revealed a neoplasm present on the lower segment of the left main bronchus. A brush cell pathological examination showed a very small amount of heterocyst, and a histopathological examination detected expression of Leukocyte differentiation antigen (CD56), synaptophysin (Syn), chromogranin A (CgA), and cytokeratin (CK). Assays of NSE and ACTH were found to be positive. Thus, SCLC of the left lower bronchus was diagnosed . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary showed normal and MRI of the adrenal glands revealed bilateral adrenal hyperplasia . An emission computed tomography of the patient’s bones revealed radioactivity concentrated in the sixth and seventh right anterior ribs, and a punctiform concentration of radioactivity was observed on the right oxter. In combination, the results of these examinations suggest that the neoplasm staging is IIIA (T3N1M0).