A.P.L.S, a 31-year-old female presented with progressive severe back/buttocks pain, tenesmus, urinary incontinence, nocturnal enuresis, bilateral foot drop and plantar flexion weakness (strength II out of V) related to a spondyloptosis . She had three failed lumbosacral spinal operations. At the age of 13, she had a decompression for an L5-S1 disc herniation. At the age of 29, she had an L4-S1 posterior fusion with anterior column support that resulted in pullout of the sacral screws and cage migration . The third operation, at the age of 30, required a posterior L4-S2 instrumented revision, also failed resulting in pullout of the sacral screws and slip recurrence .
The fourth surgery included a posterior lumbopelvic instrumented fusion using bilateral long iliac screws, with the addition of BMP-2 into the disc space. Four iliac screws were placed, two on each side, three of them measuring 7 × 120 mm and the other 7 × 45 mm. Although known to be very useful in spine surgery, we did not have navigation nor neurophysiological monitoring available at that time. After iliac screw placement, anteroposterior (AP), outlet, inlet and combined obturator-oulet pelvis views were used to confirm adequate placement without sciatic notch or acetabular fossa penetration. All screws were connected directly to the rods without the use of offside connectors. This allowed a cantilever force that enabled partial reduction of the slip and indirect decompression of the spinal canal. The cages that had been previously inserted were left in place to maintain an anterior column support. The patient was allowed to ambulate immediately after surgery without any type of cast, as recommended by some authors when performing lumbopelvic fixations.
Postoperative imaging studies demonstrated reduction of the slip to a grade II and excellent placement of the iliac screws . A robust fusion mass across the lumbosacral junction was documented in the follow-up CT scans . Two years after surgery, she complained only of occasional tenesmus and minimal nocturnal enuresis, and her physical examination demonstrated that the strength in her distal lower extremities had improved to IV out of V. She has returned to work full time.