A 59-year-old male presented with epigastric pain and difficulty swallowing and was referred to our outpatient department. He had smoked for 40 years, had never taken medication, and occasionally drank alcohol. The physical examination was unremarkable. The serum values of the tumor markers, such as a-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were almost normal. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed the circumferential wall of the lower section of the esophagus, cardiac and corpus thickening in the portal phase, and delayed enhancement of the thickening esophagus and stomach wall and perigastric lymph nodes . Positron emission tomography (PET) confirmed 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG)-avidity in the lower section of the esophagus, cardiac and corpus, and perigastric lymph nodes at stations 1, 3, 7, 9, 11, and 16. Subsequent endoscopy at our center revealed stenosis of the lower esophageal cavity, elevated circumferential lesions of the gastric body with involvement of the cardia, and biopsy-proven adenocarcinoma. A multidisciplinary team debate recommended that the patient start out with conversion therapy because the tumor was borderline resectable.
To assess a 620-gene panel of genomic change, a tissue sample acquired during an endoscopy was subjected to next-generation sequencing (NGS) with the patient’s permission (GloriousMed Clinical Laboratory Co., Shanghai, China), while the PD-L1 expression was also detected via immunohistochemistry (IHC). Genomic testing identified somatic mutations, including KMT2D Q3612del, FLCN F157del, CASP8 F414C, and LATS2 G223R, while the germline mutations of the DNA damage repair pathway genes included BLM S801T, MLH3 T1348I, MSH6, K646R, and ROS1 M1340T. No mutations were detected in TP53, CDH1, or ERBB2 . The tumor mutational burden (TMB) was 2.25 mut/Mb, defined as TMB-low. The IHC results showed that the PD-L1 CPS of the tissue sample was 80-90 and the PD-L1 TPS was about 5%, indicating high PD-L1 expression . Moreover, shotgun sequencing was done to determine the gut microbiota makeup for assessing the efficacy of immunotherapy. We observed an overrepresentation of specific strains, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, Bifidobacterium longum, Odoribacter, and Veillonella . Chemoimmunotherapy was applied in response to these findings after the patient gave informed consent. After four-cycle treatment with camrelizumab (200 mg, day 1, i.v.), apatinib (250 mg, daily, oral), S-1 (80 mg/day, days1-14, oral), and abraxane (200 mg, days 1 and 8, i.v.), CT scans in January 2020 showed lesion shrinkage in the esophagus, stomach, and perigastric lymph nodes . Next, the patient received S-1 monotherapy for two cycles between January 2020 and March 2020 due to personal reasons. CT scans in March 2020 revealed effective tumor downsizing in the esophagus, stomach, and perigastric lymph nodes.
Due to significant tumor shrinkage, the patient received curative resection in March 2020. The anterior gastric wall, the cardia at the lesser curvature, and the gastric fundus were all palpable with tough masses and numerous swollen lymph nodes surrounding the stomach, as revealed by intraoperative exploration. The tumor proliferated upward to above the esophageal hiatus and the left diaphragm. Eventually, the lower esophagus, entire stomach, part of the left diaphragm, and perigastric lymph nodes were surgically removed. Specimens were then sent for further pathological evaluation. No cancer cells or positive lymph nodes were found in any of the resected specimens, indicating that the patient achieved pCR after conversion therapy. The histological assessement revealed severe necrosis and fibrosis. . The entire course of the clinical treatment is illustrated in . The patient continued to exhibit disease stability at the time of the last follow-up in April 2021 and achieved pCR lasting more than 19 months.