An 80-year-old Caucasian female presented to a local hospital with 4 days of progressive emesis, generalized abdominal discomfort, and diarrhoea. She had no known COVID-19 exposure or infection in the past and received the first dose of the BNT162b2 vaccine 7 days prior to symptom onset. She reported no immediate symptoms following vaccination.
She had a prior appendectomy, cholecystectomy, and hysterectomy. Stress echocardiogram obtained in 2015 for atypical chest pain was negative for ischaemia and showed normal left ventricular (LV) function. Her medications included ranitidine, cholecalciferol, and daily fish oil capsules and had no significant alcohol, smoking, or illicit drug use.
Upon presentation, she was afebrile with a heart rate of 98 beats per minute, arterial oxygen saturation of 99% on room air, and blood pressure of 94/64 mmHg. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed non-specific ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities and low voltage QRS complexes throughout (similar to that obtained at the University of Minnesota, shown in ). Initial laboratory findings are presented in Troponin I was critically elevated at 72.65 ng/mL, B-type natriuretic peptide was 1511 pg/mL, and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was negative for SARS-CoV-2.
Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis obtained to further evaluate her gastrointestinal symptoms showed evidence of anasarca but was otherwise unremarkable. Coronary angiogram revealed non-occlusive coronary artery disease. Subsequent transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed normal LV size, moderate LV hypertrophy, and LV ejection fraction of 35% with moderate global hypokinesis.
The following day, she had increasing oxygen requirement and developed progressive hypotension. Troponin I was down-trending, but C reactive protein peaked at 120 mg/L. Right heart catheterization revealed a right atrial pressure of 11 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure of 45/32 (36) mmHg, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 32 mmHg. Cardiac index and systemic vascular resistance were calculated at 1.4 L/min/m2 (Fick) and 2400 dynes.s.cm–5, respectively. Endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) was obtained. Given evidence of cardiogenic shock, dobutamine, nitroprusside, and bumetanide drips were started. Despite these interventions, her oxygen requirement continued to increase, creatinine was elevated at 2.05 mg/dL, and lactic acid level rose to 5.8 mmol/L. Impella CP (Abiomed Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) was placed for systemic hypoperfusion and worsening end-organ function. Left ventricular ejection fraction was 20% post-procedure. Endomyocardial biopsy revealed fulminant myocarditis with extensive myocyte damage out of proportion to the inflammatory infiltrates. No giant cells or granulomas were revealed . Her haemodynamic and respiratory status continued to worsen, prompting the administration of 1000 mg methylprednisolone and transfer to our institution.
Upon arrival, her mean arterial pressure was 72 mmHg with the Impella CP set at P7. She remained somnolent prompting endotracheal intubation. Amiodarone drip was started due to frequent episodes of paroxysmal atrial flutter and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia associated with haemodynamic instability. She was continued on methylprednisolone 1000 mg per day for 3 days followed by rapid prednisone taper. A thorough infectious workup was completed with negative blood, sputum and urine cultures. Repeat RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 was negative but spike receptor binding domain antibody titre was positive at 1:6400. Other viral studies including Influenza A (including H1 and H1N1) and B, Parainfluenza Virus, Coronavirus, Human Metapneumovirus, Rhinovirus/Enterovirus, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Coxsackie Virus, Adenovirus, Parvovirus B19, Cytomegalovirus, Hepatitis C, Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae were also negative. Epstein–Barr Virus DNA was positive at 1417 copies/mL and this was thought to be consistent with virus reactivation. D-Dimer was elevated at 3.4 μg/mL and interleukin-6 (IL-6) peaked at 93.4 pg/mL.
On Day 7, Impella device was removed, and she was extubated. Repeat TTE on Day 8 showed normal LV function with mild to moderately reduced right ventricular function. Dobutamine was weaned off as cardiac index increased to 3.1 L/min/m2 with oral afterload reduction and renal function recovered to baseline. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was notable for normal biventricular function and acute myocarditis . She was discharged in stable condition and on the following medications for heart failure (HF) management: metoprolol succinate 25 mg daily and spironolactone 25 mg daily.
We followed her very closely in our outpatient HF clinic. Her overall condition continued to improve, laboratory values remained normal, and HF medications were titrated. Repeat cardiac MRI at 3 months showed resolving myocarditis with normal biventricular function, persistent myocardial oedema, and significantly reduced burden of patchy mid-myocardial fibrosis in the LV . At 6 months follow-up, she continued to do well and regained her prior-to-admission functional status.