A 26-year-old woman without medical history presented to the ED due to abdominal pain for approximately 12 hours. The patient reported no tobacco use, and her only prescribed medication was the etonogestrel/ethinyl estradiol intravaginal ring. The patient had been evaluated earlier in the day at an urgent care facility; the urgent care provider then sent the patient to the ED for an apparent abnormal urinalysis (UA). In the ED, she was complaining of mid-epigastric and right upper quadrant abdominal pain along with continued nausea. She also noted back pain, a headache, and bilateral upper extremity numbness since that morning. She noted her bilateral upper extremity numbness and headache had become intermittent. She denied any associated diarrhea, constipation, dysuria, fever, chills, recent travel, or trauma.
The patient’s vital signs included the following: temperature 98.0º Fehrenheit; heart rate 76 beats per minute; respirations 18 breaths per minute; blood pressure 129/53 millimeters of mercury; and pulse oximetry 98% on room air. On physical exam, she exhibited moderate tenderness to palpation of the right upper quadrant and epigastric area. The remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable.
There were no considerable lab abnormalities except for “small” bilirubin noted on the UA. Urine pregnancy test was negative. The patient had a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen/pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast, which demonstrated an extensive thrombus within the superior mesenteric vein, extending into the main portal vein, intrahepatic portal veins, and distal splenic vein . She was administered IV heparin 5800 units bolus and a continuous IV heparin infusion of 18 units per kilogram per hour. She was then transferred to a tertiary care center.
At the tertiary care center, the patient was maintained on the heparin infusion until she was later transitioned to rivaroxaban. The patient underwent extensive hematologic testing including the following: protein C; protein S; anti-thrombin III; alpha fetoprotein, homocysteine; factor 5 gene mutation; prothrombin gene mutation; anti-cardiolipin antibody IgG and IgM by ELISA; anti-beta2-GP I antibody; JAK2 V617F mutation; and mutation in exon 12 of JAK2. No abnormalities were detected. The patient also had normal venous Doppler studies of the bilateral upper and lower extremities. Ultimately she was discharged home on hospital day 3 on rivaroxaban 15 milligrams twice daily with hematology follow-up and discontinuation of hormonal contraception.