A 32-year-old male patient, with unremarkable medical or surgical history, presented to our hospital with a ten-day history of severe abdominal pain. This pain was diffused on and off in nature and was associated with vomiting and followed by constipation. Physical examination showed a febrile, paled patient with a distended abdomen with localized tenderness in the left paraumbilical region. No evidence of bleeding or masses was detected in the rectal examination.
On admission, the patient was conscious, alert, and oriented to time, place, and person, and showed his vital signs.
Both performed plain chest and abdominal X-rays failed to diagnose the existence of a foreign body .
Then, abdominal ultrasound was done before hospital admission, showing two large intraperitoneal abscesses in the right lumbar region with a mild subhepatic thick turbid collection.
At this point, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdominal and pelvic region was decided, revealing (, ):Multiple encysted fluid collections were seen in the pelvic abdominal region. Two encysted fluid collections were seen connecting, one was seen in the anterior part of the right lumbar region measuring about 12 × 3 cm, and another one was seen in the umbilical and left lumbar region measuring about 11.6 × 7 cm. Another large, encysted collection was seen in the pelvic region between the urinary bladder and rectum, compressing the urinary bladder anteriorly and measuring about 12 × 7.6 cm. Multiple enlarged mesenteric and para-aortic lymph nodes. Normal appearance of liver, gallbladder, common bile duct, pancreas, spleen, kidneys, and adrenals. Impression was multiple large, encysted collections most likely to be multiple abscesses in the pelvic abdominal region.
Conservative management was with intravenous fluids and antibiotics initiated, which failed to control the patient's clinical condition. So, a diagnostic laparoscopy was planned . The procedure was initiated by supra and infra umbilical incisions, during which a large amount of pus spilled through the umbilical trocars and a large space of the abdomen was found to be occupied by pus. Thus, the decision was made to be shifted to the open laparotomy technique. Further adhesions were detected between the small bowel and the pyloric membrane. An omental mass that contains a fishbone, located between the transverse and sigmoid colon, was resected. During mass resection, no perforation was noted, the transverse colon and stomach sides appeared healthy, and the sigmoid colon showed an inflammation reaction. Due to the presence of an inflamed and shrunken omental area located between the transverse colon and sigmoid, the site of perforation was thought to be the colon.
The presence of an inflammatory response indicated healed perforation that was created by the fishbone.
Drainage of supra hepatic abscess and inflamed sigmoid colon was also achieved.
Multiple attempts were done to assess the perforation and abscess formation sites. These include an air leak test, upper gastrointestinal methylene blue test, and milking test. All tests showed negative results. The patient's abdomen was kept open for abdominal re-evaluation, aiming to detect the perforation site.
Three days later, a second look was performed, during which no evidence of free fluid or leak was detected. Running of the small and large bowel was done, and two drains were placed in the left upper quadrant and pelvis. Finally, abdominal skin closure was achieved using skin clips.
The resected specimen was sent for histopathological studies .
A: Inflammation and myofibroblastic proliferation.
B: Gram stain inflammation and Bacteria.
C: Inflammation and myofibroblastic proliferation.
D: Necrosis myofibroblastic proliferation.
E: Inflammation giant cell reaction.
F: Inflammation and myofibroblastic proliferation.
G: Inflammation giant cell reaction.
H: Acute inflammation and mesenteric tissue.
Grossly, the resected specimen revealed a tan-brown mass measuring 8.5 × 6.5 × 2.5 cm. The cut sections showed a solid yellow surface with hemorrhagic and necrotic areas. Also, the resected mass was a positive Gram stain for bacterial organisms. So, acute and chronic inflammation with myofibroblastic proliferation, ischemic with necrotic changes, and abscess formation of the omental mass was detected.
The patient could not recall the time of fish bone ingestion retrospectively. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 5.