The patient was a 58-year-old female, who was found to have abdominal distension with nausea and vomiting for 15 days. She was seen in our hepatobiliary and pancreatic surgery department on September 5, 2022. The patient had undergone a gastroscopy on September 1, 2022, at an outside hospital, which showed: duodenal bulb changes and gastric retention and chronic non-atrophic gastritis. Gastroscopic biopsy revealed chronic inflammation, edema and glandular hyperplasia in the duodenal mucosa. She received conservative treatment, but her symptoms did not resolve and she was referred to our hospital. The physical examination found no abnormalities or family history of hereditary disease. Barium radiography showed an increase in gastric volume, gastric retention, narrowing of the gastroduodenal anastomosis, and obstructing the passage of the contrast medium . The initial diagnosis given to her by our hospital was a duodenal mass with gastric retention. In order to relieve her obstructive symptoms, we performed gastrojejunostomy and colostomy for her on September 15, 2022, and during the operation we saw a localized elevation from the gastric sinus to the duodenal bulb with a size of about 6.0 cm*3.0 cm*2.0 cm during open exploration, the gastric wall where the mass was located was thickened, hard and poorly mobile, and the mass invaded part of the duodenal wall, and continued exploration of the adjacent organs and the lymph nodes were not abnormal, so the involved tissues around the duodenum were taken for examination. Rapid intraoperative pathology showed a small amount of inflammatory cell infiltration in the gastric sinus and a small amount of heterotypic cells, which could not exclude neoplastic lesions, pending further analysis of the slow pathology and immunohistochemistry results. Postoperative pathology reported scattered heterogeneous cells in the fibrous connective tissue of the gastric sinus, combined with immunohistochemical staining results consistent with carcinoma, not excluding invasive lobular carcinoma of mammary gland origin. Immunohistochemical staining results: ER (90%), PR (-), Ki67 (2%), GATA3 ( +), CK (AE1/AE3) ( +), CK7 ( +), CK20 (-) . The ultrasound examination of both breasts and axillae was completed, and the results showed that a hypoechoic cluster of about 2.1 cm*1.0 cm in size was seen next to the nipple at point 7 of the right breast, with poorly defined and irregular morphology, and dotted strong echogenicity was seen within it. Echogenicity of the right axillary lymph node was observed, with a height of approximately 1.2 cm*0.7 cm, and cortical echogenicity predominated. Ultrasound diagnosis: right breast mass, BIRADS-US classification: class 4C. Right axillary lymph node enlargement . On September 21, 2022, a coarse needle aspiration biopsy of the right breast mass and axillary lymph nodes was performed under local anesthesia. Puncture pathology results: (right breast mass puncture) invasive lobular carcinoma (classic), (right axillary lymph node puncture) no carcinoma seen. Immunohistochemical results: ER (95%), PR (-), HER-2 (0), Ki67 (5%), GATA3 ( +), E-Cadherin (-), CK (AE1/AE3) ( +), P120 (cytoplasmic +). She came to our department for the next treatment on October 8, 2022. After admission, breast tumor markers, whole-body bone scans, and plain gastric CT with enhancement were completed to further evaluate the patient's condition. Breast tumor marker results showed: CA125 value 39.60U/ml (0 ~ 35U/ml), CA153value 32.40U/ml (0 ~ 31.3U/ml); postoperative gastric computed tomography (CT) showed thickening of the gastric wall in the sinus region with surrounding lymph nodes ; whole-body bone scan showed multiple tumor bone metastases, through the whole-body examination and orthopedic specialist consultation, the final consideration was from the breast . Diagnosis: right breast cancer, cT2N0M1, stage IV. Treatment: palliative treatment with bisphosphonates and CDK4/6i (Palbociclib) combined with AI (Exemestane). The patient is currently under regular evaluation and is being followed up.