A 36-year old woman was referred to a tertiary unit at 29+5 weeks of gestation due to fetal cardiomegaly and mild ascites , which was detected on a scan undertaken for suspected small for gestational age. The woman was nulliparous with a low-risk first trimester combined screening test and unremarkable anomaly scan. She was rhesus B negative and underwent non-invasive prenatal testing that determined the rhesus genotype of the fetus to be rhesus B negative. Otherwise, no red blood cell antibodies were reported. Of note, the maternal grandmother was known to have sideroblastic anaemia that was diagnosed at 17 years of age. The mother of the unborn fetus and her brother had undergone testing as children but were told that no further follow-up was needed. Unfortunately, additional information regarding and genetic testing for this family history was not available. The woman had mild macrocytic anaemia with haemoglobin of 10.4 g/dl and a mean corpuscular volume of 104 fl. The woman had not received any preconceptional or genetic counselling.
Upon arrival, the first scan in our department demonstrated a middle cerebral arterial (MCA) peak systolic velocity (PSV) value above 1.5 Multiples of the Median (MoM). Fetal biometry was normal, as was the amniotic fluid index and umbilical artery doppler. Dexamethasone for fetal lung maturation was administered, and an uncomplicated in utero fetal blood transfusion (IUT) was performed at 30+3 weeks of gestation. The pre-transfusion fetal haemoglobin was 4.4 g/dl, which was increased to 14.1 g/dl following 120 mL of blood transfusion through the intrahepatic portion of the umbilical vein . Investigations to determine the underlying cause of fetal anaemia included microarray comparative genomic hybridization, serology to exclude congenital infection, a peripheral blood film and fetal bilirubin to detect haemolysis. These preliminary investigations were normal. A fetal MRI brain was performed, which showed no abnormalities. In the subsequent weeks, the MCA-PSV improved, as did the cardiomegaly.
At 35+3 weeks of gestation, the MCA-PSV increased to above 1.5 MoM. The options of delivery and ex-utero transfusion versus IUT were discussed with the multidisciplinary team and with parents. As it was considered that an IUT would allow pregnancy to proceed to term, it was decided to proceed with IUT. A second IUT took place with a pre-and post-transfusion fetal haemoglobin of 9.7 and 15 g/dl, respectively. The MCA-PSV remained stable until 37 weeks and three days when a caesarean section for breech presentation was planned. Fetal biometry was consistent with previous measurements, and the amniotic fluid index and umbilical artery doppler were normal. The woman was counselled regarding the need for delivery and likely need for exchange transfusion in the neonatal period. Delivery of a female infant via caesarean section due to breech presentation was performed at 37 + 4 weeks. The birth weight was 3150 g, and apgar scores were 8 and 10 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively.
Subsequently, the infant again became anaemic, requiring regular 3–4 monthly blood transfusions but she is making good developmental progress. Her anaemia was unresponsive to pyridoxine. Iron levels should be closely monitored to detect the need for chelation therapy in future care plans, since iron toxicity is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in XLSA .
Fetal and maternal blood was collected for DNA extraction, at the time of the first IUT. DNA was sequenced by next-generation sequencing for 11 genes associated with sideroblastic anaemia. Analysis was performed using Agilent SureSelect XT custom enrichment technology and Illumina DNA sequencing. Significant maternal cell contamination of the fetal blood sample was excluded using the ABI AMPFLSTR Identifiler PCR Amplification Kit. A heterozygous variant in the ALAS2 (NM_000032.4) gene was identified in both the mother and the fetus. The c.488G > A; p.(Arg163His) variant identified affects a conserved amino acid and is absent from the gnomAD controls database . The variant was therefore classified as pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) variant interpretation guidelines . The findings for both the mother and the fetus were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. These results were available two days following delivery and verified a heterozygous ALAS2 c.488G > A; p.(Arg163His) and SLC4A1 c.876 + 5G > A mutations in both the baby and the mother . X-inactivation studies [, ] were undertaken. There was no significantly skewed X-inactivation in the sample provided from the baby. The level of X-inactivation in the mother could not be determined, as she was uninformative for the AR locus .