A 66-year-old female presented to the emergency department due to frequent generalized seizures occurring within a week and persistent drowsiness.
In November 2023, the patient developed dizziness, headache, walking instability, tinnitus, and hearing loss. A head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated meningeal thickening and occupation of the cerebellum and occipital bone. The patient underwent lumbar puncture, which revealed an increase in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure of > 400 mm H2O, indicating a rapid disease progression, seizures developed more gradually.
In November 2022, the patient underwent gastroscopy with no abnormality. In May 2023, the patient was treated at another hospital for lumbar pain, and lumbar MRI was performed. Abnormal vertebral signals were considered for tumor metastasis. After further examination by positron emission tomography/computed tomography and gastroscopy, the patient was diagnosed with advanced GaC with multiple metastases to the abdominal lymph nodes and lumbar vertebrae. In June 2023, the patient was treated with the regimen of Candonilimab + oxaliplatin and capecitabine (CAPEOX). After two courses of treatment, the patient showed elevated troponin and aminotransferase levels. Considering the adverse immune reactions, the above drugs were discontinued and gamma globulin and methylprednisolone were administered to suppress the immune system. In September 2023, the patient was administered another two courses of CAPEOX chemotherapy because of disease progression.
The patient denied any family history of tumors or other notable medical history.
The patient’s vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 38 °C; blood pressure, 170/94 mmHg; heart rate, 95 beats/min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min. When receiving treatment, the patient was in a shallow coma, with left conjunctival congestion, and she demonstrated signs of mydriasis.
Laboratory investigations revealed normocytic anemia (hemoglobin, 66 g/L), elevated leukocyte (14 × 109/L), and elevated C-reactive protein (28.48 mg/L). Tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (56.2 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 199 (139.4 U/mL), were above the reference range. Genetic testing of CSF and peripheral blood revealed an increased MET copy number and genetic mutations at the TP53p.R213 Locus.
Gastric mucosal pathology: Less differentiated adenocarcinoma, differentiated grades II–III, and mixed type Lauren classification.
The immunohistochemical results of the Gastric mucosal are as follows: Claudin18.2 (40% +); Her-2 (0); Met (90%); MLH (+); MSH2 (+); MSH6 (+); programmed death 1 (tumor-, interstitial 5% +); programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) (tumor-, interstitial 5% +); PMS (+); TROP2 (100% +++); Ki67 (90% +); EBER (-).
MRI revealed thickening of the meninges and abnormal diffuse signals in the skull. A mass on the right cerebellar showed mixed-signal intensity. In December 2023 there was a decrease in the lesions, but the top right nodules increased .