shows the overall course summary. A 62-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for refractory MAC-PD diagnosed 3 years before the referral, which had been treated with several antibiotics (details unknown) for a few months. However, she complained of hemosputum. She had no other pulmonary diseases and had never smoked cigarettes. Chest radiography showed some cavitary lesions in the right lung field and consolidation in both lower lung fields . Chest computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed multiple cavitary lesions in the bilateral lower lobes and consolidation in the lingula with bronchiectasis (–). The laboratory examination revealed elevated serum Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) levels of 608 U/mL (reference range, <500 U/mL), which is useful to monitor disease activity in MAC-PD and interstitial lung disease., Her sputum culture grew M. avium with resistance to clarithromycin twice immediately after the referral.
We administered antibiotic therapy with clarithromycin (800 mg/day), ethambutol (750 mg/day), and rifampicin (600 mg/day). After 8 months of this therapy, her hemosputum improved, but liver function impairment gradually developed, which might have been caused by the antibiotics. The three-drug therapy was interrupted. However, consolidation with bronchiectasis in the bilateral lower lung fields had worsened approximately 1 year after the interruption of antibiotics. We resumed clarithromycin and ethambutol, followed by intravenous amikacin (600 mg, three times weekly).
Four months after the treatment, she developed secondary pyothorax due to M. avium , which was successfully treated with drainage for several weeks. After the treatment, she was treated with multiple antibiotic therapies, including clarithromycin, ethambutol, inhaling amikacin (600 mg/day), or sitafloxacin (200 mg/day). These antibiotics maintained an improvement in her symptoms, including hemosputum and cough.
Six years after the referral, the patient began to feel arthralgia in her fingers that gradually worsened. At that time, she had multiple swollen finger joints, and her blood test showed a high titer of rheumatoid factor (RF) (437 IU/mL) and anticitrullinated peptide antibody (ACPA) (442.0 U/mL). Ultrasound examination indicated multiple and bisymmetrical synovitis of her joints with a clinical disease activity index (CDAI) as high as 21.3, suggesting RA. Prior to the RA diagnosis, RF had been measured and was increasing: 59 IU/mL two years ago, 248 IU/mL a year and a half ago, and 311 IU/mL a year ago. At the diagnosis of RA, chest radiography showed worsening bilateral consolidation in both lower lung fields , and her chest CT images still showed several cavitary lesions and bronchiectasis (–). She was administered methotrexate (8 mg/week) and prednisolone (5 mg/day). After several months of using these drugs, drug-induced pneumonitis developed, which might have been caused by methotrexate. We changed methotrexate to iguratimod (25 mg/day) and temporarily added a high prednisolone dose (maximum 40 mg/day, gradually decreased to 10 mg/day as the maintenance dose). For a while, iguratimod with prednisolone therapy was effective for RA, with low CDAI.
Regarding the therapy for macrolide-resistant M. avium, combination therapy that included sitafloxacin, inhaled amikacin, and ethambutol improved lung lesions and sputum culture conversion. The regimen was changed to clarithromycin and ethambutol therapy for macrolide-susceptible M. avium, followed by erythromycin (200 mg/day), owing to fasciculitis optica and a stable disease state. One year later, joint pain in her fingers deteriorated with an elevated C-reactive protein level and active synovitis, as revealed by ultrasound, with CDAI reaching 9.8.
The patient began using abatacept (500 mg every 4 weeks) for RA because her pulmonary symptoms and lesions had not changed, despite the presence of cavitary lesions ( and –). Most of the sputum smear test results had been negative for approximately 3 years, and the bacterial burden in sputum was apparently lower than before . Clarithromycin (800 mg/day) and ethambutol (250 mg/day) were administered simultaneously. Several cavitary lesions and consolidation in the bilateral lung lobes had worsened mildly ( and –), although her pulmonary symptoms were stable, with low CDAI, and the sputum smear results remained negative.