A 73-year-old right hand dominant male presented to the clinic complaining of persistent pain on the ulnar aspect of his left hand. His symptoms began 3 months prior, after falling onto the ulnar aspect of his hand. The patient had been evaluated at the time of injury in the emergency department and subsequently at an urgent care facility where the correct diagnosis remained unidentified despite obtaining the radiographic images shown in (, ).
3 months after his initial injury, the patient presented to the senior author’s office with the primary complaint of persistent pain at the base of his fifth metacarpal. He also noted that his small finger would get caught outside his pocket when retrieving an item. On physical examination of the left hand, a slight small finger abduction deformity was noted throughout digital range of motion. There was tenderness to palpation over the base of the metacarpal and no signs of neurological or vascular impairment. Posteroanterior (PA), lateral, and oblique radiographs reviewed from the time of injury and those taken at the time of presentation demonstrated a dislocation of the fifth metacarpal base in a volar and ulnar direction.
The decision was made with the patient to proceed with operative reduction and fixation of his chronic injury. A longitudinal incision was made along the dorsal aspect of the fifth metacarpal. The extensor tendons were protected and retracted. Surrounding intrinsic musculature and fibrous tissue were released from the metacarpal allowing visualization of the CMC joint. Successful reduction was accomplished with axial traction and manual pressure applied in a palmar to dorsal direction at the base of the metacarpal. An appropriate reduction was fluoroscopically confirmed at the metacarpal base, and the abduction deformity was reduced. The fifth metacarpal was then stabilized with parallel Kirschner wires to the fourth metacarpal distally and proximally. The reduction was confirmed and supported with an additional Kirschner wire driven retrograde through the CMC joint into the hamate .
The patient was immobilized in an ulnar gutter splint and pins were maintained for 6 weeks. He was given a home exercise program to begin following pin removal. The patient was followed postoperatively at 6 weeks, 10 weeks, and 6 months. Clinical improvement was assessed by measuring QuickDASH scores and grip strengths measured with a Jamar grip dynamometer, as shown in . The patient’s QuickDASH score was 6.8 at his 10-week follow-up and 4.5 at his 6-month follow-up. At 6 months, the patient’s grip strength had returned to normal. He was pain free, achieved full range of motion in his fingers and wrist, and the reduction was well maintained. The patient was very satisfied with his treatment and post-operative outcome. Radiographs and clinical photographs were taken at the patient’s 6-month post-operative follow-up, as shown in (, ), respectively.