A 44-year-old man with chronic renal failure was admitted to our hospital because of the marked progression of anemia. He had been on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis since 2 years ago for the treatment of end-stage renal failure due to chronic pyelonephritis. He had also been subcutaneously administered C.E.R.A. as a sole ESA once a month at the hospital since 4 years ago for the treatment of renal anemia. At the hospital, C.E.R.A. had been kept refrigerated until it was administered. He was also being subcutaneously administered C.E.R.A. at a dose of 50 μg per month, which controlled his hemoglobin level at 12 g/dl. From 10 months before diagnosis, however, his hemoglobin level suddenly began to decline, reaching as low as 6 g/dl. Increasing the C.E.R.A. dose did not slow the progression of anemia, and frequent transfusions were required . On admission, his body temperature was 36.8 °C and blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg. His palpebral conjunctiva was serious anemic and bilateral lower leg edema was not observed. He did not present with a symptom of throat infection, and did not have a past infection before admission. Laboratory results were as follows: red blood cell count, 2.29 × 106 /μl; hemoglobin, 7.1 g/dl; hematocrit, 20.7%; mean corpuscular volume, 90.4 fl; reticulocyte count, 3.2 × 109 /l; white blood cell count, 4830 /μl with normal differentials; platelet count, 1.2 × 105 /μl; lactate dehydrogenase, 197 IU/l; total bilirubin, 0.34 mg/dl, which showed a normocytic anemia accompanied with reticulocytopenia and no evidence of active hemolysis. Anti-nuclear antibodies and anti-DNA antibodies were negative. The patient was also negative for IgM antibodies to parvovirus B19. Computed tomography of the chest did not reveal thymoma. Further examination, including of the upper gastrointerstinal tract and a fecal occult blood test, could not detect an apparent bleeding source. The dialysis was adequate and he did not have a significant mineral bone disorder. The ferritin level was more than 500 ng/l, with transferrin saturation at 91.8% thanks to the frequent transfusions, and the folate level was normal. At the peak of the condition, the patient needed packed red blood cell transfusions almost every 2 weeks .
Bone marrow examination confirmed severe erythroid hypoplasia with entirely normal white cell and platelet precursors. Antibody-mediated PRCA was therefore suspected. The level of anti-C.E.R.A antibodies was assessed by Chugai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. Kamakura Research Laboratories using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, which used the patient’s own serum as the primary antibody . The results showed positivity for both anti-epoetin-beta and anti-C.E.R.A antibodies (anti-epoetin-beta: 1.1205 titer (normal range < 0.3973), anti-C.E.R.A.: 0.0275 titer (normal range < 0.0123)) . Based on those findings, the patient was diagnosed with antibody-mediated PRCA associated with C.E.R.A.
The patient’s clinical course is depicted in Fig. . Administration of ESA was stopped. The option of renal transplantation was explored, but unfortunately no suitable kidney donor was found. Therefore, oral administration of prednisolone and cyclosporine was commenced, resulting in a gradual increase in his reticulocyte count and a decreased in the frequency of the red blood transfusions. By the 20th week of therapy, both anti-epoetin-beta and anti-C.E.R.A. antibodies were undetectable, which was also confirmed on the 32nd week . At that time, we commenced intravenous C.E.R.A. 50 μg monthly. He tolerated the C.E.R.A. injection well, with no allergic reaction. The patient’s hemoglobin level increased, enabling red blood transfusions to be stopped. Since then, his hemoglobin level has been stable at 12 mg/dl , and 20 weeks after re-introduction of C.E.R.A., the patient remains negative for both anti-epoetin-beta and anti-C.E.R.A. antibodies .