A 67-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension disease, chronic hepatitis and poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma was referred to our hospital for investigation of decreased appetite and pruritus with no relevant findings in the abdominal examination for the previous 6 months.
Gastroscopy performed 3 years ago revealed an obvious gastric mass around the gastric antrum which proved to be poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma by cytologic evaluation. The chest CT at the same time showed obvious enlargement of supraclavicular lymph nodes. Afterwards, the patient received 6-course chemotherapy of SOX (S-1 and oxaliplatin) regimen. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography on admission this time revealed the previously enlarged cervical lymph nodes significantly shrank and gastroscopy on admission also revealed the previous obvious gastric mass at the gastric antrum had shrank into an ulcer scar at the lesser curvature. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed previous multiple lymph nodes with increased metabolism at the lesser curvature of stomach, para- abdominal aorta and bilateral supraclavicular fossa were no longer obvious on admission . All of these evidences demonstrated that the patient’s gastric adenocarcinoma achieved complete response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography performed 6 months ago suggested dilatation of intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts and the pancreatic duct and the presence of suspicious nodules at the duodenal papilla . Afterwards, she presented with yellow sclera and skin, choluria and clay colored stool that persisted for 3 months. Laboratory examinations revealed 64.6 μmol/L total bilirubin (normal, 5.1–22.2 μmol/L), 50.0 μmol/L direct bilirubin (normal, 0–6.8 μmol/L), elevated transaminase levels, including 38U/L alanine aminotransferase (normal, 7–40 U/L), 80U/L aspartate aminotransferase (normal, 13–35 U/L) and cholestasis parameters, including 1411U/L γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (normal, 7–45 U/L), 314U/L alkaline phosphatase (normal 50–135 U/L). Tumor markers carbohydrate antigen 19–9 was 58.1U/ml (normal, 0–34 U/ml)while levels of other tumor markers were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed the common bile duct and main pancreatic duct were suddenly narrowed in the duodenal ampulla and the upstream bile duct was obviously dilated suggesting the presence of an ampullary tumor . Neither Lymph node enlargement nor distant metastasis were found. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed a bulging protrusion at the ampulla of Vater which was diagnosed on biopsy to be poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . Implantation of bile duct and pancreatic duct plastic stent was performed during ERCP. PET/CT showed an increased metabolic focus of 1.0 × 0.8 cm and SUVmax 4.0 at the duodenal papilla area considered to be malignant lesions, the properties of which still needs to be determined . The patient has lost 8 kg for the last 3 months.
Levels of serum chemistry data and tumor markers on admission this time were within normal limits. Subsequently, laparoscopic radical gastrectomy and pancreaticoduodenectomy with regional lymph node dissection was performed. The gastric tumor was observed to be at the lesser curvature around the gastric antrum and was marked under the electronic gastroscopy during the operation. Pathological analyses documented the presence of adenosquamous carcinoma (ASC) at the ampulla of Vater with invasion into the duodenal muscular layer and gastric ulcer which is consistent with complete response to chemotherapy. No regional lymph node metastases or perineural infiltrations were observed. Immunohistochemistry examinations of the adenocarcinoma marker cytokeratin (CK)-7 showed positive expression in the adenocarcinoma component and the squamous marker P63 was detected in the squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) component . Postoperative outcome was uneventful. The patient was discharged two weeks after surgery and experiences no tumor recurrence or metastasis after a 6-month follow-up period.