A 29-year-old man was admitted with frequent premature ventricular contractions. Medical treatment with amiodarone, propafenone and beta-blocker was unsuccessful. He had no other current health problems or history of previous cardiovascular or other major diseases.
A total number of 27,530 PVCs per day were observed on the 24-hour ambulatory Holter monitoring. At baseline, monomorphic PVCs were frequent and exhibited a left bundle branch block and left superior axis QRS morphology; upright R-waves in leads I, aVL; a rs pattern in lead II; a QS pattern in leads III, aVF, aVR and V1; and R-wave transition in the precordial lead V4 .
Written informed consent was obtained, and the electrophysiologic study (EPS) was performed after all antiarrhythmic drugs were discontinued at least five half-lives before ablation. Under local anesthesia, a decapolar catheter was inserted into the coronary sinus (CS) from the left subclavian vein, and a quadripolar catheter was introduced from the right femoral vein and placed in the right ventricular apex (RVA). A long sheath (8-French, SR0) was used as needed for stabilizing via the right femoral vein, and a 3.5 mm, quadripolar cool saline irrigated catheter was used for mapping and ablation via the long sheath. The ablation procedure was guided by CARTO system. During activation mapping, the earliest activation was identified at the lateral subtricuspid annulus, preceding the QRS onset by 28 ms. The QRS morphology during pacing was similar to the spontaneous PVCs . Several radiofrequency applications (35 W, 43 C, 17 mL/min, 60 seconds) at the earliest activation site could abolish PVCs, but the PVCs had an immediate reoccurrence. Despite further applications around this site, the PVCs were still present. Despite the absence of ECG pattern evoking an epicardial origin, we decided to perform further ablation procedure using epicardial mapping through pericardial access. By percutaneous subxyphoid puncture, RF catheters could have been placed in the pericardial space for epicardial mapping. However, the earliest ventricular activation of epicardial mapping preceded the QRS onset was not earlier when compared to the endocardial mapping, and pace mapping could not provide an identical match with the PVCs morphology . Epicardial ablation was abandoned. Finally, we believed that it was because of difficulty in obtaining a stable contact of the ablation catheter. Ablation catheter was then reintroduced via the right subclavian vein; another long sheath (8-French, SR0) was used for stabilizing the ablation catheter to improve contact. During PVCs, the earliest activation was found close to the previous endocardial mapping site, preceding the onset of the QRS complex by 24 ms and pace mapping provided an identical match with the spontaneous PVCs . A single radiofrequency application with a target temperature of 43°C and maximum power output of 35 W was delivered , which resulted in the successful abolition of the PVCs. Thereafter, no VAs could be induced despite a programmed electrical stimulation as well as an isoproterenol infusion . During more than 1 year of follow-up, the patient remained free of VAs without any antiarrhythmic drugs. No complications occurred during the ablation procedure or during a follow-up period.