A 32-year-old woman, with chronic kidney disease (CKD) secondary to chronic glomerulonephritis, received a living donor kidney transplantation four years ago, with normal allograft function. The immunosuppressive therapy was tacrolimus 0.1 mg/kg bid, dose adjusted according to blood levels, azathioprine 2.0 mg/kg, and prednisone 5 mg/day. She had an obstetric history of one previous pregnancy before transplantation without complications, and currently not using any contraceptive method.
She presented at ten weeks amenorrhea, with pregnancy confirmed by serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) test. There was no assisted fertilization treatment or hormonal use. Ultrasound showed a dichorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy with gestational age coincident to amenorrhea. Prenatal screening of infectious diseases and metabolic disorders at 12 weeks of gestational age showed no abnormalities. Renal function was normal (serum creatinine 0.78 mg/dL and urea level 27 mg/dL), without proteinuria in a 24-hour urine test (0.15 g). The patient presented normal parameters of blood test (hemoglobin of 12 g/dL, hematocrit 34.7%, platelets 212,000/mm3), normal aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels (10 U/L and 13 U/L, respectively), normal serum bilirubin (1.0 mg/dL) and normal lactate dehydrogenase level (148 U/L). The patient had previous systemic arterial hypertension (SAH), but she presented normal blood pressure measurements before pregnancy in the sitting position after a five-minute rest and without antihypertensive drugs. In her first antenatal visit, she presented normal blood pressure measurement (120x80 mmHg) in the left lateral decubitus position after a five-minute rest, without any antihypertensive drugs. Because of her previous SAH, she received preeclampsia prophylaxis with a low dose of acetylsalicylic acid (100 mg) and calcium (1.5 g). The first-trimester ultrasound screening at 12 weeks was normal. The blood pressure remained stable without antihypertensive therapy. There was no change in the doses of immunosuppressive drugs, and the tacrolimus blood level remained between 3-6 ng/dL throughout the follow-up. The patient presented a reduction in the hemoglobin and hematocrit, reaching 9.6 g/dL and 29.4%, respectively, while the other laboratory parameters remained in the normal range, without the onset of proteinuria. She received iron supplementation with ferrous sulfate throughout the pregnancy.
Around 20 weeks of gestational age, an ultrasound showed multiple malformations in one of the fetuses. Such fetus had an estimated weight of 338 g, scalloping of the frontal bone (“lemon” sign), caudal displacement of the cerebellar vermis with obliteration of the cisterna magna (“banana” sign), mild ventriculomegaly, clubfeet and bifid spine with lumbosacral myelomeningocele, compatible with Chiari type II diagnosis. The other fetus had an estimated weight of 367 g without detectable abnormalities. At 28 weeks of gestational age, renal function remained stable (serum creatinine 0.79 mg/dL and urea 18mg/dL), with normal urinalysis and hematimetric parameters and negative gestational diabetes screening.
Assessment of fetal vitality at 33 weeks of pregnancy showed a non-reassuring pattern in cardiotocography test when she was referred for hospital admission. Ultrasound revealed adequate blood flow in umbilical arteries, and preeclampsia screening was negative, with mild impairment of renal function (serum creatinine 0.92 mg/dL and urea to 26 mg/dL). On the third day of hospitalization, the patient presented premature rupture of membranes, with spontaneous onset of labor within a few hours. A cesarean section was performed due to breech presentation of the first fetus. The first newborn’s weight was 2180g with an Apgar score of 9/10 at 1 and 5 minutes after childbirth, and the second newborn had the same weight and 10/10 Apgar score.
Four days after the cesarean section, a subcutaneous hematoma was diagnosed with spontaneous regression without surgical intervention. In late puerperium, the renal function returned to pre-conception values, without proteinuria. Screening for anti-human leukocyte antigens (HLA) antibodies was negative, and allograft biopsy performed in the first year post pregnancy revealed no rejection. Both children are alive and with normal growth. The child who presented malformations underwent orthopedic surgery, and remains in follow-up, with good clinical evolution and normal physical and cognitive development.