A 56 years old female, chain-smoker, admitted to the Department on February 15, 2012 for a giant tumor in the perianal area, covering the whole perianal and gluteal regions, complicated with persistent bleeding and discharging. Blood loss caused severe anemia, which required multiple transfusions of haematogenous/blood replacement products.
The tumor had been growing in the patient for almost 20 years. Due to feelings of shame with her condition she did not seek any medical advice until the overgrown tumor has started to give her problems with acquiring a sitting position. Disintegrating tumor tissue was producing a discharge and an unpleasant odor, easily smelled by the patient and people around her. The tumor also caused problems with defecation, constipation and incontinence of gases and stool, which lead to decreased food intake and progressing loss of body mass.
At the date of admission a giant cauliflower like tumor was reported in the perianal area. The tumor was 18 cm x 20 cm in diameters, and was closing the anus almost completely. It was invading the lower anal canal, skin in the crotch area and at the buttocks. The tumor was bleeding and was covered with disintegrating tissue with areas of localized necrosis . Viral serology revealed the patient to be HPV-16 and HPV-18 negative. Her HIV status was negative. Laboratory tests showed anemia and also confirmed a high level of malnutrition. Pathologic tests of the multiple biopsies of the tumor showed condyloma acuminatum. Imaging tests (abdominal USG, abdominal and pelvic MRI, X-ray of the chest) excluded distant metastases, as the tumor was suspected to be malignant, and proved that the mass did not invade anal sphincters but was compromised to anal mucosa. On February 22nd, 2012 a full tumor resection was performed together with the removal of subcutaneous tissue with the anoderm of the whole anal canal circuit. The weight of the tumor immediately after removal was 1.650 kg. The tissue loss was covered with two rotational skin and fatty subcutaneous tissue flaps in butterfly wing shapes, which were grafted from neighboring areas of buttocks and thighs. The whole circuit of the lower anal canal was covered with skin taken from those lobes and an anastomosis with the anal mucosa was performed. To align the length of the wound edges and to reduce the tension after moving the lobes, Burow’s triangles were cut at the base of the lobes. Two Redon’s drains were left in the wound and no protective stoma was formed. Postoperative recovery was complicated with temporary ischemia of the edge of one of the grafted lobes. After implanting secondary stitches, full coverage of the wound was achieved . In the pre- and postoperative periods, a full, complete parenteral nutrition was applied, this also helped to delay the first postoperative defecation. Patient was discharged home on day 32, before the wound was fully healed. The 2 and 6 months follow-up examinations showed full wound healing and a normal activity of the anus. The stenosis of the anus along the stitch lines were expanded using the dilatator . After surgery the patient’s subjective quality of life improved a lot, mainly due to the full, radical tumor removal with its odor, restored ability to function normally including sitting and regular defecation, restored ability to function among people, and because no stoma had to be performed. Postoperative pathologic tests showed huge genital warts with characteristic of a Buschke-Loewenstein tumor. In the 12 months follow-up examination a 2.5 over 2.7 cm recurrent tumor was found in the anal canal, and it was removed without compromising the function of the anus. The 18, 24 and 30 months follow-up examinations didn’t reveal any local recurrence signs nor any other pathologies.