A 39-year-old woman visited at a provincial oncology center with a complaint of vaginal discharge and chronic pelvic pain for 4 months. The patient got married and was nulliparous. She had a history of intestinal multiple polyp resection by endoscopy 7 years ago, with no history of smoking, drug or alcohol use. Her father and her brother had been diagnosed with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and died of colon cancer at the age of 64 and 45, respectively. Her older brother and his two children had experienced laparoscopic surgery for strangulated intussusception of the colon. She meets the diagnostic criteria for Peutz-Jeghers syndrome proposed by WHO criteria for diagnosis with gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps , characteristic, prominent, mucocutaneous pigmentation and family history of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. The patient did not have screening PAP smear before.
Gynecological examination revealed bloody vaginal discharge, a mass 3 × 4 cm in diameter was found on the cervix, not invading vagina and parametrium and no evidence of metastatic lymphadenopathy involvement. Initial biopsy was negative and colposcopy-guided cervical biopsy of the red ulcerated lesion was performed, and atypical glandular cells (AGC), endocervical type was recorded on histopathological examination.
Sonographic findings included a slightly enlarged uterus with a fluid filled uterine corpus (about 51–70mm). Endometrial biopsy was performed, which yielded endometrial hyperplasia. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a prominent uterine cervix with a diameter of 4 × 2.3 × 3.5cm . Some pelvic lymph nodes about 8 × 9mm in size were found. The mass was confined to the cervix and did not invade the parametrium. No evidence of distant metastasis was identified. Laboratory data showed no blood, urine changes and serum tumor markers were within their normal ranges.
The patient was then diagnosed with clinical stage IB3 cervical cancer in accordance with the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics 2018 staging system. Specific findings were 1) a tumor size of 4 cm in the greatest dimension, 2) depth of invasion of 3.5 cm, 3) no lymphovascular invasion, 4) no involvement of parametrium and 5) extension to the endometrium. Eventually, the patient underwent radical transabdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy by a senior surgeon specialized in gynecological cancer surgery without delay. The final histopathological analysis of the specimen from radical surgery confirmed gastric type mucinous adenocarcinoma of the cervix . Pathological stage IIIC was diagnosed with tumor dimension 5cm, myometrial invasion and metastasis to pelvic lymph nodes (2/7 positive nodes). The patient then had adjuvant chemoradiation therapy. After one year of follow up, the patient was stable and no recurrences were detected.