A 64-year-old woman presented to our hospital with the chief complaint of a progressively enlarged mass in the left abdomen accompanied with flank pain, fatigue and weight loss for the last few months. Physical examination revealed a well-defined mass on the left abdomen. Routine blood tests showed that hemoglobin was 111 g/L (normal range was 115 g/L to 150 g/L) and hematocrit was 34% (ranging 35 to 45%), indicating anemia. The remaining blood tests were normal. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) confirmed presence of a tumor measuring 18 cm × 11 cm on the left posterior perinephric capsule , with enhanced density after administration of contrast medium .
The mass was excised and a pathologic consultation was requested. On macroscopic examination, the specimen was composed of a giant nodular mass measuring 18 cm × 11 cm × 9 cm with a little attached portion of normal renal cortex. The outer surface of the mass was smooth and brownish in color. Sectioning revealed patchy areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. Microscopic examination was performed on paraffin-embedded sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Histopathological examination revealed that two components interspersed with each other within this tumor and there were transitional zones between the two . One component comprised of atypical cells arranged in multiple architectures. Some well-differentiated fields were composed of irregular interanastomosing vascular spaces or channels lined with discrete and large endothelial cells with variable degrees of cytological pleomorphism, nuclear atypia and multilayering . Many of these structures contained red blood cells, indicating a vascular lesion. Some poorly-differentiated fields were composed predominantly of atypical epithelioid cells arranged in solid areas . The epithelioid cells had irregular round or oval nuclei with prominent nucleoli, abundant cytoplasm and a high degree of nuclear atypia. Tumorous necrosis was obvious , and up to five mitotic figures per high-power field were observed . The other component (including the areas adjacent to the renal cortex) was primarily composed of adipose tissue, smooth muscle cells and abnormal thick-walled blood vessels , indicating the feature of AML. But in multifocal areas of AML, atypical cells with the morphological and structural characteristics resembling those of the first component were observed .
An immunohistochemical study was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue block to define the histogenesis of the lesion. Several pre-diluted antibodies against ERG, CD31, CD34, Ki-67, S-100, HMB45, Melan A, SMA, Actin, Vimentin, CD10, EMA, PAX-8, RCC and pan-cytokeratin were used. The results showed that the atypical cells in the areas of the first component were reactive strongly and diffusely to ERG , CD31 , CD34 , and Vimentin, but negative to HMB45 , Melan-A , SMA, Actin and S-100. In addition, the cells were also negative to pan-cytokeratin, PAX-8, RCC, EMA and CD10. The cell proliferation marker Ki-67 (MIB-1) was positive in about 50% of the atypical cells . To sum up, the immunohistochemical results supported the diagnosis of angiosarcoma. On the contrary, the cells in the areas of AML were reactive strongly and diffusely to Melan-A and SMA , focally to HMB45 and Actin, confirming the diagnosis of AML. However, the atypical cells in the AML background were positive to ERG , CD31 , CD34 , but negative to HMB45 , Melan-A and SMA . On the basis of clinical, histologic and immunohistochemical findings, a final diagnosis of renal angiosarcoma concomitant with an AML was made.
Three months after the surgery, the patient presented again with progressive abdominal distention for about one week. CT examination showed diffuse thickening and nodular deposits of omentum in the left lower abdomen and a lot of abdominal and pelvic effusion. Combined with the history and imaging examinations, extensive abdominal metastasis was highly suspicious. The patient received intraperitoneal cisplatin perfusion and symptomatic treatments such as paracentesis and analgesia. However, one month later, she died.