A 50-year-old woman presented with a 2-day history of visual disturbance that was later identified as left-sided hemianopsia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple acute CIs in almost all lobes . The patient had a medical history of mild hypertension and adenomyosis with relatively severe symptoms that had not yet been officially diagnosed. An electrocardiogram showed no abnormal findings, such as arrhythmia or ST-wave changes. The results of common laboratory tests were as follows: Hb 9.2 g/dL and D-dimer 6.4 μg/mL. The patient’s recent menstruation was initiated 2 days before the onset of visual disturbance and appeared heavier than ever before. Considering the distribution of acute CIs, elevated D-dimer levels, and gynecological medical history, TS was initially suspected. As a primary treatment, the patient was administered a 10,000 U/day dose of heparin to prevent recurrence of ischemia. In addition to routine screening tests, such as carotid sonography and echocardiography which turned out to be within normal later, malignancy confirmation checks, such as abdominal computed tomography (CT) or tumor markers, were performed; the analyses suggested cancer antigen (CA) 125 level to be 999 U/mL (normal value <35 U/mL) and CA 19-9 level to be 112 U/mL (normal value <37 U/mL). The values of protein C/S, anti-thrombin III, and homocysteine were within the normal range. Pelvic CT showed massively expanded uterus and adnexa that were considered as malignant lesions, such as ovarian cancer. However, detailed radiological interpretation revealed no expanded lymph nodes, and thus, adenomyosis was the first differential diagnosis. We mistakenly excluded the relationship between adenomyosis and stroke. First, conservative therapy (GnRH agonist therapy) was administered for adenomyosis and direct oral anticoagulant (Xa inhibitor; apixaban 5.0 mg 2T2×) was prescribed for preventing ischemia. One day after discharge (on the 7th day after the first admission), the patient experienced recurrent acute CIs presenting with moderate dysarthria without any limb weakness. MRI showed several tiny acute CIs in the bilateral cerebellum . A review of the literature on the relationship between acute CI and adenomyosis indicated simple hysterectomy to be a possible radical treatment for recurrent acute CI. The surgery was performed on the 14th day after the initial symptoms that revealed no histopathological malignancy in the uterine specimens. One month after the operation and after discontinuing Xa inhibitor, D-dimer, the CA 125 and CA 19-9 levels were within normal ranges. The patient had not experienced any CI relapse for 18 months.