A 36-year-old woman, whose first child was a 6-year-old boy, was pregnant again. At 37 weeks of gestation, she accidentally fell while walking from a standing height and suffered minor trauma to her right wrist, and then came to our emergency department complaining of right wrist pain. During the first pregnancy and 12 months of lactation, she had no discomfort or pain in her hips and low back. The patient had no history of anorexia nervosa, diabetes mellitus, thyroid and parathyroid diseases, rheumatoid arthritis, kidney diseases, or other chronic diseases. She had no medical history of consuming alcohol, smoking, or using drugs. She had no family history of osteoporosis or pathological fracture. She discontinued taking calcium and vitamin during pregnancy. She was 163 cm in height and weighed 62 kg (body mass index 23.3 kg/m2). Swelling and deformity of the right wrist were found and the range of motion was restricted. Physical examination showed no obvious abnormality, except for lumbar tenderness. For the safety of the fetus, the patient underwent an emergency MRI examination immediately, which showed Barton fracture in the right wrist . Although the indications for fracture surgery were clear, temporarily closed reduction and plaster external fixation were performed, due to the considering that the patient was about to give birth. At 38 weeks of gestation, she gave birth to a healthy boy and began breastfeeding after delivery. Three days after delivery, the patient was admitted to the orthopedic ward for surgery. The patient underwent imaging examinations and laboratory tests . X-ray examination and CT scan showed the classification and characteristics of the fracture. Laboratory tests showed the levels of serum calcium (Ca), osteocalcin, albumin (ALB), hemoglobin (HGB) and 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 (25-(OH)Vit D3) were decreased, while alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels were elevated. In order to make a definite diagnosis, bone mineral density (BMD) was measured with dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA, HOLOGIC®Discovery-A), which showed the BMD of the lumbar (L1–L4) as 0.714g/cm2 (Z-score = −2.9) and total hip as 0.717 g/cm2 (Z-score = −1.7) . The patient was diagnosed as PLO. Considering pain in her low back and the fact that patients with PLO are often associated with vertebral fractures,,, MRI examination was performed and no fractures were found . The patient underwent open reduction and internal fixation and treated with weaning and supplementation of calcium carbonate (1200 mg/day) and vitamin D (1200 IU/day). The lifestyle of vigorous activities, high protein and high calcium diet, and more sunshine exposure was suggested. The fracture healed 3 months later and the wrist joint function recovered well. Wrist function was evaluated using wrist ranges of motion (ROMs), Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scores, and Gartland-Werley (G-W) scores. The ROMs of the wrist joint were as follows: flexion: 70º,extension: 60º,pronation: 85º,supination: 85º .The DASH scores were 1.67, and the G-W scores were 1. During the 1-year follow-up period, the results of laboratory tests and DEXA gradually returned to normal .