The eight-year-old female giant panda was born in a nature reserve in Shaanxi Province, China. According to keepers, the giant panda has been thin since birth, but no abnormalities were found during routine medical checks. At the beginning of May 2022, the giant panda was presented to Qinling Giant Panda Research Center (Xi’an city, China) for a history of acute onset of unilateral nostril bleeding. Approximately two weeks later, the animal began to develop lethargy, anorexia and bloody diarrhea. Serum chemistry revealed marked azotemia with elevations in both creatinine (23.53 mg/dL, reference range 0.87–1.92 mg/dL) and urea nitrogen (112.01 mg/dL, reference range 5.32–27.17 mg/dL), and marked elevations in liver enzymes including aspartate aminotransferase (AST,1078 U/L, reference range 53-140.5 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT, 442 U/L, reference range 54–98 U/L). There were electrolyte abnormalities of hypochloridemia, hyponatremia, and hypocalcemia with markedly decreased levels of chloridion (20.31 mEq/L, reference range 94.92-105.69 mEq/L), sodion (118.0 mEq/L, reference range 129–135 mEq/L) and calcium (4.49 mg/dL, reference range 8.28–9.28 mg/dL). Hematology examination revealed anemia and severe thrombocytopenia with low levels of red blood cell count (3.47 × 1012/L, reference range 5.66–7.31 × 1012/L), white blood cell count (4.2 × 109/L, reference range 9.0-15.2 × 109/L), hematocrit (19.30%, reference range 30.3–40.9%), hemoglobin (71 g/L, reference range 107–146 g/L), and marked decrease of platelet count (13 × 109/L, reference range 158–281 × 109/L).Urinary sediment revealed that the parameters of urinary protein and occult blood were both positive suggestive of proteinuria and hematuria. Five days prior to death, the giant panda were treated with interferon α, arrestin and nutrient solution. Antibiotics of Ceftiofur sodium and Omeprazole were administrated for one day. Despite of supportive therapies, the clinical condition of the giant panda quickly deteriorated and progressed to oronasal bleeding, vomiting, polyuria and dyspnea. The giant panda finally died on 11 June 2022.
At necropsy, subcutaneous edema was observed. Both kidneys were shrunken and scarred with pallor. In the heart, focal extensive petechiae was seen on the epicardium. The tissue speciments from the kidneys, heart, lungs, spleen, liver, and small intestine were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 5 μm for routine H.E staining and microscopic examination. Additionally, the kidney tissue samples were specially stained with H.E, PAS and Masson’s trichrome in 2 μm sections, and von Kossa and Congo red in 5 μm sections. The heart tissue samples were specially stained by von Kossa and PTAH staining.
Histopathologically, in both kidneys, there was marked interstitial fibrosis which separated and replaced approximately 50% of tubules and glomeruli. Glomeruli showed diffuse cystic changes with capillary tufts atrophy and Bowman’s capsules were moderately thickened.Tubules had moderately to severely thickened basement membranes. The tubular epithelium showed moderate to severe necrosis, desquamation, or atrophy. Within tubules, there were many proteinaceous fluid, occasional refractile basophilic crystals . Small numbers of lymphocytes infiltrated in the interstitium. Occasionally, there was mild deposition of amorphous material of the intima (hyaline degenaration) and calcification of media in the artery or arteriole . The Masson’s trichrome staining identified marked collagen deposition in the intima of renal artery (arteriolosclerosis) and in the glomeruli (glomerulosclerosis) . The PAS staining demonstrated that the tubules had markedly thickened and wrinkled tubular basement membranes (peritubular fibrosis) . The von Kossa staining demonstrated the calcium deposition in the renal tubules, which appeared basophilic crystals on H.E sections. Congo red staining for amyloid on renal tissue sections was negative.
In the heart, the myocardium had multifocal to coalescing areas of necrosis and hemorrhage . There was multiple coalescing foci of calcium deposition in the blood vessels and myocardium. Additionally, thrombi was noted in the lumen of large vessels . The necrotic myofibers manifested abrupt interruption and fragmentation of sarcoplasm, which had a much better visualization using the PTAH staining . Von Kossa staining demonstrated vascular and myocardial calcification .
In the small intestine (the segment is unkown), there was diffuse loss of the mucosal epithelial lining and moderate hemorrhage in the lamina propria. Vascular thrombosis was occasionally observed in the muscular layer. In the liver, there were multifocal foci of acute coagulative necrosis and extensive fatty degeneration particularly of centrilobular to midzonal hepatocytes. Hemosiderin in the Kupffer cells was frequently observed. In the spleen, white pulp was not prominent. Diffuse hemosiderin deposition was seen in the red purple. There were rare megakaryocytes scattered throughout the splenic parenchyma (extramedullary hematopoiesis).In the lung, multifocal anthracosis was observed around bronchioles and blood vessels.