A 59-year-old male with a history of hypertension, heavy smoking, acute coronary syndrome, and circumflex artery stenting 1 year previously underwent coronary angiography, due to angina. It was performed through transradial access using a JR 6Fr catheter. During the study, a distal fragment of the catheter ruptured and migrated, lodging inside a branch of the right middle cerebral artery [ and ]. The cardiovascular team asked us to consult. At the time of our evaluation, the patient had no neurological symptoms. He still had the same 6Fr sheath in his right arm that had been used for coronary angiography.
We decided to attempt retrieval of the catheter segment using the same radial approach as used for coronary angiography. With the patient under general anesthesia, the right carotid artery was catheterized with a Simmons II catheter (Merit Medical, South Jordan UT, USA), which was exchanged, using a 260 mm guide wire (Radifocus, Terumo, Somerset NJ, USA) in the external carotid, for a 6Fr guide catheter JR (Merit Medical, South Jordan UT, USA). We then catheterized the right internal carotid artery with a 6Fr guide catheter (Merit Medical, South Jordan UT, USA). Angiography revealed a radio-opaque fragment localized distal to the right medial cerebral artery bifurcation. With a 0.014 microwire (Hybrid 12–14, Balt, Montmorency, France), we navigated inside the catheter fragment, up to the M2-M3 segment. Then, we tried to pass it with a double-lumen 6 mm per 7 mm balloon (Eclipse, Balt, Montmorency, France), but it was impossible to pass distal to the catheter fragment with the balloon, and when we inflated it, the fragment was displaced distally [ and ].
We changed through a 300 mm 0.014 wire (FineCross, Terumo, Somerset NJ, USA), the remodeling balloon to a coronary angioplasty balloon of 1.25 mm per 20 mm (Ryujin, Terumo, Somerset NJ, USA), with which we were able to cross the catheter fragment. Then, we insufflated the balloon, half inside the fragment and half distal to it, and pulled the inflated balloon back. We retrieved the inflated balloon until it, and the catheter fragment reached the end of top of the guide catheter. Then, we retrieved the balloon, fragment, and guide catheter together, and all of them were extracted with the radial sheath .
After the procedure, the patient reported a headache, after which computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) . Control angiography was performed, documenting complete extraction of the fragment and no vascular complications . After 1 week, the patient was discharged, asymptomatic, having no neurological deficits, and with no residual evidence of a SAH on CT . The patient was reevaluated clinically 2 days and 4 weeks after discharge. During both visits, the patient had a normal neurological examination and no residual effects from the procedure.