A 65 year old Indian female, gravida 7, para 7, non smoker, non alcoholic, housewife weighing 60 kgs, height 5'6" presented to the gynecology outpatient with complaints of bleeding and pain abdomen for the past 6 months. No history of any drug intake or previous medical problems or family history of any disease was present. On vaginal examination uterus was enlarged to 8 weeks in size, retroverted with clear bilateral fornices. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a right ovarian solid mass. The left ovary was normal. Endometrial curettings revealed simple glandular hyperplasia without cytological atypia. A clinical diagnosis of dysfunctional uterine bleeding was made. A total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed.
Grossly we received a specimen of uterus with cervix along with bilateral adnexa. The right ovary measured 5 × 4 × 2 cm. It was globular, nodular and externally encapsulated with no capsular breech . Sectioning of the ovary revealed a predominantly firm grey white solid mass with focal yellowish firm 0.2 × 0.2 cm areas with compressed normal ovarian parenchyma at the periphery . Bilateral fallopian tubes and the left ovary were grossly unremarkable. Sectioning of uterus revealed an endometrial polyp measuring 2 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm. The myometrium on serial slicing showed a focus of hemorrhage and an intramural fibroid.
Histologically, the right ovarian tumor was highly cellular composed of uniform spindle cells arranged in sheets and intersecting fascicles . The cells had scant to moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm with elongated nuclei with tapered ends and 1–2 inconspicuous nucleoli. Mitotic figures ranged from 0 to 1 per 10 high powerfields. Dispersed among these cells were few scattered clusters of relatively uniform large cells with inconspicuous nucleoli, arranged in poorly defined nests and cords . These small aggregates were sharply demarcated from the surrounding stroma and formed less than 5% of the tumor area.
The spindled out cells stained blue with Masson Trichrome stain. Immunohistochemically, the spindled cells were diffusely positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and weakly expressed vimentin and inhibin. These spindled cells were negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and cytokeratin. The uniform large cells in nests and cords were strongly immunoreactive for inhibin and negative for vimentin, SMA and EMA. Based on these above findings a final diagnosis of fibroma with minor sex cord elements was made.