A 53-year-old woman was admitted to the Neurosurgery Department, referred by an ophthalmology physician, complaining of hemiheadache, progressive exophthalmos of the right eye for 2 years, and developed restricted eye movements in the lateral side, which led to diplopia during the past 2 months. She had no medical, surgical, allergic, drug, or familial history. The patient was aware and responsive and the physical examination was unremarkable. All the laboratory investigations were within normal. The head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a hyperdense lesion arising from the right greater wing of the sphenoid bone and compressed on the orbit’s components and eye muscles, which caused proptosis . The MRI revealed a lesion with a low signal on T2-weighted in the lateral wall of the orbit compressed the rectus lateralis muscle on the right eye, causing proptosis with light pressure on the anterior part of the right temporal lobe . These findings suggested osteoma even though it is not familiar in this location and classified meningioma as differential diagnoses. The surgical excision was indicated and written consent from the patient was taken. Medical consultations before surgery were taken. The tumor was removed by craniotomy under general anesthesia by a specialist in neurosurgery. Before the surgery, there was a differential diagnosis of calcified meningioma. But during the surgery, the tumor was a thickening of the sphenoid bone without any adhesion to the meninges, or invasion of neighboring muscles. The edges of the tumor were clearly defined and regular, without any signs of malignancy. The operation went according to plan except that we were forced to transfer blood to improve the hemoglobin after unexpected little bleeding. After surgery, the patient was given three letters of physiological serum, prophylaxis antibiotics, analgesics, and NSAIDs. The physical examination after 2 days of the surgery was normal, the eye’s movements returned normal, the exophthalmos significantly decreased, and the pupils were reflexive and symmetrical. The laboratory investigations were normal except for low hemoglobin (8 mg/dl); the patient was discharged. Histopathology examination was compatible with osteoma. The CT scan after 2 weeks revealed normal findings with no residues, and the proptosis significantly decreased . The patient was followed up for 6 months physically and radiologically without any signs of recurrence.