During the COVID-19 pandemic, a 36-year-old man with a history of schizophrenia fell from the 5th floor and was transferred to our emergency department. He had a fever and fatigue for 3 days before he fell and worked in a factory with three C’s (closed spaces, crowded places, and close-contact settings), but had not had any contact with any patient with COVID-19. The primary physical examination findings were: an intact airway, respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min, SpO2 of 92% (room air), no subcutaneous emphysema or frail chest, heart rate of 113 b.p.m., blood pressure of 104/66 mmHg, active bleeding from both lower limbs, Glasgow Coma Scale score of 14 (E4V4M6), pupils equal and reactive at 3 mm, no hemiplegia, and body temperature of 37.6°C. The laboratory findings showed an elevated D-dimer (36.0 μg/mL), a slightly elevated white blood cell count (109 × 100/μL), low lymphocyte count (13.7%), and normal C-reactive protein level (<0.02 mg/dL). Pan-scan CT showed multiple GGOs just below the peripheral pleura, without rib fractures and/or traumatic pulmonary pseudocysts . Computed tomography also revealed fractures of the pelvis, 11th thoracic vertebra, and right femur and calcaneus. We strongly suspected that the pulmonary findings were due to pulmonary contusions, but could not rule out COVID-19. Although his fever continued even after hospitalization, the results of real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for COVID-19 carried out on days 2 and 3 were negative . Moreover, CT carried out on day 5 showed less GGOs and localization of the pulmonary contusions compared with initial CT . Therefore, COVID-19 was ruled out. Until the repetitive RT-PCR tests were negative, strict and standardized processing procedures were implemented for the patient in the same way as for a patient with COVID-19. He subsequently received multiple orthopedic surgeries. Computed tomography carried out on day 14 revealed no GGOs, with further reductions in the other shadows produced by the pulmonary contusions.