A 29-year-old female presented to our emergency room with 6 h of left-sided weakness and right-sided facial deviation. Her history was significant for 2 years of chronic back pain in the interscapular region, occasional myalgia, and tingling sensations over the back. She had no history of fever, blurred vision, dizziness, headache, nausea, or vomiting. She has been on amlodipine 5 mg for hypertension for the last 2 years but has no history of diabetes. She does not consume alcohol or cigarettes. There was no family history of cerebrovascular accidents. On examination, she was pale, conscious, oriented, and following commands. Pulse and blood pressure were undetectable in the upper limbs with normal lower limb measurements. Neurological examination revealed left-sided hemiplegia more prominent on the upper limb with the power of ⅖ and ⅗ on the lower limb, hyperreflexia, and an extensor plantar reflex. Weakness of the facial muscles on the left side of the Upper Motor Neuron type was seen. A soft-pitched, early diastolic, decrescendo murmur was heard loudest at the left lower sternal border. A bruit was heard over the bilateral carotid arteries.
Laboratory investigations showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 50 mm/h. Creatinine was 2.9 mg/dl, and urea was 59 mg/dl, which reached baseline after 1 week. The ECG was normal. An emergency noncontrast head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed encephalomalacic changes in the right anterior frontal lobe region . On further inquiry, the patient’s family reported that the patient had a history of left-sided weakness, slurring of speech, and left facial weakness 1 month ago, for which she did not seek any medical help. The patient was managed conservatively due to late presentation beyond the window period for thrombolysis, and we started with the administration of aspirin 150 mg and atorvastatin 40 mg. Regarding the diagnosis of stroke in young patients, further investigations were carried out to identify the cause. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and T1/T2 weighted MRI of the brain and neck revealed encephalomalacic changes and gliosis in the right anterior frontal lobe with normal internal carotid artery (ICA), MCA, and anterior cerebral artery. Unfortunately, due to financial constraints, further investigations were delayed. CT angiography of the head and neck two months after initial presentation showed subacute right frontal lobe infarct with variable circumferential wall thickening of the arch of the aorta, right brachiocephalic trunk, bilateral subclavian artery, and bilateral common carotid, external carotid, and ICA. Changes were predominantly in the bilateral subclavian artery, proximal left common carotid artery (CCA), and right ICA till the proximal C2 segment, causing their complete nonopacification.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a bicuspid aortic valve, mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, moderate-severe AR (aortic regurgitation), and grade 1 left ventricular diastolic dysfunction with a preserved ejection fraction of 60%. Takayasu arteritis was diagnosed as per the Modified Ishikawa Criteria for Diagnosis of Takayasu Arteritis. The patient was prescribed aspirin, atorvastatin, metoprolol, amlodipine, tapering dose prednisolone, and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). The patient was invited to follow-up with us after 2 weeks, and multispecialty care was planned involving a team of rheumatology, neurology, and cardiology. Carotid Doppler done at 2-month follow-up revealed diffusely thickened walls of the bilateral CCA and brachiocephalic trunk with features suggestive of large-vessel vasculitis, severely narrowed lumen of the left CCA with resultant monophasic, very low resistance flow in the left ICA with near total loss of pulsatility in the left ICA, and very low resistance monophasic flow with loss of pulsatility in bilateral vertebral artery suggestive of high-grade proximal stenosis. Follow-up CT angiography of the head and neck in maximum intensity projection after 1 month revealed severe focal narrowing of the right ICA with more than 90% stenosis, marked wall thickening of the whole length of the left CCA with severe stenosis in the proximal portion, and complete occlusion of the mid-CCA along with reconstitution of the right distal CCA from collaterals. Occlusion of bilateral subclavian arteries along with normal bilateral vertebral arteries and left vertebral arteries supplying collaterals in the left subclavian region with the possibility of left subclavian steal syndrome was revealed . Disease activity was not controlled with conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs( DMARDs) (MMF) at the initial follow-up after 2 weeks. Due to financial constraints, neither biologic DMARDs nor surgery for carotid occlusion were started. Initial treatment was not able to control disease activity, and the patient also started feeling anxious and overwhelmed due to her paralysed status, but with familial support, regular physiotherapy, and monthly follow-up, she is currently stable on prednisolone and MMF.