A 72-year-old Caucasian man, with a past medical history of mild Parkinson's disease, hypertension, coronary artery disease and cardiac insufficiency, complained of four weeks of back pain. Physical examination and imaging with computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a recent osteoporotic compression fracture of L1 and an older, consolidated fracture of the L2 endplate. The patient underwent the initial operation at an outside institution; bilateral transpedicular L1 kyphoplasty was performed, using the Kyphon® (Sunnyvale, CA, USA) kyphoplasty system with polymethylmethacrylate cement. A single dose of antibiotic prophylaxis (cefazolin sodium USP, 2 g) was administered preoperatively. Intraoperatively, a bone cylinder biopsy was taken; histological examination showed no evidence of malignancy or infection. Plain radiographs demonstrated satisfactory placement of the cement in the vertebral body . He was discharged on the postoperative day six pain free and neurologically intact.
Six weeks after the initial operation, the patient complained of worsening thoracolumbar back pain (Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) 8) requiring hospitalization. On physical examination, incomplete sensory paraplegia below the L1 dermatome was present without motor impairment. The white blood cell count was 14,800 G/L (normal range 4000-10,000 G/L) and the C-reactive protein level was 75 mg/L (normal range 0-5 mg/L). Plain radiographs demonstrated destruction and subtotal resorption of the L1 vertebra, with the cement filling displaced and exposed . In addition, MRI revealed L1 spondylitis with a right-sided psoas abscess and compression of the lumbar spinal cord . These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of pyogenic spondylitis of the L1 vertebra after kyphoplasty.
Re-exploration was recommended but was refused by the patient due to his poor general medical condition, although he was informed about the risk of a progression to complete paralysis. The patient underwent CT-guided aspiration and drainage of the psoas abscess. Cultures grew group C hemolytic Streptococcus. He was initially treated conservatively with a six-week course of cefuroxime and clindamycin. The abscess cavity was irrigated daily with normal saline until drain removal on post procedure day six.
The patient's symptoms progressed to leg paresis without neurogenic bladder and/or bowel dysfunction. He gave informed consent and underwent re-exploration with dorsal spinal decompression, T12/L1 laminectomy and T11 - L4 fusion using transpedicular fixation with a dural rod system (Xia®, Stryker Howmedica®, Keil, Germany). In a second procedure on postoperative day 10, ventral transphrenic bisegmental spondylodesis was performed. After the removal of the residual L1 vertebra with the cement body, adjacent discs and osteolytic endplates, an intracorporal stand-alone titanium cage (Obelisc, Ulrich Medical, Ulm, Germany) was implanted between T12 and L2. The patient was transferred to the inpatient rehabilitation unit after 11 days. He made an uneventful recovery and his back pain improved significantly (VAS 3). His neurological symptoms regressed after six weeks, with normal biochemistry and no signs of ongoing inflammation. At discharge, his pain was a VAS 2; six months later, he was symptom free and completely ambulatory without assistance . After 24 months, he had no complaints, neurologic deficit or signs of infection. Plain radiographs demonstrated no pseudarthrosis or dislocation of screws, rods or the cage .