A 40-year-old female was initially admitted into a regional hospital for the left flank pain and refractory hypertension. Ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) revealed severe stenosis in the right renal artery and aneurysm in the left . The diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis was assumed, but without evidence from either lab tests or images. Endovascular bilateral renal artery stenting was performed, with uncovered stent inserted in the right renal artery and covered one in the left . A stenosis distal to the covered stent in the left renal artery was noted and could be the potential cause of recurrence . The symptoms ameliorated after the interventional therapy. However, three months later the symptom of left flank pain recurred, and repeated CT showed relapse of the left RAA. Expectant treatment was ineffective, so the patient was transferred to our Urology Surgery Department. The patient complained about fatigue and intermittent dull pain in her left flank. But general condition was moderate. Multidisciplinary consultation was organized following the admission of the patient in our center. The size of the aneurysm (over 30 mm in diameter) and progressive pain gave the impression of a threatened rupture. Given the giant size of the aneurysm, previous covered stent implantation history, and the elusive etiology, immediate radical nephrectomy was considered, however, the left covered renal artery stent stretched into the aorta was a great challenge for surgery . She was transferred to the interventional radiology suite for endovascular treatment. Written informed consent was obtained. Under local anesthesia, access from the right groin was obtained and a 5F sheath was placed. Angiography showed the bilateral renal artery stent insertion, and the presence of a large aneurysm originating from the distal end of the left renal artery stent . The stent was a covered one and the proximal part of it stretched into the aorta. A 6 × 40 mm balloon catheter (ATB advance, Cook, Bloomington, IN, USA) was placed into the stent through a guide wire (Terumo, Tokyo, japan). Thrombin injection was completed under protection of the balloon dilation . Further embolization with 2 coils placed into the prior stent (10 mm, Boston Scientific, Interlock) successfully occluded the aneurysm, with sacrifice of the left kidney .
The one-week post-embolization renal function tests (BUN and CREA) were within normal range. The patient remained stable after the second endovascular treatment and was discharged. However, the patient developed multiple painful subcutaneous nodules in her flanks 20 days after the embolization procedure. Biopsy was performed in the regional hospital and pathological exam revealed undifferentiated sarcoma . Chemotherapy was tried but the patient could not tolerate it. The patient experienced more episodes of hemorrhagic shock which required multiple blood transfusions, and finally passed away 2 more weeks later.