A 29-year-old gentleman with diabetes mellitus has been presented to the emergency department with complaints of left sided upper limb and lower limb weakness associated with altered sensorium, vomiting, and hypotension. He was provisionally diagnosed with stroke, encephalopathy, and was suspected to be in septic shock. In the emergency department, he required high oxygen support to maintain saturation and was commenced on vasopressor support. Echocardiography was likely suggestive of Takotsubo or stress cardiomyopathy. He remained hypotensive with profound acidosis requiring escalation to two vasopressor support therapies. The noncontrast computed tomography brain revealed a massive right hemispheric infarct with raised intracranial pressure (ICP). He was immediately transferred to the intensive care unit, where he was resuscitated with fluid therapy, triple inotropes, broad spectrum antibiotics, and shock dose steroids. He developed anuria with persistent metabolic acidosis, for which he was commenced on continuous renal replacement therapy (RRT) along with the use of Cytosorb® adsorber (M/s CytoSorbents, Inc., New Jersey, USA). Over the next few hours his neurological status deteriorated from a GCS 14 to 7/15 and was intubated for airway protection. A repeat CT brain revealed massively elevated ICP with midline shift due to malignant cerebral edema, requiring decompressive craniotomy.
He was diagnosed with COVID-19 positive with minimal respiratory involvement and was treated with only dexamethasone and continued on Cytosorb therapy along with dialysis. His condition deteriorated further to multiple organ failure. Inflammatory mediators (IL-6 5600 pg/mL, and PCT vs 198 ng/dL) were pointing toward a cytokine storm, as seen in septic shock as well as critically ill COVID-19 patients; therefore, treatment with Cytosorb along with dialysis was continued. Subsequently over a period of 4 days IL-6 dropped to 99.5% (5600–23 pg/mL) and procalcitonin (PCT) to 98.6% (198–2.8 ng/dL) and vasopressors were stopped. shows the serial drop of PCT over a week, correlating with drop of WBC counts. Serial fall in IL-6, D-dimer, and Ferritin is shown in .
The patient improved dramatically and his EF also normalized to 60%. Regression in cerebral edema was seen on repeat CT brain and he started to obey commands but a left-sided hemiplegia persisted. All the bloody fluid cultures’ and imaging for source of infection identification were negative.
Later, he developed purpura fulminans with digital necrosis and blistering of skin ; however, the Dopplers for lower limbs were normal. Unfortunately due to worsening gangrene probably owing to the hypercoagulable state of COVID-19 infection with diabetes he had to undergo both below knee amputations. A tracheostomy was performed in view of prolonged ventilation that weaned off ventilator support by 2 weeks. He also recovered from renal and liver dysfunctions by then. Neurologically he improved with good cognitive and bulbar functions but had left-sided hemiplegia. He was successfully de-cannulated and was discharged on day 32, on oral anticoagulants and anti-epileptics. On follow-up he is able to ambulate with prosthesis, awaiting cranioplasty.