A 43-year-old, right-handed transgender woman from the State of Mexico is a housewife and professes the Catholic religion. Three months ago, the patient suddenly experienced hemiplegia and hemiparesis in her right lower extremity, followed by a myoclonic focal epileptic seizure, vertigo, and a right frontal headache with a visual analog scale of 10/10. In the past month, the patient reported drowsiness, urinary sphincter loss, diplopia for 1 week, three daily focal epileptic seizures in the right arm and leg with tonic-clonic characteristics, without alterations of the mental status, and postictal weakness.
The patient has a personal pathological history of receiving intramuscular (IM) hormone treatment for 27 years based on algestone/estradiol 150 mg/10 mg/mL, which is currently suspended. She has been vaccinated against COVID on three occasions with the Pfizer brand and has not contracted the disease. In addition, she has undergone several surgical interventions, such as rhinoplasty 25 years ago, breast implants 20 years ago, and other cosmetic surgeries on the face. With a significant family history of illness, her mother has been diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease; her father suffered from diabetes mellitus and died of liver cancer, and her brother has a history of deep vein thrombosis of the lower extremities.
During the clinical examination, right eye exotropia, bradykinesia, anisocoria with the right miosis, right-side spasticity, and left side exteroceptive hypoesthesia were noted. To treat her adjustment disorder with depressive symptoms due to dysplastic hyperthymia, a tendency to cry, and ideas of worthlessness and ruin, she started on mirtazapine at 15 mg daily.
She was admitted to a private hospital and started on carbamazepine 200 mg every 8 h as symptomatic treatment. However, 9 days later, her condition had not improved, so a computerized axial tomography was requested. This showed encephalic volume with structural changes according to age and a lesion of primary neoplastic aspect, likely a glioblastoma, in the left parietal lobe subcortical towards the convexity.
On arrival at our institution, magnetic resonance imaging image studies were performed , revealing an intra-axial mass with poorly defined, heterogeneous borders and thick borders with perilesional edema in the left parietal lobe, as well as a rounded hypodense image with well-defined walls in the right internal capsule. A hypointense lesion is observed in the right thalamic region on T1 and hyperintense on T2, with a cystic-type appearance, which restricts diffusion. In the right parietal cortex, there is a diffuse lesion that is hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2. On the contralateral hemisphere, in the left frontotemporal region, there is a heterogeneous lesion that is hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2, with abundant perilesional edema. Due to the characteristics of the lesions, a tumor or infectious process may be suspected.
After establishing the diagnosis and determining the surgical strategy, the patient was transferred to the operating room under anesthesia and placed in a supine decubitus position with Mayfield-Kees cranial fixation. A craniotomy-guided horseshoe incision centered on the lesion was made, with intraoperative ultrasonographic tracing to confirm the lesion below the craniotomy. A lesion was identified from the subcortical region with a soft, friable consistency, and yellowish appearance, measuring approximately 3.5 × 4.5 cm in diameter. Due to its friability, fragmentary resection was performed, with the lesion being devastated using Mallis forceps and suction. Samples from the resected tumor were sent to the pathology department, which confirmed the diagnosis of wild-type glioblastoma .
The patient was discharged from the operating room in a hemodynamically stable state and with a functioning ventilator. Postoperative imaging studies were conducted [ and ], however, due to the patient’s deteriorating alertness and persistent headaches that did not respond to medication, a second surgery was scheduled.