An 87-year-old female presented with chief complaints of dyspnoea and fatigue for 1 week. Two weeks prior, the patient underwent atrial lead revision of her dual-chamber pacemaker due to atrial lead failure. The new lead was placed in the right atrial appendage and the old atrial lead was abandoned. The pacemaker was programmed to DDDR mode with automatic mode switching to VDIR on detection of an atrial arrhythmia with a rate above 170 b.p.m. An electrocardiogram (ECG) before discharge revealed atrial paced and ventricular sensed rhythm.
The patient has a past medical history of Ebstein’s anomaly complicated by severe tricuspid regurgitation status post-tricuspid valve annuloplasty 13 years prior, paroxysmal atrial tachycardia (AT), atypical atrial flutter, and sinus node dysfunction (SND) requiring the implantation of a single-chamber atrial pacemaker. Three years prior, the patient underwent redo tricuspid valve repair and replacement with an addition of a right ventricular (RV) epicardial lead and upgrade to a dual-chamber pacemaker. In-office device interrogation after the surgery revealed significantly decreased sensed atrial activity and elevated atrial lead thresholds. Five weeks prior to the index emergency department visit, the patient had increased weakness and dyspnoea. Interrogation of the pacemaker showed loss of sensing and failure to capture of the right atrial lead. The patient underwent atrial lead revision as mentioned above. Her outpatient medications included nebivolol 5 mg daily, amiodarone 100 mg daily, and warfarin. Amiodarone had been on hold for ∼2 months prior to the presentation due to concern for possible contribution to progressive weakness.
Physical examination revealed an elderly woman in no acute distress. Blood pressure was 128/78 mmHg, heart rate was regular at 70 beats per minute (b.p.m.), respiratory rate was 16 per minute, and temperature was 98.2°F. Pulse oximeter showed 95% oxygen saturation. Grade 3/6 pan-systolic murmur at left parasternal border was noted. Neck veins were not distended. Fine crackles on both lung bases were noted. There was no lower extremity oedema. Complete blood count and basic metabolic panel were unremarkable. B-type natriuretic peptide was 925 pg/mL (normal: ≤100 pg/mL). Troponin I was <0.03 ng/mL (normal < 0.05 ng/mL). Chest X-ray showed bilateral lower lung interstitial infiltrates. Electrocardiogram showed ventricular paced rhythm at 70 b.p.m. with retrograde P waves .
The chief differential diagnosis was CHF. Due to recent pacemaker lead revision and upgrade, complications related to the procedure such as pericardial effusion, pacemaker malfunction, and pacemaker syndrome were considered.
Transthoracic echocardiogram was unchanged from prior and was significant for left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 65%, dilated right ventricle with decreased systolic function, and status post-bioprosthetic tricuspid valve replacement with moderate tricuspid regurgitation. There was no significant pericardial effusion.
Pacemaker malfunction was suspected due to unexpected ventricular paced rhythm with visible retrograde P waves on ECG. In the absence of obvious atrial arrhythmia, one would expect to see atrial or AV sequential pacing. The pacemaker was now apparently functioning in either VOO or VVI mode.
Pacemaker interrogation was performed. Intracardiac electrograms (EGMs) revealed two independent simultaneous atrial rhythms and ventricular paced rhythm . The first atrial rhythm has a relatively larger amplitude of ∼1 mV at a cycle length of 855 milliseconds (ms) and coincides with the retrograde P waves seen on surface ECG (double-ended arrows). The other atrial rhythm has a smaller amplitude of ∼0.3 mV at a shorter cycle length of 318 ms, likely representing AT (small arrows). Atrial tachycardia is electrically isolated with conduction exit block as it does not influence the cycle lengths of the retrograde atrial rhythm, nor does it have any association with the ventricular activity in this patient with no history of AV conduction block. The pacemaker was able to sense both atrial rhythms (marked as ‘AS’ on EGMs) with the combined rate above the preset mode switch rate of 170 b.p.m., leading to automatic mode switch.
Pacemaker was temporally programmed to AAI at 30 b.p.m. to check for sinus rhythm and intrinsic AV conduction. The atrial lead sensitivity was decreased from 0.25 mV to 0.5 mV. Sinus bradycardia with anterograde AV conduction was noted on EGMs . Atrial tachycardia exhibited no influence on sinus rhythm or ventricular activities. Atrial tachycardia was no longer recognized by the device after sensitivity change. On the surface ECG, sinus bradycardia with intermittent atrial pacing coexisted with AT (, amplitude 20 mm/mV). Atrial tachycardia activity can be seen most clearly in lead V3 (, arrows) with the cycle length identical to that seen on the intracardiac EGMs.
Because the amplitude of AT was relatively small, atrial lead sensitivity was decreased to ignore AT and DDDR mode was restored . The patient’s symptoms subsided shortly afterwards. Amiodarone was resumed. Upon outpatient follow-up, she remained asymptomatic and AT was no longer present .