A 90-year-old female was transferred to the hospital after sustaining a low-energy trauma, a simple fall. She experienced pain in the right hip and pelvis. Weight-bearing on the affected side was no longer possible. The medical file revealed a HA for a displaced femoral neck fracture at the right and left side, respectively, 6 and 8 years ago. She was ambulating only short distances using a walking stick. Radiographic assessment revealed a displaced acetabular fracture with a central dislocation of the bipolar head. Impaction against the acetabular roof resulted in a displaced fracture of the greater trochanter ( and ).
No other bony lesions or associated neurovascular injuries were noted. After a careful pre-operative assessment, the surgical plan consisted of a stabilization of the acetabulum fracture by means of cerclage wires together with a conversion of the HA to a total hip prosthesis.
The patient was positioned in a lateral decubitus. A triradiate approach was preferred to gain a wide exposure to the hip joint. The greater trochanter was already fractured. Hence, no osteotomy at that level needed to be done. After removal of the bipolar head, the femoral component seemed to be fixed very well and was left in place. First of all, a 2 mm braided cable (Zimmer, Inc., Warsaw, Indiana) passed around the body of the ischial bone using Satinsky aortic clamps. Thereafter, one end of the wire carefully passed along the inner pelvic surface while the other passed under beneath the sacrospinal ligament. Both ends were clamped together above the acetabulum, creating a configuration as described by Mears and Shirahama . A second cerclage wire was used to fix the posterior column . After reduction and stabilization of the acetabular fracture, the acetabulum was progressively reamed to the appropriate size. A cementless trabecular metal cup (Zimmer, Inc., Warsaw, Indiana) was inserted, and titanium screws were applied to provide additional stability to the construct. A highly cross linked polyethylene liner was implanted together with a new metallic femoral head. The fracture of the greater trochanter was reduced and fixed by means of two AO screws. Finally, a reduction of the total hip prosthesis was performed which seemed to be stable without major leg length discrepancy.
Postoperatively, continuous passive motion of the operated hip was started immediately. Weight-bearing was not allowed during the first 6 weeks. Thereafter, ambulating using a walking device and partial weight bearing (20 kg) was allowed. 4 months after surgery, she regained her pre-operative functional status, and a radiographic evaluation of the right hemipelvis showed good signs of the fracture healing without migration of the acetabular component ( and ).