A 55-year-old Chinese woman presented with a history of left hypochondrial pain for a duration of one year, associated with early satiety and postprandial vomiting. She did not report any reflux symptoms. Her physical examination did not reveal any significant abnormality. An upper endoscopy did not show any evidence of reflux oesophagitis, except for a severely deformed stomach with difficult duodenal intubation. However, a chest radiograph showed an air bubble with air-fluid level in her left thoracic cavity, and a diaphragmatic hernia was initially suspected. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and a barium swallow study confirmed a diagnosis of PEH with intrathoracic mesentericoaxial gastric volvulus.
The surgery was performed with her in a modified lithotomy position, under general anaesthesia. The surgeon stood between her legs (the French position), with the camera surgeon at her right side and the assistant at her left side. Five trocars were used : one supraumbilical 12mm camera port, one 11mm left midclavicular right-hand working port, one 5mm right midclavicular left-hand working port, one 5mm left anterior axillary retraction port and one 5mm subxiphoid Nathanson liver retractor port (Cook Medical, Bloomington, USA). The initial entry into the abdomen was obtained with a bladeless 12mm trocar (XCEL®, Ethicon Endo-surgery, Cincinnati, USA) under direct telescopic visualization using a 10mm 0° laparoscope (Karl Storz Endoscopy, Tuttlingen, Germany). Once all the trocars were inserted, she was tilted into the reverse Trendelenburg position (20 to 30°).
Initially, the herniated stomach was reduced using atraumatic graspers (Johan, Karl Storz Endoscopy, Tuttlingen, Germany) . Gentle ‘hand-over-hand’ traction was applied to the stomach until complete reduction was achieved. Next, dissection of the hernia sac started below the hiatal rim. Division of the attenuated phreno-oesophageal ligament where it attached to the hiatal rim was made, followed by correct identification of the plane between the right crus and the hernia sac . The sac was dissected and separated from the mediastinum, using a combination of sharp and blunt dissection . The separation was assisted by pulling the cut edge of the sac into abdomen. Complete circumferential dissection of the sac as a whole was done in two parts, first the anterior and lateral sac in one piece, followed by the posterior sac. When performing retro-oesophageal dissection, care was taken to preserve the posterior vagus nerve. A nylon tape was then passed behind the oesophagus at the level of the oesophagogastric junction to sling the oesophagus upwards to allow further circumferential dissection of the oesophagus. In addition, the use of a sling prevented direct grasping of the oesophagus for retraction, thus avoiding possible injury to it. The dissection was completed when the mediastinal sac had been retracted down beyond the lower oesophagus and over the proximal stomach.
The redundant portion of the sac was excised with an ultrasonic scalpel (Harmonic®, Ethicon, Cincinnati, USA) taking care to avoid injury to the oesophageal and stomach wall. A wide hiatus was visualized after the dissection , making it impossible to approximate the crura. A lateral releasing incision adjacent to the right crus was subsequently made with an ultrasonic shear (Harmonic®, Ethicon, Cincinnati, USA) , allowing primary closure of the hiatus posterior to the oesophagus with three interrupted Ethibond™ 2/0 sutures (Ethicon, Cincinnati, USA) using intracorporeal knots . A composite mesh (Proceed®, Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson Medical, Norderstedt, Germany) was later placed over the diaphragmatic defect and the posterior crural closure, and secured by tack fixation . A Toupet (posterior 270°) fundoplication was performed to recreate the anti-reflux valve . The posterior fundus was first fixed to the right crus using Ethibond™ 2/0 sutures, followed by four more similar sutures between the fundus and each side of the oesophagus.
Postoperatively, she was started on oral liquids on the evening of the surgery and she rapidly progressed to a soft diet, remaining on this diet for four weeks. She was discharged on postoperative day one. A barium swallow study at one month after surgery showed a normally located stomach . At a follow-up review of six months, she was well, with no relapse of symptoms.