The patient was a 14-year-old female Chinese semi-professional tennis athlete. She first developed mild right shoulder pain after a forehand tennis stroke with left trunk rotation in practice which disappeared after two days of resting. The second injury occurred five days later with the same mechanism of injury and resulted in 8/10 pain with immediate loss of upper extremity function. An x-ray and Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI) of the patient's shoulder were ordered by her primary care physician. The imagines ruled out epiphyseal plate, ligamentous, or labral damage, but showed a supraspinatus muscle strain. The patient self-referred to our team for TH due to the limited access to local sports-medicine resources. Oral consent was obtained from her guardian. During TH history taking, the patient complained of weakness with shoulder flexion, abduction, and external rotation (ER), as well as kinesiophobia. These combined physical and psychological limitations negatively impacted the patient's activities of daily living (ADL) and tennis. (Details in ).
After collecting patient history, the clinicians conducted a 30-minute virtual training session with the patient's guardian to teach hand placements, resistance strength, force angle for manual muscle testing (MMT), and special tests. For range of motion (ROM) measurements, the clinicians screenshot the patient's shoulder active ROM (AROM), then measured the angles through a smartphone 2-Dimensional application (Angle Meter 360) after the assessment . For strength tests, modified MMT (partner-assisted MMT) was used. Instead of having the tester grade on a 0 to 5 scale, the patient reported a percentage of effort by answering the question: “Compared to your uninvolved side, how many percent were you able to resist on the last repetition?” Special tests cluster (Painful Arc, Drop-arm test, Infraspinatus test, and Hawkins-Kennedy) were performed by the guardian and showed positive signs (, ). (Detailed testing results can be found in ).