A 33-year-old Moroccan man with an unremarkable medical history, presented with large joints polyarthralgia, inflammatory pain in his buttocks and lower lumbar spine (morning stiffness of 45 minutes and frequent nocturnal awakenings), fever and skin lesions. He had no family history of rheumatic or skin diseases. On physical examination, the patient had a low-grade fever (38–39°C), six tender but not swollen joints (shoulders, elbows, and knees), a marked limitation of his lumbar spine flexion (Schober index=10+2cm, finger-to-ground distance=10cm), and painful erythematous maculopapules over his face, neck, and hands. Laboratory tests showed hyperleukocytosis (12,140/mm3 with 8500/mm3 of neutrophils), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (106 mm/hour), and raised C-reactive protein (CRP) (93 mg/L). The results of the immunological tests including antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies were negative. The results of urine culture, blood culture, tuberculin skin test, search of tubercle bacilli in the sputum, and serology of cytomegalovirus and hepatitis were negative. Investigations for an underlying neoplastic disease remained negative. The patient’s chest X-ray was normal, whereas X-rays of the patient’s skeleton showed a squaring of the lumbar vertebrae , and suspected bilateral sacroiliitis that was confirmed on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the sacroiliac joints . A skin biopsy revealed a neutrophilic infiltrate in the dermis and epidermis.
A diagnosis of SwS was based on two major and two minor criteria proposed by Su and Liu and modified by Von Den Driesch [,] . The diagnosis of SwS associated with AS (the AS criteria of the Assessment of SpondyloArthritis international Society were fulfilled) was established. The patient received indomethacin (150 mg/day) and showed rapid onset of improvement. Within a few days, the progression of the skin lesions had stopped and they started to disappear. After one week, fever and pain disappeared with a decreasing CRP level (20 mg/L).