A 76-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our Department of Urology with a low-risk urothelial bladder cancer. The patient told us about an abdominal lymph cyst that he had known about for more than 15 years; a puncture revealed no malignant cells. His surgical history consisted of an open cholecystectomy twenty years ago. Twenty months after first presentation with bladder cancer, ultrasound examination and a computed tomography (CT) scan showed a giant lymph cyst. In the past years, the patient noticed a gradual increase in abdominal girth. Physical examination revealed a well-nourished man (height, 1.79 m; weight, 94.0 kg) with a grossly distended abdomen without ascitic fluid wave or tympany.
Eleven months later, grade II hydronephrosis caused by the giant lymph cyst was visible in the patient's ultrasound examination. The kidney function test (clearance) showed a less-than-normal tubular function of 139 mL/min/1.73 m2 body surface (lowest norm, 143 mL/min/1.73 m2 body surface), left kidney with 27% of function and hydronephrosis. The serum creatinine level was 105 μmol/L. At that time, he had the first symptoms because of this giant lymph cyst; an insertion of a 70-cm-long ureteral catheter on the left side was possible . Postoperative ultrasound examination showed a complete regredience of hydronephrosis. Figures and show the giant lymph cyst (27 × 18.5 × 22.5 cm) in CT scans one month later.
Time delay of further treatment was caused by a new diagnosed atrial fibrillation. After cardiologic diagnostics and medical treatment two months later, laparoscopic partial resection of the giant lymph cyst was performed. Percutaneous drainage of a portion of the fluid was necessary to create adequate space for port placement. After drainage of one litre of fluid, a right-sided midabdomen 10-mm trocar was achieved, a second 5-mm trocar was inserted in the left side. In total, the mechanical aspirated volume during the operation was eight litres. The color of the fluid was more tan or brown than the straw-colored fluid typical of seromas or dark red of hematomas. Microscopic evaluation of the fluid revealed mostly lymphocytes and red blood cells; in the resected wall of the lymph cyst, collagen and muscle fiber were found, with no malignancy. Laboratory study was consisted with lymphatic fluid as well; the result was sterile lymphatic fluid. After surgery, a prolonged secretion of lymph fluid for more than 10 days was obvious. External pressure of the abdomen was necessary.
Two months later, the lymph secretion interrupted. The position of the elongated left ureter is shown in Figure . After extraction of the ureteral catheter by ureteroscopy, the kidney function test (clearance) again showed a less-than-normal tubular function of 137 mL/min/1.73 m2 body surface (lowest norm, 143 mL/min/1.73 m2 body surface), and the left kidney was now better with 39% of function and better outlet. The serum creatinine level was 92 μmol/L.