We present a 76-year-old nullipara postmenopausal female with a history of stage 1B, grade 1 endometrioid endometrial adenocarcinoma status post-robot-assisted total laparoscopic hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, and pelvic lymph node dissection 10 months earlier. The initial gynecologic specimen at the time of surgery was noted to have a depth of invasion of 63%, without lymphovascular invasion or lower uterine segment involvement. Left-pelvic sentinel lymph node sampling and six right pelvic nodes were all negative for malignancy. She presented with a rapidly expansile, painful, fungating subungual mass on her right-small-finger distal phalanx, which had the classic appearance of a subungual melanoma , given its color and location. She also reported concomitant right-hip pain and a vulvar mass. Her symptoms developed over a 10-day period. The widely metastatic presentation was more concerning for melanomas, and recurrent endometrial cancer was felt to be less likely as this pattern of metastatic disease would be remarkably rare.
At the time of presentation, radiographs of the right hand showed a destructive lesion in the distal phalanx of the small finger, with a pathologic fracture and an associated soft-tissue mass . An MRI of the right hand showed a 1.5 cm destructive lesion within the small-finger distal phalanx, with subungual soft-tissue extension. Upon a further work-up, CTs of the abdomen/pelvis demonstrated a lytic lesion of the right acetabulum extending into the ischium . An MRI of the pelvis showed additional enhancing masses at the anterior right vagina and anterior vulva. Further advanced imaging revealed multiple, bilateral pulmonary nodules on a CT of the chest and brain metastases. PET/CT was consistent, and further visualized a left external iliac lymph node and nonspecific focal uptake in the right forefoot.
Given the extent of bone destruction, clinical presentation, and concern for melanoma, the patient was taken to the operating room for excisional biopsy and tissue diagnosis via a partial amputation of her right small finger. A fish-mouth incision over the middle phalanx of the right, small finger was created, just proximal to the lesion. The digital neurovascular structures were identified and transected. Care was taken to identify the flexor digitorum profundus, and it was sharply transected. The terminal extensor tendon was similarly identified and transected. A sagittal saw was then used to create a transverse bone cut in the middle phalanx, and the specimen was sent to pathology. The remaining tissue was healthy. Meticulous hemostasis was achieved, and the incision closed. Negative margins were noted on the specimen’s pathology.
Gynecologic oncology performed a concurrent gynecologic exam under anesthesia and biopsies of the concerning lesions. All biopsies indicated adenocarcinomas, with a glandular formation, and PAX-8 positivity on immunohistochemistry . The finger lesion showed abundant hemorrhages, including areas with hemorrhages extending into the epidermis. The location in conjunction with the hemorrhage contributed to the clinical impression of a pigmented lesion, such as a melanoma. The patient was diagnosed with a metastatic recurrence of endometrial adenocarcinoma, with metastases to the right acetabulum, pulmonary nodules, and brain lesions. She was started on Megestrol acetate for hormonal therapy for her metastatic disease.
She was referred to radiation oncology for a discussion of palliative radiation to her brain and right ischium, and a plan for check-point-inhibitor therapy, systemic therapy, and osteoclast inhibitor therapy. The patient completed 2 cycles of pembrolizumab and whole-brain radiation. Unfortunately, she succumbed to disease 2 months later, presumed to be secondary to rapidly progressive disease. Autopsy was declined.