This is a 33 years old divorced male who holds a master’s degree in developmental studies and had worked as a lecturer at university and this is his first admission and first visit, the information gathered from the patient himself and his elder brother and the information seems reliable. He came to our hospital to get a “legal certificate regarding his capacity to return to work”. Therefore, we admitted him for observation in order to settle his diagnosis and his capacity to return to work.
According to him he started using khat since 2004; initially he started chewing in small amounts for recreational purposes. However, since 2016 his consumption of khat increased from 2 bundles to 4 bundles, followed by increased amount of time in using and getting the substance, frequent absence from work and conflict with his boss. In addition his khat use led him to have frequent conflict with his wife; which ended by divorce in late 2016. After the divorce, he gradually began to show unusual behaviors like difficulty of falling asleep followed by destroying home materials and tearing off his clothes.
Later, he began to have visual hallucination of wild animals like a lion and a snake on the roof while he chews khat. Occasionally, he started hearing voices which arose from his head and as he reported the voices were similar to that of a machine.
Furthermore, he also reported that sometimes while chewing khat he felt as if he was a detached from oneself and as if he was observing himself from outside. He also sees his double talking to him and giving him comment. He also believes that some external agent changes the position of his household material without his will which usually frightened him. In addition, he also feels that some unknown force opens his head and inserts unknown fluid in his body. As a result of this, his elder brother took him to holy water and he stayed there for about 2 months. During this time he had some improvement. However, after 4 months of sobering, he started to use khat in large amounts after having conflict with his boss at work.
In 2018, his illness worsened to the extent; he attempted to kill himself using a rope in the absence of a depressed mood. Two months after his suicidal attempt his family took him to a monastery for holy water treatment. At his stay at the holy water, religious fathers at the monastery advised him not to chew khat again. Because of this, he accepted to quit khat use and his illness improved in 2 weeks’ time of his sober from khat consumption.