A 47-year-old woman affected by tubular gastric adenocarcinoma (G3) with a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine component (N:7+/31) was treated with D2 gastrectomy in another hospital.
After surgical resection, total body computed tomography scan and tumor markers (CEA, CA 19-9 and NSE) were both negative.
Three months later, the patient was admitted in our institution to begin adjuvant chemotherapy with platinum, epirubicin, 5-fluorouracil and folic acid (PELF protocol) .
After the first two administrations, she was hospitalized because of increasing nausea and vomiting that did not respond to antiemetic drugs.
During hospitalization, the patient experienced epigastric pain that did not resolve with analgesic drugs and the vomiting persisted. Mild fever (38.5°C) was present, rapidly improving after the administration of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid.
An abdominal X ray was performed to investigate the epigastrial pain.
The radiograph showed a moderate elevation of left hemi diaphragm associated to an intestinal air-fluid level.
Regular intestinal meteorism was absent, especially in the rectum and ascending colon.
Another radiograph was performed 24 hours later. It showed a significant increase of intestinal distension and the further elevation of the left hemi diaphragm with hypo expansion of left lung.
A moderate pleural effusion was observed in the left costophrenic angle. A urgent abdominal CT scan was performed that highlighted a giant air-fluid level occupying the left hemi thorax, with collapse of the lingula, the entire left lower lobe and part of the left upper lobe.
The remaining left upper lobe showed ground-glass opacity, induced by parenchymal congestion.
A moderate fluid was observed in the left pleural space. Marked fluid distension was seen in the ascending and transverse colon, with empty descending colon, sigma and rectum.
Coronal and sagittal multiplanar reformat (MPR) reconstructions confirmed abundant fluid distension of ascending and transverse colon.
In the sagittal view, a tear in the left diaphragm and herniation of intestinal loops were seen.
Radiological appearance was consistent with acute diaphragmatic hernia inducing a mechanical occlusion. The patient underwent urgent explorative laparotomy and final diagnosis was acute hiatal hernia with intestinal volvulus. It was probably related to a partial tear of the left diaphragmatic crus in the site of surgery, representing a late complication of partial gastrectomy. The acute herniation was likely consequence of an increased abdominal pressure, induced by vomiting.
Surgical repair of dome and crus of the left hemidiaphragm was performed. Post-surgical management showed left lung expansion, with a rapid decrease in pleural effusion.
The patient was discharged after seven days and three months later she was asymptomatic, with a normal chest X rays.