A 24-year-old male presented with severe right upper quadrant abdominal pain for 3 months. There was no significant past medical history. He was vitally stable and general examination was unremarkable except for epigastric tenderness. His laboratory findings revealed abnormal liver function tests. Imaging studies were suggestive of cholelithiasis with an evolving cholecystitis. The liver was enlarged. An elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy was planned. His initial peripheral blood smears done on the day of the surgery showed 72% lymphocytes on differential leukocyte count, although total white cell count was 3.9 × 109E/L. Peripheral smear showed approximately 15% blasts. Hemoglobin was 9.4 gm/dL, while platelet count was low 100 × 109E/L. The surgeon decided to proceed with the procedure as he had no suspicion that the gallbladder was infiltrated by a neoplastic lesion and believed that the blast cells seen on complete blood count were an independent finding from cholelithiasis and cholecystitis.
Pre-cholecystectomy ultrasound of liver and gallbladder showed moderately distended and thickened gallbladder measuring 80 × 35 mm and containing tiny stones mixed with sludge. Wall thickness was 7 mm. The liver was enlarged and showed mild increase in parenchymal echogenicity suggesting mild fatty infiltration. No focal lesion was seen. No intra- or extrahepatic biliary dilation was present. The common bile duct (CBD) and portal vein were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed slightly edematous, distended, and thick-walled gallbladder with sludge and stones. Ultrasound, MRI, and MRCP findings were suggestive of cholelithiasis with evolving cholecystitis. There was no evidence of any intra or extra hepatic biliary dilatation. The right and left hepatic ducts and cystic duct appeared unremarkable. Post-cholecystectomy ultrasound, MRI, and MRCP showed no focal lesion or distortion in liver, biliary tract, or spleen. However, the liver appeared enlarged. No evidence of bilateral pleural effusion or ascites was noted. He underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
On laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the gallbladder was distended and was adherent to the liver. The cystic duct was short and wide. Dissection was difficult due to adhesions and hepatomegaly. The liver appeared inflamed and friable; peri-hepatic fluid was present. Adhesiolysis was performed and dissection was continued over the liver bed. The gallbladder was dissected from the gallbladder fossa. Some bleeding was encountered due to traction on the liver.
Grossly, the gallbladder measured 7 cm in length and 2 cm in diameter. The serosal surface was smooth. The fundal wall showed an average thickness of 5 mm, with very subtle thickening at some places . No stones were present in the lumen.
Microscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed diffuse, densely cellular atypical lymphoid cell infiltrate involving the full thickness of the gallbladder wall. Cystic duct resection margin was involved. The infiltrate was composed of small- to medium-sized cells with round to oval, convoluted nuclei, condensed nuclear chromatin, indistinct nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm . Nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio was high . Numerous mitotic figures were seen. IHC studies were performed, and the neoplastic lymphoid cells demonstrated strong diffuse positivity for PAX-5 and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) . Ki-67 (Mib-1) proliferative index was raised up to approximately 60% (not shown). The neoplastic cells were negative for Keratin cocktail AE1/AE3, CD20, CD3, CD5, myeloperoxidase (MPO), CD34, and IgG4. Liver biopsy was not performed.
Based on these findings, a diagnosis of B-lymphoblastic lymphoma/ leukemia (B-LL) was rendered. Peripheral blood film was repeated and bone marrow biopsy was performed post-resection. Peripheral blood film showed normochromic, microcytic red blood cells. Hemoglobin was 7.8 gm/dl. Approximately 80% blast cells were seen. Platelets were low on film. Bone marrow aspirate revealed diffuse infiltration with blast cells which constituted approximately 85% of the total nucleated non-erythroid cell population. Similarly, section of bone trephine also showed hypercellularity (approximately 80 to 85%) and diffuse infiltration by blast cells. Immunophenotyping by flow cytometry performed on bone marrow showed reactivity of blast cell population to pan B-cell markers i.e., CD10, CD19, CD22, and CD79a along with HLA-DR and CD45. This population also showed positivity to CD9, CD58, CD34, and TdT. Overall findings were consistent with B-LL.
ABL1 by FISH/PCR was subsequently performed and was negative. Conventional cytogenetics showed 46 XY chromosomes.
Our patient responded well to treatment. He received treatment with MRC UK ALL XII protocol. His minimal residual disease after induction phase I was less than 0.01%. He subsequently successfully completed all blocks of treatment till consolidation. During induction phase I, he developed steroid-induced hyperglycemia which reverted with insulin and oral hypoglycemics. Since then, he has not developed any other chemotherapy-related complications. He is currently on maintenance treatment with 6-mercaptopurine and methotrexate with prophylactic trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole. His last complete blood count (CBC) showed hemoglobin 13.2 gm/dl, white blood cells (WBC) 5.1 × 109E/L, platelets 450 × 109E/L. He is well 2 years after the diagnosis.