A 45-year-old man presented with vague abdominal pain associated with a palpable mass. An ultrasound scan demonstrated a mass in the right iliac fossa but no evidence of hepatic metastases or lymphadenopathy. A plain X-ray film of the chest demonstrated no abnormality. A subsequent barium enema suggested a caecal carcinoma and he was subsequently treated for a pT3 N0 M0 (Dukes B) moderately differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma of the caecum in July 2002 with a laparoscopically-assisted right hemicolectomy. A complete oncological resection was achieved with clear surgical resection margins of at least 4 centimetres. Fourteen lymph nodes were sampled but no metastatic disease was identified. In concordance with his high risk for microsatellite instability, he underwent 30 sessions of weekly adjuvant 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) chemotherapy with minimal co-morbidity. Eight months post-operatively he was referred to the Urology Department with a 4-month history of irritative lower urinary tract symptoms that had culminated with a short history of frank haematuria.
An initial flexible cystoscopy revealed a solid-looking 2 cm growth on the posterior bladder wall. A subsequent intravenous urogram demonstrated normal upper tracts. He underwent trans-urethral resection of the bladder tumour (TURBT) through to deep muscle. Histology of the TURBT specimen revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with the following immunoprofile: CK20 and CDX2 +ve, but CK7 -ve. This tissue contained no evidence of extensive cystitis cystica glandularis, intestinal metaplasia or any in-situ component, as may be seen in a primary bladder adenocarcinoma. Comparison was made with the original caecal pathology. Morphologically and immunohistochemically these specimens were identical, suggesting bladder metastases from the primary caecal malignancy . A computed tomography (CT) scan at this time revealed no sign of further metastatic disease. The Oncology Department arranged for him to receive CT-staged 3-D conformal multi-fractionated radiotherapy to a total dose of 56 Gray (Gy).
Ten months following the original TURBT, recurrent bladder tumour was found in the same position at check cystoscopy. This was confirmed to be recurrent moderately differentiated intestinal-type adenocarcinoma. Magnetic Resonance scanning revealed a mass involving the right antero-lateral bladder wall and dome extending to the perivesical fat and the right vas deferens. Review of the scans at the Uroradiology multidisciplinary team meeting suggested the lesion to actually be stage pT2b with associated post-TURBT perivesical inflammatory changes. There was no evidence of lymphadenopathy or metastatic disease. Furthermore neither recurrent colon tumour nor any direct involvement between bowel and bladder were identified. Subsequently he was offered and underwent a partial cystectomy . There was no evidence of recurrent disease at twelve-month review.