A 47-year-old male patient was admitted to our clinic in December 2017 for routine heart catheter. He had a history of severe ischaemic cardiomyopathy since 2012 and had been supported by the left ventricular assist device (LVAD) Heart Mate II for 2 years. Due to recurrent driveline infections, he underwent heart transplantation with an HLA-compatible heart in October 2014. Since then, he has been regularly examined according to our routine post-transplant surveillance protocol every 3–6 months. The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) remained stable at 55% since transplantation. His immunosuppressive regimen included cyclosporine A and everolimus, and he had no signs of rejections since transplantation. The current hospital admission was scheduled for evaluation of cardiac allograft vasculopathy.
On admission, the patient reported of new-onset of fatigue and dyspnoea during ordinary physical exertion [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class II] a few weeks before. Physical examination at rest revealed a heart rate of 88 b.p.m. and blood pressure of 105/75 mmHg. Lung auscultation did not present rales, and there were no peripheral edema. However, echocardiographic assessment showed worsening of the LVEF to 30–35%. Serum pro B-type natriuretic peptide (proBNP) was increased up to 10 000 pg/mL (normal range < 125 pg/mL) in contrast to 250 pg/mL 6 months earlier. Cardiac allograft vasculopathy was excluded by coronary angiography. On suspicion of rejection, myocardial biopsy was performed and donor-specific antibodies (DSA) were evaluated.
In contrast to 3 months earlier, where no DSA were detected, serological testing was now positive for the HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, HLA-DRB1, and HLA-DQB1 genes , suggesting de novo DSA. Accordingly, endomyocardial biopsy showed histological and immunopathologic evidence for AMR of the cardiac allograft with a high number of CD68 macrophages and C4d positive deposits as well as MHC Class II molecules on capillary endothelial cells of the allograft. The biopsy did not show any evidence for acute cellular rejection (ISHLT classification: Grade 0R). Based on these findings, the diagnosis of late AMR of the cardiac allograft was made.
In order to prevent further deterioration of the allograft function, high-dose prednisolone was administered immediately after biopsy. Additionally, plasmapheresis was initiated for 5 days combined with intravenous Gamma Globulin (IVIg). The prior maintenance immunosuppression regimen with cyclosporine A and everolimus was continued. However, LVEF estimated by echocardiography remained 30–35%. Therefore, rituximab (375 mg/m2 weekly) was added for 4 weeks . Unfortunately, DSA levels remained at a high level, and we replaced plasmapheresis by immunoadsorption, assuming that this procedure may be more effective in removing DSA. Additionally, we administered another round of IVIg. Notably, under this strategy, and 35 days after initiating the treatment, LVEF improved to 50% and proBNP decreased to 1200 pg/mL . However, there was no significant decline of DSA levels . Therefore, we decided to add bortezomib. Over the next weeks, LVEF and proBNP remained stable, and the patient improved to NYHA Class I. However, even with additional immunoadsorption three times a week, DSA levels remained high. Following 8 rounds of plasmapheresis and 31 rounds of immunoadsorption, we stopped the extracorporeal procedures.
Currently, 3 years after the diagnosis of cardiac AMR, graft function continues to be nearly normal, while DSA levels remain at a constant elevated level. There is no evidence for transplant vasculopathy.