We examined a 63-year-old Japanese woman with hypoxic–ischemic encephalopathy after subarachnoid hemorrhage who required PMV. She had a medical history of being treated with catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation 1 year before the onset of hypoxic–ischemic encephalopathy after subarachnoid hemorrhage. The patient was married, with a history of one successful pregnancy. Additionally, she had lived inside and outside her home as a housewife after giving birth. She had a medication history of using oral anticoagulants (15 mg/day). There was no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. This patient developed hypoxic encephalopathy because of cardiac arrest lasting more than 10 min after subarachnoid hemorrhage . In the intensive care unit of the previous hospital, mechanical ventilation and rehabilitation were initiated as spontaneous respiration had stopped after the onset of the disease. Rehabilitation was performed at the previous hospital until 4 months after the onset of the disease, but the patient did not start to breathe spontaneously. Thus, at that point, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further rehabilitation.
On admission, physical and neurological examinations showed that the level of consciousness was E4V1M4 on the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), making communication difficult. No significant limitation was found in the range of motion of the neck, limbs, and trunk. However, the deep tendon reflexes of the limbs and pathological reflexes were hypoactive or absent, and little spontaneous movement of the limbs was observed. Spontaneous breathing was also absent, as noted in the previous hospital. Vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, and body temperature) at time of admission and during hospitalization were variable due to hypoxic–ischemic encephalopathy. Medications, including expectorant, gastrointestinal agent, gastric acid inhibitor, antacid, potassium, antihypertensive drugs, and antibiotics, were administered via a nasogastric tube . The results of laboratory findings at the time of admission to our hospital were as follows: complete blood count (WBC = 6300/μL, RBC = 3,910,000/μL, Hb = 12.2 g/dL, PLT = 273,000/μL), liver function (AST = 18 U/L, ALT = 29 U/L, T-Bil = 0.4 mg/dL), renal function (BUN = 27.3 mg/dL, Cre = 0.73 mg/dL), urinalysis (opacity = 1+, PH = 8.5), and inflammatory response (CRP = 0.39 mg/dL). Serology was negative for hepatitis B and C; however, microbial culture test revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa in sputum and urine.
The Trilogy 100 plus ventilator (Koninklijke Philips N.V., Amsterdam, Netherlands) was used for ventilatory management at our hospital, and the pressure-controlled mode was adopted, similar to the management during the patient’s previous hospitalization . The patient’s breath sounds were clear except for coarse crackles owing to accumulation of pulmonary secretions. Pulmonary complications were not observed upon chest radiography immediately after admission to our hospital. However, 1 month after admission to our hospital, atelectasis of the right upper lobe was observed for three consecutive days upon radiography and computed tomography . This, in turn, reduced the tidal volume, minute volume, and oxygen saturation, and caused an absence of breath sounds in the right upper lobe during auscultation. We aimed to ameliorate the patient’s atelectasis and improve her ventilation parameters with positioning and expiratory rib-cage compression for pulmonary rehabilitation after endotracheal suctioning. The patient was seated in Fowler’s position, and the expiratory rib-cage compression involved the application of mild pressure to the upper thorax during expiration, which tends to increase the inspiratory volume of the right upper lobe. Endotracheal suctioning was performed according to American Association for Respiratory Care clinical practice guidelines .
Breath sounds were audible in the patient’s right upper lobe as soon as the intervention started. Furthermore, amelioration of her atelectasis was observed upon chest radiography performed on the same day . In addition, her ventilation parameters (tidal volume, minute volume, and oxygen saturation) improved .
Physical and neurological examinations at 6 months after pulmonary rehabilitation revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of E4V1M4, no significant limitation on range of motion, hypoactive or absent deep tendon and pathological reflexes, and absence of spontaneous breathing. The vital signs were as follows: SBP, 119 mmHg; DBP, 83 mmHg; HR, 57 bpm; and BT, 36.1 °C. The results of laboratory tests included CBC (WBC = 8600/μL, RBC = 3,920,000/μL, Hb = 12.4 g/dL, PLT = 238,000/μL), liver function (AST = 10 U/L, ALT = 26 U/L, T-Bil = 0.4 mg/dL), and renal function (BUN = 25.9 mg/dL, Cre = 0.81 mg/dL). Chest radiographs showed improvement in atelectasis in the right upper lobe after pulmonary rehabilitation .