A 30-year-old woman presented to our hospital complaining of swallowing difficulty.
A patient had a violation of physical development and constipation from an early age. At the age of 7 years, she was diagnosed with partial bilateral symmetric ptosis. At the age of 8 years, she was referred to the hospital with diagnoses of generalized viral infection of unspecified etiology, postinfectious encephalopathy, cerebro-asthenic syndrome, neurosis, urinary bladder and gut atony, chronic pyelonephritis, mydriasis, semiptosis, and dystrophy. At the age of 9 years, she had suspected high intestinal obstruction which was followed by surgery. The obstruction was not revealed during the surgery. In the postoperative period, signs of intestinal obstruction persisted, and they were managed conservatively. After the surgery, she developed meningeal signs, gaze paresis, double vision, and reduced vision. Electrocardiogram showed an incomplete type of blockade of the right branch of the bundle of His. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed gastric hypotony. Computed tomography scans of the head revealed moderate diffuse cortex atrophy. Cerebrospinal fluid was clear with 0.066. The patient was seen by a neurologist, ophthalmologist, infectious diseases specialist, and neurosurgeon. However, the diagnosis remained unclear. The following pathologies were excluded: neuro infections, intestinal infections, oncohematology, and endocrine pathologies. Further generalized pathology persisted. At the age of 10 years, a second laparotomy was performed followed by a temporary ileostomy because of signs of acute intestinal obstruction. From the ages of 11 years to 14 years, the patient was annually referred to the surgery department with signs of acute intestinal obstruction, which were managed conservatively. At the age of 11 years, she was diagnosed with intestinal pseudo-obstruction. From the age of 11 years, paradontosis began. From the age of 14 years, the patient had daily dysphagia while eating solid and liquid food. She lost 5 kg and began feeling weak and fatigued. At the age of 15 years, resection of the jejunum was performed two times with an overall resection length of 90 cm because of acute intestinal obstruction which was not managed conservatively. The patient was dystrophic, which was thought to be because of malabsorption as a consequence of the resection of the jejunum. At the age of 25 years, the patient lost all her teeth because of progressive paradontosis. From the age of 26 years, she developed amenorrhea. At the age of 29 years, esophagography showed signs of achalasia, gastroptosis, and delayed gastric and duodenum emptying time. At the age of 30 years, the patient was referred to the endoscopy department of Pavlov Medical University for achalasia treatment.
History of present illness includes the patient’s entire life. That is why we suppose that this part is irrelevant in this case.
The mother, father, and sister are healthy. There was no family history of GI or autoimmune pathologies or allergic disorders. The niece (4 years of age) had sensorineural hearing loss.
Eckardt score was 4. Her weight was 38 kg. Her body mass index was 16.9, and she had protein energy malnutrition. During preoperative preparation, the patient was revealed to be 16 wk pregnant. She was not aware of the pregnancy. In addition, intraventricular blockage was diagnosed. High-resolution esophageal manometry showed achalasia type I . Hemoglobin and total blood protein levels were 106 g/L and 64 g/L, respectively. Creatine phosphokinase and lactate levels were normal. Neurologic and ophthalmologic disorders were not observed. Considering all data, we suspected mitochondrial disease: incomplete Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS) or mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy (MNGIE) disease.
Histology of the esophageal muscular layer specimens: There were myocytes of different thicknesses with sites of wave-like deformation and dystrophic changes. There were also single myocytes with necrobiotic changes and small vessels with “edge standing” leukocytes .
Genetic testing of mitochondrial DNA (lymphocytic): It showed segment deletion in mitochondrial DNA (mDNA) which affected the genes RNR1 (MTRNR1) and RNR2 (MTRNR2). This aberration is considered to be pathogenic and most frequently observed in patients with KSS. Unfortunately, after discharge, the patient refused further genetic testing.