A 45-year-old male was admitted to the emergency department with postural instability and dysarthria. To lessen his instability and avoid to fall, the patient widened his support polygon. He had also reported dyspnea at effort, which occurred 3 days prior to his admission. He had a history of rheumatic mitral stenosis, since 2005, for which he benefited from a percutaneous mitral dilation in the same year. He also reported a Penicillin allergy.
Initial examination found the patient conscious. His heart rate was 125 b/m, blood pressure was 135/85 mm Hg. He was polypneic and orthopneic with a respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min, an O2 saturation of 96% on ambient air with the presence of bilateral crackles. He had a fever measured at 39.5C. Cardiac
auscultation revealed a low-pitched diastolic rumble, well heard at the apex. The neurologic examination revealed unsteady gait and the patient was unable to perform Romberg's test.
The ECG showed coarse-mesh atrial fibrillation with an average ventricular rate of 90 cycles per minute . No abnormalities were detected on the chest x-ray. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) found rheumatic changes of the mitral valve including: commissural fusion and thickening, producing “dog leg deformity” of the anterior mitral leaflet (-A). The mitral valve area was 0,8 cm2 (-B) and the pressure gradient across the mitral valve was 22 mmhg (-E). We noted a mobile vegetation measuring 11,7 mm of length, located in the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve (-C). The left atrium was dilated at 47 cm2 while size and function of the left ventricle was normal. Pulmonary arterial systolic pressure (PASP) was important (-F) and the filling pressures of the left ventricle were elevated. In addition to that, we reported moderate aortic stenosis and regurgitation and mitral regurgitation at grade A.
Three sets of blood cultures were made, coming back negative as well as the HACEK organism's serologies (Haemophilus; Actinobacillus; Cardiobacterium; Eikenella; and Kingella). It was decided to perform a brain MRI based on the clinical findings. It showed a recent ischemic stroke involving the right peduncular territory associated with chronic lacunar infarcts .
Signs of inflammatory response were noted, high white blood cell count at 14 770/mm3 in addition to C reactive protein (CRP) at 67 mg/l, Ferritin was elevated at 839 μg/l. The kidney function was normal. Further investigations were realized to precise the extension of infective endocarditis, all coming back normal. No point of entry for the pathogen was detected.
The patient was admitted to the cardiology unit. The diagnosis of infective endocarditis was made, based on the modified Duke criteria (1 major clinical criteria +3 minors clinical criteria). Given the negative blood culture endocarditis and the history of penicillin allergy, it was decided to start an antibiotic therapy combining: Vancomycin at 30mg/kg/day for 6 weeks (Vancomycin serum concentrations of 15–20 mg/L were aimed) and Gentamicin at 3mg/kg/day for 2 weeks, in addition to intravenous diuretics (80 mg of Furosemide as bolus followed by a maintenance dose of 40mg/12hours) with a strict control of kalaemia. Finally, for his supraventricular arrythmia, Enoxaparin was started at a curative dose (100 UI/kg/12h). The tolerability was good and no adverse events were reported.
Within 4 days, fever disappeared. The postural instability and the dysarthria were less important than in his admission. Routine TTEs showed a regression of the vegetation and a normalization of the left ventricular pressures. The patient was satisfied after the improvement of his clinical condition. He was addressed after that to the cardiovascular surgery department for a surgical treatment of his valve disease.