A 51-year-old man of Turkish origin, who is a smoker, was admitted to our emergency department with retrosternal localized typical acute chest pain that started 1 day prior to presentation but was continuous during the last 20 minutes. A past diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia and family history were not found. His past medical history was significant for chronic ITP, for which he had not received any treatment, for 15 years. His physical examination was unremarkable, and neither cutaneous nor mucosal petechia nor purpura was noted. According to his electrocardiography (ECG) report there were biphasic T waves in anterior derivation (Figure A). In his transthoracic echocardiograph it was observed that his left ventricular apex septum and the middle of the anterior wall were hypokinetic. Laboratory blood tests revealed hemoglobin of 14mg/dL, platelet count of 14,000/μL, normal prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time, troponin I of 1.89ng/mL, and creatine kinase MB 69U/L. Early coronary angiography and PCI were planned because of his continuous angina pectoris and dynamic ECG changing (Figure A,
B). He received in the emergency room nitroglycerin and morphine as well as 300mg of clopidogrel and 325mg of aspirin along with 5000 units of heparin bolus. Prior to coronary angiography, one dose of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and six units of platelet transfusion were performed on the advice of the hematology department. Primary PCI was performed. A femoral approach was preferred; Allen test was positive in both his upper extremities. His right common femoral artery was accessed with a 6-French sheath. Diagnostic angiography revealed acute 90% thrombotic occlusion of the midsegment of his left anterior descending (LAD) artery and diagonal ostium. His left circumflex and right coronary arteries were patent with right system dominance (Figure A,
B,
C). A 6-French Judkins LAD 3.5 guiding catheter was used to intubate his left coronary system. An activated clotting time of 270 seconds was achieved. A 3.0×18mm bare metal stent (Gazelle, Medtronic, United States of America) was deployed in the midsegment of his LAD with optimal angiographic result and Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction grade flow 3 in his LAD artery (Figure D,
E,
F). During the operation his diagonal artery was protected with another wire. He was not given glycoprotein (Gp) IIb/IIIa inhibitors because of his low platelet number. The sheath introducer was removed after 6 hours with manual compression of the puncture site. His platelet number was between 57,000 and 63,000/μL in hospital. No bleeding or ischemic condition was observed. During his stay in hospital, he was given another dose of IVIG on the advice of the hematology clinic. He was discharged on aspirin 325mg and clopidogrel 75mg. His platelet level upon discharge was 159,000/μL. After 2 weeks, he has no symptoms and the movement of his left ventricular walls was found to be normal in his echocardiography.