A 10-year-old Iranian girl was referred for evaluation of a large mass in the medial aspect of the distal right thigh. The mass was found at age five and diagnosed as lipoma by a pediatrician who cautioned the parents to return if it grew faster or caused new symptoms. The patient returned after 5 years with an enlarged mass. The mass was painless, mobile, well-defined, non-pulsatile, non-inflamed, and 5 cm wide in diameter. She was a student and lived with her family in an urban area. They had no previous medical issues and denied smoking and substance abuse.
She had no abdominal pain or discomfort, no chest pain or cough. There was no history of weight loss, hyperhidrosis, trauma, walking issues, discharge, or lesions on other sites. The patient's vital signs were normal, she was afebrile, and the neuro-vascular assessment was normal.
The ultrasonography evaluation demonstrated an extra-articular multilobular cystic lesion in the right distal thigh, characterized by a thickened wall and collapsible hypoechoic structures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a multicystic lesion measuring 7 × 7 cm between the Sartorius and vastus medialis muscles. Contents of cysts show high T2 and low T1 signal intensity, and the whole lesion had a thick irregular capsule with distinct borders . No abnormal enhancement or signs of solid components were seen in post-contrast images. Based on the imaging results, the hydatid cyst and benign cystic soft tissue tumor emerged as the primary differential diagnosis; therefore, additional radiological investigations of various body regions and serological tests were undertaken on the patient.
Despite the lack of exposure to dogs, laboratory studies for hydatid cysts were conducted for her due to MRI characteristics and the hydatidosis endemicity in Iran. All hematologic and serologic tests, including specific Immunoglobulin G against Echinococcus
granulosus, total IgE, eosinophil count, ESR, and CRP, were normal.
Considering that one of the primary diagnoses was hydatid cyst, we administered Albendazole 15 mg/kg/day for 8 weeks preoperatively based on the infectious diseases service consultation. We prepared the patient for a wide excisional biopsy. Under general anesthesia and via medial approach, using an elliptical incision and preserving the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve, an oval cyst with a diameter of about 7 cm was found after opening the fascia between the vastus medialis and Sartorius muscles. The cyst was carefully excised with about 1cm margin without damaging the capsule . After dissecting the cyst and observing the germinal membrane and daughter cysts, the diagnosis of a hydatid cyst was confirmed. For more caution, gowns, gloves, and surgical sets were changed, and adding the suture, the operative field was washed with hypertonic saline. After inserting two subfascial vacuum drains, the fascia was sewn layer by layer.
The wound healed 2 weeks after surgery, and the stitches were removed. The infectious diseases service suggested to continue Albendazole 15 mg/kg/day for 3 months following surgery. In addition to reconfirming the diagnosis of hydatid cyst via histopathology, the results indicated that the protoscolices were non-viable. Following the pathologist’s confirmation of the diagnosis, abdominal and chest computed tomography (CT) scans and MRI of the brain were conducted to rule out multifocal hydatidosis. Twelve months after surgery, imaging studies exhibited no evidence of recurrence.