A 24-year-old Japanese pregnant female presented with severe pruritis and jaundice in the 15th week of her first pregnancy and was referred to our department. She had never been diagnosed with a constitutional hyperbilirubinemia. Physical examination revealed skin and conjunctival jaundice. No nausea, vomiting, headache, or fatigue were noted, and her blood pressure and other physiological tests were normal. Laboratory tests revealed the increased levels of direct bilirubin (D-Bil, 4.0 mg/dl), aspartate aminotransferase (AST, 264 IU/l), alanine aminotransferase (ALT, 545 IU/l), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH, 241 IU/l). Total bile acid level was high (89.6 μmol/l), and the ratio of the cytotoxic chenodeoxycholic acid to total bile acid (C/BA) was 0.24 at the time of admission . No hemolysis or decrease in platelet count was observed, and tests for viral markers including hepatitis A, B, and C and autoimmune markers including anti-nuclear, anti-mitochondrial, and anti-phospholipid antibodies were negative. Slight increases in AFP (α-fetoprotein) to 36 ng/ml and AFP-L3 (Lens culinaris agglutinin -reactive α-fetoprotein isoform) to 32.8%, which are often found in pregnancy were detected and protein induced by Vitamin K absence or antagonists-II (PIVKAII) showed normal level . No proteinuria or ketonuria was noted on urine tests. Ultrasonography revealed no chronic damage or acute fatty infiltration in the liver. Computed tomography was not utilized due to the pregnancy. The patient’s mother had a history of third-trimester pruritis; however, her symptoms were milder, and she had no history of fetal death or preterm delivery. No symptoms were marked in her grandmother. Based on these findings, she was diagnosed with ICP with severe clinical symptoms, although rare in the Japanese population. To support the diagnosis, we obtained the patient’s written informed consent and performed genomic sequencing of genes such as ABCB4 and ABCB11, the genetic variations of which have been reported to be related to the etiology and severity of the disease (approved by the ethics committee at the Niigata University, No. 536). Sequencing of all the coding exons of the genes revealed a nonsynonymous homozygous mutation in ABCB11 and a synonymous mutation in ABCB4 . The nonsynonymous polymorphism in ABCB11 was a major single-nucleotide exchange from thymine to cytosine at the position 1331 (1331 T > C), leading to an exchange from valine to alanine (V444A). This has been reported to be strongly associated with ICP based on a large cohort study . The synonymous mutation in ABCB4 was 504 C > T, which has never been reported to be association with the disease.
After the diagnosis of ICP, the patient was treated with UDCA (300 mg daily) from the 18th day of her admission and the dose was increased to 600 mg daily at 13 weeks after the admission since the level of ALT showed mild increasing pattern . Her pruritis slowly improved, and D-Bil, AST, ALT, and LDH levels slowly decreased to normal ranges after the initiation of the administration of UDCA and returned to the normal levels of 0.6 mg/dl, 17 IU/l, 20 IU/l, and 135 IU/l, respectively within 3 weeks after the spontaneous preterm delivery of a healthy and well-developed infant at the 35th week of gestation . Her C/BA ratio decreased to 0.19 (total bile acid level of 270.3 μmol/l) within 12 weeks and returned to the minimum level of 0.02 (total bile acid level of 42.5 μmol/l) just after delivery. The administration of UDCA was discontinued 3 weeks after delivery, and no symptom recurrence or increases in the level of hepatobiliary enzymes were observed.