On October 30, 2019, a 54-year-old man was admitted to our neurological disease ward due to intermittent throbbing headache lasting for 20 years that had grown notably worse over the past week. Twenty years earlier, he started to have intermittent throbbing headache after severe influenza. The patient complained his headache was always triggered by cold wind and it was localized to the side of his head blown by a cold wind. He also experienced nausea and vomiting when the headache became severe. The headaches usually lasted for 3–4 h after he was blown by the cold wind, though he had no fever. The weather had been cold for the past week, so the frequency and severity of his headaches had increased. So, he was afraid to use air-conditioning in hot summer and he must wear thick hat and scarf in winter when he went outside. He claimed to have no other significant medical history than chronic hepatitis B. Because his headache was tolerable and not severe, he occasionally used painkillers.
He was awake and alert with normal mental status. His vital signs were within normal limits. Cranial nerve examination was unremarkable. Movement and sensation were symmetrical in his extremities. His neck was supple with a negative Kernig’s sign and Brudzinksi’s sign. Lumbar puncture was performed, but intracranial pressure (ICP) was not measured. The number of white blood cells (WBCs) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was 1/μL. There was no atypical cell. The lymphocyte ratio and monocyte ratio were 0.69 and 0.31, respectively. The sugar level was 50 mg/dL (serum 90 mg/dL) and the protein level was moderately high at 510 mg/L. Ink staining, acid-fast staining, and culture were negative. A positive result was shown for Aspergillus fumigatus by nanopore targeted sequencing (NTS) of CSF (kit provided by Wuhan Dgensee Clinical Laboratory Co. Ltd., Wuhan, China; Laboratory at Wuhan University People’s Hospital, Wuhan, China). The reads for Aspergillus fumigatus was 1176 by NTS. D-dimer was 3.25 mg/L and fibrinogen degradation product was 11.50 mg/L. These were markedly higher than the normal levels. The conventional and contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was negative for parenchymal and meningeal lesions. Additional examination showed a negative blood routine, sedimentation rate, liver and kidney function, cellular immunity, and humoral immunity. The patient was advised to inject fluconazole at the local hospital, 0.2 g each time, twice a day, for 14 days. He did so, but his headaches persisted. The patient returned to our neurological clinic on November 19. Lumbar puncture was performed in the outpatient department, but ICP was still not measured. The protein level was increased to 1090 mg/L. Blood tests for Aspergillus (Wuhan Kangsheng Global Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China) revealed IgG antibody to Aspergillus fumigatus 104.62 AU/mL, Aspergillus galactomannan (GM) antigen 3.27 μg/L, which were markedly higher than the normal levels. The patient was re-admitted to the hospital on December 9. On the day of the admission, lumbar puncture indicated an ICP of 240 mmH2O, WBCs 2/μL, lymphocyte ratio 0.63, monocyte ratio 0.35, glucose concentration 50 mg/dL, and protein concentration 590 mg/L. Ink staining, acid-fast staining, and CSF culture were negative. The cryptococcal antigen was negative. So, he was diagnosed as probable aspergillosis infection of central nervous system. He received voriconazole 0.2 g each time, twice a day from December 10. On December 15, repeat tests showed Aspergillus IgG 45.92 AU/mL and GM antigen < 0.25 μg/L, which were normal. After 7 days of treatment, he had nausea and his liver function was mildly impaired. Entecavir and magnesium Isoglycyrrhizinate was prescribed to protect his liver function. On December 23, his headache relieved significantly and nausea was disappeared. Lumbar puncture was repeated and showed a normal CSF analysis: ICP 170 mmH2O, white blood cell count 2/μL, lymphocyte ratio 0.45, monocyte ratio 0.55, glucose level 65 mg/dL, and protein level 430 mg/L. Aspergillus was negative by NTS test of CSF. The liver function was normal. He was discharged on the same day. It was recommended that he continue oral voriconazole tablets, 0.2 g each time, twice daily for 10 weeks. On January 16, 2020, he returned to the clinic without a headache for 20 days. The D-dimer and fibrinogen degradation product were 0.35 mg /L and 4.3 mg /L, respectively, which were both normal. On March 26, 2020, we followed up with him, he has stopped taking voriconazole tablets for 3 weeks and had no headache for 3 months. He was satisfied with the treatment.