An obese 21-year-old male with no other past medical history presented to the emergency
department (ED) with 3 days of cough, fevers, shortness of breath, pleuritic chest pain, and
1 day of light-headedness with near syncope as well as acutely worsened dyspnoea. He denied
contact with sick persons, exertional chest pain, weight loss, night sweats, abdominal pain,
changes in bladder or bowel habits, and recent travel, surgery, or prolonged immobilization.
Upon arrival, he was febrile (38.9°C), tachycardic (121 beats per minute), normotensive
(104/66 mmHg), and hypoxic saturating 82% on room air, however, improved to 100% with
non-rebreather mask at 15 L/min.
Obesity: body mass index (BMI) 37.
This patient’s presentation with chest pain, dyspnoea, and near syncope preceded by cough
and fever in the midst of a global pandemic raised concerns for COVID-19 and
community-acquired pneumonia as well as pneumothorax and pulmonary embolism.
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 nasopharyngeal qualitative polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) was positive. electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated evidence of right heart
strain as well as S wave in lead I, Q wave and inverted T wave in lead III (S1Q3T3), a
pattern associated with acute PE . Point of care ultrasound demonstrated right ventricular free wall
hypokinesis with preserved apical contractility (McConnel’s sign), also consistent with PE.
Initial D-Dimer was elevated at 3.71 mcg/mL (Ref. range ≤0.49), troponin-T was elevated at
0.04 ng/mL (Ref. range ≤0.00), and pro-BNP NT was elevated at 4573 pg/mL (Ref. range ≤125).
A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) demonstrated pulmonary emboli involving the
bilateral pulmonary arteries, including the central, segmental, and subsegmental branches.
There was also enlargement of the pulmonary trunk and flattening of the interventricular
septum, with right ventricle to left ventricle ratio of 1.4 to 1 .
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) on high-flow nasal cannula and
intravenous (IV) unfractionated heparin (UFH) infusion (goal PTT 60–80 s) with stable vital
signs. Twelve hours after initial presentation, the patient became increasingly hypoxic and
persistently hypotensive with systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg. At this point, he was
presumptively diagnosed with massive PE, and urgently underwent CDT of the bilateral
pulmonary arteries utilizing the EKOS™ Endowave Infusion Catheter System (1 mg/h tissue
plasminogen activator (tPA) per side over 6 h). Intravenous heparin infusion was continued
(goal PTT 40–60 s during tPA infusion, 60–80 s post-tPA infusion). Following CDT, the
patient improved clinically and was transferred to the general medicine floor on hospital
Day 3 with minimal supplemental oxygen and plan to discharge with oral anticoagulation.
On hospital Day 4, the patient was initially normotensive with blood pressure 114/64 mmHg
and saturating 99% on 2 L/min of oxygen via nasal cannular when he developed acute
respiratory failure with oxygen saturation of 65% requiring non-re-breather mask and
hypotension with blood pressure 70/30 mmHg. The patient was subsequently intubated and
developed cardiac arrest regaining spontaneous circulation after two rounds of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and one electrical shock. Vasopressor support was initiated
with norepinephrine, epinephrine, vasopressin, and phenylephrine. Due to persistent
haemodynamic instability, veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was initiated at
bedside. Recurrence of massive PE was suspected, but a repeat CTPA could not be obtained due
to clinical instability. Instead, the patient was taken to the catheterization laboratory
where a pulmonary angiogram demonstrated bilateral pulmonary emboli with interval worsening
of clot burden compared to index CTPA . Repeat CDT of the bilateral pulmonary arteries was performed (2 mg/h
tPA per side over 6 h) with continuous systemic IV UFH infusion (goal PTT 50–60 s during tPA
infusion, 60–80 s post-tPA infusion).
Over the next 48 h, ventilation parameters improved, and vasopressors were discontinued.
Repeat pulmonary angiography demonstrated significant improvement in the right central
pulmonary embolism, with residual obstruction of the left central pulmonary artery
. Venous duplex
ultrasound was then performed demonstrating non-occlusive thrombus of the right femoral vein
and right popliteal vein. An inferior vena cava filter was placed, and the patient’s
anticoagulation regimen was transitioned from UFH to low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH)
(Enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg every 12 h) due to concern for failure of anticoagulation.
Hypercoagulable workup consisting of Beta-2 Glycoprotein, Cardiolipin, and Phospholipid
Antibodies as well as Prothrombin A and Factor V Leiden gene mutations was unremarkable. The
patient was successfully weaned from ECMO on hospital Day 10 and extubated on hospital Day
31.
The remainder of the hospital course was notable for septic shock treated with broad
spectrum antibiotics and development of a right thigh haematoma and compartment syndrome
requiring surgical debridement on hospital Day 40. Postoperatively, the patient was
transitioned to rivaroxaban 15 mg twice daily for 21 days and 20 mg once daily thereafter.
On hospital Day 52, the patient was discharged to an acute rehabilitation facility.
The patient returned home 67 days after admission and was able to perform activities of
daily living independently. The patient remained anticoagulated on rivaroxaban 20 mg daily
and had no major adverse events 4 months following discharge.