A 5-year-old boy presented mainly with ADHD and developmental retardation accompanied by gait instability and abnormal facial features (low-set ears). DNA samples were extracted from the child’s and his parents’ peripheral blood to detect whole-exome sequences and whole-genome copy number variations (CNVs). The results revealed heterozygous deletions of exon 6-21 of FOXP1 gene in the child.
In 2018, a 3-year-old boy presented to our hospital with a 3-year history of developmental retardation. Since birth, the child had lagged behind in development; he had progressive improvements, could not pronounce words properly, could not utter any meaningful sentences, had symptoms of ADHD, and could perform only simple actions. The child learned to sit when he was aged approximately 9 mo. He could crawl when he was 1-year-old and only learned to walk independently when he was 2-years-old. He was admitted to our hospital for etiological diagnosis and treatment. Now, the child has ADHD, developmental retardation, gait instability, and low-set ears.
The child was his parents’ first. He was delivered by cesarean section at term, with a birth weight of 3.35 kg and a body length of 50 cm. He had no birth trauma or puerperal tetany, but he had a history of amniotic infection and jaundice for 1 mo. No obvious reason could be proposed for his developmental retardation with progressive improvements. The child had a normal diet without preferences. Hydrocephalus and atrial septal defect were revealed during prenatal examination at 32 wk.
The parents were in good health, and they denied consanguineous marriage and a history of familial inherited diseases.
Physical examination upon admission showed that the child was generally in good condition, had a moderate nutritional status, a slightly slow response to external stimuli, equally large and equally round bilateral pupils, was sensitive to light reflection, and had poor eye contact and joint attention. He had no meaningful utterance and could not pronounce words properly. He was able to use gestures to simply express his thoughts, to perform simple actions, and to listen to instructions. He had no rash, cafe-au-lait macules, or depigmentation spots. He had thick black hair and low-set ears. He had highly sensitive skin, especially on his face and palms. He had no abnormal palm fingerprint. Cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations revealed no abnormalities. He had normal limb muscle strength and tension. He showed normal tendon reflexes of both knees. His bilateral Babinski and meningeal irritation signs were negative. He had a normal male vulva.
He exhibited restricted interest in common things and even had imaginary play with toys as a substitute for real things. He was capable of sitting and walking independently. He could pinch small pills with his thumb and forefinger and unscrew bottle caps. He could doodle with a pen in hand and build three layers of blocks. He showed uncoordinated walking movements. He was observed to easily fall. He was incapable of running, jumping.
Auxiliary examinations were conducted. Head magnetic resonance imaging on September 3, 2018 revealed slight dilatation of the right ventricle, with inborn anomalies considered. Vacuole turcica electrocardiography showed trace tricuspid regurgitation (with physiological considerations).
Cardiac function and electroencephalography (EEG) found no abnormalities.
Before treatment, the patient was rated according to the Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC), Gesell Developmental Schedules, and S-S Language Delay Assessment. He had an ABC score of 67 points on August 16, 2018. According to S-S Language Delay Assessment, the patient was categorized as Class I, with language delay, and the development level was about 2.0–2.5-years-old. According to Gesell Developmental Schedules, the patients had an adaptive development quotient of 44.13, with his language and personal–social skills severely lagging behind, and his other skills were moderately lagging behind.
The patient was preliminarily diagnosed with autism with dysphasia accompanied by mental retardation on the basis of his clinical manifestations and laboratory results. After regular rehabilitation treatment and functional exercises, his abilities in various fields developed: He could maintain eye contact; he could flexibly communicate every day using different sentence patterns; he could clearly articulate every note, although his speech was a little slow; he could perform two-step actions; and he could play simple drama games with adults familiar to him to reproduce life scenes, as well as perform parallel plays with peers without understanding the rules of the games. He is now capable of running, jumping, alternating his feet while going up and down the stairs, ride a scooter, build nine layers of blocks, and imitate circles, squares and crosses.