A 47-year-old Caucasian male presented to the sector of oral medicine “V. Margiotta”, University Policlinic “P. Giaccone” of Palermo complaining of a mass on the gingiva. He first noticed the painless mass 1 year ago. He reported to have undergone HSCT 15 years ago for acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and had developed cGVHD of the mouth, liver and lungs 24 months after transplantation. cGVHD compatible lesions were treated with dexamethasone 0.01% mouthrinse 5–10 ml as a mouthwash twice daily for 5 or 10 min for 1 month.
Intraoral examination revealed a well-circumscribed, sessile yellowish and verrucous nodule upon canine, multiple yellowish and verrucous nodules on the hard palate , yellowish and verrucous nodules on left buccal mucosa . In addiction, an area of white striae in a reticular pattern with erythema and ulceration was present on the dorsum of the tongue. This lesion was consistent with a known history of oral cGVHD . Moreover, we observed a suspected area of oral erythroplakia yet on the dorsum of the tongue.
After obtaining an informed consent from the patient, an incisional biopsy was performed with 6 mm diameter punches biopsy one in hard palate, and one on the dorsum of the tongue. The biopsy specimens were processed routinely in 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin.
In biopsy specimen of hard palate histopathological examination revealed crypts between the epithelial projections filled with parakeratin, and rete ridges elongated to a uniform depth; connective tissue papillae composed of numerous large macrophages with foamy cytoplasm . Based on these findings, a diagnosis of OVX was established.
In biopsy specimen of the dorsum of the tongue histopathological examination revealed epithelium with a lack of keratin production and nuclear hyperchromatism, pleomorphism and cellular crowding alterations from the basal layer throughout most the epithelial thickness, although slight maturation and flattening of the cells appeared to be present at the surface; the underlying connective tissue demonstrated chronic inflammation . Based on these clinical-pathological findings, a diagnosis of erythroplakia with high grade dysplasia was established.
As previously reported, the current treatment OVX consists in surgical resection of the lesion, and recurrence and malignant transformation of this lesion are rarely documented, and usually OVX has a good prognosis .