A 73-year-old man suffering from non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy in NYHA class I was admitted to our hospital because of recurrent VT episodes. summarizes the patient's clinical history.
Cardiovascular risk factors included: former smoking habit, dyslipidemia and a long-term history of systemic arterial hypertension. Noteworthy comorbidities included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) treated with long-term oxygen therapy and nocturnal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). In July 2020 he suffered an episode of spontaneous pneumothorax (PNX), which was successfully treated with blebectomy and chemical pleurodesis.
The underlying cause of the patient's cardiomyopathy had been studied throughout the years by performing multiple coronary angiographies, which showed no evidence of significant coronary artery stenoses. In 2012 he was implanted with a single-chamber implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) in primary prevention. He also underwent successful atrial fibrillation catheter ablation and atrial flutter catheter ablation.
About 1 year before hospitalization, the patient started experiencing frequent ICD shocks (often during the night), which severely impacted his quality of life. In May 2020, device interrogation showed recurrent VT episodes, either sustained or interrupted by antitachycardia pacing (ATP) or direct-current (DC) shock, therefore optimized anti-arrhythmic therapy with Amiodarone 200 mg twice daily and Mexiletine 200 mg three times a day was started. In April 2021, an electrophysiological study (EPs) showed induction of multiple VTs of different morphologies. All induced VTs caused hemodynamic instability.
The patient was admitted to our Cardiology department in November 2021 to undergo VT ablation. During the 2 months before admission, device interrogation showed that the patient experienced 4 episodes of VT recurrence, all ended by DC shock.
A baseline echocardiogram showed left ventricle (LV) hypertrophy (IVS: 17 mm) and dilation (LVEDVi 76 ml/mq) and a moderately reduced ejection fraction (50%), with inferior basal wall hypokinesia. Cardiac Magnetic Resonance imaging (MRI) was not performed due to the presence of a non MRI-conditional device.
3D Electroanatomic mapping (EAM) of the left ventricle was carried out with the Abbott EnSite system by retroaortic approach. The bipolar map showed low voltage areas (bipolar voltage 0.5–1.5 mV) in the inferior mid LV (total area: 1.4 cm2), while the unipolar map showed a more extended low voltage area (unipolar voltage 5.5–8 mV) in the inferolateral LV (total area: 2.8 cm2). Two VTs were induced: the first one (VT1) showed a RBBB morphology, with a cycle length (CL) of 345 s (174 bpm); the second (VT2) showed a CL of 322 s (186 bpm). respectively show Bipolar and Unipolar EAMs of the patient's left ventricle.
Since the arrhythmia was not hemodynamically tolerated, endocardial substrate mapping was attempted but turned out to be unsuccessful because of VT2's persistent inducibility at programmed ventricular stimulation. Moreover, various ECG features pointed toward VT of epicardial origin (MDI 0.55) . Epicardial approach through percutaneous subxyphoid puncture was therefore attempted. Three attempts from three different electrophysiologists were made, all failing due to the impossibility to advance the guidewire in the pericardial space. Considering the patient's past history of chemical pleurodesis and the related pleuro-pericarditic reaction, no further direct epicardial access attempts were made. STAR was therefore proposed to the patient and informed consent was given.