A six year old Indian male born to non-consanguineous parents presented for routine outpatient review for monitoring of deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2). On systems review, he had a 24-h history of nausea and vomiting, followed by acute, moderate right-sided testicular pain, without fever.
His past medical history included an isolated episode of transient neutropenia as an infant, in association with hepatosplenomegaly which was considered at the time to be due to intercurrent viral infection. These features resolved completely, but at the age of 5 years he was referred to our centre with lower limb rash considered to be cutaneous PAN. Examination revealed typical livedo racemosa mainly involving the lower limbs, with no other abnormalities detected on full examination of all systems. Consequently, genetic screening of ADA2 and assessment of serum ADA2 enzyme activity was undertaken. These revealed homozygous c.139G > C mutation (p.G47R) of ADA2, and absent (i.e. undetectable) serum ADA2 enzyme activity, detected as part of routine care, as previously described by our group , confirming the diagnosis of DADA2. His parents were heterozygous for the same mutation; a 3 year old female sibling was bi-allelic wild type for ADA2; and there was no family history of vasculitis, autoimmunity or immunodeficiency. Investigations performed prior to the acute presentation as part of general workup for DADA2 revealed: normal complete blood count (including normal differential white cell counts); normal renal and liver function; serum amyloid A (SAA) 8.2 mg/L (reference range [RR] < 10 mg/L); C-reactive protein (CRP) < 5 mg/L (RR < 20 mg/L); erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) < 10 mm/hour (RR < 10 mm/hour); normal coagulation screen; negative viral hepatitis screen; normal immunoglobulin G, A, and M levels; negative screening for coeliac disease; negative autoantibody screening (Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), ANCA (Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) rheumatoid factor, and thyroid peroxidase antibodies); and normal brain and brainstem magnetic resonance imaging, and magnetic resonance angiography. Since his only clinical feature was mild cutaneous involvement, and he was otherwise completely asymptomatic and with completely normal laboratory and imaging workup, he was kept under close surveillance without treatment, since it is known that DADA2 can vary considerably in clinical severity, with adult asymptomatic cases described previously .
At the acute presentation, he was afebrile and haemodynamically stable. Systemic examination including full neurological examination was normal except for livedo racemosa on his lower limbs . He was also noted to have a mildly swollen and tender right testicle, but without typical clinical features of torsion. Repeat laboratory workup revealed a normal full blood count (haemoglobin 125 g/L; total white cell count 6.56 X109/L [RR 5–15]; platelets 306 X109/L [RR150–450]); normal liver, renal and coagulation profile. ESR was mildly elevated at 28 mm/hr. [RR < 10]; CRP of 17 mg/L [RR < 20]; and SAA 5 mg/L (RR < 10). Screening for antiphospholipid syndrome was negative for lupus anticoagulant (normal direct Russell Viper venom test; and negative anticardiolipin IgG autoantibodies). Ultrasound-scan (USS) of the testes showed significantly reduced perfusion of the right testes compared to the left , with no suspicion of torsion. He underwent an urgent surgical exploration and testicular biopsy. There was no evidence of testicular torsion found intraoperatively. Histology showed ischaemic seminiferous tubules with intervening haemorrhage and acute inflammatory cells which was consistent with an underlying vasculitic process, although no vessels were visible in the specimen to confirm that definitively . Post-operatively, he was pulsed with intravenous methyl-prednisolone (30 mg per kilogram for 3 consecutive days); followed by 2 mg per kilogram of daily oral prednisolone tapering off over 6 weeks; adalimumab 20 mg subcutaneously every 2 weeks (dose-banded, based on weight of 27.4Kg); and anti-aggregant dose of aspirin, 75 mg daily. He recovered well from the surgery and was discharged on post-operative day 3. Repeat USS at three weeks showed good perfusion of the testicular parenchyma on the right, with a small area of focal infarction. At last follow-up (11 months after the acute presentation) he remains well on 40 mg of adalimumab every 2 weeks (weight now 32 kg), and daily aspirin. Apart from the mild elevation of ESR detected on the day of presentation with testicular ischaemia, all blood tests including CRP and SAA have remained steadfastly within the reference range before, during, and after testicular infarction .