A 43-year-old male patient presented with intermittent dyspnea during sleep for 20 days and underwent TTE at a local hospital, which revealed a left atrial myxoma. He was referred to our hospital for surgical evaluation and was further directed to the cardiothoracic surgery department. The patient denied any history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and tobacco use. Upon physical examination, a moderate diastolic murmur was auscultated at the cardiac apex area. Electrocardiography showed a sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 63 beats per minute. All initial laboratory tests were within normal limits, except for a mild elevation in B-type natriuretic peptide (108 pg/L). Additionally, hemoglobin was 143 g/L, albumin was 38.5 g/L, aspartate aminotransferase was 13 U/L, alanine aminotransferase was 12 U/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 2 mm/hour, and Troponin was 0.011 μg/L. TTE demonstrated an almost echoless mass measuring 4.6 × 4.4 cm with well-defined margins in the left atrium, which was attached to the atrial septum with a narrow base . TEE showed a large cystic mass in the left atrium that protruding into the mitral valve during diastole, causing mild mitral stenosis . A cardiac CT scan displayed a giant tumor located in the left atrium with heterogeneous density following enhancement, suggesting the possibility of a myxoma .
The patient underwent a video-assisted thoracic surgery using the Da Vinci surgical system (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA). After double-lumen intubation, cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established by femoral artery and vein cannulation, and a right-sided incision was made to access the chest cavity. During the surgery, a giant parenchymal cyst was found in the left atrium with a pedicle attached to the atrial septum, which was intact . We attempted to completely remove this lesion. Unfortunately, the cyst accidentally ruptured during resection, causing blood to flow out and resulting in its collapse. Nevertheless, the tumor was completely removed without causing any damage to the adjacent tissue. The total operation time was 2 h and 14 min, the CPB time was 1 h and 18 min, and the cross-clamp time was 35 min. Pathological examination revealed a smooth cyst wall with a thickness of 0.1–0.2 cm. The cyst wall consisted of small stellate and fat spindle cells with round, oval, or elongated nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm, surrounded by a mucoid matrix. The tumor cells were arranged in a linear pattern and oriented towards the blood vessels, with no cytological atypia present . The postoperative recovery process was uneventful, and the patient was transferred from the intensive care unit to the general ward on the second day after surgery, and discharged nine days later, with normal mitral valve and left ventricular functions confirmed through echocardiography before discharge. During the follow-up period, there was no recurrence of myxoma.