A healthy 22-year-old Asian male with no specific past medical, social, family, or environmental history presented with extensive burns. In addition, there was no specific medication, smoking history, or alcohol consumption. The cause of the accident was a methanol-based paint spill on his clothes that ignited; this incident occurred at a plating factory . He was transferred to our hospital for emergency treatment. On arrival, his vital signs included a respiratory rate of 24 breaths/minute, blood pressure of 165/102 mmHg, and pulse rate of 90/minute. His body temperature was 37.3 degrees Celsius. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was E4 V5 M6, and there was no motor or sensory paralysis. Physical examination revealed 25% total-body-surface-area flame burns (7% partial thickness on the trunk and right hand and 18% full thickness on the right arm, both legs, and chest). There were no problems with hand function. On day 2 after admission, the wounds on his two thighs and right arm were debrided, and Integra dermal regeneration templates (Integra LifeSciences Holdings Corporation, Princeton, NJ, USA) were applied. On day 9 after admission, the wounds on his right lower leg, right arm, and chest were debrided, and 1:3 meshed 10/1000-inch (0.26 mm) STSGs were applied. On day 16 after admission, the Integra silicone sheet was removed, and 1:3 meshed 10/1000-inch (0.26 mm) STSGs were applied. Epithelialization had occurred in most parts of the burn; however, the graft failed in the proximal one-third portion of the left thigh, resulting in an ulcer. With topical treatment with a silver-impregnated hydrofiber dressing (Aquacel® Ag BURN: ConvaTec, Princeton, NJ, USA) for 6 days, petroleum gel (PROPETO®; Maruishi Pharmaceutical Co., Tokyo, Japan) for 6 days, a hydrocortisone-bacterial culture suspension mixture ointment (Eksalb, Maruho, Osaka, Japan) for 3 days, and silicone-faced wound dressing mesh (SI-mesh; ALCARE, Tokyo, Japan) for 3 days, the ulcer was covered with healthy granulation tissue .
On day 37 after admission, an operation was performed. The ulcer surface was debrided, and an 11/1000-inch (0.28 mm) skin graft was taken from the ipsilateral thigh and meshed, using a 1:1.5 ratio. A slightly larger skin graft was taken, and the excess skin graft was immediately regrafted to the donor site. The regrafted skin was meshed using a 1:1.5 ratio, the same as the recipient site. NPWT (INFOV.A.C.™ Therapy System, KCI, San Antonio, TX, USA) was then applied to both the donor and recipient sites with a continuous negative pressure of 125 mmHg. A silicone-faced wound dressing mesh (SI-mesh) was inserted between the skin graft and polyurethane foam dressing (V.A.C. GranuFoam Dressing, KCI, San Antonio, TX, USA) to avoid damage to the skin graft . On days 37 and 38 after admission, 1 g of cefazolin was administered intravenously every 8 hours as perioperative prophylaxis.
On day 43 after admission, the polyurethane foam dressing was removed from both the donor and recipient sites. Although the regrafted skin at the donor site was taken completely, the skin graft was not found at the recipient site, and the entire area was covered with granulation tissue . No granulation tissue overgrowth was observed at the donor site. The staples that had held the grafts in place were embedded in the granulation tissue and were removed. On the same day, the wound was cleaned under running tap water, and small islands of epithelialization were visible under the granulation tissue. NPWT was ceased, and topical treatment with a hydrocortisone-bacterial culture suspension mixture ointment (Eksalb) was applied . Rapid epithelialization of the ulcer was observed as the granulation tissue regressed, and epithelialization of both the donor and recipient sites was almost completed on day 48 after admission (5 days after NPWT cessation) . No significant change was observed between pre- and postoperative laboratory findings . In addition, no significant findings were observed in urinalysis on day 17 , and no further urinalysis was performed during hospitalization because no specific symptoms appeared. The patient was discharged on day 52 after admission and was referred to the local plastic surgery clinic for follow-up, and had recovered uneventfully at 6 months after surgery. The hand was healed without complications.