In July 2016, a 4-year-old girl was admitted to our department complaining of decreased vision and cough after physical activities. Ten months before hospitalization, she suffered from blurred vision, which grew rapidly worse within one month, until only light perception remained. In her local hospital, she was diagnosed with uveitis and cataract, and received prednisone, ciclosporin A, and local symptomatic treatment. The ocular lesions did not further exacerbate. Three months before hospitalization, the girl began to cough after exercise, with no fevers or other symptoms. Examinations showed normal blood routines and biochemical indicators, as well as a slightly increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 29 mm/h). There were no positive findings from the pulmonary CT scan or electrocardiogram, while an ultrasonic cardiogram showed bilateral CAAs, hypertrophic interventricular septum and left ventricular wall, and mitral and aortic valve insufficiency. Other significant findings were increased EBV-DNA (3.29 × 104 copies/mL) in the peripheral blood, and positive EBV antibodies (EBV-CA-IgG, EBV-EA-IgA, and EBV-NA-IgG). She was given aspirin and ganciclovir, and the cough subsided. This patient did not suffer from recurrent infections, having no other medical history and no family history of PID. She had an elder sister (17 years old), who was healthy with no known diseases. Physical examination showed vision loss (only light perception remaining), systolic murmur at the apex, and slight hepatosplenomegaly.
The examinations after hospitalization showed generally normal brain MRI manifestations, and similar results for ophthalmic tests and the ultrasonic cardiogram as before (inner diameters of left and right coronary arteries: 5.0 mm and 5.7 mm respectively). The pulmonary CT scan showed extensive parenchymal and interstitial lesions of the lungs bilaterally , and abdominal CT scan revealed a thickened aortic wall, as well as stenosis and dilation of the segmental abdominal aorta . There were no apparent abnormal findings in other vessels. Blood EBV-DNA and EBV antibodies were still positive, but autoantibodies were negative. There was no evidence for other infections, including other human herpes viruses [such as herpes simplex virus (HSV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8)], human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), tuberculosis, toxoplasmosis, and syphilis. The immunoglobulin and complement levels were within normal range. Lymphocyte subgroups showed an increased percentage of CD3+ T cells and a decreased percentage of B cells and NK cells. The proportion of CD4+ T cells increased, and the ratio of CD4+ T to CD8+ T cells was also elevated . A bone marrow smear was near normal, while bone marrow biopsy showed much infiltration of lymphoid cells, which had mildly irregular nuclei . Positive CD3/CD5/CD7/CD2 (partially)/TIA-1/GrB (sparsely)/ki67 (80%) and negative CD20/CD56 were revealed by immunohistochemistry, and the presence of EBV-encoded small RNAs (EBERs) was shown by in-situ hybridization . We did not find significant pathogenic genes by whole-exome sequencing (WES).
Based on her clinical manifestations, increased EBV-DNA, positive EBV antibodies, and the pathological results of the bone marrow biopsy, we diagnosed the patient with CAEBV. She received allogeneic HSCT (allo-HSCT) in another hospital. The EBV-DNA in the peripheral blood could not be detected after HSCT. Compared with before HSCT, the percentage of CD4+ T cells and the ratio of CD4+ T to CD8+ T cells both decreased after HSCT . The cataract operation was performed after HSCT. Her CAAs did not progress, and uveitis was well controlled. The patient’s vision recovered gradually over the 3 years after HSCT.