A 52-year-old woman with no medical history experienced impaired consciousness while bathing and was brought to our hospital. The primary physical findings upon her admission were a GCS score of E1V2M4, elevated blood pressure (208/145 mmHg) and tachycardia with atrial fibrillation (180 bpm), respiratory rate of 30 breaths/min, and body temperature of 36.1 °C. Brain computed tomography (CT) revealed subarachnoid hemorrhage (Fisher group 2, World Federation Neurological Surgeons; WFNS Grade IV) associated with a ruptured aneurysm of the posterior communicating artery branching from the left internal carotid artery . A thyroid hormone test was performed since tachycardia was also observed. High values of free T3 (23.10 pg/dl) and free T4 (> 7.7 ng/dl) and low values of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH < 0.005 µIU/ml) were observed. As no thyroid dysfunction has been addressed previously, it was further determined to be a case of undiagnosed hyperthyroidism. In addition to the clinical symptoms of tachycardia and diffuse thyroid swelling on imaging, probable Graves’ disease was diagnosed based on high T3 and T4 levels, low TSH levels, and high thyrotropin receptor antibody levels (18.4 IU/l). Although tachycardia continued, vital signs were stabilized, and the aneurysm was irregular with a size of 8 mm and was accompanied by bleb. Therefore, clipping surgery was performed on the same day to prevent re-rupture . The patient’s intraoperative vital signs remained stable. After the operation, oral thiamazole 30 mg/day and beta-blockers were initiated as the treatment for hyperthyroidism and tachycardia, respectively. However, disturbances of consciousness, fever (38.0 °C or higher), and tachycardia of 130 bpm or higher persisted. Thus, we diagnosed the patient as having a thyroid storm according to Japanese diagnostic criteria on the 3rd day [, ]. The dose of thiamazole was increased to 60 mg/day, and oral potassium iodide (200 mg/day) as well as hydrocortisone (300 mg/day) was added . This treatment was successful, and on the 7th day, the patient’s free T3 decreased to 2.85 pg/dl, her heart rate improved to 100 bpm or less, and she became lucid. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed on the 14th day of hospitalization did not show findings suggestive of cerebral vasospasm or cerebral infarction . Drug dosages were gradually tapered off as hydrocortisone was reduced to 30 mg/day on the 15th day, and thiamazole and potassium iodide were reduced to 30 mg/day and 50 mg/day, respectively, for continuous administration. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation facility on the 20th day. Three months after the incident, the patient’s Glasgow Outcome Scale score indicated good recovery, and she achieved a modified Rankin Scale score of 1.