A two months old Saudi Arabian male infant was admitted to the pediatric ward of maternity and children's hospital, Buraidah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the management of multiple ulcers on his face. The ulcers was observed by the parents at the age of one month and progressively increased in size with no history of fever. He was the third child of healthy unrelated boduin Saudi Arabian parents, the mother's age was 35 and the father's age was 40. There was no history of perinatal or postnatal complication. The child was delivered in a tent in the desert where his parents live.
On physical examination, there was severe disfigurement of the face with 3 crusty ulcers Surrounded by a notable erythematous reaction, the biggest one presents on the right cheek and measures 2 × 2 cm. The second ulcer presents on the right lower eye lid and measures 1 × 1.5 cm. The third ulcer presents on the forehead and measures 0.5 × .5 cm . The examination also revealed no lymphadenphathy or hepatosplenomegaly.
On first look to the face of our case, it was difficult to recognize the facial features of Down syndrome because of severe disfigurement of the face, the ulcers were surrounded by extensive edema that caused the eyes to be closed most of the times so the upslanting palpebral fissures which is a very characteristic feature of Down syndrome was not so obvious, in addition the presence of an ulcer near the nasal bridge added more difficulty to recognize the facial features but the presence of hypotonia, flat occiput, short neck, low set ears, short broad hands; clinodactyly of fifth finger; bilateral simian creases of the hands and gap between the first and second toes, directed us to request karyotyping. The result of karyotyping confirmed our suspicion and the diagnosis of Down syndrome was confirmed.
Blood count and immunological study were normal except for the presence of lymphopenia and inverted CD4/CD8 ratio. The baseline erythrocyte sedimentation rate was normal. Liver, kidney, and thyroid function tests (TSH, T3, and T4) were within normal limits. Histopathologic examination of the ulcers' sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin showed a superficial reticular dermis occupied by large pale histiocytes with leishmania. With the Giemsa stain technique multiple leishmania were seen confirming the diagnosis of cutaneous leishmaniasis. After the diagnosis of leishmaniasis, sodium antimony gluconat was administered intravenously along with other antibiotics, the condition started to improve but unfortunately after two weeks of treatment the child was discharged from the hospital under the request and insistence of his parents. The parents were seeking cautery treatment for the ulcers which is a common practice in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; the parents refused all medical advices to continue the treatment in the hospital. The child was discharged and was never seen again.