The patient was a 19-year-old Persian male with a past medical history of sinusitis and allergic rhinitis for four years and episodes of wheezing and shortness of breath for two years who was admitted for fever, productive cough, worsening of dyspnea in the past two months. Two weeks prior to admission, in addition to increased shortness of breath, blood streaks were present in his sputum and he developed gradual paresthesia in his right lower legs. On physical examination, he was in respiratory distress and had coarse crackles and generalized ronchi and wheezing in the lung bases. The level of SPO2 upon admission was 74% and increased to 91% with administration of 6 liters of 40% oxygen via venturi mask. Our patient's hemodynamics were stable except for tachypnea and he was not febrile. A complete blood count showed a white cell count (WBC) of 18,000 with 23% eosinophils with no anemia and the platelet count was 215,000 per cubic millimeter. Liver and renal function tests, blood coagulation studies and electrolytes were within normal limits. Our patient's erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 3mm/h 15 days prior to admission and 14mm/h at the hospital. Blood cultures were negative one week after admission. Urinalysis was normal. Tests for rheumatoid factor (RF), anti nuclear antibodies (ANA), circulating anti neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (cANCA), perinuclear anti neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) as well as C3, C4 and CH50 were negative. Skin tuberculin test (PPD) was negative at 72 hours. Cardiac echography was normal. On the second hospital day, our patient developed hyperesthesia and severe pain in his right lower leg which led to a foot drop on the same side the following day. He underwent EMG (electromyography) and NCV (nerve conduction study) studies that showed neuritis and axonopathy along the common peroneal nerve located below the right knee level. He eventually underwent bronchoscopy and transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) of the right lower lobe and of mucosa of trachea and bronchi. Lung pathology showed infiltration with eosinophilic and limited number of multinucleated giant cells. Bronchi and lung parenchyma were free of signs of vasculitis but accumulation of eosinophils in the alveoli was seen. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) revealed neither mycobacteria nor cancerous cells. A closer look at our patient's past medical history revealed desensitization vaccination for allergy control. The vaccines were first administered twice weekly, every Monday and every Wednesday for four months and again this year, for a period of three months. He had no history of switching inhaled steroid medications to oral steroids or the use of leukotriene antagonists.
During his hospital stay, our patient was treated with oral steroids and cyclophosphamide and he was discharged two weeks after admission in no respiratory distress and good general health.