A 25 year old Asian woman with a history of lupus presented to the emergency room with headaches not responding to over the counter analgesics. The headaches started 6 days prior, with no reported history of trauma. She described the headaches as a gradual onset of intermittent 10/10 sharp right-sided head pain which lasted for several seconds only, and occurred multiple times per day. The pain occasionally spread to the right neck with a pulsating quality but without tinnitus. There was no postural component, no associated migrainous features (including nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, osmophobia, or vision changes), and no trigeminal autonomic symptoms (including facial pallor, facial flushing, lacrimation, or rhinorrhea). In addition, she occasionally had brief lower back spasmic-type pain with no radiation. She did not have any symptoms of coagulopathy including easy bleeding, GI bleeds, epistaxis, or hemoptysis. She carried a diagnosis of lupus with discoid rash and arthralgia as predominant symptoms for which she was taking prednisone 15 mg daily and mycophenylate 500 mg BID (she had self-discontinued the mycophenylate 1 week prior to admission), and a family history significant for a sister who died of anemia of an unknown etiology at the age of 24. Our patient’s neurologic examination was unremarkable.
Given the new onset of severe unilateral headaches without clear symptoms of a primary headache syndrome, head imaging was performed. Brain MRI revealed bilateral infracerebellar and right pre-pontine extra-axial collections most consistent with hematomas (Figure A and B), and basic laboratory studies were significant for an isolated elevation of PTT at 74 with a normal CBC, chemistry panel, liver panel, INR, and urine toxicology screen. Additional imaging included a brain MR venogram with no venous thrombosis, a CT angiogram with no vasculitis or aneurysms, and a spinal MRI with additional subdural hematomas in her cervical and lumbar regions (Figure C and D). Work-up of her elevated PTT revealed a clotting mixing study that failed to correct with a 1:1 ratio to plasma (suggestive of the presence of an inhibitor) and an undetectable factor 8 level, consistent with AHA (one month after treatment the factor 8 activity level was 36% with a normal range of 56–191%). Lupus anticoagulant testing had previously been performed twice over 6 months, with an initial indeterminate anti-cardiolipin IgG of 17 that was normal at 10 on rechecking, and normal levels of anti-cardiolipin IgM, anti-beta-2-glycoprotein IgG, anti-beta-2-glycoprotein IgM, Russell Viper Venom Test, and Russell Viper Venom confirmation testing. Urine pregnancy testing was negative and she was not post-partum. Infectious labs revealed a positive beta-D-glucan and negative galactomannan, but a brochoalveolar lavage that was positive only for candida and rare gram-positive cocci and was negative for acid fast bacilli, other fungi, and viral cultures. Other infectious testing was negative including a nasopharyngeal swab for influenza A and B, urine cultures, blood cultures, histoplasma antigen, and a hepatitis panel. She was started on recombinant factor 7a and rituximab, with repeat imaging showing resolving hematomas.