The patient was a 49 years-old male who was a herder living in Inner Mongolia, the northern part of China. He did not receive any treatment involving corticosteroid nor did he intake large amounts of alcohol. The patient first presented with recurrent fever. A few days later pain in bilateral sides of hips showed. He was admitted to the local hospital, the experimental test indicated that the patient is infected with Brucella spp., plain radiography showed normal contour of the femoral head on the left side whereas the right side had already developed into ARCO Stage IIIA , he did not receive standard treatment for Brucellosis at that time. The patient was also diagnosed with spondylitis and have a history of chronic hepatitis B. His symptom of hips aggravated only after a few months and the patient has been treated with doxycycline and rifampin for 6 weeks at the local hospital. Before discharging the Rose-Bengal Plate Agglutination Test (RBPT) showed weakly positive, the Wright test showed a titer of 1:50 and the Cysteine test showed a titer of 1:20. At the time the patient admitted to our center, both sides of the femoral head were aggravated to ARCO Stage IIIC in plain radiography , and the necrotic lesion showed in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . The patient showed limited active and passive hip movement, the abduction and adduction were significantly restricted, Patrick test and Thomas sign were both positive on both sides, Harris Hip Score were 54 on the right side and 45 on the left side. The Agglutination test of Brucella showed weakly positive, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) levels and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) were within the normal range. We performed bilateral total hip arthroplasty (THA), during the procedure, we used iodophors soaking the wound for 3 min and then irrigated before and after intramedullary reaming to prevent infection. The procedure was successfully performed , and we added doxycycline and rifampin to the post-operative period to prevent the relapse of Brucellosis. The patient was able to walk with the help of the walker on the second day of the surgery. The movement of both hips was improved. Harris Hip Score was 80 on the right side and 85 on the left side. All experimental results showed no recurrence of infection after the surgery.