A 75-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for 1 h of persistent severe chest pain. Apart from smoking, she had no cardiac risk factors. At the time of admission, the electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation in leads I,avl. Laboratory data showed that the serum creatine kinase and troponin I had elevated. According to the results of electrocardiogram and laboratory data, STEMI was definitly diagnosed. Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was indicated immediately. The coronary agiography (CAG) revealed triple vessel disease with left circumflex as the culprit which was occluded in the proximal segment .
With the indication of aspiration thrombectomy and percutaneous coronary balloon dilatation, the coronary reperfusion therapy was achieved . The symptom of chest pain was relieved. Meanwhile, the cardiac surgeon was invited for consultation, and his recommendation was to complete the CABG surgery after the acute phase of AMI. We ended the operation because the goal of primary percutaneous coronary intervention was achieved. The initial course went well, and the patient’s condition was stable gradually after PTCA. However, she suddenly exhibited severe chest pain, dyspnea, agitated, and profuse sweating 6 days after hospitalization. Physical examination indicated a blood pressure of 79/44 mmHg, a heart rate of 98 beats/minute. An electrocardiogram examination did not show ST-segment elevation again. She was given dopamine to raise the blood pressure and fluid to maintain the circulation capacity immediately. The patient presented cardiac syncope suddenly following the onset of atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 140 beats per minute after half an hour. In consideration of further hemodynamic impairment caused by tachyarrhythmia, electrical defibrillation was urgently administered to restore sinus rhythm. Emergency echocardiography demonstrated pericardial tamponade. After pericardiocentesis with ultrasound guidance and continuous drainage of hemorrhagic pericardial effusion, the patient’s haemodynamic condition returned to stability. The catheter drainage of pericardium stopped when there was no fluid drainage in 2 days. Subsequent echocardiography revealed an abnormal cardiac chamber adjacent to the lateral wall of the left ventricle. Doppler echocardiography demonstrated to-and-fro signals in a myocardial defect (11 mm) in the lateral wall. And LVEF was 55%. These findings supported a diagnosis of congestive haemodynamic impairment caused by the rupture of the left ventricle after acute myocardial infarction followed by the presenting of acute pericardial tamponade. Timely pericardial drainage stabilized haemodynamics and pericardial adhesions sealed the rupture and contained the bleeding, and a pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricle formed eventually. Considering the tendency of rupture of pseudoaneurysm that may lead to death at any time, we recommended that the patient should receive surgical treatment as soon as possible. However, due to the resolute refusal and advanced age of patient, the conservative treatment was performed. Drug regimens included dual antiplatelet, statin, β-blocker and diuretics.
After discharge, the patient was followed up for a long time (36 months). During the first 2 months of follow-up, the volume of pesudoaneurysm increased to 65 × 55 mm. Despite repeated warnings that pseudoaneurysm may further rupture causing sudden death, and recommendation for surgery as soon as possible, the patient persisted in conservative treatment. During this period, the patient’s condition was relatively stable, without obvious symptoms. However, an amazing change occurred in the following days of follow-up. One year after the onset of AMI, color doppler ultrasound revealed no progressive increase in the size of the pseudoaneurysm(53 × 44 mm), but the blood flow within the aneurysm cavity decreased(44 × 19 mm). Echoes of the thrombus had been seen in the other areas within the aneurysm. At the 1.5 years of follow-up, the thrombus almost filled the aneurysm cavity. Partial blood flow imaging had been seen only nearby the defect of the left ventricular. Further myocardial contrast echocardiography clearly verified these findings . Because of the dynamic changes in the pseudoaneurysm showed that the risk of ventricular aneurysm rupture gradually reduced, we maintained the conservative treatment program. 2.5 years after the onset of AMI, she was admitted for angina once again. After admission, conventional color doppler ultrasound showed no significant change in pseudoaneurysm compared with 1 year ago. Cardiac multislice computed tomography (MSCT) clearly revealed a 64 × 48 mm pseudoaneurysm adjacent to the left ventricle. There was no contrast enhancement in it . As angina pectoris manifested, coronary angiography was reviewed after admission. The result revealed lesions in three branches of the coronary artery, with 90% stenosis in the middle segment of the left anterior descending (LAD) and 95% stenosis in the distal segment of the right coronary artery (RCA) . Therefore, LAD and RCA PCI were given, and one stent was implanted respectively .
The symptoms of angina were significantly improved after operation. Our patient continued outpatient follow-up after discharge, and was symptom free. There was no significant change in medication during the 3 years of treatment. Dual antiplatelet therapy was continued for 3 years.