A 74-year-old, Caucasian woman from Germany with a long history of local recurrences of DFSP on her right upper limb was readmitted for surgical intervention of a tumour of her right axilla. On clinical examination she presented with two firm tumour masses in the right axilla and on the thoracic wall with a size of 6 × 7 cm and 6 × 5 cm. Both lesions displayed central ulceration. In addition, the patient requested the resection of a small (1.7 × 1.6 cm) nodular skin lesion of her right elbow region.
The DFSP of her right shoulder region was first diagnosed in 1991. Following several incomplete tumour resections and local progressive tumour growth she was transferred to our hospital in 2001. Tumour resection was carried out and radiation therapy was suggested but refused by the patient. Despite clear resection margins the tumour recurred locally 10 months later and, at this stage, the tumour had infiltrated the brachial plexus. Since then, additional surgical interventions for local recurrences of the DFSP were required every 5 to 9 months. Fifteen years after the initial diagnosis of the DFSP, at readmission for a local recurrence, the tumour extended from the axilla along the thoracic wall to the lateral aspect of the ipsilateral scapular and an additional small (less than 2 cm) reddish blue subcutaneous nodular lesion was observed at the dorsal aspect of the right elbow.
Histologically the two tumour masses in the axilla and thoracic wall confirmed the clinical diagnosis of a local recurrence of the known DFSP. The tumours were highly cellular with partly ovoid, partly spindle shaped nuclei with small fascicular cell formations. Due to these clear detectable fascicular areas, these recurrences were classified as DFSP with fibrosarcomatous transformation .
In contrast, the tumour from the elbow microscopically presented as a highly cellular small cell tumour lacking fascicular formations . Additional immunohistochemical analysis revealed punctual reaction of the vast majority of tumour cells for keratin MNF 116 with a cytoplasmatic distribution and a punctual perinuclear immune reaction for cytokeratin-20. The tumour was CD3, CD20 and LCA negative. A high proliferative activity index (Ki 67) of 70% was evident. The histological and immunohistochemical analysis verified the diagnosis of a Merkel cell carcinoma (pT1 pN0, pM0 R0).
The Merkel cell carcinoma was resected in total whereas a complete resection of the DFSP (pT2b, pN0, pM0, R2) with preservation of the extremity could not be achieved.
Six months after the surgery the patient suffered a synchronous local recurrence of both the DFSP and MCC . At this time the tumour specimen from the elbow histologically resembled the previously described MCC. The axillary specimen revealed an infiltration of a spindle cell-like tumour with a partial storiform, partial fascicular, growth pattern. Within this tumour, an area of up to 1.1 cm with a small cell tumour infiltrate, correlating with the described Merkel cell tumour mixed with a spindle cell tumour formation, was found. The histological findings displayed a collision tumour of a metastasis of the Merkel cell tumour (pT3, pN0, pM1) and the relapse tumour of DFSP (pT2b, pN0, pM0, R2) . Further clinical and radiological tumour staging demonstrated no further evidence of metastatic disease.
For local tumour control, the option of an interthoracoscapular amputation was discussed but not accepted by the patient. Therefore, palliative radiotherapy and chemotherapy with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor Imatinib was initiated.