A 45-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with recurrent transient losses of consciousness and a serendipitous parasellar lesion.
According to his account, the patient had suffered three brief periods (tens of seconds) of an unexplained loss of consciousness within 8 mo. No attack was accompanied by headaches, vomiting, or convulsions. On the first two occasions, he was admitted to two local hospitals and underwent repeated noncontrast computed tomography (CT) scans , electroencephalograms, electrocardiograms, carotid ultrasound, cardiac ultrasound, transcranial Doppler, and measurements of blood glucose, blood lipid, and hemoglobin levels. Since no abnormality was detected in the previous examinations, he was diagnosed with and treated for cerebral circulation insufficiency twice. During the last event, the patient had suddenly lost consciousness for tens of seconds while riding a motorcycle and caused an accident. An emergency CT scan did not reveal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), but unexpectedly showed an abnormal density on the right side of the sella while the patient received trauma-related treatment at the nearest emergency center . Therefore, he was advised to go to a superior hospital.
This patient did not have a history of cardio-cerebrovascular diseases or neurological diseases.
The patient denied a family history of hypertension, stroke, or psychiatric disorders.
Upon admission, no abnormalities in the central nervous system were identified.
Upon admission, the patient underwent a blood cell analysis and examinations of blood electrolyte, blood glucose, blood lipid, liver function, renal function, and adenohypophysial hormone levels. The test results were all normal, except for a slight increase in the white blood cell count (11.56 × 109/L) and neutrophil count (6.65 × 109/L).
CT angiography (CTA) was performed immediately and revealed a morphologically irregular cystic aneurysm of the right internal carotid artery. The aneurysm had multiple sacs pointing in different directions, and the longest diameter of the aneurysm was approximately 11 mm .