A 66-year-old Caucasian (Irish) woman presented to our surgical outpatient clinic with lower abdominal pain, chronic constipation and abdominal swelling. She is an ex-smoker with a background history of diverticular disease and long-standing psoriasis.
Clinical examination on presentation revealed a large, slightly tender, left-sided abdominal mass which was tympanic on percussion. Baseline blood tests were all normal. A plain film of the abdomen showed a large air-filled cyst displacing bowel loops . A chest X-ray showed an ill-defined nodular opacity projected over the posterior segment of the right lung lower lobe. Subsequently, an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a communicating GDC of 14 cm size with multiple small diverticulae in the sigmoid colon along with an irregular thickening of the upper rectal wall highly suspicious of malignancy . A further CT scan of her thorax revealed multiple small nodules in both lung fields which were consistent with metastatic deposits. Fine needle aspirate from one of these nodules showed evidence of metastatic mucinous adenocarcinoma, probably from the rectal site.
Her case was discussed in our departmental meeting and the decision was made to perform anterior resection of the rectum along with sigmoid colectomy. At surgery, a single GDC was found in the sigmoid colon with dense adhesions to the uterine fundus, the right ovary, the right fallopian tube and the posterior abdominal wall . Significant diverticular disease was also found along with a solid upper rectal tumor.
Anterior resection of the rectum together with en bloc sigmoid colectomy, partial hysterectomy and right salpingo-opherectomy was performed and a colostomy was fashioned. It was not possible to perform colorectal anastomosis due to the considerable inflammation and adhesions. Macroscopic examination of the specimen revealed a thickened sigmoid wall with many diverticula and a large cyst of 14 cm diameter. The cyst wall was 1 mm to 10 mm thick, with irregular inner and smooth outer surfaces. There was a communicating stalk attaching to the bowel wall. In the rectum, there was an ulcerating tumor with a crater of 4 × 1.5 cm invading into the perirectal fat and reaching the peritoneum. Six lymph nodes and two conglomerates of lymph nodes were present along with a uterine corpus of four cm and right adnexa. Histological examination revealed a partly mucinous adenocarcinoma of the rectum extending to the peritoneal surface, with lymphovascular invasion and lymph node metastasis (Duke's C, T4N2M1) and diverticulosis of the sigmoid colon with a single GDC. The uterus was not involved in the malignant process but was very adherent to the bowel.
The postoperative recovery was uneventful and the colostomy had started to function on the second postoperative day. The patient was subsequently discharged home in a good condition and is now under joint surgical and oncological care.