A 29-year-old Japanese woman in her second pregnancy was being treated for pregnancy-induced hypertension and preeclampsia with a drip infusion of magnesium sulfate at 30 weeks 2 days gestation. The dose of continuously infused magnesium sulfate was 0.1 g/h on day 1, 0.5 g/h on day 2–5, and 1.0 g/h on day 6–12. The dose was increased to 2.0 g/h to control an imminent preterm delivery on day 12, just before an emergency transfer to our hospital. During this treatment, maternal serum magnesium levels were not monitored. The mother had no medical conditions or any intake of other medications within these 12 days, which could have influenced blood potassium concentration.
On admission to our hospital, the patient could not mobilize independently because of hypotonia caused by severe hypermagnesemia and hypocalcemia . On the same day, she delivered a male infant through vaginal birth. Her laboratory analysis at 7 h before and 7 h after delivery showed that the serum concentration of potassium, sodium, and creatinine ranged from 4.3 to 6.0 mmol/L, 133 to 128 mmol/L, and 0.85 to 0.95 mg/dL, respectively. These levels returned to within normal ranges at 5 days after delivery.
The male infant was born at 32 weeks gestation weighing 1268 g and with Apgar scores of 8 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min. He was immediately admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit in our hospital. There was no evidence of respiratory distress syndrome on chest radiograph, and he had a stable microbubble test. His heart rate was 130 beats per minute, and the arterial blood pressure was 42/22 mmHg, with normal contraction of the left ventricle confirmed by echocardiographic examination. His muscle tone was determined to be within the normal range by two expert neonatologists. The size and shape of both kidneys on ultrasonography were within the normal range, and his first urine was observed at 2 h after birth.
Laboratory data showed that his venous blood potassium concentration was 6.4 mmol/L at 2 h after birth and reached 7.0 mmol/L at 4 h after birth even though he had sufficient urine output . Glucose-insulin combined therapy was administered for 54 h with an insulin infusion rate between 0.9 units/kg/day and 1.9 units/kg/day to maintain his serum potassium concentration below 6.0 mmol/L. All blood samples were obtained from a catheter inserted directly into the right radial artery. During the therapy, he was not given potassium. His urine output was 4.1 mL/kg/h during the first 8 h, 6.2 mL/kg/h during the next day, and 3.3 mL/kg/h during the third day after birth with insufficient urinary potassium excretion .
Laboratory analysis of his umbilical blood also showed hypermagnesemia at birth, which gradually subsided . The serum calcium concentration remained over 7.3 mg/dL with intravenous drip administration of calcium sulfate. Although transient hyponatremia was observed at 6 h after birth, it recovered in 24 h without sodium administration.
After resolution of NOHK, the neonate’s serum concentrations of potassium and magnesium were within the normal range. He was discharged from our hospital at 72 days after birth with no clinical complications and had normal growth and development at 3 years of age.