A 24-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital after a medical check-up revealed mild transaminase elevations. He had no symptoms. He was found to have mild fatty liver and a pancreatic mass by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT). Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed an increasingly enhanced mass of 40mm diameter in the pancreatic tail . Ultrasonography (US) showed a low echoic mass of 35mm diameter in that location. T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed low signal intensity in the tail of the pancreas, whereas T2-weighted MRI showed high signal intensity. Diffusion MRI showed high signal intensity. Our EUS (GF-UM 2000; Olympus Co, Tokyo, Japan) observations led us to the same conclusions as the abdominal US . In addition, [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG PET/CT) showed abnormal accumulation (maximum standardized uptake value, 6.53) , and this finding raised our suspicion of a malignant pancreatic tumor. However, the case could not be confidently diagnosed solely on the imaging results. FNA was therefore performed via a transgastric approach with linear EUS (GF-UCT 2000; Olympus Co), and two passes were made with a 25-gauge needle (EchoTip Ultra(ECHO-25); Cook Endoscopy, Winston-Salem, NC, USA). We noted no signs or symptoms in the patient during or after the procedure. Our histopathological findings derived from the samples taken during the EUS-FNA procedure included the presence of cells with round nuclei that showed pseudopapillary growth. The tumor cells showed immunopositivity for CD10, progesterone receptor and vimentin . We diagnosed this tumor as a SPN and performed minimally invasive surgery to resect it (a spleen-preserving laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy) . Upon examination of the resected specimen, we determined that it was a solid tumor extending to the tail of the pancreas. The tumor did not contain calcified or cystic areas . Our histopathological findings were similar to those obtained by EUS-FNA. The tumor cells showed immunopositivity for β-catenin, CD10 and vimentin. Our final pathological diagnosis was SPN of the pancreatic tail. No vascular invasion or infiltrative growth was observed. The tumor margin was negative. The patient’s post-operative course was good, and he had no post-operative recurrences in the 18-month follow-up period, during which time he was followed in the outpatient department.