December 2014, a 65-year-old Lebanese male patient known to have severe ischemic cardiomyopathy with left ventricular dysfunction, type II diabetes, hypertension, and chronic moderate renal impairment, was transferred to our cardiac surveillance unit at the Beirut Cardiac Institute (BCI) medical center of Al Rassoul Al Aazam Hospital (RAH) for heart failure management. This tertiary health care center is a community based hospital, located in south Beirut in Lebanon and comprised of 2 community medical centers with a total of 260 beds.
Three months prior to his current admission, the patient had been diagnosed of single vessel coronary disease, which was managed in a peripheral hospital by an angioplasty with drug eluting stent implantation to the left anterior descending artery (LAD). He was then rehospitalized 2 weeks prior to his transfer to our center, in the same peripheral hospital, for acute myocardial infarction and cardiogenic shock. Urgent coronary angiogram showed occlusion of the LAD stent, the other arteries were unremarkable. Thus the patient underwent stent desobstruction, but despite such management his hemodynamics and left ventricular function did not improve, with failure to wean from inotropes. He was then referred to our center.
Upon his admission, the clinical exam revealed hypotension (mean arterial pressure: 65 mmHg), sinus tachycardia (90/min), cold extremities, pulmonary crackles, and hepatomegaly (19.3 cm). Electrocardiogram showed diffuse Q waves and T waves inversion in anterior leads; troponin level was high (1.13 ng/ml; normal range: 0-0.014) and blood test showed elevated creatinine (1.45 mg/dl; normal range: 0.6-1.3). Cardiac ultrasound showed a dilated left ventricle with extensive antero septo apical akinesia and a very low left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF: 15 %). Chest X-ray showed subacute pulmonary oedema. We maintained the inotropes (Dobutamine), and we inserted an Intra Aortic balloon pump (IABP) on his second day of admission, allowing stabilization of hemodynamics and improvement of diuresis and renal function. Due to the failure of IABP weaning we performed a HeartWare left ventricular assist device (HeartWare, USA) on day 12. Intravenous (IV) vancomycin therapy was started empirically three days pre-operatively (pre-op) and continued post-operatively (post-op) along with imipenem/cilastatin (IV) as infection prophylaxis. The patient was stable initially, with no surgery related complications. On day 4 post-op he developed worsening of his kidney function with creatinine level reaching 2.37 (mg/dl). Vancomycin therapy was stopped. By day 12 post-op creatinine level decreased (1.46 mg/dl). Nevertheless, the patient had high white blood cells count (30.3 k/μL; normal range: 4-11) ; based on empirical evidence Acinetobacter baumannii was suspected and he was managed with teicoplanin, anidulafungin and polymyxin E along with imipenem/cilastatin.
By day 14 post-op he developed diarrhea and rectorrhagia (rectal bleeding) and laboratory testing indicated negative results for C. difficile antigen. Abdomen and pelvis Computed tomography (CT) scan showed significant thickening of the whole colon and rectum with surrounding fat stranding, illustrating pancolitis which is usually unresponsive to medication and requires frequently surgery . Oral vancomycin and metronidazole (500 mg PO QID) were administered and former medicines were sustained. Day 17 post-op, his WBC decreased but diarrhea persisted, C. difficile antigen remained negative; culture stool was negative for Salmonella and Shigella; Entamoeba histolytica cysts (not being the cause behind colitis) were seen in stool and occult blood was positive. He was continued on vancomycin and metronidazole, and started on oral rifaximin, ceftriaxone and probiotics (Euflora). Colonoscopy, performed on day 27 post-op, revealed diffuse colitis, scattered yellowish plaques and large amount of blood throughout the colon. A biopsy from the left colon was taken for histological diagnosis and reported benign colonic mucosa with marked thick layer of acute and chronic inflammatory cells that was most consistent with severe pseumembranous colitis. The patient was thus put on cholestyramine (Quantalan and Questran) regimen. The patient’s condition worsened not responding to any of the conventional therapy. The gastroenterologist prescribed FMT prior to Protocolectomy. On day 32 post-op, FMT (240 cc) was delivered, following the local hospital protocol into the duodenum through gastroscopy; an unrelated healthy person was the donor after proper stool testing for common pathogens. The patient’s diarrhea improved within few hours and clinical resolution occurred after 24 h.