A 9-month-old boy was diagnosed with a single left ventricle with a hypoplastic right ventricle, double inlet left ventricle, and ostium secundum defects at birth. At the age of 2 months, he underwent pulmonary artery banding to optimize pulmonary blood flow. At the age of 7 months, upon catheterization examination, his pulmonary artery pressure was 14 mmHg, pulmonary artery vascular resistance was 0.80 unit m2, and pulmonary artery index was 366 mm2/m2. At the age of 9 months, he was scheduled for elective Glenn and DKS procedures.
On admission, his height, weight, and body surface area (BSA) were 66 cm, 6.1 kg, and 0.32 m2, respectively. His oxygen saturation was 85% in room air in the operation theater. Preoperative computed tomography showed the anatomical condition . Anesthesia induction was uneventful, and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed during pre- and post-cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB); the patients’ vital signs were stable. The stored ultrasound images from the Prosound F75 Premier (Hitachi Aloka Medical, Tokyo, Japan) were transferred to a computer for analysis with the VFM software (DAS-RS-1, Hitachi-Aloka Medical, Tokyo, Japan). We evaluated intracardiac flow, EL, KE, and the ratio of the KE cycle to EL cycle (energetic performance index, EPI).
We performed Glenn, DKS, and atrial septal defect enlargement procedures. Pre- and post-CPB hemodynamic parameters are shown in Table . Figure shows the pre- and post-CPB VFM images analyzed by TEE, and Fig. shows the pre- and post-CPB chart of EL, and KE values during one cardiac cycle. Furthermore, Additional file : Movie S1 and Additional file : Movie S2 show the pre-CPB VFM and EL and Additional file : Movie S3 and Additional file : Movie S4 show the post-CPB VFM and EL in the mid-esophageal long-axis views by TEE, respectively. After the surgery, the mean EL and mean KE decreased from 39.8 to 14.5 mW/m and from 49.7 to 46.5 mW/m, respectively. EPI increased from 1.25 to 3.20. Consequently, the patient was moved to the general ward 23 days after the initial surgery, without any inotropic support.