A 75-year-old Caucasian woman underwent a dynamic hip screw operation for treatment of an intertrochanteric fracture of her left hip. Six weeks later, she experienced a peri-prosthetic fracture, which was managed by hemiathroplasty. She was discharged to a rehabilitation center but readmitted four weeks later with suspected prosthesis infection.
Blood tests on admission showed neutrophil leukocytosis at 18.5×109/L, elevated C-reactive protein at 210mg/L and bicarbonate of 24 mmol/L. Our patient underwent a hip revision.
Intra-operative specimens and blood cultures identified coagulase-negative Staphylococcus aureus that was sensitive to vancomycin. She started vancomycin (1g intravenously twice daily), along with acetaminophen (1g every six hours) for pain control. Her other blood work, including liver and kidney function tests, matched her baseline results, with normal liver function test results and a serum creatinine of 152μmol/L.
Her past medical history included chronic kidney disease with a baseline creatinine level between 130 and 150μmol/L, hypertension, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, dyslipidemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and folate deficiency. Her prescription medications included aspirin 75mg, bisoprolol 10mg, atorvastatin 10mg, furosemide 40mg twice daily, gliclazide modified release 90mg, pantoprazole 40mg, folic acid 5mg, combivent nebulizer, and OxyNorm® (oxycodone) 10mg as needed.
On day 10 of admission, our patient’s condition deteriorated and she became drowsy, confused and disorientated, and was hyperventilating. A physical examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 12. Her vital signs were as follows: temperature, 36.2°C; blood pressure, 145/66mmHg; pulse, 80 beats per minute; respiratory rate, 24 breaths per minute; and oxygen saturation (SaO2), 99% on room air. Our patient moved all of her extremities spontaneously. The rest of her physical examination was unremarkable.
An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm of 90 beats per minute. A chest X-ray revealed mild cardiomegaly with no signs of infection or congestion. Repeat blood tests showed the following: sodium, 142mmol/L; potassium, 3.5mmol/L; chloride, 118mmol/L; CO2, 5mmol/L; urea, 8mmol/L; and creatinine, 150μmol/L. Liver function findings were unremarkable except for hypoalbuminemia at 17g/L. Full blood count findings showed hemoglobin of 10g/dL, neutrophil leukocytosis at 16.5×109/L and platelets of 485×109/L. Arterial blood gas showed metabolic acidosis with respiratory compensation (pH, 7.18; partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 1.7kPa; partial pressure of oxygen, 16.7kPa; bicarbonate, 8.3mmol/L; base excess, −22.7mmol/L; SaO2, 98.6% in room air). The corrected anion gap for hypoalbuminemia was 25mmol/L. The following causes of high anion gap metabolic acidosis (HAGMA) were excluded: lactic acid 0.7mmol/L, blood ketones <0.2mmol/L, salicylate <0.4mmol/L.
It was felt that her unchanged creatinine of 150μmol/L was insufficient to explain the marked deterioration in her acid–base status. A urine analysis and serum toxicology screen were unremarkable, including her serum acetaminophen level. The osmolar gap was mildly elevated at 21 mOsm/kg. Because her serum toxicology screen was negative, our patient’s urine was sent for organic acid detection by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry, which demonstrated a markedly increased excretion of 5-oxoproline at the peak of her acidosis, 10 days into her admission.
The acute management (based on the differential diagnosis and our patient’s condition) included commencement on bicarbonate (8.4% infusion of which she received a total of 600 milliequivalents over 48 hours), supportive intravenous fluids, and discontinuation of acetaminophen.
Over the following two days, her acidosis resolved with an overall improvement in her clinical condition. Repeat arterial blood gas showed the following: pH, 7.40; partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 3.8 kPa; partial pressure of oxygen, 12.7kPa; and bicarbonate, 20mmol/L. The acidosis correction persisted on subsequent testing over the remainder of her admission, indicating that the causative agent (acetaminophen) had been removed. The diagnosis of 5-oxoprolinemia was confirmed on receipt of organic acid test results two weeks later.