We present the case of a 72-year-old Caucasian male with multivessel coronary artery disease who was admitted to the Cardiology Clinic of the Timisoara Municipal Clinical Emergency Hospital for aggravated rest angina episodes lasting for 10–15 min, recurrent during the last 24 h, and partially relieved by sublingual nitroglycerin. We diagnosed an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) of unstable angina type in a patient with a long history of well-controlled grade 3 hypertension, mild hypercholesterolemia, significant cigarette smoking (60 pack years), peripheral artery disease, and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome with recurrent orthodromic re-entry tachycardias.
The patient also has a history of two previous myocardial infarctions: anterior (1999), when thrombolysis with streptokinase was performed, followed by triple bare metal stenting on the left anterior descendent artery (LAD), and inferior (2021), when primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was performed with double drug-eluting stenting of the right coronary artery (RCA).
The patient has also had bilateral arteriopathy obliterans of the lower limbs, stage IIA, with intermittent claudication at 500 m and paclitaxel stent implantation in the left (1999) and right (2000) superficial femoral arteries.
A coronary angiography performed in 2000 revealed proximal stent restenosis and middle stent occlusion on the LAD, as well as 50–75% stenosis in the middle segment of the RCA, followed by a double aortocoronary bypass graft on the LAD and RCA, using left and right internal mammary arteries.
From 2004 to 2010, the patient suffered multiple reinterventions on the ADA and RCA for stent restenosis, followed by six more implantations of pharmacologically active stents.
At the current admission, we counted that 13 stents were implanted (11 of which were coronary stents), and a double aortocoronary bypass graft was performed.
Metoprolol succinate slow-release 50 mg, perindopril 5 mg, amiodarone 100 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg, aspirin 75 mg, atorvastatin 20 mg, and pantoprazole 40 mg are the drugs the patient takes on a daily basis.
The physical examination demonstrates a normoponderal status (BMI = 24 kg/m2) and a blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg with no detectable difference between the upper extremities. The results of the laboratory tests reveal that the patient has mild mixed dyslipidemia (low-density lipoprotein 61 mg/dL, high-density lipoprotein 46 mg/dL, total cholesterol 139 mg/dL, triglycerides 162 mg/dL) and mildly impaired renal function (creatinine 1.3 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate 58 mL/min/1.73 m2). Blood counts, serum electrolytes, fasting plasma glucose, glycated hemoglobin, liver and thyroid gland function tests, viral markers, and a coagulation profile were within normal limits. Cardiac enzymes were not raised (creatine kinase-myocardial band 19.6 U/L and troponin-I 0.40 ng/mL) and did not change during the admission.
The ECG shows sinus rhythm, left axis deviation, a heart rate of 100 beats per minute, mild horizontal ST segment depressions in the DII, DIII, aVF, and V4-V6 leads, and a minor right bundle branch block .
The echocardiographic measurements are normal, with a normal global systolic function and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50%, but the LV wall motion is weak on the side .
We used speckle-tracking echography in 4-3- and 2-chamber apical incidences to calculate the global LV strain, which was found to be significantly decreased (<12%, normal range > 20%). We then assessed the myocardial work (MW) of the patient. The LV-pressure strain loop (PSL) in this new method is derived from non-invasively acquired brachial artery cuff pressure and generated by adjusting the profile of a reference LV pressure curve according to the duration of the isovolumic and ejection phases, as defined by the echocardiography timing of aortic and mitral valve events. After calculating the global LV strain, measurements of brachial blood pressure and time of valvular events were utilized to obtain the LV-PSL with currently available echocardiographic software. The area of the PSL represents approximately the MW and is computed by multiplying the rate of segmental shortening, obtained by integrating the strain curve, by the momentary LV pressure. This product is a measure of instantaneous power, which is incorporated throughout the cardiac cycle to generate MW, which is given in mmHg%. In addition to the MW index (work assessed from mitral valve closure to mitral valve opening), segments were examined for wasted work (WW) and constructive work (CW), with global values calculated as the mean of all segmental values. The global myocardial work index (1123 mmHg%; normal value > 1200 mmHg%), which measures LV work during systole, was reduced. As shown in , myocardial work efficiency, which is calculated as the ratio of constructive to wasted work, was also found to be lower (85%, normal value > 90%).
The Bull’s-eye polar map representation of the global longitudinal strain of the LV, with 17 wall segments divided from apex to base and the visualization of a circumscribed blue area in specific segments, allows one to determine the distribution of blood flow abnormalities based on the culprit coronary artery.
On the polar map of the GLS, the regions with the lowest longitudinal strains were the anterior, lateral, and posterior ones, with the smallest value being observed at the level of the anterior region (−4%), as shown in A.
The polar map of the global MW index (B) also showed that the anterior, lateral, and posterior regions of the LV wall present lower values of the MW index, the lowest value being observed at the level of the posterior area (447 mmHg%).
The echographic images suggested severe blood flow abnormalities in these regions, which are irrigated from branches originating from the circumflex and from the right coronary artery, as shown in .
Considering the patient’s history, it was decided to perform coronary angiography, which showed multiple coronary stents, the right-dominant coronary system, and diffusely atheromatous coronary arteries; a LAD with ostial in-stent total chronic occlusion, but with a patent arterial graft on the mid segment; and an RCA with serial stenotic lesions of a maximum of 50–70% and a sub-occlusive lesion at the postero-lateral branch (PLB), as shown in . Percutaneous coronary intervention was performed, and a 2.25–14 mm DES was implanted on the postero-lateral branch with a good final angiographic result .
The patient is discharged with complete angina remission. The medications recommended at discharge are: metoprolol slow release 100 mg daily; ticagrelor 180 mg daily; aspirin 75 mg daily; atorvastatin 80 mg daily; amiodarone 100 mg daily; amlodipine 5 mg daily; perindopril 5 mg daily; and pantoprazole 40 mg daily.
The long-term evolution has been favorable, with no angina five months after the last angioplasty.