A 3-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat was referred to The University of Queensland Small Animal Hospital within 24 h of a crushing injury from a slow-moving motor vehicle. Severe bruising and oedema was evident over the caudoventral abdomen and inguinal regions. Pelvic radiographs revealed a severe sacrococcygeal luxation. A mildly regenerative but significant anaemia (haematocrit 17%; red blood cell count 3.54 ×1012/l [reference interval 5.00–10.0 ×1012/l]; haemaglobin 54 g/l (reference interval 80–150 g/l) was identified and treated successfully with two units of whole blood. Once clinically stable, the cat underwent tail amputation at the level of the tail base. Evidence of a lower motor neuron bladder persisted postoperatively and was managed by bladder expression. By day 6 post-admission, subcutaneous bruising had progressed on the ventral abdomen and evidence of free fluid accumulation in the ventral abdominal and inguinal regions became apparent. Ultrasound revealed a large volume of free, mildly echogenic fluid in the caudoventral, inguinal and perineal regions. The subcutaneous fat was irregular and mildly hyperechoic. Aspiration of the subcutaneous fluid revealed suppurative inflammation with rare intracellular and extracellular bacterial rods, and a disproportionately high percentage of lymphocytes . The cat was bright and afebrile. Amoxicillin clavulanate at 15 mg/kg q12h was commenced pending aerobic and anaerobic culture, which failed to yield bacterial growth.
A 10 Fr silicone closed-suction drain (Cardinal Health Jackson-Pratt Hemaduct JP-HUR101) was placed via percutaneous stab incision into the fluid pocket and >250 ml serosanguinous fluid was removed. Over the next 10 days, fluid production in the caudoventral abdomen and inguinal region remained persistent at 10–15 ml/kg/day. Repeat cytology and aerobic and anaerobic culture of the fluid was performed at 3 and 10 days post-drain placement . The fluid was repeatedly characterised as a modified transudate consistent with lymphatic effusion. No microorganisms were observed and cultures were negative. Production from the closed-suction drain continued at 10–15 ml/kg/day until day 19, when accidental drain removal occurred. Ultrasound of the right inguinal region identified heterogeneous fat and a mildly enlarged inguinal lymph node. Fluid accumulated in the inguinal area over the following 2 days. Surgical exploration of the right inguinal region identified an inguinal hernia with inflamed omentum and yellow swollen vaginal process remnants identified in the inguinal ring. Non-viable tissue was debrided and the inguinal hernia repaired with 2/0 polydioxanone suture in a cruciate pattern. A 10 Fr haemaduct closed-suction drain (Cardinal Health Jackson-Pratt Hemaduct JP-HUR101) was placed before routine subcutaneous and skin closure. Again, tissue culture was negative for microbial growth.
Serosanguinous lymphocyte-rich fluid production from the region continued at 10–15 ml/kg/day over the next 7 days until the cat dislodged the drain. Over the next 2 days, fluid again began to accumulate in the caudoventral abdomen and inguinal areas. A firm, non-painful tubular mass was evident in the right inguinal area. On ultrasound, this mass was consistent with inflamed fat. Surgical exploration of the caudoventral abdominal region was performed on day 30 post-initial trauma. A large, open pocket with a smooth, shiny capsule lining extended over the entire caudoventral abdominal wall, down both inguinal areas, extending past the level of the stifle on the right. The lining was meticulously debrided. There was evidence of re-herniation of fat through the right inguinal ring. A caudal coeliotomy was performed to identify bladder and ureters. The herniated right lateral ligament of the bladder was examined for viability and reduced into the abdomen. The hernia was repaired with 2/0 non-absorbable nylon in a horizontal mattress pattern. Tacking sutures of 3/0 polydioxanone were used throughout the caudal abdominal and inguinal subcutaneous pocket to reduce dead space and a 10 Fr haemaduct closed-suction drain was placed (Cardinal Health Jackson-Pratt Hemaduct JP-HUR101).
Histopathology from the capsular lining revealed dense bands of connective tissue with extensive areas of granulomatous and lymphoplasmacytic inflammation (aggregates of neutrophils, epithelioid macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells often rimmed by dense bands of fibrocytes). No microorganisms, mesothelial or neoplastic cells were identified.
Lymphocyte-rich serosanguinous fluid production continued until inadvertent drain removal 2 days postoperatively. Repeated application of light-compression bandages over the pelvic limbs and caudal abdomen were attempted to prevent re-accumulation of subcutaneous fluid; however, they were not tolerated well by the cat and were difficult to maintain in position. Fluid accumulation persisted and was managed with intermittent percutaneous aspiration using a standard aseptic technique.
Forty-four days post-admission to hospital, the cat was returned for surgery owing to persistent fluid accumulation. The capsule lining of the subcutaneous pocket had reformed and was again meticulously debrided. The inguinal lymph node and all remaining subcutaneous fat in the right inguinal area were excised. An omental flap was created and passed through the right caudal abdominal wall into the caudal abdominal and inguinal regions of the subcutaneous pocket and secured in situ with 3/0 polydioxanone tacking sutures before routine skin and subcutaneous closure. Histopathology on the capsule lining was again consistent with granulomatous and lymphoplasmacytic inflammation with aggregates of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Small granulomas of multinucleated giant cells occasionally contained irregular shards of blue–grey-to-clear foreign material, 20–100 μmin length, identified as suture fragments.
Immediately postoperatively, a moderate accumulation of fluid was identified over the ventral abdomen and right inguinal region. This resolved over the following week without further intervention. Medical management after each surgery included a combination of methadone (0.3 mg/kg SC q6h), buprenorphine (5 μg/h transdermal patch), gabapentin (10 μg/kg PO q8h) and meloxicam (0.1 mg/kg PO q24h).
The cat was discharged from hospital on day 65 post-admission. Six months after discharge from hospital, the owner reported the cat to have normal activity levels with no evidence of recurrence of ventral abdominal swelling or discomfort.