A 65-year-old male patient visited a general practitioner because of jaundice and was referred to our hospital. Laboratory results showed elevated levels of total bilirubin, transaminases, and biliary enzymes (total bilirubin 12.6 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 8.6 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 48 IU/L, alginate aminotransferase 44 IU/L, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 84 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase 999 IU/L). Tumor markers were all negative (carcinoembryonic antigen 4.0 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 2.0 U/mL, DUPAN-2 < 25 U/mL, Span-1 15 mg/dL). An abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed that a tumor of 11 mm in diameter was enhanced in the arterial phase and in the delayed phase at the AoV . The upstream common bile duct and intrahepatic bile duct were dilated. No distant metastasis or lymph node metastasis was found. Magnetic resonance imaging showed that the tumor of the AoV exhibited high intensity on diffusion-weighted images, low intensity on T1-weighted images, and high intensity on T2-weighted images. Positron emission tomography revealed that fluorodeoxyglucose was accumulated with a maximum standardized uptake value of 4.5 at the tumor of the AoV . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showed an unexposed tumor of the AoV and stenosis of the lower bile duct with dilatation of the upstream bile duct. A biopsy specimen of the site showed proliferating tumor cells in the lamina propria mucosae, partially with a glandular structure . A moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma was suspected.
Subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy and D2 lymph node dissection were performed with a diagnosis of duodenal papilla carcinoma. Macroscopic findings showed a grayish-white solid tumor at the AoV . Histopathological examination showed that small monotonous tumor cells, with high-grade dysplasia, proliferated arranged in cords, nest, or tubular structures along with fibrous stroma . A glandular structure such as adenocarcinoma was not evident. The tumor cells were found to have invaded the muscle propria and the mucosal layer of the duodenum. The mitotic count was 30–40/10 in HPF. Immunohistochemical staining showed cells positive for neuroendocrine cell markers, synaptophysin, and chromogranin A. The Ki-67 index was found to be 40–50% . Moreover, p53 staining was positive for more than 95% of cancer cells , indicative of p53 overexpression. Rb1 staining was positive for about 70% of cancer cells . Lymph node metastasis was not evident in the resected lymph nodes. Based on the above findings, a small cell-type NEC was finally diagnosed.
Four months after pancreatoduodenectomy, an abdominal CT scan showed multiple liver metastases, and a percutaneous liver biopsy was performed, which confirmed metastasis of the NEC. Five months after the operation, chemotherapy consisting of a combination of irinotecan (CPT-11) and cisplatin (CDDP) was administered. The best response to the chemotherapy was stable disease. However, multiple liver metastases progressed after 8 cycles of chemotherapy , and no new liver metastasis developed. Salvage liver resection for liver metastases was performed 14 months after the pancreatoduodenectomy. Unfortunately, multiple liver metastases developed 2 months after liver resection. Combination chemotherapy of etoposide and CDDP was administered, but it was ineffective. The patient died 18 months after the pancreatoduodenectomy.