A 92-year-old woman presented to her family doctor with acute abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. She was admitted to the hospital with a primary diagnosis of infectious enteritis suggested by examinations, including computed tomography (CT). The day after hospitalization, the radiologist noted free air and fluid collection within her abdomen on the CT scan from the previous day. The patient was transferred to the emergency room of our hospital for further examination and treatment.
The patient underwent brachytherapy using cobalt-60 (Co-60) gamma irradiation after hysterectomy for the treatment of uterine cancer at the age of 49. She was 145 cm tall, weighed 55 kg, and had a body mass index of 26.16.
On admission, her vital signs were relatively stable with a blood pressure of 146/74 mmHg, heart rate of 90 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and body temperature of 36.9℃. Her abdomen was flat and had a postoperative hysterectomy scar on the lower abdominal midline. She exhibited focal tenderness, muscular guarding, and mild rebound tenderness in her lower right abdomen. The blood investigation revealed a high inflammatory response as follows: white blood cell count (WBC) of 15,500/μL, 93.5% neutrophils and C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 22.07 mg/dL. Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels were also increased to 37.2 and 1.3 mg/dL, respectively, whereas estimated glomerular filtration rate, hemoglobin, total protein, and albumin levels were decreased to 29.4 mL/min/1.73 m2, 8.2 g/dL, 4.2 g/dL, and 1.3 g/dL, respectively. Electrocardiogram and arterial blood gas results were within normal limits. Abdominal CT performed at a previous hospital showed free air mainly in the upper abdomen and fluid collection in the right subphrenic space. In addition, it confirmed the presence of multiple slightly high-density contents with spheroid or discoid shapes with sizes that varied from 1 to 4.5 cm within the intestinal tract . Nevertheless, the specific organ (i.e., jejunum, ileum, or colon) in which these contents were located was not identified given the unclear boundaries of the intestinal tract in this study. The upper gastrointestinal series revealed no fistula or leakage of contrast medium in the gastroduodenal tract.
On admission, we inserted a drainage tube into the right subphrenic space, and grayish white and odorless mucus-like gastric juice was discharged from the tube. The chemical analysis of the drainage fluid revealed an alkaline phosphatase level of 332 IU/L and amylase level of 60 IU/L. Therefore, we initially suspected upper gastrointestinal perforation without continuous leakage of digestive juice. Moreover, she had stable blood pressure and no fever one day after onset. However, she was elderly and exhibited dehydration and renal failure, so the risk of surgery itself cannot be underestimated. Therefore, we started nonoperative management (NOM). After hospitalization, her vital signs remained stable, body temperature also remained normal, and abdominal pain improved. The WBC was transiently reduced to 2500 μL one day after admission, but remained within the normal range thereafter. The CRP and procalcitonin levels also exhibited peak levels of 32.5 mg/dL and 37.0 ng/mL, respectively, on the second day after admission, but both values improved thereafter. Her general condition improved day by day; however, the color of discharge from the drain turned from grayish white to dark green, similar to jejunal juice. Furthermore, the volume of drainage increased to approximately 500 mL/day. CT taken 7 days after onset showed an undrained fluid collection localized in the right paracolic gutter; nevertheless, the perforation site was not identified. Therefore, we performed additional intra-abdominal drainage and continued NOM. Thereafter, her general condition was unchanged and stable, and the volume of drainage was decreased to 200 mL/day. However, the appearance of drainage fluid remained similar to jejunal juice. An abdominal CT performed 10 days after onset demonstrated a suspicious perforated lesion as a partial defect of the small intestinal wall, and a slightly high-density structure was located immediately beside the lesion . Consequently, she was preoperatively diagnosed with localized peritonitis due to NTPSI.
We urgently performed an abdominal midline incision. The small intestine was tightly adhered to the abdominal wall and to each of the other loops of the bowel in the pelvic cavity, resulting in mass formation of the so-called “frozen pelvis”. On meticulously performing adhesiotomy and enterolysis, a 3-cm perforation appeared in a part of the small intestine. Moreover, a spherical 4.5-cm stone occupied the intestinal lumen on the immediate oral side of the perforation site. We performed en bloc resection of the mass forming sections of the small intestine from 1 m on the anal side of the ligament of Treitz to 1 m on the oral side of the terminal ileum, including the perforated lesions and stones. Additionally, end jejunostomy without ileal mucous fistulostomy was performed .
The adhered specimen of the resected small intestine was approximately 1 m in length and had a sclerosing and thickened wall of approximately the entire length. Furthermore, it exhibited many strictures and prestenotic dilatation and contained multiple deep green stones of various sizes in the proximal lumen of the strictures. The largest stone measured 4.5 cm by 4 cm and was impacted in the narrowest stenotic lumen of the resected specimen. The perforated portion was located immediately on the oral side .
Infrared absorption spectrophotometric analysis revealed that the stones were true primary enteroliths composed of greater than 98% deoxycholic acid (DCA) . Some discoid stones were laminated and contained a structure suspected to be a persimmon seed in the core . The histopathological findings of resected specimens of the small intestine revealed severe fibrosis and hyalinization in the layers from the muscularis propria to the serosa compatible with the diagnosis of radiation enteritis. The final diagnosis of the present case was peritonitis due to NTPSI derived from multiple true primary enteroliths associated with radiation enteritis.
In this patient, surgical site infection of the wound occurred 4 days after operation; therefore, she underwent wound lavage and negative pressure wound therapy. She resumed oral ingestion of food 19 days after the operation. Her postoperative progress was almost uneventful; however, several days were required for wound healing and improvements in daily living activities because she was frail and elderly. She was transferred to a nearby hospital 104 days after the operation.