A 56-year-old female came with complaints of severe back pain and urinary incontinence of 3 months duration. There was no history suggestive of trauma or tumor or infection. On examination, bilateral radiculopathy with saddle anesthesia was noted. Motor power was comparable with plantar flexor response.
Urinary flow studies were carried out and the patient was found to have neurogenic overflow urinary incontinence. Other than leukocytosis and eosinophilia, all her baseline blood investigations were within normal limits. Plain radiographs showed an expansile lytic lesion affecting the right iliac wing with near-complete cortical bone destruction of the sacrum and pelvic computed tomography (CT) visualized a well-localized cystic swelling in the right pelvis over the region of lumbosacral plexus roots, as shown in . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed neural involvement, sacral destruction, and replacement by a multiloculated cystic mass extending to the spinal canal, as shown in , suggestive of infection or tumor such as echinococcosis or chordoma. The case was labeled as slow-onset cauda equina syndrome and further investigation to diagnose the etiology of this compressive radiculopathy was ascertained.
The etiology of the compression was diagnosed to be due to echinococcosis with serum enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Total body survey with whole-body CT was normal without any coexistent lesions elsewhere in the body. Although the lesion presented as a slow-onset cauda-equina syndrome considering its chronic nature, we resorted to combined medical and surgical management to combat the lesion.
Neoadjuvant medical therapy in the form of tablet albendazole 400 mg twice daily and tablet praziquantel 40 mg/kg once weekly was started. Following the medical therapy, the patient underwent ultrasound-guided percutaneous aspiration injection and reaspiration (PAIR) therapy of the residual cyst cavity with scolicidal agent (hypertonic saline) and sclerosant (95% ethyl alcohol). Follow-up radiological evaluation showed successful aspiration of the cyst. The following morphologic changes were noticed: A gradual decrease in cyst size, thickening, and irregularity of the cyst wall due to separation of endocyst from pericyst, and development of a heterogeneous appearance of the cyst components. The cytological examination of the fluid showed brood capsules, free scolices, and scattered hooklets which are pathognomonic of hydatid disease.
After 2 weeks of neoadjuvant medical therapy, she underwent open excision of the residual multiloculated cystic mass and lower sized hydatid vesicles to relieve the nerve root compression, as shown in . The macroscopic examination of the surgical specimen showed a hydatid cyst containing clear fluid and daughter cysts with the cuticular layer of the cyst wall evident, as shown in . The patient was discharged and advised to continue her adjuvant medical therapy for 3 months.
After successful completion of the multimodal treatment regimen, as shown in , the patient not only recovered from her radicular pain and sensory disturbances but also had a dramatic regain of her bladder control. There was no evidence of recurrence clinically at 4 years follow-up.