A 51-year-old man initially presented to a local clinic with paroxysmal palpitation but no other accompanying symptoms. Electrocardiography revealed brief bursts of atrial tachycardia and abnormal R- and T-waves on precordial leads (see , ). Antiarrhythmic drugs (oral propafenone and metoprolol) were administered for 4 weeks, but the palpitation did not subside. The patient then visited our clinic. A thorough review of the patient’s medical history revealed several risk factors for ASCVD, including a 10-year-old history of Stage 1 hypertension, a 7-year-old history of a transient ischaemic attack, heavy smoking, and alcohol consumption. Additionally, the patient had experienced polyneuritis and scleritis at the age of 8 and 50 years, respectively; both diseases were cured with corticosteroids.
At presentation, the patient’s vital signs were stable and body mass index was 28.68 kg/m2. Physical examination revealed no positive findings. Coronary artery disease was suspected initially. The outpatient physician suggested an immediate transthoracic echocardiography, which revealed a left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 58% in addition to hypokinesis and thrombus formation of the LV apex, indicating an old myocardial infarction (MI; ). Then the coronary computed tomography (CT) angiography (CCTA) revealed soft-tissue masses wrapped around the aortic root, left main coronary artery (LM), and distal left anterior descending artery (LAD; ). Based on the patient’s medical history and above-mentioned findings, non-atherosclerotic disease, particularly an inflammatory condition, was considered a more possible diagnosis.
The patient was admitted to our inpatient ward for further investigation. Laboratory examinations showed that his complete blood count, troponin level, liver and kidney functions, coagulation function, inflammatory markers, and autoantibody level were all within the normal range. However, immunoglobulin (Ig) E level significantly increased to 273 (normal range <100) kU/L; levels for other Igs, including IgG and its subclass, were normal. Although CT angiography of the whole aorta revealed atherosclerotic lesions involving the aorta and peripheral arteries, no other periarterial mass was found . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) further confirmed the abnormal mass surrounding the LAD; the mass was characterized by obscure boundaries and significant enhancement, indicating an inflammatory lesion . We also confirmed transmural infarction and thrombus formation in the LV apex . Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT findings were remarkable for an elevated maximum standard uptake value for the ascending aorta and ostium of the LM , indicating active inflammation; the pericoronary mass was also noted, but detailed evaluation was impossible because of its small size. Furthermore, coronary angiography (CAG) revealed 80% stenosis of the distal LAD, which corresponded with the location of the pericoronary mass detected on CCTA, cardiac MRI, and PET/CT . Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) revealed a diffuse fibroatheroma along the LAD as well as echoic regions in the media/adventitia of the stenotic segment . We attempted optical coherence tomography (OCT) but could not complete it because of a flow-restricted coronary spasm, which was successfully managed via dilation and massage with a small balloon. Thus, no stent implantation was required.
A multidisciplinary consultation was held with a vasculitis expert, a rheumatologist, and several radiologists. Takayasu arteritis, giant cell arteritis, and other systemic vasculitis were ruled out based on the atypical clinical manifestations and imaging characteristics observed on the above-mentioned examinations. The experts eventually highlighted IgG4-PAO/PA as a plausible explanation for the periaortic and pericoronary mass with subsequent MI. Ultrasound of the lymph nodes, salivary glands, and abdominal organs performed to screen for IgG4-RD-induced systemic damage showed unremarkable findings.
After we ruled out immunosuppressive therapy contraindications, the patient received oral prednisone (30 mg/day for 3 weeks and then tapered to 10 mg/day by 9 weeks) and methotrexate (15 mg/week). Rivaroxaban (20 mg/day) was prescribed to treat the LV thrombus because of its convenience as well as its non-inferiority over warfarin in dissolving thrombus and reducing embolic events. Clopidogrel (75 mg/day) was prescribed as an antiplatelet therapy following balloon massage because of coronary spasm; metoprolol (50 mg twice a day) was prescribed for hypertension and arrhythmia and atorvastatin (20 mg/day) for atherosclerosis.
At the 3-month follow-up, the patient was symptom-free with good exercise tolerance and free from immunosuppressive therapy-related side effects. The CCTA revealed slight thinning of the aortic root wall . Clopidogrel was discontinued, but rivaroxaban was continued because the LV thrombus sustained . The patient was referred to a rheumatologist for additional treatment and monitoring.